INDIAN
LORE


INDIAN LORE
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Requirements
Always check www.scouting.org for the latest requirements.
1. Identify the different American Indian cultural areas. Explain
what makes them each unique.
2. Research an American Indian tribe, group, or nation. Tell
your counselor about traditional dwellings, way of life, tribal
government, religious beliefs, family and clan relationships,
language, clothing styles, arts and crafts, food cultivation,
foraging and preparation, means of getting around, games,
customs in warfare, and where and how they live today.
3. Do the following.
a. Learn 10 common terms in an American Indian language
and their meanings.
b. Identify the meaning of 10 place names of American Indian
origin in the United States.
c. Name five well-known American Indian leaders, either from
the past or people of today. Give their tribes or nations.
Describe what they did or do now that makes them notable.
4. Do the following:
a. Describe how life might have been different for the
European settlers if there had been no Native Americans to
meet them when they came to this continent.
b. Describe eight things adopted by others from American
Indians.
c. Learn a game played by a group or tribe. Teach and lead it
with a Scout group.
35910
ISBN 978-0-8395-3360-3
©2024 Scouting America/Boy Scouts of America
2024 Printing
FPO


INDIAN LORE 3
5. Do ONE of the following:
a. Visit a museum either in-person or virtually to see
American Indian exhibitions and collections. Discuss
with your counselor what you observed or learned from
two exhibitions and identify 10 artifacts by tribe or
nation, their shape, size, and use.
b. Attend a contemporary American Indian gathering.
Discuss with your counselor proper etiquette for
attending as well as what you learned and observed
during your visit.





INDIAN LORE 5
Contents
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
America’s First Immigrants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
Northeast Woodlands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
Southeast Woodlands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
Great Plains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
Southwest . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
Great Basin and Plateau . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
California . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
Pacific Northwest . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80
American Indians Today . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 90
Indian Lore Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92


6 INDIAN LORE
Introduction.
Introduction
What is the “typical” American Indian like? Although many of
us try to classify all Indians into one group, the truth is that
Indians are as diverse a group as one can find on this Earth.
Using the term “American Indian” to
describe all of the native peoples of North
America is like using “European” for all
the nationalities in Europe. Swedes and
Spaniards, Greeks and Germans, Britons and
Romanians—all are Europeans, but all have
distinctly different cultures and traditions.
So it is with American Indian tribes.
American Indians have many different cul-
tures, languages, religions, styles of dress,
and ways of life. In fact, they were not
“Indians” until Europeans called them by
that general name. The original inhabitants
of North America thought of each tribe as
a separate nation, with different names,
customs, and languages.
Therefore, as you work on the Indian
Lore merit badge, remember that there is
no “typical” American Indian. There are
Onondaga, Seminole, Dakota, Yakima, Paiute,
Navajo, Cherokee, Menominee, and scores of others from coast to
coast. Most Indians today identify first as members of their tribe,
and secondly as American Indians.
To learn about these different groups is to take an exciting
journey of discovery in which you will meet some of America’s
most fascinating peoples. In your journey, you will trace the
footsteps of North America’s first immigrants (new arrivals).
They inhabited its vast wilderness centuries before the first
European set foot in the “New World.” (To Indians, of course,
the “New World” wasn’t new; it was a land with a long history.)


INDIAN LORE 7
.Introduction
You will learn about groups of people who are as varied
as the land in which they settled; whose languages, religions,
cultures, and ways of life reflect how they adapted to (learned
to fit into) many different environments.
You will find that American Indians are far different from
the stereotypes or common images that are portrayed on film,
on television, and in many books and stories. You will learn
how the contributions of American Indians helped to shape
and influence many elements of life in the United States.
You will see how modern life is influenced by centuries-
old Indian ideas about how humankind must coexist with
nature and the environment to preserve Earth for future genera-
tions. Today, we call it conservation and ecology. To American
Indians, respect for Earth and its resources is a basic value.
For thousands of years, their traditional ways of life have
functioned in harmony with nature.
In your journey, you will learn about American Indians of
today, and those who lived years or centuries ago. Individually
and as a group, these people have influenced the American way
of life and the way in which America has evolved as a cultural,
political, and economic world force.
A Scout Is Courteous
As you study Indian cultures, be alert to religious
customs, rituals, and traditions, including ceremonies
and prayers, dances, songs and music, special clothing,
artwork, and even games. Sometimes these are part of
sacred rituals. Be careful not to give offense by misus-
ing anything of religious significance. Ask questions if
you are not sure whether an item or activity you are
portraying is part of a tribe’s religious custom. Just as
you might have ceremonies and rituals that are sacred
to your faith and your religious practice, so do the
Indian groups you are learning about.


8 INDIAN LORE
Introduction.
Finding Your Way
Every trip begins with a first step. This pamphlet will help you
take that important first step in your journey of discovery. Use
the information here as a starting point to learn more about
American Indians and American heritage.
You might want to focus on only one tribe to fulfill all of
the merit badge requirements. You might want to learn more
about Indian life in general before Europeans came, as well as
after they arrived. You might also investigate how Indians live
and work today and carry on their ancient traditions.
Ask for help. Ask your school or public librarian for books
and other materials about different Indian groups. If you have a
natural history museum in your area, ask the curator or person
in charge for information.
See if your town or city has an American Indian center, or
an Indian tribal council or similar governing group. Learn first-
hand about tribes in your area and about Indian life today. If
possible, talk with tribal members about their experiences.
Reality Versus Myth
What many of us know about American Indians comes from
the movies, television, comics, and books. What we have seen
or read has helped to shape how we think of American Indians.
Much of that thinking comes from centuries-old misunderstand-
ings, and prejudices or intolerance.
Misunderstandings started with Christopher Columbus.
More than five centuries ago, Columbus thought he had found
a shorter route to the Indies, in Asia. He named the group of
islands he encountered in the Bahamas “the West Indies,” and
called the natives “Indians.”
Europeans who followed Columbus added to the mistakes.
America’s first settlers believed they had “discovered” a new,
empty continent, one without civilization. Therefore, the
“uncivilized” peoples who met the settlers when they came
ashore must not have any sort of culture or traditions of their
own—or so the thinking went.
The settlers saw the New World through Old World eyes.
They arrived not only with their possessions but also their nar-
row viewpoints and ideas about civilization—politics, religion,
ethics, economics, art, and culture. They saw what they wanted
to see: tribes of Stone Age “savages,” whom they viewed as
inferior to themselves.


INDIAN LORE 9
.Introduction
If the Europeans could have looked beyond their prejudices,
they would have seen that the Indians had sophisticated civili-
zations and complex systems of government and laws. But the
Europeans didn’t understand the Indians, and the Indians, who
had lived here for thousands of years, found the new arrivals
equally strange and puzzling.
American Indian or Native American?
You have probably heard that the native people of North America
should not be called “Indians.” The citizens of the country of India, in
southern Asia, are the Indians. Those 15th-century European sailors who
mistook the Bahamas for the Indies mistakenly named the people they
met “Indians.”
Is it more correct to refer to American Indians as “Native Americans”?
Strictly speaking, anyone born in America is a native American. And even
if we’re careful to use a capital N for a Native American who is an Indian,
and a small n for a native-born American who is not an Indian, we still can
get confused. The term “Native American” also applies to native or indig-
enous peoples of the Hawaiian Islands, Alaska, Puerto Rico, and Guam.
Here is some advice from Dr. David Hurst Thomas of the American
Museum of Natural History in New York. Dr. Thomas learned “Indian
lore” when he was a Scout, and he credits his Scouting work for start-
ing him on his career in anthropology and archaeology. In his book
Exploring Native North America (2000), Dr. Thomas writes:
“Indigenous people throughout Native North America recognize the
garbled logic behind all such labels. Most simply accept the impreci-
sion and use terms such as American Indian, Canadian Native, Native
American, Indian, and Native more-or-less interchangeably. . . .
“Of much greater concern to most Indian people is the tribal name.
Today, those native Arizonans formerly known as ‘Pima’ and ‘Papago’
prefer to be called the O’odham people. Some Navajo people would like
to be known as Diné, a traditional name meaning ‘The People.’ Some,
but not all, Native people prefer the terms ‘Lakota’ and ‘Dakota’ over
the more-common ‘Sioux’ (which is a French variant of an Ojibwe or
Chippewa word meaning ‘enemy’). Whenever discussing a tribe . . . try
to use the term preferred by the particular tribe in question.”


10 INDIAN LORE
Introduction.
Appreciating Tribal Differences
You will discover many differences in the various tribes of
North America. These differences generally reflect the environ-
ments in which the groups originally lived.
Some groups were farmers; others were nomads who hunted
game and foraged for food. (Nomads keep moving, following
food sources such as wild game.) Some Indians depended on
fishing; others ate only red meat.
Most believed that nature belonged to everyone and to no
one. The land, the rivers and seas, and the air were gifts that
could not be owned or sold. Some tribes believed that Mother
Earth was sacred, and that it was wrong to cut into her body
by tilling the soil.
Most Indians believed (and continue to believe) that all
living things are linked together and depend upon each other.
They believed in the supernatural. Different tribes had different
beliefs about the spirit world and practiced their beliefs with
many kinds of rituals and ceremonies.
Indian Culture and American Democracy
The basic principles of the Haudenosaunee of New York and Ontario (also
known as the Iroquois Confederacy or Six Nations) are explained in their
Great Law of Peace. It is a constitution, with principles and laws that
determine the powers and duties of the government.
Many Americans think the Great Law of the Haudenosaunee influenced
the development of American democracy. Interesting similarities exist
between the Great Law and the U.S. Constitution.
Some historians, however, say there is little evidence that America’s
founding fathers ever read the Haudenosaunee constitution. Some believe
it is more likely that the writings of European scholars influenced the
framers of the U.S. Constitution.
Most people agree that colonial American leaders often met, negoti-
ated, and traded with the Six Nations and with other American Indians. In
fact, Benjamin Franklin knew about the Confederacy of the Six Nations—
he wrote about it in a letter in 1751.
Supernatural
relates to a
belief in God,
or gods, ghosts,
and spirits.


INDIAN LORE 11
.Introduction
Indians and American Culture
Few of us realize how much of American culture has been
influenced by American Indians. Many of our ideas about
freedom, as expressed in the Constitution of the United States,
came from the Indian way of life. Indians deeply respected indi-
vidual rights and equality. Many groups governed themselves
by a system of values learned from infancy and voluntarily
followed by every member of the group.
Individuals enjoyed great personal liberty. Leaders did
not rule, but advised and helped to resolve disputes. Everyone
had the right to speak out on issues, and the group had to
agree before taking any action. Many Europeans left their
homelands hoping to find such a place to live, where they
could be free from oppressive rulers and practice their beliefs
without interference.
Indians introduced the first settlers to many new food
crops. Corn, potatoes, and tomatoes—staple foods in cultures
around the world—came from the Americas and were first
cultivated by American Indians. In fact, 60 percent of the food
eaten worldwide today comes from plants that were originally
farmed by American Indians—mainly Indian women. They
were the first to grow and harvest foods such as pumpkins,
squash, beans, sunflower seeds, and avocados.
The Indians were inventors. Kayaks, canoes, moccasins,
hammocks, ponchos, dogsleds, toboggans, and parkas are all
from American Indian cultures.
Language in the United States would be very different
without the Indian influence. Many names of cities, states,
lakes, rivers, plants, and animals, and common expressions
have Indian origins. See how many different items or words
you can find that were first used by Indians and then adopted
by nonnatives. Can you list the 26 states whose names are of
Indian origin?
Medicinal plants
that Indians
discovered and
used are still
being used for
medicines today.
From the bark of
the willow tree
came salicylic
acid (used in
aspirin). Digitalis,
a heart medicine,
came from the
common foxglove.


12 INDIAN LORE
America’s First Immigrants.
America’s First Immigrants
Paleo-Indians
Scientists have different theories about when Paleo-Indians—
America’s true pioneers—first set foot on the North American
continent. (Paleo-Indian is the name given to the Asian migrants
of the late Pleistocene age, a prehistoric time known as the great
age of glaciers. The Pleistocene is a division on the geologic time
scale, similar to the Jurassic period of movie fame but much more
recent.) Some scientists believe Stone Age people came to North
America as early as 40,000 years ago; others believe it was as late
as 12,000 to 15,000 years ago.
To trace the movements of Paleo-
Indians, scientists look for clues in the
physical evidence the people left behind.
Most now think that these migrants
probably traveled from Asia across a
land bridge that once connected Siberia
and Alaska. Today, the Bering Strait
separates Siberia from Alaska by about
50 miles of seawater. But during the
last Ice Age, massive sheets of ice
covered huge expanses of land and
“locked up” so much water that the
world’s oceans dropped. The receding
waters opened the Bering Land Bridge.
People could have simply walked across
into North America.
Dwellings of the ancestral Pueblo


INDIAN LORE 13
.America’s First Immigrants
It took them many centuries to get here. Small bands of
people moved gradually from place to place. They were not
intentionally migrating. They were following herds of game,
or seeking better places to forage for roots and berries—or
just looking to see what lay beyond the next hill.
Along the way, they found plentiful game to hunt. They
stalked some now-extinct animals, such as 20-foot-long ground
sloths, massive woolly mammoths standing 14 feet tall at the
shoulder, and beavers as large as today’s black bear. They for-
aged for food with the huge bison and moose. While the hunt-
ers were stalking game, saber-toothed cats with 8-inch canines,
dire wolves, and giant bears were surely stalking the hunters.
Scientists believe they know when and how these ancient
wanderers lived, based on intriguing clues they left behind. Near
Clovis, New Mexico, archaeologists found evidence of the first
identifiable American Indians—the Clovis people—at mammoth
kill sites that date back about 12,000 years. (Archaeologists study
human life and cultures of the past by examining the things
those people left behind.) The Clovis people who apparently
camped and hunted there left distinctively shaped spear points,
stone scraping and cutting tools, and deftly fashioned tools of
bone and ivory.
The Clovis people probably lived in small bands of no
more than four to 10 families—about the number their nomadic
lifestyle could support. A small band of hunters could track and
kill a 6-ton mammoth. A few families could live off the kill.
The Clovis people were followed by other groups who left
their own marks on prehistory. The Folsom people, named for
a discovery at Folsom, New Mexico, left behind stone weapon
points (distinct from the Clovis) that are about 8,000 to 10,000
years old.
In Colorado, scientists found the remains of almost 200
bison in one site where a group of Plano people camped. Their
tools and weapons were different from the Clovis and Folsom
peoples, so archaeologists identify them as a separate group.
Because of the size of the kill, scientists can also imagine
how the hunt was conducted. As many as 150 people may have
taken part, helping to stampede a herd of bison over a cliff
and slaughtering the animals killed or injured in the fall. Such
a well-organized hunt could mean that this group had a social
order that required discipline and leadership among its members.
For more about
archaeologists
and how they
uncover the
stories of the
past, see the
Archaeology merit
badge pamphlet.
Clovis point


14 INDIAN LORE
America’s First Immigrants.
Evidence of a desert culture was found in Danger Cave in
Utah. People lived in this cave off and on for many centuries
from about 11,000 years ago. They may have been among the
first people in the world to practice the craft of basket weaving.
Another desert group, the Cochise, may have been the first
farmers in North America. In Bat Cave, New Mexico, archaeolo-
gists uncovered a cache of Cochise-style weapon points and
several corncobs from a primitive type that was deliberately
grown, or cultivated.
We cannot be sure how farming got started. Perhaps
some observant food-gatherer noticed that certain plants
grew in certain places, and realized that where seeds fell to
the ground, new plants later grew. Maybe seeds were buried
in the ground as a sacrifice, and someone noticed that plants
appeared on that spot soon after. However it happened, the idea
of cultivating crops was a stunning advance in the way of life
for prehistoric people.
Changing Patterns
Huge animals like the mammoth began to disappear at the end
of the Ice Age. Then people began to hunt smaller animals like
rabbits, deer, and antelope, or fish and fowl. They found other
sources of food, too, as they foraged for edible roots, grains,
A New Weapon
By 8000 b.c. (perhaps much earlier), a new invention greatly enhanced
the hunter’s skill. The atlatl was a 2- or 3-foot-long stick with a small base
carved in its butt end. A spear rested on the atlatl. The hunter threw the
spear using a whiplike motion that hurled it from the atlatl toward its
target with great force and
long-distance accuracy.
This allowed the hunter
to be farther away (and
safer) when striking at
prey. The atlatl was a
major weapon until the
invention of the bow and
arrow, and the arrival of
guns with the Europeans.


INDIAN LORE 15
.America’s First Immigrants
wild vegetables, nuts, and berries. They made new tools for a
changing way of life artfully shaped scrapers and choppers, and
notched points for hunting and killing small game.
Between 5000 b.c. and 1000 b.c., some groups settled into
semipermanent villages. Although they continued to hunt and
forage, they began to cultivate plants deliberately to provide
enough food for everyone. Social customs—the ways in which
people behave toward each other—changed as people settled
together in villages to live and raise their families.
Of course, not every Indian group changed to this way
of life. Some tribes remained hunters and foragers until
modern times.
The role of men (the hunters) and women (the foragers and
farmers) changed to adapt to a more settled existence. New ways
of doing things evolved. Artisans crafted utensils that were not
only useful, but beautiful. Religion and ritual became more
important. Family and tribal relationships were affected.
The Formative Period
Great civilizations were built during the period from about
1000 b.c. to a.d. 1500. Many of these were in Mexico and in
Central and South America. Extraordinary societies also
developed in what is now the United States.
The ancestral Pueblo people built huge apartment-like
dwellings four or five stories high in Chaco Canyon, New
Mexico, and in Mesa Verde, Colorado. This great civilization of
the Southwest left behind the remains of a complex and sophis-
ticated culture. Preserved for modern-day archaeologists to study
are textiles (fabrics), fragile baskets still vibrant with centuries-
old color, black-on-white pottery, furs, and even feathers.
Other remarkable cultures, the Adena and the Hopewell,
appeared in the eastern half of the present United States.
The Adena culture formed in the Ohio Valley about 500 b.c.
To honor their dead, these people built low earthen mounds
over graves. As centuries passed, the Adena built their funeral
mounds ever larger and more fanciful. Some of the mounds had
many layers. Some were shaped like birds, tortoises, or humans.
The largest was the Great Serpent Mound near Cincinnati,
Ohio. Shaped like a snake wriggling across the woodland, the
mound is 20 feet wide, 5 feet high, and a quarter-mile long.


16 INDIAN LORE
America’s First Immigrants.
The Hopewell people also arose in the Ohio area, about
100 b.c. They soon dominated the Midwest and influenced a
region from the Atlantic to present-day Wisconsin and Iowa,
and south to the Gulf of Mexico. The Hopewells built great
earthworks. One of their most impressive sites was an enclo-
sure at what is now Newark, Ohio, that covered 4 square miles.
Apparently built to house the dead, the site contained burial
mounds, a great figure of an eagle, and many avenues, circles,
and plazas.
After the decline of the Hopewells, another mound-
building society appeared in what is today the southeastern
United States. In the centuries after a.d. 800, this Mississippian
culture spread from the Great Lakes to the Gulf Coast and from
present-day Georgia to as far west as Oklahoma. Mississippian
society reached a high point at a city called Cahokia, in what is
now Illinois. There, these Temple Mound Builders, as they are
called, constructed mounds higher and broader than any oth-
ers north of the Rio Grande. One massive earthwork rose to a
height of 100 feet. At its base it was 1,000 feet long and more
than 700 feet wide. The flat top of this huge structure once sup-
ported a building—probably a temple—that spread over an area
large enough for three modern tennis courts.
Hundreds of years before the arrival of Europeans, Cahokia
was a center of art and religion, trade and industry. Long after
the first European explorers entered the North American heart-
land, the great mounds and earthworks of Cahokia and other
now-vanished centers of Mississippian life would continue to
amaze and mystify the new American settlers.
American Indians Today
As you read in the following pages about the history of Native Americans,
keep in mind that as many Indians live in the United States today as
when Columbus reached the Caribbean—about 2 million, according
to the 2000 census. The direct descendants of America’s first people
are still very much here. Indians are not people of the past. They are not
“vanishing Americans.” Indians are a proud and vital part of 21st-century
America, and theirs is a proud, vital, and rich heritage. As you learn about
Indian history, always be aware that the culture you are investigating is a
living, dynamic culture.


INDIAN LORE 17
.America’s First Immigrants
Indian Culture After 1492
After Europeans arrived, the lives of American Indians were
forever changed.
Newly introduced diseases—smallpox, measles, flu, yellow
fever, and others—wiped out whole societies. Wars killed many
natives. European ways of doing things were imprinted, some-
times forcibly, on Indian ways. Indians lost traditional hunting
and farming lands. Whole tribes and nations were sent to live
in faraway places.
Scholars believe that at the time the first Europeans came
here, there may have been about 2 million Indians in North
America—or possibly as many as 18 million. They had many
different traditions and ways of doing things. They lived in all
kinds of dwellings: adobe pueblos, longhouses, hogans, plank
houses, tepees. Some were farmers; others were hunters and
trappers. Some lived in cities. Others lived in small, close-knit
communities. They had rich social lives and established
systems of government.
The map shown here
depicts the approximate
regions where different
groups lived, and the gen-
eral names given to cultural
(related or neighboring)
groups. In each chapter that
follows, you will find a list
of most of the major groups
and tribes included in that
cultural area. Not every
tribe will be mentioned; nor
do all who study American
Indians agree on where to
place each tribe culturally.
Use the general
descriptions of how tribes
in each area have lived,
worked, and worshiped
as a starting point for your
journey of discovery. Then
do your own research to
learn more about the fascinating
heritage of the American Indians.


18 INDIAN LORE
Northeast Woodlands.
Northeast Woodlands
Tribes on the eastern seaboard were among the first to meet
European explorers and settlers. The Pilgrims thought the
Indians were heathens and tried to teach them European ways.
In fact, the first Europeans to land on the North American
continent probably would not have survived their first winter
had not the Indian people taught the Pilgrims to hunt, fish, and
forage for native foods. Later, these Woodlands Indians taught
them to plant foods native to the continent.
Located in the northeast quarter of what is now the United
States, the home of the Woodlanders was a huge area. It
stretched between the Atlantic Coast and the Mississippi River,
and from the upper shore of Lake Superior to about the north-
ern border of present-day Tennessee. Because the environment
varied greatly from region to region, these tribes had different
ways of living depending on where they lived.
Most spoke some variety of Algonquian, which was the
most widespread language in the New World. Siouian and
Iroquoian languages also were spoken. English words of
Algonquian origin include hickory, hominy, moccasin,
papoose, pecan, powwow, squash, terrapin, tomahawk,
raccoon, chipmunk, totem, and
wigwam, and many geographic
place names.
Hunters often bagged animals bogged down in the snow. Note the snowshoes.


INDIAN LORE 19
.Northeast Woodlands
The People
The tribes, subtribes, and nations of the Northeast Woodlands
are generally divided into the following groups. Other tribes
besides those listed also lived in this region.
The Indians of the coastal plains lived on flat, fertile land
between the Atlantic Ocean and hardwood forests teeming
with game. Tribes such as the Delaware and Montauk reaped
the bounty of sea and forest and also benefited from the lush
growing areas where they cultivated crops such as corn.
Farther to the north, where cold winds blew and life
was not so easy, lived the Penobscot,
Abenaki, and other seminomads.
Corn would not grow in the subarctic
northern regions. So these tribes lived
a wandering but well-ordered life pur-
suing deer, bear, moose, wild ducks,
and fish. They trapped animals such as
beaver for their meat and pelts. After the
Europeans arrived, beaver pelts became
very valuable, and a brisk trade started
between the Indians and the Europeans.
Tribes of the western Great Lakes
region included the Menominee, Ottawa,
Potawatomi, Ojibwa, and Winnebago.
These tribes were both farmers and
hunters. Using canoes, they harvested a
delicious wild rice that still grows thickly
in the thousands of lakes and ponds of
that region.
Eastern Algonquian: Abenaki, Mahican, Massachuset, Penobscot,
Narragansett, Wappinger, Pequot, Montauk, Delaware (Lenape)
Iroquois (League of Five Nations): Seneca, Cayuga, Onondaga, Oneida,
Mohawk, Tuscarora (joined League about 1713)
Western Algonquian (Forest Tribes): Ojibwa or Chippewa, Ottawa,
Menominee, Forest Potawatomi
Western Algonquian (Prairie Tribes): Sauk, Fox, Kickapoo, Illinois, Miami,
Prairie Potawatomi, Shawnee
Menominee gathering wild rice. Notice
the wigwam. (Courtesy Milwaukee
Public Museum)


20 INDIAN LORE
Northeast Woodlands.
Some Algonquian groups, such as the Powhatans of
Virginia and the Abenakis of Maine, formed powerful confed-
erations that dominated large regions. The mightiest confedera-
tion in the Northeast, however, was of the Iroquoians who lived
in the forests east of Lake Ontario.
The tribes of the Mohawk, Seneca, Oneida, Cayuga, and
Onondaga made up the Iroquois League of Five Nations. (The
Tuscarora later joined the confederacy.) They were farmers
whose lives revolved around the seasons. In spring and summer,
the women planted and raised corn, beans, and squash—crops
they called the Three Sisters. The men hunted and fished.
When Europeans arrived in the New World, these Iroquois
Confederacy tribes dominated much of the Northeast. Not every
Iroquois-speaking tribe joined the confederacy, however. The
Huron, which was a nation of four tribes, and the Tobacco tribes,
for example, scorned and often warred with the confederacy.
Dwellings
Among the Woodlands tribes were many types of houses, but
a few types are most associated with these groups.
Because the northern tribes were wanderers, moving with
the seasons to follow game, they needed portable houses. The
The Algonquian Birchbark Canoe
The birchbark canoes of the
Algonquians plied the rivers and
lakes of the Northeast Woodlands.
The Algonquians used the light,
swift, and graceful watercraft to hunt, fish, trade, and make war.
These lightweight canoes could easily be portaged, or carried from
one waterway to another. On the trail, they served as shelter from the
elements. They were constructed in all sizes, from small, two-person
craft to large canoes for eight to 10 people.
Cedar was normally used for the framework. The bark of birch,
peeled from the trees in large sheets, did not shrink or stretch and was
ideal for the covering. Bark pieces were sewn together with spruce
roots and shaped around the frame. Spruce tree resin waterproofed
the seams. The braces and paddles were made of maple.
In the fall, the
Iroquois harvested
and preserved
crops and game
for their winter
food source.


INDIAN LORE 21
.Northeast Woodlands
wigwam was perfect for their way of life. Its frame consisted of
four saplings bent toward the center. They covered this with
long strips of bark sewn together and lined the inside with grass
for insulation. Animal skins hung at the entrance. Fir branches
covered with moose skins lined the floor. The Abenaki, unlike
most other New England tribes, built cone-shaped wigwams
that resembled the tepees of the Great Plains Indians.
The village-dwelling Delaware lived on river meadows and
built small, irregularly spaced groups of bark buildings. Some
were round, domed wigwams; others were oblong and arched;
and still others were rectangular longhouses with pitched roofs.
The Iroquois built permanent structures. Known as the
People of the Longhouse, they imagined a gigantic, sym-
bolic “longhouse” stretching across their nation, the
“doors” guarded by different tribes to the east and
west. This imaginary longhouse took actual form
in the many pole-and-bark structures that made
up each village.
An individual longhouse was about 50 to 150
feet long, depending on the number of families
living inside. A typical house could shelter about 50
people. It was built like an arbor, with long poles driven into
the ground, then more poles arched across to form a high
roof. Long poles running the length of the structure inter-
twined with the arched poles. Sheets of bark covered the
whole structure from top to bottom.
Inside, a long central corridor ran the
length of the longhouse, and to each side
were boothlike quarters where families slept
and stored their possessions. A tall fence,
or palisade, surrounded each village. Warriors
stood guard there while the villagers carried on
their pursuits.
Village and Family Life
The seasons dominated life. In the spring, nomadic tribes
would move their entire villages to their favorite coastal
fishing grounds to gather lobsters, clams, and shellfish.
More settled tribes like the Iroquoians tended to stay in
their well-established and protected villages.
During the warm summer months, Indians all along the
seaboard turned to fishing and hunting, and in the south, to
A wigwam made of
grass mats tied to
saplings and covered
with slabs of bark
Northeastern
multifamily
longhouse
Usually, two
or three
families shared
one wigwam.


22 INDIAN LORE
Northeast Woodlands.
planting corn. Traders traveled up and down the coast and from
inland, bringing the goods of different regions for barter or trade.
In the fall, the northern tribes returned to their nomadic
lifestyles and spent the autumn and winter months following
moose and smaller game. Their southern neighbors also hunted
for winter provisions, but families stayed in their villages. The
women tanned hides, sewed, took care of the children, and
prepared for the winter.
Many tribes, including the Huron, the Iroquoians, and the
Delaware, were matrilineal, meaning they traced their ancestry
or kin relations through the mother’s side. Other tribes were
patrilineal and traced their ancestors through the male line.
How the Iroquois (Haudenosaunee)
Confederacy Was Formed
According to tribal history, the Iroquois Confederacy was first suggested
in about 1570 (possibly earlier), when intertribal warfare threatened to
destroy the Iroquois. A holy man named Dekanawideh had a vision in
which the five warring nations were united under a symbolic Tree of
Great Peace. He saw tribes who lived in harmony under a government
of law and put the future welfare of their people ahead of any other
desire. A Mohawk named Hiawatha heard of the holy man’s vision and
was greatly moved.
Hiawatha traveled from one tribe to another over the Iroquois
territory, spreading the message of a confederation united in peace and
under one government. One by one, the tribes accepted this astound-
ing idea. First to join were the Mohawk, who became keepers of the
Eastern Door. Then the Oneida, the Cayuga, and the Onondaga, who
were the Firekeepers, joined the league. Finally, the most warlike tribe,
the Seneca, entered the confederacy and became keepers of its Western
Door. This was the League of Five Nations; later, when the Tuscarora
joined, it was called the League of Six Nations.
The six agreed to stop fighting among themselves and to cooperate
for a common defense. Each tribe kept control of its own affairs, but
united in matters concerning other tribes and foreign countries.
Modern Six Nations people prefer to be called Haudenosaunee
instead of by their French name, Iroquois. Haudenosaunee (pronounced
Ho-deh-no-shaw-nee) means “People Building a Long House.”


INDIAN LORE 23
.Northeast Woodlands
The oldest woman in the longhouse was supreme. She was
“mother” to the entire household in the sense that it belonged
exclusively to her and her female relatives. Women in matrilin-
eal societies such as the Seneca were very powerful. The clan
mother, with the advice of other women of her tribe, appointed
each of the eight Seneca councillor-chiefs. If a councillor-chief
failed in his duties, the women could remove him from office.
The chief of a village or several villages would have a
council and other city officials, just as cities do today. Town
meetings were powwows, with singing, dancing, prayers,
games, and serious talk all part of the ceremonies.
Some tribes had more than one chief. The peace chief was
usually a hereditary position. The war chief was chosen for his
military prowess. Some tribes had a third leader, the shaman,
or medicine man, who was responsible for religious rituals.
Clothing, Arts, and Crafts
During the warm summer months, men of the Woodlands
tribes generally dressed in soft deerskin breechcloths, or
breechclouts, that covered the loin area. Children did not wear
clothes. Women wore kneelength skirts and, after the arrival of
Europeans, wampum headbands. Wampum were purple and
white disk-shaped or cylindrical beads made of clamshell. They
were strung together and exchanged as gifts. After Europeans
arrived, wampum became an exchange currency like money.
Family life
was important.
Being a family
member meant
being a member
of a clan. Clans
traced their
origins to a
common ancestor.
They usually were
identified by an
animal symbol,
such as the
Bear Clan or
the Wolf Clan.
Among some tribes, the
calumet, a sacred pipe
used for rituals of peace
and war, was the most cher-
ished possession. The pipe
was both an altar and a kind
of passport. French missionary-explorer Jacques Mar-
quette carried a calumet to pass unharmed through
the territories of various tribes in the Mississippi Valley.
The Wolf belt, strung with wampum (clamshell beads), celebrated the
friendship between Northeast Woodlands Indians and white settlers.


24 INDIAN LORE
Northeast Woodlands.
The Myth of the Indian “Squaw”
The role of women in Indian life is largely misunderstood. An Indian
woman was not a “squaw” or slave, as the Europeans mistakenly
saw her. In fact, many modern-day Indian people regard the word
“squaw” as insulting and demeaning.
In most Indian groups, life in the village centered on the family.
Chores were divided fairly. As lifeways gradually changed from
hunting to foraging to farming, the skills of women, who were the
foragers and the first farmers, grew in importance. Women’s
economic role became central to the group, and their status and
power increased.
Many tribes became matrilineal, with family lines traced through
the mother. In these groups, a child always belonged to the clan of
his or her mother. The father was acknowledged but was the head of
the families of his sisters, not of his wife and children. In matrilocal
tribes, the husband lived with the wife’s family.
Women acquired property and wealth. For the Navajo of the
American Southwest, for example, sheep
became the basis of wealth, and all sheep
belonged to women. Indian women
owned herds of horses. Plains Indian
women, like the women of many other
tribes, owned the lodges and almost
everything in them. Pueblo women
owned the houses, all the furnish-
ings, and all the crops.
Women had great influence
with their husbands. Sometimes
they went to battle, with or with-
out their husbands. Women were
often the true rulers of a village;
they might choose the chief, and
fire him if he did a poor job. They
certainly were not the drudges or
slaves the Europeans considered
them to be.


INDIAN LORE 25
.Northeast Woodlands
In the cooler months, everyone dressed for warmth. Both
sexes wore fur shawls and robes woven of downy, waterproof
turkey feathers. Deerskin leggings, or trousers, moccasins, and
often fur hats provided extra protection from the cold.
The Woodlands Indians used materials at hand to shape
tools, weapons, and ceremonial objects. Wood, bark, and other
plant materials, and stone, clay, hide, bone, antler, shells, quills,
and feathers were used. Later, the Europeans introduced new
materials such as metals, glass, and cloth.
The Algonquians used watertight birchbark or the hard-
wood burls from birch, elm, and maple to make bowls, dishes,
and trays. Wooden bowls were made by charring, then scraping
the burls. The shredded bark of trees such as basswood was
twisted to make twine for sewing. They plaited baskets from
sweetgrass and wood splints and used clay for unpainted
pottery dishes.
The Iroquois made pottery from clay shaped in coils, then
decorated them with geometric designs and sun-dried and fired
them in hot, smoldering coals. The Huron embellished clothing
and other items with intricate designs using the hairs of moose
dyed with bright vegetable colors.
Religion and Ritual
Beliefs and rituals among the Indian tribes were quite
varied. The Algonquians believed in forces called
Manitou, which had many different forms. Spirits were
in all things—animals, plants, water, rocks, the sun, the
moon, weather, and even sickness. Shamans were sup-
posed to be able to control these spirits. Each person was
thought to have a personal, protective spirit.
Some tribes had sacred societies with special rites,
signs, and symbols. Examples include the Midewiwin (the
Grand Medicine Society) of the Ojibwa and the False Face
Society of the Iroquois, also an organization of healers.
While the women
of many tribes
excelled at
making elaborately
decorated clothing,
those items
were saved for
special occasions.
The men of some tribes, the Delaware in particular, liked to wear a
vermilion, or red, makeup of fat mixed with berry juice and minerals.
Women also wore makeup. Some Indian men used sharpened mussel-
shell tweezers to pluck their heads bare except for a central crest; others
shaved their heads.
Potawatomi beaded
garters, worn during
ceremonial dances


26 INDIAN LORE
Northeast Woodlands.
Warfare
The means and methods of Indian warfare confused Europeans
when they first came to America. Rather than fight in the open,
Indians scattered their men and fought from behind fences,
trees, and bushes. Surprise and ambush were weapons,
as valuable in warfare as axes, bows, arrows, and
war clubs.
Most fights were small and were rooted in intense rival-
ries and blood feuds between tribes. One tribe might avenge
the death of a warrior by taking the lives of the offending tribe’s
warriors. The offending tribe would want revenge, often at the
urging of the wife or mother of a slain man. In these raids,
people were killed, and captives and goods taken. Prisoners
were sometimes tortured and killed; more often they were
adopted by the captors’ tribe to replace the men lost to war.
The western Algonquians fought mainly to keep others out
of their territory, and sometimes helped the French to fight the
English. They also carried out raids, took women and children
for slaves, sometimes tortured male warriors, and often took
the scalps of enemies. But touching a live enemy in battle
meant more.
The Iroquois Confederacy began to fall apart with the
American Revolution, when four of the Six Nations tribes joined
with the British. The defeat of the British by American forces
brought them more grief. George Washington sent Gen. John
Woodlands war
clubs like
this one were
carved from a
single piece of
ironwood. This
ball-like head
seems clutched
in the jaws of a
fierce animal.
When the Iroquois united to eliminate intertribal warfare, they turned their
full energy to waging war against other tribes and nations, and against the
newcomers from Europe. They were great warriors who began developing
military skills when they were young, practicing with knives, war clubs,
and bows and arrows. Through military exploits, a man could gain great
respect and be named a war chief.
The Algonquians called these ferocious warriors the “real adders” or
“poisonous snakes,” and the name stuck: “Iroquois” is the French adapta-
tion of the Algonquian phrase. One Iroquois chief in particular, Aharihon
of the Onondaga, was feared by Indians and Europeans alike for his cru-
elty to anyone not of his tribe. But to his own people, he was a moral and
virtuous leader, and a loving husband and father. Aharihon came to be a
symbol of the conflict between American Indian and European values of
the time.


INDIAN LORE 27
.Northeast Woodlands
Why the Owl Has Big Eyes
Raweno, the Everything-Maker, was busy mak-
ing the animals. He was working on Rabbit, and
Owl (still unformed) was sitting in a tree nearby,
awaiting his turn.
”Whoo, whoo,“ Owl said. ”I want a long neck
like Swan’s, and red feathers like Cardinal’s, and
a long beak like Egret’s, and a crown of plumes
like Heron’s. I want you to make me into the
most beautiful, the fastest, the most wonderful of all the birds.“
”Be quiet,“ Raweno ordered. ”Close your eyes. Don’t you know no
one is allowed to watch me work?“
Owl refused to obey. ”Whoo, whoo,“ he said. ”Nobody can forbid
me to watch. Nobody can order me to close my eyes.“
Raweno got angry. He grabbed Owl, pulled him down from his
branch, stuffed his head deep into his body, shook him until his eyes
grew big with fright, and pulled at his ears until they stuck up at both
sides of his head.
”That will teach you,“ said Raweno. ”Now you can’t crane your neck
to watch things you shouldn’t watch. Now you have big ears to listen
when someone tells you what not to do. Now you have big eyes—but
not so big that you can watch me, because you’ll be awake only at
night, and I work by day. And your feathers won’t be red like Cardinal’s,
but gray like this“—and Raweno rubbed Owl all over with mud—”as
punishment for your disobedience.“
Owl remains as Raweno shaped him in anger—with big eyes, a
short neck, and ears sticking up on the sides of his head. And he must
sleep during the day and come out only at night.
—Condensed from a traditional Iroquois story
Sullivan on a campaign of pillage and arson that destroyed 40
Iroquois villages and most of their crops.
Today, the Cayuga, Oneida, Onondaga, Seneca, Mohawk,
and Tuscarora maintain headquarters in New York. Other
Northeast Woodlanders are present throughout the region:
the Narragansett in Rhode Island; the Pequot in Connecticut;
the Micmac, Passamaquoddy, and Penobscot in Maine; and
the Sac and Fox in Iowa. There are Chippewa in Minnesota,
Wisconsin, Michigan, Montana, and Canada. Also in Wisconsin
are Menominee, Potawatomi, and Oneida.


28 INDIAN LORE
Southeast Woodlands.
Southeast Woodlands
Tattoos, powerful kings, a sun god, and “Stinkards” met
Europeans when they first encountered the tribes of the
Southeast Woodlands.
The Southeastern tribes lived in a region bordered by the
Atlantic Ocean on the east, the Gulf of Mexico on the south, the
Trinity River in the west (approximately), and the Tennessee
and Potomac Rivers to the north (approximately). It is an area of
great diversity. The territory of these Indians included the salt-
water marshes of the coastal plains, the subtropical Everglades,
rich river valleys, and the forests and mountains of the southern
Appalachian chain.
Some of the most advanced tribes north of Mexico lived in
the Southeast Woodlands. They were skilled farmers, hunters,
and builders who lived mostly in permanent villages. They used
herbs and medicines that have equals in modern health care.
They were conservationists who valued and took care of their
natural resources. Their practices and beliefs are reflected in
present-day environmental and ecological ideas.
About 150 or 200 separate groups or tribes lived in this
region at the time the first European invaders found them.
They spoke many different languages, some similar and
some as different as Russian is
from German.
Florida Indians prepare
to kill an alligator.


INDIAN LORE 29
.Southeast Woodlands
The People
While many languages were spoken among the Indian tribes of
this region, we can divide the groups roughly according to the
following language families.
Lifeways
Young people growing up among the Indians in the Southeast
Woodlands probably thought they were living in paradise. They
were surrounded by beautiful country. Nature was bountiful.
There were game animals to hunt—deer, alligators, turtles,
rabbits, and squirrels. There were fish to
catch, nuts and berries to eat, and rivers to
swim and play in.
They lived in a town of several hun-
dred people, with a king or chief, the
members of the noble class, and the
members of the working class. All
followed the same laws and tradi-
tions. They dreamed of becoming
warriors, or perhaps healers. In
some tribes, war was the most
important way for someone to
gain honor and prestige. In others,
one’s place might also be determined
by achievements in healing or religion.
Their ancestors, the Temple Mound
Builders, had lived in this region long before Europeans arrived.
From the Temple Mound culture had come the tradition of build-
ing houses for rulers high atop large earthen mounds. Smaller
homes for priests and nobles were on terraces below the tops
of the mounds. The higher up the side of the mound one lived,
the higher one’s rank. The king often lived atop his own mound.
Villages or cities that surrounded the mounds housed merchants,
artisans, soldiers, hunters, farmers, and laborers.
Muskogean: Creek (Muskogee), Seminole, Choctaw,
Chickasaw, Natchez
Siouian: Catawba, Tutelo
Iroquoian: Cherokee, Tuscarora (before 1712)
Others: Yuchi, Shawnee


30 INDIAN LORE
Southeast Woodlands.
Much of that way of life remained at the time the first Euro-
peans came to the Southeast Woodlands. The Natchez, who
lived in territory that now makes up parts of Mississippi and
Louisiana, were probably the last of the Temple Mound culture.
They were still living that life as late as 1682, when the French
explorer La Salle made contact with them.
Their king, the Great Sun, had absolute power over his sub-
jects. He was a true monarch, crowned with red-tasseled swan
feathers and seated on a throne of feathers and furs atop his
village’s highest mound. Below him were priests with shaved
heads, and warriors, tattooed from head to foot, strolling through
the precisely laid out village watching the commoners work.
East of the Natchez lived the Creeks. The Creeks spoke a
type of the Muskogean language. They were among the most
widespread and powerful of Muskogean tribes. In many ways
the typical Southeastern way of life is better represented by the
Creeks than by the exotic Natchez.
The Creeks lived along rivers and streams coursing through
the piney woods of their territory in most of present-day Georgia
and Alabama. They were a confederacy of about 20,000 people
who lived in at least 50 towns. They were mainly farmers, but
also hunter-gatherers. Each family grew its own crops of corn,
beans, squash, pumpkins, melons, and sweet potatoes. Everyone
also helped with the communal fields, which fed the warriors,
the poor, and guests.
Other tribes who spoke varieties of Muskogean are the
Alabama, Chickasaw, Choctaw, and Seminole.
The Cherokee are related to the Iroquois. They lived in the
mountains and valleys of the southern Appalachian chain, occu-
pying a large area of land. They had villages in parts of North
Carolina and western Virginia, eastern Tennessee, South Carolina,
Georgia, and northern Alabama. Their name for themselves
in the Iroquoian language means “real people.” The name
“Cherokee” probably came from their neighbors, the Creeks.
Tciloki in its original form means “people of the different speech.”
Besides being good farmers, the Cherokee were excellent
hunters who used disguises to get close to their prey. Wearing
an entire deerskin, antlers and all, and sounding an authentic
deer call, they would entice the shiest deer. They brought down
big game with bow and arrow. Smaller animals such as raccoons,
rabbits, squirrels, and turkeys fell prey to blowguns. With these
hollowed-out cane reeds, hunters could blow small wood-and-
feather darts with deadly accuracy as far as 60 feet.
The commoners
were called
Stinkards. They
did all the labor,
such as farming
and building
mounds. The
nobility—even
the king himself—
had to marry from
the Stinkard class.
When the noble
died, the noble’s
spouse and
servants were
sacrificed to go
with him or her
to the next world.


INDIAN LORE 31
.Southeast Woodlands
Dwellings
The homes of many Southeast Woodlands tribes were similar
in construction. Most families had two houses—a large summer
home and a smaller winter home.
The summer house was rectangular in shape. It had a
peaked roof of bark or thatch, a pole framework, and cane
and clay walls. The house was open to the breezes during
the hot summer months. The winter home doubled as a
sweat-house and was built over a pit with a cone-shaped
roof of poles and earth.
The Seminole lived in a warm, wet climate of rivers and
swamplands in Florida in raised houses called chickees. The
homes were up on stilts to keep them above water.
The Natchez house was made like a giant overturned
basket with no windows. Posts were sunk into the ground,
then canes and reeds were woven within them. Arched
saplings formed the roof, thatched with reed, canes, or
grass. Then the whole house was plastered with mud and
sometimes whitewashed.
One type of dwelling used
by the Seminole in Florida


32 INDIAN LORE
Southeast Woodlands.
Village and Family Life
War was a fact of life, and villages typically were surrounded
by log fortifications. There was an open square or plaza in
the center, with open-sided shelters where spectators could sit
during ceremonies. The town’s meeting house or council house
was at one end of the square.
The most influential person in the village was the civil
chief, who headed the council and was responsible for handling
village matters. A war chief led the warriors in battle, super-
vised dances and games, and policed the town.
Family life centered on the clan. Clans took the names
of animals—the Bear clan, the Deer clan, the Eagle clan, etc.
Because the family line passed through the mother, children
were members of their mother’s clan, and their mother’s brother
acted as their “father.” Their real father had responsibilities to
his sisters’ families, and was little more than a visitor in his
wife’s home.
Religion and Ritual
The Upper World, the Lower World, and This World made up
the universe of the Southeastern Indians. The Upper World had
order and stability and was clean and pure. In the Lower World
were pollution and madness, but also fertility and invention.
This World, where people, most animals, and all plants lived,
was thought to be somewhere between the other worlds.
In the religion of these people, humankind’s purpose in
life was to find balance between the perfect order of the Upper
World and the chaos of the Lower World. To keep balance, the
Indians offered to the spirits gifts of tobacco, copper, beads, and
other objects in many different ceremonies. The greatest deity,
the sun, was represented on Earth by a sacred fire that burned
throughout the year.
Southeastern Indians believed that good countered evil.
They used herbs and plants to treat disease. The shaman
sought the causes of disease and worked to dispel them. Priests
cured illness, predicted success in war, and were in charge of
the sacred village temple.
Some tribes
formed loose
confederations
for protection
and united in
war. Towns and
villages kept
their own control
over other
matters, however.


INDIAN LORE 33
.Southeast Woodlands
Priests also took charge of ceremonies. The important
Green Corn Ceremony was held toward the end of the sum-
mer’s corn harvest; it marked the start of a new year almost
like a New Year’s Eve celebration. Feuds were mended, com-
munal buildings repaired, hearth fires extinguished, and houses
cleaned; old cooking pottery was broken and thrown away.
Villagers fasted. Prisoners were set free. The high priest lit
the ceremonial new sacred fire. Then everyone danced, sang,
and drank for days until a purifying bath in a nearby stream
brought the celebration to an end.
Clothing, Arts, and Crafts
Southeastern Indians—men and women—favored
tattoos. Their daily dress was much like that of other
tribes. In the warm summer weather, men dressed in
buckskin, fiber, or cloth breechclouts, and women
wore skirts of buckskin or fiber. In winter, the men
put on buckskin shirts and leggings, while the
women donned buckskin capes. Moccasins kept their
feet warm. Bear, beaver, or other skin robes kept the
chill off during very cold weather.
For special occasions, men wore feathered
crowns. Often they shaved their heads or plucked
their hair in patterns,
although they always left
a scalp lock as a challenge
to the enemy to try to take.
Women wore their hair long.
Everyone wore jewelry and
ornaments of feathers, bones,
shells, and beads.
Women sometimes wove a
highly prized cloth from nettle,
silk grass, and mulberry bark.
They made cradleboards (baby
carriers) from swamp cane.
They wove mats and
fashioned colorful split-cane
and wicker baskets. Pottery
was common, but not ornate.
Men wore feathered
crowns on special
occasions.
A belt of feathers
worn as a skirt
Tattoos show that this
Florida man was an
accomplished warrior.
(Courtesy American
Museum of Natural History)


34 INDIAN LORE
Southeast Woodlands.
The Cherokee were known for their Booger masks (from
the word bogeyman), which were carved from wood and gourds
to ward off evil spirits. Cypress logs, hollowed out, made canoes
for navigating the many streams and rivers of the region.
Warfare
Prestige, personal glory, obtaining slaves, getting revenge, righting
wrongs—and sometimes, just the thrill of the battle—were rea-
sons for war for Southeastern Indians. Once war was decided on,
preparations were turned over to the Great Warrior, the chief of
war. With the veterans of earlier conflicts to help him, he would
rally the young volunteers for combat (no one was ordered to
fight). Speeches, war songs sung by the women, fasting, and
purifying drinks all helped prepare the warriors.
Those in the war party would paint their bodies red and
black, then arm themselves with weapons such as pikes, lances,
darts, slings, clubs, and bows and arrows. Stealthily creeping up
on the enemy, they would surround the foe, cutting off all pos-
sibility of retreat. Then, howling and screeching, the warriors
would launch a terrifying rain of arrows, clubs, and lances.
No mercy was given. Entire villages might be wiped out;
scalps were taken, and sometimes a head or two was carried off
as a war trophy.
The fate of captives was uncertain. They might be adopted
and treated as kinsfolk or kept as slaves. A great and feared
enemy warrior, however, could expect to be put to death.
Cherokee pottery
Cherokee pipes like this one
could take months to make.
The Cherokee used
Booger masks to
chase away evil
and diseases.


INDIAN LORE 35
.Southeast Woodlands
Lacrosse: War’s “Little Brother”
No Indian game aroused more enthusiasm than istab-
oli, which we know today as lacrosse and play in a
very modified way. In its bloody original version, the
game, sometimes
called Indian stick-
ball, was nicknamed
“the little brother
of war.”
Major lacrosse
games drew players and spectators from neighbor-
ing villages for miles around. Sometimes as many as
a thousand spectators would show up for the action.
Formal invitations went out to the opposition.
The playing field was carefully laid out. Spectators
brought furs, skins, and trinkets to bet on the game’s
outcome. Pregame ceremonies reached a climax the
night before the match, when the 75 or so members
of each team painted their bodies, drank sacred
medicine, danced, and sang.
The purpose of the game was to toss a leather
ball between goalposts, using 3-foot-long rackets or
sticks that had curved and webbed ends. Each player
used two rackets to catch and throw the ball. Players
could not touch the ball with their hands or use the
sticks to fight, but almost any other activity was fair.
Tripping, hitting, tackling, stomping, and piling on
one another were part of the game. Broken bones,
severe injuries, and even deaths resulting from the
frenzy were not uncommon.
Medicine men would act as coaches for the
game. But they used incantations, rather than game
strategy, to get their team to score the 100 points
needed to win.


36 INDIAN LORE
Southeast Woodlands.
The Five Civilized Tribes and the Trail of Tears
Nonnatives named the Chickasaw, Choctaw, Cherokee, Creek,
and Seminole Indians the “Five Civilized Tribes.” These tribes
adopted many European customs—which, to non-Indians,
seemed “civilized.”
The tribes went through difficult times after they first
encountered European explorers in the 1500s. By the early
1700s, their populations had dropped about 75 percent. But
despite many setbacks, including wars, starvation, and disease,
they rebuilt their lives so that by the early 1800s they lived
much like the Southern whites. They owned plantations and
slaves and had learned new farming methods and the white
people’s ways of doing business. They established a republican
form of government. Sequoyah, a Cherokee, produced a written
version of the Cherokee language—the first written Indian lan-
guage—so that his people could have a written constitution.
However, they were still not well-treated by whites. A forced
removal—the Trail of Tears—took place in 1838. Fifteen thousand
Cherokees were forced from their lands so that whites could get
the gold discovered on Cherokee property. President Andrew
Jackson ordered the Indians moved nearly 1,000 miles to Indian
Territory, in what is now the state of Oklahoma.


INDIAN LORE 37
.Southeast Woodlands
They were not allowed to take clothing, food stores, or per-
sonal belongings. As many as 4,000 Cherokees died during the
terrible forced marches over a route they came to call nunna-
da-ul-tsun-yi: “the trail on which they cried.” More died of epi-
demics and starvation when they reached the Indian Territory.
Others of the “Five Civilized Tribes” also lost their homelands
during this shameful period in American history.
Indian Territory was supposed to be a permanent home
for the different tribes. But over the next few decades, settlers
poured onto Indian land in Oklahoma and it became theirs. By
the turn of the 20th century, the Indians had lost most of the
territory that was first promised to them.
In recent years, the federal government has tried to make
up for some of the losses these tribes suffered. Many Indians
themselves have sought cultural renewal and tribal unity as the
best path to a better life.
The Cherokee, Chickasaw, Choctaw, Creek, and Seminole
nations have headquarters and tribal heritage centers in Okla-
homa today. Some groups avoided forced removal during
the 1830s, and their descendants still live in the Southeast.
These include the Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians in North
Carolina, the Mississippi Band of Choctaws, the Poarch Band
of Creek Indians in Alabama, and the Seminole Tribe of Florida.
The Trail of Tears


38 INDIAN LORE
Great Plains.
Great Plains
When most Americans imagine how Indians look, dress, and
act, they think of the Great Plains Indians. Why is this group
the most famous of all?
The Great Plains stretch westward from the Mississippi
Valley to the Rocky Mountains, and south from present-day
Canada to central Texas. The Plains Indians had not lived in
the area long before their first contacts with the Spanish in the
1500s. Ancient Indians had once lived there but had moved
away before the 13th century. When tribes started moving
back, the first were probably farmers. Later groups became
nomadic, with a lifestyle centered on buffalo hunting.
When settlers started moving westward in the 19th century,
the Plains Indians fought them. Those final, desperate Indian
wars are portrayed over and over in books, movies, and
television shows.
Perhaps this explains why the Plains Indian image is
everywhere. The Indian-head nickel, the buffalo hunter,
Sitting Bull in his feather headdress, Conestoga wagons,
mustang ponies—all evoke the era of America’s
westward expansion.
On the Great Plains, various Indian tribes developed a hunting
lifestyle based on the horse and the buffalo.
Arapaho dog
dancer (Courtesy
American Museum
of Natural History)


INDIAN LORE 39
.Great Plains
The People
The Great Plains is a huge area. Much of it is treeless grassland
that stretches like a vast ocean for thousands of miles. In some
the prairies are interrupted by highlands, such as the Ozarks
of Missouri and Arkansas, the Black Hills of South Dakota and
Wyoming, and the badlands of South Dakota.
Into this enormous area came the different
Plains tribes. Some were looking for fertile
farmland in the river valleys. Others had
been pushed from their homelands by
the newcomers from Europe and were
seeking places to live. Teeming herds
of buffalo and other wild game lured
those who lived by hunting.
Buffalo-hide shield with snapping turtle
design, probably Mandan
Some of the Plains tribes encountered by European explorers included
the following.
Village tribes: Mandan, Hidatsa, Iowa, Oto, Missouri, Omaha, Ponca,
Osage, Kansa, Wichita, Caddo, Arikara, Pawnee
Hunting tribes: Dakota (Santee and Yankton Sioux), Lakota,
(Teton Sioux), Assiniboine, Crow, Blackfoot, Cheyenne, Arapaho,
Sarsi, Plains Apache, Plains Cree, Comanche, Kiowa


40 INDIAN LORE
Great Plains.
The Horse People
Plains Indians developed ingenious ways to hunt and catch
buffalo. One way was to drive whole herds over cliffs. Or they
would trap the beasts by setting fire to the grass around a herd,
leaving only one escape route where hunters waited with bows
and arrows and lances. They were highly successful buffalo
hunters—and at first they did it all on foot.
Spaniards brought horses to the New World in the 1500s.
(Prehistoric horses, native to North America, had died out
thousands of years earlier.) By the early 1700s, when the
Plains tribes got the horse, a new way of life opened to them:
a nomadic life of hunting buffalo. On horseback, they could
travel great distances searching for game, carrying their posses-
sions with them. Although it was no longer necessary, not all
Indians gave up farming. But even the farmers of the village
tribes took to the range, returning home at planting and harvest
time and during the winter.
Before they had horses, Plains Indians carried their posses-
sions on their backs, or on the backs of their dogs. They used
a sledlike device called a travois. Two poles were tied together
at one end, which rested on the dog’s shoulders. Hide stretched
between the trailing poles provided a pallet for carrying things.
Sometimes women pulled travois.
Horses could pull giant travois big enough to carry many
possessions, and people, if necessary. The long wooden frame-
work poles of the travois served double duty as tepee poles.
Tribes met on their wanderings and gradually, they adopted
the customs and habits of other Indian bands. The
groups shared religious rituals, hunting methods,
warfare secrets—even more efficient ways to build
tepees or haul provisions. They devised a hand
sign language so that all the different groups
could speak to each other.
A Blackfoot woman, with her children riding a travois


INDIAN LORE 41
.Great Plains
Lifeways
Through most of the year, the nomadic tribes foraged and hunted
in small bands. In cold weather they lived off the fruits of the
summer hunt, occasionally tracking elk, deer, or other game
through the snow.
Winter could bring hunger, but it also could be a fun time.
Buffalo ribs lashed together made excellent sleds. Games and
contests involved both children and adults. Dancing and espe-
cially singing accompanied most activities. The women sang
high, trilling songs that inspired courage and excitement.
Seminomadic bands would return from the summer hunt
to their stockaded villages in time for the fall harvest. Then
they settled into their lodges to begin preparations for spring,
when crops would be planted again.
Summer was a time for games, trading, courtship, tribal
reunions, and ceremonies. The most important ceremony was
the Sun Dance, as the Sioux called it. The Cheyenne called it
the New Life Lodge, and the Ponca the Mystery Dance.
The Sioux Sun Dance took 12 days. During the first four
days, while the various bands assembled, people renewed family
ties, swapped stories, and began courtships; almost everyone
was in a mood of high excitement. During the next four days,
assistants to the shamans, or medicine men, ritually prepared
themselves for the following four days of sacred ceremonies.
On the final day of the Sun Dance, some of the men volunteered
to have bits of flesh cut from their bodies. Or they agreed to
be skewered and hung from a pole until their skin ripped and
freed them. Their pain was a sacrifice to honor and thank the
Great Spirit.
The great “surround,” an annual tribal hunt, was another
important ritual. This solemn affair involved several hundred
men and their families. Prayers and many rituals preceded
the hunt. Discipline was strictly enforced; every hunter had
assigned tasks, and members of a military society made sure no
one tried to hunt by himself. The discipline imposed during the
group hunt was rare; Plains Indians prized their independence
and resisted strict authority.
When a herd of buffalo was located, the hunters stripped
themselves and their horses of any clothing or gear that might
restrict movement or make noise. The hunters rode their ponies
into the midst of the huge herd. Dodging the buffaloes’ power-
ful horns, they forced the beasts into a circle where they killed
them with bows and arrows or lances.
Different tribes
had different
rituals, but the
purpose of the
Sun Dance was
the same: to
give thanks
for blessings
bestowed and
to ask that the
coming year
also be blessed.
Through ceremony,
the people sought
to renew nature,
keep the buffalo
plentiful, bring
victory in battle,
make marriages
successful, heal
the sick, and
settle quarrels.


42 INDIAN LORE
Great Plains.
The Gift of the Buffalo
The buffalo was like a general
store on hooves. Plains Indians
made use of nearly every inch
of these giant prairie beasts.
Buffalo meat was the staple
food of the Plains tribes. They
ate the liver and kidneys raw.
Sweet marrow and roasted
intestines were favorites, but
the greatest delicacies were
the tongue and flesh from the
hump. Following a successful
hunt, after everyone had eaten their fill of roasted and raw flesh, the
rest of the meat was dried for jerky. Or it might be mixed with berries
and fat to make pemmican, a trail food.
Skins had many uses. The soft skin of a calf swaddled a newborn
baby. Hides were sewn together to make tepee covers and hung
inside for curtains. A single hide could make a round, lightweight
bullboat. Parts of hides became drums and rattles and battle shields.
Specially prepared hides were used to fashion clothing, and long-
haired winter skins made excellent cold-weather blankets and robes.
Tails were flywhisks. Rawhide made strings and lassos from which the
warriors fashioned tools and weapons.
Buffalo hair was woven into strong rope or stuffed loose into
cradleboards, gloves, moccasins, saddle pads, and pillows. Rolled
tightly, it made an excellent ball for games.
Bones became saddletrees and tools of various kinds. Ribs tied
together with rawhide made sleds. The skull was used in certain
religious ceremonies, as were rattles made from the animal’s hooves.
The buffalo paunch (stomach) became a cooking pot. It was suspended
from four sticks and filled with water, wild turnips and onions, and
meat; then hot rocks were dropped in to cook the stew.
Indians suitably honored the buffalo with special ceremonies.
Tribal leaders often took names associated with the buffalo to give
them added status.


INDIAN LORE 43
.Great Plains
The conclusion of a successful hunt was a joyous occasion.
Everyone—even the dogs—ate their fill. Then the exhausted
revelers would rest for a few hours before beginning a night of
celebration and dance.
In general, the Plains Indians lived without need of a
strong central government. Men and women were free to go
their own way. There were no hereditary or elected governors,
and rarely did a chief have the power to give orders to others.
The title “chief” was usually awarded to an individual honored
for bravery, wisdom, and powers of persuasion.
Some tribes traced family lineages through the paternal
(male) line. The Omaha, for example, were divided into 10
paternal clans. Others traced descent from a common mother.
Some tribes had no clans. But almost every tribe had military
societies that played important roles in tribal life. Society mem-
bers might be responsible for guarding camps during wartime,
keeping discipline during hunts, or organizing traditional feasts,
dances, and games.
Romance and courtship were much the same as in any
other society. Boys and girls flirted, but a girl’s virtue was
closely guarded. The parents arranged most marriages, although
sometimes couples eloped.
Many warriors died each year during buffalo hunts and
wars. Because women outnumbered men, many tribes allowed
polygamy (the practice of having more than one wife or husband
at the same time). A man could have several wives to bear
children and to help with the workload of the camp.
Babies were eagerly awaited, and great joy and celebration
greeted newborns. Children enjoyed a free and secure life. A
Sioux child had a second “mother” who took over much of his
or her care so that the birth mother would not spoil the child.
Men did not “buy”
their wives, as is
widely believed.
A suitor gave the
girl’s family a gift
of horses. The gift
was not to buy
her—women were
not property that
could be bought—
but to show his love
for her and to prove
that he could be a
good provider.
Among the most unusual societies were the Hidatsa
Dogs, known as the “Contraries.” They did everything
the opposite of what they were asked or expected to
do. They rolled in the dust to “wash” and jumped in
water to “dry off.” They said yes when they meant no,
and attacked when they were told to flee in battle.
Does the tribe you are studying have an unusual
society like the Contraries?


44 INDIAN LORE
Great Plains.
Dwellings
While the Plains tribes had different types of dwellings, the
tepee is the one most associated with this group. To nomadic
tribes such as the Blackfoot or Cheyenne, it was the only home
they knew.
The tepee made an ideal dwelling for nomads. A simple
structure, it could be put up and taken down quickly and was
lightweight and easily transported for a life of following the
great herds of buffalo.
The tepee was more than a shelter or home: It was a sacred
place. The floor symbolized the earth, and the walls the sky.
The tepee’s base was a circle, a sacred shape that symbolized
how all of life is interconnected. Sacred objects lined the walls,
along with family possessions and the necessities of daily life.
The inner walls were painted with brightly colored figures and
shapes that referred to family histories, spirit beings, ancestors,
and battle honors. A small altar was also a part of every tepee.
To put up a tepee at a new campsite,
several of the long poles that also served
as travois shafts were lashed together at
the top. The poles, stood on end, slanted
outward from the top lashing to form a
cone-shaped structure. Other poles were
leaned against the framework to strengthen
it. The woman who owned the tepee
covered the pole framework with buf-
falo hides sewn together and secured by
wooden pins. An opening at the top pro-
vided a smoke hole, and the flaps could
be left open or closed, depending on
the weather. During the winter, more
skins were hung on the inside
walls to insulate from the cold.
Nearly every Plains tribe
used tepees when it was on
the move. Some tribes, like
the Mandan and the Hidatsa,
continued to farm and had
permanent homes as well.
Plains buffalo-hide tepee


INDIAN LORE 45
.Great Plains
Their huge lodges were made of earth and grass, and housed
from 40 to 60 people. Above the firepit in the center was a
smoke hole in the roof. The sacred place was in the rear of the
lodge. Food platforms, storage pits, sleeping areas, and a stall or
two for horses lined the walls of the structure.
Religion and Ritual
Everything in life had supernatural aspects and religious mean-
ing for the Plains Indians. Sky, sun, and wind were all part
of the Great Spirit and were objects of reverence. The Indians
drew power from nature, from animals or other living things.
Each individual practiced religion in a unique way. Visions
were an important part of the religious experience. A vision was
considered a direct encounter with the Great Mystery Power.
Both men and women went on vision quests when they felt
the need for help from the spirit powers. A vision quest was a
boy’s initiation into manhood. A man went on vision quests to
seek help before a hunt or raid, or at other important times in
his life.
The sacred pipe was an important element in Plains Indian
rituals. Most tribesmen owned their own pipes. Some pipes
were owned by a tribe as a whole and were used in many cer-
emonies. Although often called peace pipes, they were more
than a symbol of peace and hospitality. Pipes were ceremoni-
ously smoked when preparing for battle, when trading goods
and hostages, before rituals and dances, and as part of some
medical treatments.
A Mandan earthlodge could hold 40 to 60 people.


46 INDIAN LORE
Great Plains.
Beautifully crafted, the pipestem was of ash or sumac
wood and the bowl fashioned from red pipestone found in a
quarry in present-day Minnesota. For many generations, all
Indians could mine pipestone without fear of harm from their
enemies, for the quarry was neutral territory.
Some especially talented pipemakers carved pipes in the
form of birds or animals. Feathers, quills or beads, fur, and
horsehair decorated sacred pipes. Tobacco and other plants
were smoked.
Many of the Plains Indians’ possessions had sacred meaning.
So did some dances and songs. If you are studying a Plains tribe,
learn which of their possessions, songs, dances, and games are
sacred. Take care not to misuse anything of religious significance.
Clothing, Arts, and Crafts
Plains Indian clothing was often artfully and elaborately
decorated. Buffalo, elk, deer, and occasionally other
animal skins were used to make clothes.
A loincloth or breechcloth and moccasins were
summer dress for men. Tanned-hide leggings might be
worn, and in the colder regions, shirts were also a part of
everyday dress.
The Sacred Pipe
“All the meanings of moral duty, ethics, religious, and spiritual concep-
tions were symbolized in the pipe,” wrote Chief Standing Bear in the book
Land of the Spotted Eagle (1933). The pipe “signified brotherhood, peace,
and the perfection of Wakan Tanka (the Great Spirit), and to the Lakota the
pipe stood for that which the Bible, church, state, and flag, all combined,
represented to the mind of the white man.”
Plains Indian culture has changed drastically since the era of the free-
ranging buffalo herds, but pipe carving is by no means a lost art. Carvers
of Indian ancestry continue to quarry the pipestone, and pipes today are
appreciated as artworks as well as for their ritual value and ceremonial
use. Modern carvers carry on an age-old tradition, ever-changing but
firmly rooted in the past.
Arapaho
moccasins


INDIAN LORE 47
.Great Plains
Women wore moccasins and
one-piece dresses of softened buf-
falo hide. Sometimes they wore
kneelength leggings. Deerskin skirts
and capes were common in Osage
and Pawnee villages and Cheyenne
encampments. Elk teeth, natural
paints, porcupine quills, beads, and
shells decorated clothes. During
the winter, fur robes, caps, and
headbands added warmth.
Ceremonial clothing differed
from tribe to tribe, but such items
were luxuriously decorated with
ermine fur, feathers, and other
embellishments. (If you have
chosen a requirement that involves
decorating an object or item of
clothing with feathers, be sure not to use feathers from an
endangered species.)
Only a few men—those who had earned the
privilege in warfare—wore an eagle-feather
headdress, or warbonnet. The longest warbonnets
were worn by war chiefs, and the number and
kind of feathers in the bonnet represented the
warrior’s exploits. Feather bonnets and decorative
caps were used for ceremonies and social affairs.
The life of the Plains Indians was often harsh. Yet they
softened it with finely crafted tools and highly decorated
clothing and other articles.
Among the tribes of the grasslands, painting, beadwork,
and porcupine-quill embroidery were prized skills. Women
took pride in the tepees they sewed and the handwork they
made. A woman was honored for her artistry.
The Plains Indians decorated with natural paints—yellow
from bullberries, black from burnt wood, green from plants,
white from certain clays. They painted containers, buffalo robes,
tepee skins, their horses, and themselves.
The insides of lodges or tepees—especially the dwelling of
a tribal chief—were painted with colorful murals. Their designs
came from the visions of the owner. The Crow Indians outfitted
their horses with saddles, bridles, collars, and blankets that were
richly decorated and embellished with beadwork and embroidery.
Feathered headdress, worn
for special occasions only
Sioux child’s coat,
made of leather
with beaded
floral motifs


48 INDIAN LORE
Great Plains.
Women spent their “leisure” time
helping to sew together buffalo skins
for tepees; braiding bags, scarves,
and belts; quilling or beading
items; and making many of the
tools needed for everyday life on
the Plains. Women sewed with
sinew. Cheyenne, Arapaho, and
Dakota women decorated pouches,
clothes, moccasins, and other objects
with porcupine quills dyed yellow, black,
red, green, and blue.
Warfare
Small bands of warriors made hit-and-run raids on other
tribes. Revenge, capturing horses, and most of all, counting
coups, or personal honors, and earning glory in battle were
reasons for warfare.
In the face of hopeless odds, a war party was expected
to pull out quickly to avoid fatalities; but once in the battle,
warriors were expected to fight to victory or death.
Standing in the midst of a raging battle and not
giving an inch to the enemy, rescuing a com-
rade, or counting coups were ways to earn
battle honors. (Touching an armed enemy
with a coup stick was considered much
braver than killing him.)
Relations between the Plains
tribes and the early settlers were not
unfriendly, at first. But as the number
of wagon trains grew, and thousands
of settlers began pouring across Indian
land, warfare between the two groups
became unavoidable.
The gold rushes of the 1850s and ’60s
brought thousands more settlers and soldiers
onto the Plains. Forts and towns sprang up. The
newcomers wanted more and more of what the
A Crow horse-bridle ornament, made from
circles of yarn sewn on buckskin, was worn
fastened to the front of a decorated bridle.
A Sioux shield of painted rawhide


INDIAN LORE 49
.Great Plains
Indians controlled: land for farms, unending miles of grasslands
for grazing cattle and sheep, and other natural resources. The
angry Indians retaliated by raiding settlements, and taking live-
stock for food, horses for mounts, captives for slaves, and scalps
for revenge.
Indian warfare became increasingly sophisticated. War
parties grew larger, and battles were bigger and more frequent.
While the Indians fought bravely, in the end they could not match
the superior firepower and strength of the United States Army.
Little Bighorn and Wounded Knee
Of all the confrontations between U.S. troops and
Indians, the Battle of the Little Bighorn and the
massacre at Wounded Knee are the most famous.
Sitting Bull, a great warrior of the Plains Indians,
will forever be connected to both events.
In June 1876 on the banks of the Little Bighorn
River, the U.S. Army’s cavalry suffered its most
crushing defeat of the Indian wars. The battle is
also known as Custer’s Last Stand. History has
not treated Lt. Col. George Armstrong Custer kindly.
Some historians say his ambition and vanity caused
the death of some 250 troopers.
Custer’s orders were to scout out a large
encampment of Indians but not to engage them in
battle until reinforcements came. Scouts estimated
that as many as 3,000 Sioux and Cheyenne warriors were at
the camp.
Custer did not wait for reinforcements. Dividing his
regiment of 600 men into several smaller groups, he ordered
an attack. In the battles that followed, Custer and at least 250
soldiers were killed. It was the Indians’ greatest and last victory.
The near-extinction of the buffalo was a heavy blow to the Plains tribes.
In 1800, there were some 60 million buffalo on the Plains. During the
1860s, whites slaughtered huge herds for sport while riding across the
prairies on the newly completed rail lines. The 1870s brought professional
buffalo hunters seeking the $3 bounty on each hide. An efficient group
of hunters could shoot and skin 50 buffalo a day. By the turn of the 20th
century, fewer than 1,000 buffalo survived.
Lt. Col. George A. Custer


50 INDIAN LORE
Great Plains.
Sitting Bull was a medicine man, or
spiritual leader, of the Hunkpapa band of the
Teton Sioux. Historians believe Sitting Bull
was not at the battle, but he had a vision that
white soldiers would fall “like grasshoppers”
into the Indian camp. His vision was inter-
preted as a sign of victory; the warriors went
into battle confident that they would win.
After Little Bighorn, Sitting Bull led his
people into Canada but surrendered to U.S.
troops in 1881. He and his followers were con-
fined to a reservation in the Dakotas. It was a
time of despair and near starvation.
The Ghost Dance religion gave them
hope. It promised that the world would soon
end and then come back as the old world the
Indians had once known. All Indians, includ-
ing the dead, would inherit the new Earth.
Buffalo would again cover the plain, and
whites would disappear. The religion quickly
became popular. Indians performed the Ghost
Dance, a simple ceremony of dancing and
chanting, to prepare for the coming age.
Reservation officials banned the dance, believing it encour-
aged rebellion. The Indians held the forbidden ceremonies in
secret and invited Sitting Bull to join them. In 1890, Sitting Bull
was arrested on a charge of rebellion. When he resisted the
soldiers, a fight broke out, and 14 people, including Sitting Bull,
lay dead or dying.
His followers fled the reservation but were quickly caught
by soldiers. The Indians surrendered at a place called Wounded
Knee, in South Dakota. When someone’s gun accidentally went
off, the soldiers opened fire on the Indian camp. As many as
300 unarmed men, women, and children were massacred.
Wounded Knee symbolized the way American Indians
historically were treated by whites. The site lies on the Pine
Ridge Reservation in South Dakota.
Today, about half of all Sioux live on reservations in the
northern plains. Other Sioux live in urban areas throughout the
United States.
Sitting Bull


INDIAN LORE 51
.Great Plains
Why the Lakota Wear the Eagle Plume
A long time ago when the world was freshly made, Unktehi the water
monster caused a great flood. The waters rose over the new earth until
everything was flooded except for one hill. The people climbed the hill,
trying to save themselves, but then the water swept over that hill, too.
The waves smashed rocks down upon the people. They were killed,
and all their blood jelled into one big pool. The blood turned to pipestone
and created the sacred red pipestone quarry, the grave of those ancient
ones. That is why the pipe, made of the red rock, is sacred. Its red bowl is
the blood of the ancestors, its stem is the backbone of those people long
dead, the smoke rising from the pipe is their breath. The pipe comes alive
when it is used in a ceremony; power flows from it.
When all the people were killed many generations ago, only one
young woman survived. As the water swept over the hill where the peo-
ple sought refuge, a big spotted eagle, Wanblee Galeshka, flew down and
let the young woman grab hold of his feet. With her hanging on, he flew
to the top of the highest stone pinnacle in the Black Hills. That smooth,
steep, needlelike rock was the eagle’s home, and it was the only spot not
flooded. Maybe that rock was not in the Black Hills; maybe it was Devil’s
Tower, as white men call it, in Wyoming. Both places are sacred.
Wanblee made the young woman his wife. She bore him twins, a boy
and a girl. The children were born on the high stone pinnacle.
When the floodwaters finally subsided, Wanblee helped the children
and their mother down from his rock and put them on the earth. He told
them: “Be a nation; become a great Nation, the Lakota Oyate”—the
eagle nation.
So the Lakota are descended from the eagle. The eagle is the wisest
of birds. He is the Great Spirit’s messenger; he is a great warrior. That is
why the Lakota wear the eagle plume.
—A Brule Sioux story, adapted from “How the Sioux Came to Be,” as
told by Lame Deer, a Sioux medicine man, to Richard Erdoes (American
Indian Myths and Legends, Pantheon, 1984)


52 INDIAN LORE
Southwest.
Southwest
Soaring mountains and deep canyons, the Painted Desert, the
Grand Canyon, pine and piñon forests, mesas, majestic rivers,
sagebrush, cactus, droughts followed by floods, scorching days,
freezing nights: This is the Southwest. It is a land of contrasts,
a land of enchantment, a homeland of both the village-dwelling
Hopi farmers and the mobile Apache nomads.
The Pueblo Peoples
The Pueblo peoples are southwestern American Indians who
live in a style of stone or adobe house called a pueblo. Pueblo
means “village” in Spanish. The term is used not only to
describe the house but also as a general name for the people
who live in such houses and for their villages. The pueblos of
New Mexico are the oldest continuously lived-in communities
in the United States.
The Southwest takes in the present-day states of
New Mexico and Arizona and parts of western Texas
and southern Colorado. Some major tribes of the
Southwest are:
Pueblo peoples: Hopi, Zuñi, Taos, San Felipe, Santo
Domingo, Acoma, Laguna
Nomadic tribes: Navajo (Diné, also spelled Dineh or
Dene), Southern Plains Apache (Llanero, Mescalero,
Jicarilla, Lipan), Western Plains Apache (Tonto, White
Mountain, San Carlos, Cibecue)
Farmers of the desert: O’odham (“Pima”), Tohono
O’odham (“Papago”), Yavapai, Havasupai, Yaqui


INDIAN LORE 53
.Southwest
Some tribes, like the Hopi and the Zuñi, live on the Colo-
rado Plateau, an area of high hills, deep valleys, and flat mesas.
The homeland of other Pueblo tribes, like the Santo Domingo
and San Felipe, is along the Rio Grande, a great river
that flows through much of the Southwest into the
Gulf of Mexico.
The Pueblo tribes have long been farmers,
cultivating corn of various colors (have you ever
eaten blue corn?), squash, beans, sunflowers,
and cotton. Hundreds of years ago they domes-
ticated the wild turkey and dog, and occasionally
hunted deer, antelope, and rabbits. They traded
their goods and extra food and sometimes traveled
many miles to trade with other pueblos.
In the spring, the men were responsible for hoeing and
tilling the soil and planting the crops, although everyone helped
in the fields. In some areas, they built miles of irrigation ditches
leading from the banks of rivers to their fields to water their
crops. During a sacred rain dance ceremony, they prayed for
good rains to bring a bountiful harvest. At harvest time, the
corn was picked, husked, and sorted. Most of it was ground into
meal; the rest was eaten fresh or stored for future use.
Dwellings
Pueblos clustered at the bottoms of wide canyons, or atop
towering buttes and mesas covered with piñon pine and
juniper trees. Others rose from the flat desert terrain and
forbidding cliffs.
The pueblo-style home is unique among Indian dwell-
ings. A pueblo was as high as five stories, and many
families lived in a building, much like
modern-day apartments. The flat
roof of one level was the floor
and front courtyard of another
level. Ladders connected the
different levels. Early pueblos
had no doors or windows,
making them easier to defend
from attack. Families entered their
apartments through
holes in the roofs.
The Pueblos made
their hoes from
the shoulder blade
of a deer, with
the handle made
of juniper wood.
Southwestern
adobe pueblo


54 INDIAN LORE
Southwest.
Pueblos were made of different types of materials. The
Hopi and the Zuñi used stones that were mortared together
and surfaced with plaster. Rio Grande Indians constructed their
homes from adobe bricks of sun-dried earth mixed with straw.
They stretched log beams across the roofs and covered them
with poles, brush, and plaster. Sometimes the beams projected
beyond the walls and were used as pegs to hang food for drying.
The women owned the apartments and all of the furnishings.
Pueblos faced the village streets and plazas. In the central
plaza of the village, the people dug kivas, underground chambers
where men conducted sacred rituals. Men also used the kivas as
clubhouses, and women usually were not allowed to enter.
Religion and Family Life
The stone-walled kivas were the spiritual and physical center of
the village. Sunk deep in the ground, kivas symbolize the World
Below, from which come the spirits said to inhabit all things. All
of the Pueblo kiva groups had similar religions, but the kiva
usually is associated with Hopi religion and ritual.
Religious ceremonies were conducted year-round,
with offerings of cornmeal and prayer sticks
placed on altars in secret rites to bring
rain and good crops. Kachinas, or
guardian spirits, were recreated in
wooden masks and dolls. Masked
kachina dancers performed at
many festivals and rituals. In
the summer, the Hopi held a
16-day festival called the
Niman Kachina, featuring
many rain dances and
celebrating the return
of the spirits to the
World Below.
A kachina doll is
not a child’s toy
but a likeness of
a supernatural
being meant to
help Hopi and Zuñi
children learn the
different kachinas.
Hopi kachina doll


INDIAN LORE 55
.Southwest
The most spectacular of rites, the Snake Ceremonial of late
August, was performed with live snakes wrapped around the
dancers’ arms and legs, and held in their mouths. Snakes, with
their zigzag movements, symbolized lightning and thunderstorms.
The senior chief of the village presided over the council of
chiefs, which led the affairs of the community. The men of the
kivas and the many religious and healing societies dominated
the ceremonial life of the village. Women were the property
holders, owning not only the houses but also the crops and the
seeds that would be planted to grow new crops. The clan was
the basic unit of Pueblo society, and children belonged to their
mother’s clan. The clans also helped direct religious events and
make village decisions.
Clothing, Arts, and Crafts
By 1540, Pueblo Indians had already perfected the
skill of spinning yarn from cotton to weave into
cloth. When Spanish explorers introduced the sheep
to their culture, they also mastered the art of spin-
ning and weaving wool.
Among the Hopi, it was the responsibility of each
man to supply his family’s clothing. Men wore short
kilts of cotton. Often they used rabbit fur for headbands to
hold down their bangs and to tie their long hair in a knot at
the back of the neck. Women wore a blanket dress—a calf-
length wrap of cotton cloth draped under one arm and fastened
to the other shoulder. Both sexes wore leggings of deerskin.
The Pueblo Indians are excellent artisans. Today, their
skillfully crafted pottery, jewelry, weavings, baskets,
and other art forms are eagerly sought by collectors
and art lovers. Traditionally, basketmaking and pottery
were women’s tasks; weaving was men’s work among
the Hopi.
Pueblo pottery jar


56 INDIAN LORE
Southwest.
Warfare
The Pueblo peoples seldom waged war. When they did, it
was to preserve peace, or to protect their villages from Navajo
and Apache raiding parties, or later, from Spanish soldiers.
In fact, the Hopi name comes from their word hópi, which
means “peaceful.”
When war was unavoidable, Hopi men held three nights of
rituals before setting out on surprise raids. Their biggest war was
against the Spaniards. When the invading Spanish tried to elim-
inate all kachina worship, the Hopi rebelled. They joined the
Rio Grande pueblos in the Pueblo Revolt of 1680 and destroyed
the Christian missions built by the Spaniards. The Rio Grande
pueblos were later recaptured, but not the Hopi. They remained
free and kept their culture despite Spanish and U.S. domination.
Today, about 7,000 Hopi live on tribal lands in Arizona.
The Nomads
The Apache and the Navajo were once a single people who
spoke the singsong Athapaskan language. The name “Apache”
comes from the Zuñi word apachu, which means “enemy.” The
name “Navajo” comes from a Pueblo Indian word that refers
to an area of land in the Southwest. In their own language, the
Navajo are the Diné, meaning “the people,” and their homeland
is the Dinétkah.
The Apache
The Apache lived a nomadic life, roaming widely over the
Southwest. They hunted deer and rabbits and foraged for plant
foods such as cactus and mesquite seeds. When food became
scarce in their rugged, desert land, they raided neighboring
tribes. The Chiricahua Apache raided into northern Mexico,
Arizona, and New Mexico from their strongholds in Arizona’s
Dragoon Mountains.
Apache lifestyles were flexible, adopting from other Indian
tribes they contacted. The Western Apaches took up farming
from the Hopi. The Jicarilla Apaches of northern New Mexico
became buffalo hunters like their Plains Indians neighbors.
The Apache fiddle, or “the wood that sings,” was
crafted from a yucca stalk and played with a bow
made of wood and sinew.
Hopi gourd
rattle with
painted design,
wooden handle,
and feather
decorations


INDIAN LORE 57
.Southwest
The Apache lived in small encampments. Home was
the wickiup, a domed structure made of a pole frame-
work covered with brush, grass, or reed mats. It
could be erected quickly.
There was no central tribal government.
Bands had headmen or informal leaders. A lead-
er’s authority came mainly from the strength of
his personality and his success in warfare. Each
band or local group was made up of several
extended families.
Women, their female relatives, and chil-
dren were at the center of the family structure.
Apache women were excellent basketmakers who wove
intricately designed baskets in many shapes and sizes. They
made pottery and buckskin clothing.
The Apache worshiped Ussen, the
Giver of Life, and often sought the help of
mountain spirits known as Gans, which
were especially important in Apache cer-
emonies. The men painted their bodies
and dressed in elaborate costumes of
kilts, black masks, and tall wooden-slat
headdresses for these ceremonies, which
were presided over by shamans.
More than 25,000 Apache live in
the Southwest today. The San Carlos,
Tonto, and White Mountain Apache tribes
are in eastern Arizona. The Chiricahua,
the Mescalero, and the Lipan are in
southern New Mexico; the Jicarilla, in
north central New Mexico.
The Apache went to war against the U.S. Army in the 1860s, led by Cochise,
a chief of the Chiricahua tribe. After the death of Cochise in 1874, another
Apache leader, Geronimo, took up the fight. Geronimo (his original name
was Goyathlay, meaning “One who yawns”) led warriors on raids against
the army and against settlers coming into the area. He was arrested, but
escaped and went on fighting until he finally surrendered in 1887. Geronimo
was still a prisoner of war when he died in 1909 at Fort Sill, Oklahoma.
This 2-foot-high
Apache basket
was used for
storing food.
Twenty to 30 poles,
about a foot apart,
and bundles of grass
were used to build
a wickiup.


58 INDIAN LORE
Southwest.
The Navajo
The Navajo—like their kinsfolk, the Apache—lived a largely
nomadic lifestyle. Eventually, the Navajo adopted a settled
way of life. They became planters of corn, beans, and squash.
With sheep and horses they got from the Spaniards, the Navajo
became excellent sheep ranchers and herders. They spun and
dyed the wool from their sheep and wove it into fine blankets
and cloth with complex designs.
The Navajo developed an art form known as sand painting,
used in ceremonies to banish evil and heal the sick. Art and
religion are linked in the Navajo way. Art could draw one
closer to ancestors, affect the weather, or cure the sick. In the
Navajo religion, Changing Woman (the Earth Mother), the Hero
Twins, and Coyote the trickster are important spirit-beings, or
Holy People. There are evil ghosts, too, that cause sickness
and accidents.
Hundreds of songs or chants tell stories from Navajo
tradition. The Evil Way chant, for example, is a defense
against witchcraft. The Blessing Way is sung for health
and harmony in family life.
The Navajo are famous for their skill as weavers of fine woolen
rugs like this one.
Navajo weaving
is among the
finest examples
of native craft.
Navajo artisans
also excel in
jewelry making.


INDIAN LORE 59
.Southwest
The Navajo Code Talkers
During World War II, the United States military urgently
needed a secret code that the enemy could not crack.
Americans were fighting the Japanese, who were skilled
code-breakers and had a group of well-trained, English-
speaking soldiers who could decipher the messages the
American military sent.
The solution: Use a Native American language for
sending secret messages. Choctaw Indians had been
“code talkers” in World War I. That tradition continued in
the 1940s, when the hundreds of Navajo code talkers who
served with the U.S. Marines used their complex native
language to create an unbreakable code. They used Navajo
words to represent terms that did not exist in the Navajo
language. A submarine, for example, was an “iron fish”
(besh-lo). A fighter plane became a “hummingbird” (dah-
he-tih-hi). And America was “our mother” (Ne-he-mah).
At Iwo Jima, six Navajo code talkers worked around
the clock for the first two days of the battle. Those six
sent and received more than 800 messages, all without
an error. The Japanese were baffled; they never broke the
Navajo code.
The code talkers’ skill and courage saved American
lives and helped the United States win the war. Only
recently, however, have the code talkers been publicly
recognized and honored, because the Navajo language
remained potentially valuable as a secret code long after
World War II ended.
Other Native Americans have served as code talkers
during World Wars I and II. It is estimated that at least
17 tribes have contributed code talkers, including the
Cherokee, Cheyenne, Choctaw, Comanche, Osage, and
Yankton Sioux in World War I; and the Chippewa, Choctaw,
Comanche, Creek, Hopi, Kiowa, Menominee, Muscogee-
Seminole, Navajo, Oneida, Pawnee, Sac and Fox, and
Sioux (Lakota and Dakota dialects) in World War II.


60 INDIAN LORE
Southwest.
Traditional Navajo society had no villages, only solitary
family encampments. As the Navajo began raising sheep,
families moved farther and farther apart to find enough grazing
land. Home was a hogan, a cone-shaped house built of timbers
and poles and covered with bark and earth. The hogan entrance
faced east to the sunrise.
Navajo extended families were grouped into about 60 clans.
Daughters inherited the hogans, sheep, and other property of
their mothers. Ancestry was determined through the female
line. Husbands fathered the children but were responsible to
their sisters and their sisters’ offspring. Many Navajo families
today live in hogans and live by centuries-old traditions.
In 1863, U.S. Army forces under Col. Christopher “Kit”
Carson campaigned against the Navajo, destroying their fields
and crops and killing their livestock. The Army forced 8,500
Navajo men, women, and children to walk to a barren reser-
vation in eastern New Mexico. Many died during the journey
known in Navajo history as the Long Walk. The survivors were
allowed to return to their homeland in 1868. There they began
the process of rebuilding.
Today the Navajo are the largest American Indian tribe
in the United States. The reservation lands in New Mexico,
Arizona, and Utah total more than 15 million acres.
A Navajo hogan made of logs, small branches, brush, cedar bark,
and earth


INDIAN LORE 61
.Southwest
Desert Farmers
The O’odham and Tohono O’odham of southern Arizona,
though closely related, developed different ways of coping with
the demands of desert life. The O’odham lived along rivers and
built large, permanent villages where they tended plentiful crops
of squash, corn, beans, and cotton. Water for the crops flowed
from the Salt and Gila Rivers through a series of irrigation ditches.
The Tohono O’odham, living deep in the desert, depended
on rain to water their crops. They spent the summers in their
“field villages” in the desert, where heavy rains usually supplied
enough water to grow beans and corn. In winter, the Tohono
O’odham moved to their “well villages,” near springs in the
mountains, and hunted deer and peccary for food. In times
of famine, Tohono O’odham families sometimes moved to
O’odham villages and worked in the fields.
O’odham men were farmers, hunters, fishermen, and
builders. They built the houses—small, round, flat-topped,
pole-framed dwellings—and the ramadas, which were open-air
structures that served as the community’s clubhouses. Men
wove cotton fibers into sheets of fabric on their horizontal
looms. Women sewed the cotton sheeting and other materials
into clothes.
O’odham women foraged for mesquite seeds and the
fruit of the saguaro cactus to add variety to their diet. Wild
foods were even more important to their kinsfolk, the Tohono
O’odham, who depended on foraging for wild plants to round
out their crops. They cooked and ate the fleshy heart of the
mescal plant. The beanlike mesquite seed was a regular part
of their diet, and the fruit of the saguaro
cactus was a delicacy. This sweet, fleshy
fruit was eaten fresh or dried; boiled into
jam or syrup; or dried and ground into
a powder that made a sweet drink
when added to water.
Both tribes were known for
the fine baskets they created. The
Tohono O’odham are also renowned
for the calendar stick they developed.
With it, they could recount their history
over many years and record important events
in tribal life. An O’odham
carrying-basket


62 INDIAN LORE
Southwest.
Piman Villages
An O’odham tribal chief was elected to preside over the chiefs
of the villages. Village chiefs reported to the tribal chief in
council. They were responsible for communal farm projects and
for defending against marauding Apache raiders. The Tohono
O’odham also had village chiefs, but there was no chief for the
tribe as a whole. In every Piman village, one man, the Keeper
of the Smoke, was a ceremonial chief.
Villages of both tribes were organized into two clans. The
clans opposed each other in games and gambling, the major
entertainment in the villages.
Unlike many other tribes, the Pimans (as the O’odham and
Tohono O’odham together are known) allowed two members of
the same clan to marry. Children took clan membership from
their fathers.
The Pimans believed that songs and singing had magical
powers. They had corn-planting ceremonies, ceremonies for
“singing up the corn,” and ceremonies at harvest time. Med-
icine men and singers conducted curing rituals. Rain-bringing
ceremonies and baby-naming ceremonies were important
religious rituals.
Pimans believed they gained power through visions. Animal
spirits, they thought, gave men power for curing, warring, even
gambling and running. On the rare occasions when they made
war (usually in defense against the Apache), villagers danced
for 16 nights to help the warriors’ purification rituals.
The Tohono O’odham made annual pilgrimages across the
desert to a place near the Gulf of California where they believed
the rain spirits lived. There, on the salt flats, they drank saguaro
wine and prayed to the rain spirits for valuable water.
In the 1980s the Papago officially changed their
name from Papago, which means “Bean Eaters,” to
Tohono O’odham, which means “Desert People”
in their native language. The name change reflects
the tribe’s desire to keep its identity and traditions.
Similarly, the group formerly known as the Pima
now prefer the name O’odham (People) or Akimel
O’odham (River People).


INDIAN LORE 63
.Southwest
The O’odham still live along the Gila and Salt Rivers. The
Tohono O’odham reservation stretches for more than 100 miles
along the Mexico/Arizona border and extends far into southern
Arizona. The reservation lies in the Sonoran Desert, where the
Tohono O’odham have lived for thousands of years. It is a land
of wide valleys, plains, and jutting mountain ranges that rise
to nearly 8,000 feet. One of the peaks, Baboquivari Peak, 7,730
feet high, is the sacred mountain home of the Tohono O’odham
creator god, I’itoi.
The reservation consists of four separate lands: Tohono
O’odham, Gila Bend, San Xavier, and Florence Village. The
combined reservation covers nearly three million acres, about
the size of the state of Connecticut. Most contemporary Tohono
O’odham live on their lands in permanent villages or they live
in the cities surrounding the reservation.
Piman Indians built earth-and-pole houses over shallow pits.


64 INDIAN LORE
Great Basin and Plateau.
Great Basin and Plateau
Great Basin Tribes
The Great Basin cultural area takes in nearly all of
present-day Utah and Nevada; parts of Colorado,
Wyoming, Idaho, Oregon, and California; and
small sections of Arizona, New Mexico, and
Montana. Much of the Great Basin is desert.
The area is covered with grasses and sage-
brush. At higher elevations, forests of pine grow
in the mountains and near lakes and streams.
The climate in the Great Basin varies from hot
dry summers at lower elevations to extremely cold
winters at higher elevations. Death Valley, the lowest
and hottest point in the Americas, is in the Great Basin.
The basin is surrounded on all sides by mountain ranges.
The Rocky Mountains stand on the eastern border; the Sierra
Nevadas on the west. The Colorado Plateau forms the southern
border; the Columbia Plateau the northern.
Because the mountains block rain and snow blowing in
from the ocean, rainfall in the Great Basin is low and the
evaporation rate is high. A few streams flow through the
valleys, fed by runoff from the mountains. In ancient times the
basin had many large lakes, but most of them have evaporated.
The Great Salt Lake, together with Utah Lake and Sevier Lake,
are all that remain of an enormous, ancient body of water
called Lake Bonneville.
For 10,000 years, tribes of resourceful desert dwellers have met the
challenges of life in the Great Basin.
Great Basin tribes: Paiute (Northern and Southern), Bannock, Mono,
Western Shoshone, Lehmi, Ute, Chemehuevi, Washo
A Paiute youth
floods a burrow
with water as a
hunter stands
ready to shoot
the animal when
it comes out.


INDIAN LORE 65
.Great Basin and Plateau
Lifeways
Because of the limited vegetation in the Great Basin, Indians
in this area were traditionally hunter-gatherers. The main food
source for early native peoples was pine nuts. The people also
varied their diet with acorns, wild beans, the bulb of the camas
plant, mesquite, ricegrass, wheatgrass, and berries from various
shrubs. A few farming groups raised corn, beans, and squash.
The people fished for trout, salmon, and whitefish, and hunted
game such as pronghorn, rabbits, rodents, snakes, lizards,
and birds.
Indians of the Great Basin traveled in small family groups
seeking food. At special times during the year, the family
groups would work together for antelope, rabbit, and grass-
hopper drives.
In spring, the people gathered cattails from the marshes
and ate the crisp inside flesh. They trapped ground squirrels
and, with bow and arrow, shot Canada geese and other water-
fowl. They used finely crafted decoys to lure and trap ducks in
nets, and they gathered duck eggs. They fished the streams that
filled each spring from mountain runoff.
In summer, they might eat the abundant insect life: locusts,
caterpillars, and crickets raw or roasted. Ants were roasted and
ground with seeds to make a flour. Grasshoppers were scorched
and ground up to make a porridge. Robins and flickers went
into the cookpot, but not magpies, which were prized especially
for their feathers.
Water was
precious and
scarce, and the
people of the
Great Basin
spent much time
searching for it.
Wood from the
relatively few
trees was also
highly prized, for
fires as well as
tool making.
A Paiute encampment on a desert plateau in northern
Arizona. The shelters were made of brush placed over a
frame of willow poles.


66 INDIAN LORE
Great Basin and Plateau.
In autumn, it was important to gather and dry enough food
to help tide them over during the winter months. The small
bands went into the hills in the fall to meet with other small
groups and gather piñon nuts. Then they returned to
the desert floor to repeat the yearly cycle.
The type of shelter they used depended
upon the season. In winter, they lived in wicki-
ups—small, cone-shaped structures with a
pole framework covered in sod, bark, grass,
animal skins, brush, or reeds. During the
summer months, a lean-to or windbreak
made of brush provided living quarters.
Family Life and Customs
A Basin Indian encampment did not need a chief, although
they might sometimes consult a wise elder. Nor did they need
many rules or laws, for the small group consisted only of an
extended family.
Indians of the Great Basin were spiritual people. They
believed they shared their world with good spirits. Shamans
were greatly respected; they were thought to have the power
to heal the sick and injured. The people often performed round
dances in which the participants would join arms and dance
around a central pole or tree. These dances were done to ask
the spirits for rain, for a successful hunt, and for other reasons.
Prayers were offered at the beginning of the fall piñon nut
harvest. The ritual piñon prayer dance lasted through the night
after the first day’s harvest. Nuts were scattered on the ground
to show gratitude for Earth’s bounty.
When potential mates were scarce, both men and women
might take more than one mate. Desert women were valued
for the foraging and gathering that made them the major food
providers. Women as well as men could become shamans.
A Paiute twined
basketwork
cap with a
painted design


INDIAN LORE 67
.Great Basin and Plateau
Clothing and Crafts
The Basin tribes, particularly the Paiute, were noted for their
craftwork. They produced cedar-bark ornaments, tule rush
mats, nets, baskets for storage,
basketwork caps, and watertight
baskets that could be used as cook-
ing pots. The women used choke-
berry wood, pliable twigs, and
antelope hide to make cradleboards
for babies.
Jackrabbits were prized both
for food and for their pelts, which
were sewn together to make a
blanket or cloak for winter wear.
As many as a hundred skins might
be needed to make one man’s
wrap. Deer provided not only food
but also skins for clothing. Most of
the Basin Indians wore clothes and
occasionally sandals woven from
shredded sagebrush and cedar bark.
Basin History
Basin people made war only in self-defense. When nonnatives
came, the newcomers were defeated at first by the elements,
not the Indians. Death Valley claimed many. Forty-five people
in the Donner party died of starvation while crossing the Sierra
Nevada to reach the West Coast.
When prospectors began pouring into the area in their
search for silver and gold, they ruined the land for food gath-
ering. They cut down stands of piñon trees for firewood.
Livestock trampled wild seed plots. To survive, many Indians
had no choice but to work in the white men’s mining camps
and on their ranches.
The Paiute entrusted their myths and legends to a
Teller of Tales. The Teller entertained around the eve-
ning campfire with stories of talking animals and
the adventures of Coyote, an animal the Basin tribes
held in high regard.
When the Paiute
could get deer,
they made the
skins into cloth-
ing like this
dress. Many
Basin Indians
made clothes
and sandals from
shredded bark.


68 INDIAN LORE
Great Basin and Plateau.
Some Indians adopted the white man’s ways. Others
fought. The Northern Shoshone took to horses and rode the
plains with other tribes.
Many Indians of the Great Basin today make their living as
farmers and ranchers. For additional income, some tribes in the
region lease mining rights to their lands.
Indians of the Plateau
Plateau Indians settled
in the northwestern
United States, where the
basin lowlands rise and
become the highlands of
present-day Idaho, Oregon,
Washington, Montana, and
part of Wyoming. The Rocky
Mountains border the region on the east. To the west is the
Cascade Range. The Columbia, Snake, and Fraser Rivers and
their tributaries provided the Plateau Indians with waterways to
travel for trade and abundant salmon for food.
Plateau pit house
Here are the major
Plateau tribes: Klamath,
Cayuse, Flathead, Nez
Perce, Yakima, Klikitat,
Walla Walla, Umatilla


INDIAN LORE 69
.Great Basin and Plateau
Before the coming of the horse, the Plateau Indians were
gatherers, hunters, and fishers. Sometime toward the end of
the Ice Age, they were drawn to the majestic Columbia River
by promising fishing sites. Cascade points—leaf-shaped projec-
tiles—are artifacts that mark the passage of these Paleo-Indians.
With nets and spears, they took salmon from the Columbia
and Snake Rivers. Women gathered berries and wild vegetables;
the starchy edible bulb of the camas, a kind of lily, was second
only to salmon as a main staple in their diet.
Lifeways
Plateau Indians traveled the rugged high country in search of
food and moved with the changing seasons. They traveled in
larger bands than the Basin Indians, mainly because food was
more abundant and more people could be fed from available
game and fish.
Most Plateau peoples had summer lodges made of bullrush
mats over cottonwood frames. In winter they lived in partly
underground earth houses.
Whole villages camped
beside the rivers when and
where the salmon ran. After
the women had finished
smoking and preserving the
catch, they took apart their
wooden drying racks and
moved on. Although they
relied on fish as their main
source of food, the Plateau
peoples also hunted deer, elk,
mountain sheep, and rabbits.
The villages were independent.
Their headmen were not all-powerful.
They guided councils in deciding such matters as
when to break camp and return to the winter home.
Plateau tribes were
renowned for their
basketmaking.


70 INDIAN LORE
Great Basin and Plateau.
Using dugout canoes, Plateau tribes traveled and traded
widely along the Columbia and Fraser river systems. From the
west came sea otter pelts and ornamental shells. Deerskins,
hemp for basketmaking, and bitterroot were brought from the
interior. All sorts of goods changed hands: dried salmon, candle-
fish oil, baskets, carvings, even the canoes in which the traders
carried their wares. When horses came to the Plateau in the
early 18th century, tribes like the Yakima, Nez Perce, and Cayuse
became expert horse raisers and traders.
The Plateau Indians had a complex system of beliefs and
ceremonies. Everyone sought visits from guardian spirits, and
when someone felt they were about to be healed by their
guardian spirit, there was a ceremony of singing and dancing.
Shamans had visions and appeared to the people in the guise
of grizzly bears.
Clothing, Arts, and Crafts
Exquisite baskets with bright geometric
designs, which could be used for food gath-
ering and even cooking, were a trademark
of these tribes. The women wore basket-
work hats woven from plant fibers. They
sewed deerskins into leggings and shirts
and made dresses decorated with beads
and fringe.
The Wishram and neighboring tribes
were noted for their horn carvings. Using the
horns of bighorn and mountain sheep, they
carved delicate and complex designs into bowls,
spoons, and other utensils.
When traveling over snow, men
wore circular snowshoes like this.
The Wasco and Wishram tribes of Oregon developed
an unusual “X-ray” style for wood carvings and bas-
ketry designs. The skeletons of the artists’ subjects
could be seen in designs portraying animals and
humans, as though the artists had looked through
the flesh.


INDIAN LORE 71
.Great Basin and Plateau
Plateau History
When the horse reached the Plateau Indians in the 1700s, it
changed the lifeways of tribes such as the Flatheads. They
adopted the buffalo-hunting and tepee culture of the Plains
Indians and fought with the Blackfoot for hunting lands.
In 1805, the explorers Lewis and Clark arrived, guided by
their interpreter, the Shoshone woman Sacajawea. The explor-
ers were followed by fur trappers and traders. Traditional
Plateau lifeways were again altered as hunting for food
gave way to hunting for the fur business.
In the wake of the fur trappers came
the settlers. The flood of settlers disordered
the Plateau Indians’ way of life. Some tribes,
including the Yakima and Nez Perce, tried
to resist, but the odds against them were
overwhelming. Today, the reservations of
Plateau tribes dot the maps of Idaho, Oregon,
Washington, and Montana.
Jason, a Nez Perce chief, in
buckskin clothing. The Nez Perce
are Plateau Indians. (Courtesy
Smithsonian Institution)


72 INDIAN LORE
California.
California
Many California Indians made their homes in a land of plenty,
between the mountains of the Cascade Range and Sierra Nevada
to the east and the Pacific Ocean on their western shore. The
climate was mild, the rain generous, and food and plant life
abundant. A wide assortment of raw materials was available to
fashion shelter, weapons, tools, clothing, and other necessities.
Such abundance supported many people. Perhaps 133,000
Indians speaking more than a hundred different languages and
regional dialects lived in the area at the time nonnatives came.
California Indians differed from one another not only in language but
also in physical appearance. An interesting fact about this group is that
the Mohaves of southeastern California, among the tallest people on
the continent, shared the same cultural area as the Yukis of the northern
coast, who were among the shortest people.
Californians such as the Chumash had coastal territory and were skilled seamen.


INDIAN LORE 73
.California
The presence of so many different languages and varied
physical traits is evidence that many different groups migrated
to the area in prehistoric times. Overall, however, they were
more alike than different. They ate the same kinds of foods,
which they gathered and prepared in much the same ways.
Their social organizations and lifestyles were similar, as were
their religious beliefs.
Food
Many tribes depended on the fruit of
the oak tree—the acorn—as a staple
food. During the important fall harvest,
women gathered the nuts as the men
and boys shook them out of the trees.
Then the acorns were hulled and ground
into a meal that was leached with hot
water to remove the bitter taste. Boiled,
the mush was a main dish at each of
the day’s two meals. Acorn meal could
also be baked into bread.
A few tribes, like the Yuma and
Mohave, were farmers. Although they lived in a sun-baked
desert, they could grow corn, beans, pumpkins, and melons,
and later wheat, along the fertile banks of the lower Colorado
River. They also hunted small desert game, fished, and gathered
mesquite beans and piñon nuts.
Most California Indians did not farm. They were hunter-
gatherers. The land teemed with wildlife; most groups hunted
deer, rabbits, and gamebirds. More than 60 wild plants were
gathered for food. Fish and shellfish were abundant in the rivers
and along the coast. The Chumash fished the ocean in plank
canoes to add to their staple diet of acorns and small game.
The following are some of the better-known tribes of California.
Northern Californians: Karok or Karuk, Yurok, Wiyot, Shasta, Hupa, Yuki
Central Californians: Maidu, Pomo, Costanoan, Miwok, Yokut
Southern Californians: Chumash, Serrano, Luiseño, Cahuilla, Gabrielino
Yuman tribes: Yuma, Mohave, Cocopa
A Pomo woman
pours hot water
on raw acorn meal
to remove the bit-
ter taste. Pouring
through a bundle
of bullrush twigs
would make the
water flow evenly
over the meal.


74 INDIAN LORE
California.
Dwellings
California tribes lived in many different types of houses. A
typical house was cone-shaped like a tepee and built of poles
covered with brush, grass, or reeds.
Some groups had lean-tos made of redwood bark slabs.
In summer, the desert-dwelling Yumans lived in open-sided,
flat-roofed shelters that gave protection from the sun.
Some tribes in central California built big, solid homes—
dome-shaped structures that housed as many as 40 to 50
people. The Maidu built partly underground houses 20 to 40
feet in diameter. A single hole in the roof through which people
entered the house also allowed smoke to escape.
In the northern part of the area, tribes built wood
plank houses.
The tepee-shaped dwellings of the Miwoks had a framework of poles tied with vines,
then were covered with brush, grass, or reeds.
The Mohave, though farmers, loved to travel. They
traveled to trade, but sometimes they would jour-
ney hundreds of miles simply out of curiosity about
other groups.


INDIAN LORE 75
.California
Village and Family Life
Villages typically were made up of several families, related
through the male line, who lived in small, independent groups.
Sometimes, when two or three of these villages were close to one
another, the people formed a loose, unstructured association.
A headman might guide village affairs or preside at meet-
ings. The shaman was the dominant person in the village, and
in some areas was more likely to be a woman than a man.
The single family was the basic social and economic unit
of many of these tribes. Life was relatively easy, but everyone
had chores to do. The women gathered and cooked the food,
made baskets, raised the babies, and kept the household in
order. Babies were welcomed, and parents were seldom strict
with their children. Men were responsible for hunting, fishing,
fighting, building their houses, making tools, and ceremonial
dancing. Generally, young men married young women from
outside bands, who were chosen by the parents.
Pomo Indians haul in a net full of fish. Nets were made of hemp, milkweed,
or nettles. (Courtesy Milwaukee Public Museum)
Some groups
were villagers in
winter, travelers
in summer.
Most put down
permanent roots.
Chumash villages
could be quite
large, with more
than a thousand
inhabitants.
In the Pomo groups, a marriage might be arranged
by maternal aunts, but according to the couple’s
wishes. The young man suggested his choice of bride;
she had the right to accept or refuse. Gifts were
exchanged as a matter of goodwill between families.


76 INDIAN LORE
California.
Religion and Ritual
California Indians had a variety of religious beliefs and practices.
Some tribes had shamans, including women healers. Some
tribes had secret societies. Prayers were offered to supernatural
spirits who were thought to live in mountains, trees, caves, and
other abodes in the local environment.
Initiation rites—the passage from childhood to adulthood—
were important in most of the tribes, as were death rites. Death
ceremonies were meant to free the spirit of the dead and keep it
from coming back as a ghost.
Major ceremonies for the Yurok of northwestern California
included the White Deerskin Dance and the Jumping Dance.
Each ritual lasted for days. The purpose was to renew the world
for the coming year and ward off illness and misfortune.
Ishi of the Yahi
In August 1911, in Oroville, California, the townsfolk found a nearly
naked and starving Indian. He was exhausted and terrified and could
not speak a word of English. The sheriff put him in jail for safekeeping.
Ishi (the name meant “man” in his native language) had lived
with his tribe, the Yahi, in the foothills of Mount Lassen in northern
California. By the time he wandered into the small town, he was alone.
The story of Ishi made the newspapers. Two anthropologists (sci-
entists who study human cultures) from the University of California
quickly arranged to take charge of Ishi. He was taken to San Francisco
and given a comfortable place to live in a museum.
Imagine this middle-aged man (Ishi was about 54 when he was
found) who had never been around whites or large groups. The sights
and sounds of 20th-century civilization must have assaulted every
sense. He was shy and bashful and lonely.
The anthropologists spent many hours with Ishi, learning his
language and his beliefs. They took him camping in his former
wilderness home so they could see how he had once lived. He made
a salmon harpoon, snared deer, and shaped juniper wood for a bow.
Ishi was a gentle man. He learned some English, adopted
non-Indian ways, and overcame his fear of crowds and noise. For the
last five years of his life, he lived in San Francisco at the museum. He
demonstrated native crafts to museum visitors and traveled around the
city when he was not working.


INDIAN LORE 77
.California
Music and dancing played important roles in ceremonies.
Some groups used a potion made from parts of a poisonous
weed to induce visions.
Clothing, Arts, and Crafts
Because of the warm climate, little clothing was needed.
Males rarely wore clothes except in the winter. Women
dressed in two-piece garments of a skirt and apron made
of animal skin or shredded willow bark. They sometimes
wore basketwork hats, iris fiber hairnets, feather head-
bands, or feather crowns. Some went barefoot, while
others wore high leather moccasins or sandals made of
fiber. In cold weather, they wore robes of sea-otter fur,
rabbit skin, or feathers.
For decoration they wore handsome necklaces of shell
and stone, earrings, and armbands. Tattooing was popular
among tribes from the Hupa of the north to the Mohave
of the south. Men and women also painted themselves for
greater beauty.
California Indians—famous for their basketry—fashioned
reeds, grasses, roots, and barks into all kinds of articles: trays,
containers, cook pots, hats, fish traps, baby carriers, ceremo-
nial objects, and even boats. The Pomo decorated their finely
crafted baskets with shells and feathers. Basketry was the
work of women in most tribes, but Pomo men often wove
articles such as mats and fish traps.
Various groups made ceremonial objects like stone and
clay pipes; rattles of gourds, turtle shells, and deer hooves;
and drums, flutes, and whistles. In central California, coastal
tribes hollowed bowls out of soapstone. Other tribes made
bowls and jars from clay, using coiled ropes of the material.
Northern tribes carved spoons and purses from elk antlers.
Ceremonies also were held for curing the sick and influencing the
weather. The Patwin Indians of California’s Sacramento Valley held
sacred ceremonies from October to May to bring health and prosperity,
rainfall, and a plentiful harvest of wild crops. A secret society, the Kuksu,
was in charge of the rituals. Kuksu members used disguises of feather
and grass headdresses to hide their identities and make them resemble
the spirits they portrayed. Some headdresses covered not only the face
but the body as well.
A young man of a
Yuman tribe in typical
clothing (Courtesy
Smithsonian Institution)


78 INDIAN LORE
California.
Men made weapons and tools for the hunt: nets of hemp
or milkweed, harpoons, stone knives, and willow and ash bows
armed with feather-tipped arrows. The seagoing Chumash built
canoes of pine planks sewn with fiber cords and caulked with
tar. Their fishing nets were woven of sea grass and weighted
with stone balls. The Hupa of northwestern California made
dugout canoes from redwood logs split in half.
Warfare
Warfare was not commonplace among native Californians.
Disputes arising from feuds or vengeful acts were usually
settled by negotiation or bargaining.
The Mohave (also spelled Mojave) who lived and farmed
along the lower Colorado River had a warrior class known
as the kwanamis (“brave men”). The kwanamis dreamed of
battle and often went out in raiding parties of 10 or 12 fighters.
Warfare on a larger scale was less frequent. With their River
Yuman allies, the Mohave made forays against the Maricopa
to the east. The Yuma called upon the Mohave to join them in
expeditions against the Cocopa who lived southward.
Native Californians fiercely resisted the onslaught of
Europeans, but the non-Indian newcomers were relentless. In
southern California beginning in 1769, the Spanish gathered
Indians into missions, where they hoped to use their labor and
to teach them Christianity and European-style trades. By the
time Mexico lost California to the United States, whole bands of
Mission Indians had been stripped of their traditional ways.
Entire tribes lost their cultures and ways of life. Some
disappeared, but others endured. Today, California has dozens
of Indian communities throughout the state, from bands of
Mission Indians in the south to the northern Yurok reservation.
Southern
Californians might
wear yucca-fiber
sandals, with soles
almost 1 inch thick.
Diegueño eagle
feather dance skirt
Woman’s carrying-basket and net
that fitted across her forehead
When nonnatives began pouring into California during
the great Gold Rush of 1848, the Indians were overrun.
Many wandered, homeless, for years. Some blended
with the settlers; others, like the Yuma and Mohave,
took up farming on a large reservation.
Pomo twined
burden basket


INDIAN LORE 79
.California
Before battle,
Yuman warriors
marched in
formation to the
battleground and
issued ceremonial
challenges to the
foe. Leaders of
each war party
fought duels,
often ending the
battle with no
one else fighting.
How the Sky Spirit
Made Mount Shasta
Before there were people on Earth, the Chief of the
Sky Spirits grew tired of his home in the Above World,
because the air was always icy cold. So he carved a
hole in the sky and pushed all the snow and ice down
below until he made a great mound that reached from
Earth almost to the sky. Today that great mound is
known as Mount Shasta.
The Sky Spirit took his walking stick and walked
down the mountain. When he was about halfway to
the valley below, he began to put his finger to the
ground here and there, here and there. Wherever his
finger touched, a tree grew. The snow melted in his
footsteps, and the water ran down in rivers.
The Sky Spirit broke the small end of his walking
stick into pieces and threw the pieces into the rivers.
Some of the pieces turned into beaver and otter; some
became fish. When the leaves fell from the trees, he
picked them up, blew upon them, and made the birds.
Then he took the big end of his stick and made all the
animals that walk on Earth.
Pleased with all that he had done, the Chief of the
Sky Spirits brought his family down to live on Earth
with him. The mountain became their lodge. He made
a big fire in the center of Mount Shasta, and he made
a hole in the top so the smoke and sparks could fly
out. When he put a big log on the fire, sparks would
fly up and Earth would tremble.
The Sky Spirit's giant strides, when he came
down the mountainside, tore up the land under his
feet. Even today his tracks can be seen in the rocky
path on the south side of Mount Shasta.
Some say the Sky Spirit decided to go back up
into the sky to live. When he left Earth, he banked the
fire in the center of his lodge, the mountain. That is
why Mount Shasta is a dormant volcano today.
—Condensed from a traditional Modoc story


80 INDIAN LORE
Pacific Northwest.
Pacific Northwest
The bounty of the sea was the harvest of the
Northwest Coast tribes. They were seagoing people.
They built the most seaworthy craft found anywhere
in early America and canoed the Pacific Ocean,
its inlets and bays, and the region’s rivers and
mountain streams.
These tribes fished and lived along the
Pacific Coast from southeastern Alaska to northern
California. They lived on islands, on beaches, and in
sheltered coves along the coast.
In the south, rising abruptly from the beaches,
were thick forest-covered mountains that gave the
Indians the raw materials for their canoes, houses,
and totem poles. In the north were more rugged,
rocky mountains, sheer cliffs, and huge canyons.
Northwest Coast tribes caught salmon and candlefish in weirs (fences) set
in rivers. The salmon were smoked, and the candlefish cooked for their oil.
(Courtesy Milwaukee Public Museum)


INDIAN LORE 81
.Pacific Northwest
The People
On the coastal islands of present-day British Columbia and
Alaska lived the wealthy Maritime peoples: the whalers, the sea-
farers, the totem-pole builders. Their relatives, the River and Bay
peoples, lived slightly inland along the rivers and ocean inlets
from the Canadian border to northern California.
Food
Northwest Coast Indians fished for salmon, smelt, halibut,
trout, cod, and herring. Women cleaned and dried the fish and
collected mussels, clams, and small abalones.
Men fished with carved hardwood hooks. They trapped
fish in large basket-like traps set in the rivers where the salmon
ran. With dip nets, the Chinook and others scooped up salmon
as the teeming masses of fish fought their way upstream to
spawn. Pulling big nets behind their canoes, southern tribes
caught barrels of fish, while northern tribes harpooned salmon.
The Nuuchahnulth and Makah were whale hunters. They
went to sea in canoes, led by chief harpooners skilled in finding
and spearing the huge marine mammals.
Indians here gathered food, too—berries, roots, and
wild celery. Inland, the Tlingit hunted caribou; others caught
elk, deer, and black bear in pitfall traps. The Kwakiutl and
Nuuchahnulth snared diving ducks in underwater traps. The
coastal Salish knocked ducks out of midair by stretching huge
nets across flyways between ponds and lakes. In the north,
hunters climbed the sheer cliffs after mountain goats, driving
them down to snares and waiting spears. Most of the tribes
hunted sea lions, seals, sea otters, and porpoises. None of the
tribes were farmers.
The Haida were
also great hunters
of whales and
sea otters. Canoes
were to them
what horses
were to the
Plains Indians.
Maritime peoples: (Alaska and British Columbia)
Tlingit, Haida, Tsimshian, Kwakiutl (Kwakwaka’wakw),
Bella Coola, Nuuchahnulth
River and Bay tribes: (Washington Coast) Quinault,
Quileute, Chehalis, Makah; (Washington Puget Sound)
Coast Salish, Chimakum, Lummi, Klallam; (Oregon)
Chinook, Tillamook, Alsea


82 INDIAN LORE
Pacific Northwest.
Dwellings
Without nails or saws, Northwest Coast
Indians built imposing wooden houses. The
walls and roofs were made of wood planks
that were precisely fitted and tied to a frame-
work of thick beams, poles, posts, and plates.
All the homes of this region were built for
multifamily use. An average lodge was about
30 by 45 feet.
In the north, the Tlingit, Haida, and Tsimshian
built rectangular gable-roofed houses, often larger than houses
today. There is evidence that some homes were as long as a
thousand feet, built to house an entire village. The Kwakiutl,
Bella Coola, and Nuuchahnulth lived in low, sloping, almost
flat-roofed houses. Some tribes built houses on pilings, often
over the water. The coastal Salish, the Makah, and others lived
in plank houses with roofs that sloped from front to back.
Village and Family Life
Social standing meant much in the family and village life of
this region. Improving one’s rank in society was a major goal.
To do this, one needed to accumulate riches like blankets, dried
fish, shells, baskets, furs, hides, and canoes.
Canoe making, wood carving, carpentry, and whale-hunting
skills, passed down in families, were handled by specialists.
Everyday chores were handled by slaves. A youth became a
specialist by having a vision about a skill, then training in
that skill for several years. The youth without a vision usually
became a routine fisherman.
Not all of the groups had clans. Clan loyalty, however, was
the basis of the Tlingit social order. Tlingit children belonged to
their mother’s clan. They were expected to learn their clan his-
tory by heart, as mothers and grandmothers repeated the stories
time and again.
Each village was headed by its wealthiest family. The
highest-ranking individual (usually, but not always, a man) was
leader of the village. The leader’s high-ranking relatives were
one rung down on the social scale. Less affluent relations were
further down the ladder. The middle classes were free people
with some property. Below them were the slaves, who were
people captured from the poorer and weaker tribes inland and
south along the California coast.
Marriages usually
were arranged by
the young people’s
families. The
families exchanged
gifts—as many
and as valuable
as they could
afford—to show
off their wealth.
To build a plank
house, the parts were
grooved and fitted
together to support
one another.


INDIAN LORE 83
.Pacific Northwest
About three times during his lifetime, a wealthy chief of
a village would throw a huge party, called a potlatch. This was
a tremendous feast, sometimes lasting for days, with much
singing, dancing, and games, and displays of wealth. The host
called his guests up in the order of their social rank and gave
them gifts. For the highest-ranking guests, gifts were especially
lavish—a canoe, perhaps, or a robe of ermine. Such fine gifts
might have taken the chief years of hunting, fishing, trading,
and wealth-building to get. The guests performed the traditional
songs and dances of their clan as well as new ones prepared for
the occasion.
The Tlingit and Tsimshian held potlatches to honor a dead
chief and to appoint a new one. The Haida, Kwakiutl, Bella
Coola, and Nuuchahnulth gave potlatches to honor the younger
person who would someday inherit an important position in
the family. Chiefs in the Salish groups, and in some Chinook
villages, gave potlatches to maintain their social positions. In
the far north, if a chief or his heir did something embarrassing
or undignified in public, he threw a small face-saving potlatch.
Religion and Ritual
Many groups, especially those from the southern part of the
coast, celebrated the beginning of the salmon run in late spring
with a ritual of thanksgiving. The people believed that salmon
were a race of immortals who lived in houses beneath the sea.
The immortals swam up the rivers in springtime to offer them-
selves to humans for food. The ritual gave thanks for the gift of
the salmon, to encourage the immortals to return the next year.
Supernatural beings of the Tlingit world included the
Thunderbird, which was thought to flap its wings and create
thunder, lightning, and rain. Land Otter Man was believed
to kidnap people and rob them of their senses. Raven was
respected for cleverness; many Tlingit stories tell of Raven’s
skill at outwitting others.
The Tlingit
believed that,
after death, their
ancestors were
reborn as babies.
When a clan
member died, the
mourners dressed
the deceased for
travel, provided
food for the trip
to the spirit world,
and cremated
the body.
Among the Kwakiutl, only wealthy men and women could generally afford
to pay the fees to belong to the religious societies. One society was dedi-
cated to the spirit of the wolf, another to the spirits of the sky, such as
stars and birds. The Shaman’s Society was for shamans only.


84 INDIAN LORE
Pacific Northwest.
All Tlingit men sought guardian spirits. Some
had visions in which their guardians seemed to
reveal themselves. Shamans were believed to associ-
ate with the spirits and to cure illness by supernatu-
ral means. Both men and women could be shamans;
most inherited their roles.
Groups such as the Kwakiutl and Bella Coola
had a rich ceremonial life centered on secret societies.
Society members wore fantastic, elaborately carved and painted
masks that represented spirits or creatures from the tribes’
mythologies. During ceremonies, the wearers told stories that
gave the meanings behind their masks. Some masks were quite
complicated, with moving or interchangeable parts.
Ceremonies were held in the fall and winter, after the
people had moved from their summer fishing camps back to
their permanent villages. The rituals had two purposes: to initi-
ate new members, and to impress audiences with the power of
the spirits. Society members appeared in spectacular costumes,
masks, and headdresses representing spirits. They staged
dramatic productions, like plays performed in theaters. Tricks
were used to give the illusion of magical powers. Dancers
“disappeared” through trapdoors and tunnels and in puffs of
smoke. Carved birds “flew” overhead on strings. From unseen
performers, strange voices called out. The effect was truly mag-
ical, and reinforced the people’s awe of the supernatural world.
Clothing, Arts, and Crafts
In the summer, the men of most tribes wore nothing. If they
covered themselves, as the Tlingit usually did, it was with a
breechcloth. They went barefoot, or wore moccasins for moun-
tain travel. During the frequent downpours on the rainy coast,
most wore raincoats and capes made of shredded cedar bark,
and wide-brimmed basketwork rain hats.
Women’s clothing typically was of shredded, woven cedar
bark. If you travel the mountainous Northwest today, you may
hear of the multicolored Chilkat blankets and shirts made by
Tlingit women from mountain goat wool. Chilkat garments were
among the most treasured items a Tlingit owned. Salish groups
also used goat’s wool in their clothing, as well as hair from a
special breed of small white dog.A Kwakiutl
hat with
painted design
Klallam Indians
wore raincoats
like this, made of
woven bark.
A wooden
Nuuchahnulth
headdress-mask
representing a
supernatural wolf


INDIAN LORE 85
.Pacific Northwest
The northernmost tribes had brightly painted dance aprons
and half-leggings. They made headdresses with a forehead mask
of wood and with ermine skins sewn to buckskin hanging down
the back.
Using chisels made of stone, elk horn, and shell, people of
the Northwest Coast became master wood-carvers. How these
artisans turned wood and horn into extraordinary masks and
elegant dishes, spoons, fishhooks, storage boxes, and other
items amazed the first explorers to visit this land.
Steaming and bending wood, sewing pieces together with
spruce root, and pegging (driving pegs into predrilled holes)
were techniques perfected by the coastal peoples. The polished
products of these carvers were sanded smooth, first with sand-
stone, then with sharkskin. Men sanded their wooden whaling
canoes so smooth that they could slip noiselessly through the
water and surprise resting whales.
The canoes they made were the grandest in
pre-Columbian America. Some were more than 50
feet long and 8 feet wide. Most were dug-
outs, carved from a single log of cedar
or redwood.
Haida chief’s ceremonial
hat with killer whale and
bear faces
Most Northwest
Indians wore
tattoos. They
painted their
faces, too, for
practical as well
as decorative
purposes. The
paint helped
protect against
sun, wind,
and cold.
Tlingit dance cape, made of leather


86 INDIAN LORE
Pacific Northwest.
None of the Northwest Coast peoples made pottery. For
storage and cooking they used wooden boxes and woven baskets.
They wove reeds and the inner bark of the red cedar into mats,
pillows, baskets, tablecloths, and even sails. Many articles,
including arrowheads, were made from the horns of elk
and mountain goat.
Northwest Coast tribes are
known for their totem poles.
Some were 60 feet tall. Wealthy
families hired master craftsmen
to carve the poles. Fashioned
from cedar tree trunks, some
totems were memorial poles put
up by the heir of a dead chief to
show that he was assuming the
chief’s title and jobs. Some were
mortuary poles and held the
ashes of the dead. Another type
was the house-portal pole. A post
carved with symbols represent-
ing the family’s history and social
rank, it was built onto the front of the house. Still
other poles symbolized special privileges.
The carvings on totem poles usually represented
important events or times in the owner’s life, illus-
trated stories and myths, or showed family (clan)
connections. Totem poles had nothing to do with
religion and were never worshipped, as many 19th-
century missionaries mistakenly believed.
The beaver was a
popular symbol on
Haida totem poles.
A Nuuchahnulth
whaling
harpoon head


INDIAN LORE 87
.Pacific Northwest
Warfare
The Tlingit, Bella Coola, Chinook, and some Tsimshian groups
made sinew-backed hardwood bows. North of Vancouver Island,
tribes used slings and double-bladed daggers; southward they had
heavy whale-rib war clubs. Some tribes used “slave killers”—
short-handled picks made of antlers, bone, stone, and hard wood.
The Kwakiutl fought with bone swords.
Tlingit, Haida, and Tsimshian war leaders and chiefs wore
wooden helmets, elk-hide armor, and breastplates of wooden
slats. The warriors themselves wore no special garments for
protection, relying instead on speed and agility. To make sure
enemies could not catch hold of their long hair, normally worn
loose, they knotted it on top of their heads.
Despite all their weapons and armor, these tribes did more
feuding than actual warring. South of Puget Sound, so-called
wars were little more than quarrels between villages. Only the
more northern groups fought real wars, usually to take property.
The Haida and Tlingit raided to get slaves or wealth.
Others staged raids after a chief died, killing only the first
persons they met so that others could mourn, too, or could
“depart” with and be company for the dead chief. The Maritime
peoples brought back heads to put on poles outside their vil-
lages. Only the Tlingit took scalps.
A (Nearly) Lost Culture
The highly developed Northwest Coast culture declined quickly
once nonnatives arrived. In 1792, George Vancouver, a British
explorer, and Robert Gray, an American sea captain, started
fur trading in the region. In return for furs, the Indians got
new tools and materials. Harpoons, bows, and clubs gave
way to guns and iron traps. Boiling water by dropping fire-
heated stones into a cookpot became obsolete when brass
kettles appeared.
By about 1840, the Hudson’s Bay Company was buying
all the furs it could, and many Indians began wearing woolen
“trade blankets” they received in exchange. Since Hudson’s Bay
Company bought only furs, many fishermen turned to hunting,
and in a short time fur-bearing animals became scarce.


88 INDIAN LORE
Pacific Northwest.
Encouraged by the villagers’ newfound wealth through
trading, potlatches became ruinously extravagant and frequent.
The rank system began to fall apart. Imported diseases
including measles and scarlet fever killed thousands.
In 1842, covered wagons reached the Willamette
Valley in Oregon. Indians soon lost their lands and
were put on reservations. Some tribes fought hopeless
wars resisting the move, but eventually they were
relocated. Other Indians blended into the non-
Indian culture. By the early 1900s, traditional
ways were disappearing.
But the Northwest Coast culture did not
vanish. By the 1930s, the Coast Indian popula-
tion had begun to grow. In 1951, laws ban-
ning major native ceremonies were dropped.
Elders again began to teach the young about
the traditions of the Northwest Coast. A
few craftsmen started to carve and paint totem
poles again.
Today there are many more carvers. Old totem poles have
been restored. New ones are being carved and raised in tradi-
tional ceremonies. The ancient stories and legends of the Coast
people are being told once more.
Tlingit wooden
boat paddles
Why the Sky Is So High
The Creator first made the world in the East. Then
the Creator slowly came westward, creating along
the way. To each group of people the Creator made,
a different language was given. Many languages
were scattered around Puget Sound and to the north.
That is why so many different Indian languages are
spoken there.
Though the people could not talk together, all of
them were dissatisfied with the way the Creator had
made the sky. The sky was so low that tall people
bumped their heads on it. Sometimes people would
do a forbidden thing by climbing high in the trees
and entering the Sky World.


INDIAN LORE 89
.Pacific Northwest
The wise leaders of all the different tribes met
to see what could be done about lifting the sky. They
agreed that the people could do it if everyone—
including the animals and the birds, as well as the
people—all pushed at the same time.
“How will we know when to push?” asked one
of them. “We don’t all talk the same language. How
can we get everyone to push together?”
Another member of the council had the idea
of using a signal. “When the time comes for us to
push,” this one said, “let someone shout ‘Ya-hoh.’
That means ‘Lift together!’ in all our languages.”
So the members of the council sent that mes-
sage to all the people and animals and birds and
told them on what day they were to lift the sky.
Everyone made poles from the giant fir trees to use
in pushing up the sky.
When the day came, the people raised their
poles and touched the sky with them. Then the
wise leaders shouted, “Ya-hoh!” All the people and
animals and birds pushed, and the sky moved up
a little.
“Ya-hoh!” the wise leaders shouted again, and
everybody pushed again. The sky moved a few more
inches. “Ya-hoh!” they kept shouting, and everyone
pushed with all their strength until the sky rose to
the place where it is now. Since then, no one’s head
has bumped against it, and no one has been able to
climb into the Sky World.
See what people can do when we all
work together?
—Condensed from a traditional Snohomish story


90 INDIAN LORE
American Indians Today.
American Indians Today
From the brief descriptions in this pamphlet, you have learned
some of the difficulties American Indian tribes faced after the
arrival of Europeans. Native peoples lost so much that by the
late 19th and early 20th centuries, it seemed to some observers
that they must be doomed.
Many tribes were wiped out. Others lost huge numbers
of their people and all of their lands and possessions. Some,
like the Mission Indians of California, lost cultural memories—
their Indian ways of living and surviving—after being under
missionary rule for many years.
Some people predicted that eventually all Indian cultures
and their traditional ways would be lost and that finally the
Indians themselves would vanish. The prediction was wrong.
Native peoples endured, and today there are about 2 million
American Indians living in the United States.
Today, more than half of American Indians live outside
the reservations that were set aside for them by the federal
government. Many live in big cities; others live in smaller
communities and rural areas. While they are fighting to win
back some of the things that were taken from them, including
their cultural identities, gains have come slowly.
Still, American Indians are taking renewed pride in their
heritages and tribal traditions. Traditional religions have survived,
despite years of outside influences and official disapproval.
“Indian people in recent years are overturning their
image as the ‘invisible Americans,’ ” notes Dr. David
Hurst Thomas. “Many tribes have constructed tourist
facilities to encourage your visits: hotels, resorts,
historical attractions, camping areas, golf courses,
recreational facilities. . . . Many tribes want to show
off their heritage and educate you about their past.”


INDIAN LORE 91
.American Indians Today
Indians are relearning lost traditions and languages and reviving
their arts and crafts, their songs, dances, and stories. Many have
chosen not to disappear into America’s “melting pot.”
Indians are reclaiming control over what happens to them.
They want to decide for themselves how they will live in the
modern world. This will not be an easy decision.
The question is, how can they keep cultural roots alive
and protect and preserve tribal identities, yet still be a part of
modern society? There is no easy answer, and no one knows
what the future holds.
Famous Names Past and Present
The history of American Indians is filled with the names of
men and women who are remembered for deeds that set them
apart from others. They may have been renowned leaders,
peacemakers, or lawmakers. Some, like Pocahontas, Sacajawea,
Hahyonhwatha (known as “Hiawatha”), and Tecumseh, lived
centuries ago. Others, like Geronimo, Ira Hayes, Ben Nighthorse
Campbell, Ada Deer, and Wilma Mankiller, are people of the
20th and 21st centuries.
Find out who are outstanding people in the Indian culture
you investigate. Learn as many details as you can about them,
so you can tell your story well.
Visiting Indian Country
Be aware that you enter another sovereign nation when you enter the
Indian “reservations” of the United States and the “reserves” of Canada.
Always ask tribal managers about any special regulations or permits that
may be required for hunting, fishing, hiking, or picnicking.
Stay in public areas. Be especially careful to not trespass on
sacred sites.
You may need permission to attend some cultural and religious
ceremonies. Be sure to ask. While visitors may be encouraged to attend
powwows and take part in certain feast days, there may be other
occasions when non-Indian visitors are simply not welcome.
Be prepared to leave your camera, video equipment, and tape recorder
behind. You might also be asked not to make sketches or take notes.
Behave as you would when visiting any other religious service. Dress
conservatively. Be quiet and respectful.
As you research
the tribe you
chose to study
for requirement 2,
be sure to
learn about its
circumstances or
situation today.


92 INDIAN LORE
Indian Lore Resources.
Scouting Literature
American Cultures, American Heritage,
Archaeology, Archery, Architecture,
Basketry, Canoeing, Citizenship in
the Nation, Environmental Science,
Leatherwork, Metalwork, Pottery,
Sculpture, Textile, Wilderness Survival,
and Wood Carving merit
badge pamphlets
“The First Americans,” an eight-part
series. Boys’ Life magazine.
May–December 1993.
Books
Aaseng, Nathan. Navajo Code Talkers.
Walker, 2002.
Ames, Kenneth M., and Herbert D.
Maschner. Peoples of the Northwest
Coast: Their Archaeology and
Prehistory. Thames & Hudson, 2000.
Bernstein, Bruce. The Language of
Native American Baskets: From
the Weavers’ View. Smithsonian
National Museum of the American
Indian, 2003.
Bonar, Eulalie H. Woven by the
Grandmothers: Nineteenth-Century
Navajo Textiles from the National
Museum of the American Indian.
Smithsonian Institution Press, 1996.
Bruchac, James, and Joseph Bruchac.
Native American Games and Stories.
Fulcrum, 2000.
Childs, Craig. House of Rain: Tracking
a Vanished Civilization Across the
American Southwest. Little, Brown
and Company, 2007.
Curtis, Edward S, Joseph Horse Capture,
et al. Sacred Legacy: Edward S. Curtis
and the North American Indian.
Barnes & Noble Books, 2005.
Divina, Fernando, and Marlene Divina.
Foods of the Americas: Native Recipes
and Traditions. Ten Speed
Press, 2004.
Grant, Bruce. Concise Encyclopedia
of the American Indian. Random
House, 2000.
Indian Lore Resources
With your parent’s permission,
visit Scouting America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org,
for a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


INDIAN LORE 93
.Indian Lore Resources
Heth, Charlotte, ed. Native American
Dance: Ceremonies and Social
Traditions. Fulcrum, 1993.
Horse Capture, George P., and Emil
Her Many Horses, eds. A Song for
the Horse Nation: Horses in Native
American Cultures. Fulcrum, 2006.
Johansen, Bruce E. The Native Peoples
of North America. Greenwood, 2005.
Johansen, Bruce E., and Barry M.
Pritzker, eds. Encyclopedia of
American Indian History.
ABC-CLIO, 2007.
Johansen, Bruce Elliott, and Donald A.
Grinde. The Encyclopedia of Native
American Biography: Six Hundred
Life Stories of Important People, From
Powhatan to Wilma Mankiller.
Da Capo Press, 1998.
Josephy Jr., Alvin M. Lewis and Clark
Through Indian Eyes. Knopf, 2006.
Lenz, Mary Jane, and Clara Sue Kidwell.
Small Spirits: Native American
Dolls. University of Washington
Press, 2004.
Marshall III, Joseph M. Journey of
Crazy Horse: A Lakota History.
Viking Penguin, 2005.
McMaster, Gerald, and Clifford E.
Trafzer, eds. Native Universe:
Voices of Indian America. National
Geographic Society, 2004.
Olsen, Madeline. Native American
Sign Language. Troll Communi-
cations, 2003.
Pritzker, Barry M. A Native American
Encyclopedia: History, Culture,
and Peoples. Oxford University
Press, 2000.
Simpson, Judith. Native Americans.
Barnes & Noble Books, 2003.
Stewart, Holly. Stories of the People:
Native American Voices.
Universe Publishing, 1997.
Terry, Michael Bad Hand. Daily Life
in a Plains Indian Village, 1868.
Houghton Mifflin, 1999.
Thomas, David Hurst. Exploring Ancient
Native America. Routledge, 1999.
. Exploring Native North America
(Places in Time). Oxford University
Press, 2000.
Waldman, Carl. Encyclopedia of Native
American Tribes. Facts On File, 2006.
CDs and DVDs
Creation’s Journey: Native American
Music. CD. National Museum of the
American Indian and Smithsonian/
Folkways, 1994.
500 Nations: A Musical Journey. DVDs
(multidisc set). Warner Home
Video, 2004.
Legacy: Native American Photogravures
& Music. DVD. DVD Interna-
tional, 2003.
Pow Wow Trail, Episode 1: The Drum.
DVD. Arbor Records Ltd., 2004.


94 INDIAN LORE
Indian Lore Resources.
Pow Wow Trail, Episode 2: The Songs.
DVD. Arbor Records Ltd., 2004.
Pow Wow Trail, Episode 3: The Dances.
DVD. Arbor Records Ltd., 2005.
Pow Wow Trail, Episode 4: The
Grand Entry. DVD. Arbor
Records Ltd., 2006.
Pow Wow Trail, Episode 5: Grass Dance
and Men’s Traditional. DVD.
Arbor Records Ltd., 2006.
Pow Wow Trail, Episode 6: The
Fancy Dance. DVD. Arbor
Records Ltd., 2006.
Sacagawea: Heroine of the Lewis and
Clark Journey. DVD. Questar, 2003.
Tales of Wonder: Traditional Native
American Stories for Children.
DVDs (two-volume set). Rich
Heape Films, 2004.
Wood That Sings: Indian Fiddle Music
of the Americas. CD. National
Museum of the American Indian and
Smithsonian/Folkways, 1997.
Organizations and Websites
American Indian Heritage Foundation
P.O. Box 6301
Falls Church, VA 22040
www.indians.org
This organization provides relief
services to Native Americans throughout
the nation and fosters an understanding
relationship between Native and non-
native peoples. The AIHF also coordi-
nates scholarship programs for American
Indian youth.
American Museum of Natural History
Central Park West at 79th Street
New York, NY 10024-5192
Telephone: 212-769-5100
www.amnh.org
One of the most famous museums
in the world, the American Museum of
Natural History has a series of exhibition
halls exploring traditional cultures. Since
its founding in 1869, the museum’s
mission has been to discover, interpret,
and make available information about
human cultures, the natural world, and
the universe.
Crazy Crow Trading Post
Toll-free telephone: 800-786-6210
www.crazycrow.com
Heard Museum
2301 N. Central Ave.
Phoenix, AZ 85004-1323
Telephone: 602-252-8848
www.heard.org
This world-renowned museum
educates the public “about the heri-
tage and the living cultures and arts of
Native peoples, with an emphasis on
the peoples of the Southwest.”


INDIAN LORE 95
.Indian Lore Resources
National Congress of
American Indians
1301 Connecticut Ave. NW, Suite 200
Washington, DC 20036
Telephone: 202-466-7767
www.ncai.org
This organization, founded in 1944,
seeks “to preserve rights under Indian
treaties or agreements with the United
States, and to promote the common
welfare of the American Indians and
Alaska Natives.” The NCAI includes
250 member tribes from throughout
the United States; they are listed on
the organization’s website under
“Tribal Directory.”
National Museum of the
American Indian
americanindian.si.edu
The NMAI is a museum of the
Smithsonian Institution and the “first
national museum dedicated to the
preservation, study, and exhibition” of
American Indian culture. Its extensive
collections (housed in three different
facilities) explore the life, languages,
literature, history, and arts of indig-
enous Americans, including tribes of
the United States, Canada, Middle and
South America, and the Caribbean.
NativeCulture.com
www.nativeculture.com
This website offers a variety of
links to American Indian resources—
current events and news, tribal sites,
education, games, and more. It also is
home to “Native American Sites” by
Lisa Mitten, a page recommended by
the Discovery Channel for its thorough
coverage of American Indian culture
and resources.
NativeTech
www.nativetech.org
NativeTech features American
Indian technology and craft resourc-
es, with a special focus on Eastern
Woodlands beadwork, weaving, stone-
work, pottery, and other crafts. The site
also offers Native poetry, recipes,
and educational games.
NativeWeb
www.nativeweb.org
This nonprofit, international web-
site provides resources to people of
indigenous cultures around the world,
including Native Americans. It includes
links to everything from art to busi-
nesses and products and also hosts
Wotanin Wowapi, North America’s old-
est American Indian weekly newspaper.
Paul’s Supplies
Telephone: 303-948-2767
www.paulssupplies.com
Acknowledgments
Scouting America is grateful to Dr.
David Hurst Thomas, curator of anthro-
pology at the American Museum of
Natural History and a founding trustee
of the Smithsonian’s National Museum
of the American Indian, and to Mr.
Anibal Rodriguez, senior technician
in the Department of Anthropology,
American Museum of Natural History.
Dr. Thomas and Mr. Rodriguez reviewed
and recommended improvements to
the pamphlet. For a number of years
they have both served as invaluable
resources for the Indian Lore merit
badge pamphlet.


96 INDIAN LORE
Indian Lore Resources.
Photo and Illustration Credits
American Museum of Natural History,
courtesy—pages 33 (man) and
38 (dog dancer)
Dean Boeckman,
www.deepsouthwest.com/silverhogan,
courtesy—page 60
Dynamic Graphics Inc.—page 80
(totem pole)
“Guiding Light” by Donald Vann,
©Native American Images,
P.O. Box 746, Austin, TX 78767;
512-472-7701—page 37
Library of Congress Prints and
Photographs Division, courtesy—
pages 49–50 (both)
Milwaukee Public Museum, courtesy—
pages 19, 75, and 80 (river)
National Park Service, courtesy—
pages 12 and 36
Negative No. 32999—Pueblo native
(photo Carl Moon, 1910), Department
of Library Sciences, American
Museum of Natural History,
courtesy—page 4
Riverside Municipal Museum, Riverside,
California, courtesy—pages 25, 47
(both), 54–55 (both), 57 (basket),
58, 85 (cape), and 88
Smithsonian Institution, courtesy—pages
71 and 77
U.S. Department of Agriculture,
courtesy—page 42
Wikipedia.org, courtesy—cover (all
except woman, tepee, and buffalo);
pages 12 and 27
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of
or are protected by Scouting America.
Darrell Byers—page 6
John McDearmon—all illustrations on
pages 13–14, 18, 20–21, 23–24, 26,
28–29, 31, 33 (crown and skirt),
34–35, 38 (hunting), 39–40, 44–46,
48, 53, 56, 57 (wickiup), 61, 63–70,
72–74, 78, 82, 84, 85 (hat),
and 86