COOKING
STEM-Based


Note to Counselor
Cooking is a life skills merit badge. It is expected that the
completion of this merit badge may take a longer period of time
than some of the other merit badges. The counselor should
keep the following in mind:
• The meals for this merit badge may be planned, prepared,
and cooked at different times. The goal is for the Scout to
understand each phase of meal planning by working on one
part of the process at a time. The meals planned and cooked
for this merit badge may not count for any other merit badge
or rank advancement.
• These requirements and the content of the Cooking merit
badge pamphlet were developed for the Boy Scouts of
America for use within the United States of America.
Adjustments should be made if traveling internationally.
Scouts working on this badge in summer camp should plan
around food they can get at the camp commissary.
• The first aid–related information found in this pamphlet is a
condensed version of that found in other BSA publications.
The counselor should be familiar with the additional
information on cooking and safety relevant to cooking found
in the Scouts BSA handbooks, Guide to Safe Scouting, First
Aid merit badge pamphlet, and BSA Fieldbook.
35879
ISBN 978-0-8395-3349-8
©2024 Boy Scouts of America
2024 Printing


Requirements
Always check www.scouting.org for the latest requirements.
1. Health and safety. Do the following:
a. Explain to your counselor the most likely hazards you may
encounter while participating in cooking activities and what
you should do to anticipate, help prevent, mitigate, and
respond to these hazards.
b. Show that you know first aid for and how to prevent injuries
or illnesses that could occur while preparing meals and
eating, including burns and scalds, cuts, choking, and
allergic reactions.
c. Describe how meat, fish, chicken, eggs, dairy products,
and fresh vegetables should be stored, transported,
and properly prepared for cooking. Explain how to
prevent cross-contamination.
d. Discuss with your counselor food allergies, food intolerance, and
food-related illnesses and diseases. Explain why someone who
handles or prepares food needs to be aware of these concerns.
e. Discuss with your counselor why reading food labels is
important. Explain how to identify common allergens such as
peanuts, tree nuts, milk, eggs, wheat, soy, and shellfish.
2. Nutrition. Do the following:
a. Using the MyPlate food guide or the current USDA nutrition
model, give five examples for EACH of the following food
groups, the recommended number of daily servings, and the
recommended serving size:
(1) Fruits (3) Grains (5) Dairy
(2) Vegetables (4) Proteins
b. Explain why you should limit your intake of oils and sugars.
c. Track your daily level of activity and your daily caloric need
based on your activity for five days. Then, based on the
MyPlate food guide, discuss with your counselor an
appropriate meal plan for yourself for one day.
d. Discuss your current eating habits with your counselor and what
you can do to eat healthier, based on the MyPlate food guide.
e. Discuss the following food label terms: calorie, fat, saturated
fat, trans fat, cholesterol, sodium, carbohydrate, dietary fiber,
sugar, protein. Explain how to calculate total carbohydrates and
nutritional values for two servings, based on the serving size
specified on the label.
COOKING


3. Cooking basics. Do the following:
a. Discuss EACH of the following cooking methods. For each
one, describe the equipment needed, how temperature control
is maintained, and name at least one food that can be cooked
using that method: baking, boiling, broiling, pan frying,
simmering, steaming, microwaving, grilling, foil cooking, and
use of a Dutch oven.
b. Discuss the benefits of using a camp stove on an outing vs. a
charcoal or wood fire.
c. Describe for your counselor how to manage your time when
preparing a meal, so components for each course are ready to
serve at the correct time.
Note: The meals prepared for Cooking merit badge requirements 4, 5,
and 6 will count only toward fulfilling those requirements and will
not count toward rank advancement or other merit badges. Meals
prepared for rank advancement or other merit badges may not count
toward the Cooking merit badge. You must not repeat any menus for
meals actually prepared or cooked in requirements 4, 5, and 6.
4. Cooking at home. Using the MyPlate food guide or the current
USDA nutrition model, plan menus for three full days of meals
(three breakfasts, three lunches, and three dinners) plus one
dessert. Your menus should include enough to feed yourself and
at least one adult, keeping in mind any special needs (such as
food allergies) and how you keep your foods safe and free from
cross-contamination. List the equipment and utensils needed to
prepare and serve these meals. Then do the following:
a. Find recipes for each meal. Create a shopping list for your
meals showing the amount of food needed to prepare for
the number of people you will serve. Determine the cost
for each meal.
b. Share and discuss your meal plan and shopping list with
your counselor.
c. Using at least five of the 10 cooking methods from require-
ment 3, prepare and serve yourself and at least one adult (par-
ent, family member, guardian, or other responsible adult) one
breakfast, one lunch, one dinner, and one dessert from the
meals you planned.*
d. Time your cooking to have each meal ready to serve at the
proper time. Have an adult verify the preparation of the meal
to your counselor.
*The meals for requirement 4 may be prepared on different days, and they need not
be prepared consecutively. The requirement calls for Scouts to plan, prepare, and
serve one breakfast, one lunch, and one dinner to at least one adult; those served
need not be the same for all meals.
COOKING


e. After each meal, ask a person you served to evaluate the meal
on presentation and taste, then evaluate your own meal. Discuss
what you learned with your counselor, including any adjust-
ments that could have improved or enhanced your meals. Tell
how planning and preparation help ensure a successful meal.
5. Camp cooking. Do the following:
a. Using the MyPlate food guide or the current USDA nutrition
model, plan five meals for your patrol (or a similar size group
of up to eight youth, including you) for a camping trip. Your
menus should include enough food for each person, keeping in
mind any special needs (such as food allergies) and how you
keep your foods safe and free from cross-contamination. These
five meals must include at least one breakfast, one lunch, one
dinner, AND at least one snack OR one dessert. List the equip-
ment and utensils needed to prepare and serve these meals.
b. Find or create recipes for at least three meals, a dessert and a
snack. Adjust menu items in the recipes for the number to be
served. Create a shopping list and budget to determine the
per-person cost.
c. Share and discuss your meal plan and shopping list with
your counselor.
d. In the outdoors, using your menu plans and recipes for this
requirement, cook three of the five meals you planned using
either a camp stove OR backpack stove. Use a skillet over
campfire coals OR a Dutch oven for a fourth meal, and cook
the fifth meal in a foil pack OR on a skewer. Serve all of these
meals to your patrol or a group of youth.**
e. In the outdoors, prepare a dessert OR snack and serve it to
your patrol or a group of youth.**
f. After each meal, have those you served evaluate the meal
on presentation and taste, and then evaluate your own meal.
Discuss what you learned with your counselor, including
any adjustments that could have improved or enhanced
your meals. Tell how planning and preparation help ensure
successful outdoor cooking.
g. Lead the clean-up of equipment, utensils, and the cooking
site thoroughly after each meal. Properly store or dispose
unused ingredients, leftover food, dishwater, and garbage.
h. Discuss how you followed the Outdoor Code and no-trace
principles when preparing your meals.
**Where local regulations do not allow you to build a fire, the counselor may adjust
the requirement to meet the law. The meals in requirements 5 and 6 may be pre-
pared for different trips and need not be prepared consecutively. Scouts working
on this badge in summer camp should take into consideration foods that can be
obtained at the camp commissary.
COOKING


6. Trail and backpacking meals. Do the following:
a. Using the MyPlate food guide or the current USDA nutrition
model, plan a menu for trail hiking or backpacking that
includes one breakfast, one lunch, one dinner, and one
snack. These meals must consider weight, not require
refrigeration and are to be consumed by three to five people
(including you). List the equipment and utensils needed to
prepare and serve these meals.
b. Create a shopping list for your meals, showing the amount of
food needed to prepare and serve each meal, and the cost for
each meal.
c. Share and discuss your menu plan and shopping list with
your counselor. Your plan must include how to repackage
foods for your hike or backpacking trip to eliminate as much
bulk, weight, and garbage as possible.
d. While on a trail hike or backpacking trip, prepare and serve
two meals and a snack from the menu planned for this
requirement. At least one of those meals must be cooked over
a fire, or an approved trail stove (with proper supervision).**
e. After each meal, have those you served evaluate the meal on
presentation and taste, then evaluate your own meal. Discuss
what you learned with your counselor, including any adjust-
ments that could have improved or enhanced your meals. Tell
how planning and preparation help ensure successful trail hik-
ing or backpacking meals.
f. Explain to your counselor how you should divide the food
and cooking supplies among the patrol in order to share the
load. Discuss how to properly clean the cooking area and
store your food to protect it from animals.
7. Food-related careers. Find out about three career opportunities
in cooking. Select one and find out the education, training, and
experience required for this profession. Discuss this with your
counselor, and explain why this profession might interest you.
**Where local regulations do not allow you to build a fire, the counselor may adjust
the requirement to meet the law. The meals in requirements 5 and 6 may be pre-
pared for different trips and need not be prepared consecutively. Scouts working
on this badge in summer camp should take into consideration foods that can be
obtained at the camp commissary.
COOKING


Scouting Literature
Scouts BSA handbooks; Fieldbook;
Basic Illustrated Cooking Outdoors;
Cooking the Dutch Oven Way; The One
Pan Gourmet; The Outdoor Dutch Oven
Cookbook; Camp Cookery for Small
Groups, The Scouts Outdoor Cookbook,
The Scouts Dutch Oven Cookbook,
Outdoor Recipe Cards Edible Wild
Plants pocket guide; Animal Science,
Backpacking, Camping, Fire Safety, First
Aid, Fish and Wildlife Management,
Plant Science, and Public Health merit
badge pamphlets
With your parent’s permission, visit
the Boy Scouts of America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org,
for a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.
Books
Conners, Tim, and Christine Conners.
The Scout’s Backpacking Cookbook.
Globe Pequot Press, 2012.
Eddy, Jackie, and Eleanor Clark. The
Absolute Beginner’s Cookbook: Or
How Long Do I Cook a Three-Minute
Egg?, 3rd ed. Clarkson Potter, 2002.
Hodgman, Ann. One Bite Won’t Kill
You. Houghton Mifflin Co., 1999.
Miller, Dorcus S. Backcountry Cooking:
From Pack to Plate in 10 Minutes.
Mountaineers Books, 1998.
New Junior Cookbook. Better Homes
and Gardens, 2012.
Siegel, Helene, and Karen Gillingham.
Totally Camping Cookbook. Ten
Speed Press, 1996.
Periodicals
Before you subscribe to a magazine,
check out a copy at your local library or
a nearby bookstore. Here are a few that
may interest you: Bon Appétit, Cook’s
Illustrated, Eating Well, Southern Living,
Taste of Home, Vegetarian Times.
Organizations and Websites
American Diabetes Association
Toll-free telephone: 800-342-2383
www.diabetes.org
American Heart Association
recipes.heart.org
Beyond Celiac
www.beyondceliac.org
Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention
www.cdc.gov
Cooking Schools
www.cooking-schools.us
Resources for Cooking
General Mills. Betty Crocker Kids Cook!
Wiley Publishing, 2007.
COOKING
Resources for Cooking.


Culinary Institute of America
Toll-free telephone: 800-CULINARY
www.ciachef.edu
Exploratorium
www.exploratorium.edu/cooking
Food Allergy Research and
Education
www.foodallergy.org
Food Network
www.foodnetwork.com
JDRF
jdrf.org
MyPlate
www.myplate.gov
The Recipe Link
www.recipelink.com
U.S. Department of Agriculture
www.foodsafety.gov
U.S. Food and Drug Administration
Toll-free telephone: 888-723-3366
www.fda.gov
Acknowledgments
The Boy Scouts of America is grateful
to Scouter and Cooking merit badge
counselor Michael Callahan,
Philadelphia, Pa., a food industry
professional, and Stephanie
Marcinkowski, Philadelphia, a Scouter
and food allergy awareness advocate.
They assisted with the content for this
edition of the Cooking merit badge
pamphlet. Thanks also to the U.S.
Department of Agriculture’s Food
Safety and Inspection Service staff:
Maribel Alonso, technical information
specialist; Mary Harris, senior project
leader; and Nadine Shaw, food safety
specialist, Scouter, and Cooking merit
badge counselor.
We appreciate the Cleveland
(Ohio) Clinic. Staff members Kristin
Kirkpatrick, Melissa Celko-Kosmon,
and James Perko were tremendously
helpful. Thanks also to FARE (Food
Allergy Research and Education) for
its assistance.
The BSA extends thanks to Scouters
who helped shape this pamphlet, led by
Ben Jelsema, Clermont, Fla., with Jim
DePaolo, Reads Landing, Minn.; Bill
Pepito, Twin Lakes, Wisconsin; Jim
Byrd, Kensington, Conn.; Donna
Cunningham, Amarillo, Texas; David
Black, Dallas, Texas; Walt Ritterbush,
Apopka, Fla.; AnnDee Sousa, Bristol,
R.I.; and Hoang Tran, Melbourne, Fla.
Some of the material provided in
this pamphlet was adapted from the
website of the USDA’s Center for
Nutrition Policy and Promotion,
www.fns.usda.gov/cnpp.
Photo and Illustration Credits
Alex Palacios, courtesy—page 7
U.S. Department of Agriculture,
courtesy—page 49 (MyPlate logo)
All photos and illustrations not mentioned
above are the property of or are pro-
tected by the Boy Scouts of America.
Tom Copeland—cover (girl)
Mark Humphries—pages 42 (resealable
bag) and 48 (can)
Bruce Levitt—page 28
John McDearmon—all illustrations on
pages 44, 46, 64, and 65
Roger Morgan—page 83
Brian Payne—cover (boys); pages 42
(cobbler), 46 (bear bag), and 50
Randy Piland—pages 17 (Dutch oven)
and 47
Michael Roytek—page 67
COOKING
.Resources for Cooking


Alex: How can you tell
when a Scout has earned
the Cooking merit badge?
Andie: How?
Alex: They make good
use of their thyme.
— from a valued Scout Life reader
Make good use of your time by
reading Scout Life magazine.
It’s loaded with outdoor adventure,
games and comics, leadership
tips, life skills, stories about
other Scouts and more. It’s just
what you need to get ahead.
Use promo code SLMBP15 for
a special print + digital bundle
when you subscribe today at
go.scoutlife.org/subscribe