sculpture

BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES

Sculpture

“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”

Sculpture
1. Explain to your counselor the precautions that must be followed for the safe
use and operation of a sculptor’s tools, equipment, and other materials.
2. Do TWO of the following:
(a) Model in clay a life-size human head. Then sculpt in modeling clay, carve
in wood or plaster, or use 3D modeling software to make a small-scale model
of an animal or person. Explain to your counselor the method and tools you
used to sculpt the figure.
(b) Make a plaster mold of a fruit or vegetable. In this mold, make a copy of
the fruit or vegetable. Explain to your counselor the method and tools you
used to make the copy.
(c) With your parent’s permission and your counselor’s approval, visit
a museum, art exhibit, art gallery, artists’ co-op, or artist’s studio. After
your visit, share with your counselor what you have learned. Discuss the
importance of visual arts and how it strengthens social tolerance and helps
stimulate cultural, intellectual, and personal development.
3. Find out about career opportunities in sculpture. Pick one and find out the
education, training, and experience required for this profession. Discuss this
with your counselor, and explain why this profession might interest you.

.Sculpture Resources

Sculpture Resources
By reading about the fine arts and art history, you can learn
about sculpture dating from ancient times to the present.
You might like to find out more about famous sculptors
of the Renaissance such as Michelangelo, Donatello,
and Cellini or more contemporary sculptors such as
Auguste Rodin, Constantin Brancusi, Barbara
Hepworth, Augustus Saint-Gaudens, Alberto
Giacometti, Henry Moore, George Segal,
and Alexander Calder. You also can
find interviews with important
contemporary sculptors,
articles about the artists, and
photographs of their work.
Artist Felix de Weldon sculpted
this world-famous U.S. Marine
Corps War Memorial, which is
displayed in Arlington, Virginia.
The memorial depicts the
raising of the American flag
at Iwo Jima, Japan. A cloth
flag hangs from the 60-foot
bronze flagpole. The bronze
figures stand 32 feet tall.

Sculpture    61

Sculpture Resources.

Scouting Literature
Architecture, Art, Basketry, Graphic
Arts, Leatherwork, Metalwork,
Photography, Pottery, and Wood
Carving merit badge pamphlets
Visit the Boy Scouts of America’s
official retail website at http://
www.scoutstuff.org for a complete listing of helpful Scouting
materials and supplies.

Books
Barrie, Bruner Felton. A Sculptor’s
Guide to Tools and Materials.
ABFS Publishing, 2000.
———. Mold Making, Casting,
and Patina for the Student Sculptor.
ABFS Publishing, 2000.
Brommer, Gerald F., and Joseph A.
Gatto. Careers in Art: An Illustrated
Guide. Davis Publications Inc., 1999.
Brown, Claire Waite, ed. The Sculpting
Techniques Bible: An Essential
Illustrated Reference for Both
Beginner and Experienced Sculptors.
Chartwell Books, 2006.

Friesen, Christi. Steampunkery: Polymer
Clay and Mixed Media Projects. CF
Books, 2010.
Hessenberg, Karin. Sculpting Basics:
Everything You Need to Know to
Create Three-Dimensional Artworks.
Barron’s Educational Series, 2005.
Lanteri, Edouard. Modelling and Sculpting
Animals. Dover Publications, 1985.
———. Modelling and Sculpting
the Human Figure. Dover
Publications, 1985.
Lark Books. The Figure in Clay:
Contemporary Sculpting Techniques
by Master Artists. Lark Crafts, 2005.
Lucchesi, Bruno, and Margit Malmstrom,
contributor. Modeling the Head in Clay.
Watson-Guptill Publications, 1996.
Miller, Richard M. Figure Sculpture in Wax
and Plaster. Dover Publications, 1987.
Plowman, John. The Sculptor’s Bible:
The All-Media Reference to Surface
Effects and How to Achieve Them.
Krause Publications, 2005.

Carlson, Maureen. How to Make Clay
Characters. North Light Books, 1997.

Reynolds, Donald Martin. Masters of
American Sculpture: The Figurative
Tradition From the American
Renaissance to the Millennium.
Abbeville Press, 1994.

Camenson, Blythe. Great Jobs for
Art Majors. McGraw-Hill, 2003.

Rich, Jack C. The Materials and Methods
of Sculpture. Dover Publications, 1988.

Dewey, Katherine. Creating Lifelike
Figures in Polymer Clay: Tools and
Techniques for Sculpting Realistic
Figures. Potter Craft, 2008.

Salmon, Mark. Opportunities in Visual
Arts Careers. McGraw-Hill, 2008.

Erdmann, Dottie. Hands On Sculpting.
Columbine Communications &
Publications, 1992.

62    Sculpture

Slobodkin, Louis. Sculpture: Principles
and Practice. Dover Publications, 1973.
Teixidó i Camí, Josepmaria, and
Jacinto Chicharro Santamera.
Sculpture in Stone. Barron’s
Educational Series, 2001.

.Sculpture Resources

Periodicals
Sculpture
Telephone: 202-234-0555
Website: http://www.sculpture.org/
redesign/mag.shtml
Sculpture Review
Telephone: 212-529-1763
Website:
http://www.sculpturereview.com

Organizations and Websites
The Art Career Project
Website:
http://www.theartcareerproject.com
International Sculpture Center
14 Fairgrounds Road, Suite B
Hamilton, NJ 08619-3447
Telephone: 609-689-1051
Website: http://www.sculpture.org
National Sculptors’ Guild
Toll-free telephone: 800-606-2015
Website:
http://www.nationalsculptorsguild.com

National Sculpture Society
Website:
http://www.nationalsculpture.org

Acknowledgments
The Boy Scouts of America is grateful
to Jean Woodham for providing images
of her sculpture and her studio in
Westport, Connecticut, and to her
daughter, Melissa Deur, for securing
the images on behalf of the BSA.
The Boy Scouts of America is grateful to the men and women serving on
the Merit Badge Maintenance Task Force
for the improvements made in updating
this pamphlet.
We appreciate Lynn Bartlett, Sierra
Hills Stone (http://sierrahillsstone.com),
Angels Camp, California, for her assistance with photography.

Jean Woodham has been creating
abstract sculpture for more than six
decades. She was one of the first
artists to use welding and industrial
applications to create large-scale
outdoor sculptures.
Jean Woodham has exhibited her
work in group shows with David Smith,
Louise Nevelson, and other well-known
sculptors. She has shown her sculpture Jean Woodham, sculptor
in a large artists’ co-op, in galleries, and
in museums around the world. More than 150 of her sculptures are in
private and public collections, including installations for the NS Savannah
(the first nuclear-powered merchant ship), the World Bank, headquarters
of major companies, and university campuses.
Sculpture    63

