ART


ART
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Art or check Scoutbook for
the latest requirements.
35858
ISBN 978-0-8395-3320-7
©2025 Scouting America
2025 Printing
FPO


ART 3
Scouts learn the finer points of painting
from Scouting America’s official artist,
Joseph Csatari.


4 ART


Contents
What Is Art? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Elements of Art and Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
Art Media and Techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
Visual Storytelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
Functional Art and Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
Careers in the Visual Arts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
Art Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62


Painting of the Egyptian goddess Isis, found at an ancient burial site


.What Is Art?
What Is Art?
The question of what “art” is has occupied the minds of
philosophers and critics ever since humankind began to think
and argue. The term has been applied to many forms of visual
media, especially to the fine arts—drawing, painting, sculpture,
and printmaking. But it also includes architecture, industrial
design, fashion design, pottery, and weaving. The difference
is that fine arts are concerned only with beauty and expression
and the others—though the art may be beautiful—focus first
on function.
This merit badge pamphlet concentrates on two-dimen-
sional art, specifically drawing and painting in various media.
One requirement introduces you to design applications in the
fields of graphic arts and industrial design. After you learn
about art history and design principles, you will understand
how these fields relate to fine art.
Art as Reality
Since prehistoric people first made
cave paintings, artists have tried to portray
reality. But what is reality? That depends.
The Egyptians portrayed their kings and
queens as gods; they posed them in rigid
and formal positions in keeping with a god’s
awe-inspiring majesty. The ancient Greeks,
on the other hand, portrayed their gods and
rulers as people.
Art has always
been of significant
importance to
humankind. While
earning this merit
badge, you will
discover the
many forms of
expression,
communication,
and opinion art
can represent.
Sculpture of Zeus, the ancient
Greeks’ supreme god


8 ART
What Is Art?.
Classical Greek and Roman artists idealized the human
figure as having a noble character and cause. This style of art
was widely displayed in public places to give the people the
impression—true or not—that their leaders were exceptional.
With the founding and growth
of Christianity, religious expression
became a popular form of public art.
Popes and rich merchants employed
artists such as Giotto, Raphael, and
Michelangelo to create art to deco-
rate churches and family altars.
In the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries, when the building of huge
churches declined, the demand for
privately owned art increased. People
in the growing middle class wanted
secular (worldly) art to hang in their
homes, particularly landscapes, por-
traits, and still lifes.
The ceiling of the Sistine Chapel in the
Vatican City illustrates an episode from
the Bible book of Genesis.
Jan Vermeer van Delft’s “The Love Letter” (1667–1668)


ART 9
.What Is Art?
Roots of Modern Art
In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, many governments
changed drastically, as did the way people earned their living.
Artists responded to these changes in basically two ways.
One group of artists, led by Jacques-Louis David, looked
to the past, to classical Greek and Roman times when a religious
or ruling class held all authority. This movement was called
neoclassicism, or “new classic.” It was a more formal style that
focused on the noble character of humankind, much like Greek
and Roman art.
In the other camp were artists who wanted to move away
from what the public expected and paint from their own subjec-
tive viewpoint. The movement, called romanticism, emphasized
feelings and imagination rather than reason. This style was the
beginning of personal artistic expression.
Jacques-Louis David’s “Madame Recamier” (1800)


10 ART
What Is Art?.
In 1849, Gustave Courbet, a French artist, reacted against
the romantics, accusing them of trying to “escape from the
realities of the times.” He also criticized the idealized art of the
neoclassicists. Courbet chose his subjects from everyday life
and painted them exactly as they were. He was part of the
movement called realism.
Édouard Manet, another French
artist, continued the rebellious trend
of using commonplace subjects. He
rejected conventional ways of paint-
ing, emphasizing the two-dimensional
character of the picture surface. He
applied paint heavily, allowing the
brush strokes to become part of the
texture. Manet claimed that a paint-
ing was not just a representation of
another object, but a worthy object
in its own right.
The impressionists, represented
by Claude Monet, Auguste Renoir,
and Edgar Degas, extended Manet’s
ideas. They explored the effects of
light and color, treating them with
as much importance as the subject
of their paintings.
Paul Cézanne
experimented
with shape
and structure
by reducing
objects to geo-
metric forms.
He thought all
objects in nature
were based on
the cone, sphere,
and cylinder.
Édouard Manet’s “Le Fifre
(The Fifer)” (1866)


ART 11
.What Is Art?
Claude Monet’s “Waterloo Bridge, Gray Day” (1903)
Paul Cézanne’s “Apples and Oranges” (1899)


12 ART
What Is Art?.
Vincent Van Gogh’s paintings expressed intense emotions
through violent color combinations and vigorous brushwork.
His work influenced expressionism, the movement that depicted
inner experience by distorting images in the natural world.
In less than 50 years—from Manet to Van Gogh—artists had
gained recognition for their new ideas about art. They were no
longer bound by tradition or what the public expected. Artists
had freed themselves to explore the elements of art within the
context of the painting.
Art in a Modern Light
Pablo Picasso introduced the element of time, the fourth dimen-
sion, into his artwork. He looked at still objects and still figures
from all sides and angles and then reassembled his memories of
those views into one image. His work marked the beginning of
the modern movement called cubism.
Vincent Van Gogh’s “La Grenouillere (The Riverbank)” (1890)


ART 13
.What Is Art?
In 1910, Wassily Kandinsky, a Polish artist, began to paint
in a completely different way—in an abstract style, which made
no attempt to represent any real subject. Kandinsky believed
that the power of the painting was in its elements of line, shape,
form, color, space, and texture.
Kandinsky’s abstract art launched modern art movements
in the 20th century, including symbolism, art deco, surrealism,
social realism, pop art, op art, conceptual art, and internet art.
Browse through some of the art history books listed in the
resources section to learn more.
In the style of Pablo Picasso, some modern artists express their
art in the form of cubism.
Abstract art is fashioned from the example of Wassily Kandinsky.


William Leighton Leitch’s “Radicofanil” (c. 1881)


ART 15
.Elements of Art and Design
Elements of Art
and Design
When you create art, you are expressing your ideas, your feel-
ings, or your beliefs. If you intend to share your art with other
people, you need to know how to organize your design so that
they will understand what your art is telling them. If you
understand what the elements are and how to use them
and apply the principles of design to your composition,
you will encourage the viewer to spend time with you
through your art.
Elements of Art
The elements of art—line, value, shape, form, space,
color, and texture—are the basic visual symbols for
communicating with the viewer.
Line
As an element of art, a line is a continuous
mark made on the drawing or painting sur-
face. Although lines vary in length, width,
texture, direction, and degree of curve, they
are measured by length and are considered to
be one-dimensional, There are five kinds of
lines: vertical, horizontal, diagonal, curved,
and zigzag.
Lines outline shapes, divide space, connect
shapes, and indicate movement and direction. Some
lines are so wide that they look like shapes. Some
lines are drawn so close to other lines that together
they create a texture.


16 ART
Elements of Art and Design.
Certain lines are imagined rather than seen. For example,
when you look after dark at the traffic on a highway, you see a
series of white headlights or red taillights. You know these dots
of lights come from separate cars, but in your mind you connect
the dots to form white or red lines. These lines—called implied
lines—are suggested, not real. Other examples of implied lines
include a trail of footprints in wet sand, the edges of colored
objects, and the contrast between light and shadow.
Lines also express moods. For example, horizontal lines
express calm or inactivity; diagonal lines express tension
or instability.
Artists use lines as actual marks to draw the pictures.
They also use lines—implied and real—as part of the whole
experience of looking at a painting. Artists arrange lines in
the composition to direct the viewer’s eye to different places
in the picture, to create a sense of rhythm, and to express a
mood. As an element of art, a line is about technique as well
as composition.
The horizontal lines indicate
a still boat on a calm river.
Claude Monet’s “Bridge at Argenteuil” (1874)


ART 17
.Elements of Art and Design
Value
Value is concerned with lightness
or darkness. It depends on how
much light a surface reflects.
Using values with shading tech-
niques creates the illusion of
three-dimensionality. Artists use
the contrast between light and
dark values as a design element.
J. H. Clark’s “A Ship’s Boat Attacking a Whale” (c. 1800)
The diagonal lines indicate an
unstable boat on a rough sea.
Mary Stevenson Cassatt’s
“Seated Woman” (1879)


18 ART
Elements of Art and Design.
Shape and Form
A shape is the outline or external surface of a form. It is two-
dimensional, measured by length and width. A shape is flat
and may be drawn as an outline or as a filled-in area. Shapes
are either geometric or free-form (irregular and uneven, often
found in nature).
A form is a solid, three-dimensional shape measured by
length, width, and depth. There are six basic geometric forms:
cube, sphere, cone, cylinder, pyramid, and prism.
Artists use geometric shapes and forms as the basis for
drawing objects as well as human and animal figures. They
also use shapes and forms—geometric and free-form—as design
elements to express motion and rhythm in the painting and to
control the direction of the viewer’s eye movements around
the canvas.
CUBE SPHERE
CONE CYLINDER
PYRAMID PRISM
Each geometric form has one or more related shapes, depending on the angle
you are seeing.


ART 19
.Elements of Art and Design
Space
In art, space is defined as
positive and negative. Positive
spaces are the shapes and
forms in a drawing or paint-
ing. Negative spaces are the
empty areas surrounding the
shapes and forms.
Artists use the size and
shape of negative spaces to
describe the positive spaces.
For example, a large negative
space around a single human
form may indicate a sense
of isolation or loneliness.
Positive spaces in close proximity with slivers
of negative space might suggest a feeling
of togetherness or crowding.
Color
When white light passes through
a prism, the colored light rays
bend and project a band of all
the colors—the visible spectrum.
The colors of the spectrum always
appear in the same order: red,
orange, yellow, green, blue, and
violet. The color wheel is the
spectrum bent into a circle. Artists
refer to a color wheel to understand
how colors mix, contrast, and harmo-
nize with one another. Color has three
properties: hue, value, and intensity.
Hue is the name of a spectral
color. The primary hues are red,
blue, and yellow. You cannot make a
primary hue by mixing other hues together, but mixing two
primary hues together produces the secondary hues: red and
yellow make orange; blue and yellow make green; red and blue
make violet. Mixing a primary hue with its adjacent secondary
hue produces a tertiary hue: for example, red and orange
make red-orange.
A color wheel with primary,
secondary, and tertiary hues


20 ART
Elements of Art and Design.
Value refers to the relative lightness or darkness of a color.
White is the highest value and black is the lowest. All other col-
ors fall between them. The more light a color reflects, the
lighter it looks. You can change the value of a hue by adding
black or white. A light value of a hue is called a tint; a dark
value is called a shade.
Intensity is the brightness or dullness of color. A pure
color is the brightest. The more neutral a color becomes, the
less intense the color. You can neutralize a color by adding
black, by adding white, or by adding the color’s complement
(its opposite on the color wheel).
Like the impressionists, Georges
Seurat (1859—1891) was con-
cerned with reproducing optical
color—the color that people
actually perceive when they
look at something. He devel-
oped his own systematic paint-
ing technique—called pointillism
because of the small points of
pure color he painted next to
each other. Seurat’s method is
called optical mixing because
the separate points or dots
blend in the eye to make colors,
not on the painter’s palette.
Georges Seurat created a painting style called pointillism, in which separate
dots ”blend” together to form an image. This close-up of Seurat’s “La Parade”
captures the details of his technique.
HUETINTS SHADES
Pointillism


ART 21
Texture
Texture refers to what a surface
feels like. The actual drawing
surface may feel smooth or rough,
depending on the materials used
and the amount of medium applied.
Texture also refers to what
the surface of an object appears
to feel like. Some artists who excel
at drawing can make you think
you can feel a satin skirt, or a
lace collar, or a velvet curtain
in their paintings.
Impasto is the thick application of paint
that forms an opaque, textured surface.
Jean-Marc Nattier’s “Francoise Renee, Marquise d’Antin” (1738)
.Elements of Art and Design


22 ART
Elements of Art and Design.
Principles of Design
Just as you learn grammar to organize words and communicate
in spoken and written languages, you learn the principles of
design to organize the elements of art to communicate effec-
tively in a visual language. These principles are guidelines—not
rules—to help you express yourself artistically. Understanding
these principles also will help you to appreciate how other art-
ists try to communicate through their work.
The six principles of design are rhythm, balance, propor-
tion, variety, emphasis, and unity.
Rhythm
Rhythm indicates movement by the repetition of a certain art
element or combination of elements. The repeated element—
a shape or line, for example—is called a motif. The artist
uses the repetition of a motif to lead the viewer’s eye around
the work of art.
Regular rhythm occurs when
identical motifs with identical
spacing between them are
repeated. This steady rhythm
may become monotonous to
the viewer if not relieved by
a change in elements such
as shape or color.
Random rhythm happens
when a motif is repeated in no
apparent order, with irregular
spacing between one motif
and the next.


ART 23
.Elements of Art and Design
Balance
Balance is the visual stability of the composition. If a work
of art has visual balance, then the viewer feels that the ele-
ments have been arranged just right. If there is an imbalance,
then the viewer feels something’s wrong—that the elements
need to be rearranged.
A formal balance occurs when
similar elements are placed on each
side of the central axis (a drawn or
imaginary line through the center
of the work). When both sides of a
composition are mirror images of
each other, this formal arrangement
is called symmetry.
“Pair of Cranes in the Shadow of
Flowers” (c. 1715) by Lang Shih-ning
shows an informal, or asymmetrical,
balance with unlike objects arranged
with equal visual weight. The different
elements of art—line, value, shape,
space, color, and texture—all influence
the visual weight of a composition. For
example, a small area of bright color
can balance a larger area of dull color.


24 ART
Elements of Art and Design.
Proportion
Proportion refers to the proper size relationship of one part
of the composition to another, and to the whole work of art.
The size of the object itself has no meaning unless you can
compare it to something else.
The proportions of a
human figure are not defined
in terms of inches, but in ratios
of one body part to another.
To determine the proportions
of an individual figure, measure
the length of the head from the
chin to the top of the skill. The
average adult is adult is seven
and one-half heads tall. A young
child is five or six heads tall,
and a baby is only about three
heads long.
Artists use correct propor-
tions to show people or objects
in a realistic way.
But some artists, like the
expressionists, distort or exag-
gerate proportions to communi-
cate feelings such as horror or
depression or utter joy.
Scale refers to the size of an
object in relation to a standard
reference—usually the human
body. If you look at a painting
of what seems to be a moun-
tain—without a building, tree,
or human figure in the picture,
how do you know how big the
mountain really is?
To find out more about drawing the human figure, read
some of the books listed in the resources section of
this pamphlet.
Average body proportions


ART 25
.Elements of Art and Design
Variety
Variety is concerned with difference or contrast. A compo-
sition has variety when something different is added to
the design to keep the repetition from being monot-
onous. Suppose you had painted red polka dots
of equal size, spacing them regularly all over
the canvas. That would be boring, right?
But if you changed just one of those
dots from red to green, that different
one would grab your attention.
Contrast creates variety, too. Different
elements placed next to each other (smooth
and rough textures, fine and bold lines, free-
form and geometric shapes, dark and light
values) are in contrast to one another.
Without the
human reference
in two of these
drawings, it would
be difficult to
judge the size of
the mountains.


26 ART
Elements of Art and Design.
Emphasis
Emphasis makes one part of the composition dominant, or
more important than the other parts. One specific element—
such as color, form, or texture—dominates the whole work.
Or, one area of the composition dominates all the other areas.
Those elements or areas that are not dominant are called
subordinate, or less important. Emphasis controls the order
in which a viewer looks at the work and how much attention
the viewer gives to each element or area.
If the emphasis is on a certain area of the work, that
dominant area becomes the focal point, or the first place the
viewer looks.
The four places where the
lines intersect are all good
focal points.
Positioning Your Focal Points
One way to create a strong composition that will attract and hold the
viewer’s attention is to draw a grid to locate focal points of interest.
Divide the field of vision into thirds, vertically and horizontally. The lines
intersect in four places, all good focal points.
In this composition, the artist used one focal point.


ART 27
.Elements of Art and Design
Unity
Unity is the quality of being complete—when the separate
elements serve the whole and nothing seems out of place or
added unnecessarily. To create visual unity in a composition,
the artist relies on design principles to arrange the elements
of art so they work together.
As you plan your projects to meet the requirements for
the Art merit badge and look at works created by other artists,
think about what seems right about the compositions. Identify
the specific art elements the artist chose and which design
principles apply. When you understand how the artist created
visual unity in the composition, you will discover that you
actually appreciate the artwork more. You might even realize
that now you like a painting or style that you didn’t think
you liked before!
In this painting, notice how the boy’s eyes are
looking at the violin bow. This detail adds
emphasis to the composition.


The artist, Jim Caraway, used a technique called stippling to create this fine portrait.
Stippling involves the application of shading with dots instead of lines.


.Art Media and Techniques
Art Media
and Techniques
The visual artist can choose from a variety of media, or
materials, to create a drawing or painting. Each medium has
qualities that make it better for certain applications than others.
Try to learn what these qualities are so you can pick the right
medium for each of your renderings.
Fundamentals of Drawing
Drawing is the basis for painting, sculpture, and printmaking.
Of course, it’s also the basis for drawings—graphic images
usually created with pencil, pen and ink, and charcoal in
black and white tonalities.
A drawing takes three forms:
• Sketch—a quick impression drawn with loose lines suggest-
ing something seen or imagined
• Study—a preliminary drawing in which the artist works out
problems for a more involved work
• Drawing—a composition that is a finished artistic statement
with visual unity
Drawing Media and Materials
In addition to the actual drawing media, you will need
other materials to create a drawing. Before you make
your first mark, set up your work area with the
right supplies.
Tone is the
general coloration
or balance of
values from
light to dark
in a painting.


30 ART
Art Media and Techniques.
Paper. Both handmade and commercially made papers
come in different weights, textures, and degrees of absorbency.
Hot-pressed papers and illustration boards have hard, smooth
surfaces—just right for making sharp lines. Cold-pressed papers
and boards have a textured surface, which absorbs paint well.
Choose the right paper for the medium so you will be pleased
with the results. If you want your work to last, use acid-free
paper so it won’t change color over time. Before you’re ready
to seal a drawing, you should protect it with a sheet of tracing
paper to keep it from smudging.
Drawing surface. The correct position for a drawing surface is at
a 45-degree angle so that the artist can draw figures and objects
in the correct perspective. Professional artists work at a special
desk with a surface that can be tilted. You can use a drawing
board or clipboard; just be sure to hold it at a 45-degree angle.
Erasers. A kneaded eraser can be manipulated into flat shapes,
points, or edges, and is meant to be pressed down on drawn
marks, then lifted to remove the graphite or charcoal medium.
A white eraser with a slightly gritty texture is good for rubbing
a mark off the surface without leaving color on the paper as a
pink eraser would do.
Sharpeners. You’ll need a pencil sharpener to keep a fine point
on graphite, charcoal, and pencils. With a craft knife, you can
sharpen corners and edges on a charcoal or pastel stick or
shave it to make a powder.
Blending tools. A tortillon and blending stump are pointed
cylinders made of tightly rolled paper. They are used to blend
and spread the media. You can also use cotton balls and
chamois cloths for blending.
Spray fixative. To prevent your finished pencil, charcoal, or
pastel drawing from smudging, you’ll need to seal it with a
fixative. Hold the aerosol can about a foot from the drawing.
Spray across the drawing, not straight down on it, and keep
the can moving.
If you carry a
sketchbook, you
can capture quick
impressions of
objects, gestures,
facial expressions,
or anything else
that you might
want to develop
later into a
finished work. Be
sure to match the
sketchbook paper
to your sketching
medium: pencil,
pen, or charcoal.
Fixative fumes are toxic and flammable. If possible,
spray your work outdoors. If you “fix” your drawing
indoors, wear a dust mask in a well-ventilated room.


ART 31
.Art Media and Techniques
PENCIL
The simplest and most available drawing media is the pencil.
With a graphite, or “lead,” pencil, you can create a monochro-
matic drawing showing complicated details and lighting. The
quality of the graphite is rated in a hardness range from the
hardest, 9H, to the softest, 6B. You produce the darkest value
with the softest pencil. Most artists use 6B and 2HB pencils,
available at art supply stores. However, you can draw with the
basic No. 2 pencil that is commonly used at school. Keep your
pencil sharpened to a fine point. Just remember: The softer
the “lead,” the sooner the point is blunted.
You can adjust the quality of the marks you make by
varying the pressure of your hand movements. Press lightly
on the paper with a sharp point to make thin lines; press hard
with a blunt point to make bold, broad lines. The pencil drawing
works best on paper with a dull textured surface. For sketches
and studies you don’t intend to keep a long time, you can draw
on a pad of newsprint. Clean up smears and unwanted lines
with a kneaded eraser.
Unlike graphite pencils, colored pencils have a waxy nature
so you cannot blend their colors. Instead, you build up layers of
crosshatched colors to create the visual effect of blended color.
Refer to the “Drawing Techniques” section to learn more about
cross-hatching.
A monochromatic
drawing is one
drawn in shades
of one color.
Monochromatic pencil drawings


32 ART
PEN AND INK
Artists have been drawing with pen and ink for centuries, but
they used to draw with quills, reeds, and bamboo. You can still
draw with them today, but you can also choose special pens to
suit your style. You’ll have to experiment with different pens to
find out which ones you prefer.
Pens that come with self-contained ink include fountain,
rollerball, felt-tipped, and technical pens. These are available
in different tip sizes to draw fine, medium, and bold lines.
With these pens, you get a steady flow of ink and a consis-
tency of lines.
A dip pen comes with a nib holder and different widths of
nibs, or tips. You can vary the thickness of lines according to
the amount of pressure you exert on the nib. The ink for this
kind of pen comes in a bottle. The most common ink colors for
drawing are black and shades of brown. Inks are waterproof or
nonwaterproof. Most nonwaterproof inks will fade gradually if
exposed to light.
Use a heavyweight paper or illustration board with a
smooth surface. If you draw with a dip pen, wipe your pen
carefully on the bottle each time you dip into the ink so you
don’t spill or blob ink on your paper.
Pen and ink drawing
Without shading,
pen-and-ink
drawings tend to
look flat, or two-
dimensional. Refer
to the “Drawing
Techniques”
section to learn
about how to use
shading techniques
to create the
illusion of three-
dimensional
shapes.
Art Media and Techniques.


ART 33
.Art Media and Techniques
CHARCOAL
Charcoal sticks and pencils contain an impure form of carbon,
made by burning sticks of wood with little oxygen. The char-
coal is compressed to varying degrees of softness. Many artists
enjoy using charcoal because they can draw quickly and can
make corrections without ruining the paper.
Use the corners of charcoal sticks to make fine lines, or lay
the stick flat to make broad strokes. You can easily manipulate
charcoal, blending it with a paper stump, a cotton ball, or even
your fingers. With a kneaded eraser, you can lift charcoal off
the paper to create a lighter tone. Experiment with the medium
by applying different amounts of pressure to the charcoal stick
on a variety of smooth and rough papers.
You can’t erase mistakes in pen-and-ink drawing, so here are a few tips
to prevent unwanted marks:
• If you’re right-handed, start working on the left side of your drawing.
Start on the right side if you’re left-handed.
• After working on one area, turn your paper around to work in a new
area so you won’t smudge the wet ink.
• Place a piece of paper under your drawing hand, but keep it still while
you draw.
Charcoal drawing
Artists often use
charcoal to make
a preliminary
sketch and then
draw or paint over
it with another
medium. If you
intend to frame
or keep your
charcoal drawing,
be sure to spray
it with a fixative.


34 ART
Art Media and Techniques.
Drawing Techniques
Drawing is a skill you can
learn with practice. And more
practice. And more practice.
But be assured—you
will improve. Observe,
analyze, read. And
keep drawing!
DISCOVERING BASIC CHARACTERISTICS
You can observe your subject to discover its basic characteris-
tics. Or you can draw it. Contour lines define the edges of an
object. The outlined object appears as a flat two-dimensional
shape. But contour lines also follow the volume of the object,
revealing its three-dimensional form.
A gesture drawing of a person or animal captures a pose or
sense of movement. Unlike contour drawings, gesture drawings
have no outlines or details. These quick sketches—built up with
scribbles and broad fill-in strokes—reveal the bulk of the figures.
Gesture drawings
Contour drawing


ART 35
.Art Media and Techniques
CREATING THE ILLUSION OF FORM
Modeling uses light and dark values as a way to suggest the
three-dimensional qualities of a drawn object. It involves the
following basic shading techniques:
• Solid shading—blending or smudging pencil, charcoal, or
pastel marks with a stump, cotton ball, rag, or fingers
• Hatching—shading with a series of fine parallel lines drawn
close together for a dark value or loosely for a lighter one
• Cross-hatching—hatching with two or more intersecting
sets of parallel lines
• Stippling—shading with dots instead of lines
Solid shading
Stippling
Cross-hatching
Hatching


36 ART
Art Media and Techniques.
CREATING THE ILLUSION OF DEPTH
If you want to draw convincingly, you must learn to observe
correctly so your eyes don’t fool you. Otherwise, your drawn
buildings might appear to lean or the forms in your still life
might seem ready to slide off the table.
Artists use a system called perspective to correctly draw
the interrelationships of objects in space. Perspective is a way of
showing the illusion of depth on a two-dimensional surface.
The controlling elements are:
• Eye level—What you see depends on your position when
you are looking at the subject. You may look straight, down,
or up at the subject.
• Vanishing point—A specific point on the horizon line where
parallel lines seem to meet.
In one-point linear perspective, the front of the subject is
parallel to the picture plane. All receding parallel lines seem to
meet, or converge, at one vanishing point on the horizon.
For more information about one-point, two-point, and
three-point perspectives, refer to the resources section.
The picture
plane is an
imaginary vertical
plane between
the viewer and
the subject.
One-point perspective


ART 37
.Art Media and Techniques
Artist’s tip: An easy way to maintain accurate propor-
tions for all the images in your picture is to use your
pencil as a gauge. Hold the pencil at arm’s length and
align it with an object in your composition. With one
eye closed, measure the image exactly as you see it
from the tip of the pencil to your thumb. Transfer that
measurement to your paper to draw the image in iden-
tical size. You can use this method for portraits, still
lifes, and landscapes.


Art Media and Techniques.
Fundamentals of Painting
Artists use line and color in different ways to make paintings.
In some artwork, the line drawing is the basis for the painting
and color is a secondary element, added to describe the out-
lined forms. In other works, color is the subject of the painting.
No matter how you plan to use color, you need to know
how to mix pigments and apply the paint.
Painting Media and Materials
Paint is formed when a pigment is mixed with a binding
medium. Pigment is finely ground, colored powder that comes
from natural sources like minerals and plants or from chemicals.
Binding medium is a liquid substance that holds pigment parti-
cles together and attaches them to a surface. This substance is
also called a vehicle because it “carries” the pigment.
In addition to paint, you’ll need other materials and sup-
plies. These will depend on which paint medium you plan to
use: pastel, watercolor, tempera, acrylic, or oil.
Be sure you have
the right tools and
materials before
you start painting.
• Easel
• Painting surfaces such as paper,
hardboard, or primed canvas
• Mediums to thin or thicken
acrylic paint
• Linseed oil and turpentine for
oil paints
• Painting tools: sable or synthetic
brushes, natural sponges,
foam rollers
• Blending tools: tortillon and
blending stump, chamois
• Palette
• Palette knife
• Rags
• Spray fixatives
• Water


PASTELS
Pastel is basically chalk mixed with pigment and a binding
medium. It is considered to be both a drawing and a paint-
ing medium because it can be applied dry with a chalk
stick or pencil, or spread with a wet brush.
The pastel types are:
• Soft pastel. The chalk stick—the most popular form—comes
in bright colors. It smudges, so it is easy to apply in broad
strokes and to blend. The chalk particles are like dust, so use
soft pastels on paper with a rough texture. You’ll have to spray
a fixative to help the chalk dust stick. Soft pastels are water-
soluble, so they can be applied like watercolors.
• Pastel pencil. The pencil is a harder version of the
chalk stick. It doesn’t smudge, so you can use it to
draw lines and fine details.
• Oil pastel. This pastel is soluble in turpentine. It acts
more like oil paint. Its biggest advantage is that it is
dustless and doesn’t require a fixative. The oil pastel
is best for bold, pure color. Because the oil pastel goes
on like a paste, the artist can use it on smooth paper.
Here are three ways to start a picture with pastel:
1. Linear—Draw the whole composition as a line
drawing in one color with a pastel pencil. Then fill
in color with soft pastel sticks.
2. Block-in—Block in the whole composition with
masses of color, using the broad side of a soft
pastel stick. Add lines, if you wish, for detail and
for emphasis.
3. Crosshatch—Make a crosshatched drawing of the
composition using pastel pencils in various colors.
Then spray a workable fixative over the layer. Apply
color with soft pastel sticks.
The key to a great pastel picture is working in
layers to add and blend colors. With soft pastels, the
chalk dust builds up in the grooves of the rough paper.
If too much chalk builds up, the color will look muddy.
To avoid that, spray a fixative over the picture between
layers of color. The fixative will darken the colors slightly,
so apply each layer of color with a light touch.
1
2
3
ART 39
.


40 ART
Art Media and Techniques.
WATERCOLORS
Watercolor paints come in tubes or hard blocks, called pans. The
tubes keep the paint from drying out, but the pans are convenient,
too, because they can be stored in metal watercolor boxes.
You’ll need two or three soft sable brushes in different
sizes to make fine tapered lines and broad brush marks. The
sable brushes cost a little more than synthetic brushes or the
camel’s hair brushes in children’s watercolor sets, but they are
worth the money because the sable brushes give you a lot of
control and keep their shape longer.
Watercolors are transparent when mixed with water. They
reflect light, producing a delicate effect. You can blend colors
together directly or layer colors in watery washes for soft shifts
in light and dark values. Try the wet-on-wet technique by damp-
ening the page first with a wet sponge. Then let the watercolors
flow from your brush onto the paper. The wetter the paper is
when you make your strokes, the more the colors will spread
and soften. For the wet-on-dry technique, let your first layer
of wash or brushstrokes dry. Then add more paint. The brush-
strokes you apply over the dry layer will keep their sharp edges.
Tints will become lighter as they dry, so allow for this by paint-
ing a little darker than you want your final picture to look.
Paper comes
in weights. Try
140-pound paper
with a slightly
textured surface.
If you plan to
apply a really wet
wash, then use
300-pound paper.
Clean your brushes after every use with mild soap and
water. Make sure that you wash out the paint that collects
in the heel of the brush (next to the metal ferrule). With
your fingers, reshape the bristles to a point, and lay the
brushes on a flat surface to dry. When the bristles are
completely dry, store the brushes—point up—in a jar.
Watercolor was a favorite medium of Scouting
founder Robert S. S. Baden-Powell. He painted
numerous outdoor scenes, including this one.


ART 41
.Art Media and Techniques
TEMPERA
Tempera paint is poster paint, the kind of jar paint you probably
have used many times in school. Like watercolor, tempera paint
is soluble in water, but the paint is not as transparent. Also,
tempera paints offer brighter, stronger colors and do not dry
quite as fast as watercolor.
If you have not used tempera much before, experiment with
it a few times before you start the painting for requirement 4.
You can thin the consistency of tempera by adding water, or you
can use it thick. For interesting effects, apply both consistencies
with medium and large brushes. Use what you learned about
mixing colors. Try painting a sky, a mountain, or even a face
with many colors applied with many brushstrokes. Your subjects
will look like forms rather than solid shapes.
Start by sketching your subject lightly in pencil. When
you’re ready to paint, use flat bristle brushes to apply broad
washes of color first. Then use round or flat sable brushes to
outline shapes and fill in details.
As with other media, you’ll need to practice a lot before
you’re able to achieve all the tones you want.
Hundreds of years
ago, artists mixed
colored powder
with egg to make
a paint called
tempera. They
applied it to
paintings on the
church altar. The
egg caused the
paint to dry to a
hard, shiny finish
so the surface
reflected light.


42 ART
Art Media and Techniques.
ACRYLICS
Acrylic paint, made with a synthetic resin binder, has been
available to artists for only the past 50 years. It is the most
versatile of all painting media:
• Once dry, the plastic paint is almost indestructible. Acrylics
are unaffected by extremes in the weather.
• Colors are brilliant and easy to mix.
• Acrylics can be used on almost any surface—except on those
containing oil or wax. Do not use on canvasses primed for oil
paint. If you want to paint on a very shiny or very smooth
surface like metal or glass, roughen the surface a little with
sandpaper so the paint will adhere.
• Acrylics act like oil paints but dry almost immediately, so you
can make a painting in a day instead of weeks or months.
• Cleanup requires water, not toxic chemicals
like turpentine or paint thinner.
Any brushes that could be used for watercolor or oil can
be used with acrylic paint, but make sure to clean all traces of
oil and turpentine on old brushes because those substances
will react badly with acrylic paint.
Experiment with the following techniques to explore some of
the many ways to use acrylics:
• Opaque technique. For maximum color coverage, use
undiluted acrylic paint. On their own, acrylics tend to dry
to a dull finish. To achieve a soft, shiny finish, you can mix
an acrylic gloss medium with the wet paint before you apply
it. By doing so, you make the acrylic paint more fluid and
easier to brush on. The more water you add to the medium,
the less glossy your picture will be. The acrylic medium dries
clear and allows you to see colors painted underneath others.
Synthetic bristle
brushes are best
for using with
synthetic paint.


.Art Media and Techniques
ART 43
Acrylic painting
• Transparent technique. Mix a glazing medium with acrylic
paint to apply the paint like watercolors. Unlike watercolors,
however, acrylic colors remain separate and are water-insolu-
ble once dry, so you can build layers of transparent color
without the colors dissolving into others or becoming muddy.
• Texturing technique. You can increase the volume and
thickness of acrylic paint by mixing it with a gel medium
or modeling paste. Apply the paint with a brush or painting
knife. If you want a heavy impastoed surface, build texture in
layers. While the paint is still wet, you can scratch the
surface, press crumpled foil into the paint, or dab it with a
stiff brush. Experiment to invent your own texture.
• Collage. Acrylic paints and acrylic mediums are adhesive,
so they are ideal for combining materials into one picture.
Any materials stuck to or pressed into acrylics will stay
permanently in place when the paint dries.
The advantages of acrylic—it dries quickly and is
permanent—can turn into disadvantages for you if you don’t
plan your painting first. Draw your painting on the surface
before you apply paint. Experiment on practice projects
before you start your painting for requirement 4.


44 ART
Art Media and Techniques.
OIL PAINTS
For hundreds of years, artists have painted with oil-based
paints. Because the paint dries slowly, the artist can make
changes to the composition, modify color relationships, and
achieve different effects by applying the paint thickly in
impasto, or thinly in glazes.
There are two methods of oil painting—direct and indirect.
• Direct method—The oil paint is applied in one layer. With
this method, you can complete a painting in one session
because there is no waiting time required before adding
another layer. Colors (hues) mixed directly on the palette
or on the canvas have solid, concealing coverage.
• Indirect method—With this more traditional approach,
you apply oil paint in layers, gradually adjusting the opacity
(concealing coverage) and transparency of the colors to
create different effects.
The first step in the indirect method is underpainting,
which is basically a brush drawing in one or two colors. This
first layer of paint establishes the basic composition. Paint the
lines in the underpainting stronger than you intend them to be
in the final stage because subsequent glazing will soften them.
In the next step or steps, apply glazes to layer color. You
can paint opaque color directly painted into the wet glaze or
when the layer dries.
Paint “fat over lean” is the basic principle of traditional oil painting. “Fat”
oil paint has more oil medium (linseed oil) in it; “lean” oil paint has less
oil medium in it. The more oil medium in the paint, the more flexible it is.
As artists apply successive layers of oil paint, they add more oil medium
to the paint to make it fatter and more flexible. This fat-over-lean rule
ensures that the upper layers don’t dry faster than the lower ones, which
can cause the paint to crack as it dries.
To make an oil
painting for
requirement 4, you
may paint your
picture with fast-
drying oils so you
can finish it before
you celebrate
two birthdays!
In the meantime,
don’t watch the
paint dry. Paint
something else.


ART 45
.Art Media and Techniques
When the painting is complete, allow it to dry completely
in a dust-free area. Don’t let it dry in the dark because the lack
of light may cause a thin film of oil to rise to the surface and
yellow the picture. It may take six months to a year for an oil
painting to dry thoroughly. When you are certain the paint is
dry, protect your painting with a coat of varnish.
COMPUTER DRAWING AND PAINTING
If you make art with your computer, you won’t
get your hands dirty, you won’t have to wear a
mask to keep from inhaling toxic fixative fumes,
and you won’t have to clean your tools when
you’re done. But you will have fun!
You need a computer with software that
includes—at the very least—some drawing tools.
But to really learn how to create computer art,
you’ll need a drawing and/or painting program.
You’ll also need a desktop printer.
Other computer drawing tools can be useful:
• A scanner will help bring photographs,
printed images, and your own rough sketches
into the computer.
• A digitalizing tablet and stylus (pen) is an
input device, similar to a mouse. When you
move the stylus over the tablet, the cursor on
the screen moves. The flat drawing surface is
pressure-sensitive, so it reacts to the amount
of pressure you apply with the stylus. The
harder you press, the thicker the electronic
“paint” will flow on the computer screen.
Many artists like to use the digitizing tablet
because it makes drawing and painting on
a computer feel more natural.
Clean paintbrushes thoroughly with turpentine and
rags. Then rub the bristles in a jar filled with brush
conditioner or human hair shampoo. Then rinse
thoroughly and squeeze out the water. Store the
brush with bristles up.
Computer drawing and painting
programs give you lots of options
for the effect of your art.


46 ART
Art Media and Techniques.
Computer Graphic Images
Graphic images are stored on the computer as bitmapped
images or vector images.
A bitmapped image is made of tiny square cells of color
called pixels, which are arranged in neat rows and columns like
a grid. The grid is called a raster, so bitmapped images are often
called raster images. Each pixel is independent of the others
and contains one color (like a mosaic tile).
A vector image (sometimes called an object-oriented
image) is stored in the computer as a set of mathematically
defined objects, or shapes. One advantage of a vector image
over a bitmapped image is that it can be scaled (changed in
size) without losing its appearance.
Pixel is short for
“picture element.”
This is an enlarged bitmapped
image. Notice how the corners
of the pixels show up on the
curved line and make the
image look jagged.
This is an enlarged vector
image. Notice how the vector
image retains its smooth line.


ART 47
.Art Media and Techniques
Computer Drawing Programs
Drawing and illustration programs are vector-based applications.
They were originally developed for mechanical drawing and
technical illustration because they produce such clean lines and
hard-edged images. Vector images appear solid and flat, more like
two-dimensional shapes. Artists often use vector-based drawing
programs to design logos and graphics composed of individual
objects or shapes.
To draw a vector image, start by creating a
path that defines the boundaries of the object.
Each click of the mouse sets set down anchor
points, which are the path segments. To control
a curved path, use the direction lines and their
control points. When the outline is complete,
add color to make the shape.
A drawing program creates independent
objects that can be placed on top or underneath
each other, moved apart, scaled one or more to
different sizes, or reshaped. In contrast, a paint-
ing program creates separate objects, but they
are not independent.
These are examples of graphic images created in a vector-based
drawing program.
To reshape an image, drag a
control point at the end of the
direction line, or drag an anchor
point on the curved path.


48 ART
Art Media and Techniques.
Computer Painting Programs
Painting programs are based on bitmapped images. The digital
toolbox contains electronic paintbrushes, which can be used
to imitate the effects of natural paint media. The variety of
painting tools allows you to add color and adjust light and
dark values, change intensity, and add texture. A computer-
painting program allows the user to paint realistic images
on an electronic canvas.
A special feature of these programs is layers. These are like
stackable canvasses, each holding part of the ultimate image.
It is possible to work with each layer independently or to work
with groups of layers. When the combination of stacked images
is complete, the layers can be flattened into a single image,
and a blending tool can be used to blend edges into one
seamless image.


ART 49
.Art Media and Techniques
Computer Graphic Images
Instead of creating original art from scratch on the computer,
most artists start with a scanned image. A rough sketch or
study can be made with a real pencil then scanned into the
drawing or painting program. Digital painting tools then can
draw over the scanned sketch.


Norman Rockwell’s “From Concord to Tranquility” (1973)


ART 51
.Visual Storytelling
Visual Storytelling
Prehistoric artists were storytellers first, artists second.
Their paintings and carvings on the walls of caves
and cliffs are the only clues we have about how
they saw the world.
Today’s artists draw and paint pictures to tell
stories about how they see the world, too. In 1973,
Norman Rockwell—regarded by many as one of
America’s finest artists—painted the picture called
“From Concord to Tranquility.” His painting depicts
the American Revolution at Concord, Massachusetts,
and the modern-day revolution of space-age technology
represented by astronaut Neil Armstrong in his space suit.
Notice how Rockwell has organized this painting. Everyone
is facing the same direction and saluting the American flag.
What kind of mood does this painting express? What do you
think the artist is telling you about his world? How does this
painting affect you?
One of the options for requirement 5 is to tell a story with a
picture or pictures, or with a 3-D rendering. To do that, you must
start at the beginning—not the “once upon a time” beginning,
but at the beginning of your idea. You have to have an idea to
have a story.
Regardless of whether you paint in a realistic style like
Rockwell or an abstract style in which nothing looks
real, your picture must have three parts:
1. Subject—people, objects, and landscapes
2. Content—the story, expressed as mood and message
3. Composition—the ordered arrangement of the
elements of art to reinforce the content


52 ART
Visual Storytelling.
What is it that you want to express? Are you grateful for
something? Angry about a situation? Anxious about leaving
your dog home alone? What about drawing a picture of your
dog waiting at your bedroom window with one of your caps
in her mouth? You could show your school bus on the street
below your window. Those images and that setting describe a
story and express a mood. The viewer doesn’t know the actual
ending of the story, but fills it in from his or her own imagina-
tion. Because the picture makes a total impression and acts on
the viewer, the story is complete.
Once you know what your mood or message is, you
decide what your subject will be—perhaps a group of kids
shooting hoops, or a still life of your messy desk, or a campsite
by the lake. Now you have to consider how to organize all the
elements—lines, values, shapes and forms, space, color, and
texture—to reinforce the mood or message. Apply the principles
of design, too. But don’t get overwhelmed. Just use what works
to communicate your story.
Make a viewfinder to help you frame your story.
Step 1—Cut two pieces of cardboard into L shapes according to the
dimensions in the illustration.
Step 2—Hold the cardboard strips in front of you and adjust the two
L-shapes to make frames of different sizes and shapes around a scene
you want to draw. You might even get an idea for a picture by moving
the frames around a room or outdoors.
Step 3—When you frame a view that pleases you, make a quick pencil
sketch of the cropped view so you can begin your composition.


ART 53
.Visual Storytelling
Telling a 2-D Story
You have the option of telling a story with one or more pictures.
If you choose to draw a comic strip, be sure the pictures tell the
story. Don’t just illustrate a joke, and be careful not to let the
words in the balloons over the characters’ heads tell the whole
story. Use only the words that help explain the action or emo-
tions that the drawings show.
You are not limited by any format or medium. If you
choose to illustrate a picture book, a comic strip, or a series
of related paintings, go right ahead.
Telling a 3-D Story
If you would prefer to tell a story in a three-dimensional format
instead of creating a picture, you can do so in any way you
choose. You could make a mixed-media collage, mobile, sculp-
ture, quilt, or whatever you can dream up.
This diorama is an example of a 3-D rendering. If you make your own diorama,
you’ll create something based on the story you want to tell. For this kind of project,
you will need some basic materials: a shoebox (or something similar), glue or tape,
paint media, paper, and scissors. Gather other materials around your house or from
nature as needed.


54 ART
Functional Art and Design.
Functional Art
and Design
Many people think art is beautiful and decorative and meant to
be displayed on a wall or a tabletop. But they don’t realize how
many everyday objects are art, too—created to be useful. Walk
through a home improvement store and look at all the different
sink faucets for sale. And doorknobs. And riding lawn mowers.
All those products have been created by designers—people
trained to make art for practical purposes.
Design for Use
One of the options for requirement 5 gives you the opportunity
to design something useful and beautiful. Have you ever been
frustrated when you were trying to do something and wondered
why no one has invented something to make your task easier?
Well, now is your chance to design something that makes life
easier or safer or better smelling.


ART 55
.Functional Art and Design
Let’s say you design a beautiful car that gets great gas
mileage because of its low profile. Sounds like a great vehicle
for an elderly person on a fixed income—except that the car is
too low for that person to get in or out. If you redesign
the car to suit an elderly person, it will be too high to
get good mileage. Maybe you could keep the low pro-
file, but jazz up the design to appeal to a young per-
son who wants a sleek looking, economical car.
Because you have designed the car with the end user
in mind, you also know whom you are going to tar-
get in your promotional piece. You want people who
drive to find out about your car, so you create an ad for
a billboard along a major highway. But you design the
ad to attract young people who want to drive a cool
car and save money on gas so they can spend more on
clothes and entertainment.
Start thinking about how your design will be used.
Begin the design process by sketching ideas and mak-
ing notes. Draw thumbnail sketches of your design
from different angles and show ways it might be used.
Who is going to use it? Do you see any design prob-
lems that need reworking? If so, change the design.
Make the final detailed drawing or model. Then create
a promotional piece to attract people to your design.
Your promotional piece can be as simple as an
announcement, flier, or poster, or it can be more com-
plicated like a folded mailing piece. Just use your imagi-
nation and the information you have learned about
what makes good design.
From a sketch to the finished
product, designing a functional
piece of art lets you use your
imagination and talent.
Stephen’s Amazing
“Care-free” Flowering Pots
are Now in Full Bloom!
NEVER NEEDS WATERING!!!
CALL 123-456-7890
TO PLACE YOUR ORDER


Functional Art and Design.
Design for Identity
A logo is an identifying symbol designed to make people recog-
nize a company or product every time they see it. The Scouting
America logo is recognized nationwide.
For requirement 5, you may design a logo. It can be a
logo for a company, a product, a team or other organization,
or a service. Designers spend a lot of time trying to deter-
mine what is unique about a company or a product, and
they use that information to create a message that sets the
company or product apart from its competition. Then they
translate the written message into a logo to use on everything
that the customer sees.
When you look at the Scouting America logo, what do you
think? Do you know why the designer combined a fleur-de-lis,
eagle, shield, and two five-pointed stars?
For your logo design, start by sketching ideas. Choose
design elements that communicate the message. Be prepared
to explain the significance of those elements to your counselor.
Finalize the drawings with full color and details.
After you have designed your logo, you must apply it to
Scout equipment, furniture, ceramics, or fabric. How you
go about this depends mainly on what the article is.
If it is a piece of furniture, you could simply trace
the design where you want to apply it and then paint
the logo on the traced design. If you want to put your
logo on a patrol flag, you could trace it
onto a piece of cloth of the proper color,
cut it out, and sew it onto the flag. You
could use the screen-printing process to
apply your logo to fabric. (Learn how
to screen print in the Graphic Arts
merit badge pamphlet.)
What’s important about this
requirement is not your ability to
apply your logo to something,
but the design itself.
Applying a logo to a useful item is
an easy way to show off your art.
56 ART


ART 57
.Functional Art and Design
Art Shows and Spaces
Looking at a piece of
art in a book or on the
internet is like looking
at a travel brochure.
You can’t really
appreciate the art or
the exotic island until
you see it in person.
That’s why you must
visit a museum, art
gallery, or special art
exhibit to experience
the art. You might be
surprised to find out
that a portrait you’d
seen in an art book and
thought was about 3
feet high is actually more than 7 feet high. Or that a
painting of what looked like a huge brown square on
your computer monitor actually has many layered col-
ors that seem to blend into a solid color.
At a museum—or, perhaps, at a gallery or special
exhibit—you’ll have a chance to see art created by
many artists. You can compare the ways they used the
elements of art and applied the principles of design to
different compositions. Is there a specific painting you
like the most, or a particular style you prefer?
Try to arrange a visit to an artist’s studio. Talk to
the artist, if possible, about the work and the media and
tools used. Find out how the artist solved design prob-
lems. Think about how you might apply what you’ve
learned to your own artwork. Discuss your experience
with your counselor.





ART 59
.Careers in the Visual Arts
Careers in the
Visual Arts
Some people create art for the pure joy of doing so. They have
a passion for communicating their ideas and emotions through
paint, metal, wood, film, or other media—regardless of whether
or not they get paid for it. Most fine artists—painters, sculptors,
printmakers, photographers—work alone in private spaces. Some
try to get commissions to make a piece of art by entering com-
petitions open to other artists. Many sign contracts with art gal-
leries to represent and sell their work from solo shows or group
exhibitions. Certain artists establish a reputation for a special
technique or for a particular style they’ve developed; when that
happens, private collectors, corporate buyers, gallery owners,
and museum curators may come to the artist with financial
opportunities. Generally, however, fine artists prefer to spend
their time making art rather than marketing their art to sell.
Consequently, the majority of self-employed fine artists have
a difficult time supporting themselves strictly from the sale
of their pieces. They often have to supplement their income
through other avenues.
Commercial artists—illustrators,
graphic designers, cartoonists, and sketch
artists, for example—can find work in
almost every area of activity, including
manufacturing, entertainment, publish-
ing, advertising, education, government,
and medicine.
Whether you want to sketch criminal
suspects, design CD covers, illustrate chil-
dren’s books, develop computer game art,
or draw renderings of hybrid cars, you
must develop your skills, train, study,
and learn the business of art.
A commission is
an agreement to
produce a work of
art as described
for a specific
place in exchange
for a certain
amount of money.


60 ART
Careers in the Visual Arts.
Education and Training
An artist who makes art for personal pleasure does not have to
get training. But if you want a career in the visual arts, you will
need some formal lessons. Many talented artists compete for
the same positions, so companies can have their pick of the
most qualified candidates—those people who have excellent
drawing skills, mastery of artistic techniques, and knowledge
and training in computer graphics software.
Colleges and universities offer four- or five-year programs
that lead to the bachelor of fine arts and master of fine arts
degrees. In addition to the core courses common to all major
areas of study, these programs include art history and studio
art classes.
Independent schools of art and design offer two-year pro-
grams that lead to an associate of art or bachelor of fine arts
degree. These programs emphasize studio work and offer train-
ing in computer graphics programs and computer-aided design
and drafting.
Certain careers require special knowledge and coursework.
Medical illustrators, for example, must have artistic ability as
well as specific knowledge about living organisms, human
anatomy, and surgical procedures. Minimum requirements for
that career include a four-year bachelor’s degree combining art
and premedical courses. A master’s degree in medical illustra-
tion is recommended.
Anyone who wants to teach art in public schools must
have a bachelor’s degree as well as a teaching certificate.
A master of fine arts degree is required for a permanent or
full-time teaching position at the college level.
A portfolio is a collection of samples of the artist’s
best work. Many art and design schools expect to see
a portfolio and evaluate the student’s talent and quality
of work before they decide whether to accept him or
her into the arts program. Every year, various schools
host a “portfolio day” so young artists can review their
portfolios with representatives from many different
art schools.


ART 61
.Careers in the Visual Arts
Areas of Study at Schools of Art and Design
You can get hands-on training working for an artist as an
apprentice, or assistant. No matter what tasks you are assigned
to do, you will learn something about art just from being in
that environment and observing the artist at work.
To find out more about specific careers in the visual arts,
refer to the resources section. Talk to your guidance counselor
at school about the training and education requirements for
those careers that interest you and find out about good art
schools. If you have a chance to meet some artists while you’re
working on this merit badge, ask them how they got started.
Then share with your merit badge counselor what you learned.
Areas of Major Study Areas of Minor Study
Advertising Design Book Arts
Animation Business of Art and Design
Architecture Comic Illustration/Cartooning
Art Education Critical Theory
Art History Curatorial Practices
Art Therapy Display and Exhibit Design
Ceramics Enameling
Digital/Electronic Media Entertainment Design
Drawing Game Design
Environmental Design Historical Preservation
Fashion Design History of Decorative Arts
Fibers/Textiles Letterform/Type
Film Critical Theory
Fine Arts Curatorial Practices
Furniture Design Display and Exhibit Design
Glass Multimedia
Graphic Design Museum Studies
Illustration Papermaking
Industrial Design Product Design
Interior Design/Interior Architecture Printing/Publishing
Jewelry Public Art
Metals Scientific Illustration
Painting Theater Design
Photography Toy Design
Printmaking Transportation Design
Sculpture Wood Design/Woodworking
Video Writing


62 ART
Art Resources.
Art Resources
Scouting Literature
Architecture, Basketry, Communication,
Drafting, Graphic Arts, Leatherwork,
Model Design and Building, Photography,
Pottery, Sculpture, Theater, and Wood
Carving merit badge pamphlets
Art History
Cumming, Robert. Great Artists:
The Lives of 50 Painters
Explored Through Their Work.
DK Publishing, 1998.
Gombrich, E.H. The Story of Art, 16th
ed. Phaidon Press, 1995.
Heslewood, Juliet. The History of
Western Painting: A Young Person’s
Guide. Raintree Steck-Vaughn
Publishers, 1997.
Traditional Media
Capitolo, Robert, and Ken Schwab.
Drawing Course 101. Sterling, 2005.
Creevy, Bill. The Pastel Book:
Materials and Techniques for Today’s
Artist, 2nd ed. Watson-Guptill
Publications, 1999.
Edwards, Betty. Drawing on the
Right Side of the Brain, 4th ed.
Tarcher, 2012.
Guptill, Arthur L. Rendering in
Pen and Ink. Watson-Guptill
Publications, 1997.
Janson, Klaus. The DC Comics Guide to
Pencilling Comics. Watson-Guptill
Publications, 2002.
Johnson, Cathy. Painting Watercolors
(First Steps Series). North Light
Books, 1995.
MacKenzie, Gordon. The Watercolorist’s
Essential Notebook. North Light
Books, 2014.
MacPherson, Kevin D. Fill Your Oil
Paintings With Light and Color.
North Light Books, 2001.
Parramon’s Editorial Team, ed. All
About Techniques in Oil. Barron’s
Educational Series, 2007.
Sheaks, Barclay. The Acrylics Book:
Materials and Techniques for
Today’s Artist. Watson-Guptill
Publications, 2000.
Thomas, Gregory, and Earl A. Powell.
How to Design Logos, Symbols, and
Icons: 24 Internationally Renowned
Studios Reveal How They Develop
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


ART 63
.Art Resources
Trademarks for Print and New
Media. How Design Books, 2003.
Computer Graphics
Ashford, Janet. The Arts and
Crafts Computer: Using Your
Computer as an Artist’s Tool.
Peachpit Press, 2001.
Hartas, Leo. How to Draw and Sell
Digital Cartoons. Barron’s
Educational Series, 2004.
Pardew, Les. Game Art for Teens, 2nd
ed. Course Technology PTR, 2005.
Pollard, Jann Lawrence, and Jerry
James Little. Creative Computer
Tools for Artists: Using Software to
Develop Drawings and Paintings.
Watson-Guptill Publications, 2001.
Schminke, Karin, Dorothy Simpson
Krause, and Bonny Pierce Lhotka.
Digital Art Studio: Techniques for
Combining Inkjet Printing With
Traditional Art Materials. Watson-
Guptill Publications, 2004.
Organizations and Websites
Bureau of Labor Statistics—
Occupational Outlook Handbook
bls.gov/ooh/
National Association of Schools
of Art and Design
11250 Roger Bacon Drive, Suite 21
Reston, VA 20190-5248
Telephone: 703-437-0700
nasad.arts-accredit.org/
National Portfolio Day Association
nationalportfolioday.org
Acknowledgments
Scouting America is grateful to Gary
M. Gandy for his assistance with the
previous edition of the Art merit badge
pamphlet, upon which this edition
was based.
The Boy Scouts thanks artist
Joseph Csatari, who so graciously
opened his studio to us for a photo
shoot. In 1977 Mr. Csatari was
commissioned as Scouting America’s
official artist and has a long history
with this organization.
Scouting America also thanks John
McDearmon for his expertise and
assistance with the sections on
computer drawing and painting.
Scouting America is grateful to the
men and women serving on the
National Merit Badge Subcommittee for
the improvements made in updating
this pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration Credits
Corel Stock Photography—pages 6,
8 (van Delft), 10 (Manet),
11 (Cézanne), 12, 14, 16 (Monet),
17 (Clark, Cassatt), 21 (Nattier),
and 23 (Lang)
Melissa Duer/Estate of James Caraway,
courtesy—page 28
©2005 Dynamic Graphics Inc.—
page 45 (apple without effects)
Richard B. Ferrier, courtesy—page 4
Gary Gandy, courtesy—
page 32 (drawing)


64 ART
Art Resources.
ICI Dulux Paints, Cleveland, Ohio/
Barbara Richardson and Jerry Glica,
courtesy—page 19 (color wheel)
Judi Krew, courtesy—page 5 (artwork)
Don Mullins, courtesy—page 27
Produced from copyright art from the
archives of Brown & Bigelow Inc.—
page 50
Perrin Sparks, courtesy—page 26
Wikipedia.org, courtesy—
pages 8 (Sistine Chapel), 9,
(David), 11 (Monet), 13
(Kandinsky), and 20 (Seurat)
All other photos and illustrations
not mentioned above are the property
of or are protected by the Boy
Scouts of America.
Jennifer A. Horn—
page 55 (illustration)
John McDearmon—pages 21 (vase) and
43; all illustrations on pages 18, 19
(chairs), 24, 25, 31, 33, 34, 35, 36,
39, 47 (sailboat), and 52