CRIME
PREVENTION


CRIME PREVENTION
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Crime Prevention
1. Discuss the role and value of laws in society with regard to crime and
crime prevention. Include in your discussion the definitions of “crime”
and “crime prevention.”
2. Prepare a journal from various sources that address crime and crime preven-
tion efforts in your community.
3. Discuss the following with your counselor:
(a) The role of citizens, including youth, in crime prevention.
(b) Gangs and their impact on the community.
(c) When and how to report a crime.
4. After doing EACH of the following, discuss with your counselor what you
have learned.
(a) Inspect your neighborhood for opportunities that may lead to crime.
Learn how to do a crime prevention survey.
(b) Using the checklist in this pamphlet, conduct a security survey of your
home and discuss the results with your family.
5. Teach your family or patrol members how to protect themselves from crime at
home, at school, in your community, and while traveling.
6. Help raise awareness about one school safety issue facing students by doing
ONE of the following:
(a) Create a poster for display on a school bulletin board.
(b) With permission from school officials, create a pagelong public service
announcement that could be read over the public address system at school or
posted on the school’s website.
(c) Make a presentation to a group such as a Cub Scout den that addresses
the issue.
7. Do ONE of the following:
(a) Assist in the planning and organization of a crime prevention program in
your community such as Neighborhood Watch, Community Watch, or Crime
Stoppers. Explain how this program can benefit your neighborhood.
(b) With your parent’s and counselor’s approval, visit a jail or detention facil-
ity or a criminal court hearing. Discuss your experience with your counselor.
8. Discuss the following with your counselor:
(a) How drug abuse awareness programs help prevent crime.


(b) Why alcohol, tobacco, and marijuana are sometimes called “gateway
drugs” and how gateway drugs can lead to the use of other drugs.
(c) The potential consequences from the misuse of prescription drugs.
(d) How the illegal sale and use of drugs lead to other crimes.
(e) Three resources in your city where a person with a drug problem or drug-
related problem can go for help.
(f) How to recognize child abuse.
(g) The three R’s of Youth Protection.
9. Discuss the following with your counselor:
(a) The role of a sheriff’s or police department in crime prevention.
(b) The purpose and operation of agencies in your community that help law
enforcement personnel prevent crime, and how those agencies function during
emergency situations.
(c) Explain the role private security plays in crime prevention.
(d) Choose a career in the crime prevention or security industry that interests
you. Describe the level of education required and responsibilities of a person
in that position. Tell why this position interests you.


CRIME PREVENTION 63
.Crime Prevention Resources
Scouting Literature
Drugs: A Deadly Game pamphlet;
Citizenship in the Community,
Citizenship in the Nation,
Fingerprinting, Fire Safety, Law, and
Safety merit badge pamphlets
Books
Davidson, Tom, et al. The Complete
Idiot’s Guide to Home Security.
Alpha Books, 2001.
DeBecker, Gavin. Protecting the Gift:
Keeping Children and Teenagers Safe
(and Parents Sane). Dell, 2000.
Giggans, Patricia Occhiuzzo, and Barrie
Levy. 50 Ways to a Safer World:
Everyday Actions You Can Take to
Prevent Violence in Neighborhoods,
Schools, and Communities. Seal
Press, 1997.
Hammer, Carl. Home Security: How to
Select Reliable Locks and Alarms for
Your Home, Office, or Car. Paladin
Press, 2001.
Kraizer, Sherryll. The Safe Child Book:
A Commonsense Approach to
Protecting Children and Teaching
Children to Protect Themselves.
Fireside, 1996.
Mann, Stephanie, et al. Safe Homes,
Safe Neighborhoods: Stopping Crime
Where You Live. Nole Press, 1993.
Rawls, Neal, and Sue Kovach. Be
Alert, Be Aware, Have a Plan: The
Complete Guide to Personal Security.
The Lyons Press, 2002.
Sechler, Jeff. Internet Safety for
Kids and Young Adults.
CreateSpace Independent
Publishing Platform, 2012.
Organizations and Websites
Bureau of Justice Assistance
U.S. Department of Justice
Telephone: 202-616-6500
Website: http://www.bja.gov
Crime Prevention Through
Environmental Design
International CPTED Association
Telephone: 403-775-7400
Website: http://www.cpted.net
Crime Prevention Resources
Visit the Boy Scouts of America’s
official retail website at http://
www.scoutstuff.org for a complete
listing of all merit badge pamphlets
and other helpful Scouting materi-
als and supplies.


64 CRIME PREVENTION
Crime Prevention Resources.
Ignitus
Toll-free telephone: 800-316-4311
Website:
http://www.ignitusworldwide.org
National Center for Missing &
Exploited Children
Toll-free hotline: 800-843-5678
Website: http://www.missingkids.com
National Child Identification Program
Telephone: 972-934-2211
Website:
http://www.childidprogram.com
National Crime Prevention Council
Telephone: 443-292-4565
Website: http://www.ncpc.org
National McGruff House Network
Website: http://www.mcgruff.org
National School Safety Center
Telephone: 805-373-9977
Website: http://www.schoolsafety.us
National Sheriffs’ Association
Toll-free telephone: 800-424-7827
Website: http://www.sheriffs.org
Prevent Child Abuse America
Toll-free telephone: 800-244-5373
Website:
http://www.preventchildabuse.org
Acknowledgments
The Boy Scouts of America thanks
Joanne McDaniel, director, and William
Lassiter, school safety specialist, the
Center for the Prevention of School
Violence, North Carolina Department
of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency
Prevention. Ms. McDaniel and Mr.
Lassiter (who also is an Eagle Scout)
helped revise the Crime Prevention
merit badge requirements.
The Boy Scouts of America is
grateful to the men and women serving
on the Merit Badge Maintenance Task
Force for the improvements made in
updating this pamphlet.
Photo Credits
Shutterstock.com, courtesy—cover
(police scanner, ©Guy J. Sagi;
shoplifter sign, ©CTR Photos; sur-
veillance camera, ©NinaM; fire
alarm, ©aodaodaodaod; police
patch, ©wolfman57; security sys-
tem, ©IRGOOFY; padlock, ©Ljupco
Smokovski; “Just Say No” sign, ©rnl;
dog, ©Aleksandar Mijatovic); pages
7 (©ShutterPNPhotography), 11
(©FabrikaSimf), 15 (©Fotosenmeer),
16 (background, ©robert cicchetti),
21 (phone, ©Kenishirotie), 28
(©You Touch Pix of EuToch), 42
(©JohnKwan), 43 (©maxim ibragi-
mov), 44 (©Jason Stitt), 45 (©Tom
Plesnik), 46 (©Iriana Shiyan), 50
(©threerocksimages), 51 (©Pedro
Bento), 52 (©Atomazul), 59
(©Evlakhov Valeriy), and 62 (back-
ground, ©Kent Weakley)
All other photos not mentioned above
are the property of or are protected by
the Boy Scouts of America.
Jack Brown—page 19
Dan Bryant—pages 31–32 (both),
41, and 47
Frank McMahon—page 50
Brian Payne—page 8
Randy Piland—page 14 (inset)
Doug Wilson—cover (Neighborhood
Watch sign)