AMERICAN
CULTURES


AMERICAN
CULTURES
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/American-Cultures or check
Scoutbook for the latest requirements.
35851
ISBN 978-0-8395-3399-3
©2025 Scouting America/Boy Scouts of America
2025 Printing FPO


AMERICAN CULTURES 3





AMERICAN CULTURES 5
Contents
Out of Many, One . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Coming to America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Going Places . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
Social and Religious Customs. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
What If . . . ? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
Outstanding Americans . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
Getting Along . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
American Cultures: One World, Many Nations . . . . . . . . . . . 61
Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62


The annual St. Patrick’s Day parade in New York City began in 1766 when Irishmen in
service to England brought their tradition to the new world. Today, this parade is one
of very few that do not allow vehicles of any kind—everyone just marches!


AMERICAN CULTURES 7
.Out of Many, One
Out of Many, One
The United States is a nation of immigrants. All of us came
here from somewhere else—or our ancestors did. You may
know a new immigrant at school or in your Scout troop, or
you might be a newcomer yourself. Certainly, you know people
who are descended from earlier arrivals at America’s shores.
Even American Indians have their origins with people who
came here from other places.
All individuals and groups coming to the United States
bring parts of their home culture with them: customs and
traditions, native languages, favorite foods, styles of dress, art,
music, beliefs, and holidays. That’s what culture is—a shared
way of life or a common background among people.
As you explore different cultures and recognize their con-
tributions to the American lifestyle, you will enjoy great food
and fantastic music and meet interesting individuals outside
your circle of friends. Your efforts will lead to a better under-
standing of people from various cultural backgrounds, which
can help you live in harmony with others in your community.
An immigrant is a
person who comes
to live in a country.
An emigrant is
someone who
leaves a country to
settle elsewhere.
Technically speaking, anyone born in the United
States is a “native” American. However, we often
refer to Native Americans as those of American
Indian heritage as well as native or indigenous
peoples of the Hawaiian Islands, Alaska (Inuits),
Puerto Rico, and Guam (Pacific Islanders).


From 1892 to 1954, New York’s Ellis Island was the main immigration point of the
United States. It has been estimated that 40 percent of Americans had an ancestor
arrive there.


AMERICAN CULTURES 9
.Coming to America
Coming to America
The various immigrant groups have had different reasons for
making the journey to start new lives in America. Some new-
comers wanted to escape unbearable situations, hoping for
abundant food and freedom in their new country. Some came
in search of work, adventure, riches, or a place to call their
own. Others were forced to come to America. Behind every
arrival is a story.
While earning the American Cultures merit badge, you will
learn the stories of a few immigrant groups that have played
major roles in America’s history and development. Space is
too limited in this pamphlet to cover all the peoples who have
immigrated here, but in order to fulfill requirements 1, 2, and
3, you are free to choose other racial, cultural, national, or
ethnic groups not mentioned.
A Common Goal
Meet two Scouts who—like you—are trying to earn the
American Cultures merit badge. Nate and Devon are friends
from different ethnic backgrounds. Nate is an African American;
Devon’s ancestors were English. The Scouts have worked on
other badges together and depend on each other’s strengths
to make the most of their experiences. Nate loves U.S. history
and collects stories about the early inhabitants of America.
Devon’s passion is for anything related to computers and soft-
ware programs. He has learned most of what he knows about
history by playing video games. For this merit badge, however,
each Scout has agreed to stretch himself by trying to do some
of what the other does well.
“OK, Nate, since you’re the history buff,” Devon said,
“why don’t you tell me which ethnic groups to research and
I’ll show you how to find population statistics by group on
the internet. I’ll even explain how to show the statistics on
a spreadsheet.”
Ethnic means
having a common
national or cultural
tradition, or a
shared origin.


10 AMERICAN CULTURES
Coming to America .
“A spreadsheet? Cool!” Nate replied. “And let’s find pho-
tographs of each immigrant group and tack them on a bulletin
board along with your research notes. Maybe that will help us
get our act together for the talk to our Scout troop or class.”
The First Americans
Evidence suggests the earliest Americans came from Asia, crossing a land bridge
that connected Siberia and Alaska where the waters of the Bering Strait are now.
These ancient immigrants probably were hunters following animals such as the
woolly mammoth and the bison along river valleys and across plains.
Over time, the various groups developed separate languages and cultures. When
Europeans first arrived in the New World, there were more than 300 American
Indian tribes or nations with populations in the millions. Through a
combination of disease and violence, the populations of these people, from whom
modern American Indians are descended, were greatly diminished.
Although the relationship between American Indians
and early European immigrants often was hostile,
explorer Christopher Columbus wrote this about the
Indians: “Of anything they have, if it be asked for,
they never say no, but do rather invite the person to
accept it, and show as much lovingness as though
they would give their hearts.”


AMERICAN CULTURES 11
.Coming to America
The Spanish
Christopher Columbus reached the New World in 1492, opening the way for Spanish
exploration of North and South America. During the 1500s, Spaniards came in search
of adventure and treasure and claimed Cuba, Florida, Mexico, and what is now the American
Southwest. Roman Catholic priests arrived from Spain to spread their religion
to the Indians. Catholics founded missions in Spanish-dominated areas that later became
the states of Florida, Georgia, Texas, New Mexico, Arizona, and California.
Most of Spain’s New World possessions, including Mexico, became independent
republics by the mid-1820s. In 1848, after a war with Mexico, the United States gained
possession of California and the Southwest territories. Before the California Gold Rush,
Mexicans outnumbered Anglos in California by about 10 to 1. By 1849, however, Anglos
drawn by the promise of gold—had swelled their population to 100,000 compared with
13,000 Mexicans.
In 1565—42 years before
the English founded their
colony in Jamestown,
Virginia—the Spanish
founded St. Augustine,
Florida, now the oldest
permanent European
settlement in the United
States. Then, in 1610, they
built the Palace of the
Governors in Santa Fe,
New Mexico—10 years
before the Pilgrims landed
at Plymouth Rock.
The San Miguel Mission in Santa Fe,
New Mexico, is one of the oldest church
structures in the United States.


12 AMERICAN CULTURES
Coming to America .
Hispanics are
people of Spanish
or Latin American
descent. Many
people with Latin
American origins
prefer to be called
Latino instead
of Hispanic.
Anglos are of
English origin.
Belmopan
San Jose
Panama
San Salvador
Guatemala
Managua
PANAMA
EL SALVADOR
GUATEMALA
BELIZE
NICARAGUA
COSTA RICA
COLOMBIA
V E N E Z U E L A
L. Nicaragua
Mississippi R.
Rio Magdalena
Rio Orinoco
G u l f
o f
M e x i c o
ec
65˚W70˚W75˚W80˚W85˚W90˚W
65˚W70˚W75˚W80˚W85˚W90˚W
FLORIDA
CUBA
BAHAMAS
HAITI
JAMAICA
DOMINICAN REP.
UNITED
STATES
PUERTO
RICO
The Hispanics
Hispanics are members of one of the fastest-growing minority groups in the United
States. One of three Californians is Hispanic, and almost half the population of greater Los
Angeles is Hispanic. In the U.S. territory of Puerto Rico, population growth and
economic opportunity prompted thousands of Puerto Ricans to move to New York City and
other large American cities during the 1950s and 1960s. Today, about half of all native
Puerto Ricans live in the 48 contiguous states.
Hispanics in America trace their origins not only to Mexico, but also to other Spanish
speaking nations. Many Cubans fled to Florida after the Cuban Revolution of 1959, and
another wave of immigrants from Cuba followed in 1980.


.Coming to America
The English
The English began colonizing the New World as early as 1585, with a failed
attempt on Roanoke Island off the coast of North Carolina. The first permanent
English settlement in America was Jamestown, Virginia, established in 1607.
The Pilgrims (English Puritans) settled Plymouth Colony in Massachusetts in
1620. Many of the first colonists left England to escape religious persecution.
Others came seeking the possibility of a better life than they could find in their
home country.
Plimoth Plantation in Massachusetts is a reconstruction of Plymouth Colony, the first
permanent European settlement in New England.


14 AMERICAN CULTURES
Coming to America .Coming to America .
Indentured servants
agreed to work
for someone for
several years in
return for payment
of their passage
to America.
Frederick Douglass (1817–1895) was the leading spokesman
for African Americans in the 19th century. Born into slavery,
Douglass became a famous reformer, author, and public speaker
who devoted his life to ending slavery and winning rights for
black Americans.
Other Europeans
While most of America’s early colonists were English, people from France, Germany,
Holland, Scotland, and other European countries also immigrated to the Colonies
to seek religious freedom.
In the early 1800s, English landlords oppressed the Irish, provoking many to
flee to the United States. In 1845, a disease began destroying potato crops, a
staple food in Ireland. During the Great Potato Famine, nearly a million Irish died
and another 1.6 million escaped starvation by going to America.
Other waves of European immigrants included Germans in the 1840s and
Italians in the 1880s. As various groups arrived in the United States, they often
clashed over housing, jobs, and other social issues.
The Africans
The first Africans in the American Colonies were indentured servants,
as were many white settlers. But in 1661, Virginia passed laws permitting
slavery, a practice that lasted more than 200 years in the United States.
About 500,000 Africans, mostly from Western Sudan, were brought as slaves
to the United States. Millions more were shipped to other countries.
Most black people in America before the Civil War worked as slaves on Southern
farms and plantations. Some free black people worked in industry
in the North.
After the Civil War and into the 20th century, the determined efforts of
African Americans to gain equality and justice led to a strong civil rights
movement in the United States. The slave trade, slavery, emancipation
(freedom), and the civil rights movement shaped African American culture.


AMERICAN CULTURES 15
.Coming to America
Chinese laborers work on California’s North Pacific Coast
Railroad in 1889.
The Chinese
often were poorly
paid and poorly
treated. When
ethnic conflicts
forced many out
of their jobs,
they started
small independent
businesses
such as stores,
restaurants,
and laundries.
.Coming to America
The Chinese and Other Asians
War, high taxes, floods, crowded conditions, and starvation drove many Chinese people to the
United States in the mid-1800s. Most Chinese immigrants were male laborers who went to
California to join the California Gold Rush of 1849, mainly as independent prospectors.
By 1865, many had turned to railroad work, laying track for the Transcontinental Railroad
that linked California with the eastern United States. They built irrigation canals and taught
their employers how to work with orchard and garden crops.
The Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882 closed America’s doors to people from China.
More than 60 years later, in 1943, a new law extended citizenship rights and once again
permitted Chinese immigration. The largest group of Asian Americans is Chinese, followed
by Asian Indian, Filipino, Vietnamese, Korean, and Japanese.


16 AMERICAN CULTURES
Coming to America .
The Jews
Jewish refugees first arrived in America 350 years ago—in 1654—and settled in New
Amsterdam (modern-day New York City). During the American Revolution, Jews fought in the
Colonial army. A Jewish financier named Haym Salomon gave much of his fortune to help the
newly established U.S. government. Many Jewish people immigrated to escape anti-Semitism
(hostility toward Jews) in their native lands. German Jews began to immigrate to America in
substantial numbers in 1830. To escape persecution, Jews from Russia and eastern Europe
began to emigrate in the 1880s.
By the time the United States enacted strict immigration quotas in 1924, some
2.5 million Jews from Russia, Poland, Austria-Hungary, and Romania had come to America.
Although they still suffered discrimination, American Jews were the largest and most secure
Jewish community in the world. Persecution and Nazi atrocities drove more Jews from Europe
to America following World War II.


AMERICAN CULTURES 17
.Coming to America
The Arabs
People from Arabic-speaking places in the Middle East first immigrated in significant
numbers to the United States around 1875. This influx of Arabs lasted until about
1920. The majority of early Arab immigrants came from Lebanon and Syria, and most were
Christians. Like most people who move to the United States, these immigrants were seeking
economic opportunities.
A second wave of Arab immigration began in the 1940s. This time, Arabs came to America
not so much to earn a better living, but to escape the Arab-Israeli conflict and other wars in
the region of the Middle East. Arabs have a shared culture but different faiths. Although many
of the Arabs who immigrated after 1940 practiced Islam, many Arab Americans today are
Christians. In many U.S. communities, Muslim and Christian Arabs live side by side with each
other and with non-Arabs.


18 AMERICAN CULTURES
Coming to America .
“Thanks for showing me how to find the U.S. Census
information on the internet,” Nate told Devon as he posted his
spreadsheet. “Now that I see the populations of immigrant
groups as a percent to the total U.S. population, I’m really
surprised how many people there are from some groups and
how few from others.”
“I know,” Devon said, “but I’ll bet those statistics probably
look a whole lot different when you compare one state or region
of the country with another.”
Refugees are people who flee their homeland
to escape danger or persecution. Thousands of
Cuban, Vietnamese, Cambodian, Laotian, Haitian,
Salvadoran, Somalian, Ethiopian, and Sudanese
refugees, among others, have reached safety in
the United States.
Ancestry in the United States*
Ancestry Millions of People
Living in U.S.
Percent of
Population
Hispanic or Latino 50.7 16.4 percent
German 47.9 15.5 percent
African American 40.1 13 percent
Irish 34.7 11.2 percent
English 25.9 8.4 percent
Italian 17.2 5.6 percent
Asian 14.7 4.7 percent
Scottish 5.5 1.8 percent
British/Scotch-Irish 4.4 1.4 percent
American Indian 2.9 0.9 percent
Arab 1.6 0.5 percent
All others 63.7 20.6 percent
Total population 303.9 100 percent
*Source: 2010 American Community Survey, U.S. Census Bureau


AMERICAN CULTURES 19
.Coming to America
No One Said It Would Be Easy
America has provided a safe haven for many but has offered
no guarantee of an easy life. Immigrants often have to take
low-paying and dangerous positions. Even today, many new
immigrants with good educations and professional standing in
their home countries must take jobs that require less skill while
they learn English and meet the requirements of their profes-
sions in the United States.
At times, great numbers of arriving refugees have strained
our health care resources and social
services. At different points in U.S.
history, the government has set
immigration quotas, or limits, on
the number of people allowed
to come from specific countries.
Immigrants have struggled
for equality, faced discrimination,
defended themselves in racial and
religious conflicts, and competed
for jobs. Certain groups were denied
citizenship and voting rights until
laws were changed. Despite the
often tough journey to the United
States and the difficulty of making
a life here, most immigrants—having
lived in America for a year or for
generations—enjoy their own ethnic
communities as well as their
enriching relationships with those
from other cultures and countries.
The Statue of Liberty has
become a powerful and
universal symbol of freedom.





AMERICAN CULTURES 21
.Going Places
Going Places
Now that Nate and Devon have identified many of the ethnic
and racial groups in America and learned some of their histori-
cal background, they are ready to study some cultures up close.
Nate’s aunt in New York City knows that Nate and Devon are
working on the American Cultures merit badge, so she has
invited them to visit her and has promised to take them to an
international street festival. The Scouts cannot wait to go, but
they have promised to read some books about the specific
cultures that appeal to them before they leave.
“You know what?” says Nate. “I think I’ll read some
African folktales. I’ve never read any, and they’re from my
own culture.”
“Well,” Devon says, “then maybe I should read about
clotted cream—Devonshire cream, my grandmother calls it.
That’s the county in England where my family comes from.”
Nate smiles. “Okay, Devon from Devonshire. Let’s head
to the library. You can tell me what ‘clotted cream’ is later . . .
or maybe much later.”
Devon grins and shakes his finger. “Ah, Nate, an open
mind is a terrible thing to close.”
On the following Saturday, the Scouts board a bus to New
York City. Devon has brought along two CDs of international
music to listen to during the ride. “Did you remember your
camera?” he asks Nate.
“Yes, and my pocket recorder and a notepad,” Nate tells
him. “I know we won’t remember everything unless we take
pictures and write stuff down.”
Whether you listen to a Mexican mariachi band, taste
Hungarian goulash, or learn to dance a Scottish Highland fling,
you will want to capture the details of your experience. Follow
Nate and Devon on their adventure; their experiences may give
you ideas for completing the merit badge requirements.


22 AMERICAN CULTURES
Going Places.
Taking to the Streets to Celebrate America’s
Multicultural Heritage
On their first day at the weeklong international festival, Nate
and Devon feel as if they’ve traveled to another planet. They
struggle to make sense of things that are different from their
way of life. Both feel comfortable with people whose cultures
and lifestyles are similar to their own, but they are a little
uncomfortable with those whose ways seem odd.
Their sudden exposure to so many unfamiliar cultures all
at once makes the friends feel confused, uncertain, and uneasy.
They realize they are judging other cultures based on their
own background. The Scouts are experiencing culture shock.
“I’ll bet most American immigrants feel like this,” Nate
says. “No wonder people from the same country move into the
same neighborhood. They probably want to be with people
who speak the same language and eat the same foods.”
Devon nods. “Right, they want to be near something
familiar. But who doesn’t?”
By the second day, the Scouts are relaxing and starting to
enjoy the differences among ethnic groups. They make a delib-
erate effort to be open-minded and to look at each culture
based on its customs and not their own.
You may have observed or heard about an ethnic
group in your community. Dig deep for more facts.
Your initial impressions and previous information
may be inaccurate, or perhaps they only scratch the
surface of what there is to learn.


AMERICAN CULTURES 23
.Going Places
Food
All along the festival streets, vendors at tented stands present
foods from cultures around the world. They call out to the
Scouts, offering Czech favorites like sausage-on-a-stick and
kolaches (pastries filled with meat, cheese, or fruit), Korean
kimchi (fermented cabbage and radishes), Japanese sushi, Greek
baklava (thin layers of pastry with honey and nuts) and dolmas
(stuffed grape leaves), and South American arepas (fried corn
cakes). Soon the boys are sampling a multicultural smorgasbord.
Swedish for an
elaborate spread
of meats, fish,
salads, and finger
foods served
buffet-style, the
word smorgasbord
also can mean
an assortment or
patchwork of
different elements.
Indian Market
The Indian Market in Santa Fe, New Mexico, is an
internationally famous event, drawing a crowd from
all around the world to the city’s historic plaza every
August. Each year the market includes about 1,200
artists from about 100 American Indian tribes who
show their work in more than 600 booths. The event
attracts an estimated 100,000 visitors. For many
visitors, this is a rare opportunity to meet the artists
and learn about contemporary American Indian art
and cultures.


24 AMERICAN CULTURES
Going Places.
“Hmmm,” says Nate as he tastes another spoonful of
gazpacho, a soup made with tomatoes, cucumbers, peppers,
and onions. “It’s spicy—and it’s cold!”
“Well, my potato soup,” Devon says—in a high-pitched
voice, “is just right.”
“That’s not what I meant, Goldilocks. My soup is sup-
posed to be cold. In Spain, the people like gazpacho when
the weather’s hot.”
As they try more ethnic foods, the Scouts learn that many
traditional dishes are linked to climate and to the availability
of vegetables and fruits in the home countries. Potato soup, for
instance, comes from Eastern Europe, where root vegetables
grow plentifully and the cold winters call for hot soup.
The Scouts find that people identify certain ingredients
with the foods of specific ethnic groups, such as paprika in
Hungarian dishes, hot chilies in Latin American cooking, and
oregano in Italian recipes. They also try special foods served
at holidays, such as matzo, the unleavened bread eaten at
the Jewish Passover.
Nate and Devon watch people as they eat. Some eat with
metal utensils; others eat with wooden chopsticks; still others
eat with their fingers. Some people pray before eating; some
do not. Until now, the Scouts never had considered how many
different rituals people have for choosing, preparing, serving,
and eating food.
As you sample special dishes from different cultures, try to learn
the history and traditions behind the foods and what sets them
apart from everyday cooking.


AMERICAN CULTURES 25
.Going Places
Music, Singing, and Dance
As the festival continues, the friends attend several music and
dance performances. Devon thinks he can’t carry a tune, and
he’s self-conscious about trying to learn ethnic dances. “I’m
good where I am,” he says when the spectators are invited to
dance. “You go ahead.”
Nate doesn’t hesitate. “You ought to get in on this!” he
shouts as he step-hops through the polka, a lively dance from
Bohemia. Minutes later, Nate is gasping for breath and back
on the sidelines with Devon. “Maybe I should learn a
slower dance.”
When the polka band finishes, a guitarist plays fast-paced
music as several men and women perform a flamenco dance
with much foot stamping, clapping, and twirling.
“Wow,” Nate says. “I thought the polka was quick. But do
you see how fast that guy is moving his feet?”
Bohemia is a
region in what is
now the Czech
Republic in
Eastern Europe.
The accordion is the musical instrument most often associated
with the lively polka sound.


26 AMERICAN CULTURES
Going Places.
“Yeah. And the music feels so different. I’ve never heard a
guitar played like that either. I better shoot some pictures before
they quit,” Devon says. “Do you think it’s OK? I haven’t seen
any warning signs.”
Nate volunteers to check with someone. When he signals
that they have permission, Devon takes several photographs,
then marks the film frame numbers in his notepad so he’ll
remember all the details when he gets the pictures developed.
When the musicians take a break, the Scouts ask them
about the instruments they play. They learn that many of the
musicians play instruments that had belonged to their parents
and grandparents. Nate asks if their grandparents had made
them. No, the guitarist says, but he points toward the hand-
made crafts area. “Over there,” he tells the boys, “you can
meet some people who do make their own instruments.” The
Scouts thank him and the other musicians and head for the
crafts tent.
Flamenco is a style
of rhythmic dancing
that originated with
Spanish Gypsies.
Dancers sometimes click
a pair of castanets—
musical instruments
like small wooden
cymbals—to beat time
to the music.


AMERICAN CULTURES 27
.Going Places
Handmade Crafts
The boys approach a woman who is strumming a stringed
instrument laid across her lap. Devon asks if she made it
herself. The woman says she did and that the instrument is
called an Appalachian mountain dulcimer. “Dulcimer,” she
tells them, “means ‘sweet music.’”
While Devon examines the dulcimer, Nate turns his
attention to an American Indian flute maker who is blowing
a meditative song. The musician stops playing to show Nate
several flutes, each one slightly different. He explains that
different tribes make flutes in their own way. Nate learns
that the man is trying to preserve his Lakota traditions. The Lakota is
an American
Indian tribe
from North and
South Dakota.
Developed by early settlers of the Appalachian Mountains, the
aptly named Appalachian mountain dulcimer usually is held in
the lap and played with a pick.
Many North American Indian tribes played flutes like these,
including the Cherokee, Hopi, Zuni, Lakota, Cheyenne, and Yuchi.


28 AMERICAN CULTURES
Going Places.
The Scouts are fascinated by the various demonstrations
going on throughout the tent. Nearby, a woman explains the
intricate stitches in Lebanese needlework. Next to her booth,
someone is weaving cloth in a traditional pattern from Bhutan.
The boys wander to a table where a man is cutting shapes out
of tin and punching designs into the metal with a special tool.
Nate remembers some Mexican ornaments like the ones the
man is making.
Devon grabs Nate’s shirtsleeve. “Look at that!” His friend
turns and spots what looks like an egg tree set on a table.
Hanging from tiny hooks are about 30 colorful eggs covered
with delicate designs. “Wow! What do you call these?” Devon
asks the woman seated behind the table. “Pysanky,” she says.
“It means ‘Easter egg.’ Painting eggs is an old Ukrainian folk
tradition. We do it with wax and dyes.”
Devon shakes his head. “I can see how certain traditions
and crafts are important to different cultures.” Nate warns his
friend that all the crafts will disappear unless kids learn to do
what their parents do, or celebrate in the same ways. “Well, I
doubt if I could decorate those Ukrainian eggs without breaking
them,” Devon says. “I’d probably end up with a whole lot of
egg salad!”
Bhutan is a
landlocked
country in the
Himalayas,
between India
and China.
Ukrainian Easter
eggs are symbols
of the Christian
faith as well
as pagan
spring rituals.
Bright-colored threads are the mark of a lot of traditional clothing
and weaving.


AMERICAN CULTURES 29
.Going Places
Clothing
Everywhere they look, the two Scouts see
people in the traditional clothing of their
native countries. Some wear costumes for
celebrations and folk dances; some wear head
wraps that honor religious beliefs; others wear
street clothes that reflect cultural customs. Nate
and Devon ask several people for permission
to take their pictures, then talk with them
about the meaning, purpose, and history of
their clothing and accessories.
The Scouts also learn how climate and
available materials influence the clothing worn in specific
cultures. For example, the sari worn by Indian women is made
of such lightweight fabric that the draped layers keep the
person cool in extreme heat. Eskimo sealskin clothing blocks
the Arctic winter cold. The ti plant, which grows in Hawaii
and other South Seas islands, provides fibers for making
traditional apparel such as the Hawaiian hula skirt.
Storytelling
Nate and Devon hear an explosion of laughter in the story-
tellers’ pavilion, so they join the crowd gathered there to hear
the treasured stories and legends of many cultures. Some of
the stories are told just for fun, but many have deep cultural
meaning. Certain stories tell a group’s history or preserve
traditional wisdom. Other tales carry a message about how to
behave and live.
Many traditional
storytellers
perform at local
libraries and
bookstores. Ask
your librarian or
read your local
newspaper to
find out about
upcoming events.
A group of storytellers perform an American Indian folktale,
which traditionally combines elements from nature with human
ethical problems to teach the audience about morals.


30 AMERICAN CULTURES
Going Places.
To earn the American Cultures merit badge, Nate plans
to learn and teach a traditional story. He listens closely and
watches the storytellers’ expressions and movements. Their
techniques will help him entertain his own audiences.
During a break, Nate asks the storytellers about the history
behind the old stories—when the tales were written or per-
formed in the native country. He learns that some tales are
oral traditions. They have been handed down through the
generations, and no one knows just how they began. He also
learns that some traditional stories are told only at certain
events or celebrations.
Devon prefers more contemporary stories, especially per-
sonal accounts of people making the journey from their native
country to America. These stories report families’ experiences—
the successes and the setbacks—of working their way into the
mainstream of American life.
Some of the speakers tell how they became “Americanized”
as children and adopted the culture of their new country. Their
attitudes sometimes conflicted with the beliefs and values of
their parents or grandparents, who continued to live by their
old traditions.
Devon remembers a trip to the mall with his English
grandmother and how upset she seemed when he didn’t want
to stop shopping long enough for a proper cup of tea. He
decides to talk to her when he gets home about her English
traditions. And maybe they’ll drink some tea.
People and Organizations
As Nate and Devon talk with people at the festival, they dis-
cover that many are bilingual (they know two languages) and
most are bicultural (they are as familiar with American culture
as with the traditions of the “old country”). Many of the people
the Scouts meet are willing to share information about their
history, traditions, social customs, and religions. A few are
curious why the boys want to know, so they explain they’re
working on a Scouts BSA merit badge.
The Scouts also stop at exhibits to get information on
associations, schools, and other cultural institutions. They find
that many ethnic groups sponsor athletic organizations. Devon
collects fliers for a Latino soccer league, English rugby teams,
and a Japanese judo gym.
If you can’t get
to a cultural
festival, consider
attending a sports
event to fulfill the
requirements.
Besides having
a great time,
you will have a
chance to see
how people from
a specific culture
handle winning
and losing, and
how they treat
their coaches,
team members,
and star players.


AMERICAN CULTURES 31
.Going Places
As they leave the festival on the last day, Nate and Devon
realize they have come to appreciate the differences and the
similarities of more than a dozen ethnic groups. They now
understand that every culture has its own music and art as
well as its own stories, songs, and dances. In each ethnic
group and in every generation, talented artists and performers
carry traditions forward to honor a culture’s people, history,
and values.
Community Life
On the last day of their visit to New York City, Nate’s aunt
invites the Scouts to go with her to a morning service at an
African American church. Devon is eager to go because he
has never been inside a place of worship other than his own.
Nate thinks he knows what to expect because he has attended
services away from home, but never has he seen anything like
this big-city church. The congregation numbers in the thou-
sands. When the choir sings, many people jump up and clap
to the music. Some even shout out. Nate looks at Devon for
his reaction. “In my church,” Devon says, “no one makes a
peep unless the minister tells us to stand up and sing.”
Find a Festival. No matter where
you live, you should have little
trouble finding a festival or similar
event that is convenient for you to
attend. Use the internet (with your
parent or guardian’s permission) to
quickly locate nearby festivals and
celebrations. In a search engine,
type the name of your city or state
and the phrase “ethnic festivals.”
You might be surprised at the num-
ber of events that pop up. You may choose a festival that is focused on
one culture only, such as a fair at a Greek Orthodox church, or you may
go to a multicultural festival, as Devon and Nate did, where you can
experience many ethnic traditions at once. Go and have fun!


32 AMERICAN CULTURES
Going Places.
On the bus trip back home, Nate and Devon think about
which two ethnic groups (besides their own) they want to study.
Because of the research they did before their trip plus their
exposure to so many cultures at the international festival, the
Scouts feel ready to decide. But you may need some more
ideas about how to choose, so consider these tips.
Explore Your Community
Do you know your neighbors? The people living near you probably have
different backgrounds from yours. Talk to your neighbors (with your par-
ent or guardian’s permission) and find out about their ancestry. If your
town has a large ethnic community, check the telephone directory for
names of civic, social, or religious associations in that neighborhood.
Also try these sources:
• The reference librarian at the public library can help you find the
names and phone numbers of people to contact in local ethnic or
religious organizations.
• People at your local chamber of commerce or city hall can put you in
touch with representatives of various cultural groups who would be
willing to talk with you.
• Radio, television, and newspapers announce upcoming festivals,
community events, museum exhibits, and speaking engagements.
• With your parent or guardian’s permission, you can search the inter-
net for local ethnic or religious organizations and events.
Established in 1808, Abyssinian Baptist Church in the New York City borough of
Harlem is the oldest African American congregation in America.


AMERICAN CULTURES 33
.Going Places
Neighborhoods
Many neighborhoods and small communities are the hubs of
people’s lives, particularly in urban areas where people depend
on buses and subways instead of cars to get around. Important
activities take place in local institutions such as schools, places
of worship, and community centers. Before you go to some of
these places, be sure to get your parent or guardian’s permis-
sion. Prepare for your visits so you can get an accurate under-
standing of how the institutions and activities fit into people’s
lives. Some questions like these might help you:
• Neighborhood. What is neighborhood life like? Do people
visit back and forth? Do many relatives live near one another?
How has the neighborhood been shaped by the cultures of
the people who live there?
• Place of worship. How do religious beliefs and values guide
people’s lives or influence the life of the community? What
cultural or community activities are offered by this church
or other place of worship?
• Community center. Who goes to the community center? Is
it the center of activity in the neighborhood or area, or is
the church or some other institution the cultural center?
Cultural and community centers are good sources for informa-
tion about the cultures you are studying.


34 AMERICAN CULTURES
Going Places.
• School. What subjects are taught? Do students learn the
traditional songs, stories, and dances of their culture? Is
language or religion taught at this school as part of a full-day
curriculum, or is it presented as an after-school activity?
How does the school involve the community?
• Restaurants and grocery stores. What kind of food does
the restaurant serve? Do people of all backgrounds eat there,
or does the restaurant cater mainly to people of a particular
culture? Is the menu printed in more than one language? Is
the grocery store a supermarket that attracts people from the
whole community, or a smaller market serving an ethnic
neighborhood? Who shops there? How is the ethnic market
different from the grocery store where your family shops?
Cajuns are
descended from
French-speaking
immigrants of
Acadia, the former
French Colony
in southeastern
Canada. Many
settled in southern
Louisiana after the
British expelled
them from Canada
in the mid-1700s.


AMERICAN CULTURES 35
.Going Places
Museums
Almost every town or city has at least one museum. Many
schools, colleges, and universities own special collections of art
and historical documents. Libraries and cultural arts centers
often house permanent or temporary exhibits of artifacts from
an ethnic group that interests you.
Nate and Devon continue their cultural explorations by
visiting a museum at a nearby college that displays a collection
of Japanese art that once belonged to the college’s founder. The
Scouts tour three rooms of sculpture, prints, and ink painting
on silk. When they have seen all the exhibits, they realize they
have just looked at 13 centuries of Japan’s artistic traditions.
At a living history museum like this one in Williamsburg, Virginia, staff or
volunteers play roles to show how people lived. Here, a costumed interpreter
plays the role of an apprentice blacksmith in Colonial times.
Call the museum before you go. Find out the hours of
operation and what they charge for admission. Ask if
you will be allowed to take photographs. Security
usually is a big issue, so leave backpacks and bulky
coats at home.
Visiting the
National Scouting
Museum–Philmont
Scout Ranch will
give you a glimpse
of Scouting’s
heritage.





AMERICAN CULTURES 37
.Social and Religious Customs
Social and
Religious Customs
Social customs often are tied to religious customs. In a tradi-
tional Italian community, for instance, the church is the center
of its social and religious activities. In most cultures, a wedding
is both a religious and a social experience, a solemn ceremony
plus a joyful celebration. The customs surrounding births and
funerals also are religious as well as social.
Social customs include everyday behavior. In a classroom
of children from different cultural backgrounds, an American
child would typically look at a teacher who is speaking to him
or her; it is a sign of respect. A Vietnamese child, however,
might have been taught to look down when being addressed
by the teacher, which also is a sign of respect. What
misunderstandings might develop if the teacher didn’t
know about these differences?
Religious and
social customs
are extremely
important in
people’s lives.
As you discuss
traditions with
people of other
cultures, try to
understand the
customs from
their point of view.
Be respectful.
.Social and Religious Customs


38 AMERICAN CULTURES
Social and Religious Customs.
Social or religious customs can determine:
• Roles of men and women
• Relationships among grandparents, parents, and children
• Clothing styles and dress codes
• Food choices and table manners
• Children’s responsibilities or chores at home
• Parents’ or guardians’ views about teenage dating
Conversations—Sources for Information
People are your best source for information. So why not start
with your own family members? Do you know who your
ancestors were or where they came from? Have you heard
stories about your forefathers’ experiences as immigrants?
Perhaps if you discover why your ancestors came to the
United States, you’ll better appreciate the struggles of people
of different racial or ethnic backgrounds.
Since Devon has been home from his trip to New York
City, he has spent several hours talking with his grandmother
about the traditions and customs she valued growing up in
England. They enjoyed looking at family albums together, and
Devon was quite relieved that he didn’t damage an old photo-
graph when he spilled his tea.
Is Three a Crowd?
People in certain cultures believe it is unacceptable
for young men and women to be alone together
before marriage. It is the custom for a relative to
accompany a young woman on her date. In a few
cultures, marriages still are arranged, even in families
that have lived in the United States for years.


AMERICAN CULTURES 39
.Social and Religious Customs
Many Americans can trace their origins back to several
countries. It’s common for an American to have a multicultural
heritage—that is, to keep family traditions or customs that have
been passed down from several cultures. Some families know a
great deal about their history and preserve their heritage in daily
life. Other families know very little about their backgrounds.
Your family may enjoy learning with you as you explore the
culture of your ancestors.
It is not necessary to research your family’s background
before you talk with them, but it is very important to do so
before you talk to other people about their culture. Devon and
Nate got a lot of information at their public library, so ask your
reference librarian to show you where to find books about the
religious and social customs of different ethnic, racial, and
religious groups.
When you think you have found enough information in
books and (with permission) on the internet, you are ready for
the next step: preparing for the interview. The planning you do
ahead of time will help to keep your conversation on track and
make you and the other person feel comfortable.
Old family photographs offer glimpses of the past and may
provide significant clues about your own cultural background.


40 AMERICAN CULTURES
Social and Religious Customs.
Making the Most of Your Conversation
You can expect people who agree to talk with you to be friendly, proud
of their cultural heritage, and happy to share their knowledge. But you
will learn more if you put them at ease. Try to interview people in their
homes or wherever they are likely to feel most comfortable.
• Make a list of your main questions. Keep the questions short, clear,
and not too personal.
• Structure your questions so the person will give you the most
information. “What did you like about growing up in the Puerto Rican
community?” will get you details. “What does it mean to you to be
Greek?” may prompt a long and thoughtful reply. Avoid asking
questions that may be answered with a simple yes or no or other
one-word response.
• When you meet the person, introduce yourself and thank him or her
for taking time to talk to you.
• If a fascinating or unexpected topic comes up, ask follow-up questions
before going on right away to the next question on your list.
• Listen carefully and take notes. (If you want to record the interview,
ask permission before you begin.)
• Ask the person for permission to call again if you think of something
else important.
• Thank the person
when you leave.
After the interview,
review your notes and
fill in anything you
remember but did not
have time to write
down. Think about what
you learned. Were you
surprised by how much
you have in common
with people from
other backgrounds?


AMERICAN CULTURES 41
.Social and Religious Customs
You will discover—through your research and
conversations—that people have different religious beliefs (in
different degrees of commitment) or no spiritual beliefs at all.
They have fought wars in the name of their religion and God
(or gods) and they have filed lawsuits claiming the absence of
God.
World Religions
There are many different religious faiths throughout the
world—a great number of which are represented at the National
Scout Jamboree. You may wish to attend one of those worship
services to learn more about those faiths. In addition, many of
these faiths have religious emblems that Scouts can earn. Visit
scouting.org to learn more about Scouting America’s religious
emblems program and to find one that might be available
for your religion. (As always, get your parent or guardian’s
permission before using the internet.)
A bar mitzvah is
the ceremony that
marks a Jewish
boy’s 13th birthday,
which is the age of
moral and spiritual
responsibility.
A Jewish boy reads the Torah as he prepares for his bar mitzvah,
the ceremony in which a young man becomes fully responsible
for performing the commandments of his religion.


42 AMERICAN CULTURES
Social and Religious Customs.
To find out more about other religions, talk with the
spiritual leaders of the cultures you are studying. You will
discover that each religion has certain rituals or ceremonies
that recognize the same special occasions in most people’s
lives. Here are some questions you might ask:
• What are the important religious customs in each culture?
• Of each group’s special holidays or observances, which are
religious in nature? Which are social or civil (nonreligious)?
Which commemorate important events in the group’s history?
• In what ways are the culture’s history and religion linked?
• How do family members take part in religion? Do both men
and women participate? Do children?
• What are the customs concerning prayer?
• How does religion play a part in birth, marriage, and death?
Do people celebrate major life events only in a religious
setting, or also with social traditions?
• What is the role of the priest, minister, rabbi, imam, or other
religious official in the community?
Scouts who earn the religious emblem for their faith
are eligible to wear this square knot award on their
official Scout uniform. While all faiths’ medals look
different from one another, the square knot award is
the same for everyone.


AMERICAN CULTURES 43
.Social and Religious Customs
Devon and Nate take separate steps to find out about social
and religious customs in various cultures. Devon decides to
interview people in cultural and community centers. Nate asks
the minister in his own church to help him organize a group
meeting with religious leaders from two other faiths.
Nate asks a few questions to get
the conversation started, but once
the three religious leaders under-
stand what he’s after, he does not
have to prod them further. They are
glad to talk about the most mean-
ingful customs and traditions of
their faiths—how they differ from
one another and also how they are
similar. The discussion naturally
touches on social customs in the
religious leaders’ local communities.
Nate leaves the meeting with a
deeper understanding of how strong
the links are between a culture’s
religious and social customs.


The Anasazi built their homes a thousand years ago in the high cliffs of the American
Southwest. Many cliff dwellers abandoned their homes about a.d. 1300, perhaps
because of hostile invaders, climate changes, famine, or severe drought.


AMERICAN CULTURES 45
.What If . . . ?
What If . . . ?
What if one of the groups you are exploring had always lived
alone in a city or country—with no contact with any other
groups? What do you think the city or country would be like
today? What would it be like if all three of your groups lived
there at the same time?
For requirement 2, you must stretch your imagination.
Picture yourself in a different cultural group and imagine what
your life would be like in that society if it had always been
isolated from the rest of the world. In this situation, members
of the community would have no technology borrowed from
other groups, and no idea that other cultures exist.
Do you think the group would be hunting with spears,
sheltering in caves, and wearing clothes made of leaves and
tree bark? Would it be a modern society with planes, televi-
sion, and video games? Or might it fall somewhere in between,
a sort of medieval society with serfs and lords of the manor?
What would daily life be like without the technologies of the
21st century?
On the other hand, what would life be like if the culture,
in its complete isolation, shot ahead of the rest of the world
and developed advanced technology such as artificial intelli-
gence and humanlike robots? Could that happen if the group
was unaware of the technologies and innovations developed by
other societies?
How would people interact if they never had contact with
anyone outside their group? In isolation, members of the group
tend to rely heavily on each other because they have no one
else to depend on. The role that each member plays is crucial
to the survival of the whole group. Shared beliefs, values, and
attitudes become unquestionable because no outside influences
make people question the way they think and live.


46 AMERICAN CULTURES
What If . . . ?.
Making Contact
Nate and Devon have gotten to know the reference librarian
fairly well, so they ask him for information about isolated cul-
tures. He points to a woman carrying a stack of books and tells
them that she is a college professor who knows all about an
isolated group in South America.
The boys introduce themselves to the professor and explain
that they are working on a requirement for a Scouts BSA merit
badge. Dr. Hanley agrees to sit down and tell them about the
Q’ero, a small society living 17,000 feet up in the peaks of the
Andes Mountains of South America. Dr. Hanley says the Q’ero
are among the most socially isolated people on Earth—rarely
making contact with anyone from outside their group.
But in 2000, Don Domingo and a few other Q’ero priests
were invited to attend a conference in New York City. They
flew to the conference on a DC-10 airliner. The Q’ero did not
have planes. Don Domingo and his friends spoke Quechua (the
language of the Inca Empire), but they had no word in their
language for “airplane.” So, they called the plane “big bird.”
The Q’ero, who inhabit remote areas of the Andes Mountains,
are direct descendants of the Incas, and they still hold to many
ancient Incan traditions.


AMERICAN CULTURES 47
.What If . . . ?
The plane landed at Newark Airport in New Jersey and the
men were escorted to a van headed to the conference center.
When their van idled in traffic, Don Domingo said to his friends,
“A horse moves faster than this.”
As they passed a small rocky hill alongside the highway,
one of the Q’ero asked, “What is the name of this mountain?”
The interpreter did not know. The Q’ero were shocked because
in their culture in the high Andes, all mountains are gods. For
the interpreter not to know the hill’s name, the Q’ero believed,
was deeply disrespectful. As the van entered the Lincoln Tunnel,
Don Domingo said quietly to the others, “Uccu Pacha.”
(Translation: “We are entering the underworld.”)
After hearing this story about the Q’ero,
Nate and Devon found it easier to under-
stand how isolation affects a group’s culture
and traditions. They also realized
that once contact is made with
the outside world, the isolated
society would start to
change, slowly adopting
new ways.
During their travels in the
early 1800s, explorers
Lewis and Clark presented
Jefferson Peace Medals
to American Indian tribal
leaders as a token of the
understanding that both par-
ties would maintain peaceable
relationships with one another.
For most people, living on Earth requires change and
adaptation. Every day we are exposed to more news,
more commercial products, more entertainment, and
more people with their own customs and languages.
Our lives—what we believe, what we talk about,
what we do, drink, eat, and wear—are constantly
affected and challenged by our contact with the rest
of the world.


48 AMERICAN CULTURES
What If . . . ?.
Interacting
Now the Scouts try to imagine a world in which the three
groups they are exploring freely contact each other, yet remain
somewhat separate.
“They’ll share things,” Nate says. “Real stuff, inventions,
and ideas. On some level, they’ll change each other’s ways
and beliefs.”
Devon agrees. “They’ll probably create new forms of art
and music by mixing their styles and traditions with other
people’s. You know, like the way the Japanese mixed Chinese
art techniques with their own style.”
“Everyone will benefit,” Nate adds. “And they’ll cooperate
to make the best of situations that affect all three groups.”
“Maybe,” Devon responds, “if all the groups stay friendly
with each other. But they’ll probably disagree about some
things. These are three different cultures, remember, and they
don’t do things alike. What if one group invents a weapon that
scares its neighbors? Or the people in one culture do something
that offends another group or violates their religious beliefs? If
they’re not willing or able to work out their differences, they
might go to war.”
Nate and Devon conclude that three groups in contact with
each other are in a good position to improve the quality of life
for all three—if the groups share and cooperate. To live together
peacefully and productively, however, the groups must tolerate
(accept) the differences among them. They must respect and
value one another’s culture. Otherwise they might become bitter
enemies, dangerously divided by their differences.
Hate crimes are motivated by intolerance of other
people’s religious, racial, or ethnic backgrounds.
Such crimes may include vandalism, threats, harass-
ment, or assault. Most laws against hate crimes
require a tougher penalty when the victims are
chosen specifically because of their race, religion,
or other cultural traits.


AMERICAN CULTURES 49
.What If . . . ?
“You know what?” Nate says. “The groups we’ve been
talking about, the three cultures living and working together, are
like a snapshot of American cultures today—except the United
States has way more than three groups trying to get along.”
“Yeah,” Devon replies. “But sometimes we don’t seem to
get along. Some people resent or fear anyone who doesn’t
think or behave the way they do.”
“Well, if you put 300 million people from hundreds of
different cultural groups together in one place, you’re bound to
have some friction,” Nate points out. “But still, our society is
stronger and richer because of all the cultures.”
“I guess the United States is like that Greek food we ate
in New York—lots of different ingredients. Definitely more
interesting than a plain-lettuce country.”


America’s “melting pot” of cultures
offers people of all nationalities an
opportunity to excel.
Mark Zuckerberg, internet
entrepreneur and cofounder
of Facebook Piyush “Bobby” Jindal, 55th
governor of Louisiana
Jeremy Lin, National Basketball
Association player
Barack Obama, 44th president
of the United States
Sonia Sotomayor, associate
justice, Supreme Court
of the United States


AMERICAN CULTURES 51
.Outstanding Americans
Outstanding Americans
Have you ever dreamed of making a great scientific discovery,
finding a cure for an illness, or handling a tough problem for
your country? You would feel good about your achievement.
Your name would go down in history, and your family would
be proud of you.
When a member of an ethnic group makes a difference in
people’s lives, that group feels proud, too. People from all walks
of life and from all ethnic groups have made major contribu-
tions to our nation. For requirement 4, you will learn about the
contributions of three great Americans from different racial,
ethnic, or religious backgrounds.
Do not overlook the contributions of local heroes. Ask people from
different cultural groups in your community to name the individuals
they admire. You may discover several local achievers—men and women
who have made important contributions where you live. Read newspaper
stories or listen to television reports about community leaders. You
might be able to interview a local hero, an experience that will have far
more meaning for you than simply reading about a famous American.


52 AMERICAN CULTURES
Outstanding Americans.
People Important to You
Our two Scouts, Devon and Nate, choose people whose contri-
butions have touched their own lives in some way. Devon, the
computer whiz, focuses on the work of:
• Steve Jobs: born to a Syrian father and an American
mother and adopted in infancy—a leader and pioneer in
the field of personal computers
• Grace Murray Hopper: of Scottish ancestry—a computer
scientist and U.S. Navy rear admiral who directed the
development of the computer programming language COBOL
• Sergey Brin: Russian immigrant at the age of 6—cocreator
of one of the internet’s largest search engines
Nate, the history buff, picks three early freedom fighters from
different religious backgrounds.
• Sgt. Benjamin B. Levy: a Jewish American—Civil War hero
who was awarded the Medal of Honor for gallantry in battle
• Susan B. Anthony: from a family of Quakers (members of
the Religious Society of Friends)—an antislavery activist who
campaigned for equal rights for all Americans, including
women and former slaves
• Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.: African American—Baptist
preacher and civil rights leader who advocated nonviolent
marches, protests, and demonstrations for the rights of
black Americans
You can see that Devon and Nate tailored requirement 4
to their own interests, finding subjects that were personally
meaningful for them. You may want to do the same.





During the 1960s, nonviolent protests supporting equal civil rights for all Americans
received national attention.


AMERICAN CULTURES 55
.Getting Along
Getting Along
By this point in their investigations, Nate and Devon fully realize
that people from different cultural backgrounds do not always
get along. Cultures often cooperate, but they often clash as well.
Some conflicts are easily resolved, but others may last for
years—even centuries—with no apparent solution.
It takes cooperation from all groups and individuals to
work together so that we can all get along. Learning to accept
people for who they are, no matter what their background,
makes good sense for us all. By understanding how conflict
and cooperation affect people and their behavior, we might
be able to make our world a better place.
Conflict
What causes conflict? People who are struggling to reach their
goals—striving for good jobs, economic advantages, and a better
way of life—may find themselves competing for those things
with members of other groups. Conflict often develops when
people are unwilling to understand or respect another culture.
Fear and mistrust between groups of people can lead to acts
of hostility and violence.
To prepare for
requirement 5,
which calls for
you to lead a
discussion, use
the contacts you
have made in the
three cultures
you are studying.
These people
will be able to tell
you about any
local difficulties
between groups
as well as
any efforts to
cooperate and
get along better.
In 21st-century America, we still see prejudice,
discrimination, and racism. To be prejudiced is to
have a strong attitude toward an individual or a
group, without having any fair or sensible reasons
for such a feeling. To discriminate is to treat a person
or group differently because of the way they look,
dress, act, or are otherwise singled out. Racism is
prejudice and discrimination directed toward a race
of people or an ethnic group.


56 AMERICAN CULTURES
Getting Along.
Cultural conflicts at their worst can explode into wars, as
history and the daily news show us. From around the world
come reports of bloody civil wars, in which different groups of
people living in the same country fight and kill one another.
Cooperation
What benefits come with cooperation? People working together
can improve a community, a nation, or the world. They can
tackle environmental threats and seek solutions to tough prob-
lems like terrorism and poverty.
Coalitions or alliances of people from different groups in a
town or city can be powerful forces for change. In workplaces,
schools, and volunteer organizations like Scouting, individuals
from different backgrounds work together to achieve common
goals. At the same time, they may become friends.
Giving a Talk
For requirement 5, you will talk to your Scout unit or class at
school about how people from different groups have gotten
along together. Plan to give examples of conflicts and coopera-
tion in the United States from the past and the present. Are
cultural groups working together in your community today?


AMERICAN CULTURES 57
.Getting Along
As you prepare your talk, you may find it helpful to
understand the terms that describe how ethnic groups treat
each other. These practices—some healthy, and some highly
destructive—may take the form of genocide, segregation,
assimilation, or cultural pluralism.
Devon and Nate discovered examples of all these practices
as they explored various cultural groups. Here is some of the
information they passed along in their talks.
Genocide is the purposeful killing of an entire racial or ethnic
group. Genocide has happened all over the world and through-
out history. Less than 100 years after Europeans arrived in the
Caribbean in 1492, no full-blooded natives remained in the
Dominican Republic. Between 1933 and 1945, the Nazis killed
more than 6 million Jews. In Rwanda in 1994, one ethnic
group massacred thousands of people in other minority groups.
Segregation is the practice of physically separating groups
because of race or ethnic origin. In the United States until the
mid-1900s, black Americans were segregated on trains and in
schools, places of worship, hotels, restaurants, theaters, and
other public places. The Civil Rights Act of 1964 ordered
restaurants and other businesses that serve the general public
to serve all people without regard to race, color, religion, or
national origin. Though forced segregation was made illegal,
Americans may still voluntarily segregate themselves by custom
or tradition. Many groups, institutions, and neighborhoods
continue to practice segregation.
Assimilation occurs when minority racial or ethnic groups
blend into the culture of the majority group. As they blend in,
minorities may lose their own customs and traits. They may
adopt the majority group’s attitudes, beliefs, values, language,
and behavior. Ethnic minorities may seek assimilation for
economic and social advantages.
Cultural pluralism means racial and ethnic groups living
together, with each group continuing to observe its own
cultural traditions and respecting those of other groups. In
the United States, ethnic pride is important and much empha-
sized. Nationwide, we celebrate Black History Month every
February, St. Patrick’s Day in March, and Cinco de Mayo in
May. Many other racial and cultural groups also celebrate
their ethnicity throughout the year.
A teenager from
India might wear
jeans to school to
be like his or her
classmates, while
the teen’s mother
and grandmother
continue to dress
in the traditional
sari.


58 AMERICAN CULTURES
Getting Along.
Leading a Discussion
The second part of requirement 5 is to lead a discussion on
ways to help various groups understand one another better.
For this, Nate and Devon again team up.
Nate leads off by suggesting that mutual respect is the first
step toward understanding one another, and failing to show
respect is a barrier to understanding. “Showing respect for
another person,” he tells the group, “is also a way of saying,
‘You are important because you are human, and every human
being deserves respect and appreciation on the basis of being
a human.’” Nate encourages those taking part in the discussion
to show respect for each other by being fair and open-minded.
To break the ice, Nate shares
personal stories about his own expe-
riences as a young African American.
He then asks other participants to tell
their stories. One Scout talks about
how it feels to be a newcomer. As he
speaks, other members of the group
nod their heads. Several people in
the group have moved to a new
school, troop, town, or country. They
know what it’s like to be a stranger.
Nate prods them to talk about
experiences that made the move easy
or difficult for them. What adjust-
ments did they make to fit into their new environment? Do
their experiences help them understand how new immigrants
might adjust to living in the United States?
Devon watches for members of the group who aren’t
participating. He urges them to talk, noting that each person’s
opinion and experience is as important as another’s.
Tolerance means
accepting people
just the way
they are.
The Latin motto E pluribus unum (pronounced ee
PLUR uh buhs YOO nuhm) appears on the Great Seal
of the United States and on all U.S. coins. The words
mean “out of many, one.” The motto refers to the
creation of one nation—the United States—out of
13 colonies. It also describes America’s multicultural
makeup. The United States is one nation composed
of people from many cultural backgrounds.


AMERICAN CULTURES 59
.Getting Along
The discussion moves to ideas about how the group could
reach out to newcomers from various cultures and countries.
Devon suggests a brainstorming session. He asks the participants
to list what their schools, places of worship, or community orga-
nizations could do to improve the relationships among ethnic or
cultural groups. The entire group takes part in the brainstorming,
and soon they have a long list of ideas.
Devon and Nate then ask the participants to rank the
suggestions in the order of their favorites to create a top 10 list.
Next, they ask the group to choose the first five suggestions as
action items and figure out how best to accomplish them.
Top Five Action Items
1. Have a get-together and encourage people to bring an item or a food
that reflects some aspect of their cultural heritage.
2. Organize a community cleanup day, inviting people from all around
the neighborhood to help pick up litter, paint fences or walls, plant
flowers or trees, or otherwise improve the neighborhood for everyone.
3. Put on a neighborhood olympics in which the athletes compete
under the flags of their ancestors’ home countries.
4. Hold a block party or a multicultural festival or fair for people to
exhibit and (if they wish) sell their folk art, pottery, rugs, baskets,
foods, or other items that are traditional in their cultures.
5. Form a crew
to greet and
welcome new
families who
move into the
neighborhood
and to tell them
about local civic
and cultural
activities in
the community.


60 AMERICAN CULTURES
Getting Along.
“Every ethnic and racial group needs to express and celebrate their
cultural uniqueness because they, like different instruments in an
orchestra, make distinctive and enriching contributions to the whole.
“But also, as a Korean American, I feel strongly that, like an instru-
ment in an orchestra, each group and each person should listen to one
another and work together for the common good. Each person should
actively participate in the life of the community and make a contribution
to making our community a harmonious and better place to live.”
—Sunok Chun Pai, an elder at Kansas City (Missouri) Korean Church


AMERICAN CULTURES 61
.American Cultures: One World, Many Nations
As Americans,
we are all free
to preserve our
cultures. Since
we have this
freedom, we also
must respect the
rights of others to
be different from
us and to practice
their own customs.
American Cultures: One
World, Many Nations
Nate and Devon have completed their work for the American
Cultures merit badge. And they had a blast! They met musi-
cians, artists, and weavers. They tasted Czech pastries, sushi,
and dolmas. They learned new songs and age-old folktales.
And they widened their views of the world—a world of many
nations in their own community.
In the United States, all citizens are Americans—people of
different stripes. We have come together from different cultures,
different countries, and different faiths. The diversity and the
blended talents and ideas enrich America and shape it into a
greater country. As a nation, the United States is still evolving.
What we are and will become depends on every one of us.
We Americans have much work still to do to build greater
understanding among all ethnic groups and all people who live
in our uniquely diverse country. Our continuing challenge is to
preserve our different cultural heritages, yet unite to solve
problems and improve our quality of life.
Each of us must resolve to do our part to bring about
peace. Cultural understanding begins with simple respect and
a willingness to be friendly. If everyone made the effort you
have made while earning this merit badge to connect with
people of different backgrounds, America would be a stronger
and fairer place.
On my honor I will do my best!


62 AMERICAN CULTURES
Resources.
Resources
Scouting Literature
American Heritage, American Labor,
Archaeology, Architecture, Citizenship in
the Community, Citizenship in the Nation,
Citizenship in the World, Communication,
Family Life, Genealogy, Indian Lore, Law,
Music and Bugling, Reading, Scouting
Heritage, and Stamp Collecting merit
badge pamphlets
Books
Bial, Raymond. Lifeways Series. Benchmark
Books. A 25-book series on the original
lifeways of North American Indians.
Bode, Janet. The Colors of Freedom:
Immigrant Stories. Franklin Watts, 2000.
———. New Kids in Town: Oral Histories of
Immigrant Teens. Scholastic, 1995.
Budhos, Marina Tamar. Remix:
Conversations With Immigrant Teenagers.
Henry Holt, 1999.
Chelsea House Publishers. The Immigrant
Experience. Separate books on American
Indians, Puerto Ricans, and Czech,
Greek, Jewish, Mexican, Polish, and
other Americans.
———. Immigrants in America. A six-book
series telling the stories of the Chinese,
German, Irish, Italian, Japanese, and
Swedish Americans through immigrants’
own words and contemporary photo-
graphs and illustrations.
———. Junior Library of American Indians.
A series of 23 books covering American
Indian tribes.
Freedman, Russell. Immigrant Kids.
Puffin, 1995.
Hall, Loretta, Anan Ameri, and Dawn
Ramey, eds. Arab American
Encyclopedia. Gale, 1999.
Haskins, Jim. Against All Opposition: Black
Explorers in America. Walker, 2003.
———. One More River to Cross: The
Stories of Twelve Black Americans.
Scholastic, 1994.
Hirschfelder, Arlene B. Native Americans: A
History in Pictures. DK Publishing, 2000.
Lawlor, Veronica. I Was Dreaming to Come
to America: Memories From the Ellis
Island Oral History Project. Puffin, 1997.
Lucent Books. Immigrants in America.
Sixteen titles on cultures includ-
ing Russian Americans and
Vietnamese Americans.
Mareno, Barry, ed. Coming to America.
Barron’s. Separate titles on African, Irish,
Italian, and Jewish Americans.
———. We Came to America. Mason Crest.
Sixteen books depicting the unique
challenges facing various ethnic groups
as they came to the New World.
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


AMERICAN CULTURES 63
.Resources
Mason Crest Publishers. North American
Indians Today. Fifteen books on modern-
day American Indians, from Apache and
Cherokee to Seminole and Sioux.
Meltzer, Milton. Bound for America:
The Story of the European Immigrants.
Benchmark Books, 2001.
Moore, John Allphin, and Jerry Pubantz.
Encyclopedia of the United Nations.
Facts on File, 2002.
Nava, Julian. Julian Nava: My Mexican-
American Journey. Arte Publico, 2002.
Renick, Barbara. Genealogy 101: How to
Trace Your Family’s History and Heritage.
Rutledge Hill Press, 2003.
Sandler, Martin W. Immigrants.
HarperCollins, 2000.
Strom, Yale. Quilted Landscapes:
Conversations With Young Immigrants.
Simon & Schuster, 1996.
Takaki, Ronald T. Strangers From a Different
Shore: A History of Asian Americans.
Little, Brown, 1989.
Telushkin, Joseph. The Golden Land: The
Story of Jewish Immigration to America.
Harmony, 2002.
Thomas, David Hurst. The Native Americans:
An Illustrated History. Turner, 1993.
Warren, Paula Stuart. Your Guide to the
Family History Library. Betterway
Books, 2001.
Organizations and Websites
Use the websites listed here as starting
points for your research, or find informa-
tion on particular cultures by searching for
“______ Americans” (replacing the blank
with the ancestry group of interest, such as
Cambodian, Pakistani, Welsh, etc.). Be sure
to get your parent or guardian’s permission
before you begin to surf.
American Indian Studies
csulb.edu/colleges/cla/departments/ais
America’s Story From America’s Library
The Library of Congress
americaslibrary.gov
Arab American Institute
1600 K St. NW, Suite 601
Washington, DC 20006
Telephone: 202-429-9210
aaiusa.org
Asian-Nation
asian-nation.org
Digital History
digitalhistory.uh.edu
Immigration: Stories of Yesterday
and Today
teacher.scholastic.com/activities/immigration
Jewish-American History Foundation
P.O. Box 760325
Lathrup Village, MI 48076
jewish-history.com
The Statue of Liberty–Ellis Island
Foundation Inc.
Attention: History Center
17 Battery Place, Suite 210
New York, NY 10004-3507
Telephone: 212-561-4588
ellisisland.org
Test of Courage
Public Broadcasting Service
pbs.org/itvs/testofcourage/diversity4.html
U.S. Census Bureau
4700 Silver Hill Road
Washington, DC 20233
census.gov


64 AMERICAN CULTURES
Resources.
Acknowledgments
In preparing this edition of the American
Cultures merit badge pamphlet, we grate-
fully acknowledge the contributions of the
following individuals: Dr. David Briscoe,
professor of sociology, University of
Arkansas at Little Rock; Suzanne J. Wilson
and Susan K. Wilson for their work on
the previous pamphlet, from which much
excellent material has been brought for-
ward to the current printing; Deborah J.
Lightfoot, author and editor, provided
additional research and materials and
blended the old with the new.
Scouting America is grateful to
the men and women serving on the
National Merit Badge Subcommittee for
the improvements made in updating
this pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration Credits
American Dulcimers, americandulcimers.
com, courtesy—page 27 (dulcimer)
California Historical Society, San Francisco—
page 15 (laborers)
Elliott Lee, sopwith@yahoo.com, courtesy—
page 32 (both)
Library of Congress Prints and Photographs
Division, courtesy—pages 6
(background), 8 (both), and 10
(historical photo)
National Archives and Records
Administration—page 54
National Park Service, Frederick Douglass
National Historic Site, courtesy—
page 14
Plimoth Plantation™, Plymouth,
Massachusetts, plimoth.org,
courtesy—page 13 (Plimoth Plantation)
Bill Thermann, Pipes and Drums of the
Jersey Shore Shillelaghs, courtesy—
page 6 (inset)
U.S. Supreme Court/Steve Petteway,
courtesy—page 50 (Sotomayor)
Wikipedia/Stephen Curry, courtesy—
page 50 (Lin)
Wikipedia/Guillaume Paumier, courtesy—
page 50 (Zuckerberg)
Wikipedia/Gage Skidmore, courtesy—
page 50 (Jindal)
Wikipedia/Pete Souza, the Obama-Biden
Transition Project, courtesy—
page 50 (Obama)
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of or are
protected by Scouting America.
Tom Copeland—page 35
Phil Davis—page 60 (both top, bottom left)
John McDearmon—page 12 (map)
Steven Michaels Studios—page 4
(Webelos Scout)
Brian Payne—pages 16 (Scouts), 17 (Scout
interviewing Arab American woman), 43
(both), 49, and 58
Randy Piland—pages 36 (interfaith service)
and 60 (bottom right)