GEOLOGY
STEM-Based


GEOLOGY
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


35904
ISBN 978-0-8395-0152-7
©2023 Boy Scouts of America
2023 Printing
Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Geology or check Scoutbook for
the latest requirements.


GEOLOGY 3


4 GEOLOGY


GEOLOGY 5


6 GEOLOGY


GEOLOGY 7
Contents
What Is Geology? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Earth Down Under . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Streams Carving Earth’s Surface. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
Energy From Our Earth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
Minerals: Earth’s Treasures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
Earth History: The Story Rocks Tell . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
Careers in Geology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91
Geology Resources. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 94


The cataclysmic eruption of Washington’s Mount St. Helens in 1980 was a physical
process that changed the shape of the mountain. Understanding today’s volcanic
eruptions helps us understand eruptions of long ago.


.What Is Geology?
What Is Geology?
Geology is the study of Earth. The word comes from the Greek
geo, meaning earth or land, and logos, meaning speech or story.
The modern study of geology started more than 200 years ago,
when James Hutton published Theory of the Earth, claiming
that studying the present is the key to unlocking the mysteries
of the past. This principle of uniformitarianism states that
physical processes at work today on Earth, like wind and water
erosion, have always been active and are responsible for all
the features seen on Earth today, including remnants from the
distant past.
Geology includes the study of materials that make up
Earth, the processes that change them, and the history of the
planet. Human civilization depends on the natural materials
available from Earth.
Although much is known about
Earth and what it provides
humankind, there is much
more yet to be
discovered—and that
is the geologist’s
responsibility.


Winds have sculpted this rock formation in eastern Utah.


GEOLOGY 11
.Earth Down Under
Earth Down Under
Earth is a complicated system of land, sea, air, plants, and
animals in constant change. Many branches of science must
come together for geologists to understand what factors have
shaped the land, including
• Meteorology, the study of weather, to explain the work
done by rain, streams, oceans, rivers, wind, ice, and frost
• Geomorphology to study present day hills and valleys
and infer the historical processes that formed them
• Biology to learn about living plants and animals and
their environments
• Paleontology to unlock the secrets that fossils and other
evidence tell about the past. A fossil is the remains or
impression (imprint) of a plant, animal, or shape, such as
a shell, bones, leaf, or even a footprint, that was created or
formed during a past geologic age.
• Chemistry and physics to understand the formation and
composition of rocks, minerals, ores, and petroleum
A Geologist’s Tools
Geologists study the surface and the subsurface of Earth. They
have several physical tools and conceptual principles to aid
them in their work.
Geological and Topographic Maps
English civil engineer William Smith developed the first
geological map in the early 1800s. It proved to be so important
that it is still in use today. Geological maps show where rocks
and sediments of the same type and age exist on Earth’s
surface. Each rock or soil type is represented by a different
color or line pattern. Rocks of the same age but of different
formation commonly are represented by different shades of the
same color.


12 GEOLOGY
Earth Down Under.
Geological maps are important in showing the distribution
of rocks of the same age and type. For example, because
different rock types have different characteristics and cause
different construction problems, it is important for construction
companies to know the type of bedrock before construction
begins. A geological map of the area where construction
will take place will allow the construction company to plan
accordingly.
Geological Map Symbols
Symbols on a geological map give the reader information about what
rocks and structures occur at the land’s surface and provide clues about
what’s under the surface, including underground fault planes, fracture
patterns, and dipping formations.
Limestone Dolomite Conglomerate Breccia
Sandstone Siltstone Shale Mudstone
and clay
Anhydrite Coarse
igneous rock
Slate Gneiss and schist
Fine-grained
igneous rock
Lava flow


GEOLOGY 13
.Earth Down Under
Geologists create geological maps from information
gathered from direct observation in the field, interpretations
of aerial photographs, and satellite data. In addition to
helping locate faults and other surface information, direct
field observations allow geologists to measure the attitude,
or orientation, of the rocks. Attitude consists of a rock layer’s
strike and dip. Strike is the orientation of an inclined rock
layer relative to the north compass direction, and dip is the
deviation of a rock layer, in degrees, from a horizontal surface.
A geologist also needs a topographic overlay (or overprint)
showing what is on “top” of the ground by indicating elevations
with contour lines. In the same way that the shape of contours
on a topographic map indicate hills, valleys, and stream
direction, much can be told about a sedimentary sequence by
the shape of its surface expressions, or outcrops. For instance,
curved outcrops often indicate folds, or areas where the rock
beds were bent under intense pressure into a series of folded
layers, like modeling clay.
Folds


14 GEOLOGY
Earth Down Under.
Principles of Geology
Geologists have found that rock and land formations tend
to follow certain patterns. By applying the principles of
superposition, stratigraphy, and structural geology, they can
make better estimates of the age, formation, and changes
underneath Earth’s surface.
As rock grains drop out of suspension in water, either from
a stream or from an ocean current, they generally are deposited
in layers, much like a layer cake: The bottom layer must be put
on the plate first, followed by the layers above it. In the same
way, each layer of sand or mud is covered by another layer, and
so on. The law of superposition (first defined by Steno in 1669)
states that younger layers are on top of older layers. Younger
layers may be removed or eroded by streams or rivers, and then
even younger layers may be added on top.
Sometimes rocks show a break in the sequence of the
layers. These unconformities can be caused by erosion (or
nondeposition) or pressure. Fractures that cut across a series
of rock layers generally indicate faults, or areas where the
rock layers were broken and where the rocks on one side of
Plate Tectonics
In 1915, German naturalist Alfred Wegener published the idea that 200 million
years ago a supercontinent called Pangaea began to break apart, forming
the present continents. Since then the continents have moved slowly to
their present locations. His hypothesis was called continental drift. Because
Wegener could not explain how the continents moved, his idea was largely
ignored for several decades.
After World War II, new data became available on the nature of Earth’s
interior, rock magnetism, ocean basin structure, and the distribution of
earthquakes and volcanoes. This data was pulled together into the theory of
plate tectonics, which became generally accepted by the late 1960s.
According to the theory of plate tectonics, Earth’s lithosphere (the
crust and upper mantle) is composed of seven major and several smaller
lithospheric plates, which move slowly (about 1 to 2 inches per year) across
the surface of Earth. The theory brings together information from all branches
of geology and is fundamental in understanding the physical and biological
history of Earth.
Most of the planet’s earthquakes, volcanoes, and mountain ranges occur
where the plates meet or met in the past.


GEOLOGY 15
.Earth Down Under
the break move away from the rocks on the
other side.
Stratigraphy is the study of Earth’s
layers and how they formed. The study of
how rocks are folded and broken, or faulted,
is called structural geology. These concepts help geologists
Horizontal layers
Try this. Fill a jar half full with
gravel, rocks, sand and soil. Finish
filling the jar with water. Close the
lid and shake vigorously.
Let it stand still for a few
hours. Did layers form? Make a
soil chart of the layers. Why did
the largest grains settle on the
bottom first?


16 GEOLOGY
Earth Down Under.
figure out what’s beneath Earth using information about
Earth’s surface.
Other Tools
Geological maps are very important. They help geologists
interpret how current topography developed and how surface
geologic structures extend into the subsurface. Geologists have
many other tools and sources of information. An example
is well information. You might think of wells as pipes that
bring water or petroleum to the surface, but they also can
give us much information about Earth’s subsurface, including
information about the sequence of beds and structural features
many thousands of feet below the surface. Measurements
made in wells, using electrical graphs, or well logs, and actual
rock samples like cores and cuttings retrieved during drilling,
precisely show the rocks in that location.
One of the most common tools in the oil industry is
reflection seismology, in which sound waves are sent into Earth
to measure the reflections, or echoes, to the tops of various
rock layers. Seismic reflections give an indirect measure of
subsurface rocks and give geologists clues as to what lies
under Earth’s surface.
Geologists use
wells, or bore
holes, to gain
information in the
subsurface for
mining, engineer-
ing, and many
other purposes.
Folds
Faults


GEOLOGY 17
.Earth Down Under
This illustration was created from seismic reflection information collected by
recording the timing and reflection angles of energy waves generated by seismic
trucks. The darker waves and lines are representative of the rock formations under
Earth’s surface.





GEOLOGY 19
.Streams Carving Earth’s Surface
Streams Carving
Earth’s Surface
Geologists study rocks to learn the history of their formation.
Rivers and streams carry small pieces of rock, called sediment,
in their current, and those pieces settle when the current loses
its energy.
Sedimentary geologists study how moving water erodes
rock grains from their original position, sorts them by size, and
redeposits them into their new location. After deposition and
burial in this new location, other processes cement the grains
together into rock units.
Because round grains do not fit perfectly together when
packed into volume, there are spaces between the grains (pores)
where water, oil, natural gas, or other fluids can collect. The
new rock is like a giant sponge. Although it looks solid, it can
hold a lot of fluid in its pores.
Sedimentary
rocks are the
most common
rock formations
on the continental
surface.


20 GEOLOGY
Streams Carving Earth’s Surface.
Sediments in Suspension
The force of water current provides the energy to hold particles
of dirt and rock in suspension, from the point where they wash
into the stream until they settle to the bottom. The amount of
stream energy determines how big a grain can be transported.
Bigger grains require more energy, or faster stream flow.
Stream energy also determines where the grain is dropped,
or deposited. When a stream slows down, it loses energy,
and the bigger or heavier grains are dropped.
The shape of a stream’s path, or its morphology, affects
the stream energy. Every winding stream has places where the
current is faster or slower. Geologists study the pattern of fluid
flow to help determine the flow pattern in ancient streams now
represented by rock formations.
There is not a
corner of North
America that
does not have
a streambed for
Scouts to study.
The 1848 California Gold Rush. Only a few
prospectors struck it rich in California. Some of them
were lucky, but the smartest prospectors knew where
to pan for gold in a stream, because they knew
where gold accumulated. The tiny yellow flakes of
gold were heavy for their small size. In fact, a volume
of gold weighs 19 times more than the same volume
of water. For this reason, gold settles to the bottom
of a stream quickly as the current loses speed. The
successful prospector knew these things, which
geologists know today.


GEOLOGY 21
.Streams Carving Earth’s Surface
Stream Gradient
A stream’s energy is determined by the speed of the water flow.
Streams have a higher overall energy in the sections with a
steeper gradient or downhill slope. Water rushing from higher
elevation to lower elevation is never stopped, but it can be
slowed down by local rock formations or by traps and dams.
Remember that fast-moving water transports larger and heavier
grains while slower-moving water begins to drop the larger
and heavier grains.
One way to estimate how fast water will flow is to
calculate the stream gradient, or the ratio of vertical versus
horizontal distance, in equal units. In other words, if the
elevation of a stream drops 10 feet for every 100 feet that
it flows, you say that the gradient is 10 to 100 (or 1 to 10).
A stream with this high gradient will have a great deal of
energy in its water flow. A slow stream might be one that
flows 10 miles (or 52,800 feet) for every drop of 10 feet.
In this case, the ratio will be 10 feet to 52,800 feet (or 1 to
5,280). This would be a low gradient representing low energy
and a slow-moving stream.
To calculate
stream gradient,
you must first
convert any
measurements
that are in miles
to feet. To do that,
simply multiply
the number of
miles by 5,280.
(There are 5,280
feet in a mile.)
STREAM
100 FEET DISTANCE10 FEET
ELEVATION


22 GEOLOGY
Streams Carving Earth’s Surface.
Activity 1. How Do Sediments Settle
From Suspension?
You have learned that sediments are carried by river current and
deposited downstream. In this experiment you will learn how
sediment size, river gradient, and obstacles affect suspension.
PROCEDURES
Step 1—Create a mountain slope from a piece of plywood or a
cardboard box (even a pizza box) reinforced with a yardstick.
Cover the cardboard with a plastic garbage bag. With an
adult’s help, spray
foam insulation on the
mountain slope to make
an S-shaped furrow for a
river to flow through.
Step 2—When the foam has dried,
elevate one end of the mountain
slope on one brick. You may allow
the other end to rest on a concrete
surface like a driveway.
Step 3—Mix 1 teaspoon of sand,
1 teaspoon of dirt, and 2 teaspoons
of gravel in approximately 2 cups
of water. Stir. Notice if the sand,
dirt, and rocks are suspended in
the water.
1
4


GEOLOGY 23
.Streams Carving Earth’s Surface
Step 4—Pour the mixture into the furrow at the high end of
your mountainside. Record your observations.
Step 5—Raise the upper end of the mountain by adding a
second brick, then repeat steps 3 and 4.
Step 6—Elevate the upper end of the mountain four to eight
times higher by adding more bricks or other support, then
repeat steps 3 and 4.
OBSERVATIONS
1. When you stirred the sand, dirt, and gravel in the water, did
they become suspended? What settled first after you stopped
stirring? What do you think would settle first in a streambed?
2. When you poured the mixture down the mountain slope,
did the sand, gravel, or dirt settle out first?
3. Where on the mountainside did the sand tend to settle, on
the point bar or the cut bank? Where did the gravel tend to
settle? Where did the dirt tend to settle?
4. As the incline increased and the mountain grew higher,
what happened to the amount of sediment that settled on
the mountainside?
CONCLUSIONS
When searching for something in a river, be it oil in an ancient
river that flowed years ago, gold for the gold rush prospector,
or a dropped Scout compass in a stream, it is helpful to know
where heavier items settle when flowing downstream. Larger
heavier materials like rocks settle out first. The faster the
stream flows, the less the suspended solids settle out. The
stream moves more slowly when the mountainside is not as
high. Sediment of all sizes will settle out when they slow down
going around a point bar. Only the heaviest rocks will settle
out in a cut bank area. These same principles apply whether in
a raging river, a gurgling brook, or a straight or twisting stream.
See “Stream
Landforms” later
in this chapter for
more information
about cut bank
and point bar.


24 GEOLOGY
Streams Carving Earth’s Surface.
Stream Patterns
The shape of a stream channel, or shape of the stream flow,
also can determine the strength of a stream’s energy. A
geologist can predict the range of stream gradient and stream
energy by looking at a map or an aerial photograph.
Straight Streams
When a stream flows in a channel without significant bends,
geologists say it flows straight. Most commonly a straight
stream is one that has so much energy and flows so fast
that it manages to erode its own channel regardless of rock
type. Straight streams tend to have steep sides and the most
energy. They can push large rocks and even boulders downhill.
Straight streams demonstrate the fastest stream velocity and
usually indicate that the stream is dropping fast from a higher
elevation to a lower elevation.
The stream shows you the direction of the downhill slope
even if you do not have a topographic map.
Straight stream map view Straight stream perspective view


GEOLOGY 25
.Streams Carving Earth’s Surface
Meandering Streams
Meandering streams are those that seem to twist and turn
in a snakelike pattern. Geologists tend to find them in wide,
flat areas. When a stream gradient is low, the stream slows
down. Then external factors, like friction between the water
and the bank or channel bottom, also can affect stream flow.
Meandering, curving streams occur where the water current
is not strong enough to force its way directly to base level,
but only plays back and forth across a (mostly) flat area.
Meandering streams are often close to a larger body of water
(base level) like a lake, ocean, or a larger river.
In time, this action is exaggerated. The slower zone in
the stream begins to drop grains of sediment, which makes the
channel shallower as it fills the channel bottom. In a shallow
channel, the water flow spreads across more area and creates
more friction, which slows the water even more, and so on.
Another cause for a stream to meander might be an
obstacle in the channel; perhaps the stream flows to a large
boulder or a different kind of rock formation and does not
have the energy (stream energy) to move it out of the way or
wash it downstream. The low-energy stream will flow around
it. Meandering streams tend to have the slowest flow and the
lowest stream gradient (energy level).
Meandering stream map view Meandering stream perspective view


26 GEOLOGY
Streams Carving Earth’s Surface.
Dendritic Streams
Streams that have a dendritic pattern, resembling the veins in
a leaf, tend to be made up of both straight and meandering
stream segments. This pattern is most common in areas of
varying elevation as in hilly or mountainous terrains. Water
from one side of a ravine will flow to the bottom of the ravine
and join with water from the other side. The combined stream
will flow down the valley until it joins another runoff stream
from a neighboring valley.
Because water always runs downhill, the intersection of
two streams makes a down-pointing arrow pattern on a map.
Dendritic streams occupy the middle ground between straight
streams and meandering streams, where the stream is still
dropping from high ground to low ground, but where the drop
is not as steep. There is still enough energy to show a
primary direction of flow.
Dendritic stream map view Dendritic stream perspective view


GEOLOGY 27
.Streams Carving Earth’s Surface
Trellis Streams
Trellis stream patterns are not as common as other patterns.
They display a stream pattern influenced entirely by the
underlying rocks. In an area where the rocks have been
folded, or thrust-faulted, the surface rocks occur in a pattern of
parallel ridges. Water will flow along the valley between these
ridges until it finds a gap that allows it to escape and flow
down to the next level. Although these streams don’t flow in
a straight line, they flow in very straight segments and their
valley walls probably are steep-sided.
Trellis streams may have very high energy and very fast
water. The softer rocks, which erode more easily than others,
erode from between the harder layers and leave behind ridges
of higher ground. These parallel ridges print their pattern into
the stream pattern because the water always runs downhill
through the eroded valleys and flows around the higher ridges.
Lakes
Envision a lake as a very wide, slow part of a stream. A stream
usually fills the lake at one end, and the overflow spills through
a low spot somewhere on the edge of the lake, allowing the
stream to continue its flow downhill. Lakes are quiet, still water.
The base level occurs where the stream gradient becomes zero
and the stream drops all the remaining grains from suspension.
There usually is very little current associated with a lake unless
storm water is flowing into the upper end, so the very finest
grains can settle from suspension. The cloudiness you see in a
lake is mostly due to algae and other lake life.
Trellis stream perspective view
Trellis stream map view


28 GEOLOGY
Streams Carving Earth’s Surface.
A LAKE WITH A RIVER.
A RIVER BUILDS A DELTA AS IT ENTERS THE LAKE.
SEDIMENT BUILDUP CONVERTS THE LAKE TO A SHALLOW SWAMP.
A LAKE BASIN FILLED WITH SEDIMENT; ONLY THE RIVER REMAINS.
Vanishing lake


GEOLOGY 29
.Streams Carving Earth’s Surface
Activity 2: Reading Topographic Maps for
Stream Gradient
You now know how to recognize four types of streams: straight,
meandering, dendritic, and trellis. In the following activity, you
will calculate the stream gradient for an example of each type
of river and determine what that tells you about the stream.
PROCEDURES
Step 1—Use a contour map provided by your counselor, or
use the four provided in this pamphlet. Identify the types of
streams found on the maps.
Step 2—Find a starting and ending place on the map where
the stream crosses a contour line. The stream on the map is not
straight. Use a piece of string to follow the stream on the map,


30 GEOLOGY
Streams Carving Earth’s Surface.
then measure the string with a ruler and the miles scale on the
chart to get the distance the water traveled. Measure as closely
as possible the distance between the points with a ruler and
convert it to feet or miles using the scale on the map. If the
distance is in miles, multiply it by 5,280 to convert it to feet.
Step 3—Read the elevation of the stream at the beginning and
ending points you selected in the last step. Often not all contour
lines are labeled, but the interval is the change in elevation
between each contour line. Use this information to find the
elevation of the contour lines that cross the stream.
Step 4—Calculate the stream gradient—the ratio of elevation
change to distance. Stream gradients are expressed in ratio form
so they can be reduced to the lowest common denominator.
Step 5—Repeat steps 1 through 4 with the other three maps.


GEOLOGY 31
.Streams Carving Earth’s Surface
OBSERVATIONS
1. Which type of stream
flows the fastest. Why?
2. Which type of
stream flows the
slowest. Why?
3. Which type of stream
would carry the
largest grains of
sediment? Why?
4. What kind of stream
gradient would a water-
fall have? Do waterfalls
flow fast or slow?
CONCLUSIONS
Straight streams tend to have the highest gradient and the
most energy, and therefore are able to carry the most
sediment. Meandering streams normally have the lowest
gradients and the least energy, and are able to carry only the
smallest sediments.
Stream Landforms
If you were a prospector in the California gold rush of the mid-
1800s, you would have carefully observed stream landforms.
CUT BANK
On the meandering stream with its S-shaped curves, the force
of water pushes on the outside of the bend. The rushing water
continues to erode, or cut away, the outside of the bend named
the cut bank. Just as a race car in the outer lane of a bend has
to travel faster to keep up with a race car on an inner lane, the
water on the outside of a river bend travels faster than water
on the inside of a bend. Because the water in a cut bank is
high stream energy, flowing quickly, it often picks up dirt and
sediment, eroding the cut bank. Typically no grains will settle
in this area.
POINT BAR AND FILL BANK
While the water on the outside of a bend travels quickly, the
water on the inside slows down and has low stream energy.


32 GEOLOGY
Streams Carving Earth’s Surface.
This creates an area where the
bigger or the heavier grains are
dropped. Where the inside of a river
bend often fills with sediment is
called a fill bank or point bar.
DELTA
Deltas form where a stream flows
into a lake or ocean and drops its
sediment. Deltas can show different
patterns of deposition but there is
usually an area where the delta
ends and the slope drops quickly
into deeper water. Stream channels
can occur within a delta. As long as
the stream has any energy to flow it will continue to maintain
its form and transport grains to the delta slope where the
stream energy drops to zero.
MEDIAL CHANNEL BAR
An elongated mound of sediment in the middle of a channel
or waterway is a medial channel bar, sometimes called a
sandbar. A delta may have a number of medial channel bars
in the waterway where the sediment settles as the flow slows
entering a lake or ocean. Grains settle out like in a delta.


GEOLOGY 33
.Streams Carving Earth’s Surface
Glaciers
To understand the glaciers of the Ice Age, geologists study today’s
remnant glaciers, called mountain glaciers, and continental ice sheets.
Mountain glaciers still can be found in Glacier National Park in Montana
and in Alaska. Continental ice sheets still exist in Greenland and
Antarctica.
Throughout geologic time, glaciers have shaped Earth’s surface.
Many scientists believe that massive ice
sheets like those that cover Antarctica
today once covered the north half of
Eurasia and from the North Pole to what
is now Kansas and Illinois. Because these
glacial sheets were so thick—nearly a
mile in some places—and may have
taken thousands of years to melt, entire
rivers flowed around them. When the
continental ice sheets finally finished
melting, the glaciers had carved out the channels of today’s major river
systems through Canada and the United States. Most geologists believe
that glaciers weighing trillions of tons dug out the low spots that became
the Great Lakes.
Mountain glaciers exist only in a single mountain valley. Today’s
mountains show evidence of long-gone mountain glaciers. Have you
ever hiked the high country and noticed wide, U-shaped mountain valley
walls (compared with narrow, sharply pointed V-shaped valleys). To form
a U-shaped valley, a single river of ice flowed through and cut away the
sides and bottom of the valley, creating its wider appearance.
Glaciers also scrape up huge amounts of rock and dirt and, as the
ice melts, deposit this material. Large deposits of glacial sediment, or
till, and glacially derived wind-blown deposits called loess can be seen
today. At the end of a glacier, the till is deposited in a mound called a
terminal moraine. Other till deposits accumulate beneath the glacier
as ground moraine or, on mountain glaciers, along the sides as
lateral moraine.


34 GEOLOGY
Streams Carving Earth’s Surface.
Activity 3: Finding Sediment With a Magnifying Glass
Looking at a riverbed you know there are sediment or river
rocks that are big enough to easily see, but there also is some
sediment that is too small to see with the naked eye. In the
following activity, you will need a magnifying glass to study
stream water.
PROCEDURES
Step 1—With your parent’s permission and a Scout buddy,
visit a nearby stream. Using a clear plastic cup, scoop up
some stream water. Using a magnifying glass, look at the
water for suspended sedimentary materials. Write down
your observations.
Step 2—Find a second location along the stream, perhaps in
a fill bank, and scoop up a second sample. Examine it with a
magnifying glass and make notes.
Step 3—If you have access to a microscope, maybe at your
school, save a sample of stream water and look at the same
water through the microscope. You may have to stir or shake
the water before making your microscope slide.
OBSERVATIONS
1. Were you able to see more sediment with the
magnifying glass?
2. Was there more sediment in the first or second sample?
3. If you were able to use a microscope, what did you observe?
4. Even though some of this sediment is too small to see
without magnification, do you think when the river drops
this sediment it impacts the stream bottom? Why?
CONCLUSIONS
Some sediment is too small to see without magnification.
Rivers and streams move materials in a large variety of sizes,
from large boulders to fine grains too small to be seen with
the naked eye. Water flowing over our planet is constantly
changing the shape of its surface.


GEOLOGY 35
.Streams Carving Earth’s Surface
Activity 4: Water Direction Clues
Have you ever hiked across a dried-up riverbed? Could you
find clues to tell which way the water had flowed? In the
following activity, you will hunt for river direction clues.
PROCEDURES
Step 1—With your parent’s permission and a Scout buddy,
visit a nearby stream. Look at the water to see what direction
it is flowing. Drop a stick, leaf, or other natural material on the
water to confirm this direction. Even if the water has dried up,
look for clues that show the direction of the previous water flow.
Step 2—Look for a second stream feeding into this stream.
Step 3—Look for an obstruction in the stream like a rock or
tree. (On an obstruction, sediment will build up on the upstream
side and the downstream side may be hollowed out.)
Step 4—Look for debris like twigs and leaves wrapped around
trees and rocks along the bank.
Step 5—Look for reeds, grass, litter bending toward downstream.
Step 6—Record all your observations with notes and sketches
in a notebook. Share your observations with your counselor.
OBSERVATIONS
1. Are you able to see sediment being carried by the
stream current?
2. If you found a second stream feeding into the first stream
did they form a V where they converged? What direction
did the V point, upstream or downstream?
3. What type of obstruction did you find? What had collected
on the upstream side of the obstacle? Was the downstream
side of the obstacle hollowed out?
4. Did you find twigs and leaves wrapped around trees and
rocks? Did the height of this debris indicate the stream once
overflowed its banks?
CONCLUSIONS
Even if a stream has dried up, many clues indicate the direc-
tion of the water flow. Often two joining streams will form a V
pointing downstream. Obstructions like trees and rocks collect
sediments as the water slows to pass around it. All streams
leave water-flow direction clues.


36 GEOLOGY
Streams Carving Earth’s Surface.
What Is a Topographic Map?
Geologists use topographic maps, two-dimensional pieces of paper
that depict the three-dimensional surface of Earth.
Topography is the shape of the land surface, the “top” of the land.
Contour lines, which on a mountain peak look like concentric rings,
show elevations. Elevation is the vertical height above sea level. The
contour lines connect points of the same elevation. Closely spaced
contour lines indicate steep slopes. Contour lines far apart represent
gentle slopes. In the topographic map below, the contour interval is
100 feet. This interval is the difference in elevation between each
contour line.
This “topo” map shows contour lines and a study line (transect)
from point A to point B.
You can draw a profile across the valley by marking elevation points
along the study line (transect A to B). Use graph paper if you can.


Topographic image taken from NASA’s Dawn spacecraft


The Hoover Dam in Nevada provides low-cost hydroelectric power for that state,
Arizona, and California. Other renewable types of energy come from windmills and
solar panels.


GEOLOGY 39
.Energy From Our Earth
Energy From Our Earth
Energy is the vital force powering business, manufacturing,
and the transportation of goods and services to serve the
United States and world economies. Energy supply and
demand plays an increasingly vital role in our national
security and the economic output of our nation. It is not
surprising that the United States budgets more than $500
billion annually on energy.
Natural Resources
Natural resources are very important in our daily lives. All
natural resources must be found, extracted, and processed
before they can be used. Many are essential to our well-being,
and others are important for our comfort. Rock is quarried
and crushed for construction. Ore is mined and refined for
metals. Petroleum (oil and natural gas) is used for plastics,
medicine, and transportation. Coal is used for heat and
electricity. Gemstones are used for jewelry. The list of natural
resources is endless and diverse.
Finding natural resources may be as simple as knowing
the surface rocks in the area, or as complex as looking three
miles or more underground. Extraction may be as simple as
dredging sand from a riverbed or as difficult as blasting a shaft
thousands of feet underground and bringing the ore to the
surface. Transporting may be as simple as loading the material
on a truck or as complex as laying a 250-mile pipeline. The
cost of extraction and transportation must be considered in
determining how valuable an Earth resource is to society.
Most of the energy resources we use today are taken from
Earth. The energy to heat your home and school, the energy
to push your family car or neighborhood bus down the street,
the energy required to lift a 747 airplane off the runway—all
come from Earth and were formed during Earth’s past. It is
When geologists
refer to gas or
natural gas, they
are talking about
the natural gas
used in a water
heater or in
heating a home.





GEOLOGY 41
.Energy From Our Earth
the responsibility of geologists working in the hydrocarbon
industries to find new deposits of these energy sources.
Where Do We Get Electricity?
In the United States, our energy comes from a number of
sources. Electricity is used for power and heat, and to operate
appliances and electronics. Electricity is clean and easy to use.
But where does electricity come from?
According to the U.S. Department of Energy, in 2021
about 4,116 billion kilowatt-hours (kWh) (or about 4.12 trillion
kWh) of electricity were generated at utility-scale electricity
generation facilities in the United States. About 61% of this
electricity generation was from fossil fuels—coal, natural gas,
petroleum, and other gases. About 19% was from nuclear
energy, and about 20% was from renewable energy sources
like hydropower, wind power, tidal power, solar energy, and
geothermal energy. While it is important that today’s society
continue to develop renewable energy resources, it’s clear
that we still depend on fossil fuels for more than half our
electricity.
Coal
Coal occurs in beds between layers of other sedimentary rocks,
such as shale and sandstone. Coal is formed when material
from ancient plants accumulates in swamps or bogs and
becomes buried under water and sediments. This process stops


42 GEOLOGY
Energy From Our Earth.
Rock where the
oil and gas form
is a source rock.
the decay of wooded material by sealing off the oxygen supply
needed for decay.
Coal forms in different stages, depending on how long it
has been buried and how much pressure and heat have been
applied during compaction. In its first stage, coal is called peat.
If dried, peat can be burned as a fuel.
With more time, heat, and deeper burial, more water
is driven out of the peat, creating lignite, or brown coal. As
continued burial drives off more water and the percentage of
carbon is increased, lignite becomes bituminous coal, the most
common and widely used form of coal in the United States.
Bituminous coal is found throughout North America, but the
deposits found in many states are not large enough to be
economically developed. If bituminous coal is folded during
burial, the added pressure and heat of folding changes it to the
very highest grade of coal, anthracite.
ROCK
PORE
PORE
PORE
PORE
PORE
ROCK
ROCK
ROCK
ROCK
PORE


GEOLOGY 43
.Energy From Our Earth
Oil and Natural Gas
Living things, like plants and animals,
are made of the same basic building
blocks as oil, gas, and coal—the carbon
and hydrogen atoms. Scientists believe
that oil and gas formed from dead plants
and microscopic or very small animals,
preserved in mud on the bottom of seas
and lakes. To be preserved, these plants
and animals had to be quickly covered
with mud so oxygen could not decay
them. During burial, bacteria, heat, and
pressure forced chemical changes in
the plant and animal material until the
carbon-based molecules became oil and
natural gas.
While the plant and animal matter
settled on the ocean floor, grains of sand
or clay were buried and packed into
rock. Like marbles packed in a jar, there
were spaces, or pores, filled with organic
material, water, and mostly clay. As
the organic material converted into oil
or natural gas, it migrated up through
these pores.
To see for yourself, fill a bottle
with cooking oil and water. Cap it and
shake. Watch the oil separate from the water and rise to the
top. Since oil and gas are both lighter than water, they do
the same thing deep underground. The oil and gas rise until
they come to a trap—a nonporous rock barrier that traps the
Syncline: fold arching downward
Dome: inverted bowl shape
Anticline: fold arching upward
Sometimes if an impermeable
barrier does not stop the
migration of oil and gas, it will
leak out on Earth’s surface in a
natural seep. There are natural
seeps in the United States,
notably in the Gulf Coast area
and in California.


44 GEOLOGY
Energy From Our Earth.
migrating oil and gas. Sometimes oil and gas will travel long
distances and collect in a large trap, creating a gigantic oil
and gas reservoir. The porous rock below the trap rock, satu-
rated with oil and or gas, is the
reservoir rock.
Few rock layers are perfectly horizontal, and it is
common for porous folded or tilted beds to become oil or
gas reservoirs. The highest point in the formation becomes
the reservoir, so the geologist hunting for oil or natural
gas learns to look for these high spots. The science of
petroleum exploration is the search for these porous rocks
sealed by impermeable rocks. These folded structures are
called anticlines, synclines, and domes. Each type of fold has
different characteristics, but anticlines and domes make the
best traps for hydrocarbons.
Not all traps are anticlines or domes. Oil can be trapped in
tilted layers against an impermeable zone, such as a salt dome
or a fault.
Tar Sands
Tar sands are sandstones containing an asphalt-like petroleum
that is too thick to be pumped out. Instead, the rock must be
heated to release the oil. Large deposits of tar sands exist
at the surface in Canada (the Athabasca Tar Sands) where
CONTAINMENT
BUILDING
REACTOR
STEAM
STEAM
ELECTRICAL POWER
TRANSMISSION
GENERATOR
TURBINE
CONDENSER
PUMP
COOLING
TOWER
NUCLEAR
CORE
BOILING
WATER
CONTROL
RODS
WATER
Creating nuclear energy


GEOLOGY 45
.Energy From Our Earth
they are mined with open-pit quarrying techniques. The
world’s largest deposits are in Venezuela, where production
is just beginning.
Oil Shale
Oil shale is a special kind of shale rock that is formed by plant
and animal matter deposited together with mud in an ocean
or lake bottom. The plant and animal matter compacted with
the mud converts to a substance called kerogen. Oil, gas, coal,
and kerogen are all hydrocarbons, made of hydrogen and
carbon atoms. Oil shale is mined like any other rock. It is then
heated to release the kerogen. Colorado, Utah, Wyoming, and
Canada all have enormous deposits of oil shale. At this time it
is expensive to mine the oil shale and remove the kerogen. Oil
shale is not economical to mine.
Nuclear Energy
A nuclear power plant uses uranium for
nuclear fission, which produces heat
to boil water, which then turns steam
turbines to generate electricity. Uranium,
a heavy metal element, comes mainly
from a mineral, uraninite, but also can
come from carnotite and autinite. The
United States has radioactive mineral
deposits in New Mexico, Utah, Colorado,
Wyoming, Arizona, and Washington.
Hydropower
Dams produce pollution-free renewable energy. Just as the
wheel in a water mill turns under the weight of falling water,
a dam’s turbine wheel also turns under the weight of falling
water. The difference is a dam’s turbine is attached to an
electric generator.
The benefits of dams include supplying water for
agriculture and communities, and reducing the risk of floods
and droughts. One of their few drawbacks is the blocked
sediment flow, which deprives the downstream flood plains of
fertile sediment. Another drawback is that dams serve as a large
source of evaporation, which can change the local climate.
Most suitable sites for large dams in developed countries
have been exploited. For this reason, hydroelectric power


46 GEOLOGY
Energy From Our Earth.
production is not expected to increase
significantly in the United States.
Wind
Wind can turn large windmills that generate
electricity. In fact, windmill “farms” can
be seen throughout the western United
States. For years, ranchers and farmers
have used wind-driven pumps, not to
generate electricity, but to save electricity.
These pumps bring water to the surface
for livestock to drink, saving the rancher
the expense of taking electricity to distant
pastures or the time bringing the livestock
to the corral to drink. Although wind energy
can be inexpensive to generate and the
land it takes up can be multi-use, it has its
drawbacks. Wind energy requires a large
area and steady wind.
Tidal Power
Tidal power, where water from a rising
tide is trapped behind gates of a large
impoundment, is used on a limited basis.
As the tide drops, the water is slowly
released through turbine gates,
generating electricity. This energy
source is relatively inexpensive
but requires a large coastal
area and may damage the local
shoreline ecosystem.
Solar Energy
Solar energy could become an
important energy source in the
future. Solar energy currently
helps save electricity by heating
water for homes and businesses.
Also, all NASA spacecraft use
solar energy to power instruments
and communications.
Although solar energy is abundant, it
requires a large area and sunny days.
Scientists also are discovering how to
store solar energy and make today’s solar
panels more efficient.


GEOLOGY 47
.Energy From Our Earth
The basement
rock is igneous
rock—rock
formed from
molten material
that makes up
Earth’s crust
and underlies
all basins.
Geothermal Energy
In areas where magma is relatively near the surface, water may
be piped down close to the magma. The extremely hot magma
boils the water, producing steam that rises through the pipe
out of the ground to turn a turbine, which generates electricity.
Exploring for Oil and Gas
Geologists have several high-tech tools in their toolbox that
help them find oil or gas. They use these tools to make a map
of what they expect to find under the surface. A map of
subsurface structures is a tool predicting the shape of rock
structures that cannot be directly observed.
Studying Rock Layers
Thick layers of sediment tend to accumulate in bowl-shaped
crustal depressions called regional basins. Geologists study
and record a basin’s stratigraphy—its rock layers from the
surface down to the basement. They know that if a certain rock
formation is a reservoir for oil and gas in one part of the basin,
it also may be a reservoir elsewhere in the same basin. If a
certain rock is found 8,000 feet beneath the surface in one part
of the basin, it might also be found at a similar depth in other
parts of the basin. Using the vertical sequence in one part of
the basin to help locate a rock formation in another part of the
basin is known as stratigraphic correlation.
Some of the tools a geologist uses to trace a formation in
the subsurface include reflection seismic, electrical well logs,
core samples, and cuttings.
A geologist must be
able to understand what
lies buried beneath the
surface of the ground or
underwater in order to
locate reserves of oil and
natural gas. Reflection
seismic is the process
of sending acoustic
waves (sound waves)
through Earth using
a wave energy source
from either mechanical
devices or explosives.
HIGH-PITCHED
SOUND FROM BAT
ECHO REFLECTED
FROM MOTH
Just as bats use sound echoes to locate flying insects, scien-
tists use reflections of seismic waves to locate underground
rock structures that might contain minerals or oil and gas.


48 GEOLOGY
Energy From Our Earth.
Then geophones (earth microphones) detect the reflections
as they bounce back to the surface. Computers measure the
time it takes for the wave to travel round-trip, then use that
information to create useful graphic displays of the subsurface
layers or structures where oil or natural gas may accumulate.
These acoustic waves travel through Earth’s layers and are
reflected back to the surface from rock formation boundaries.
Formation boundaries usually are defined where the rock type
changes (for example, sandstone to limestone).
Electric Well Logs
Electric well logs are electrical measurements taken in a well
after it has been drilled, to create a record of the stratigraphy
and rock properties encountered in the well. Electrical current
is passed through the rock formation using a long, cylindrical
sonde, a special tool connected by wire
to a computer on the surface. The sonde
measures how easily electricity passes
through the rock formation. By comparing
this electrical conductivity to rock
properties in other parts of the same basin,
geologists can predict the rock formations
in other parts of the basin. Engineers use
the well log to develop a plan of how to
best drill and recover the oil and gas.
Core Samples
Typically seismic and/or well logs provide
the information needed to begin drilling
a new well. Occasionally geologists
and engineers test a special cylinder-
shaped rock sample called a core sample.
Laboratory testing can tell the engineer
rock porosity, the amount of space between
the rock grains. A special hollow drill bit,
shaped like a straw, cuts core samples and
brings them to the surface. Core samples
are often 1 to 21
⁄2 inches in
diameter yet hundreds to even
thousands of feet long.
As the drill bit digs deeper
in the rock, ground up rock
TRANSMITTER
ELECTRICAL
SIGNAL PASSING
THROUGH ROCK
FORMATION
RECEIVERS
In an electric well log, the sonde first takes the
electric readings in the well. Then the readings
are plotted on a graph against the depth to
produce a well log. In the final step, a geologist
can use the well log to draw a geological cross
section, spacing the well logs in proportion to
the actual wells.


GEOLOGY 49
.Energy From Our Earth
pieces called cuttings come to the surface.
A geologist compares cuttings to what was
expected. The cuttings reveal if the predicted
vertical sequence, stratigraphy, needs to
be modified and give the driller clues to
know when the bit has reached the target
rock formation. Cuttings are saved for other
geologists to examine for clues about the rock
formations in other parts of the same basin.
Making the Exploration Map
Geologists make maps of things they cannot
see from information gathered with seismic
surveys, well logs, core samples, and cuttings.
A first pass in a new basin might include
a seismic survey to produce a picture of the
subsurface structures, which include tops of
formations and other underground features.
The best seismic surveys allow geologists and
geophysicists to compare what they already
Make a Core Sample
To better understand core samples, try this
for fun. Cut the top off a 2-liter plastic drink
bottle. Mix equal parts of sand and dry
plaster of paris. Fill the bottom 3 inches of
the bottle with this mix. Now mix equal
parts of dirt and plaster of paris. Make a
second layer in the bottle with the dirt mix-
ture. Sticks, seashells, and leaves may be
added between layers in your core sample.
Mix equal parts of gravel or rocks with
plaster of paris and add for a third layer.
Now add layers, in the thickness and order
as you wish, to fill the bottle. Fill the bottle
with water. The next day remove your core
sample.
Core samples


50 GEOLOGY
Energy From Our Earth.
know about the basin stratigraphy with the structures in the
seismic print.
If the basin area has been explored before, geologists will
use electric well log plots from nearby wells to estimate at
what depth to expect oil and gas. They can build a subsurface
structure map using the depth-to-formation numbers from the
well log plots and may use the same technique to reveal the
bottom of the formation and determine its thickness. This
subsurface isopach map shows the potential thickness of the
target reservoir.
A structural map represents seismic data measured from
the surface to a particular subsurface rock layer of interest.
These measurements are given a value in time or depth and
are placed on a map at regular intervals from each other
according to the surface location of the seismic data. The
finished map looks much like a surface topographic map, but
it is the subsurface.
Activity 5: Drawing a Subsurface Structure Map
Contour mapping is like drawing a connect-the-dots
puzzle. Making a subsurface structure map is like making a
topographic map, except that the map is of the buried top (or
bottom) of a particular target rock formation. In this activity
you will learn how to draw a subsurface structure map.
The elevation used on most subsurface
structure maps are shown in negative numbers
to show how far these values are below sea
level. Sea level becomes a datum, or a standard
reference position known in all wells. The
elevation at sea level is zero. If your counselor
has access to well data, use that to make a
subsurface map. Perhaps your counselor also will
have copies of the electric well logs from which
this information was taken. Otherwise use the
data in the chart on page 51.
PROCEDURES
Step 1—The depth-to-structure values are
negative because they are below sea level. To
make mapping simpler, add 6,200 feet to each
depth in the blank column.


GEOLOGY 51
.Energy From Our Earth
Step 2—Trace or copy the well location map and label each
well with the depth below 6,200 feet you calculated in step 1.
Step 3—Look at the elevations. Decide if you would like to
draw contour lines on 50-foot intervals. Find the lowest point.
Step 4—You may want to use dashed or light pencil lines
until after you have checked the points in step 7. Draw a line
between the four lowest points for the –600-foot contour line.
Step 5—Next draw the contour line for –550 feet. Does this
line intersect points?
Step 6—Continue sketching in contour lines between points
until you reach the highest elevation. Remember, contour lines
cannot cross one another.
Step 7—Double-check your contour lines. Make sure, for
example, an elevation of –289 doesn’t fall between the –300
and the –350 contour lines.
Well Number Depth to Structure
(Subsea) Feet +6,200 Feet
1 -6,790 590
2 -6,810 610
3 -6,840 640
4 -6,435 235
5 -6,241 41
6 -6,438 238
7 -6,294 94
8 -6,489 289
9 -6,750 550
10 -6,555 355
11 -6,750 550
12 -6,780 580
13 -6,805 605
14 -6,350 150
15 -6,395 195
16 -6,428 228
17 -6,463 263
18 -6,658 458
19 -6,679 479
20 -6,742 542


52 GEOLOGY
Energy From Our Earth.
Step 8—Look for a structural high, the place of the highest
relative elevation. It looks like a hilltop of a topographic map
but actually is the structurally highest point on the map.
Since oil and gas are lighter than water, they migrate upward
through the rock and collect in a structural high. Label your
map where you would expect an oil reservoir to exist.
OBSERVATIONS
1. Is the lowest point well 3 or 5? Why?
2. Are some contour lines spaced out more than others? Where
is the steepest section of the formation?


GEOLOGY 53
.Energy From Our Earth
CONCLUSIONS
Three-dimensional surfaces can be clearly seen on a contour
map. Drawing a contour map shows hills and valleys that would
be difficult to find by reading the well data. A subsurface map
is an important geological tool.
Offshore Drilling. Oil companies can drill wells on dry land or
in deep water. Some offshore platforms stand in water hundreds
of feet deep, and others drill in water so deep the platform
does not even touch the ocean floor. These platforms float like
small islands surrounded by water.
Because it is so difficult and expensive to drill offshore,
oil companies try to drill more than one well once they set up
a drilling platform. They can drill wells in different directions
from the same location, using the same hole.
Activity 6: Extraction Tabletop Display
The geologist has located a large oil and gas reservoir. Now
what happens? For this activity, make a tabletop display
and share either oil and gas extraction or coal extraction
information with a small group or your counselor.
PROCEDURES
Step 1—Choose oil and gas or coal as your focus. (Oil and gas
often are found together in one reservoir.) Make a three-panel
display board. Add one large label in the center that reads either
“Oil and Gas” or “Coal.” The three labels for the three panels
could be labeled “Exploration,” “Extraction,” and “Processing.”
Step 2—With parental permission and a librarian’s help, search
the public library databases for articles on oil and gas or coal.
With parental permission, explore the internet using a search
engine for terms like “oil exploration” or “coal mining,” for
Isopach Map. Whenever geologists make a structure
map of the bottom of the formation, they can calcu-
late the thickness by subtracting the depth of the top
from the depth of the bottom. This map showing
formation thickness is called an isopach map and can
help the geologist or engineer determine whether
there is enough rock formation present to make a
sufficient reservoir for oil or gas.


54 GEOLOGY
Energy From Our Earth.
example. By putting the words in quotes, the search engine
will pull up only websites that have both words together in
the content.
Step 3—Decorate your display board with interesting facts you
found on extraction.
Step 4—Give a five-minute presentation on your findings to a
small group or your counselor.
OBSERVATIONS
1. Are geologists more involved in exploring for oil, gas, and
coal or processing it?
2. What is something you learned in the research you did not
know before?
3. Are there oil, gas, or coal reserves in your state? What states
do have oil, gas, or coal reserves?
4. Does your home use natural gas? If yes, in what ways?
CONCLUSIONS
The exploration, extraction, and processing of oil, gas, and
coal is a fascinating business. Now you understand that by the
time you pump gasoline into your car, many people, including
geologists, have worked to find, extract, and process the oil
for the gasoline.


GEOLOGY 55
.Energy From Our Earth
Activity 7: Visit an Operating Drilling Rig
Would you enjoy working on an oil-drilling rig as a geologist?
Complete this activity to find out.
PROCEDURES
Step 1—Ask your merit badge counselor for assistance with
finding a geologist who works on a drilling rig. You might locate
a geologist in your area by contacting a geological group listed
at the end of this pamphlet. With permission from your parent
and counselor, telephone or email this contact, explaining you
are working on the Geology merit badge and that one of the
requirements is to visit with a geologist at a drilling rig.
Step 2—Visit the geologist at work and ask to see what
geologists do onsite. Ask to see cutting samples.
OBSERVATIONS
1. What is drilling mud,
and what purpose does it
serve? What are drill bits
and drill pipe?
2. How many barrels of
oil does the geologist
think the reservoir holds?
How many gallons of
oil is that? (There are 42
gallons in a barrel of oil.)
How much of the oil is
expected to be removed
or recoverable?
3. Ask the geologist what is
the most satisfying part
of working on a drilling
rig. Was it hard getting
a geology degree? Why
did the geologist pick this
career?
CONCLUSIONS
Visiting a drilling rig gives you
a glimpse of what a geologist’s
daily life can be like.


The magnificent blue Hope diamond, at more than 45 carats, sparkles for visitors at
the National Museum of Natural History, Smithsonian Institution, in Washington, D.C.


GEOLOGY 57
.Minerals: Earth’s Treasures
Minerals:
Earth’s Treasures
Rocks are a mixture of one or more minerals found on Earth,
other planets, moons, and meteorites. Some rocks, like marble,
contain only one mineral—calcite. To be considered a mineral,
a substance must be naturally occurring, inorganic, and solid
with an orderly crystal structure and a well-defined
chemical composition.
Gems—minerals like amethyst that are highly valued for their
beauty—are often used in jewelry.


58 GEOLOGY
Minerals: Earth’s Treasures.
Minerals
The most abundant elements in Earth’s crust are oxygen
and silicon (about 74 percent of Earth’s crust). Because these
elements combine to form minerals, geologists know that
the most common minerals are those composed of the most
common elements. It should be no surprise that the most
abundant minerals are silicates—compounds of oxygen and
silicon. Common silicate minerals include quartz, feldspar,
mica, and clay.
These common minerals may be unfamiliar to you because
many people are fascinated with the less common minerals,
such as metallic, silvery gray, and cubic galena. But identifying
minerals is an important step in recognizing the potential
economic value of a substance, or even in identifying rocks
you find on vacation or in your own back yard. Geologists did
not have sophisticated electronic equipment when the first
mineralogists were identifying minerals, so they developed a
series of comparative scales to determine a mineral’s physical
properties and then to identify the minerals.
A geologist
who studies
minerals is called
a mineralogist.
Relative abundance of elements in Earth’s crust
SILICON
27.7 PERCENT
ALUMINUM
8.1 PERCENT
IRON 5.0 PERCENT
CALCIUM 3.6 PERCENT
SODIUM 2.8 PERCENT
POTASSIUM 2.6 PERCENT
MAGNESIUM 2.1 PERCENT
ALL OTHERS 1.5 PERCENT
OXYGEN
46.6 PERCENT


GEOLOGY 59
.Minerals: Earth’s Treasures
A comparative scale compares a single property among
specimens. For example, one kind of mineral may be darker
red than other red minerals in the same rock. So you suspect
it is a different mineral from the others. When you compare it
to a rock color scale, you can see its color tone is between two
values on the scale. Geologists record this scale value in their
notes, because later it might be important information. Most
minerals can be identified using a combination of two or three
of the following eight physical properties: hardness, specific
gravity, color, cleavage, fracture, luster, crystal form, and streak.
Hardness
You wouldn’t rub your sunglasses across concrete because you
know the concrete is harder and will scratch them. In the same
way, a mineral is said to be harder than another material if it
can scratch, or cut into, it.
The hardness test is a scratching test. Scratch one mineral
against another to determine if it will scratch the other. Harder
minerals will scratch softer ones. Mineralogists have deter-
mined a numerical scale, based on the relative hardness of
common minerals. This is called the Mohs’ scale.


60 GEOLOGY
Minerals: Earth’s Treasures.
If you want to know what quartz can scratch, read the
Mohs’ scale. Quartz has a hardness of 7. This means quartz
can scratch anything with a hardness of less than 7. Quartz
will scratch a knife blade with a hardness of 5.5 and certainly
your fingernail with a hardness of 2.5, but will not scratch a
diamond with a hardness of 10. In fact, no other mineral
scratches a diamond—it is the hardest naturally occurring
material on Earth. (Some minerals found in a meteorite are
harder than diamonds.)
This hardness scale would be useful if you found a mineral
and wondered if it was fluorite or calcite, which sometimes
look alike. Trying the hardness test on a copper penny with
a hardness of 3.5 will tell you. Fluorite can scratch a penny,
calcite cannot. Why?
It is sometimes confusing which material is scratching which, like writing
on a driveway with chalk. The chalk is worn down, leaving dust without
scratching the concrete, so the concrete would be considered the harder
of the two materials.
Mohs’ Comparative Scale of Relative Mineral Hardness
Mineral
Scale of
Hardness Common Use of Mineral
Common Materials
With Similar Hardness
Talc 1 Talcum powder
Gypsum 2 Plaster of paris Fingernail 2.5
Calcite 3 Cement Copper penny
(pre-1973) 3.5
Fluorite 4 Fluoride in toothpaste
Apatite 5 Fertilizer Steel nail 5
Orthoclase 6 Artificial teeth Knife blade 5.5
Quartz 7 Quartz watch
Quartz sand in porcelain
Glass 6 to 7
Streak plate 6.5 to 7
Hardened steel file 7+
Topaz 8 Jewelry
Corundum
(ruby, sapphire)
9 Ruby or sapphire for
jewelry or lasers
Diamond 10 Jewelry and cutting tools


GEOLOGY 61
.Minerals: Earth’s Treasures
Specific Gravity
Specific gravity is the weight of a substance compared with
the weight of an equal amount of water. A heavy material like
lead will have a high specific gravity. A lighter material like
aluminum has a lower specific gravity. A geologist uses this
relative weight to quickly sort through a collection of minerals,
placing heavier ones in one category and lighter ones in another.
Color
Minerals all have a color, and color is possibly the most
common—yet least reliable—mineral test. Minerals can have
impurities, or elements not normally in its crystal structure,
that change its color appearance. The purple amethyst is
actually a milky or clear quartz crystal with traces of iron or
lithium. Because the color can be misleading, geologists use
color as a first-pass comparison before performing other tests.
The lead sinker is the same size as the aluminum foil ball but weighs more because
it has a higher specific gravity.


62 GEOLOGY
Minerals: Earth’s Treasures.
Fracture and Cleavage
A mineral is said to fracture if, when struck against a hard
object, the mineral breaks with uneven, or irregular, surfaces.
Some different types of fractures are hackly, uneven,
and conchoidal.
A mineral is said to cleave if it breaks along smooth
surfaces and in regular directions. Minerals that chemically
bond to form layers will cleave when broken apart, leaving
smoother surfaces. Cleavage can be a definite indicator for
mineral identification. Fracture is the apparent lack of
cleavage, and that information also is a definite indicator.
Luster
Luster refers to the appearance of the mineral in normal light.
Minerals that look like glass are said to have a glassy luster.
Minerals with a dull, dirty appearance are said to have an earthy
luster. Minerals also can appear waxy, oily, silky, or metallic.
Calcite forms rhombic forms; salt forms cubes; mica forms sheets; and quartz does
not have cleavage, but forms a conchoidal fracture when broken.
Calcite
Mica Quartz
Salt


GEOLOGY 63
.Minerals: Earth’s Treasures
Crystal Form
When a mineral solution is allowed to cool slowly, crystals can
grow. A mineral takes a crystal form if it is allowed to grow
without constraint, but the lack of a crystal shape does not
rule out any particular mineral. Geologists can identify certain
minerals by their characteristic crystal shape.
For example, quartz may form in a volcanic steam vent,
where the quartz is deposited one molecule at a time on the
sides of the vent opening, allowing time for the quartz to form
into crystals. Granite forming underground contains quartz,
but this quartz is crowded by other minerals and does not
form larger crystals.
Galena HalitePyrite
Galena Quartz Pyrite
QuartzQuartz Orthoclase
Some common crystal shapes


64 GEOLOGY
Minerals: Earth’s Treasures.
Streak
Streak is the powdery residue left when a mineral is dragged
across a piece of rough porcelain. Such a piece of porcelain,
which has a hardness of about 7, is called a streak plate and is
carried in the field or used in the lab. Sometimes a mineral’s
streak is surprising because its color is different from the rock
color. For example, the iron mineral limonite is yellow, but its
streak is dark brown, typical of any iron mineral.
Rocks
A rock is a naturally occurring, solid substance composed of a
mineral or a mixture of minerals that form an essential part of
Earth’s crust. The rocks described below are found worldwide,
on every continent and in every ocean basin. There are three
basic classes of rocks, classified by the process that forms
them: igneous, sedimentary, and metamorphic.
Sedimentary rocks cover 75 percent of the continental
landmass, but this is a thin covering, like the skin of an
apple, and is only 5 percent of Earth’s materials. Igneous
and metamorphic rocks comprise the remaining 95 percent.
Igneous rocks covered by a thin layer of sediments form the
ocean floors.
Magma is molten rock.
Descending into Earth’s
interior, the temperature
rises to where rock melts.
Magma may be completely
liquid or a mixture of liquid
rock, gases, and crystals.
When molten rock flows
out onto Earth’s surface,
as with a volcano, it is
called lava.


GEOLOGY 65
.Minerals: Earth’s Treasures
Igneous Rocks
When magma cools and solidifies, it forms igneous rock. There
are two basic types of igneous rocks—extrusive and intrusive.
Sometimes magma reaches Earth’s surface as a lava flow,
where it quickly cools to form extrusive igneous rock. Many of
the minerals that make up extrusive rocks cool very quickly and
produce crystals smaller than sugar grains. Extrusive igneous
rocks with very small crystal grains are said to be fine-grained—
basalt is one example. Basalt flows are found in many parts
of the western United States, for example, the Columbia River
area in Washington and the area around Philmont Scout Ranch
in New Mexico. The new rocks formed when Mount St. Helens
volcano erupted in 1980 are mostly basalt.
Extrusive igneous
rocks form on
Earth’s surface;
intrusive igneous
rocks form
underground.
UPPER MANTLE
LOWER MANTLE
D-DOUBLE-
PRIME LAYER
OUTER CORE
(MOLTEN)
INNER CORE
(SOLID)
CRUST
0
250 MILES
406 MILES
1,688 MILES
1,806 MILES
3,219 MILES
3,981 MILES
Earth’s layers


66 GEOLOGY
Minerals: Earth’s Treasures.


GEOLOGY 67
.Minerals: Earth’s Treasures
Igneous rocks that cool deeper inside Earth are called
intrusive rocks. They have a coarse-grained texture and mineral
crystals, or grains, around the size of fingernails. Examples of
coarse-grained intrusive igneous rock include diorite and granite.
Occasionally, igneous rocks called porphyry form.
Porphyries exhibit two stages of cooling with large crystals
(called phenocrysts) embedded in a fine-grained groundmass,
which makes them look something like a chocolate chip cookie.
Three characteristics of igneous rocks—texture, color, and
mineral content—are useful in understanding their nature
and origin.
• Texture indicates the cooling time and possible location
(depth) of the igneous rock when it formed.
• Color is useful in understanding the composition of the
magma from which the igneous rock formed.
• The mineral content or chemical composition of the rock
is used to classify the kind of igneous rock that is found
in the field.
When igneous
rocks cool so
quickly that
mineral grains or
crystals do not
have time to form,
the rocks form
a volcanic glass
called obsidian.
Obsidian was
highly prized by
Indians for making
arrowheads.
Devils Tower in Wyoming is a volcanic neck composed of basalt.
The basalt solidified in the vent of an ancient volcano, most of
which has eroded away.


68 GEOLOGY
Minerals: Earth’s Treasures.
Rock texture, or grain size, provides information about
the depth at which the minerals in the magma began to cool,
forming igneous rocks. As an example, if you find a fine-grained
igneous rock, you interpret the rock to be an extrusive rock
that cooled at or near the surface, as in a volcanic eruption or
lava flow. Coarse-grained igneous rocks are intrusive rocks that
cooled over very long periods of time. These deep rocks get to
the surface when tectonic (mountain-building) forces uplift the
area and the material covering
the intrusive rock is eroded
away by wind and water.
Another important
characteristic of igneous rocks
is color, which indicates the
kinds of rock minerals. Lighter
colored igneous rocks such as
granite are usually formed from
sialic or silicic magmas, rich
in quartz and feldspar. Darker
colored igneous rocks such as
black- or green-colored gabbros
or basalts are formed from
mafic magmas, rich in iron and
magnesium.
Sedimentary Rocks
Weathering of rocks exposed at Earth’s surface yields two
types of materials: solid grains (called detritus) and chemicals
dissolved in water. Solid grains may be carried away by
erosion, usually from running water, eventually to be deposited
and buried. Buried sediment may then be compacted and
cemented into one of several types of detrital sedimentary
rocks depending on the texture (size) and composition of
the grains.
The second category of sedimentary rocks are the
chemical sedimentary rocks. This category includes limestones
(calcite), chert (silica), and evaporates (salt). Most of these
rocks originate from chemicals carried by fresh water to the
oceans. Under extreme conditions, some of these chemicals
may precipitate directly out of evaporating sea water as
halite (salt) or gypsum. However, the majority of chemical
sedimentary rocks are limestones or biochemical rocks, formed
as various animals (clams, snails, oysters) and algae extract


GEOLOGY 69
.Minerals: Earth’s Treasures
dissolved minerals, especially calcite, from seawater to form
shells and other hard parts. After burial, loose shells may be
cemented into one of several types of limestones, such as
fossiliferous limestones (larger shells), fossil reefs (corals and
other animals), or chalk (microscopic shells).
Coal is also classified as a chemical sedimentary rock.
Coal forms from the burial and lithification of plant material
deposited in ancient swamps. Initially accumulating as peat,
the organic material is compressed during burial into lignite
(brown coal) and then into bituminous coal (soft black coal).
Metamorphic Rocks
Metamorphic rocks are the third category of rocks. It seems
logical to explain them last because they develop from
other sedimentary, igneous, and even metamorphic rocks.
Metamorphic rocks result when minerals in rocks are exposed
to heat and pressure, or hydrothermal solutions of mineral-
rich steam. In most cases, heat and pressure cause the mineral
atoms of existing rocks to rearrange, sometimes even producing
different minerals. In other cases, new chemical elements
Grain/Size Properties Rock Names
Gravel (more
than 2
millimeters)
Rounded
grains
Conglomerate
Angular
grains
Breccia
Sand
(1 ⁄16 to 2
millimeters)
Quartz grains Sandstones Quartz
sandstone
More than
25 percent
feldspar
Arkose
More than 15
percent clay
minerals
Graywacke
Silt ( 1⁄16 to 1⁄256
millimeters)
Very fine
quartz
Mudstones Siltstone
Clay/Mud
(less than 1
⁄256
millimeters)
Clay minerals Shale


70 GEOLOGY
Minerals: Earth’s Treasures.
are brought by very hot steam moving through existing rock,
which can alter the minerals in the rock to form new minerals.
Hydrothermal solutions often associated with metamorphic
processes penetrate surrounding rocks forming many of the
ore deposits found in the world.
Metamorphic rocks can be formed by contact with magma,
by heat and pressure associated with burial of sediments, or
by squeezing forces. Foliated, or layered, metamorphic rocks
generally form from existing rocks that have many different
mineral grains. For example, during metamorphism, shale
(a sedimentary rock consisting of very tiny grains, including
both the primary sediment as well as grains of other minerals)
can reform into larger grains of the former minerals, giving
the rock a layered appearance. Depending on the degree of
metamorphism, shale may be altered to form slate, schist, or
gneiss, all of which exhibit foliation but varying grain sizes.
Even igneous rocks can be altered by metamorphic conditions.
Granite is believed to form gneiss when exposed
to metamorphic conditions.
Nonfoliated metamorphic rocks commonly form from
monominerals—rocks largely composed of one mineral—that
are exposed to metamorphism. Limestone, which is largely
composed of calcite, becomes marble when exposed to
metamorphic conditions of heat and pressure. Sandstone,
composed of quartz with some feldspar, will be
metamorphosed to form quartzite.
Collecting Minerals and Rocks
Minerals include a variety of metallic ores, which are sources
of important metals, and nonmetallic ores, which are sources
of a variety of products, including building materials and
agricultural supplements (like fertilizer). Other minerals and
rocks have great appeal as gemstones and for ornamental
purposes. Agates and turquoise are of interest to jewelers or
rock hounds just as large deposits of magnetite are of interest
The word metamorphic means to change form. Think
of metamorphic rocks as rocks that have changed or
formed with heat and pressure from another rock.


GEOLOGY 71
.Minerals: Earth’s Treasures
to geologists searching for iron ore to make steel or good
limestone deposits to make crushed rock for highways are of
interest to aggregate producers.
Our ancestors searched for good deposits of obsidian, chert,
and flint for arrowheads. Explorers coming to the New World
were motivated by the desire to find gold. Today geologists look
for rocks and minerals to understand how Earth continually
changes and are searching other planetary surfaces to
understand their geologic processes.
When you collect rock specimens or study rocks and
minerals, you have the opportunity to hold earth history in
your hands and to recognize earth processes at work.
Shale (sedimentary) Slate (metamorphic)


72 GEOLOGY
Minerals: Earth’s Treasures.
Everyday Uses of Rocks
Some geologists use rocks and minerals to give them clues
about earth processes and about the history of Earth. Other
geologists study rocks and minerals to find new ways to
use them.
Almost every city has a nearby source of earth materials
used in manufacturing, construction, energy production,
agriculture, and even recreation. A rock quarry or sand-and-
gravel operation produces materials for construction of roads
or buildings. Can you think of one you have seen? Crushed
limestone is the most commonly mined or quarried material in
the United States. Millions of tons of limestone are used each
year in the manufacturing of cement or crushed rock called
aggregate. This aggregate is used in road concrete, highway
asphalt, and even loose gravel for driveways and roads. Other
mining operations range from coal, gypsum, ore, and salt, to
oil production and fertilizer manufacturing. Mining or mineral
extraction is found throughout the United States.
If you examine where you live, your home, the sidewalks
and roads, your school, your place of worship, Scout camp,
sports fields, even silverware, nearly everything around you is
a product of mining or contains products derived from mining.
Listing of common rocks and minerals, and where to find them
Rock or Mineral Common Name Where to Obtain Them
Limestone Road aggregate or chat Building supply store
Volcanic scoria or pumice Lava rock Landscaping supplies
Marble Marble chips Landscaping supplies
Use this chart to get started on requirement 3a of the mineral resources option.


GEOLOGY 73
.Minerals: Earth’s Treasures
Road Building
Road building is one way geology affects you every day. First
of all, government planners and construction companies employ
geologists and civil engineers. These professionals can tell
them the best places to build highways, bypasses, highway
exits, and streets. The geologist or engineer checks the location
to be sure it offers a sound foundation for a road bed.
The selection of materials is also important because there
must be a balance between selecting the best materials for
the job against the cost of purchasing and transporting the
materials. For example, we may have a ready supply of river
gravel in the community but no limestone to make cement for
concrete. It is not acceptable to build a high-speed interstate
highway out of loose gravel, so we pay a higher cost to bring
cement to the site from hundreds of miles away. Often it is
more cost-efficient to repair and resurface a highway rather
than to build a new one. If a geologist has access to limestone
supplies and oil refinery petroleum, the geologist might
recommend resurfacing a concrete roadway with asphalt.
What kinds of road materials are used in your area? Look
at the highway closest to your home, look at the street that
you take to school, and look at your own driveway or the
parking lot of a nearby business. What are they made of, and
where did the materials originate?
Activity 8: Road Construction Materials in
Your Community
Now that you understand the types of rocks that make up
Earth, explore how roads are built in your community. In this
activity you will identify the three most common road-building
materials in your community, how they are produced, and how
they are used in road construction.
PROCEDURES
Step 1—With the help of your counselor or parent, call or visit
a construction engineer or a concrete or construction business
listed in the yellow pages.
Step 2—Take notes as you ask what the business uses as its
three most common road construction materials.
Step 3—Ask how these three materials are produced and how
these three materials are used in road construction.





GEOLOGY 75
.Earth History: The Story Rocks Tell
Earth History:
The Story Rocks Tell
The story of geology, the history of Earth, is divided into
chapters much like a book. The story is filled with the mystery
and adventure of what happened to former lands and seas,
plants and animals. This merit badge pamphlet attempts to look
at the different chapters that tell the story of Earth. After earning
this merit badge, you will have a better understanding of the
history of Earth’s crust and the evolution of life on Earth.
Events Revealed by the Geological Record
Climate Change
Earth’s climate has fluctuated throughout history. This includes
several ice ages, the harshest of which began about 715 million
years ago and lasted at least 100 million years. This event
is referred to as the Snowball Earth period (or Cryogenian
Glaciation). Most of Earth was covered in snow and ice.


76 GEOLOGY
Earth History: The Story Rocks Tell.
The most recent glaciation (the Pleistocene Glaciation)
began about 2.5 million years ago and is ongoing. It consists
of several alternating glacial and interglacial intervals. We are
currently in an interglacial interval that began about 12,000
years ago. During the last glacial interval, sea level fell almost
400 feet below its present level.
Alternatively, during much of Earth history global climates
were warmer than today, such as during the Cambrian Period
and most of the Mesozoic Era. One brief and exceptionally
hot event occurred 56 million years ago. Referred to as the
Paleocene-Eocene Thermal Maximum (PETM), global mean
temperatures rose to 73°F (today the global mean temperature
is 60°F). Data indicate the increase in temperature was due to
a massive release of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere, but
the source of the carbon dioxide is still being investigated.
In the 1980s and 1990s, scientists became concerned about
the accumulation of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. Carbon
dioxide is a byproduct of the combustion of petroleum and coal,
which are fuels for cars, airplanes, and power plants. While
the average temperature of Earth’s atmosphere has fluctuated
for hundreds of years, including a “Little Ice Age” (ending
about 1850), the input of carbon dioxide due to human activity
began increasing at the beginning of the European Industrial
Revolution (about 1760). This input began to manifest itself as
increasing atmospheric temperatures by about 1910.
Carbon dioxide in the atmosphere traps infrared radiation
reflected from Earth’s surface and converts it into heat, causing
atmospheric temperatures to rise. The Intergovernmental


GEOLOGY 77
.Earth History: The Story Rocks Tell
Panel on Climate Change has speculated that the average
temperature could rise 1.5°C by 2100. Potential impacts include
the melting of glaciers, rising sea levels, reduction of polar sea
ice, and changing weather patterns.
Extinction of Dinosaurs
In the 1970s, Walter Alvarez, along with his father, Nobel
Prize winner Luis Alvarez, and chemists Frank Asaro and
Helen Michel began investigating sediments in Italy. Samples
collected from outcrops spanning the Cretaceous-Paleocene
boundary were found to have elevated levels of the element
iridium. Iridium is extremely rare on Earth’s surface, so the
scientists began to ask what why the iridium was present.
Speculation focused on objects from outer space—
meteors—that would bring the iridium to earth. In time,
geologists were able to identify the impact site, a 93-mile-wide
crater located near Chicxulub, Mexico. The crater had been
covered by sediments but the basic structure was identified. In
addition to the iridium, shocked quartz, a form of quartz that
has a microscopic structure different from normal quartz, was
found in the area of the crater.
Calculations indicate the meteor might have been 6 to 7
miles (10 kilometers) in diameter. Such a meteor impact would
have a tremendous impact on the earth’s climate and biologic
processes. Scientists believe the dust generated by the impact


78 GEOLOGY
Earth History: The Story Rocks Tell.
substantially reduced the sunlight, cooled the planet, and halted
photosynthesis. The disruption and reduced food supplies led
to the mass extinction of approximately 75% of life on Earth,
including the dinosaurs. A contributing factor to this extinction
appears to have been a concurrent outpouring of massive lavas
(flood basalts) in India. This volcanism, which lasted several
thousand years, released enormous amounts of carbon dioxide
and sulfurous gases into the atmosphere.
Reviewing the geologic record, scientists have identified
four additional mass extinctions in the past 540 million years.
These extinctions were generally caused by massive volcanic
eruptions, although major ice ages and sea level changes may
have contributed. All these causes are related to changes in
global climates.
Determining the Earth’s Age
Scientists use two basic techniques—relative dating and
absolute dating—to estimate the age of a rock layer or a fossil.
Relative dating is the most basic technique, based on the
observation that most rocks are laid down in roughly horizontal
layers, with the oldest layer at the bottom and the youngest
layer at the top. This allows geologists to say that one rock
layer is older or younger than another layer, but it does not
identify the actual age of the rock. Because this technique tells


GEOLOGY 79
.Earth History: The Story Rocks Tell
only the relative age of a rock layer in comparison to the layers
above and below it, it is called relative dating.
Scientists also use absolute dating to determine the age in
years of certain rock types. Absolute dating is measured by
calculating the radioactive decay, or degeneration of an element’s
atomic structure through time, as they phase from one element
form (isotope) to another (like potassium to argon, uranium to
lead, or the different isotopes of carbon). Using sophisticated
laboratory equipment, scientists can estimate an element’s
half-life—the time needed for half of a sample to decay by
losing atomic particles.
Using relative dating, geologists know that rock in layer C is older than
rock in layer B but younger than rock in layer D.


80 GEOLOGY
Earth History: The Story Rocks Tell.
HALF-LIFE
Radioactive decay is a process in which the nucleus of an atom
loses some atomic particles over a period of time. As those
particles leave the nucleus, the atomic number changes, and
the element degrades into a daughter product, sometimes
creating a totally different element. For example, some isotopes
of uranium can decay into lead over a period of time. Some
scientists are convinced that measuring the amount of decay
that has occurred in a rock sample can give us a way to
measure time.
There are four relatively abundant radioactive isotopes
that occur in rocks: two isotopes of uranium (U238 and U235),
rubidium (Rb87), and potassium (K40). We can measure
the ratio (the relative amount) of different isotopes to others:
uranium isotopes to other uranium isotopes, rubidium to
strontium, uranium to lead, and potassium to argon. This
ratio allows a rock to be dated based on the isotope’s half-life.
Imagine a 1-gram sample of uranium 238. In theory, it would
take 4.5 billion years for half, or 0.5 grams, of it to decay to
lead 206.
Common Radioactive Atomic Half-Lives Theory
Atom Billion Years
Uranium 238 4.5
Uranium 235 0.7
Rubidium 87 47.0
Potassium 40 1.3
Carbon 14 5,730 years
When uranium 238
loses atomic particles
and becomes lead 206,
it is called radioactive
decay. The number 238
is the total protons plus
neutrons in the nucleus
of this uranium isotope.
ATOMIC
PARTICLES
URANIUM 238 LEAD 206


GEOLOGY 81
.Earth History: The Story Rocks Tell
Geologic time is
organized into
eras. Each era
represents a time
during which
certain lifestyles
dominated Earth.
Eras cover long
intervals of time,
so geologists find
it useful to further
divide the eras
into shorter
time intervals
called periods.
A geologic map shows the common ages and types of
rocks on Earth’s surface. Ask your counselor to show you a
geologic map of the area in which you live and, using the map
legend and descriptions, discuss how to estimate the age of the
surface rocks in your area.
Fossils Give Clues to the Past
Have you ever wondered why we are all so interested in fossils?
Is it because big, scary creatures like Tyrannosaurus rex or
saber-toothed tigers fascinate us? That’s certainly part of it, but
most fossils are not the remains of big, scary creatures. Much
of our fascination with fossils is because they are the closest
things people have to a time machine, a way to go back into
prehistoric times and to see Earth’s plants and animals of long
ago. The study of fossils is called paleontology, and the geolo-
gist who studies fossils is a paleontologist. The paleontologist
reconstructs the past by combining the knowledge of modern
animals and plants with what is known about the remains of
ancient animals and plants from fossils.
A fossil is the remains or impression (imprint) of a
plant, animal, or shape, such as a shell, bones, leaf, or
even a footprint, that was created or formed during a
past geologic age.


82 GEOLOGY
Earth History: The Story Rocks Tell.
Geologic Time Scale Theory
CenozoicMesozoicPaleozoic
Precambrian Time
Approximate age of Earth: more than 4 billion 600 million years
Era Period
and Approximate Duration Characteristic Life
QUATERNARY
(2.6 MILLION YRS.)
TERTIARY
(63 MILLION YRS.)
CRETACEOUS
(79 MILLION YRS.)
JURASSIC
(56 MILLION YRS.)
TRIASSIC
(51 MILLION YRS.)
PERMIAN
(47 MILLION YRS.)
PENNSYLVANIAN
(24 MILLION YRS.)
MISSISSIPPIAN
(36 MILLION YRS.)
DEVONIAN
(60 MILLION YRS.)
SILURIAN
(25 MILLION YRS.)
ORDOVICIAN
(41 MILLION YRS.)
CAMBRIAN
(56 MILLION YRS.)
PROTEROZOIC EON
(2 BILLION YRS.)
ARCHEAN EON
(1.5 BILLION YRS.)
HADEAN EON
(500 MILLION YRS.)


GEOLOGY 83
.Earth History: The Story Rocks Tell
For example, today sharks live in the ocean. Shark
teeth are distinctive, not like your teeth or the teeth of other
mammals. When paleontologists find a shark tooth in a
rock layer, they know that the rock layer was deposited on
an ocean floor. As paleontologists study the rock layer that
held the shark tooth, they may find more fossils and gather
other geologic information. Together the fossils and other
information allow the paleontologists to piece together an idea
of the ocean the shark lived in. Also based on the size of the
fossil tooth compared to today’s shark teeth, the paleontologist
can closely estimate the shark’s size.
What other animals lived there? Was the water deep or
shallow? Was the bottom sandy or was it a hard reef made of
coral? If this was the ocean, where was the land? You can’t
go back in time, but you can use your knowledge of modern
oceans and modern life, with your knowledge of fossils, to
compare ancient times with the present.
What makes an animal or plant turn into a fossil? If you
are at summer camp and a raccoon dies near your tent, it
probably won’t turn into a fossil. As it lies on the ground,
vultures, beetles, flies, and other scavengers eat it. Even the
bones are destroyed. By the time you return to camp the next
summer, no trace of that raccoon will remain. It will never
become a fossil.
The key for any animal or plant to become a fossil is that it
must be buried soon after death. If a raccoon falls into a stream
or river, the river sands or mud will bury it quickly. Even if
the soft tissues of the animal are decayed, its bones may be
preserved and the layers of sand and mud covering the bones
protect it from being destroyed. Unfortunately, animals that
live on land have a poor chance of becoming fossils. There
are very few situations where they are quickly buried. There
are places where animals have been buried in a river, as at
Dinosaur National Monument in Utah, or in a tar pit, as at
La Brea Tar Pits in Los Angeles. However, these places are
not common.
Fossils act like
time machines
for geologists,
allowing them a
peek into the past.
Only a fraction of plants and animals die and fall in a
place with the right conditions for fossils to form. Yet
even with the low chance of becoming a fossil there
are billions of fossils in the world, from big dinosaur
bones to tiny microfossils.


84 GEOLOGY
Earth History: The Story Rocks Tell.
The shells of clams, snails, and other shell-bearing animals
can be preserved as fossils. Plants and even soft-bodied worms
can form impressions in soft mud that preserve the shape of
these organisms after the mud turns to rock. Sometimes, after
the shell has been buried in soft mud, it will dissolve, leaving
the shape of the shell preserved as a mold in the rock.
Measuring Time Using Fossils
Many geologists commonly speak of the age of a rock or fossil
in millions or even billions of years. People have a life span of
only about 60 to 100 years, so a million or a billion years is
almost impossible to imagine. How can you determine the age
of something that old?
Geologists refer to the abundant fossil record as that time
when numerous and different life forms appeared on Earth
at the same time. Before the Cambrian Period, most life forms
were single-celled organisms like amoeba, bacteria, or plankton.
At the beginning of the Cambrian (beginning of the Paleozoic
Era), many life forms appeared in the world ocean and most
of them were complex, multicelled organisms (animals and
plants that developed several types of specialized cells within
their bodies, each performing a specialized function). These
organisms were no longer living on photosynthesis (like a
plant) or by absorbing nutrients from surrounding water
(like an amoeba or bacteria). These animals and plants were
evolving and becoming larger and more complex.
Once buried, the grains of sediment cover the plant or
animal and accumulate. If the plant or animal has “hard parts”
like a shell or woody trunk, they can support the weight of
overlying sediments. Then the mud will create a mold around
the fossil. As the sediments harden into rock, the molded
impression also hardens and its outline may still be seen, even
if the fossil is dissolved away.
Sometimes you can find an animal fossil that has
undergone replacement of its original shell material with a
new, secondary mineral. This occurs long after burial when the
original shell material is slowly dissolved away by groundwater.
Then one molecule at a time seeps in to fill the void.
Relative dating is most common for fossils. After
examining thousands of different fossils and comparing the
rocks in which they are formed with rocks dated by radioactive
means, paleontologists have determined an age range for most
fossils and the rocks that contain them.
Ocean animals
like clams, snails,
and corals have
a greater chance
of becoming
fossils than
land animals,
partly because
sediments quickly
bury them on
the ocean floor,
but also because
they have
hard shells.


GEOLOGY 85
.Earth History: The Story Rocks Tell
Life Through Time in the Fossil Record
The fossil record suggests that life has changed through time.
You may find that none of the species in the fossils you collect
are alive today. Many plants and animals may have evolved
and thrived under a specific set of environmental conditions.
This set of conditions is a paleoenvironment. When conditions
change the plant or animal is no longer able to compete for
food and dies off. If the conditions change across a wide enough
area the plant or animal may become extinct. One circumstance
that could have caused extinctions occurred during a time
when widespread glaciation killed plants. When plants die,
plant-eating animals starve and also die. The plant and animal
species alive today are only a fraction of all the species that
have been alive during Earth’s history.
Make a fossil with plaster of paris. Find an animal footprint in soft mud.
Pour plaster of paris over the footprint. When it hardens lift your “fossil”
out of the mud. This may be a part of a Scout nature study. Make a plant
fossil by pouring plaster of paris in a disposable tray, like an aluminum
baking tin, and then press a fern or other leaf into it.


86 GEOLOGY
Earth History: The Story Rocks Tell.
Fossil records suggest that during certain relatively short
time periods massive extinctions occurred. During these
events, not only could individual species become extinct, but
even entire ecosystems. Five major mass extinctions have
occurred since the beginning of the Paleozoic Era. The two
largest extinction events occurred at the end of the Paleozoic
and Mesozoic eras, respectively.
Of course, not all species of plants and animals died out at
the end of the Paleozoic. Sharks originally appeared during the
Paleozoic Era and have remained essentially unchanged since
then. The record shows many new species developed during the
next era, the Mesozoic. The Mesozoic Era is most commonly
thought of as the age of dinosaurs, although many other plants
and animals were present during that time.
The final era is the Cenozoic Era, which started at the
end of the Mesozoic and continues through today. The word
Cenozoic means recent life. The last 2.6 million years of the
Cenozoic Era include a distinctive paleoenvironmental feature,
known as the Ice Age. Scientists believe it was a time when
periods of extremely cold climate allowed the widespread
development of glaciers in the Northern Hemisphere (the north
half of the planet Earth). In North America, widespread sheets
of ice, measuring hundreds or thousands of miles across,
spread southward from the North Pole and filled the continent
from the Appalachian Mountains in the east to the Rocky
Mountains in the west. These sheets of ice extended as far
south as Kansas and the ice measured more than a mile thick
in some places. See the section in this pamphlet about glaciers.
During this Ice Age, many plants and animals adapted
to the new living conditions. Mammoths and mastodons
were common in North America and may have been hunted
for food. The climate south of the ice sheets was rainy,
and insects thrived. Bats and birds thrived by eating the
abundance of insects.
Interpreting the Past With Fossils
Every animal and plant species tends to be found within the
habitat in which they are best adapted to survive. Environmental
conditions vary from one habitat to the next. For example, the
forest floor of a tropical rainforest is usually humid from frequent
rain and has little sunlight. Many smaller plants grow thickly and
cover the forest floor. A plant adapted to survive on a rainforest
Suppose you
discover fossils
of marine animals
that lived in the
tropical ocean
waters near your
home. The ocean
may have extended
over the land
where you now
live. This suggests
that when the
fossilized animals
were alive, your
home’s climate
was warmer.


GEOLOGY 87
.Earth History: The Story Rocks Tell
floor might not be able to survive in an open field where it is hot
and dry, or in a desert. Likewise, a plant from a sunny field prob-
ably could not survive long in the moist shady floor of the rain-
forest. The amount of sunlight and the amount of moisture limit
where particular plants can survive.
An animal living in the ocean also must be adapted to its
environmental conditions. One major environmental factor is
ocean salinity, the amount of salt dissolved in the water. Far
from land, salinity remains constant and fish and other animals
have adapted to this open marine environment. Near shore,
rivers pour into the ocean, bringing freshwater. This freshwater
reduces the ocean salinity at the mouth of the river. At this
point salinity is less than normal ocean salinity. This water is
called brackish. Animals living in brackish water are able to
adapt to changes in salinity. Many fish that survive in brackish
water cannot survive in the higher salinity of the open ocean
or in a freshwater river or lake.
In the ocean, scientists have observed that different
marine animals live in particular environments. Geologists
study fossils of these animals and their paleoenvironment.
Knowing this information about paleoenvironments helps
geologists to pinpoint areas where valuable minerals or
hydrocarbons may exist.
Marine Animal Environments
Where an animal lives tells us how it eats and survives. Pelagic
animals are those that either swim or drift in the water near
the surface. Since pelagic animals swim or float, they must eat
things that swim or float. Some plants are pelagic and live near
the surface where they can catch the sunlight.
Benthic animals are those that live on the bottom of the
ocean. A benthic plant, like all plants, requires sunlight for
The fossil record suggests, despite what many people think, that all
dinosaurs did not live at the same time. The familiar Apatosaurus
(formerly called Brontosaurus) lived in the late Jurassic period,
which many scientists believe ended about 140 million years ago.
Tyrannosaurus rex lived during the late Cretaceous period, which these
scientists theorize ended about 66 million years ago. Accordingly, they
believe the last of the tyrannosaurs lived about 74 million years after
the extinction of Apatosaurus.


88 GEOLOGY
Earth History: The Story Rocks Tell.
photosynthesis. Since sunlight filters through water only to a
limited depth, benthic plants live in shallow water. A benthic
animal can stay in one place and wait for food to float past,
which a clam would do. Or it can live like a starfish crawling
along slowly eating other benthic animals. Because these animals
will die if washed out to sea in a storm current, most have
adapted some sort of anchor to help them stay in place.
Littoral animals live along the shore line bounded by the
levels of high and low tide. This is called the intertidal zone. Tide
pools are littoral environments where they are under water and
out of water part of the time.
Not all animals that live in water live in the ocean. Those
living in rivers live in a fluvial environment, and animals living
in lakes live in a lacustrine environment.
Because animals tend to live in very specific environments,
their fossil remains give us a lot of information about the history
of the area. A coral reef tends to create a barrier between the
shore and the open sea, so frequently a quiet water lagoon is
located between the reef and the shore. Knowing this geologists
can predict in which direction rocks will be deposited in the open
ocean, versus rocks onshore. This will enable geologists to draw
a paleogeographic map, or a map showing the ancient geography
at the time of sediment deposition.
Field Trips Are for Learning About Geology
Geologists love to take field trips to see rock collections. A
museum or university geology department are the best places
to see how geologists organize and categorize their collections,
especially when the collections are used to educate.
To complete the requirements for the earth history option,
each Scout is encouraged to visit a museum or university
geology department. Remember to call ahead and make an
appointment with a curator or professor so that person can
set aside enough time to properly show the fossil and mineral
collections. The people who work in such places enjoy having
the public visit and most will happily take time for you. Be sure
to ask questions and have them show you how they clean and
prepare a freshly discovered fossil for display.
If there is not a museum or university department nearby,
your counselor may be able to provide addresses of local
buildings that used fossiliferous rocks as building stones. Visit
these buildings and treat them like fossil dig sites.
The most common
benthic animal are
the corals, which
build rigid skele-
tons in community
structures called
coral reefs.


GEOLOGY 89
.Earth History: The Story Rocks Tell
1. Sketch the building’s fossils in your notebook or photograph
them and tape photos into your notebook with written
descriptions of the fossil and anything else you observe.
2. Observe the type of rock that contains the fossils (is it
sandstone or limestone), and observe whether the rock
grains are very fine or more coarse. Finer grains help
preserve fossils in greater detail. Can you describe the
paleoenvironment of deposition from looking at these
rocks? Remember that finer grained sediments occur in
calmer water, whereas coarser sediments occur where there
is a current, as in a stream or beach. Also remember that
certain kinds of plants and animals live in certain kinds of
paleoenvironments and their very presence is a clue to the
ancient environment. Write your thoughts in your notebook
and discuss your observations with your counselor.
If you happen to be on vacation or away from home for some reason,
you may discover a rock outcropping worth exploring. Take notes,
photographs, and sketches of what you see there. When you return
home, you and your buddy can meet with your counselor and discuss
what you found at the outcrop.
If a visitation is not practical for you, create a display or
presentation on your state fossil instead. Your research at the library
and online (with your parent’s permission) will pay off with an amazing
presentation. Remember, if your state does not have a state fossil,
you may select a state fossil from a neighboring state.


A geologist collects samples at an active field site.


GEOLOGY 91
.Careers in Geology
Careers in Geology
Even if you are not interested in a career in geology, it is good
to learn more about our Earth. Knowledge of geology makes
Earth even more interesting. A walk or drive is more fun if
you know why and how the hills and valleys formed, how the
waves on a beach sort and distribute sand, how sand someday
will be a solid rock and carry oil, gas, and water, how part
of the land is always on its way to the sea, and where the
minerals come from that are used to make the things you use
every day.
Geology is a wide field with many career choices. Hydro-
geologists help find water underground and can plan how much
to use so you will not run out. Geological engineers advise
where to build a dam, where bridge abutments and piers may
be built safely, where buildings will have solid foundations, or
where tunnels can be built without collapsing.
Many geologists are involved in the exploration of and/or
the production of natural resources, like oil and gas, coal, iron
ore, copper, gold, and countless other minerals.
To learn more
about geology
take an earth
science course
in high school,
or two or more
college courses
in geology.


92 GEOLOGY
Careers in Geology.
A professional geologist must earn at least a four-year
college degree (bachelor’s degree) in geology, geophysics,
environmental geology, or geological engineering. In many
fields a master’s degree (two years beyond a bachelor’s degree)
may be necessary. To teach at a college or university, or to do
research, a doctorate is required (three to seven years beyond
a bachelor’s degree).
Aside from geology courses, all geologists should take
fundamental science courses such as chemistry and physics,
and also mathematics. Some fields will require specialized
courses. Writing skills are always important, as geologists must
write reports about their discoveries and tell others what they
have found. Virtually all geologists use computers extensively
in their work.
Geology is fun. Geologists enjoy their profession and
like the challenge and adventure. Geologists were the first
environmentalists. They enjoy working outdoors and in out-of-
the-way places that are hard to reach and where it is difficult
to live. Geologists like to solve puzzles and like to grapple with
geological problems, using evidence you may—or may not—be
able to see.
For more information on careers in geology, or to
find what schools offer geology or geology related
degrees, contact the American Geological Institute.
Many professional societies also have career
information. See the resources section at the end of
this pamphlet.


GEOLOGY 93
.Careers in Geology


94 GEOLOGY
Geology Resources.
Geology Resources
Scouting Literature
Archaeology, Chemistry, Collections,
Drafting, Energy, Engineering,
Environmental Science, Landscape
Architecture, Mining in Society, Nuclear
Science, Oceanography, Orienteering,
Soil and Water Conservation,
Surveying, Sustainability, and Weather
merit badge pamphlets
With your parent’s permission, visit
the Boy Scouts of America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org,
for a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.
Books
Altman, Linda Jacobs. The California
Gold Rush. Enslow Publishers Inc.,
2012.
Dixon, Dougal. The Practical Geologist.
Simon & Schuster
Inc., 1992.
Gaines, R., H. Skinner, E. Foord,
B. Mason, and A. Rosenzweig.
Dana’s New Mineralogy.
Wiley-Interscience, 1997.
Hyne, Norman J., Ph.D. Nontechnical
Guide to Petroleum Geology,
Exploration, Drilling, and
Production. PennWell Corp., 2012.
Johnson, Carl. Fire on the Mountain.
Chronicle Books, 1994.
Lamb, Simon, and David Sington.
Earth Story: The Forces That Have
Shaped Our Planet. Princeton
University Press, 2003.
Lambert, David, and the Diagram
Group. The Field Guide to Geology.
Checkmark Books, 2006.
Mayor, Adrienne. The First Fossil
Hunters: Paleontology in Greek and
Roman Times. Princeton University
Press, 2000.
Monroe, James S., and Reed Wicander.
The Changing Earth: Exploring
Geology and Evolution, 7th ed.
Cengage Learning, 2015.
Pough, Frederick H. Rocks and
Minerals. Houghton Mifflin
Harcourt, 1998.
Stewart, Iain. Journeys from the Centre
of the Earth: How Geology Shaped
Civilization. Random House, 2005.
VanCleave, Janice. Rocks and Minerals.
John Wiley & Sons Inc., 1996.


GEOLOGY 95
.Geology Resources
Organizations and Websites
American Association of
Petroleum Geologists
1444 S. Boulder Ave.
Tulsa, OK 74119
Toll-free telephone: 800-364-2274
www.aapg.org
American Geosciences Institute
4220 King St.
Alexandria, VA 22302-1502
Telephone: 703-379-2480
www.americangeosciences.org
American Petroleum Institute
1220 L St. NW
Washington, DC 20005-4070
Telephone: 202-682-8000
www.api.org
The Geological Society of America
P.O. Box 9140
Boulder, CO 80301-9140
Telephone: 303-357-1000
www.geosociety.org
Paleontological Research Institute
1259 Trumansburg Road
Ithaca, NY 14850
Telephone: 607-273-6623
www.priweb.org
Society of Exploration
Geophysicists
8801 S. Yale Ave., Suite 500
Tulsa, OK 74137-3575
Telephone: 918-497-5500
www.seg.org
U.S. Geological Survey
www.usgs.gov
Acknowledgments
The Boy Scouts of America thanks
the E.F. Reid Scouting Fund of the
American Association of Petroleum
Geologists Foundation for its work in
promoting the science of geology
in Scouting. In particular, the BSA
thanks Ronald Hart (team leader),
Robert Baxter, Richard Erickson,
Sherman Lundy, John “Jack” Thomas,
and William Underwood for their time
and expertise in writing this edition
of the Geology merit badge pamphlet,
as well as the 2009 revision.
Special thanks to Michael Jackson,
Tony Kolodziej, and Robert Silva for
their assistance in reviewing materials
and to the American Association of
Petroleum Geologists and the Society
of Exploration Geophysicists for
their assistance.
For their involvement with the
2023 edition of the Geology merit
badge pamphlet, we are grateful to
John Macke, St. Louis Mineral and
Gem Society, and Perry Leong, team
leader for their review and comments.
The Boy Scouts of America
is grateful to the men and women
serving on the National Merit Badge
Subcommittee for the updating of the
BSA merit badge library.


96 GEOLOGY
Geology Resources.
Photo and Illustration Credits
HAAP Media Ltd., courtesy—pages 57
and 67
Miguel Hernandez III, courtesy—
page 17
NASA, courtesy—page 37
U.S. Geological Survey, courtesy—
pages 8, 49 (geologists), 90, and 93
(geologists in red jackets, wiping
down pipes)
U.S. Geological Survey/D.P. Hill,
courtesy—page 64
U.S. Geological Survey/R. McGimsey,
courtesy—page 93 (lava flow, over-
looking snow-covered mountains,
photographer)
Wikipedia.org, courtesy—pages 62
(calcite) and 63 (galena, pyrite)
All other photos not mentioned above
are the property of or are protected
by the Boy Scouts of America.
John McDearmon—all illustrations
on pages 12–16, 18, 21, 24–30,
36, 43–45, 47–48, 58, 63, 65, and
79–80
Brian Payne—page 85
Randy Piland—pages 54, 55, 59,
and 81