SCULPTURE


SCULPTURE
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Sculpture or check Scoutbook
for the latest requirements.
35947
ISBN 978-0-8395-3322-1
©2025 Scouting America/Boy Scouts of America
2025 Printing FPO


SCULPTURE 3
Contents
About Sculpting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
Sculpting Basics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
Modeling a Head . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
Making a Mask . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
Plaster Casting. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
Carving in Wood . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
Carving in Soapstone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
Experimenting With Sculpture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
Art Spaces and Places . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
Careers in Sculpture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
Sculpture Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
Robert Indiana’s LOVE sculpture


Evening Sun (left) and Noonday Sun (right), both by Jean Woodham


SCULPTURE 5
.About Sculpting
About Sculpting
Our world and the objects in it, such as humans, trees, and
buildings, have three dimensions: length, width, and depth.
Sculpture is an art form that allows you to express what you
see and feel by using these three dimensions when shaping
materials such as clay and wood.
The art of sculpture is part of the
earliest human history. Using bones and
soft stone, early humans carved the shapes
of animals and people. As civilization
developed, so did ideas about the uses
and forms of sculpture. Some forms might
be realistic representations, while others
might be abstract forms invented by the
artist. These abstractions, with little or
no realistic form, express the artist’s
emotions or attitude.
The material an artist uses often dic-
tates a sculpture’s form. For example, hard
stone might express heavy solid shapes.
Soft stone lends itself to more intricate or
delicate shapes. Metal can be cast at high
temperatures or made into sheets and rods,
which may be used to create solid or airy
forms. Clay, which is soft, can be easily shaped
and detailed. The artist may follow the wood
grain to carve the shape of a sculpture.
Sculpture can be almost anything that is three-dimensional:
a statue, a mobile, a monument, or a portrait.
Argus, by Jean Woodham


About Sculpting.
Sculptors have almost no size limitations on their cre-
ations. They may make sculpture as small as a finger. Some are
as large as a mountain, such as the one carved with drills and
dynamite in Mount Rushmore in South Dakota. Starting in
1927, sculptor Gutzon Borglum, his crew, and his son patiently
worked on Mount Rushmore for more than 14 years to sculpt
the faces of four U.S. presidents—George Washington, Thomas
Jefferson, Abraham Lincoln, and Theodore Roosevelt.
Another mountain carving in South
Dakota, only 17 miles from Mount
Rushmore, is of Oglala Sioux chief Crazy
Horse riding a horse. Sculptor Korczak
Ziolkowski, who had worked briefly on
the Mount Rushmore sculpture in 1939
as Borglum’s assistant, started the Crazy
Horse Memorial in 1948.
Ziolkowski and his helpers used
explosives, jackhammers, and torches to
work on the 563-foot-tall, 641-foot-long
statue in the mountain. Crazy Horse’s
face is as tall as a nine-story building,
and the horse’s face stands 22 stories
high. During the work, Ziolkowski also
carved a 3,000-pound statue of frontiers-
man Wild Bill Hickok and a 7-ton statue
of Teton Sioux chief Sitting Bull from the
granite he had blasted from the mountain.
He also built his own tomb near the
statue of Crazy Horse.
Korczak Ziolkowski
Mount
Rushmore


SCULPTURE 7
.About Sculpting
Ziolkowski worked on the mountain project until his death
at age 74 in 1982. His wife and seven sons and daughters have
continued to carve the Crazy Horse Memorial.
It is interesting to learn about
the ideas or themes sculptors
think about when they create their
art. Often, sculptors gain reputa-
tions for a particular style, mate-
rial, or subject matter. Frederick
Hart, Louise Nevelson, and David
Smith are among those who had
their own unique way of sculpting
and are admired for their creativity
and dedication.
Work on Korczak Ziolkowski’s
mountain carving that depicts
Oglala Sioux chief Crazy Horse
continues today. The statue in the
foreground (above) shows what
the completed carving will look like.
The overhead view (right) shows
the massive scale of the project.


8 SCULPTURE
About Sculpting.
Frederick Hart
American sculptor Frederick Hart (1943–1999) is best known
for his monumental works. The Creation Sculptures on the
west facade of the Washington National Cathedral, Washington,
D.C., were begun in 1972 and dedicated in 1990. Recognized by
many art authorities as the most important religious sculptures
in an architectural setting in the 20th century, they consist of
three life-size statues—Adam, St. Peter, and St. Paul—and three
relief panels—Creation of Night, Creation of Day, and Ex Nihilo
(“Out of Nothing”)—all carved from Indiana limestone.
In 1997, Hart presented The Cross of the Millennium
to Pope John Paul II, who called it “a profound theological
statement for our day.” The masterpiece utilized Hart’s
patented casting technique of embedding one clear acrylic
sculpture within another.
Three Soldiers© 1984, Hart & VVMF
Frederick Hart’s most visited monument is the heroic Three Soldiers, a bronze
statue at the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington, D.C. It was dedicated
by President Ronald Reagan in 1984.


SCULPTURE 9
.About Sculpting
The artistic and historic importance of The Creation
Sculptures, Three Soldiers, and The Cross of the Millennium
are discussed in Masters of American Sculpture, by Dr. Donald
Martin Reynolds, noted authority on public monuments in the
United States.
Frederick Hart believed in creating sculptures that deeply
move people to revere and reflect upon the greatness, the
splendor, and the beauty of nature, of God, and of humankind.
Louise Nevelson*
Louise Nevelson (1899–1988)
emigrated from Ukraine to the
United States with her family
and grew up in Rockland, Maine.
Although she lived in cold climates,
she always disliked the cold. She
remembered her classrooms as
cold. The only room in school
where she felt warm was the art
room. She said, “It had nothing to
do with the temperature. It had
something to do with my generat-
ing heat.” She was referring to the
passion, enjoyment, and enthusi-
asm she had for her work.
Nevelson struggled to make a
living as a sculptor in New York
City. It took her a long time to
achieve a reputation, because she
held fast to her independence.
Nevelson liked to dress with style,
and people assumed that a woman
who did not wear the 1940s artist’s
“uniform” of a beret and old
clothes could not be dedicated,
serious, or talented. Louise Nevelson’s Transparent Horizon (1975),
on the campus of Massachusetts Institute of
Technology in Cambridge, Massachusetts
*Some of the information for the biography of Louise Nevelson was drawn
from the “Oral History Interview With Louise Nevelson,” by Arnald Glimcher,
Smithsonian Archives of American Art, 1972.


10 SCULPTURE
Although Nevelson worked in materials such as Plexiglas,
metal, and plastic, wood was her favorite material. Her best-known
sculptures—“sculptural walls”—began as shallow boxes or
trays filled with wooden objects she found in the streets or in
antiques shops. These pieces of wood—knobs, chair slats,
wheels, broken boards with nails in them—became interesting
abstract forms as she assembled them in her boxes.
She began to stack the boxes vertically so they resembled
walls. They had height and width but fairly shallow depth. She
usually painted these “walls” black, giving the viewer the impres-
sion of a three-dimensional abstract painting.
David Smith
David Smith (1906–1965) was born in Decatur, Indiana. Smith
explored the artistic and sculptural uses of welded metal.
Metalwork may have been in his blood, as one of his ancestors
had been a blacksmith. During his lifetime, many regarded Smith
as one of the most inventive and productive American sculptors.
From early
childhood,
Nevelson knew
that she had to
be an artist.
She decided to
become a sculptor
because, as she
said, “I don’t want
color to help me.”
Rain Garden II (1977), a sculptural wall by Louise Nevelson
About Sculpting.


SCULPTURE 11
.About Sculpting
Smith was a fast
worker. In the last
13 years of his life,
he created more
than 400 pieces.
For most of his career, Smith focused on iron, which, unlike
marble or bronze, was not considered an “artistic” material. Smith’s
sculptures often featured objects and tools that had been thrown
away. For example, using materials he found in five abandoned
factories in Italy, Smith in one month made 27 sculptures.
Smith sometimes painted his abstract sculpture in bright
colors. He also worked in stainless steel, polishing his stainless
steel sculptures so they would take on the colors of the sky.
The blunt lines and sense of enduring strength seen in Smith’s
work has prompted many scholars to view his work as an
expression of industrial power.
David Smith’s The Banquet (1951), at the estate of John D. Rockefeller in Sleepy
Hollow, New York





SCULPTURE 13
.Sculpting Basics
Sculpting Basics
Sculpting is similar to painting or drawing a picture, because
it is a means of expressing what you see or feel. But unlike a
picture, a sculpture is a three-dimensional form based on an
arrangement of surfaces and spaces.
Visualizing Movement
If you want to be a sculptor, you should study the form and
movement of everything around you. Watch animals moving
or people walking, dancing, or running. What in their shapes
conveys the idea of movement or action? Observe the way
balance shifts when a figure stands, then runs. Visualize the
kind of movement you want your sculpture to express before
you begin making the piece.
One way of visualizing action is
to do gesture drawings. These are
quick sketches that are not
meant to show exactly what
the subject looks like but to
show what it is doing. Use a
pen, brush, or felt-tip pen to
make your drawing. Watch a
person or animal in action
and then draw it quickly—in
a few seconds. You cannot
possibly put in all the details,
so look instead for the lines
that show action.


14 SCULPTURE
Sculpting Basics.
Looking at Sculpture
Because it is three-dimensional, sculpture usually is designed
to be observed from all sides, with each side as important as
another. When making a sculpture, you should decide how you
want your work to look from each angle, keeping in mind that
certain factors such as light as well as positive and negative
space change the sculpture’s appearance.
For centuries, artists have used materials such as clay, stone, wood,
and metal to model, carve, or cast sculpture. Modern materials such as
plastics and aerated concrete, and newer techniques such as welding
and brazing, have expanded the possibilities for artistic expression.


SCULPTURE 15
.Sculpting Basics
Light
Simple objects become sculptural if you look at
them in different ways. For example, try placing
an egg on a piece of white paper. It still looks like
an egg. Now use a flashlight or an ordinary lamp
to shine light on the egg from various angles. The
light and shadow play on the shape and volume
of the egg and it now becomes a piece of art.
Light reveals form in sculpture the way shading
with a pencil reveals form in a drawing.
Use more complex objects—including your
face—to see how shining a light on them from
different angles changes their appearance.
Positive and Negative Space
Besides light, there are two other important factors involved
in designing a piece of sculpture: positive space and negative
space. The egg, for example, is called the positive space and
the space around the egg (where the egg isn’t) is called the
negative space.
Look at a chair to see the positive and negative spaces.
While the chair is solid (positive space), you may notice nega-
tive space within the solid form. You will see that the space
between the back of the chair and the seat has a shape and
so does the space between the four legs. The negative space
within the chair’s form gives an impression of lightness. On the
other hand, if you look at a dense sculpture, such as a figure of
a hippopotamus, you will see a compact shape. The negative
space surrounds the hippo, giving an impression of heaviness.


16 SCULPTURE
Negative space may play just as
important a role in the overall impact of
a sculpture as positive space. In David
Smith’s work, for example, negative
space takes on its own form and becomes
a part of the piece. If you visit art muse-
ums, you may have seen works by
Alexander Calder, who is known as the
inventor of the mobile as an art form.
He made negative space an even more
important element of sculpture because
his mobiles constantly create new nega-
tive space as their parts move.
Subtractive and Additive
Techniques
Artists use subtractive techniques or
additive techniques to create sculpture.
In subtractive sculpting, as in wood or
stone carving, material is removed until
the form is revealed. In additive sculp-
ture, as in modeling with clay, material
is added to create the finished form.
American sculptor Jo Davidson
(1883–1952) used the additive technique to create portrait
heads of such notables as Franklin D.
Roosevelt and Albert Einstein. Davidson
once said: “To model, you start with
nothing and add on until you have
something. To carve, you start with too
much and by cutting away with a
knife, chisel, or other implement,
you cut it down to what you
want to express.”
As its negative space shifts, a mobile
becomes a moving sculpture.
This bust of Gen. Omar Bradley
(1893–1981) appears on display at
the national office of Scouting
America in Irving, Texas.
Sculpting Basics.


SCULPTURE 17
.Sculpting Basics
Materials
There is quite a variety of materials you can use to make sculp-
tures. Choose a material based on the properties of the material
and the type of sculpture you plan to make.
Clay probably is the oldest sculptural material. There are
several types of clay you can use. Terra-cotta, which has been
used since prehistoric times, is perhaps the best. After allowing
a clay piece to dry, you fire it in a kiln, a very hot oven in
which clay objects are placed to permanently harden them.
Modeling clay (Plasteline or Plastalina) is a soft, oily,
synthetic clay that does not harden and can be used to
make a mold of a sculpture.
Sculpey, a synthetic clay, is a good choice for small projects.
It is soft and hardens only when placed in an oven. There also
are self-hardening clays that must be kept wet until a project
is finished.
Plaster of paris is an inexpensive, quick-hardening paste. It
may be cast into blocks and then carved with a rasp, a coarse
file with cutting points that is used for scraping or smoothing
wood or metal.
Plaster cloth is an open-weave cloth, such as gauze, with plas-
ter of paris embedded in the fabric. When moistened, it can be
formed or wrapped to almost any shape. Plaster cloth dries in
about 15 minutes.
When using any sculpting materials, be sure to follow the
manufacturer’s instructions.
Remember to
wash your hands
with soap and
water after using
clay, modeling
clay, Sculpey,
plaster of paris,
or plaster cloth.


18 SCULPTURE
Sculpting Basics.
Tools
Fingers probably are the most useful tools for working with soft
clays. You can use a loop tool, a wooden tool with a metal loop
on the end, to trim away excess clay. If you are working with
soapstone (a soft stone), you will need a rasp and a riffler, a
metal tool similar to a rasp with fine, small cutting points on
one or both ends.
Even though soapstone is quite soft, it still requires a lot
of effort to carve a form. It is best to keep your design simple.
For carving wood, you will usually need gouges (handheld tools
with curved cutting edges) or regular chisels, which are sharp-
edged metal tools that you can use to cut away and shape
the material.
Safety
Be careful that you use tools safely. When using knives and
chisels to make wood sculptures, always carve and cut away
from your body. Pay attention to the placement of your fingers
on the material. Your counselor might advise that you wear
protective gloves. And take your time. When carving and
chipping wood, it’s a good idea to wear protective goggles,
especially if you will be using hand tools or power tools.
Use wood-carving tools, such as
rasps, files, gouges, chisels, and
V-tools, with great care.
These commercial tools come in handy
for the artist working with clay.
Whenever you
see this icon,
there will be
safety information
that goes with it.


SCULPTURE 19
.
Lightweight paper “dust masks” are not
designed as protection against toxic dust
and vapors. Use a respiratory mask.
If you ever work with sanding
machines or anything else that will
produce dust particles, wear a protective
respiratory mask. It is also a good idea to
wear one when working with clay. If you
use electrical equipment, such as a grinder, do not
wear loose-fitting clothes.
When working with clay, glazes, paints, or other materials
that can produce toxic dust or vapors, wear a toxic dust respira-
tory mask approved by the National Institute for Occupational
Safety and Health (NIOSH), disposable gloves, and work cloth-
ing made of materials that will not collect dust. Separate these
clothes from other laundry and wash them weekly.
Avoid food areas when working on any project, and do
not eat or drink in the work areas. If you work clay with bare
hands, wash your hands thoroughly with soap and water. If
you find it very time consuming to get your hands clean after
working with clay, you might want to try an art soap specifi-
cally designed to wash off clay.
It is best to use premixed clay to avoid exposure to large
quantities of clay dust. Be careful when firing clay in a kiln.
If it is burned or scorched, the clay can emit dangerous fumes.
Although you can fire polymer (synthetic) clays such as
Sculpey in an ordinary kitchen oven at temperatures from 250
to 275 degrees, you should still take precautions. Get the advice
of your instructor before attempting to fire polymer clays.
Use a kiln only under the direct supervi-
sion of a qualified adult instructor who
is familiar with its operation. Be sure
the area is well-ventilated, with an
adequate exhaust system. If you look
into a kiln when it is firing, be sure to wear infrared
goggles approved by the American National Standards
Institute (ANSI), or use a handheld welding shield with
a shade number of 1.7 to 3.0.
If you need to use
an oven for your
project, do so only
under the direct
supervision of a
responsible adult.


20 SCULPTURE
Sculpting Basics.
Armatures
To model a life-size head or small-scale animal or person, you
might need an armature, a framework that gives inner support
to a soft material such as clay. You can make one by using a
piece of threaded pipe and a flange screwed to a wood base.
The materials can be purchased at a building-supply store.
A piece of 2-by-2-inch or 2-by-4-inch wood that is at least
12 inches long also will work in place of the threaded pipe. Use
an 8-by-8-inch or 10-by-10-inch piece of plywood or a board of
similar size for the base. Drill a hole in the center of the base
so that you can use a large wood screw to fasten the 12-inch
piece of wood upright to the base. This will give you an
armature to mold your sculpting material around when
shaping a head or figure.
To build a complex armature, you will need a threaded metal pipe or
PVC pipe, 6 to 12 inches long and 1
⁄2 to 1 inch in diameter, and a flange
for the pipe to screw or fit into. Screw the flange into the center of an
8-inch-square board. Screw one end of the pipe into the flange and
the other end into a T-shaped pipe. To make a life-size head, attach an
aluminum wire (6 gauge works well) to the top of the T-shaped pipe and
shape it like a circle. For arms, thread the wire through the T-shaped pipe;
for legs, wrap wire around the lower area of the pipe.
Making an armature will help give your model inner support as you work on it.


SCULPTURE 21
.Sculpting Basics
Grog, which is
ground-up
unglazed fired
clay, is usually
added to the clay
to make it more
porous and easier
to form into
irregular shapes.
Ceramic Sculpture
One of the earliest ways people used clay was to make ceramic
pottery. Artists make sculpture with the same basic methods
today, although the clay they use might be different from that
used to make pottery.
A clay body is a combination of clays and minerals
blended together for a specific ceramic purpose. There are
three major types of clay bodies: earthenware, stoneware,
and porcelain.
Earthenware usually is full of impurities that give the clay
different color ranges and cause it to mature (harden) at low
temperatures. Because the clay does not completely solidify
into a watertight state, sculptors may apply glaze inside and
out. Terra-cotta is a type of earthenware.
Stoneware fires at a higher temperature, which leaves the
surface hard and nonporous. It is usually opaque (not
transparent), but when it is shaped to be very thin, it may
let some light through. Sculptors often combine several clays
with grog or sand to make a stoneware clay body.
Porcelain, made from a pure clay fused by intense heat, has
a smooth, white surface. Some porcelain objects are known
as whiteware, including china and plumbing fixtures such as
toilets and sinks.


22 SCULPTURE
Modeling a Head.
Modeling a Head
One of the best ways to get a feel for modeling is to experiment
by molding the material into different shapes. After doing this,
you might want to try shaping clay into a head. There is no
need to try for perfection—the head does not have to look like
anyone you know. The purpose of this requirement is simply to
introduce you to the basics of sculpting.
Using Terra-Cotta
When using terra-cotta, you will need an armature on which
to model your clay head. You must place something over the
upright pipe of the armature to make the head hollow. Try
using a ball of newspaper to shape the head. Then slip a paper
bag over the newspaper and twist the bottom around the pipe.
To make the head, start by covering the armature with
small bits of clay. Keep adding clay until the surface is a half
inch thick. A tight bond between bits of clay is important. The
clay shrinks as it dries and will crack at weak joints. If the
terra-cotta seems to dry too much while you are working with
it, dampen the clay with a wet sponge or cloth. If you cannot
finish the head in one session, cover it with a damp cloth and
plastic until you work on it again.
You can start making facial features on the head by press-
ing your thumbs into the clay to indicate where the eyes should
be. Place a long piece of rolled clay down the middle of the face
to set up the profile. Push the clay around to shape the nose,
lips, and chin. Draw in lines for the eyebrows and lips. Use a
metal loop tool to gouge out eye sockets. Keep adding clay and
massaging it to form the forehead, brow, and cheeks. Work
around the head, building up the back of the head, too. Roll
out two ovals for ears and place them on the sides of the head
between the brow and nose tip. Add more clay for hair. Use
your fingers to blend and smooth the clay, and use pointed
tools to carve details.
As you study real
people and work
on the full-size
head, you proba-
bly will realize that
a face is not
symmetrical; that
is, the left and
right sides do not
match exactly.


SCULPTURE 23
.Modeling a Head
If you plan to fire the head in a kiln, you must first remove
the armature. Let the terra-cotta become “leather dry” before
you try to pull out the paper. Then take a very thin wire about
16 inches long and carefully slice the head in two, behind the
ears. Remove the armature. Scratch the edges of the two parts
where they will touch when you rejoin them. This step helps
the clay parts “grab” each other. Make some slip (clay mixed
with water to the consistency of cream) and paste it on the
scratched surfaces. Wiggle the pieces a little to create suction.
Then blend some clay to get rid of the seam. Let the head dry
on a pillow.
Terra-cotta must be completely dry before being fired in
a kiln. The drying could take several days, depending
on the size of the head. Any moisture in the sculpture
will make it explode during firing. Ask your instructor to
check the head for dryness. One way to tell is to hold
the sculpture to your cheek. If it feels cold, it still has
moisture in it and is not safe to fire.
Kiln Caution
Firing clay
requires technical
knowledge and
can be dangerous.
For your sculpture
project, leave
the firing to a
qualified instructor.


24 SCULPTURE
Modeling a Head.
Using Modeling Clay
If you plan to use modeling clay for making your life-size head,
you will need to model the head on an armature. Modeling clay
will not dry completely while you work, but you will need to
keep it moist. Build your piece gradually by adding
small pieces of clay to the armature. You
will probably need more than one
session to finish the head, so cover
it tightly with plastic to keep it from
drying out when you are not working
on it. The sculpture is finished when
it looks the way you want it to look.
You will need an armature for making a full-size human head
using modeling clay.


SCULPTURE 25
.Modeling a Head
Using Plaster Cloth
You can use plaster cloth to model a head. You might form the
shape of the head with the plaster cloth and then add plaster of
paris to finish the piece. It is up to you whether to use an arma-
ture. If you do use an armature, it will become a permanent
part of the piece, because you will not be able to remove it.
Here is what you will need.
£ Newspapers, garbage bags, or plastic sheeting
£ Roll of plaster cloth
£ Large bowl of warm water
£ Scissors
Step 1—Cover your work surface with newspaper, garbage
bags, or plastic. Dip the roll of fabric in water to thoroughly
wet the plaster.
Step 2—Build the head over a form on the armature, as
described in the section on making a terra-cotta head. Wrap
at least two layers over the form.
Step 3—Now begin adding features by using more plaster cloth.
Step 4—Give the plaster cloth enough time to set slightly so
that the face does not slump.
With a little practice, you will learn how fast to go. The plaster
will need to dry for about two hours.





SCULPTURE 27
.Making a Mask
Making a Mask
Many cultures have used masks for religious purposes and to
express their emotions in the presence of nature’s power. In
ancient Greece, actors often wore masks when performing plays.
Modern theatrical performances sometimes still use masks.
To get started making your own mask, decide what character or
animal you will portray and then gather the following supplies.
£ Large garbage bags or plastic sheeting to cover the
work surface
£ Materials for an armature (A simple, plastic Halloween
mask will do.)
£ Modeling clay
£ Newspaper
£ Scissors
£ Large bowl of water
£ Paintbrush (1
⁄2 to 1 inch wide)
£ White glue
£ Acrylic paints
£ Assorted small paintbrushes
£ Shellac or clear acrylic
coating (optional)
£ Respiratory mask
(if using shellac or acrylic coating)
Because making
a mask can be
messy, first
protect your work
surface with
plastic sheeting
or a large
garbage bag.


28 SCULPTURE
Making a Mask.
Step 1—Using modeling clay, model the face on an armature.
Because this is a mask, you should model the face only to
the ears.
Step 2—Cut or tear the newspaper into strips about 4 inches
long and 1 inch wide. Soak them in water for several hours.
Step 3—Carefully apply the wet newspaper strips around all
parts of the modeling clay face. Use a brush to tamp the strips
down firmly in all corners.
31
4 6


SCULPTURE 29
.Making a Mask
Step 4—Fit small pieces of newspaper tightly around corners of
nose, mouth, and eyes.
Step 5—Soak more strips of newspaper at least four hours,
then crumple them in water until thoroughly pliable.
Step 6—While the newspaper is soaking, coat the newspaper
layer you have already placed on the mask with white glue,
applying it smoothly with your fingers. You may want to thin
the glue with water to make it easier to spread.
Step 7—Add the wet paper, strip by strip. Tamp down, using a
brush to push the strips into close contact with the glue-covered
newspaper. Allow no wrinkles or air bubbles.
Step 8—Coat the overlapped paper with white glue and add a
final layer of wet newspaper.
87


30 SCULPTURE
Making a Mask.
Step 9—Reinforce the top of the mask, the chin, and the jaw
with an extra strip of newspaper to prevent sagging.
Step 10—Let the mask dry for several hours.
Step 11—Pull out the modeling clay mold from inside the
paper mask.
Step 12—Outside or in a well-ventilated space, decorate the
face with acrylic paints.
To help preserve the paint and the mask, you can spray or
paint it with shellac or a clear acrylic coating. This is best done
outdoors, in an open and well-ventilated area.
12
9 11


SCULPTURE 31
.Making a Mask
When using shellac, go outside to an open area,
or wear a respiratory mask. Shellac is harmful if
it is inhaled.





SCULPTURE 33
.Plaster Casting
Plaster Casting
A copy of an object made by pouring plaster of paris into a
mold is known as a plaster cast. Bananas and pears are the
easiest to mold because both have few indentations that
would make the mold more difficult to separate, and both
have easily identifiable shapes.
In addition to the fruit or vegetable, you will need the
following materials.
£ Knife or box cutter
£ Cardboard half-gallon milk container
£ Small piece of modeling clay
£ Petroleum jelly (or lubricating oil such as WD-40)
£ Large plastic container
£ Large metal spoon
£ Plaster of paris
£ Duct tape
£ String or rubber bands
£ Rasp
£ Acrylic paints
£ Assorted small paintbrushes
If you are feeling adventurous, try
making a plaster cast of your hand.
You will have fun with such a lifelike
replica of the real thing.


34 SCULPTURE
Plaster Casting.
Step 1—Cut the cardboard milk container into equal halves.
Step 2—Place a small piece of modeling clay inside, on the
base of the container, to balance your fruit or vegetable. (For
a banana, you may need two pieces.) Use enough clay so
that the fruit rests about an inch or so off the bottom. Coat
the fruit with a thin layer of petroleum jelly or a lubricating
oil such as WD-40.
Step 3—Pour into a large plastic container enough water to
fill half of the bottom part of the milk container. Sprinkle in
the plaster until it starts to float on the surface. Wait a few
minutes for it to settle and then stir gently to get rid of
trapped air bubbles.
1
2 3


SCULPTURE 35
.Plaster Casting
Step 4—Add more plaster as needed, until the mixture has the
consistency of heavy cream.
Step 5—Pour the plaster around the fruit until it reaches the
middle of the fruit. Work fast because the plaster sets quickly.
Step 6—Let the plaster harden.
Step 7—Coat the top of the dried plaster with a thin layer of
petroleum jelly.
Step 8—Tape the two halves of the container together with
duct tape.
Step 9—Now mix another batch of plaster and pour it over the
top of the fruit to fill the rest of the container.
Step 10—Allow the plaster to harden overnight.
85


36 SCULPTURE
Plaster Casting.
Step 11—Tear open the container, remove the tape, and gently
separate the two halves. Remove the fruit.
Step 12—Pop out the modeling clay piece and allow the halves
to thoroughly dry. This might take several days. (When dry, the
plaster will not be cold to the touch.)
Step 13—You can now cast your own plaster fruit or vegetable.
Coat the inside of the mold with a thin layer of petroleum jelly.
Step 14—Secure the two halves of the mold with string or
rubber bands.
Step 15—Mix up enough plaster to fill the mold. Turn the
mold upside down and slowly pour the plaster through the hole
left by the modeling clay piece. Tap the mold gently to allow air
bubbles to rise to the surface.
11 14


SCULPTURE 37
.Plaster Casting
Step 16—Allow the newly poured plaster to harden. Refer to
the drying directions on the plaster of paris packaging to find
out how much time to allow. (Most plaster of paris hardens in
30 to 45 minutes.) Then gently remove your plaster fruit.
Step 17—Use a rasp to file away the pour plug, and allow your
plaster fruit to dry thoroughly. This might take several days.
Step 18—When your plaster fruit is dry, you can paint it with
acrylic paints.
15 17
18





.Carving in Wood
Carving in Wood
You will be most successful in fulfilling the requirement to
sculpt a person or animal out of wood if you choose a soft
wood, such as balsa wood or pine. These woods are relatively
easy to carve. Start by drawing an outline of the image you
want to shape on the block of wood. The piece of wood has six
sides, so you will have to draw your image from the front,
back, right and left sides, and top and bottom.
To be safe, carve away from your body. Make sure your
tools are sharp—dull tools make wood carving dangerous.
If a piece is difficult to cut, you might be trying to carve
through too much wood at one time, or your knife
blade might be dull.
Remember that carving is a subtractive
process. This means once you have carved
away a portion of wood, you can’t put it back.
For more information about carving in wood,
see the Wood Carving merit badge pamphlet.
SCULPTURE 39WOOD
CARVING


40 SCULPTURE
Carving in Wood.
The Eagle Neckerchief Slide©*
This simple wood carving makes a good project for new wood
carvers. To make the slide you will need the following supplies.
£ Wood
£ Wood-carving tools
£ 1
⁄2-inch or 3
⁄4-inch diameter PVC pipe cut into a 1-inch length
£ Instant glue or epoxy
£ Acrylic paints
£ Assorted small paintbrushes
Carve Carefully
Remember to
• Always carve away from your body and keep your
fingers out of the path of the knife’s blade.
• Always take your time when using sharp tools. Never rush carving.
• Keep your work well away from your face, and never carve on your lap.
• Always carve on a clean and stable work surface and use a sturdy chair.
• Make small, well-placed carving strokes rather than long strokes.
• Always keep knives in a safe place, away from children.
*This plan for the eagle neckerchief slide is the property of Jeff Springer,
Topeka, Kansas, and is reproduced here with his permission.
Eagle template


SCULPTURE 41
.Carving in Wood
Step 1—Transfer the eagle design onto a
block of wood that measures 3 3
⁄8 inches
with the grain and 2 1
⁄4 inches across the
grain. Use basswood, if possible.
Step 2—Cut or carve away the outside
profile of the eagle.
Step 3—Score the line separating the beak
and the top part of the eagle’s head. Then,
carve back to your score line, keeping the
beak flat for the time being.
Step 4—Score the line separating the
upper and lower parts of the beak. Carve
the lower part of the beak so that it is
recessed from the top. Next, round off and
shape the top of the beak.
Step 5—Score the back part of the eagle’s
head. Carve back and use a stop cut to the
line that you have scored. Slightly round
off the top and bottom of this back portion
of the head.
Step 6—Slightly carve the top, bottom,
and edges of the main part of the eagle’s
head. To add more definition to the eagle’s
features, carve a little bit of wood off
where the back of the head meets the
neck and where the front of the head
meets the beak.
Step 7—Carve the eye and nostril.
Step 8—In a well-ventilated space, glue
the PVC ring to the back of the carving.
Let the glue dry thoroughly and paint the
slide. The eagle in the slide shown has a
yellow beak, a white head, and a brown
neck. The eye and nostril are black.
1
2–3
4
5
8





SCULPTURE 43
.Carving in Soapstone
Carving in Soapstone
Soapstone is a soft rock that has been popular with carvers for
centuries. It comes in a variety of colors and, true to its name,
has a slippery, soapy feel. Carving is a subtractive process, so
when working with soapstone you must have an idea of what
the finished form should look like before you start. A sketch on
paper or a clay model the same size as the
sculpture can serve as a guide.
The following tools are useful for working with soapstone.
 Rasp—Similar to a file, but with large teeth on its surface.
 Riffler—A file or rasp that is curved or double-ended with
different scraping shapes. Use it on concave surfaces and
for hard-to-reach areas.
 Combination rasp—A combination tool with a flat file on
one side and a half-rounded rasp on the other.
 Hacksaw—A handsaw with small teeth on a metal blade
stretched taut across a frame.
 Minihacksaw—A smaller version of the hacksaw.
 Wet sandpaper—Specially treated sandpaper that is used to
smooth file marks off of soapstone.
 Tung oil or boiled linseed oil—Oils that are used as quick-
drying finishers.
COMBINATION RASP
RIFFLER
RASP
TUNG OIL
HACKSAWS
SANDPAPER
Carving tools are
sharp. To avoid
injury, always saw
or file away from
your body.
Remember also
to wear safety
glasses and a
respiratory mask
to avoid breathing
in particles.


44 SCULPTURE
Carving in Soapstone.
Removing excess stone is a slow process and should not be
hurried because the stone is soft and will break. Plus, once the
material is removed, there is no way to replace it or add it back.
To carve a mourning dove, you will need a block of soap-
stone that is approximately 5 by 5 by 3 inches. You won’t have
to remove much excess stone, so you can just use a wood rasp
and a riffle to carve the sculpture. If you were working on a
larger, more advanced piece, you might use a hacksaw and a
variety of chisels.
Step 1—Using heavy paper, make a scaled side-view
drawing of the mourning dove. If you use a scale of 1 inch
equals 3 inches, you will carve a bird that is 4 inches long—
in proportion to a real-life mourning dove.
Step 2—Make a template by cutting out the drawing.
Step 3—Study the soapstone and decide which faces of the
stone will be the right side, left side, top, bottom, front, and
back of the sculpture. Use a pencil or wax pen to trace the out-
line of the template on the correct face of the soapstone. Lines
can be redrawn or adjusted as you go.
Step 4—Block the piece by cutting away the larger unneces-
sary pieces of soapstone with a saw. Be careful not to cut too
far—once stone is cut off, it’s gone!
Step 5—With a rasp, rough out the side design by filling from
the top of the stone down to the upper line of the wings. File in
a forward motion only (away from your body). Be careful not
to file areas already outlined.
Step 6—Following the template, continue to remove excess
stone. You will want to leave a flat area on the bottom side as a
base for the dove. Do not work too long on any one side. This is
a three-dimensional piece, so move the stone around to view it
from all angles as you work. This will help you create a balanced
sculpture. Little by little, the mourning dove will start to emerge.
Before carving, use a pencil or wax pen to trace your
template onto both sides of the block of soapstone.
Find most of the supplies you will need at a local crafts
store. You can also order supplies and kits over the
internet (with your parent or guardian’s permission). Be
sure the soapstone you buy is labeled as nontoxic.
Do not use an ink
or felt-tip pen;
soapstone is so
porous that the
ink will bleed
into the stone.


.Carving in Soapstone
Step 7—When you get close to the design lines, use a riffler
to complete the shape of the bird and carve the fine details.
Step 8—The texture of the final surface is up to you. You
can leave the file marks showing, or you can use sandpaper
to polish it to a shine. To begin polishing the sculpture, smooth
the surface with 150-grit sandpaper. Continue sanding with
progressively finer sandpaper until the piece is as smooth
as you want it to be. If you want your piece to be
very smooth and shiny, finish polishing with 0000
grade steel wool.
Step 9—Use a soft cloth to dust your piece of
any fine particles. If you want your mourn-
ing dove to have a shiny surface, cover the
piece with a light coat of tung oil or boiled
linseed oil. Wipe off any excess oil and
allow the stone to sit overnight before you
add another coat. Let the surface dry, then
buff the sculpture with a soft cloth.
3 4
5 6
7 8





SCULPTURE 47
.Experimenting With Sculpture
Experimenting
With Sculpture
There are many ways to explore the possibilities for making
sculpture. In the world of art, there are no single solutions; any
rules can be challenged. Artists have always experimented with
what is available, looking for new ways to use the materials.
Find new and different ideas about what
to make in books and on the internet (with
your parent or guardian’s permission). Many
sculptors find inspiration in “found” objects,
things people discard as junk—broken
furniture, machine parts, light fixtures,
and so forth.


48 SCULPTURE
Experimenting With Sculpture.
Making a Mobile
To make a simple mobile that moves and changes constantly
with air currents, you will need the following.
£ Pen or pencil
£ White or colored poster paper
£ Scissors
£ Wooden dowel, 10 inches long and 1
⁄8 inch in diameter
£ Cotton string of any color
£ Acrylic paint
£ Paintbrushes
£ Ruler
£ Cup hook
£ White glue


SCULPTURE 49
.Experimenting With Sculpture
Step 1—Draw the shapes of four realistic or abstract objects
on the poster paper. You can make all four shapes identical
or you can make them all different. Each shape should be
about 3 inches by 4 inches. Cut out the shapes and paint
them as desired.
Step 2—Find a place to suspend the mobile. Tie a 3-foot-long
piece of string from one end of the dowel to the other. Tie
another piece of string to the center of the 3-foot string. Make
the string the length you will need in order to suspend your
mobile from your selected spot.
Step 3—Glue one end of a piece of string
to each of your paper objects, then loop the
other end of the string around the dowel
and tie a knot to secure each object.
Suspend the paper objects at varying
lengths from the dowel. The first object
should be tied so that it hangs about 5 1
⁄2
inches from the dowel; another should be at
1 3
⁄4 inches; another at 5 3
⁄4 inches; and the
other at 2 1
⁄8 inches.
Step 4—Screw a cup hook into the spot
where you want to suspend the mobile.
Tie the hook to the center string, or tape
or tack the string in place instead of using
a cup hook.
Step 5—After you suspend your mobile, adjust the positions of
the objects on the dowel until they are balanced and moving
without bumping into each other.
Sculpting in Ice
Some sculptures are made of materials that have been around
for thousands of years, such as marble, bronze, and clay. Other
sculptures last for only a few hours. Some sculptors create their
short-lived works of art from blocks of ice.
Ice blocks are made from pure water, distilled or filtered to
remove all chemicals and impurities. The companies that make
ice used by ice sculptors have developed their own techniques
for handling and freezing the water to minimize air bubbles,
fractures, and other flaws in the ice blocks, and to increase
the clarity of the ice.
Ice sculptors
often have to
wear protective
clothing to avoid
getting ice burns
from being in
constant contact
with ice.


50 SCULPTURE
Experimenting With Sculpture.
Ice sculptures vary in size, from small figurines to huge
pieces weighing as much as several tons. These large pieces are
made from several blocks of ice fused together with heat. The
artist uses a chainsaw to form the basic shape of the object and
then uses chisels and handsaws to carve the details. Sometimes
the sculptor polishes the ice with heating elements or illuminates
the piece with colored lights.
There is almost no limit to what can be sculpted from ice.
On ocean cruises, passengers often get to watch artists create
ice sculptures of subjects such as fish, castles, and carousels.
People do not expect ice sculptures to last. Part of appreciating
the beauty of an ice sculpture is watching it undergo interesting
changes as it melts.


SCULPTURE 51
.Experimenting With Sculpture
Four sand sculptors from Team Sandtastic, Sarasota, Florida, took
less than a week to sculpt this medieval castle. Team Sandtastic offers
these tips for sculpting in sand.
• Cut out the inside
bottom rim of a 5-gallon
bucket for a quick,
inexpensive mold.
• Use a 2-foot section of
a 2-by-4 as a tamper to
solidify the structure.
• Use cement-working
tools (spreaders,
margin trowels) to
form the sand. Other
handy tools include
shovels, D-handle
spades, and small
paintbrushes.
• Add detail with tools
from the kitchen, such
as spatulas, melon
ball scoops, straws,
measuring spoons,
cake icing spreaders, and wooden skewers. Be sure to ask your parent
or guardian for permission before using any household tools.
Place the bucket upside-down where you want your sculpture. Start
packing wet (not soupy or dry) sand inside the bucket, 3 inches at a time.
After packing each layer, tamp straight down with the 2-by-4. Keep the
bucket straight, and always tamp straight down. Continue adding sand,
packing, and tamping until you reach the top of the bucket. Then firmly
tap the sides of the bucket and remove it by pulling up from the bottom
(never from the top) of the bucket. You now have a block to start carving
your sculpture.
Start with the largest tools to “block out” the basic shape of your
design. Don’t be afraid to move the sand around; you can always add
and build on by using the bucket. For a more exciting design, consider
creating a theme rather than just building a figure.


Delivering this 28-foot-high sculpture to the installation site required a crane, cherry
picker, and flatbed truck. Sculptor Jean Woodham’s studio in Westport, Connecticut,
stands 40 feet high.


SCULPTURE 53
.Art Spaces and Places
Art Spaces and Places
Making art is—generally—a solitary effort. Most sculptors and
other fine artists work alone in private spaces or studios. Every
work space is different. Some sculptors create small-scale
pieces in a studio in their homes. Others create large-scale
sculptures. Because they may work with toxic or flammable
materials and dangerous equipment, they often work in studios
fitted with exhaust systems, hoists, and rigs.
Try to arrange a visit to a sculptor’s studio. Notice which
materials and special equipment the artist uses. You might ask
the artist why he or she decided to become a sculptor. Find out
how the sculptor uses art for self-expression and for communi-
cating with others.
Art Speaks
Art is a visual language that speaks for
the artist and to the viewer. First, art is
a means of self-expression, a way for the
artist to create something tangible out of
his or her emotions and ideas. Through
the act of creating shapes, forms, and
images, artists clarify their beliefs and
personal theories. The final piece of
artwork—no matter how chaotic it may
appear—is an organized arrangement
of design elements that represents the
artist’s point of view.
Second, art provokes a reaction
from the viewer. You may look at a piece
of art and think, WOW!—or walk away
from it shaking your head in confusion.
Or it may make you sad or angry. Western Tori I: Sungate, a welded bronze
and brass sculpture by Jean Woodham


54 SCULPTURE
Art Spaces and Places.
One goal of the visual arts—particularly the fine arts
(sculpture, painting, photography, and printmaking)—is to
improve the world by getting people to think differently about it.
An important value of looking at art is recognizing something
about yourself by analyzing the way you react to the artwork.
You become more socially tolerant, culturally sensitive, and even
compassionate when you slow down and question whether you
prejudged the art. Did you reject the piece because the subject
matter offended you or because the people and setting were
from a culture other than your own? Did you take the time to
consider what the artist was trying to communicate to you?
Sometimes artists want to shock you. They may create
works that reveal prejudice, hatred, violence, or hunger. They
want viewers to realize that people in the world need help.
The art might then prompt viewers to think about what they
could do to help resolve these problems. In a way, art speaks
for those who cannot speak for themselves.
Exhibiting Art
Some artists create art for their own enjoyment. They are not
concerned about whether other people see their work or if
anyone buys a piece. Most sculptors, however, want to build a
reputation as an artist and to sell their work. They know that
in order to achieve those goals, they will have to exhibit their
work so that others may see what they have created.


SCULPTURE 55
.Art Spaces and Places
Artists may join a co-op gallery in which the artist-
members pay for and operate the gallery. The focus of the
co-op is to get exposure—to present the artists’ work to the
art world and to the interested public. Few artists sell enough
work in a co-op to support themselves, but often an art dealer
may “discover” artists there and invite them to show their art
in commercial galleries.
A commercial gallery is in business to sell art. A gallery
owner or art dealer offers to represent an artist (along with
others) and agrees to give the artist a solo show once every
year or two. Because the gallery markets the artist’s work
and sets up the exhibitions, the gallery keeps between 40 and
60 percent of the sales price. That seems like a lot, but the
commercial gallery attracts a larger, more serious audience
than a co-op. Other dealers come, as do important art collectors
and art critics who review the artist’s work in newspapers and
magazines. A good review helps generate attention and sales,
and helps build an artist’s reputation.
Artists who have made a name
for themselves might have their work
purchased by a museum. A museum
houses and makes available rare,
valuable, and famous art for the
public to enjoy. The artwork is not
for sale. It might have been purchased
or donated, or it might be on loan
from private collections or from other
museums. If an artist achieves a
significant reputation, a museum
might show his or her work in a
solo exhibition or combined with
other artists.
If you choose to visit a museum,
art gallery, artists’ co-op, or art
exhibit, approach the experience from
several points of view: as the artist
showing the work, as the viewer,
and as the gallery owner or museum
director. You will discover that many
people and many decisions are
involved in making, showing, and
selling art.


56 SCULPTURE
Art Spaces and Places.
Touch This!
Some sculptors actually want people to interact
with their works of art by encouraging them to
touch, feel—even use—the sculpture.
Black Slide Mantra, Sapporo, Hokkaido, Japan. Sculptor
Isamu Noguchi (1904–1988) created this slide for a park. It was
carved in black stone so that the sculpture could be seen even
during the snowy winters of Sapporo. Noguchi wanted the
piece to cultivate a sense of imaginative play in children. The
spiral structure consists of a short staircase in back that leads to
the slide at the top. Noguchi once said, “The completion of this
sculpture will be when children polish it with their bottoms as
they slide down.” The slide was completed after his death, and
children today continue to slide down the Black Slide Mantra,
polishing the black stone along the way.
Civil Rights Memorial, Montgomery, Alabama. Sculptor and
architect Maya Lin (1959– ) wanted the memorial to remind
people about all the principal players and events of the Civil
Rights movement. She accomplished this by creating a “water
table,” a circular fountain engraved with a time line of the
movement. Visitors can run their fingers across the thin layer
of water that flows over the water table, and they can touch the
names and events inscribed in the black granite. The concept
Black Slide Mantra


SCULPTURE 57
.Art Spaces and Places
came to her when she read Martin Luther King Jr.’s “I Have a
Dream” speech, which rephrases a passage from the Bible:
“No, no, we are not satisfied, and we will not be satisfied until
justice rolls down like waters and righteousness like a mighty
stream.” Lin used a wall of granite, inscribed with those words,
as a backdrop for the water table.
Face the Jury, St. Petersburg, Florida.
When Douglas Kornfeld’s collection of chairs
was being installed at the St. Petersburg
Judicial Center, he said, “I hope people
climb all over them.” The chairs are meant
to represent the participatory aspect of the
jury system. There are 12 “juror” chairs,
each one oversized and diverse in shape
to represent the diversity of a jury. Most of
the chairs stand around 6 feet high
but seem even taller atop their
posts, mounds of dirt and grass
that elevate some chairs to as
high as 10 feet. The 13th
chair, of ordinary proportion,
sits at ground level, facing
the “jury” and representing
the defendant.
Civil Rights Memorial, by Maya Lin
Douglas Kornfeld’s
Face the Jury


58 SCULPTURE
Careers in Sculpture.
Careers in Sculpture
As you have already learned from reading the previous chapter,
many people are interested in sculpture—whether they want to
make it, sell it, show it, or buy it. Fine artists feel a personal
drive to make art, so they will often try to make a full-time
career of it. Some sculptors have creative talent as well as a
head for business and perhaps a flair for self-promotion, but
others need help getting their artwork shown and sold.
A sculptor—like every self-employed artist—must be
self-motivated and self-disciplined. No one else is going to
make you go to work or finish a project. If you make large
artwork that takes a long time to complete, you will have to
be able to keep up your interest in the work. And if your work
is a commissioned piece—that is, if someone hires you to create
a piece—you will have to deliver the piece to the buyer by the
agreed-upon deadline.
Most self-employed sculptors have a difficult time support-
ing themselves strictly from the sale of their pieces. They usually
have to supplement their income through related opportunities
such as teaching sculpture in colleges or in workshops.
Some people choose careers, such as those listed below,
in which they can be involved with art and sculpture without
actually creating it.
• If you think you would enjoy helping another artist create a
large-scale sculpture, then you might be interested in a career
as a foundry worker or mold maker.
• If you have a talent for selling things, you might enjoy a
career as an artist’s agent, art appraiser, art auctioneer, art
consultant, art dealer, or gallery owner.
• If you like art history, you might consider a career as an
art historian, art librarian, museum curator, conservator,
or restorer.


SCULPTURE 59
.Careers in Sculpture
• If you like to write, you might enjoy a career as an art writer,
art critic, or art reviewer.
• If you enjoy teaching others, you might be interested in a
career as an artist-in-residence, art teacher, museum
educator, or workshop instructor.
Education and Training
If you want to pursue a career as a
professional sculptor, you will need
some studio lessons and hands-on
training. You can start by finding
out if your high school offers shop
classes that will introduce you to
the techniques for working with
metal, wood, and plastics. Later,
you can get hands-on training by
working for another artist as an
apprentice or assistant. If you
intend to supplement your income
in a related field, you might have to
earn advanced degrees.
Colleges and universities offer
four- and five-year programs that
lead to bachelor of fine arts (BFA)
or master of fine arts (MFA)
degrees. Beyond the core courses
common to all major areas of
study, these programs include art history and studio art classes.
Independent schools of art and design offer two-year
programs that lead to an associate of arts or bachelor of fine
arts degree. These programs emphasize studio work.
Anyone who wants to teach art in public schools must have
a bachelor’s degree; you might also need a teaching certificate.
For a permanent or full-time teaching position at the college
level, you will need to earn a master of fine arts degree.
To find out more about specific careers related to sculpture
or fine arts, refer to the resources section. Talk to your guidance
counselor at school about the training and education
requirements for those careers that interest you.





SCULPTURE 61
.Sculpture Resources
Sculpture Resources
By reading about the fine arts and art history, you can learn
about sculpture dating from ancient times to the present.
You might like to find out more about famous sculptors
of the Renaissance such as Michelangelo, Donatello,
and Cellini or more contemporary sculptors such as
Auguste Rodin, Constantin Brancusi, Barbara
Hepworth, Augustus Saint-Gaudens, Alberto
Giacometti, Henry Moore, George Segal,
and Alexander Calder. You also can
find interviews with important
contemporary sculptors,
articles about the artists, and
photographs of their work. Artist Felix de Weldon sculpted
this world-famous U.S. Marine
Corps War Memorial, which is
displayed in Arlington, Virginia.
The memorial depicts the
raising of the American flag
at Iwo Jima, Japan. A cloth
flag hangs from the 60-foot
bronze flagpole. The bronze
figures stand 32 feet tall.


62 SCULPTURE
Sculpture Resources.
Scouting Literature
Architecture, Art, Basketry, Graphic
Arts, Leatherwork, Metalwork,
Photography, Pottery, and Wood
Carving merit badge pamphlets
Books
Barrie, Bruner Felton. A Sculptor’s
Guide to Tools and Materials,
2nd. ed. ABFS Publishing, 2007.
Barrie, Bruner Felton. Mold Making,
Casting, and Patina for the Student
Sculptor. ABFS Publishing, 2000.
Brommer, Gerald F., and Joseph A.
Gatto. Careers in Art: An Illustrated
Guide. Davis Publications Inc., 1999.
Brown, Claire Waite, ed. The Sculpting
Techniques Bible: An Essential
Illustrated Reference for Both
Beginner and Experienced Sculptors.
Chartwell Books, 2006.
Carlson, Maureen. How to Make Clay
Characters. North Light Books, 1997.
Camenson, Blythe. Great Jobs for
Art Majors. McGraw-Hill, 2003.
Dewey, Katherine. Creating Lifelike
Figures in Polymer Clay: Tools and
Techniques for Sculpting Realistic
Figures. Potter Craft, 2008.
Erdmann, Dottie. Hands On Sculpting.
Columbine Communications &
Publications, 1992.
Friesen, Christi. Steampunkery: Polymer
Clay and Mixed Media Projects. CF
Books, 2010.
Hessenberg, Karin. Sculpting Basics:
Everything You Need to Know to
Create Three-Dimensional Artworks.
Barron’s Educational Series, 2005.
Lanteri, Edouard. Modelling and Sculpting
Animals. Dover Publications, 1985.
Lanteri, Edouard. Modelling and
Sculpting the Human Figure. Dover
Publications, 1985.
Lark Books. The Figure in Clay:
Contemporary Sculpting Techniques
by Master Artists. Lark Crafts, 2005.
Lucchesi, Bruno, and Margit Malmstrom,
contributor. Modeling the Head in Clay.
Watson-Guptill Publications, 1996.
Miller, Richard M. Figure Sculpture in Wax
and Plaster. Dover Publications, 1987.
Plowman, John. The Sculptor’s Bible:
The All-Media Reference to Surface
Effects and How to Achieve Them.
Krause Publications, 2005.
Reynolds, Donald Martin. Masters of
American Sculpture: The Figurative
Tradition From the American
Renaissance to the Millennium.
Abbeville Press, 1994.
Rich, Jack C. The Materials and Methods
of Sculpture. Dover Publications, 1988.
Salmon, Mark. Opportunities in Visual
Arts Careers. McGraw-Hill, 2008.
Slobodkin, Louis. Sculpture: Principles
and Practice. Dover Publications, 1973.
Teixidó i Camí, Josepmaria, and
Jacinto Chicharro Santamera.
Sculpture in Stone. Barron’s
Educational Series, 2001.
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


SCULPTURE 63
.Sculpture Resources
Periodicals
Sculpture
Telephone: 609-689-1051
sculpture.org
Sculpture Review
Telephone: 212-764-5645
sculpturereview.net
Organizations and Websites
The Art Career Project
theartcareerproject.com
International Sculpture Center
14 Fairgrounds Road, Suite B
Hamilton, NJ 08619-3447
Telephone: 609-689-1051
sculpture.org
National Sculptors’ Guild
Telephone: 970-667-2015
nationalsculptorsguild.com
National Sculpture Society
nationalsculpture.org
Acknowledgments
Scouting America is grateful to Jean
Woodham for providing images of her
sculpture and her studio in Westport,
Connecticut, and to her daughter,
Melissa Deur, for securing the images
on behalf of Scouting America.
Scouting America is grateful to
the men and women serving on the
National Merit Badge Subcommittee for
the improvements made in updating this
pamphlet.
We appreciate Lynn Bartlett, Sierra
Hills Stone (sierrahillsstone.com), Angels
Camp, California, for her assistance
with photography.
Jean Woodham has been creating
abstract sculpture for more than six
decades. She was one of the first
artists to use welding and industrial
applications to create large-scale
outdoor sculptures.
Jean Woodham has exhibited her
work in group shows with David Smith,
Louise Nevelson, and other well-known
sculptors. She has shown her sculpture
in a large artists’ co-op, in galleries, and
in museums around the world. More than 150 of her sculptures are in
private and public collections, including installations for the NS Savannah
(the first nuclear-powered merchant ship), the World Bank, headquarters
of major companies, and university campuses.
Jean Woodham, sculptor


64 SCULPTURE
Sculpture Resources.
Photo and Illustration Credits
Crazy Horse Memorial, Crazy Horse,
South Dakota, courtesy—pages
6 (Korczak Ziolkowski) and 7
(overhead view)
The Gihon Foundation, courtesy—
page 10
Douglas Kornfeld, courtesy—
page 57 (Face the Jury photos)
©Jeff Springer, Topeka, Kansas,
courtesy—page 40
Teamsandtastic.com, courtesy—page 51
Three Soldiers ©1984, Hart & VVMF—
page 8
Wikipedia.org, courtesy—pages 3, 7
(color image), 9, 11, and 57 (Civil
Rights Memorial)
Wikipedia and Wikimedia Commons—
page 56 (both)
Jean Woodham, courtesy—pages 4–5
(both), 52–53 (both), and 63
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of
or are protected by Scouting America.
Dan Bryant—page 21
John McDearmon—illustrations on
pages 13, 44, and 45
Randy Piland—cover (sculpting tools,
human head plaster cast); pages 15
(egg), 18 (clay-modeling tools),
20 (both), 23, 24 (armature), 25–26
(both), 28–32 (all), 34–37 (all), 48
(constructing mobile), and 60