DIGITAL
TECHNOLOGY
STEM-Based


DIGITAL
TECHNOLOGY
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


35733
ISBN 978-0-8395-0000-0
©2024 Boy Scouts of America
2024 Printing
Note to the Counselor
The Digital Technology merit badge was designed to show
the close relationship between humans and the technical
world surrounding us. The fleur-de-lis in the center represents
the Scout who, acting as the “brain” of a typical computing
device, interfaces with the digital technology world through
the means that those electronic devices can “under-
stand”—electrons, bits of data, and specialized path-
ways for information. As we increasingly use digital
technology in our everyday world, this relationship
extends from the Scout to the digital devices.
Eventually, the machine becomes an extension of
the Scout’s will, carrying out what the Scout directs it
to do. The challenge for the Scout and for every user of
digital technology is to understand this boundary and rela-
tionship, to not lose one’s own identity in the machine. We
humans must remember that machines are simply an extension
of—not a replacement for—the human mind.
The American Standard Code for Information Interchange,
or ASCII, is used to transmit information between computers.
To manage the alphabet, this binary system uses numbers 0 to
9 and special characters for 256 possible combinations with an
eight-digit binary number. Those numbers would be 00000000,
00000001, 00000010, 00000011, 00000100, up to 11111111. In deci-
mal it would be 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, and so on, up to 255. That’s 256
combinations, including zero.
Where does that number come from? Computers at the
most fundamental level handle circuits that are like “on” and
“off” switches. In the decimal system, we typically use 10 sym-
bols—numerals 0 to 9—and every digit uses a factor of 10. The
binary system uses only two symbols—0 and 1—and a factor of
2. In the digital technology industry, these conditions are typi-
cally referred to as a binary number system with 1 for “on” and
FPO


DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY 3
0 for “off.” In decimal, the number 12 would be written as
12 = (1 X 10) + (2 X 1). In binary, it would be written as
1100 = (1 X 8) + (1 X 4) + (0 X 2) + (0 X 1).
This chart includes a “translation” of zero through 9, the
entire alphabet (capital and lowercase letters), and a few other
characters. See “Understanding Data and Files” for more infor-
mation on ASCII translation.
The original design for the Digital Technology merit badge contained a
special ASCII encoding for “BSA.” However, due to constraints in the
badge making process, this idea was abandoned. As a fun aside for
Scouts, see if they can figure out the message. For the letters “B,” “S,”
“A” in ASCII, here is the standard assignment:
B = 01000010 S = 01010011 A = 01000001
Starting from the tab in the top row to
the far left, notice a trace that stops at a circle,
which represents a zero. Going clockwise, the
next trace twists and radiates outward. The
next two end at circles. Then going down the
right side of the yellow tabs, combinations
of 1s and 0s are found. Eventually, if you go
around the entire badge, you get the 1s and
0s to spell out “BSA” in ASCII format.


4 DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY
Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Digital-Technology or check
Scoutbook for the latest requirements.


DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY 5


6 DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY


DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY 7





Contents
Digital Technology All Around Us . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
History of Digital Devices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
Performance of Digital Devices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
Understanding Data and Files . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
Computer Software . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
The Internet and the World Wide Web . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
Digital Technology at Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
Recycling E-Waste . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
Intellectual Property . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
Glossary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
Digital Technology Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91





DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY 11
.Digital Technology All Around Us
Digital Technology All
Around Us
Simply put, a computer chip is a machine that can perform
simple commands: adding numbers, comparing values, moving
data from one place to another, all at remarkable speeds. By
performing many simple calculations exceedingly fast, comput-
ers can operate robots that build cars, send pictures and words
to a video monitor or printer, run fast-paced video games, and
send email messages around the world.
Digital technology devices use computer chips to perform
specific functions. The range of devices that use computer
chips is ever-growing. The remote control for your TV, the TV
itself, mobile phones, game machines, tablet computers, digital
cameras, and industrial robots all depend on digital signals
from computer chips.
These devices do not think on their own. Software
engineers write instructions for computers called programs.
Software programs accomplish complex tasks by performing
the computer’s simple yes-or-no logic more than a billion times
per second. Even though some digital devices seem to have
intelligence, they are actually following the exact instructions
they were given, extremely quickly.
Just how quickly does a computer chip work? Using
a watch or clock to time yourself, count (by ones)
as fast as you can in 10 seconds. How high did you
get? 50? 70? 100? An average computer chip can
count (by ones) to over 20 billion (20,000,000,000)
in this same time. It is this mind-boggling speed of
computer chips that has been harnessed in digital
devices to do the incredible things they do.


12 DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY
Digital Technology All Around Us .
Besides counting,
digital devices can process
information—troop rosters,
for example, or the amount
of water your family used
at home last month, or the
measurement of a car’s
speed. Many digital devic-
es can also store informa-
tion to be retrieved later.
Digital Technology
Is Everywhere
Computer chips are found
in almost all modern machines and electronic gadgets. Often
you can’t see the tiny computer processors built into the device
and powered by a sometimes equally small battery. But these
processors make possible digital technology devices like smart-
phones, garage door openers, DVD players, house thermostats,
cameras, wristwatches, fuel-efficient vehicles, MP3 players,
GPS units, and even recordable greeting cards.
Each global positioning system (GPS) satellite—an orbiting digital device in space—
sends a constant stream of location data. This is interpreted by a handheld digital
device (or smartphone) that converts the signals into an exact location on a map,
which can tell hikers or drivers where they are.


DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY 13
.Digital Technology All Around Us
Video games also use lots of computing power. These
games once required a big desktop computer. But with
the increased power and lower cost of computer chips,
they now perform with ever-better quality on ever-smaller
portable devices.
Digital devices don’t just make our lives easier, safer,
and more comfortable. They have become essential to busi-
ness, industry, science, medicine, and communication: practi-
cally every part of society. For instance, stores can track prod-
uct inventories with barcode scanners and
keep just the right amount of products on
their shelves. When you buy a shirt at a
store, the computer at the register sub-
tracts one shirt from the inventory list
so the manager knows exactly when
it’s time to order more shirts. This saves money because it
helps the store keep the right quantity of products on hand.
The worldwide network of computers known as the
internet has revolutionized communication. Now, instead of
waiting days or even weeks to receive a letter through the
postal mail, people can use computers to send emails that zip
around the world in seconds. Also, text messages and photos
can be sent and received directly from a person’s digital
device. Vast databases of information are available through
web browsers, mostly for free, allowing students and scientists
to research from any location that has an internet connection.
People can shop online for vast arrays of items.
Computers continue to be used in many more
ways. A traveler’s passport—the little booklet that
identifies a person entering or leaving a country—
now has an embedded computer chip. On the high-
way, a computerized tag attached to a car allows
the driver to pay the toll while driving through a
tollbooth without slowing down, and the car owner
gets billed automatically.


14 DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY
Digital Technology All Around Us .
In industry, digital devices have streamlined every step
of the production process through computer-aided drafting,
design, engineering, and manufacturing. Advanced software
programs allow products to be conceived, designed, and tested
virtually—that is, before they have taken physical form. In this
way, a car designer can make a three-dimensional model of
the car parts, “fit” them together, and test how well they work,
all without tightening one bolt. When it’s time to manufacture
the product, digital devices control the
machines that fabricate and assemble
the parts.
Using digital technology, phone
companies keep track of millions of
customers. They send each a detailed
bill every month showing precisely
which phone numbers were called,
how many minutes customers
talked on the phone, how much
texting they did, and how much
each transaction cost.
The team that developed this pamphlet used online
meeting tools, enabling people from all over the
country to collaborate on the project.


DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY 15
.Digital Technology All Around Us
Digital technology is also common
in the entertainment industry. One person
using a synthesizer can make music that
sounds like a whole orchestra playing.
Animation workstations help artists create
special effects in movies, such as making
superheroes appear to jump from building
to building. The video game industry is
almost as big as the movie industry and it
uses digital technology to produce these
same special effects.
Digital technology has also changed
photography. Not long ago, most cameras
used rolls of light-sensitive film to capture pictures. If a picture
was blurry or if someone blinked, you would not know until
the photo was developed. Now with smartphones and digital
cameras, you can take lots of pictures, delete the ones you
don’t like, and print only the good ones. Digital technology also
makes it possible to alter a digital photo and add special effects.
With digital technology being used all around us, it’s good to be aware
that anything you say and do could turn up in unexpected places—
even posted online by complete strangers.


Hollerith’s electric tabulator 1880s
Analog computer 1927
ENIAC 1946
EDVAC 1951
Babbage’s computer 1830s
Boolean logic 1850s
Slide rule 1617
Mechanical calculator 1642
Automatic loom (punch cards) 1804
Abacus 1100 B.C.
Transistor 1947
UNIVAC 1951
Integrated circuit late 1950s
Microprocessor 1971
Altair 8800 1975
Apple II® 1977
IBM PC 1981
Macintosh® 1984
Charles Babbage
Hollerith’s electric
tabulator


DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY 17
.History of Digital Devices
History of Digital
Devices
The modern computer reflects the ingenuity of many inven-
tors, mathematicians, and philosophers working over a period
of centuries, often improving on the work of others who came
before them.
Today, we use handheld electronic calculators at home,
school, and work. But another calculating aid, the abacus, has
been around since about 1100 b.c. and is still used in some
parts of the world. An abacus consists of a wooden frame with
beads that slide along rods. By assigning
a value to the beads and sliding them up
and down the rods, users can add, sub-
tract, multiply, and divide.
Early Math Aids
In 1617, Scottish mathematician John
Napier invented an aid to calculation—
the concept of logarithms, which sim-
plify the task of multiplying and dividing
into a form of addition and subtraction.
He inscribed his logarithms on a set
of calculating rods he called “Napier’s
bones.” Soon after, English clergyman
William Oughtred invented a device
based on Napier’s logarithms: the slide
rule. It remained in use for the next 350
years, until the electronic calculator was
invented. Like the earlier inventions,
however, the slide rule was only an aid
to calculation, not a true calculator.
William Oughtred


18 DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY
History of Digital Devices .
First Calculator
The first practical mechanical calculator was
invented by a French mathematician. In 1642, while
still a teenager, Blaise Pascal invented an adding
machine called the Pascaline, which worked with
wheels and gears. His father, a tax collector, used the
Pascaline to add up how much money people owed
the government—something modern computers still
do today. In 1670, a German named Gottfried von
Leibniz improved on Pascal’s invention, developing
a calculator that not only could add and subtract, but
also could multiply and divide.
The First Computer
In 1804, a French weaver named Joseph-Marie Jacquard
invented an automatic loom, or weaving machine, controlled
by sets of instructions coded into punched cards. Different
cards held instructions for different patterns to be woven into
fabrics. The idea of using coded instructions readable by a
machine became the basis of computer programs, years later.
In the 1830s, English mathematician Charles Babbage
designed plans for the analytical engine. His machine, intended
to automatically produce mathematical tables for navigation at
sea, consisted of four main parts, all found on today’s computers:
• An input device to read instructions from punched cards
• A memory to store the instructions and results
• A processor, which Babbage called a mill
• An output device to print the tables of numbers
Augusta Ada King, who wrote a program for the
analytical engine, is considered to be the world’s first
computer programmer.
Blaise Pascal


DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY 19
.History of Digital Devices
Babbage’s analytical engine could be programmed
to perform different tasks. That feature also made it like
a modern computer—although the analytical engine was
completely mechanical and powered by steam, not electricity.
Unfortunately, Babbage was never able to complete the
machine or test it. A model of his earlier design, the difference
engine, was finally built at London’s Science Museum for
display in 1991. It had 4,000 parts and weighed three tons.
Boolean Logic
In the 1840s and 1850s, English mathematician and
philosopher George Boole developed a kind of logic
that allows thoughts to be expressed in mathlike terms.
The basic forms of Boolean logic (also called Boolean
algebra) are the AND, OR, and NOT operations.
• An AND operation is one in which two or more
conditions must be true to achieve a result. For
example, before you can safely cross a street
intersection, the walk sign must be lit AND cross
traffic must be stopped.
• In an OR operation, the result will happen if either
condition is met: If it is cold outside OR if it
is raining, you will put on a jacket before
leaving home.
• With a NOT operation, a result happens
when a particular condition is not met: You
will go to school today if today does NOT
fall on the weekend.
Years after Boole died, computer design-
ers arranged electric switches to perform
these operations in what became known
as logic circuits, allowing digital computers
to mimic human thought processes. Later
still, Boolean logic would be used in internet
search engines and in specialized computer
languages used to manage data in databases.
George Boole
For more about
computer
programs, see
the Programming
merit badge
pamphlet.


20 DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY
History of Digital Devices .
In 1906, American inventor Lee de Forest dis-
covered that placing three electrodes inside the bulb
created an amplifier. Besides making radio and televi-
sion possible, this vacuum tube could also serve as an
extremely fast on-and-off switch. This discovery would
prove crucial in the development of digital computers.
Special-Purpose Calculators
Every 10 years, the U.S. government conducts a cen-
sus, or study, to collect information about everyone
who lives in the country. By 1880, the population was
so large—over 49 million—that the task took seven
years to complete.
To speed things up for the 1890 census, the
government turned to American inventor Herman
Hollerith. His electric tabulating machine automati-
cally recorded punched cards prepared for every
individual. The cards held information that could be
presented in different ways—for example, to find out
how many married people lived in Tennessee, or how
many owned farms smaller than 3 acres. This machine
was the beginning of automated data processing.
Soon, other companies were formed to build special-
purpose calculating machines to help businesses.
Eventually, universities joined in, finding scientific
and military uses for the technology. These machines
were one of a kind, and each had its peculiarities.
Edison’s Vacuum Tube
In 1883, a few years after Thomas Edison invented the electric light-
bulb, he noticed something peculiar about how electricity flowed
inside it. To protect the brightly glowing filament, air had been
removed from the bulb, creating a vacuum tube. Surprisingly, if he
placed a metal plate inside the bulb, electricity would flow across the
vacuum from the filament to the plate. Edison patented the discovery
of how electrons flowed across a vacuum, now known as the Edison
Effect, though he made little use of it.
Herman Hollerith, the father of automated data process-
ing, formed a company that would later become the giant
IBM corporation.
Thomas Edison


DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY 21
.History of Digital Devices
At Harvard University, professor Howard Aiken worked on the
Mark I computer using electromagnetic relays as switches. At
the University of Pennsylvania, John William Mauchly and
J. Presper Eckert Jr. designed the EDVAC and the ENIAC,
using vacuum tubes as switches, which worked a thousand
times faster than the relays in the Mark I.
Hollerith punched card
Massachusetts Institute of Technology engineer Vannevar Bush
invented the differential analyzer, an electromechanical analog
computer, in 1927.
Grace Hopper coined the term “bug” for a
computer fault. The original bug was a moth that
created a hardware problem in the Mark I. Hopper
was the first person to “debug” a computer.


22 DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY
History of Digital Devices .
The military used these first-generation digital computers
to calculate weapon trajectories and help build atomic bombs.
Each of these computers weighed tons, filled an entire room,
and consumed enough electricity to light up a small town.
They also required thousands of vacuum tubes, which tended
to overheat and burn out, needing to be replaced often.
The “Universal” Computer
The first commercially built computer was Mauchly’s and
Eckert’s UNIVAC. It was designed to be a general-purpose, or
“universal,” computer that would serve scientists, business
people, and engineers alike.
The UNIVAC was a stored-program computer, meaning the
program didn’t have to be fed into the computer as it was run-
ning. Another innovation in the UNIVAC was its ability to take
input from data on magnetic tape, rather than from punched
cards. This ability made it faster and easier to operate.
The U.S. military used first-generation digital computers like
this ENIAC to calculate trajectories of artillery shells and to help
build weapons.
Customers for the new computer—which cost
about $1 million in the early 1950s—included the
U.S. Census Bureau, the Air Force, and
insurance companies.


DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY 23
.History of Digital Devices
The Transistor—A Major Breakthrough
In 1947, engineers John Bardeen, Walter Brattain, and
William Shockley at Bell Laboratories ushered in the second
generation of computers by inventing the transistor. Like a vac-
uum tube, the transistor had three terminals. It could function
as an amplifier and a switch, but it was much smaller, used
far less power, and performed thousands of times faster. Early
transistors were also used in consumer products, most notably
the portable transistor radio.
The Integrated Circuit—An Even
Bigger Breakthrough
A major limitation of transistors was that they had to be con-
nected to other electronic components
(resistors, capacitors, and diodes) to form
circuits. An early computer could have
tens of thousands of transistors and other
components that required tens of thou-
sands of hand-soldered connections.
This problem was solved in
the late 1950s when Jack Kilby of
Texas Instruments, and a few months
later, Robert Noyce of Fairchild
Semiconductor, thought of the integrated
circuit. The concept was simple: Instead
of connecting components after they
were made, manufacture them all on
the same chip of silicon, with built-in
connections. The integrated circuit, also
called the microchip, revolutionized
computing. It also made possible such
products as the handheld calculator and
the digital wristwatch.
The Apollo space program of the 1960s,
with a mission to put an American on
the moon by the end of the decade, was
an early user of integrated circuits.
Silicon, the most
widely used
semiconductor
material, is used
to make silicon
chips.
Integrated circuits were also used in so-called
minicomputers, which, though smaller than the big
mainframes of the day, still cost tens of thousands
of dollars each.


24 DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY
History of Digital Devices .
The Microprocessor
In 1971, engineers at Intel Corporation, founded by Noyce,
advanced the integrated circuit to a new level: They designed
the first microprocessor, putting all the circuits needed for a
computer’s central processing unit (its “brain,” which could
run coded instructions) onto a single chip. This invention
made the personal computer possible.
Personal Computers
The Altair 8800 was an early model
personal computer sold in 1975 as a
mail-order kit for hobbyists to build
themselves. That year, boyhood
chums Bill Gates and Paul Allen,
along with Monte Davidoff, wrote a
programming language called BASIC
that would run on the Altair. For a
fee, they licensed the program to the
computer maker and formed their
own company, Microsoft®.
Meanwhile, two other young
friends, Steve Wozniak and Steve
Jobs, were busy working on the Apple II, a personal computer
released in 1977 by their new company, Apple®. Unlike most
early computers, the Apple II® had color graphics. This asset
made it good for games, and it became extremely popular with
home users.
Altair 8800
The year before the release of their Apple II®
computer, Wozniak and Jobs had worked together
making a video game for Atari, a company
founded by Nolan Bushnell. Atari had already
become successful by selling a console that played
one video game—called “Pong”—in arcade and
home versions. Pong was the beginning of the
multibillion-dollar video game industry.


DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY 25
.History of Digital Devices
In 1979, Daniel Bricklin and Robert Frankston created a soft-
ware program for the Apple II called VisiCalc, short for “visible
calculator.” The program automatically calculated rows and
columns of numbers arranged in a form known as a spread-
sheet. This program, which was not available for mainframe
computers, helped start a trend of companies installing per-
sonal computers in the workplace.
Two years later, IBM introduced its PC (or personal com-
puter) based on the Intel 8088 microprocessor. The PC ran its
own version of VisiCalc as well as other software programs,
including a word processor. IBM contracted with Microsoft to
supply a form of BASIC for the new computer, as well as an
operating system, the program that gets the computer up and
running, and then interacts with application programs.
The original IBM PC cost $3,000 when it debuted in
1981—around $7,500 in 2012, adjusted for inflation.
Today’s desktop computers, thousands of times
more powerful, can be purchased for only a few
hundred dollars.
Microsoft later created a similar
operating system, MS-DOS, for use on
computers made by many different com-
panies. The IBM PC and other computers
using the MS-DOS platform dominated
the business and home computer mar-
kets, helping make Microsoft one of the
world’s largest corporations.
Apple’s Macintosh® computer also
had great influence on the industry.
Introduced in 1984, the Mac’s operating
system featured several innovations that
made computers easier to use, many of
which had been developed years earlier
by researchers working for Xerox. These
innovations included a handheld pointing
device, or mouse; the use of little pic-
tures called icons to represent programs
and files on the computer screen; and a
system of pull-down menus and movable
screen displays called windows.
Apple II®


26 DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY
History of Digital Devices .
Despite the Macintosh innovations, the PC grew ever more
popular, in part because IBM allowed other companies to sell
less expensive “clones” of its PC design, while Apple did not.
By 1990, Microsoft managed to incorporate many user-friendly
advantages of the Macintosh into the latest version of its oper-
ating system, called Windows®.
Computers continue to drop in price and grow in power,
much as they have throughout their history. In 1971, a micro-
processor held 2,250 transistors; by 1993, it was 3.1 million. In
early 2008, Intel® announced the creation of the first micropro-
cessor to hold two billion transistors. Experts say this exponen-
tial growth in computing power cannot continue indefinitely.
Computers in Your Hand
Rapid increases in computing power have allowed computers
to get ever smaller and faster. The early years of the 21st
century saw an explosion in handheld computing devices—
not only calculators, but also GPS units, which people now
commonly use to find their way while driving; and personal
digital assistants (PDAs), small computers that could fit in
a pocket and be used as portable media players, electronic
address books, mobile phones, and web browsers.
Likewise, enhanced cell phones, called “smart-
phones,” do many tasks beyond making phone calls. This
includes taking pictures, doing calculations, browsing the
internet, texting, using apps, playing games, utilizing social
media, and storing information.


DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY 27
.History of Digital Devices
Another category of handheld computer is the personal
translator. These small, inexpensive devices act like a “speak-
ing dictionary,” so you can hear how to pronounce words and
phrases in various languages and see how they are spelled on
a display screen.
In recent years, tablet computers have become popular
handheld devices. Tablets are generally larger than a smart-
phone. A tablet’s touchscreen allows the user to operate the
device with finger or stylus
gestures. Some models have
detachable physical keyboards,
but a tablet computer is gener-
ally self-contained like a smart-
phone, with an on-screen
“virtual” keyboard for typing
and on-screen icons for
accessing the many software
applications that run on
these versatile devices.
New software programs are continually introduced
to take advantage of the increased power and to
expand the ways in which we use computers.
A Quick Response (QR) code is a two-dimensional
bar code that is widely used to cause a webpage to
download to the user’s smartphone when scanned
with a mobile tagging application (app).


28 DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY
History of Digital Devices .
The Web Is Born
The 1990s brought another significant
revolution: the rapid expansion of
the internet and the World Wide
Web, linking computers around the
globe and changing the way people
communicate and do business.
Today, many activities we used
to do in person can be done by
connecting our digital devices to
distant computers called servers or
via Wi-Fi (a wireless network access
point). By connecting to a server at
a bank, for example, we can transfer
money from one account to another
or pay bills; by connecting to the
server at a library, we can renew a book we checked out;
by connecting to a server at an online store, we can order
all manner of products and even rent movies. Students now
check assignments due and turn in homework online through
a website kept by their schools or teachers. There are online
colleges that grant degrees for work done through the internet.
See “The Internet and the World Wide Web”
later in this pamphlet for more about
online communications.


DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY 29
.History of Digital Devices
Cloud Computing
What do you get when you combine advances in software with
advances in internet connectivity? One result is cloud computing. The
term refers to the “cloud” of powerful computers (servers) scattered
throughout the internet. Increasingly, these servers provide “tempo-
rary” software that exists on a distant “cloud” and is loaded into a
computer’s web browser only temporarily, while being used.
You can visit a site, upload photographs, and edit them (say, mak-
ing them sharper or more colorful) without actually downloading any
software. An auxiliary program that temporarily loads into the web
browser makes this possible.





DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY 31
.Performance of Digital Devices
Performance of
Digital Devices
Every digital device—from large multiuser computing systems
to a handheld mobile device—has a central processor and
memory. These fundamental building blocks determine the
system performance and ultimately what kind of experience
awaits the device’s user.
Central Processor
The “brain” of a digital device is the central processing unit
(CPU). This part has four main functions: It fetches instruc-
tions from memory, decodes those instructions, executes the
instructions, and places the result back in memory. All of these
functions are typically contained in a single chip mounted on a
circuit board. The CPU has many different circuits all working
together to process and move the data around.


32 DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY
Performance of Digital Devices.
Some CPUs contain multiples of these processors in a sin-
gle part. A “quad-core” CPU has four CPUs on a single device.
If a program is written to take advantage of the four proces-
sors, they can share the workload and complete tasks sooner.
In 1971, Intel’s first processor had 2,300 transistors
in it. Today’s processors have more than 1 billion
(that’s 1,000,000,000!). The transistor has gotten
ever smaller over the years, and processors are
doing more in less space, allowing huge computing
power to be put into small devices like smartphones
and tablets.
The speed of early processors was measured in kilohertz
(kHz): 1,000 cycles per second. Today’s processors are mea-
sured in gigahertz (GHz) in billions of cycles per second. To
get an idea of how much faster today’s processors are, think of
sprinting coast-to-coast across America in no more time than it
would take you to walk across your bedroom.
Between 1993 and 1999, processor speeds increased
tenfold. Since then, processor speeds have not
even doubled. The reason for the declining rate of
increase lies in the physical limitation of the silicon
being used to make semiconductors.


DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY 33
.Performance of Digital Devices
Most digital devices have
coprocessors to help the CPU
with specialized functions such
as graphics and sound capabili-
ties. This further improves the
system performance. Collectively,
the various components that per-
form critical functions are known
as the chipset.
Memory
The CPU and memory work
closely together. Everything the
CPU does comes from memory
and ends up in memory. The two main types of memory are
ROM (read-only memory) and RAM (random-access memory).
ROM is permanent memory that remains in place even when
the device is turned off. Information stored in ROM is “main-
tained” in BIOS (Basic Input–Output System), a small program
that starts—or boots—the digital device, checks its compo-
nents, and launches the operating system.
RAM is temporary memory. When you launch an applica-
tion program, it is loaded into RAM. Information that you put
into the device during a particular work session is stored in
RAM. RAM remembers this information only while the com-
puter is turned on. If you turn off the computer, everything in
RAM is lost.


34 DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY
Flash memory is a type of memory that retains
data after the device is turned off but can be used like
RAM. Flash memory chips are found in digital cam-
eras, handheld computers, cell phones, USB drives, and
other devices.
The speed of a digital device depends largely on
how fast the CPU can store information into memory
and retrieve information from it. In the 1960s, memory
could be accessed only once every 10,000 nanosec-
onds (that’s every 0.00001 seconds). Today, memory can be
accessed every 60 nanoseconds (or once every 0.00000006
seconds), which means memory speed has improved more
than 10,000 percent.
Flash card
Storing Files in a Flash
The portable USB flash drive (or thumb drive) is a
handy little pocket device that allows you to easily
transport files and take files anywhere you go.
Just plug it into your computer’s USB port and
it will pop up on the screen as a portable or
removable device.


DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY 35
.Performance of Digital Devices
Digital Device Performance
Simply having a fast processor does not guarantee a fast
device. The memory needs to be fast enough to keep up with
the processor, and they must be connected to each other in
a way that ensures data flows freely between them. Think
of driving a high-performance racing car through a crowded
city. That super-fast car is slowed by stoplights, pedestrians,
and other traffic. Similarly with processors and memory, if the
processor can’t access the memory because other devices like
graphics cards also try to use the same “highway” called the
data bus, then having a fast processor is of little advantage.
Devices can be rated by the speed of this highway.
Some devices use multiple buses to improve the
flow of data between the processor and memory to
improve system performance.





DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY 37
.Understanding Data and Files
Understanding Data
and Files
Data and information are two terms commonly used to mean
the same thing. However, each term has its own definition.
“Data” refers to symbols—letters, numbers, and other char-
acters—that may or may not have meaning. “Information”
is data placed into a context that gives them meaning. For
instance, a data set may include 89, 93, 85, 90, and 96. Alone,
these numbers are data with little meaning. But if it is revealed
that these numbers were the high temperatures of several con-
secutive days or a student’s test scores in a course, then the
data become information. Digital devices store data and can
help organize data into context to make
usable information.
Almost all data is stored in the form
of files. The many different types of files
include number, text, picture, sound,
and video files. The type, or format,
of the file is identified by the suffix, or
extension—usually several letters long—
that follows a dot after the file name. For
example, in the file name badger patrol.
txt, the “.txt” indicates a text file.
Software programs are set up to
properly interpret specific types of files.
Most programs can use multiple file for-
mats. However, the types of files a pro-
gram can interpret are typically limited
to the program’s function; for instance,
audio players can process only sound
files and not spreadsheet files.
Information
89
93 85 90
96
Test scores for
John Doe Data
Data
Data
Data
Data


38 DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY
Understanding Data and Files .
What Extension, Please?
When creating a file name, using the correct
extension is important, particularly if the file will
be emailed to another computer or viewed on a
webpage. If the servers that display webpages or
help send email can’t read those extensions, they
can’t tell the receiving device what sort of file it
is receiving, and the recipient won’t be able to
process the file.
There are thousands of different types of files
and file extensions. Some can be read only by
a specific brand of device or software program.
However, many popular file formats can now be
read on any operating system as long as the digital
device is running the required software.
On many devices and in operating systems,
these extensions are not displayed as commonly
as they once were. In many cases, file types are
distinguishable by the different icons.


DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY 39
.Understanding Data and Files
Extension File Type
Text files
.txt ASCII text
.doc or .docx Microsoft Word® (word processing)
Document Files
.pdf Portable document format for files compatible with the Adobe
Acrobat® Reader; can include text and images
Image files
.jpg Popular for saving photographs; adjustable compression ratio to
achieve exact desired file size
.gif Nonphotographic images such as icons, buttons, drawings,
and figures
.png Image format with better color reproduction than .gif
.bmp Short for bitmap, a standard Windows® graphics format
.tif Offers a lossless way to compress graphics; produces much larger
file than .jpg
Presentation files
.ppt or .pptx Microsoft PowerPoint®, a slide-based presentation program
Spreadsheet files
.xls or .xlsx Microsoft Excel®, a spreadsheet program
Sound files
.mp3 High compression of sound data with only a slight loss in quality
.aiff, .au Macintosh®-platform sound file
.wav Windows®-platform sound file
.aac, .wma High compression; even better quality than .mp3 file
Video files
.avi Windows® video file
.mov, .mpg,
.mpeg Movie file in Mac® or Windows® platform
Web files
.htm, .html Hypertext markup language
.asp, .aspx Active server page (.aspx is used for dynamic pages)
.php Dynamic webpages
.css Cascading style sheet


40 DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY
Understanding Data and Files .
Storing Data
Let’s look at some main types of data and how they are stored
on digital devices.
Numbers
Think of a digital device as a collection of billions of circuits,
each with just two positions, off and on. These two positions are
represented by the numerals 0 and 1, which make up the binary
number system. All data is stored on a digital device as groups
of 0s and 1s. Each individual numeral is called a bit, short for
binary digit. Bits are arranged in sets of eight bits, which is
called a byte. The byte is a fundamental unit of data storage.
For more
about machine
languages, see
the Programming
merit badge
pamphlet.
Bit
Nibble =
4 bits
Byte = 8 bits
Kilobyte = 1,024 bytes
Megabyte = 1,024 kilobytes
Gigabyte = 1,024 megabytes
Terabyte = 1,024 gigabytes
This binary code translates to “Boy Scouts of America.”


DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY 41
.Understanding Data and Files
Binary numbers do not look much like the decimal
numbers we are used to seeing. For example, writ-
ten as a binary number, the decimal numeral 101 is
01100101. Binary numbers make up machine code,
the low-level language that digital devices translate
all data into before performing operations on it.


Understanding Data and Files .
Text
Text is stored using a special code corresponding to the num-
bers between 0 and 255. The code is called ASCII (American
Standard Code for Information Interchange). Similar to the way
it stores decimal numbers, the device represents each text char-
acter as a single byte of information. For example, the letter A
is assigned the number 65 in ASCII code, which is 01000001 in
binary form. ASCII text is stored without any formatting, such
as indentations or boldface.
Pictures
Pictures are stored as a series of small dots called pixels. A mon-
itor might display, for example, 1,024 x 768 pixels; each hori-
zontal row contains 1,024 pixels, and there are 768 rows stacked
vertically. In a black-and-white monitor, each pixel requires only
one bit of information, telling it to display either 1 (black) or
0 (white). A grayscale monitor designates up to 256 different
shades of gray between black and white for each pixel.
A device screen that is in color displays pixels with three
color components—red, green, and blue. Different colors, dis-
played in various shades and strengths, produce the desired final
color. Eight bits of information per pixel will produce 256 differ-
ent colors on the screen; 16 bits will produce 32,767 colors; and
24 bits will produce 16.7 million colors—the maximum number
the human eye can see, sometimes called true color.
An ASCII text file is often referred to as a plain text
file and can be read by almost any word-processing
program. Depending on the program, you can add
formatting and save the text in another format.


DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY 43
.Understanding Data and Files
When digital cameras take pic-
tures, the resolution, or number of
pixels, is important for the quality
of the picture. Each pixel is a dot
that has information about the
picture in that location.
A television (old analog or
today’s digital) also has pixels.
For example, a high definition
television labeled 1080i indicates
that the picture is 1920 pixels wide
by 1080 pixels tall. That means
each picture has about 2.1 million
pixels. This is also known as 2.1
mega-pixels.
Figure 1 is a “high” resolution
picture of 1.4 mega-pixels. Figure
2 is a “low” resolution picture of
only 30 thousand pixels. Because
Figure 2 has much less informa-
tion about the image, it looks less
crisp and clear.
In Figure 3, we magnify a
small section from the left-hand
side of Figure 1. Some detail is
still there, but individual pixels
are starting to be noticed. This is
sometimes called pixelation. In
Figure 4, we magnify Figure 2.
The individual pixels are clearly
seen. Depending on the photog-
rapher, a high or low resolution
picture would be important.
Figure 1, pixels, hi-res
Figure 2, pixels, lo-res
Figure 3, pixels, detail from Figure 1
Figure 4, pixels, detail from Figure 2


44 DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY
Understanding Data and Files .
Sound
Sound is made up of vibrations that travel through the air by
passing from one molecule to the next. These vibrations are
called waves. If you could see them, they would look like the
waves at the beach. The height, or amplitude, of the wave
determines the volume or loudness. How close together the
waves are determines the frequency, or pitch—whether it’s a
bird’s whistle or a boom of a bass drum and how that sounds
to your ear.
A digital device “hears” through a microphone or media
player, via an analog signal consisting of these sound waves.
Compression
Picture and image files are stored in many different
formats. Some formats use specialized mathemati-
cal formulas to compress the picture. The file takes
up less disk space and is easier to email or display
on the web, but some of the original data is lost,
causing the expanded picture to be more blurry
than the original. This is called lossy compression.
Another type of compression, called lossless, can
temporarily shrink a file by removing parts that are
repeated and then, later, restore the file to its full
size. Lossless compression is often used with text
files and database files. Lossless compression is
also used when you want to retain the original
picture size and quality.


.Understanding Data and Files
The device’s audio circuitry feeds this signal through an ana-
log-to-digital converter chip that converts the signal into bits
that the computer can read and save as a digital file: basically
a long list of 1’s and 0’s. When you replay the file, the data is
sent back through a digital-to-analog chip, which rebuilds the
shape of the wave and sends that information to the speakers,
which vibrate the air, re-creating the original sound wave that
you can hear.
Video
Faster microprocessors have made it possible for devices to
display video. Digital video is projected much like traditional
film in that digitally encoded pictures are flashed up on the
screen in rapid succession to give the appearance of movement.
However, storing all the digital pictures needed to make up one
digital video requires enormous amounts of storage space. To
reduce the amount of storage needed, video files use a type of
digital compression where the first picture is stored in the video
file and then only the changes to that picture are stored as the
second picture. The third picture is made up of only the changes
made by the combination of the first and second picture. Each
succeeding picture is made up of the changes made from the
previous composite image. This process continues for the entire
movie. By using the image displayed on the screen and only
storing the changes to the current display, the video file is able
to eliminate lots of redundant information and compress the
video to a manageable size.


46 DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY
Java is one of the most popular programming languages in the world because it
is free and runs on many different platforms, a quality referred to as “Write Once,
Run Anywhere.” Java is easy to learn if you are already familiar with another
text-based language.


DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY 47
.Computer Software
Computer Software
Software, a set of instructions organized into a program, is
what makes hardware work. The central processing unit (CPU)
uses this list of instructions to move and manipulate data in
the digital device.
The three main categories of programs are operating
systems, application programs, and programming languages.
Operating systems control the basic operations of the com-
puter and set up the environment for the applications to run.
Application programs allow users to do specific tasks with
their digital devices, such as write letters or touch up photo-
graphs. Programming languages are used to write other pro-
grams; for example, application programs.
Operating Systems
Operating system (OS) software is the foundation software on
which all other programs run. This set of programs controls all
of the digital device’s basic operations. This includes accept-
ing input, displaying output on the monitor or graphic display,
keeping track of files and directories on the hard drive or other
internal storage, and controlling peripheral devices such as disk
burners, printers, scanners, speakers, and the mouse.
Because of the work done by the OS, programmers
who create application software do not have to
write code (instructions) into their applications to
control these basic functions.
Hardware is the physical, electronic, and electrical
devices that make up a computing device, such as
the CPU, disk drive, keyboard, and monitor.


48 DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY
Computer Software .
Likewise, the OS adapts to upgrades to a computer’s
hardware (for example, installing more RAM), automatically
updating settings in the rest of the system. Another task of the
OS is to serve as a kind of traffic cop, allocating processing
power and memory space among the various programs that
might be running at once while holding back some resources
for use by the OS itself.
Common operating systems are the Microsoft®
Windows® series, the Macintosh® series, Android™
OS, and the UNIX® family of operating systems,
which includes freeware and inexpensive versions
of what is known as Linux®.
Applications
As digital devices become more powerful, and as people think
up new ways that computers can help us at school, work, and
home, new application programs are continually being written.
There is no limit to how many applications can exist. The fol-
lowing are some of the most popular types of application pro-
grams, but there are many others adapted to particular needs
in science, business, industry, and personal use.
Spreadsheet
A spreadsheet performs arithmetic on numbers, which are
arranged in rows and columns. The rows and columns inter-
sect to form boxes, called cells. A formula is a function per-
formed on numbers in particular cells—for example, adding
the number in cell A1 to the number in cell A2, and having
the sum appear in cell A3.
The benefit of a spreadsheet is that if you change a num-
ber in one cell, the program immediately recalculates the totals
in the other cells that are affected by the change. This allows
you to perform “what if?” operations. For example, you can
figure out how many more Scouts could go to summer camp if
the troop raised an additional $300 or $400 at car washes.
Besides numbers, you can also type words in a spread-
sheet, such as headings, names, and explanatory notes.
Spreadsheets are useful for various types of reports, including
fundraising reports, fitness logs, sports team records, travel
budgets, currency conversions, and worksheets for car loans.PROGR AMMING
STEM-BasedSTEM-Based
For more
about machine
languages, see
the Programming
merit badge
pamphlet.


DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY 49
.Computer Software
Database Manager (DBM) Program
Database manager (DBM) programs are used for organizing,
storing, and keeping track of a set of information called a data-
base. The data are organized in lines called records, with each
record consisting of a number of fields. For each new record,
the same set of fields is stored, with different contents in
each field.
A troop attendance database could be set up with a record
for each Scout in the troop. Each record would consist of fields
for the Scout’s name, patrol, rank, troop meeting attendance,
campout attendance, and other events. An entry of “present”
or “absent” could be made in the appropriate field of each
Scout’s record after each activity. The Scoutmaster could easily
see who attended a particular event. The DBM program could
also calculate the percentage of participation for each activity.
Word Processing Program
Word-processing software programs are tools that make writ-
ing—and formatting text—easier. Once words are typed into
a document, they can easily be rearranged and corrected.
Software may allow you to change the size and style (together,
called the font) of the letters, as well as the color. You can eas-
ily align paragraphs to the left, right, or center; add bullets or
underlining; adjust the amount of indentation at the beginning
of a paragraph; and alter the width of margins.
Some programs let you add tables and graphics and will
automatically number pages. You can check the spelling, make
different versions of documents without completely retyping
them, and print out your work.
A DBM program
can perform sort-
ing and searches
of the database
information and
produce neatly
printed reports
with graphs
and charts.
With the “mail merge” command,
you can insert names and
addresses from a database
program into a form letter to
send out personalized letters
to a large group—to every
Scout in your troop,
for example.


50 DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY
Computer Software .
Presentation Program
A popular aid for public speaking, a presentation program
lets you create screens or slides that list important points of
your speech, as well as pictures, charts, graphs, and even
sounds and animation. Slides you create can be projected
onto a screen in front of your audience, and can be advanced
from one slide to the next while you speak. Also, the text and
graphics portion of your presentation can be printed and dis-
tributed as handouts for your audience.
Desktop Publishing and Graphic Design Software
Desktop publishing programs allow you to design (or lay out)
a page with various elements, including words, pictures, and
drawings. The programs have special tools for formatting text,
such as setting a headline in big, bold type; sizing images to
fit the layout; and adding color backgrounds, shading, boxes,
lines, and other design elements. Using a desktop publishing
program, you can design a newsletter, a poster, or even a book.
Graphics and design programs allow you to cre-
ate and edit pictures or drawings. Paint or draw
programs let you create images in two dimensions.
Other programs allow you to draw in two or three
dimensions and create sophisticated models.


DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY 51
.Computer Software
Computer-Aided Drafting
(CAD) Programs
Three-dimensional CAD programs
can be used to create wireframes,
or outlines of objects, and solid
models, which can show texture,
light, and shadows. Automotive
engineers use CAD programs to
design automobiles, down to each
individual part. Other engineers
use CAD software to design circuit
boards, bridges, or buildings.
CAD software is also used by
architects to design rooms or entire
buildings. A designer usually starts
drawing the walls of the structure
by dragging the cursor across the
screen with the mouse, and the
program automatically adds dimensions. You can place furniture
in a room—using pull-down menus for couches, tables, etc.—
and input exact measurements to match your own furniture.
Photo and Video Programs
Using photo-editing software, you can
enhance digital pictures by cropping,
sharpening, adjusting brightness and
contrast, deepening color saturation,
correcting color hues, and otherwise
improving your pictures. You can then
print the touched-up photos and save them
as digital files.
Photo files can be saved at various
resolution and compression levels,
depending on how you will use an image.
For printing, you want as high a resolution
and as low a compression as possible,
resulting in a large file size and sharp
prints. For sending a photograph via email
or displaying a photo on a website, you
want low resolution and high compression,
which produces a small file size that will
quickly download to a viewer’s computer.
CAD architecture software allows the user to
create a floor plan like this that can be printed
and shared.


52 DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY
Computer Software .
Video editing programs turn a computer into a digital
movie studio, allowing you to edit and enhance video footage
taken from a digital device. The basic functions of these editing
programs include cutting and rearranging video sections; add-
ing transition effects such as fades and wipes between scenes;
and adding titles and text, background music, and narration.
Most digital cameras come bundled with image editors.
Photo album programs help you organize your pic-
ture collection electronically on a hard drive or com-
pact disc (CD or DVD). This software may also let
you create slideshows of your pictures that can be
stored on a CD or DVD for playback on a computer
or TV.


DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY 53
.Computer Software
Webpage Editors
Webpage editors are programs that help you create websites
without having to write HTML, the best-known markup lan-
guage used on the World Wide Web. Typically, these programs
help you design your page—positioning text and graphics—by
selecting commands from toolbars and icons. The editing pro-
gram automatically creates the underlying code needed. Most
webpage editors also allow you to add advanced features such
as animation and scrolling text. The programs offer some help in
publishing the webpages you have created onto the internet.
Financial Programs
Financial programs help users keep track of money. In their
simplest form, they are like a checkbook that does all the addi-
tion and subtraction for you. Financial software has additional
features that allow you to generate reports, helping you track
how you spend your money by categorizing expenses (enter-
tainment, phone, school, and so on). A program can also help
you create a budget so that you won’t overspend in particu-
lar categories. This kind of software can be linked to bank
accounts over the internet so a check register can be automati-
cally updated, and funds can be transferred between checking
and savings accounts.
Media Players
Media players help organize music. You can use these pro-
grams to convert music from audio compact discs into files
that can be stored digitally. You can also add songs that you
have purchased. These programs let you create playlists of
your favorite songs, “burn” songs onto CDs, and download
your music files into portable music players.
See “The Internet
and the World
Wide Web” later
in this pamphlet.
It is important to remember that
copyrighted song files cannot
legally be shared over the
internet. See “Intellectual
Property” later in this pamphlet.





DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY 55
.The Internet and the World Wide Web
The Internet and the
World Wide Web
Two or more computers working together can do far more
than a single computer. When computers are linked, their con-
nection is called a network. It might be a local area network
(LAN) contained within a single building; or a wide area net-
work (WAN) covering a large region of the country.
These small and midsized networks, in turn, are linked
to form a much larger system that spans Earth. That system is
called the internet. The internet, simply stated, is a network of
networks. When connected to the internet, any digital device
can communicate with any other digital device around the
globe that is also connected to the internet.
The amazing thing about the internet is that it does not
rely on any one central computer
to operate, nor even a central
network. No one organiza-
tion controls it. Instead, the
internet operates across
numerous high-speed
networks maintained by
various internet service
providers (ISPs) and pri-
vate networks operated by
different companies.


56 DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY
The Internet and the World Wide Web.
Origins of the Internet
The internet’s origin can be traced to ARPANET, a small net-
work launched in 1969 by the U.S. Department of Defense.
ARPANET linked computers at various universities around
the country. In 1974, researchers Robert Kahn and Vinton
Cerf developed a way to join ARPANET with other similar
networks. The networks were joined in 1983, and the internet
was born.
At first, all networks were connected to the internet
through a “backbone” network. ARPANET was the first back-
bone. Then came a high-speed network of supercomputers
organized by the National Science Foundation. That backbone,
in turn, was replaced by private high-speed networks.
For years, only universities, military agencies, and defense
contractors used the internet. But as private companies were
allowed to join the internet, and as local area networks started
getting connected, it became possible for people everywhere to
use the internet, as well.
The supercomputer is the fastest type of computer made. This is Titan, one of the
world’s largest supercomputers.


DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY 57
.The Internet and the World Wide Web
World Wide Web
As the internet grew, a better way was needed to access and
display the vast stores of information it held. That better
way was the World Wide Web, developed in 1990 by Tim
Berners-Lee, a British physicist and software consultant at
CERN, the European particle physics laboratory. The web—
consisting of documents called webpages—would eventually
bring graphics, pictures, sound, animation, and video to the
internet. However, its true brilliance was in the simple system
of organization it provided.
One of Berners-Lee’s two main innovations was the uni-
form resource locator (URL), a form of address that can be
used on any webpage or other file on the internet. His other
important invention was hypertext markup language (HTML),
a form of computer language for creating webpages that link
to other webpages through clickable hypertext. A word in
hypertext can be linked by way of a hidden URL to any other
page, or part of a page, or file. Simply by clicking your cursor
on the linked word, you can jump to some other location on
the internet, even if it is stored on a computer far from the
page where you started.
Billions of
webpages are
indexed on the
World Wide
Web—and an
endless number of
pages is possible.
The Incredible Optical Fiber
Optic and photonic devices help make today’s internet work. Lasers,
fiber optics, photonic switches, and photonic displays allow digital
devices anywhere in the world to connect to each other, exchange
information, and visually display that information. All information,
like movies, phone calls, and emails, are converted into binary data,
or ones and zeros, similar to the dots and dashes of Morse code on a
telegraph line.


58 DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY
The Internet and the World Wide Web.
Today, those ones and zeros of information known
as “bits” are generated as pulses of light by turning
a laser on and off. A small number of the bits are
grouped together in what is called a packet with its
own address or header, just like an old-fashioned
letter, so they can get to the right place. These pack-
ets of light pulse and then travel along a strand of
glass called an optical fiber.
An optical fiber is about the same size (approxi-
mately 100 micrometers, or millionths of a meter)
as a hair on your head. It can transmit as much
information as more than 30 feet (10 meters) in
diameter of copper telephone cables. A single fiber
can carry more than 1 million phone calls at the
same time.
There are optical switches on the internet that
get those packets from your computer to your
friend’s computer, if it is an email, or from a special
computer called a server, if it is a movie, video,
website, etc. Near the end of the journey, the light
pulses are converted back to electrical ones and
zeros. Those electrical “bits” drive special photonic
display devices (LEDs or LCDs) so you can see
the information.
In summary, the vast amount of information on
the internet is available at your fingertips because
optical fibers carry millions of times more bits of
data over thousands of times greater distances than
the copper cables they replaced. The only thing
preventing you from getting even more information
faster is the copper wire connecting you to the pho-
tonic internet.


DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY 59
.The Internet and the World Wide Web
Web Browsers and Helper Software
To view webpages, you need a software program called a web
browser. As webpages add video, sound, and animation, addi-
tional software is needed to enable the browsers to use these
multimedia elements. A helper software program “inserted”
into a browser is referred to as a plug-in. When videos are
uploaded to a popular website (YouTube, for example), the
video files—no matter what format they were created with—
are converted into Flash files, which are compressed (made
smaller) for easy loading onto a webpage.
Another kind of helper software used in web browsers is
called a cookie. A cookie is a small data file transferred to your
computer from a website. The cookie, which can contain infor-
mation about you, such as your user name, language prefer-
ences, or shopping preferences, stays on your computer and is
loaded into your web browser the next time you visit the site.
Cookies are retrieved from your computer each time you visit a
website to allow your visits to have consistency.
Third-party cookies are another type of cookie that can be
placed on your computer. Typically these cookies are placed
on a computer to track internet usage to be used in advertising
and statistical analysis. All browsers allow you to manage and
remove cookies that are stored on your computer.
Widely used
plug-ins include
Adobe® Flash®
and Adobe®
Acrobat®, which
allow webpages
to display videos
and PDF files.
Most browser
creators allow
users to view and
manage plug-ins
or add-ins through
the browser’s
Tools menu.


60 DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY
The Internet and the World Wide Web.
Protocols and Domains
Every device connected to the internet can be identified by its
unique internet protocol (IP) address. Every computer connect-
ed to the internet has an IP address, either a permanent one
or a different one that is assigned to the computer each time
it connects. A typical IP address looks like this: 23.67.61.152.
This is the same as typing www.scouting.org into a web
browser. Finding devices by their IP addresses was difficult, so
in 1983, the University of Wisconsin created the domain name
system (DNS), which allows people to find a computer on the
internet by a unique name connected to the IP address. (These
names form part of the website’s URL.)
Domain names, such as “www.scouting.org,” always have
two or more parts separated by dots. The part of the name
farthest to the right is the top-level domain—.com, .net, .org,
.gov, .edu. The part to the left of the top-level domain (“scout-
ing” in this example) is the host name. The top-level domain
alone can tell you something about the website.
• .com, .net, and .org—for general use
• .gov—reserved for governmental agencies
• .edu—for educational institutions, such as schools
and colleges
Once a particular domain name, such as www.scouting.
org, has been registered, no one else can use it. A nonprofit
group called ICANN (Internet Corporation for Assigned Names
and Numbers) maintains the internet domain name system.
ICANN regulates the buying and selling of domain names,
which is handled by various private companies.
Different countries have their own top-level domains.
For example, .uk stands for United Kingdom, .au for
Australia, .jp for Japan, .ru for Russia, and .ca for
Canada. Websites with those letters at the end are likely
to be based in those countries.


DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY 61
.The Internet and the World Wide Web
Internet Security
When most users type in a web address, they usually start
with the “www” part of the URL. But in front of that is an
important part which tells the browser how to communicate
the information: http (plain text) or https (encrypted). HTTP,
which stands for hypertext transfer protocol, is a set of stan-
dards governing the exchange of data as text. This is the most
common type of request sent through the internet.
HTTPS, which stands for hyper-
text transfer protocol secure, adds an
additional layer to HTTP by encrypt-
ing the information with Secure
Sockets Layers (SSL) and adding
more security around a web request
using security certificates. You will
typically see https used whenever
you are asked to log in to a website
or send personal information.
Before sending personal infor-
mation to a website that is requesting
it, you should check that the site has appropriate security and
a valid security certificate. web browsers (Internet Explorer,
Firefox, and others) know how to trust HTTPS websites and
typically represent secure websites with a lock icon in the URL
address bar. You can click on the lock to see information on
the website and security information. Check
that the name on the certificate matches the
website you are visiting and that it is still
valid. When in doubt, stop and do not use
the website.


Instant Messaging, Texting, and
Video Chatting
Digital technology has made possible new forms of communi-
cation. You know that email allows you to send a written mes-
sage to any other email user in the world who has an email
account that is connected to the internet. Another form of digi-
tal communication is instant messaging (IM), by which people
can communicate in real time, using digital devices. IM also
lets users see whether a particular person is online and con-
nected to make an instant-messaging exchange possible.
Another kind of instant messaging is text messaging,
usually done through a cell phone, which contains com-
puter chips. Texting is good for quick communication at
times when phone calls might be disruptive or impractical,
or when a person isn’t available to take your call. Text
messages can also be sent to order products or services,
but you must be careful not to receive unwanted charges
on your cell-phone bill this way.
Video chatting allows you and a friend to talk to and
see each other, turning your digital device into a sort of video
telephone. You can use your computer or other device with
a camera attached to stream the video and audio back and
forth. Another way to do this is through your cell phone or
mobile device using specialized streaming software.
Search Engines
The internet contains billions of pages of content. To find the
information you need among all these pages, you use a search
engine. Search engines use programs called crawlers to explore
the web and build indexes of webpages.
To use a search engine, you simply type in your search
term (“court of
honor,” for example),
wait a moment, and
then see a list of
webpages pop up that
contain the term you
submitted. You can
click on any of the
listed pages that you
want to view.


DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY 63
.The Internet and the World Wide Web
Tips for Online Safety
On the internet, you can have fun, play games, and take care
of business. You can find help with your hobbies and interests,
learn all sorts of things, click your way to a wide world of
instant information, and even read books. Along with the con-
venience of the internet, however, comes some risk.
Stay Safe Online
Learn about internet safety by viewing the Digital
Safety video that is required for Scout rank. Together
with NetSmartz.org, the BSA created this video to help
educate Scouts about being safer online, cyberbullying,
and internet scams, and to promote community
awareness of internet safety issues. Before reviewing
this video, Scouts should complete the exercises in
the “How to Protect Your Children from Child Abuse: A
Parent’s Guide” pamphlet with their parent or guardian.
This pamphlet can be found in the front of the Scouts
BSA Handbook. Find the video at www.scouting.org/
training/youth-protection/scouts-bsa
A computer can catch a malware infection from an
email message, websites, downloaded programs, or
infected disks.


64 DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY
The Internet and the World Wide Web.
Protect Yourself
When you are online, be careful to guard your
privacy and protect yourself from potentially harm-
ful situations. The following tips will help you stay
safe. Your parent, merit badge counselor, or Scout
leader may talk with you about other rules for inter-
net safety. This information is covered in the Cyber
Chip. To review, here are a few tips for keeping
yourself safe and being a good online Scout.
1. Follow your family’s rules for going online.
Respect any limits on how long and how often
you are allowed to be online and what sites you
can visit. Do not visit areas that are off-limits. Just
as there are places you don’t go to in real life,
there are places to avoid on the internet.
2. Protect your privacy. Never exchange emails or
give out personal information such as your phone
number, your address, your last name, where
you go to school, or where your parents work,
without first asking your parent’s permission. Do
not send anyone your picture or any photographs
unless you have your parent’s permission.


DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY 65
.The Internet and the World Wide Web
3. Do not open emails or files you receive from
people you don’t know or trust. If you get some-
thing suspicious, trash it just as you would any
other junk mail. It may contain a virus that can
harm your computer just by opening the email.
4. If you receive or discover information that
makes you uncomfortable, leave it and tell your
parent. Never respond to any message that is
disturbing or hurtful.
5. Never agree to get together with someone you
“meet” online. Tell your parents if someone you
don’t know tries to arrange a meeting with you.
6. Never share your internet passwords with anyone
(even if they sound “official”) other than your
parents or other responsible adults in your family.
7. Don’t believe everything you see or read online.
Along with some great information, the internet
has lots of junk. Learn to separate the useful
from the worthless. Talk with your parents or
merit badge counselor about ways to tell
the difference.


66 DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY
The Internet and the World Wide Web.
Protect Your Computer and Other Digital Devices
Besides taking precautions to protect your personal safety
online, you should protect your computer and other digital
devices from a number of online dangers, including malware
and theft of files. This applies not only to your home
computer but also to any device that can be connected
to the internet such as cell phones and internet-connected
video game consoles.
Malware is a term covering several types of harmful files,
including viruses (software codes designed to harm your com-
puter in some way, such as by destroying files or causing your
computer to malfunction); worms (files that infect your com-
puter and send out copies of themselves from your computer
over the network); and trojan horses (programs that appear
to do something useful but actually are harmful). Another
form of malware is spyware. Such programs, often attached
to some useful software, “spy” on you, tracking your move-
ments on the web. Spyware can also install secret programs
on your computer.


DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY 67
.The Internet and the World Wide Web
Keep Your Digital Devices Healthy
The following tips will help you keep your computer and other digital
tools safe. Your parent, counselor, or librarian may talk with you about
other rules for avoiding viruses.
1. Look carefully at the return address of all email messages you
receive, especially those that arrive with attachments. Download
a file only from someone you trust; even then, be suspicious.
Sometimes a virus can be sent from a friend’s computer without the
person’s knowledge if the computer is infected. Be particularly wary
of a file attachment with a name ending with “.exe,” which indicates
an “executable” program file that may harm your system.
2. Install antivirus software on your computer and keep it updated. The
software can be set to automatically look for viruses on your hard
drive, to scan disks and files that you put into your computer, and to
scan email attachments that you receive.
3. Do not open email that appears to be spam, or junk mail, which may
only be trying to sell you something but could also introduce a virus
into your computer or other device.
4. Back up your important files regularly onto optical storage media
(CDs, DVDs), flash drives, or extra hard drives. (There are also
online backup services available for a yearly fee.) It is prudent to
make your backup redundant; that is, back up to more than one type
of media. Be sure to scan your backup media for malware, too.
5. Buy software only from trusted sources. Unauthorized copies of
software programs often contain viruses and should be avoided.
6. For added protection, use a firewall, which can consist of software,
hardware, or both, to keep intruders from looking at and possibly
stealing private information stored on your hard drive, such as pass-
words or credit card numbers. Using a firewall is particularly wise if
you have a broadband connection to the internet. The latest versions
of Windows® and Macintosh® operating systems have built-in fire-
walls that you can activate to protect your computer online.
7. Keep your digital device software up-to-date. Software creators often
release updates as they fix issues with their software that can lead
to security problems. You can help protect your devices by keep-
ing up to date with these releases. Never update your computer or
other device without your parent’s permission.





DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY 69
.Digital Technology at Work
Digital Technology
at Work
Today, digital-technology skills are useful in almost every pro-
fession. As technology has become cheaper and more power-
ful, it has spread into practically all aspects of business includ-
ing agriculture, medicine, landscape design, and aerospace.
Almost all industries use digital technology for at least one part
of their operations. Employees use computers to perform vari-
ous tasks. Companies use websites and social media to com-
municate with customers. Technology has become an integral
piece of business.
Basic application programs—word processing, spread-
sheets, etc.—are used throughout the economy. But beyond
that, each industry uses specialized software, and often spe-
cialized technology, tailored for the specific needs of the trade.
• Graphic designers and special-effects creators use computers
to produce special film sequences for movies and
television commercials.
• Air-traffic controllers who guide commercial airplanes use
sophisticated systems to help them do their jobs.
• Music publishers record and edit
music digitally.
• Newspaper and magazine publishers use computers to edit
and design print products and online publications.
• Professional translators use digital devices to automatically
translate writing from one language into another.
• Doctors store and retrieve digital medical records of their
patients and access medical information that can help diag-
nose and treat illness.
• Hospitals use software-controlled robots for surgery and
digital techniques for medical images.
Computer-driven
robots are used
in manufacturing,
where they
provide precise
control of
sophisticated
equipment.


70 DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY
Digital Technology at Work.
• Architects use software, such as CAD, to help them
design buildings.
• Retail workers such as cashiers and stockers use digital
devices to track the store’s inventory both into the store and
then out through the registers.
The list of career uses for digital technology can be end-
less. When exploring any career field that interests you, look at
how that field uses digital technology to enhance and simplify
the work.
Video Games: More Than Just Fun
The video game business, which today employs thousands of
people, did not exist before digital technology was invented.
In only a few decades, the business has grown from a small
niche market to a major industry. In 2012, more than 214 mil-
lion video games were sold in the United States, or more than
two games for every household in America. Globally, the video
game industry sells more than 500 million games annually.
In the early days of video games, in the late 1970s and
early 1980s, many games were developed by one or two peo-
ple working alone on their computers. Graphics were simple.
Game play was crude and unsophisticated. Today, however,
video games are often large-scale productions involving entire
teams of individuals working on different parts of the game.


DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY 71
.Digital Technology at Work
Positions in the video game industry
include lead programmers, special-effects
programmers, audio programmers, sound
engineers, composers, art directors, game
designers, level designers, screenwrit-
ers, project managers, and game testers.
Developing a game can take months or years
of work and cost millions of dollars, but the
profits of a successful game can be huge.
Recently, sales of video games reached
over $10 billion per year in the United States
alone. If games played on social media and
mobile apps are added, this figure rises to
$15.9 billion. Electronic games are played
in 65 percent of American households.
Responding to the demand, more than 200 colleges, universi-
ties, and design schools now offer courses or degree programs
in game development and digital media.
Preparing for Your Visit
As you prepare to visit a business or an industrial facility that
uses digital technology, consider a grocery store, school, manu-
facturing facility, office, or even your local library. Here are
some things to investigate on your visit.
1. What types of digital technology are used—scanners, print-
ers, smartphones, tablets, price-check stations, and so on.
2. What types of software programs are most useful to the
organization—inventory, office applications, or mobile
apps, etc.
3. Whether any specialized software had to be written to meet
the organization’s particular needs.
4. What kind of digital technology skills the organization
seeks in newly hired employees.
5. How the internet has changed the way the organization
operates. Ask whether the organization has a website and
how many employees it takes to maintain the site. Ask if
the organization participates in social media and whether it
maintains a blog.





DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY 73
.Recycling E-Waste
Recycling E-Waste
New and exciting digital technology emerges every day to cap-
ture our imaginations and improve our lives. Digital technology
is changing so rapidly that yesterday’s wonder gizmo is today’s
outdated trash, filling landfills with e-waste. Most discarded
digital technology is loaded with toxic chemicals like lead,
bromine, cadmium, chlorine, and mercury.
According to the Environmental Protection Agency,
Americans throw away 125 million phones each year, creating
65,000 tons of waste. When digital technology is dumped in
landfills, dangerous chemicals can leak into groundwater. When
incinerated, the toxic chemicals contaminate the air. More than
half the states have banned electronics from landfills.
Manufacturers recognize the environmental issues and are
shifting to manufacturing processes that minimize the use of
hazardous chemicals, including:
• Reducing or eliminating lead solder
• Using less hazardous resins in plastics
• Using mercury-free flat-panel liquid crystal displays (LCD)
and arsenic-free glass
• Using bromine-free and chlorine-free printed circuit
board laminates
• Moving to less toxic and reactive phosphorous-based flame-
retardant chemicals
Because many recyclers are not equipped to responsibly
recycle electronics, it is important to help ensure proper dispos-
al of e-waste and use a certified recycler. Certified electronics
recyclers meet high standards for data privacy, environmental
responsibility, and employee health.
You can learn
about certified
recyclers by
visiting the
Environmental
Protection
Agency’s website;
see the resources
section.


74 DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY
Recycling E-Waste .
Batteries
Batteries are a special concern since every
mobile device uses some kind of battery.
While today’s household batteries—the
common AA, AAA, C, and D cell alkaline
batteries—are not thought to pose a sig-
nificant hazard because they contain
much less mercury than they used
to, it is still best to recycle them
and not discard them in the trash.
Batteries are not biodegradable, and
some of their properties can contaminate groundwater.
Rechargeable batteries are a significant problem, because
they are used in almost every mobile device in the market.
These contain toxic metals and can be hazardous in landfills
and incinerator emissions.
When recycling batteries, it is important to cover
the contacts with electrical tape to prevent a short,
which could start a fire.
The battery industry sponsors the Rechargeable Battery
Recycling Corporation (RBRC), which is dedicated to the
collection and disposal of rechargeable batteries. Many home
improvement stores participate in this program. You can
probably find a participating store in your community.
WHAT HAPPENS TO MY DATA?
A proper recycling center will remove all data
before reusing your old digital technology. But
why depend on others to do it? Always follow the
manufacturer’s guidelines to remove personal data
from your device so thieves can’t use your data. Not
deleting your data is like throwing important papers
in the trash without first shredding them. Note that
simply reformatting or resetting your old device
may leave your data subject to recovery. Be sure to
use an application which “sanitizes”
data completely.
For more infor-
mation about
recycling
batteries, see
the resources
section.


DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY 75
.Recycling E-Waste
How Can I Help?
Do your part to reduce e-waste by follow-
ing the four R’s of digital-device disposal:
Reuse. The best form of recycling is
to donate your old digital technology to a
good cause. A quick internet search will
identify charities that will take and refur-
bish your old technology for people who
can’t afford brand-new products, or for
residents of third-world countries where
digital technology is not readily available.
Recycle. According to the EPA, for every million cell
phones we recycle, 35,000 pounds of copper, 772 pounds of
silver, 75 pounds of gold, and 33 pounds of palladium can be
recovered. Many companies will responsibly recycle digital
e-waste for you; make sure you use a certified recycler.
Refurbish. Several companies buy old digital technology,
refurbish it, and then resell it. This is another form of recycling
that helps everyone involved. Many refurbishers will buy old
technology even if it doesn’t work properly and use certain
parts to fix other devices. See the resources section at the end
of this pamphlet for more information.
Reduce. The best way to reduce the amount of e-waste
is to simply use less stuff. Do you really need three or four
devices that play music, or could you get by with one or two?
Do you really need the latest cell phone, or could you wait a
year or two?
How Scouts Can Be Involved
Why not start your own recycling
effort in your community? Think
about how you can educate your
community about e-waste and set
up drop boxes for digital technol-
ogy that you could then send
to recycling and reuse centers.
You might even sell the devices
you collect to a refurbishing com-
pany and use the proceeds for
your troop.





DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY 77
.Intellectual Property
Intellectual Property
Ideas are referred to as intellectual property. Intellectual prop-
erty laws are set up to protect unique and original ideas by
establishing and defining the rights of those who create, own,
and use them. The laws seek to balance the benefits of copy-
ing, sharing, and spreading ideas while making it worthwhile
for people to produce new ideas.
Digital technology has made it much easier for people to
copy, share, and spread ideas, whether or not they own the
ideas. Technology allows people to mash up songs and videos,
manipulate images, and duplicate and use apps on different
devices. Creatively, this enables people with artistic skills to
put new spins on existing ideas. When it comes to innovation,
people can spend more time adjusting, enhancing, and tweak-
ing ideas without the need to start from scratch.
There is a downside to copying, sharing, and spreading
ideas—especially the ideas of others. Allowing people who cre-
ate ideas to enjoy the recognition and to profit from their hard
work is important in motivating people to produce new ideas
and materials.
In the United States, everyone is entitled to intellectual
property rights. For example, a record company has the right
to protect and profit from a song that it produces and releases,
just as an individual has the right to protect and profit from
a song that he or she writes and performs. A record company
may have the right to use a portion of another company’s or
artist’s song in one of their songs, just as an individual may
also use a portion of another person’s or company’s song. It all
depends on the intellectual property laws and how they apply.
Laws help protect intellectual property. Every Scout
needs to make sure to respect those laws and the
intellectual property created by others.


78 DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY
Intellectual Property .
Intellectual Property Protections
Intellectual property, or IP, refers to creations that cannot be
touched or held, such as ideas, plans, and designs. The major
types of intellectual property protection include copyright, pat-
ents, trade secrets, and trademarks. Each type protects different
aspects of ideas and has its own rules. The information below
provides an overview.
Copyright
Copyright law protects the creative, original expression of an
idea, not the idea itself. Examples of copyrighted works include
books, magazine articles, movies, music, plays, sculptures,
paintings, software, and photos. Under copyright law, protected
items are called “works of authorship,” and their creators are
called “authors.” Copyright law
gives the copyright owner a set of
exclusive rights to:
• Reproduce the work.
• Make “derivative works” of
the original work.
• Distribute copies of the work.
• Publicly perform the work.
• Publicly display a work.
• Perform an audio
recording via a digital
audio transmission.
A Scout Is Trustworthy
Scouting promotes hard work, creativity, and
innovation, and acting in an honest and respectful
fashion. Scouts should strive to create new ideas
and use existing ideas in a manner that respects
the hard work and the desires of the creators and
owners of those ideas.


DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY 79
.Intellectual Property
Keep in mind that copyright protects a set of
legal rights; it does not cover ownership of copies
of the works themselves. Just because a reader
owns a single copy of a book or movie on DVD
does not mean the reader can legally make cop-
ies of those works. However, although the copy-
right owner has the right to publish, reproduce,
and distribute a work, people are entitled to
resell items they have legally purchased. For instance, a person
can sell his or her books.
A “derivative work” is a work based on another work. If
someone translates an English-language book into French, the
French version is a derivative work. Also, if a producer creates
a movie based on a book, the movie is a derivative work of
the book.
Copying another person’s ideas may or may not
infringe upon or violate the person’s intellectual
property rights. Under certain circumstances and
limitations, the legal doctrine known as “fair use”
enables people to use a limited portion of copy-
righted works without obtaining permission.
The length of copyright protection can vary. Typically it is
the lifespan of the author plus 70 years, but under certain con-
ditions it can be longer. The Library of Congress has tools that
can help determine whether copyright protection on a work is
still in force.
Works no longer protected by copyright are in the public
domain. Anyone can use such works without obtaining permis-
sion or approval from the rights holder. For instance, Sir Arthur
Conan Doyle’s novels about Sherlock Holmes have entered into
the public domain, allowing people to make new movies and
television shows featuring Holmes or a Holmes-like character.
These new creations have their own copyright protections.


80 DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY
Intellectual Property .
One major restriction imposed by copyright law is that
you cannot make illegal copies of protected works. Trading in
illegal copies of copyrighted works is called piracy.
Unfortunately, digital technology makes it easy to produce
exact digital copies of certain kinds of intellectual property,
including copyrighted software programs, games, music, photo-
graphs, books or articles, and movies. Worsening the problem
is the illegal sharing of these pirated copies over the internet
through the use of file-sharing networks. These networks make
piracy easy and seemingly secret.
Not all copying is illegal. When you buy recorded music,
you usually are allowed to copy it for your personal use.
However, it is illegal to give copies of music or software to
your friends. If you do, you are committing a crime. If you
download pirated files into your computer, you also run the
risk of downloading a virus that can harm your computer and
data files.
Look at the copyright notice on page 2 of
this merit badge pamphlet. The information
follows the copyright symbol: © (a circled
capital C). What does the information tell
you? Also look at the acknowledgments in
the back of the pamphlet. What images in
this publication are copyrighted? All merit
badge pamphlets comply with intellectual
property laws.
Copying songs and books like this merit badge
pamphlet is like stealing anything else, and it is
wrong. You would not shoplift a CD at the music
store or sneak in at a concert to listen for free.
Similarly, you should not make copies of songs,
books, and other copyrighted materials for friends.


DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY 81
.Intellectual Property
Patent
A patent, issued by the U.S. government, grants certain exclu-
sive rights in an invention for a limited term, typically 14 to 20
years. Patent law gives the inventor the right to exclude others
from making, using, offering for sale, or selling the invention
throughout the United States or importing the invention into
the United States. In exchange for these exclusive rights, the
inventor must publicly disclose the invention. After the patent
expires, anyone is free to use the invention.
In the United States, an inventor must file a patent appli-
cation with the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office. The govern-
ment will grant a patent only after an examiner has looked at
the application and is satisfied that it meets the requirements.
For more about patents and the rights of inventors, see the
Inventing merit badge pamphlet.
Trade Secrets
Unlike copyright and patent law, trade secrets are covered by
state law. In most states, the four requirements for trade secret
protection are:
• The confidential information provides a competitive edge for
a business.
• The information has value.
• The information is not generally known.
• The information’s owner protects it through
reasonable measures to maintain its secrecy.
As long as the business ensures that the
information continues to meet these require-
ments, the business can maintain trade secret
protection indefinitely. Unlike patents, no
registration with a government agency is
necessary to obtain or maintain trade
secret protection.
Foreign governments also issue patents that
provide protection within their countries.


82 DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY
Intellectual Property .
Trademarks
A trademark (identified with a ™ or ®) is any word, name,
logo, symbol, or device, or a combination of them, used to
identify and distinguish the goods or products of a business.
Some famous trademarks are Coca-Cola®, McDonald’s®, and
Apple®. You are also likely familiar with the trademarked logos
of well-known companies, such as the golden arches of the
McDonald’s® restaurant chain. Unlike copyrights and patents,
trademark rights continue indefinitely as long as the owner
continues to use the mark.
In the United States, it is possible to obtain limited pro-
tection of a mark without registration. As soon as a business
starts using the mark, the business obtains some protection of
the mark as an unregistered trademark. Registration of a mark
with the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office gives the mark’s
owner additional benefits. Businesses can also obtain trade-
mark registrations from foreign governments.
The trademark symbol ™ may be used with any
mark. But the registered trademark symbol ® may
only be used by the owner of a mark following reg-
istration with the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office.


DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY 83
.Intellectual Property
Piracy
The unauthorized use of
another person’s intellectual
property is called piracy. As an
example, software piracy is a
costly, worldwide problem.
According to the Business
Software Alliance’s 2011 Global
Software Piracy Study: “[T]he
global piracy rate hovered at 42
percent in 2011 while a steadily
expanding marketplace in the
developing world drove the commercial value of software theft
to $63.4 billion.” It is not a victimless crime.
The Federal Bureau of
Investigation is charged
by the U.S. government
to investigate piracy
and intellectual property
theft. This includes ideas,
inventions, and creative
expressions, such as trade
secrets, music, movies,
and software. The FBI’s
Anti-Piracy Warning Seal is used to help “detect and
deter criminal violations of U.S. intellectual property
laws by educating the public about the existence of
these laws and the authority of the FBI to enforce
them.” You have probably seen this seal alongside the
following text:
The unauthorized reproduction or distribution of
a copyrighted work is illegal. Criminal copyright
infringement, including infringement without
monetary gain, is investigated by the FBI and is
punishable by fines and federal imprisonment.





DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY 85
Glossary
analog. Describes a device or information that is continually
variable, like a clock or a sound wave. The opposite of digital.
binary. A numbering system that uses only two digits. In digi-
tal technology, the two digits are 1 and 0, which represent
turning an electronic circuit on and off.
bitmap. A grid on a computer screen made up of individual
dots or pixels. The file name extension is “.bmp” and is a stan-
dard image format for personal computers.
browser. A program that lets users find
and explore information on the World
Wide Web, including text, graphics, sound,
and video.
cloud computing. Applications and data
storage, management, and processing
offered over the internet, on shared
computing resources rather than individual
personal devices.
compression. Shrinking a file. Compression
can be lossless (preserving all the data in a
file) or lossy, (some data is deleted).
cookie. A small file downloaded from a
website to your computer to store informa-
tion about your activity at the site, such as
what items you placed in your “shopping
cart” at a store website.
digitize. To change something such as a
picture or a sound into a form that a com-
puter can understand.


86 DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY
Glossary .
download. Transferring information “down” from someone
else’s computer to one’s own computer, by way of a local area
network connection or the internet.
driver. A small computer program that allows the computer to
communicate with a peripheral device, such as a printer
or scanner.
field. Part of a database in which a specific type of information
is stored, such as telephone numbers.
firewall. Software or hardware that protects a com-
puter or a private network of computers from other
computers on the internet.
freeware. Software that is not copyrighted and can be
used and copied by anyone. Also known as public-
domain software.
hard drive. A rigid disk consisting of several platters
that store information in magnetic form, usually
installed inside a computer.
HTML (hypertext markup language). The basic language
for displaying text and pictures on websites and linking
webpages together.
integrated circuit. A group of related circuits all manu-
factured together on a single chip.
local area network. A computer network
within a single office, building, or other site.
lossless/lossy. Compression can be lossless
(preserving all the data in a file) or lossy, in
which some data is deleted.
machine code. A programming language made up
of sets of binary codes that a computer uses to pass instruc-
tions back and forth among its parts. Sometimes called low-
level code.
malware. Damaging or “malicious” software intended to dis-
rupt a network or a single computer. Types of malware include
viruses, worms, and trojan horses.
memory. Where a computer stores information, for example,
in RAM or ROM, or on compact discs or hard drives.
microchip. Integrated circuit.
Integrated circuit


DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY 87
microprocessor. The “brain” of a microcom-
puter, or personal computer.
motherboard. The main circuit board of a com-
puter, which contains the central processing unit.
network. A group of connected computers.
operating system. Software that allows the computer to
perform basic functions.
output device. Any device such as a monitor, printer, or
sound card that allows information to be sent out from
a computer.
pixel. Short for picture element. A single dot on a
computer screen.
port. A place on a computer where accessories and
peripherals can be plugged in and connected.
protocol. The rules computers use to commu-
nicate with each other.
RAM (random-access memory). Temporary memory
that the computer uses to store programs and information
until the computer is turned off.
read. To retrieve information or a program from storage and
put it into the computer’s internal memory. The opposite
of write.
resolution. Describes how much detail is used to print an
image (in dots per inch, or DPI) or display it on a computer
monitor (in number of pixels wide by number of pixels high).
ROM (read-only memory). Permanent, unchangeable memory
used to store basic instructions the computer needs in order
to operate.
router. A device or software that
serves as a bridge between two or
more networks. A router determines
the best route for sending a packet
of data to its destination.
Microprocessor
Ports
Router


88 DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY
Glossary .
security certificate. A digital
certificate that authenticates
business websites and secures
email messages, allowing users
to verify the identity of
the company or person
with whom they are
doing business.
server. A computer on a
network that manages
shared resources, such as
files or webpages.
shareware. Software that a user pays for after trying it and
deciding to use it.
sound digitizer. A circuit that converts sound into digital form.
trojan horse. A virus or harmful computer program disguised
to look like a useful program, such as a screensaver.
uniform resource locator (URL). A location or address identi-
fying where documents can be found on the internet; also
known as a web address.
upload. To transfer information from one’s own computer
“up” to someone else’s computer via a local area network or
the internet.
USB (universal serial bus) port. The device used to
connect all such peripheral devices.
Wi-Fi (wireless fidelity). A
method of connecting comput-
ers on a network with radio
signals rather than wires.


DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY 89
.Glossary





DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY 91
.Digital Technology Resources
Digital Technology Resources
Scouting Literature
Drafting, Electricity, Electronics,
Engineering, Game Design, Graphic
Arts, Inventing, Photography,
Programming, and Robotics merit
badge pamphlets
With your parent’s permission, visit
the Boy Scouts of America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org,
for a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.
Organizations and Websites
American Society for
Engineering Education
www.asee.org
Computer and Information
Technology Occupations
Occupational Outlook Handbook:
www.bls.gov/ooh/computer-and-
information-technology/home.htm
Computer History Museum
www.computerhistory.org
Entertainment Software Association
www.theesa.com
Environmental Protection Agency
www.epa.gov
IEEE (Institute of Electrical
and Electronics Engineers)
www.ieee.org
IEEE Computer Society
www.computer.org
International Game Developers
Association
www.igda.org
International Intellectual
Property Alliance
www.iipa.org
Library of Congress
www.loc.gov
Recording Industry Association
of America
www.riaa.com
U.S. Patent and Trademark Office
www.uspto.gov
World Wide Web Consortium
www.w3.org


92 DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY
Digital Technology Resources.
E-Waste Resources
Call2Recycle
www.call2recycle.org
Earth911
earth911.com
Terracycle
www.terracycle.com/en-US
Acknowledgments
The Boy Scouts of America grate-
fully acknowledges the team that
helped update this edition of Digital
Technology, which replaces the
Computers merit badge pamphlet:
Celeste Rance—Digital
Technology merit badge lead;
coauthor, Programming merit badge
pamphlet; software development
manager, Pearson
Rick Folea—Eagle Scout;
Programming merit badge lead;
coauthor, Robotics merit badge
pamphlet; AutomationDirect.com
Laszlo Hideg—Ph.D., P.E.—
Transmission Algorithms and Control,
GM Powertrain; coauthor, Robotics and
Programming merit badge pamphlets;
FIRST® Robotics competition judge
and volunteer
Steve Petersen—Eagle Scout;
BSA Cyber Chip codeveloper; web
development professional
Robert J. Caruso, CISSP—
Information security architect, Battelle
Memorial Institute; inventor and
software product developer; U.S.
CyberPatriot mentor and lifelong
Scouter; coauthor, Programming merit
badge pamphlet; BSA Cyber
Chip codeveloper
Steve Wincor—Chief systems
architect, Lockheed Martin; BSA
Nova Awards mentor; coauthor,
Programming merit badge pamphlet;
BSA Cyber Chip codeveloper
Dr. Philip Stahl, Ph.D.—Eagle
Scout; senior optical physicist, NASA;
2014 president, SPIE (Society of Photo-
Optical Instrumentation Engineers)
Thanks also to Eagle Scout
Christopher Hideg for his assistance
with sidebars for this merit
badge pamphlet.
We appreciate Scott Stuckey for
writing the previous edition of the
Computers merit badge pamphlet,
upon some of which this new pam-
phlet is based. Mr. Stuckey is a former
editor of Scout Life magazine.
The BSA is grateful to the
Components, Packaging, and
Manufacturing Technology Society
of the Institute of Electrical and
Electronics Engineers, in particular
longtime national Scout jamboree staff
member Ralph W. Russell II, IEEE
Precollege Education Coordinating
Committee, for their assistance with
previous editions of the Computers
merit badge pamphlet that formed the
basis for much of this revised edition.


DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY 93
.Digital Technology Resources
Photo and Illustration Credits
American Museum of Radio,
courtesy—page 16 (transistor)
Apple Computer Inc., courtesy—page
16 (Macintosh®)
Federal Bureau of Investigation,
courtesy—page 83 (FBI logo)
Christopher Folea, courtesy—cover
(e-recycling logo)
Rick Folea, courtesy—page 75 (Scout)
Christopher Hideg, courtesy—
page 43 (all)
Library of Congress, Prints and
Photographs Division, courtesy—
pages 16 (Babbage) and
20 (Edison)
MIT Museum, courtesy—
page 21 (Bush)
NASA, courtesy—page 23
Oak Ridge Leadership Computing
Facility at the Oak Ridge National
Laboratory, courtesy—page 56
University of Pennsylvania, courtesy—
page 22
Wikipedia.org—pages 17, 18 (Pascal,
King), 19, 20 (Hollerith), and 24
Wikipedia.org/Asim18—page 25
Wikipedia.org/Gwern—page 21
(punched card)
Wikipedia.org/Adam Schuster—page
16 (Hollerith’s electric tabulator)
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the prop-
erty of or are protected by the Boy
Scouts of America.
Brian Payne—page 12 (youth)


Notes


Notes


Get ahead in Scouting with Scout Life magazine. It’s loaded with the
latest news on merit badges and other advancement tools. Plus, it’s got
outdoor adventure, games and comics, leadership tips, life skills, stories
about other Scouts and more. It’s just what you need to succeed.
Subscribe today at go.scoutlife.org/subscribe
Use promo code SLMBP15 to get a special
print + digital bundle offer priced just for Scouts.