INSECT
STUDY
STEM-Based


INSECT STUDY
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Note to the Counselor
The Insect Study merit badge pamphlet emphasizes a
heightened awareness on safety as a result of hazards that
may be associated with exposure to ants and bees and the
addition of a new optional requirement for working close to a
bee hive or colony. Also new to this merit badge is the
addition of the standard risk- and health-related requirement
for safety and first aid.
Prior to counseling Scouts, Insect Study merit badge
counselors are strongly encouraged to become familiar with the
Guide to Safe Scouting, a helpful planning tool for all Scouting
volunteers. This resource provides an overview of Scouting
policies and procedures rather than comprehensive, stand-alone
documentation. For some items, the policy statements are
complete. However, unit leaders are expected to review the
additional reference materials cited (such as the First Aid merit
badge pamphlet) prior to conducting certain activities.
Counselors can access the Guide to Safe Scouting online by
visiting scouting.org/health-and-safety/gss/.
Scouts choosing to pursue optional requirement 5(b)(2)
should first find out whether they are allergic to bee
stings. This can be determined by a visit to an allergist
or a family physician. If it turns out a Scout is allergic to
bee stings, the Scout should choose option 5(b)(1). If
the Scout visits a beekeeper with another Scout, parent
or guardian, then all participants also should be
checked by a physician before the visitation.
35911
ISBN 978-0-8395-3353-5
©2024 Scouting America/Boy Scouts of America
2024 Printing FPO


INSECT STUDY 3
To help keep participants safe during Scouting activities,
the National Council has an established set of procedures called
the “Scouting America SAFE Checklist.” In an effort to assist
merit badge counselors, the following considerations provide
additional guidance of special interest to them.
Supervision.
• The Insect Study merit badge counselor should have
knowledge of the applicable local and state USDA
regulations for handling bees and beekeeping equipment.
Assessment.
• Counselors should take reasonable measures to provide
participants with a well-constructed hive that passes USDA
inspection.
Fitness and Skill.
• Counselors should be aware of youth participants who
might be allergic to bee stings.
Equipment and Environment.
• Counselors should ensure hives follow USDA guidelines.
• Counselors should ensure all participants are wearing
proper protective beekeeping clothing such as hat, veil,
coveralls, gloves, long sleeves, pants, and other protective
devices.
• Counselors teaching this merit badge must have experience
with beekeeping and be recruited to do the work involved.
As a rule, Scouting activities may not include activities for
youth that, by law, they would not be allowed to do in the
workplace.
• Counselors should take reasonable measures to ensure all
participants are using beekeeping tools and equipment
properly.
The SAFE checklist is available at scouting.org/health-and-
safety/safe/.


Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Insect-Study or check
Scoutbook for the latest requirements.
4 INSECT STUDY


INSECT STUDY 5
Yellow-legged
meadowlark


6 INSECT STUDY


INSECT STUDY 7
Contents
The World of Insects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
What Is an Insect? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
Parts of an Insect. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
Insect Safari . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
Identifying Insects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
The Life of an Insect . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
The Social Insects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
Insects and Humans . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
Careers in Entomology. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87
Insect Study Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92
Walking stick





INSECT STUDY 9
.The World of Insects
The World
of Insects
Hiking in the woods or fields
on a summer day, you are sure
to see dozens, perhaps hundreds,
of insects. Many are so tiny and
seem so insignificant (except when
they bite you) that you might dismiss
them simply as nuisances. If you do, you are
missing a chance to explore a world of unbeliev-
able variety, filled with marvels hard to imagine.
Get ready to meet tiny creatures with tremendous strength
and speed. You will see insects that undergo startling changes
in habits and form as they grow. You will learn how insects see,
hear, taste, smell, and feel the world around them; how they
find food; and how some of them live together in amazingly
complex societies. You will learn about insects that are helpful
to humans and others that are harmful or even deadly.
The field of insect study is as broad as all outdoors and
just as open. Entomologists, scientists who study insects, have
described about 1.5 million different insects, each a distinct
type known as a species. Scientists discover from 7,000 to
10,000 new species of insects every year. They estimate that
there are between 1 million and 10 million species still undis-
covered. However, research in the Amazon region of South
America has led some scientists to think there could be as
many as 30 million insect species worldwide.
Clearly, much remains to be learned about insects. While
working on the requirements for this merit badge, you might dis-
cover something about insects that no one ever knew. Remember
that you are welcome to watch and study insects wherever you
find them, but it is illegal to collect insects in many natural
areas, especially state parks, national parks, and wildlife refuges.


10 INSECT STUDY
The World of Insects.
Extreme Insects
Extremely strong: An ant can lift
50 times its own body weight.
If a 180-pound person could do
that, that person could lift 9,000
pounds—4 1
⁄2 tons!
Extremely fast: Dragonflies can
fly 60 miles per hour. A housefly’s
wings beat about 200 times a
second (the buzzing of a fly is
the sound of its wings beating).
Some midges move their wings
1,000 times a second.
Extremely nimble: A flea can
broad jump about 13 inches.
By comparison, a human athlete
would have to jump 700 feet to
equal the flea’s performance.
Dragonfly
Cat flea
Red fire ant


INSECT STUDY 11
.The World of Insects
Extremely big: Goliath beetles
grow to about 5 inches long.
Australia’s giant Hercules moth
and South America’s giant owl
moth have wingspreads of about
12 inches. The Queen Alexandra’s
birdwing butterfly has a wing-
spread of about 11 inches. Some
extinct dragonflies were 18 inches
long with wingspans of 2 1
⁄2 feet.
Extremely small: Fairyflies and
feather-winged beetles could
easily pass through the eye of
the smallest needle. The pygmy
mole cricket is a tiny insect as
well, with a maximum length of
1
⁄4 inch.
Extremely colorful: Butterflies are
every color imaginable,
from bright yellows, reds, and
oranges to shimmering coppers;
pale, silvery blues; and pearly
whites. Some beetles are a
rainbow of brilliant metallic or
jewel-tone shades.
Extremely bright: Fireflies are
even bioluminescent—they
literally shine like a light.
Bioluminescence is the result of
a reaction between a molecule
(luciferin) and an enzyme
(luciferase). It serves many
purposes from attracting mates
and prey, to warding off
predators, or providing a form
of camouflage.
Goliath beetle
Fairyfly
Firefly
Eastern tiger swallowtail


12 INSECT STUDY
The World of Insects.
Extremely smelly: Stinkbugs,
some beetles, and lacewings
emit foul odors to repel enemies.
The bombardier beetle fends
off attackers by squirting two
chemicals from the end of its
body. The chemicals mix to
produce a hot puff of gas.
Extremely ancient: Insects first appeared on Earth
in prehistoric times. Dragonflies flitted through the
skies and silverfish and cockroaches scurried on the
ground while dinosaurs walked the land.
Extremely versatile: Among insects there are
builders and carpenters, hunters and trappers, farmers
and livestock
raisers, nurses,
guards, soldiers,
papermakers,
sanitation work-
ers, slaves, and
even thieves.
Texas leafcutting ant
Silverfish
Brown stinkbug
American
cockroach


INSECT STUDY 13
.The World of Insects
Extremely adaptable: Insects are everywhere—in trees and forests,
in grasslands, in deserts, on mountains, in lakes, in the air, on buses,
in homes and offices. The young of some insects can live in pools of
crude oil. Some live in hot springs at temperatures of 120 degrees.
Others live in ice-cold streams, even above the Arctic Circle. After being
frozen and thawed, some insects will revive unharmed. Some insects
live in caves deep within Earth, or between the thin walls of a leaf.
The only place you are not likely to find many insects is in the oceans.
Extreme travelers: Every fall sees
some North American monarch
butterflies take a mind-boggling
long trip across the United States.
Monarchs from east of the Rocky
Mountains fly up to 3,000 miles to
their winter homes in central
Mexico. Western monarchs have a
bit shorter trip, traveling to the
California coast.


14 INSECT STUDY
The World of Insects.
What Is
an Insect?
There are more insects in the world than all other animals com-
bined; 75 percent of all animal species are insects. They come
in every imaginable size, shape, description, and color. Most
insects pass through life stages during which they look quite
different from their adult forms. Given the enormous number
and variety of these creatures, it might seem difficult to say
exactly what an insect is. Nevertheless, all insects have certain
things in common that make them recognizable.
All insects belong to a larger animal group known as
arthropods, which also includes spiders, mites, ticks, scorpions,
harvestmen (daddy longlegs), crabs, shrimp, crayfish, sow
bugs, barnacles, centipedes, and millipedes. All of these related
animals share two unique characteristics that distinguish them
from all other animal groups. Arthropods have jointed legs. An
external skeleton—the exoskeleton—encloses the entire body in
a shell.
Differences in body structure separate the insects from
their arthropod relatives. Insects have six jointed legs (three
pairs); all other arthropods have four or more pairs of legs.
Insect bodies are divided into three distinct regions—head,
thorax, and abdomen; most other arthropods have only two
body regions—head and trunk. Insects have one pair of anten-
nae or “feelers”; spiders and their relatives have no antennae,
while crustaceans (crabs, shrimp, crayfish, etc.) have two pairs.
Most adult insects have wings; no other arthropod has wings at
any stage of life.
Bush katydid


INSECT STUDY 15
.The World of Insects
Identifying insects from other arthropods
and small animals gets easier with experience.
For example, a caterpillar you see feeding on
a leaf might not look like an insect because it
appears to have more than six legs. However,
it actually has six jointed legs and 10 fleshy,
unjointed accessory legs called prolegs. When
the caterpillar (larvae stage) transforms into
an adult butterfly, you will have no doubt
about the number of legs it has.
Black swallowtail adult butterflyBlack swallowtail caterpillar
Remember these identifying characteristics:
• Insects have an external covering called an exoskeleton (a shell).
• Insects have three body regions, six jointed legs, and one pair
of antennae.
• Adult insects usually have wings.
Ant
PROLEGS





INSECT STUDY 17
.Parts of an Insect
Parts of an Insect
Compare a bumblebee, a grasshopper, and a butterfly. They
differ in many ways, but they share the same general body
structure. While their body parts might differ in size and shape,
they and all other insects are put together in the same way.
Insect Body Regions
The insect body has three distinct regions—head, thorax, and
abdomen. The prominent features of the head are the eyes,
antennae, and mouthparts. Attached to the thorax are the legs
and, when they are present, the wings. The abdomen contains
many of the important internal organs, such as the reproductive
and digestive systems.
In a few insects, the thorax and abdomen might appear to
run together. The jointed legs, however, are always attached to
the thorax. The area where the last leg is attached is the point
where the thorax ends and the abdomen begins.
GrasshopperSPIRACLES
WINGSOCELLUS
ANTENNA
MOUTHPARTS
LEGS
OVIPOSITOR
ABDOMENTHORAXHEAD
COMPOUND
EYE
TYMPANUM


18 INSECT STUDY
Parts of an Insect.
The Insect’s Armor
An insect’s exoskeleton, or shell, is formed of plates fitted
together like the armor of a medieval knight. Insects have no
bones—no internal skeleton such as humans have. Muscles and
other body tissues are attached to the inside of the exoskeleton.
The exoskeleton is made of chitin (KY-tuhn), a light, strong
material. Every insect lives encased in chitin, although shell
thicknesses vary. Exoskeletons of caterpillars form thin skins;
beetles have thick, armorlike plates.
As an insect grows, its skin becomes too tight and splits—
it molts, or sheds its skin. The chitinous exoskeleton splits
down the back, and the insect emerges from its old skin and
expands into a new, larger one. The number of molts needed to
reach adult form and size varies from four to 40, depending on
the species.
Cicada nymphs hatch from
eggs laid in trees. The
young insects burrow into
the ground and suck sap
from roots, staying buried
for up to 17 years. When
they do come back out,
they crawl up trees, shed
their old exoskeletons,
and emerge as full-grown
adults ready to lay eggs
and keep the cycle going.
An insect’s body structure is related to its senses of
sight, smell, hearing, taste, and touch, and to how it
moves about, eats, and breathes.


INSECT STUDY 19
.Parts of an Insect
How an Insect Sees
Most insects have two kinds of eyes: compound eyes for
seeing detail and simple eyes for perceiving brightness.
In the compound eye, six-sided lenses called
ommatidia contribute to the complete image the insect
sees. A large dragonfly can have as many as 28,000
ommatidia in each compound eye. Some queen ants
have about 50 lenses; some robber flies, 4,000; a
swallowtail butterfly, 17,000. These large compound
eyes bulge outward, allowing insects to see up, down,
forward, backward, and to each side.
PHOTORECEPTORS
OMMATIDIUM
LENS
NERVE FIBERS
TO BRAIN
SIMPLE EYES
Praying mantis
EYE
Head of fruit fly
OMMATIDIA
COMPOUND EYE
Compound eye of a fruit fly


20 INSECT STUDY
Parts of an Insect.
The simple eyes, called ocelli, are set in a triangular
arrangement between the compound eyes. Simple eyes seem
to help the insect detect changes in brightness rather than
for actual vision. In some cases, the ocelli are 16 times more
sensitive to light changes than are the compound eyes.
Insects probably never see the world around them in per-
fect focus. They see objects, but probably not in sharp detail.
A dragonfly will dart at bits of floating ash above a campfire,
evidently mistaking them for insects on the wing. A wasp might
dart repeatedly at the shadow of a fly resting on the other
side of a canvas tent. Butterflies will rush at a decoy cut from
colored paper as readily as at another butterfly.
When a bee flies in a “beeline” home to the hive, it navi-
gates largely by using its eyes, recognizing landmarks along the
way. If the same bee is carried into country it has never seen
before, it is lost. Similarly, wasps find their
way back to their nests or burrows by eye-
sight. If you place a leaf over the entrance
of a digger wasp’s burrow, the wasp will be
confused when it returns because the spot
looks different. One scientist found that
when he cut off a small bush near the
entrance of a wasp’s burrow and stuck it
in the ground several yards away, the wasp
flew to the bush instead of to the burrow.
It was using the bush as a landmark.
Insects can see and remember different colors. The
English scientist Lord Avebury proved this in a classic
experiment. He placed a little honey on a blue square
among squares of other colors. After bees began to
come daily to this square for food, he shuffled the
squares and put food on none of them. Instead of
flying to the square that lay where the blue square
used to be, the bees immediately landed on the blue
square even though it was in an entirely different
position. They associated the color with food, proving
they could see and remember blue as a color.
Insects cannot
focus their eyes
first on distant
objects and then
on near ones,
as we can. Their
eyes are like
fixed-focus
cameras. Insects
can, however,
see “black light,”
the ultraviolet rays
invisible to humans.
Digger wasp


INSECT STUDY 21
.Parts of an Insect
How an Insect Smells
An insect’s antennae function as its nose. Compare a damselfly
with a male cecropia moth. The damselfly has immense eyes
but small, spikelike antennae. The moth has small eyes but
large, fernlike feelers. The damselfly depends on sight to guide
it; the cecropia, flying in darkness, follows its feelers along faint
odor trails through the night.
Some ichneumons (ik-NOO-muhn), insect parasites
that lay their eggs on tree-boring grubs, have such
an amazingly keen sense of smell that they can detect
the odor of their prey through 2 inches of solid wood.
In the antennae
of one june
beetle, scientists
found 40,000 tiny
olfactory pits for
detecting odors.
Laboratory tests
have proven
that honeybees
can distinguish
more than
40 different odors.
Eastern forktail damselfly Male cecropia moth


22 INSECT STUDY
Parts of an Insect.
Like a radio tuned to one station, the sense of smell in
many insects seems limited to a narrow range of odors. A male
moth, traveling through miles of darkness to reach the female,
seems insensitive to the thousands of other smells around it.
Carrion beetles, which appear as if by magic when a fallen
sparrow or dead mole begins to decompose, are led to the spot
from far away by their sensitive feelers. All other smells seem
not to affect them. Butterflies and moths follow their sense of
smell to plants that will provide the right kind of food for their
larvae. The females are “tuned in” to that particular smell.
Larvae are young,
immature insects.
The larvae of
butterflies and
moths are
called caterpillars.
Unlike bees and wasps, the earthbound ant seems to depend on
smell rather than sight to find its way. Ants leave odor trails on
the main routes around their nests. As long as its antennae are
intact, an ant can follow these scent trails. Without its antennae,
the insect is completely lost, even if placed close to the entrance
of its home.


INSECT STUDY 23
.Parts of an Insect
Insect Antennae
The antennae of
different insects vary
greatly in shape and
size. They range from
the slender, threadlike
feelers of katydids
and long-horned
grasshoppers to the
stubby spikes of robber
flies. Ants and bees
have jointed, elbowed
feelers; butterflies have
antennae that resemble long-handled clubs; gnats and
mosquitoes have bristly feelers that look like miniature
bottle brushes. With such feelers, mosquitoes find their
food in the dark.
Antennae of (A) butterfly; (B) skipper; (C) moth;
and (D) saturniid moth
A B C D
Only female
mosquitoes bite
people; males
dine on the
nectar of flowers.
Antennae of (A) butterfly; (B) skipper; (C) moth;
and (D) saturniid moth
A B C D
Delaware skipper


24 INSECT STUDY
Parts of an Insect.
How an Insect Hears
Besides detecting odors, the bushy antennae of some mosquitoes
and gnats help catch certain sounds. To demonstrate this,
a scientist fastened a live male mosquito to a microscope slide,
then held a tuning fork with exactly the same pitch as the hum
of a female mosquito to the right of the male. Instantly, the
hairs on the male’s right antenna began to quiver. The scientist
held the tuning fork to the left of the male mosquito. The hairs
on the left antenna vibrated. When the tuning fork was held in
front of the insect, the hairs on both antennae quivered. Like an
airplane pilot flying on a radio beam, the male insect can find
the female in the dark. To stay on course, he has only to keep
the hairs on both his feelers vibrating equally. That will lead
him to the humming female.
Other insects hear in different ways. A cricket’s ears are
on its forelegs, just below the knees, as are a katydid’s. You
can easily see these oval openings, called tympana, when the
insects are at rest. The ears of short-horned grasshoppers, or
locusts, are on the sides of their bodies near the base of the
wings. Many species, including honeybees, ants, and dragon-
flies, give no sign that they hear sounds the way humans do.
However, they certainly feel vibrations within the range that
we call sound.
Asian tiger mosquito
Among all
the insect
“instrumentalists”
(katydids,
grasshoppers,
crickets, cicadas),
only the males—
never the females
—make music.


INSECT STUDY 25
.Parts of an Insect
Many insect sounds are associated
with the mating season.
The song of the snowy tree
cricket, the fiddling of the
katydid, the chirping of the
field cricket, the loud burr of
the cicada, even the ticking of the death-
watch beetle as it bumps its head against the
walls of a tunnel it has hollowed out in a house tim-
ber—all of these are serenades to attract females. In a
laboratory experiment, a female field cricket was drawn to a
telephone receiver 30 feet away when she heard the chirps of a
male cricket at the other end of the line.
How an Insect Tastes and Eats
Many insects react to the same four kinds of taste—salty, sour,
sweet, and bitter—that people can identify. Some insects are
especially sensitive to certain tastes. A honeybee, for example,
will react to faint traces of salt that a human tongue cannot
detect. A monarch butterfly can taste sugar dissolved in water
at a level thousands of times weaker than a person can taste.
The taste organs of most insects are on their mouthparts,
as expected. However, the antennae of ants, bees, and wasps
help them taste, while some flies and butterflies can taste with
their feet. When the legs of a monarch butterfly touch nectar
or sweetened water, the insect
immediately uncoils its hollow
tongue—its proboscis—to feed.
Cicada with
wings spread
Hummingbird hawk
moth with tongue
(proboscis) extended


26 INSECT STUDY
Parts of an Insect.
Butterflies and moths, with their coiled suck-
ing tubes, take only liquid nourishment, mainly
nectar. The paper wasp, with jaws and a tongue,
can lap up nectar or chew captured insects to
feed to the larvae in its nest. Plant lice and
squash bugs have
sharp, sucking beaks
for drawing sap from
plant tissues, as does
the tiny froghopper.
Beetles, crickets, and
grasshoppers have
jaws for chewing
leaves and other solid
food. The jaws, or
mandibles, work
sideways instead
of up and down
like the jaws of
higher animals.
How an Insect Feels
Tiny hairs and spines connected with its nervous system give an
insect a delicate sense of touch. These touch organs cover all
parts of an insect’s body, even its eyes. Ants and other earth-
hugging insects such as crickets, earwigs, and cockroaches have
spines that are particularly sensitive to vibrations. Some butter-
flies have a fringe of sensory hairs along the margins of their
wings. Water striders can use the fine hairs on their feet to sense
the approach of their prey through vibrations of the water’s
surface film. Tiny hairs on the leg joints of some insects—hairs
that are bent when the legs move—enable the insects to tell the
position of their limbs. In contrast, we humans tell the position
of our legs by the “feel” of the muscles.
The central nervous system in insects consists of a brain,
located in the head, and two nerve cords that lie side by side
along the lower side of the body cavity. This position of the
nerve cords is opposite to the placement of the spinal cord in
higher animals.
The praying
mantis has
powerful jaws
for devouring
its prey.
A grasshopper’s strong jaws help it chew.


INSECT STUDY 27
.Parts of an Insect
How an Insect Moves About
Insects travel on the ground, underground, underwater, and in
the air. Many have odd and often surprising means of travel
that fit them for the place where they live. Dragonfly naiads,
for instance, sometimes move like miniature rockets along a
pond bottom by
expelling jets of
water from their
rears. This
drives them
ahead in sud-
den spurts.
Primitive
insects
known as
springtails
have a forked, taillike appendage that can be bent and
then suddenly released like a spring to catapult the
insect into the air. Springtails are so light that some of
them shoot into the air from the surface film of ponds
or streams. The most spectacular are the so-called
snow fleas. In mild midwinter weather, these curious
black insects sometimes appear on snowdrifts in such
numbers that they look like clouds of windblown soot.
A naiad is the
immature,
water-living form
of insects such
as mayflies
and dragonflies.
Mature calico pennant dragonfly
A “cloud” of snow fleas
Snow flea
Dragonfly naiad


28 INSECT STUDY
Parts of an Insect.
Legs
The legs of insects suggest the kind of life they lead. Mole crick-
ets and the nymphs (larvae) of periodical cicadas have forelegs
enlarged into powerful digging tools. The long, spiked forelegs
of the praying mantis are spined traps for capturing prey.
Houseflies have feet with sticky pads that help them walk on
smooth panes of glass or upside down on ceilings. Robber
flies—insect predators that swoop down on victims and grab
them in midair with their feet—have unusually long legs ending
in hooked claws. Dragonflies are almost completely aerial
creatures; they form their spined legs into a basket to catch
prey in flight. Their legs are bunched so far forward that they
are almost useless for walking, and are used mostly for clinging
and climbing. Some water beetles have legs that work like oars.
Praying mantis
Housefly
Periodical cicada nymph Camel cricket


INSECT STUDY 29
.Parts of an Insect
Water striders walk on the surface film on water-repellent tufts of
hair that spread fanwise near the tips of their legs, like snowshoes.
When not in use, the hairs fold up into a slot on the insect’s leg.
A Solid Footing
To find out how insects use their six legs to walk,
watch a large insect from above when it is chilled
and moving slowly. The insect walks on a series of
tripods, the front and hind legs on one side and the
middle leg on the opposite side moving
in unison. Thus, like a three-legged stool
it is always firmly planted, never off
balance. An exception is the monarch
butterfly, which walks on only four of
its legs. The front pair is carried folded
against its body.
Bark beetle


Parts of an Insect.
Wings
Most insects have two pairs of wings, a few have one pair,
and some have no wings at all. Only adult insects have wings;
a winged insect is fully mature, with the exception of the
subadults (or subimagoes) of mayflies.
In the air, some insects reach high speeds and high
altitudes and travel great distances. Their wings operate differ-
ently from the wings of birds. Instead of the flap-
ping or rowing motion of a bird, the wings of an
insect usually move in a series of figure eights.
The English scientist Lord Avebury was the first to
demonstrate this motion. He tipped the wings of a
wasp with gold leaf and let the insect fly in sun-
light. The tiny spots of shining gold traced figure
eights in the air. On wings moving in this fashion—
often so fast they are blurs to our eyes—many insects can out-
maneuver birds. They can stop in midair, turn, go straight up,
drop to the ground, and, in some cases, even fly backward.
The wing muscles of flying insects are the largest in their
bodies. In one kind of fly, the wing muscles account for 48 per-
cent of the insect’s body weight. These great muscles change the
whole shape of the thorax, causing the wings to move up and
down. Other special muscles are used to manipulate the wing to
change direction, or to fold the wing when the insect is at rest.
When wasps, butterflies, and bees take to the air, the hind
pair of wings attaches to the front pair so that the insect flies as
though it had only a single pair of wings. This is done in vari-
ous ways. In wasps and bees, small rows of twisted hooks on
the front edges of the hind wings engage little ridges on the
trailing edges of the forewings.
Some butterflies
can reach
heights of almost
20,000 feet.
Dragonflies, which have four wings, use
a different flying technique than most
insects. The two pairs of wings are kept
separate and move independently.


INSECT STUDY 31
.Parts of an Insect
How an Insect Breathes
An insect has no lungs,
but it still must breathe.
Air enters through
openings in the body
called spiracles, and
a system of finely
branching tubes, or
tracheae, carries
oxygen directly to body
tissues. The droning
of some flies is the
humming sound made
by air entering these
breathing tubes.
Most insects need little oxygen. The most active fliers,
however, such as dragonflies, bees, and moths, have small,
bladderlike reservoirs connected to air tubes. These reserve
“gas tanks” hold extra supplies of air. A dragonfly breathes
about 118 times a minute; many humans average about
18 times a minute. Less active species of insects breathe
more slowly.
Many diving, air-breathing aquatic insects have a thick
coating of fine hair, or pile, on the underside of their bodies.
It is called the plastron. Air catches in this pile and is carried
along when the creature dives. By carrying its own oxygen
supply, the insect is able to stay underwater for long periods.
An Insect’s Circulatory System
The insect circulatory system consists of its heart, an open-ended
aorta (blood vessel), and hemolymph (blood). The heart and
aorta, located on the body cavity’s upper side, pump blood
throughout the open body cavity. There is no system of blood
vessels as in higher animals. Blood fills the entire cavity, bath-
ing all the organs and muscles.
The blood of most insects is usually straw-colored, pale
green, or colorless because it lacks the oxygen-carrying pigment
called hemoglobin. The blood of most insects is not designed to
carry oxygen. Instead, it transports and stores water, waste
products, disease-fighting antibodies, and hormones.
The spiracles are easy to see on the
sides of a tobacco hornworm.
When descending
underwater to lay
their eggs in the
stems of aquatic
plants, some
female dragonflies
are enclosed in a
film of air. In the
sunshine, it looks
as if each diving
dragonfly has a
shiny silver case
or “diving bell.”
A few insects,
like bloodworms,
do have red blood
with hemoglobin.
They live in
low-oxygen
environments and
use hemoglobin to
transport oxygen.
SPIRACLES





INSECT STUDY 33
.Insect Safari
Insect Safari
The most accurate observation of an insect in nature comes
from watching it undisturbed. When observing insects in their
habitat, be careful to leave them unharmed in the place that
you found them.
As with any trek in the outdoors, there are some basic
guidelines to follow when searching for insects.
1. When you embark on your insect safari, prepare a trip plan,
or at the very least, tell an adult where you are going. It is
also a good idea to take a friend with you.
2. It is a good idea to wear long pants, a long-sleeved shirt, a
hat, and closed shoes to keep ticks, chiggers, and insects
from biting you or hitching a ride.
3. Check with natural resources authorities in advance to
be sure that you will not be collecting any protected or
endangered species, or wandering in a habitat where
collecting is prohibited.
4. Ask permission before entering private property.
5. If you must handle an insect, be careful and gentle to avoid
injuring it. Insects are fragile.
6. Avoid touching an insect’s nest.
7. In most cases, specimens should be returned to the location
of capture after the requirement has been met. Check with
your merit badge counselor for those instances where the
return of these specimens would not be appropriate.
The Seven Principles of Leave No Trace and the Outdoor Code apply to all
outdoor activities, including insect study. Requirements for the Insect
Study merit badge call for you to not only observe insects, but in some
cases, to collect them.


34 INSECT STUDY
Insect Safari.
Playing It Safe
Prevention goes hand in hand with mitigation, which means
“to lessen in force or intensity” and “to make less severe.” By
taking precautions to manage risk and the possibility of injury,
you can be prepared to anticipate, help prevent, mitigate, and
respond to just about any incident that might happen while you
observe insects.
Like all outdoor activities, insect watching has its risks. You
can start by dressing appropriately—for instance, jeans, boots,
gloves, and a long-sleeved shirt for protection. The bites of mos-
quitoes, chiggers, and no-see-ums are irritating but not usually
dangerous. However, if your area has had cases of West Nile
Virus, protect yourself from mosquitoes by using the right insect
repellent when you are outdoors. For protection from ticks,
wear long pants tucked into your boots and a long-sleeved shirt
buttoned up to the collar.
Be careful when walking through areas where spiders and
biting insects might be lurking. Watch out for fire ants, which
live in loose mounds of dirt. These bites can usually be treated
by washing the area with soap and water, applying an antisep-
tic, and covering with a sterile bandage. For more relief, take a
mild nonaspirin pain reliever and apply a cold pack to the area.
Seek medical attention immediately if there is trouble breathing
or the pain does not ease.
Anyone who is highly allergic to fire ant bites or bee or
wasp stings can have a life-threatening reaction called
anaphylactic shock, or anaphylaxis. Symptoms can include
swelling of the throat tissues or tongue that makes breathing
difficult or even impossible. Let others in your group know
that you are allergic, and they know where your
epinephrine medication is kept and how to use it. In an
emergency, all 911 for immediate medical assistance. Keep
the victim comfortable—usually a sitting position—until
medical help arrives.
People who know they are susceptible to anaphylaxis
should carry an emergency kit that contains an injection of epi-
nephrine, a rapidly acting hormone that reverses the effects of
anaphylactic shock.
For more detailed information about first aid, consult the
First Aid merit badge pamphlet.
Whenever you are
in the outdoors,
make it a habit to
use sunscreen
with an SPF of at
least 15. Reapply
sun protection
as needed.


.Insect Safari
The Outdoor Code:
As an American, I
will do my best to
• Be clean in my
outdoor manners.
• Be careful with fire.
• Be considerate in
the outdoors.
• Be conservation
minded
The Leave No Trace
Seven Principles:
• Plan ahead and
prepare
• Travel and camp on
durable surfaces
• Dispose of waste
properly
• Leave what you find
• Minimize campfire
impact
• Respect wildlife
• Be considerate
of others.
Equipment for the Insect Safari
To observe insects, you must go where they live. Bring along
the right equipment so you can properly study and document
the creatures you encounter. The basic equipment described
here should easily fit into a day pack.
The Basics
Some everyday items will be valuable in your search for the
most interesting insects:
• Some magnifying lenses can be worn around your neck.
Others fold up neatly and fit in a pocket.
• A good insect guide will help you identify the critters
you see.
• Use a notebook and pencil for jotting notes and
making sketches.
• A flashlight will help you investigate bushes and other
nooks and crannies where insects are hiding.
• Bring a camera that can take close-up photos. Your own
photos will make a great addition to your scrapbook.
INSECT STUDY 35


36 INSECT STUDY
Insect Safari.
Aspirator
An aspirator is a handy tool that helps you capture most insects
without harming them. You can make one easily.
Step 1—Curl a 4-inch-square piece of clear plastic into a tube
and secure it with tape or glue.
Step 2—Tape a bit of gauze over
one end of a wide drinking straw.
Step 3—Form two ping-
pong-sized balls of model-
ing clay. Press them flat
into disks big enough to
cover the ends of the tube.
Push a straw through the center of
each disk.
Step 4—Position the disks at the ends of the plastic tube. Make
sure the gauze is inside the tube.
To use the aspirator, place the straw covered with gauze
in your mouth. Position the bottom straw near the insect you
would like to capture. Suck on the top straw to vacuum an
insect into the bottom-end straw (the gauze will keep the insect
from being sucked into your mouth!). You may then observe the
insect in the aspirator. To free the insect, simply pull the clay
disk off the bottom of the aspirator.
Insects you should
not capture with
an aspirator are
stinging and biting
insects, and large
insects, such as
butterflies, that
cannot fit into
the straw.
What You’ll Need:
• 4-inch square
of clear plastic
sheet that can
be curled to
create a tube
• Tape
• Gauze
• Modeling clay
• 2 straws
3
4
1–2


.Insect Safari
Collecting Net
A good collecting net is an important piece of equipment.
Collecting nets are lightweight, can be taken apart to be
carried, and will last a long time with proper care. Aerial
nets with larger hoops are better for collecting large and fast-
moving insects such as dragonflies and butterflies; those
with small hoops are better for bees, flies, wasps, and other
smaller insects.
You can make a net from a wooden dowel or length of
bamboo; a piece of wire or a wire clothes hanger bent into a
hoop; a fine-mesh fabric pillowcase or mosquito netting for
the bag; monofilament fishing line for sewing the mesh fabric
or mosquito netting into a bag shape; and duct tape for
attaching the hoop to the wooden dowel. The bag should be
rounded or blunt-tipped at the closed end and at least one and
a half times as deep as it is wide. The handle length depends
on the material from which the handle is made and the kind
of collecting for which the net is intended. Do not make the
handle too long or heavy.
A Clean Sweep
You can collect many insects by “sweeping” a
lawn or yard. This technique is done not with a
broom but by swinging a collecting net back and forth
over the grass. Brush the tops of the blades of grass
with a flat side of the hoop that holds the mesh net.
Sweep for 30 seconds or even a full minute, then
swing the net swiftly through the air to force any
captured insects to the bottom of the net bag.
Quickly grab the net bag about a third of the way up
from the bottom to keep the insects from escaping.
Have a friend open a clear, self-sealing plastic
bag. Carefully turn your net inside out into the bag,
shake the insects into it, then seal it. After
observation, return them to the area where they
were collected.
Sweep the same area several times throughout
the year. Do the kinds of insects you capture change
with the seasons?
INSECT STUDY 37
You can use your
collecting net to
capture insects
from the land, air,
and water.


38 INSECT STUDY
Insect Safari.
Observation Jar
You might like to take along an observation jar so you can
momentarily watch the insects you collect with a net.
Remember to keep the insect in the jar for only a few hours, at
the very most. As soon as possible, return the insect to the
place where you collected it. Be sure to return bark, stones,
logs, or anything else you move back to the same position they
were found.
To make an observation jar, simply wash and dry a wide-
mouthed glass jar, such as a pickle jar. Add a crumpled tissue
or blades of grass in the jar to give the insect something to
climb on. You can place a piece of mesh in a mason jar lid to
help the insect breathe better.
Finding Insects
You will find insects almost everywhere: fields, gardens,
beaches, swamps, woods, and roadsides. Look under stones,
rotting logs, and leaves, and around flowers and grasses. The
best times of year are summer and early fall, but insects can
be found any time of year. In winter, look in protected spots
such as under tree bark or stones, and indoors. Here are some
suggestions for finding common insects.
Butterflies
Bright, sunny days with little wind are best for butterfly observa-
tion. Clover fields and overgrown lots with thistles, asters, milk-
weed, and similar plants are excellent locations for collecting.
Orange milkweed attracts so many of these insects that it is
commonly called butterfly weed. Butterfly bushes (Buddleja)
also are worth visiting often. On windy days, open fields on the
wind-sheltered side of wooded areas usually are good hunting
grounds, as are flower-filled fields on protected hillsides.
Blooms for Butterflies
Attract butterflies by planting some of their favorite flowers in a garden
or a window box. Choose a sunny spot that is protected from wind—the
south or southeast side of a building, wall, hedge, or slope might provide
sufficient protection. Or, arrange your plants to grow into a bowl shape,
with the taller plants on the outside as a windbreak.
Do not use pesticides in your butterfly garden. The poison that kills
insect pests will also kill butterflies.
Building a butter-
fly garden is a
great backyard,
schoolyard, or
Scout camp con-
servation project
that can serve as
a living classroom.
Butterfly
bush (Buddleja)


INSECT STUDY 39
.Insect Safari
When trying to catch a butterfly on a sunny day, keep the
sun ahead or to one side of you. Approaching with the sun
behind you will cast a shadow that could alarm the butterfly
before it is within reach. Typically, it works best to drop the net
over the butterfly you are pursuing. Once your target is in the
net, pull up the bottom of the bag with your free hand, and the
butterfly will dart upward into the bag. Raise the net, rotating it
quickly to lock the butterfly inside.
In some cases, sweeping the net from the
side is more effective, but you will have to flip
the bag over the hoop to trap the butterfly in
the tip of the bag. Do this carefully so that you
do not damage the specimen.
Different butterflies have different flight
habits; some will dart quickly upward, some
will drop to the ground. Note the flight habits
of different butterflies, learn from your
mistakes, and you will become expert at
capturing these lively and colorful insects. Sulfur butterfly
Plant a variety of fragrant flowers with large petals or blossoms. Good
choices include goldenrods, dahlias, geraniums, hibiscus, marigolds,
milkweed, phlox, snapdragons, lilacs, lavender, thyme, red clover, zinnias,
sunflowers, and common daylilies. Check with a local nursery, the county
extension agent, or your state’s department of natural resources to find
out which plants are best for a butterfly garden in your area. It’s always
best to use native species.
Milkweed Goldenrod
Phlox Red clover
Hibiscus Marigold
Snapdragon Sunflower


40 INSECT STUDY
Insect Safari.
Moths
Moths usually fly at night, so different methods are used to
capture them than are helpful in catching their butterfly
relatives. Working the lights, sugaring, and mate attraction
are some favorite techniques of moth collectors.
Working the lights takes
advantage of the attraction
that some artificial lights hold
for night-flying moths. Moths
will circle endlessly around
black-light or mercury-vapor
bulbs. You can catch many
moths after dark from around
an isolated streetlight, or at a
local gas station or shopping
center—with adult supervi-
sion. Or, attract moths by
setting up a white sheet at
the edge of a wooded area,
then shining a lantern or vehicle headlights on it. You can
observe moths by catching those that come to your porch light
at night or that flutter along the lighted windows of your home.
Sugaring is an exciting method—and one of the most
successful ways—of catching moths. Flies, bees, beetles, wasps,
and butterflies also are frequent visitors to sugared trees. Mash
or blend some peaches, apricots, or bananas, add a bit of
brown sugar, molasses, or honey, some apple cider, and a
teaspoon of yeast (optional) in a plastic container. Loosely cover
the container and let the mixture ferment in the sun for
a couple of days. Use a stick or an old paintbrush to smear
the mixture on tree trunks in long streaks. The best trees for
sugaring are those out in the open or at the exposed outer edge
of a wooded area. The best time is dusk. Sugar several trees in
a rough circle, creating a moth trapline that you can visit easily.
Make the rounds with a flashlight to observe insects
attracted to the trees. Add more of the concoction each night.
Spring and fall are best for sugaring, but sugaring can be
successful whenever moths are active. Visit the trees
occasionally during the day. Be aware that sugaring might also
attract various animals.
Hot nights when
storms threaten
will bring the
most moths.
Cabbage moth


INSECT STUDY 41
.Insect Safari
To try the technique of
mate attraction, you need
any newly emerged female
saturniid moth. (The satur-
niid family includes the pro-
methea, io, luna, polyphe-
mus, and cecropia moths.)
Place the female in a
screened box or in a jar with
a mosquito-net top. Put this
container in an open area
and wait for results. Males
attracted by the scent of the
female can be netted easily.
If your female is a pro-
methea, the males of the
species typically will begin
to arrive in the late after-
noon. Males of the io, luna,
and polyphemus species usually arrive after dark; the males of
the cecropia arrive just before dawn.
Dragonflies
The best place to observe dragonflies is near vegetation where
they frequent, but you will need to be patient. These swift
aerial insects are skillful at dodging the sweep of a net. During
the evening after dragonflies have landed in vegetation, they
can sometimes be found clinging quietly to weed stems or
leaves. In early autumn they remain quiet for some time after
sunrise while the morning chill keeps them inactive.
To catch a dragonfly on the wing, sweep the net from
behind the insect, if possible. Sweeping a net back and forth
through the tops of swampside or pondside vegetation is
another way of capturing small dragonflies and damselflies.
Use great care, as their delicate wings and body can easily
be damaged.
Rake out trash from the bottom of a pond to capture
underwater naiads of dragonflies. Raised to maturity in an
aquarium, the naiads will provide perfect adult specimens.
A few species of
dragonflies land
as soon as the
sun goes behind a
cloud. The smaller
damselflies flutter
slowly about
and can be
netted easily.
Luna moth


Insect Safari.
Never pull an
insect off a
branch—its
legs could rip
off its body.
Beetles
Beetles are everywhere, and most of them are easy to catch.
Look around dead trees, logs that are rotting in shade, clumps
of goldenrod, late-summer mushrooms, trees in bloom, and
piles of trash left by receding streams or spring runoff. Search
along woodland paths and moss banks or under old stones.
Many beetles can be picked up by hand, some are best
netted, and some can be caught by “beating” or “sifting.”
To beat, hold an open umbrella upside down under a bush and
hit the base of the bush sharply with a stick. Or, spread a sheet
under the bush. Startled beetles let go of the bush and drop
into the umbrella or onto the sheet. Return insects back to
where you collected them on the same day you found them.
Most insects will not survive captivity for very long.
Be careful; wasps may have built a nest in the bush you
have in mind, so use a flashlight to investigate the bush before
attempting to oust any insects.
Sift plant trash from a forest floor over a newspaper, a white
bedsheet, or a sheet of white poster board, and catch the beetles
as they appear. A beetle trapline also can excellent results. Bury
empty jars or tin cans in the ground with their open tops just
level with the earth. Bait them with old meat or decaying fish
to attract beetles, which tumble into the traps. Remember to
refill the holes with the earth when you are finished.
You also can work the lights for beetles just as for moths.
Frequently, a blundering beetle will strike against the glass of
a streetlight or a bright win-
dow and fall, kicking, on its
back. Simply pick it up.
Handling Insects
Insects are fragile creatures
and must be handled with
extreme care. The best way
to catch one is to gently
coax it to crawl onto your
hand, into the observation
jar, or onto a piece of card-
board or clear plastic, where
you may observe it without
harming it. Always wash
your hands after handling
insects, even if you were wearing gloves.
42 INSECT STUDY


INSECT STUDY 43
.Insect Safari
An Insect Zoo
Besides collecting larvae, pupae, and cocoons during the summer, you
can collect adult insects for observation and maintain a temporary but
fascinating insect zoo. Katydids, praying mantises, and similar insects
make unusual short-term pets. Ants can be kept in ant houses for
observation. (See “Preparing an Ant Farm” later in this pamphlet.)
You can keep crickets in transparent cages formed of old-fashioned
glass lamp chimneys pushed down into the dirt in a flowerpot. Or, check
out the wide variety of small cages available at retailers. After you put
the crickets inside, cover the tops of the chimneys with mosquito netting.
Lettuce and other greens and an occasional bit of meat protein, as found in
bone meal and dry dog food, will keep crickets in good condition. The meat
protein is essential; without it, the crickets will begin to eat one another.
Some butterflies that emerge indoors become so tame they will
alight on your hand and drink sugar water from a spoon or nectar from
flowers held in your fingers. Another way to feed butterflies indoors is
to dip a small sponge into a mixture of sugar or honey and water. The
insects will uncoil their tongues and insert them into the sponge’s pores
to suck out the sweet fluid. If your butterfly needs coaxing, use the end
of a pin to carefully uncoil the tongue and lead it to the sugar water.
Once you do this, the butterfly probably will continue to feed.


44 INSECT STUDY
Insect Safari.
Food Plants of Butterfly and Moth Larvae
Butterfly Preferred Food Plant of Larva
Cecropia Willow, maple, apple, elm, lilac,
bridal wreath
Promethea Wild cherry, lilac, tulip tree
Polyphemus Oak, birch, hawthorn, dogwood, willow
Luna Walnut, hickory, butternut, sweetgum,
persimmon
Cynthia moth Wild cherry, tree of heaven
Darling underwing Willow, poplar
Five-spotted hawk Tomato
Pipevine swallowtail Pipevine, Dutchman’s-pipe
Tiger swallowtail Wild cherry, birch, poplar, ash
Cabbage butterfly Cabbage, Swiss chard, mustard, radish
Great spangled fritillary Violets
Black swallowtail Carrots, dill, celery, caraway, parsley
Clouded sulfur Clover, vetch, lupine
Regal fritillary Violets
Pearl crescent Asters
Red admiral Nettles and hops
Painted lady Thistles
Mourning cloak Willow, elm, poplar
Buckeye Plantain, snapdragons
Monarch Milkweed
Viceroy Willow, poplar
American copper Sorrel
Red-spotted purple Willow, wild cherry, plum, hawthorn
Moth Preferred Food Plant of Larva


INSECT STUDY 45
.Insect Safari
Preparing a Scrapbook
Creating a scrapbook of the insects you observe will give you a
valuable resource. If you use a three-ring binder and devote one
scrapbook page to each insect you observe, you can add to the
book as you observe more insects. You may want to keep your
scrapbook electronically, and scan photos or use digital photos.
Labels. Label each insect in your scrapbook with the place and
date of observation, and write the insect’s scientific and
common names (check a reference book for the correct
spellings). Some enthusiasts like to record fun facts such as the
plant the insect was found feeding upon, or weather conditions.
Sketches. Sketching an insect is a way to learn about and
become more familiar with its parts. Perhaps you will have time
to sketch from real life as you watch an insect in its habitat,
before it hopped or flew away, or from an observation jar. You
might enjoy working from a photograph or illustration. Check
out the resources in the back of this book from which you can
create your own art.
Articles. Another way to learn more about an insect you
observe is to research it. Copy or print out articles you find. If
the article is short, you may want to write it out by hand. In
all cases, be sure to document the author of the article, the
place it was published, and the publication date.
Photographs and Illustrations. You may be lucky enough
to snap some great shots of insects. If not, you can use a
copier to reproduce images found in books and magazines, or
redraw yourself.
Take Some Basics. Carry a few tools of a naturalist:
magnifying glass, binoculars, notebook and pen, drawing
paper and pencils, a camera, a compass, and a map.
Use Technology. The same electronic devices that draw us
away from nature can also enrich our understanding of it.
That is especially true when they are coupled with actual
outdoor experiences. There are smartphone applications for
identifying insects. Electronic field guides lead users through
steps to identify insects. Cameras on many cellphones produce
photographs and videos ideal for recording signs and sounds
of environmental exploration.
You can organize
your scrapbook
using a
phylogenetic
system, arranging
insect pages
from the most
primitive to the
most advanced.
Most books about
insects use
this system.





INSECT STUDY 47
.Identifying Insects
Identifying Insects
Watching and documenting insects can be fun all by itself,
but it is twice as much fun if you know precisely what you
have seen. Scientists must be able to determine exactly what
they are observing. One scientist can’t tell others about an
insect unless they all know and agree on the exact name of
the insect being described.
About 250 years ago, scientists began naming the hundreds
of thousands of known insect species. They started by dividing
all the insects into orders, broad groupings of insects. Some
scientists recognize 22 orders of insects; others, more than 30.
Most of the orders are based on the kind of wings and mouth-
parts of an insect. For example, the order Coleoptera includes
all sheath-winged insects—that is, all beetles.
There are about 300,000 different known kinds of beetles;
simply knowing the order is not enough. Scientists further
divide the orders into families. These are smaller groupings
within an order based on finer distinctions such as size, hard-
ness of armor, and shape of antennae and other body parts.
Carl Linnaeus (1707–1778)
Swedish botanist and naturalist Carl Linnaeus was the
first to formulate principles for defining genera and
species of plants and animals, to simplify the binomial
(two-name) system for naming species, and to use
the system consistently. His binomial system quickly
became the standard method among zoologists and
botanists for naming species and is still in wide use
(though with modifications) today.


48 INSECT STUDY
Identifying Insects.
There are about 150 families of beetles. While dividing
the order Coleoptera into families simplifies the problem of
naming a single beetle, this still is not going far enough.
Scientists next subdivide the families into genera. (The singular
form of genera is genus.) Each genus is then divided into
species. To pinpoint the name of an insect, therefore, the
scientist must know four things: the insect’s order, its family,
its genus, and its species.
When scientists write an insect’s name, they use only
the genus and the species, often followed by the name of the
person who first described the insect. The genus name is capi-
talized; the species name is not. The name of the person who
described the insect also is capitalized and may be abbreviated.
The person’s name is placed in parentheses if the species was
first described in a different genus. Scientific names are always
italicized in print or underlined in writing.
With more than 700 different families of insects, it is
impossible to cover in this pamphlet the characteristics of them
all. Therefore, to fulfill requirement 4 you will have to do your
own scientific research. Make it a point to observe the habits
of the insects you observe or collect. This type of research is
valuable because you will remember the facts you see in action
longer than those you merely read about. Make notes as
you observe.
A familiar beetle is the ladybird or ladybug. It is
one of the most common and most welcome
insects, but there are more than 450 species of
ladybug beetles in North America. If scientists
want to talk about one of them, they must use its
scientific name. One of the species is called the
convergent ladybird. It looks like all the other
species except that it has 12 spots. A scientist
talking about the convergent ladybird calls it by
its scientific name, Hippodamia convergens
Guérin-Méneville.


INSECT STUDY 49
.Identifying Insects
Major Insect Orders
Most of the insects you see will belong to the orders listed
in the following table. Some of the less familiar orders, includ-
ing the proturans, springtails, stoneflies, earwigs, lice, thrips,
scorpion flies, and caddis flies, are not listed. You can find more
information about them in field guides.
The descriptions in the table refer to adult insects only.
Remember, the young of these insects often do not look much
like the adults. (The difference between immature and adult
insects is discussed later in this pamphlet.)
Sources of Help
Plenty of sources can help you determine an insect’s
scientific name:
• Field guides, such as those listed in the resources
section at the back of this pamphlet.
• Local amateur or professional entomologists. If you
live near a college, natural history museum,
agricultural school, or national park, you can probably
find someone there who knows about the insects in
your area. A biology teacher at a local high school or
a county agricultural agent might also be helpful.
• There are several apps that can help you identify
insects using your phone. Be sure to ask your parent
or guardian’s permission before using the internet or
searching the app stores.
European earwig


50 INSECT STUDY
Identifying Insects.
Mayflies: net-veined wings folding
over the back like a butterfly’s;
two or three long tails; found near
water; most live only a few hours as
adults; incomplete metamorphosis
MayflyEphemeroptera
Mayfly
Katydids, crickets, and
grasshoppers: chewing
mouthparts; two pairs of wings;
forewings leathery, hind wings
broad and membranous, folded
under front wings when at rest;
incomplete metamorphosis
Field cricket
Katydid
Grasshopper
Orthoptera
Katydid
Termites: small, mostly white and
soft-bodied; chewing mouthparts;
live in large, hidden communities;
incomplete metamorphosis
TermiteIsoptera
Winged termite
Dragonflies and damselflies: two
pairs of net-veined wings; very large
compound eyes; chewing mouthparts;
adults are strong fliers but cannot
walk; incomplete metamorphosis
Dragonfly
Dragonfly
Damselfly
Odonata
Order Characteristics Typical Members
DESCRIPTIONS OF MAJOR INSECT ORDERS
Bristletails and silverfish: wingless,
usually scaly body; long, slender
antennae; two or three bristlelike
tails; no metamorphosis
Bristletail
Silverfish
Thysanura
Silverfish


INSECT STUDY 51
.Identifying Insects
Beetles: hard-shelled front wing
covers (elytra) under which rear
wings fold; chewing mouthparts;
largest of the insect orders; complete
metamorphosis
Ladybird beetle
Boll weevil
Rove beetle
Colorado potato
beetle
Tiger beetle
Firefly
Coleoptera
Boll weevil
Order Characteristics Typical Members
True bugs: usually two pairs
of wings; forewings leathery at
base, membranous at tip; sucking
mouthparts at the front of the head;
feed on plant or animal juices;
many are harmful to crops;
incomplete metamorphosis
Box elder bug
Squash bug
Water strider
Giant water bug
Hemiptera
Giant water bug
Aphids, scales, leafhoppers, etc.:
winged or wingless; those with wings
(usually four) hold them arched above
abdomen; mouthparts connect at the
back of the head or between the legs;
beak usually short; cicada males
make loud buzzing sounds;
incomplete metamorphosis
Periodical cicada
Cicada
Aphid
Spittlebug
Mealybug
Leafhopper
Lacewings, etc.: chewing
mouthparts; two pairs of
net-veined wings, roofed
over body when at rest;
long, slender antennae;
complete metamorphosis
Lacewing
Ant lion
Adult lacewing
Neuroptera
Ant lion nymph


52 INSECT STUDY
Identifying Insects.
Order Characteristics Typical Members
Flies: two wings; usually small,
often swift and agile fliers; many are
nuisances to humans
and livestock; some
carry disease; complete
metamorphosis
Housefly
Horsefly
Gnat
Mosquito
Midge
Diptera
Mosquito
Biting
midge
Housefly
Fleas: tiny, wingless, jumping
insects; adults are bloodsucking
parasites of birds and mammals;
body flattened side to side like a
sunfish; complete metamorphosis;
caterpillarlike larvae
Cat flea
Dog flea
Rat flea
Siphonaptera
Dog flea
Bees, wasps, and ants: all have
four membranous wings (ant
workers are wingless); one of the
highest orders of insects, as many
are social; complete metamorphosis
Ant
Honeybee
Sawfly
Hornet
Ichneumon
Wasp
Hymenoptera
Winged ant
Butterflies and moths: two pairs
of wings covered with scales (the
“dust” that rubs off when one
is handled); sucking mouthparts
(long, coiled proboscis); antennae
club-shaped on butterflies and
fernlike or threadlike on moths;
complete metamorphosis
Thistle butterfly
Monarch butterfly
Buckeye butterfly
Mourning cloak
butterfly
Painted lady
butterfly
Swallowtail
butterfly
Sphinx moth
Cecropia moth
Fall webworm
Lepidoptera





Metamorphosis of the locust boring beetle


.The Life of an Insect
The Life of an Insect
With the exception of aphids (the eggs hatch inside the female,
which gives birth to live young), all insects hatch from eggs.
Insects reach adulthood in a variety of ways. Some look like
miniature wingless adults when they hatch; others pass through
several stages during which they look entirely different from the
adult. This process of change is called metamorphosis.
Types of Metamorphosis
Insects grow into their adult forms in
one of three basic ways: no metamor-
phosis, incomplete metamorphosis,
and complete metamorphosis.
No Metamorphosis
Among the most primitive insects, the
young emerge from the egg looking just
like adults, only smaller. An example is
the wingless silverfish that often is
found in attics or basements. Young and
adult silverfish live in the same places
and have the same type of mouthparts
and feeding habits.
Incomplete Metamorphosis
Grasshoppers, chinch bugs, cicadas,
mayflies, and dragonflies
are examples of insects
that undergo incomplete
metamorphosis. The young
emerging from the egg
resemble the adults in
general body form but
do not have wings.
Incomplete Metamorphosis
(Example: Grasshopper)
EGG
NYMPHAL STAGES
ADULT
No Metamorphosis
(Example: Silverfish)
EGG YOUNG IN STAGES
OF GROWTH
ADULT


The Life of an Insect.
The dragonfly nymph is often mud-colored and
well-camouflaged as it stalks smaller insects on the
bottom of a stream or pond. Nearing its prey, it darts
out an armlike underlip nearly half as long as its body
and grabs the prey with a pair of sharp pincers.
After going through several growing stages and
molts in the process of incomplete metamorphosis, the
nymph reaches its full
size and climbs out of
the water. The back of
its skin splits as the
nymph undergoes its
last molt, and a
mature dragonfly
emerges. The adult insect is fitted for an
aerial life with fully developed wings and
has a tracheal system for breathing oxygen
from the air.
Water Babies
Among mayflies, stoneflies, and dragonflies, the
nymphs live in water, while the adults are airborne.
The nymphs only slightly resemble the adults into
which they develop. They hatch from eggs laid in the
water or on aquatic plants. They breathe through gills
and will die if removed from the water.
EGG
Blue-winged olive mayfly
Life stages of
a mayfly
AQUATIC
NYMPH ADULT
Whitetail
dragonfly


INSECT STUDY 57
.The Life of an Insect
The young of such insects as grasshoppers and chinch
bugs—the nymphs—go through a series of feeding stages,
each followed by a molt. With each successive molt, the nymph
looks more like the adult than it did in the preceding stage.
The wing buds appear in the later stages. Both nymphs and
adults have the same type of mouthparts, eat the same foods,
and live in the same kinds of places.
Consider the life of the red-legged grasshopper, Melanoplus
femur-rubrum (De Geer). In the late summer, the female digs
an inch-deep hole in the ground with her long ovipositor, the
egg-laying apparatus on the rear of her body, and lays tiny eggs.
She then carefully covers the hole by scratching and sweeping
dirt around it.
Unless a bird or a predatory insect finds the egg mass,
it remains buried in the ground all winter. Hatching begins in
the spring, and within one or two days the young grasshoppers
have dug their way out of the hole. They emerge looking like
short, stubby, wingless versions of the parent.
During a two-month growing period, the red-legged grass-
hopper molts about five times, each time shedding its old skin
for a new, larger one. After the final molt, the adult has fully
developed wings and has reached full length—about 11
⁄2 inches.
If it escapes its enemies, the grasshopper will live until autumn,
only to be killed by winter weather.
Red-legged grasshopper


58 INSECT STUDY
The Life of an Insect.
Complete Metamorphosis
The most advanced insects go through four life stages: the egg,
the young or larva, the pupa or resting stage, and the adult.
Their needs and ways of life during each of these stages are
different. Butterflies, moths, ants, bees, wasps, beetles, flies,
fleas, and mosquitoes all undergo complete metamorphosis.
The larvae differs greatly in form from the adult into which
it develops. It passes through a series of growing stages and
molts, but, unlike insects with incomplete metamorphosis, the
larva does not resemble the adult any more closely after a molt
than it did before a molt; it remains wormlike or grublike in
form. The larva is primarily a growing stage. While most larvae
have chewing mouthparts, some are equipped instead with
mouth hooks.
The larvae of different insect orders are known by various
names. Beetle larvae are grubs, butterfly and moth larvae are
caterpillars, fly larvae are maggots, and mosquito larvae are
wigglers or wrigglers.
Complete Metamorphosis
(Example: Potato Beetle)
EGG
LARVAL STAGES
PUPA
ADULT
Adult Colorado potato beetleColorado potato beetle larva


INSECT STUDY 59
.The Life of an Insect
When the larva is mature, it stops feeding and transforms
into the pupa. In this stage, the insect usually is inactive and
does not feed, but it undergoes a remarkable change into the
adult form. After several days or months, the adult emerges from
the pupal stage. The adult’s most important job is to reproduce.
In many insect groups, the adults die soon after laying eggs.
EGGS ON A LEAF
CHRYSALIS
ADULT
A Monarch’s Life
Let’s take a close look at an insect that undergoes complete metamor-
phosis—the monarch butterfly, Danaus plexippus. This common yet
beautiful orange-and-black butterfly begins life as a pale-green egg on
a milkweed leaf. A tiny caterpillar emerges four or five days after the
egg is deposited. This is the larval stage of the butterfly. The caterpillar
immediately eats the eggshell and then the leaves of the milkweed,
the only food it will eat thereafter.
For about 12 days, the caterpillar does almost nothing but eat milk-
weed leaves, cutting off pieces with its strong jaws. By the end of that
period, it will have molted three or four times. The caterpillar is then
about 2 inches long and striped with bands of yellow, black, and green.
As the end of the larval stage draws near, the caterpillar begins
spinning a silken thread from glands in its mouth and attaches one end
to a leaf. The other end is tied to its rear. The skin splits and slowly slides
off the body while the caterpillar hangs downward, revealing the third
stage—the pupa or chrysalis.
CATERPILLAR
Life stages of a monarch butterfly


60 INSECT STUDY
The Life of an Insect.
The chrysalis is a shiny, transparent green with several spots of gold.
It hangs from the leaf for several days to about three weeks, depending
on the weather. Near the end of this period, the chrysalis turns very dark
(almost black), and the wing pattern of the adult butterfly can be seen
beneath the thin skin.
Finally, the bottom of the chrysalis splits and out crawls the adult
monarch butterfly. Its wings gradually expand and harden, and the
butterfly starts to use its long, hollow, coiled “tongue” to suck
nectar from flowers.
Usually, the adult will live four to six weeks, feeding occasionally
but mostly just wandering from field to field. The last brood of summer,
however, will migrate south, often in large numbers and journeying an
incredible 2,500 miles. This brood lives longer—some of the monarchs live
through the winter in Mexico or along the southern coast of California.
Many fly northward the next spring and begin the cycle of life over again.
Monarch butterfly chrysalis
Moths, which go through the same stages as butterflies, often spin a
protective cocoon of silk around the pupa. Only a few butterfly species
spin cocoons.


INSECT STUDY 61
.The Life of an Insect
Studying the Life Cycle
One of the most dramatic events you are likely to witness
during your insect watching will be when a large moth or a
brilliant butterfly comes out of its cocoon or chrysalis. During
the summer, look for caterpillars of moths and butterflies to
collect and raise. Watch them spin their cocoons or turn into
chrysalides and, later, see them come forth as adults. You can
get an early start by collecting the cocoons of larger moths
during the winter.
Caterpillars must have the right food. Most of them will eat
the leaves of only one sort of plant and will quickly starve to
death if given other leaves. You can assume that you are feed-
ing a caterpillar the right food if you give it the leaves of the
plant upon which you found it.
Offer only fresh leaves. Keep your caterpillars in covered
shoeboxes so the leaves will not wilt rapidly. Or, place caterpil-
lars on a small tree branch enclosed in a sleeve of mosquito
netting to keep out birds and insect parasites.
Some moths, notably the sphinx,
change from larvae to adults in the
ground. You often can collect pupal cases
of the five-spotted hawk moth by digging
carefully around the roots of tomato
plants in late summer or early fall. Look
for a large (about 3
⁄4 of an inch thick and
11
⁄2 inches long), shiny, mahogany-
colored, jug-handled pupa. A live pupa
is heavy and plump. A dead pupa is light
and usually shriveled.
It is best to leave cocoons, pupae,
or chrysalides outdoors over winter. If
you keep them indoors, dampen them
occasionally. Cocoons kept indoors at
room temperature all winter seldom
develop. They must be exposed to cold
temperatures to trigger development.
Place cocoons in the refrigerator for
one to two months, then return them
to room temperature to stimulate
emergence. This will cause the adults
to emerge sooner than they would if
the cocoons were kept outside.
Not all butterflies
or moths spend
the entire winter
in chrysalides
or cocoons.
Many caterpillars
collected in late
spring or early
summer will
emerge as adults
before winter.
Black swallowtail
larva, pupa,
and butterfly


Baldfaced hornets’ nest


INSECT STUDY 63
.The Social Insects
The Social Insects
Most insects are not dependent upon one another, but for a
few species, the story is different. Social insects will swarm and
sleep, hibernate, and migrate together. Social insects include
termites, ants, and certain species of bees, wasps, and hornets.
These insects live together in groups all their lives. By
instinct, each individual performs a certain task that is of value
to the whole community. Social insects care for their young
(something most insects do not do), build nests, and sometimes
feed each other. Let’s look at some species of social insects.
The Paper Wasp
You may have come upon the paper wasp
(Polistes) while hiking with your patrol,
on a family picnic, or in your backyard.
You might not have enjoyed the encounter,
as the female of this species can give quite
a painful sting when annoyed. Even so, this
wasp must be considered a friend to people
because it preys upon such pests as cater-
pillars. The larvae of various destructive
insects are food for the paper wasp’s young.
A paper wasp colony begins in the
spring when a queen, the only survivor of a nest from the pre-
vious summer, awakens from her winterlong hibernation. She
immediately starts building a new nest out of coarse paper. She
makes this paper by gouging out bits of old wood from stumps
or logs and chewing them into a pulp with her strong jaws.
She first makes a single, six-sided cell, suspending it upside
down in a protected place—beneath the eave of a garage or
barn, or from the underside of a tree branch. As soon as the
first cell is completed, the queen lays a single egg in it, attach-
ing it with a gluelike substance inside the upside-down cell. She
also places a drop of nectar in the cell for the larva’s first meal.
Golden paper wasp


64 INSECT STUDY
The Social Insects.
The queen makes more cells surrounding the first and
lays eggs in them. As the tiny, white, helpless larvae mature,
they are given solid food—the bodies of insects the queen has
captured. When a larva reaches full size, it spins a cover over
the end of its cell and transforms into an adult paper wasp.
The emerging wasp breaks out of its cell and immediately
begins to help the queen make new cells and feed the larvae.
All of these workers are sterile females. Only the queen can
lay eggs. When she has plenty of papermakers at work,
the queen retires and concentrates on egg laying. Occasionally,
a wasp colony has more than one queen; then the nest
grows faster.
A few of the larvae get extra rations of food. These
will become queens of future generations of paper wasps.
As summer ends, the old queen lays unfertilized eggs that
develop into male wasps. These white-faced wasps mate
with the young queens.
As the chill of winter nears, the wasps become sluggish
and less active. Finally, all but the young queens die. These
fertile females find a snug harbor under a log, in a trash pile,
or in an attic or shed, and hibernate for the winter. With the
spring sun, the queens come out of their hiding places and
begin the cycle of wasp life over again.
Paper wasp colony
Notify an adult if
a paper wasp
nest needs to be
removed because
it poses a risk to
people, such as
in a bathroom
or tent.


INSECT STUDY 65
.The Social Insects
Optional
Requirement 5(b)(2)
If you want to choose optional requirement
5(b)(2), you should first find out whether you are
allergic to bee stings. This can be determined by a visit
to an allergist or your family physician. If it turns out
you are allergic to bee stings, you should choose
another option.
In completing requirement 5(b)(2), your counselor
can help you find an established beekeeper. Ask if the
beekeeper can meet with and another Scout and a
parent or guardian and, as part of this requirement,
whether the beekeeper will allow you to remove the
combs. Before your visit, be sure all participants also
have been checked by a physician and are not allergic to
bee stings.
For help with locating a beekeeper in your state, visit
beeculture.com and click on “find a beekeeper near you.”
Ants and Bees
Ants and bees are the most social of the social insects; both
are interesting to watch. If you choose to observe an ant colony,
you will have to make a special observation unit called a formi-
carium and put the colony in it, because you cannot see much
ant activity above ground.
Just as they do in nature, ants will dig elaborate tunnels within a formicarium,
or ant farm. The tunnels allow a route from one area of their living space to
another, as well as access to the surface. The tunnels lead to sections and
chambers that have specific purposes. Some are designated for food storage,
while others are where the ants store their garbage or where the queen will
live and lay eggs.
The queen’s tunnel and chamber is specially constructed to prevent her
from drowning; the tunnel that leads to it branches off from another tunnel
and then turns up. As the ants dig their tunnels, they carry the extra material
to the surface, which creates a mound. These mounds are called ant hills.


66 INSECT STUDY
The Social Insects.
Preparing an Ant Farm
The simplest method of preparing an ant farm, or formicarium,
is to use two widemouthed glass jars with lids. One of the jars
must be smaller and slightly shorter than the other; when it is
placed inside the larger jar, there should be about a half inch of
space between the outside of the smaller jar and the inside of
the larger one.
Follow these steps to prepare your ant farm:
Step 1—Securely tighten the lid of the smaller jar, then put
that jar into the larger one.
Step 2—Drill two holes approximately 1
⁄4 inch in diameter in
the lid of the wider jar.
Step 3—Put a tight-fitting cork into one of the holes; this will
serve as an opening for feeding the colony.
Step 4—Use quick-drying rubber cement or a glue gun to
fasten a screen of fine cloth or wire mesh over the other hole.
A small piece cut from a discarded pair of women’s hose
will work well as a screen and will let plenty of air into the
observation unit. The opening will be small enough to prevent
the soil in the unit from drying out rapidly and endangering
the ants’ lives.
BLACK PAPER OR
RUBY-COLORED
CELLOPHANE
LARGER JAR
SMALLER JAR
LID
SCREENED AIRHOLE
CORKED FEEDING HOLE
SOIL AND ANTS
FOOD
The soil in your ant farm must remain damp. Be sure to add a
little water from time to time.


INSECT STUDY 67
.The Social Insects
Your next step is to collect a living, functioning ant colony.
The simplest way during summer is to turn over some large flat
rocks until you find a full-fledged colony. The center of the nest
is often at the surface directly beneath a rock. You may see the
workers, soldiers, larvae, cocoons, eggs, and winged males and
females (young queens and their mates) in one scrambling
mass when you suddenly overturn a rock.
Quickly scoop up that living mass, along with the surface
soil, and pour it into the space between the two jars in your
observation unit. Do not pack the dirt tightly. Fill the space to
within an inch of the top and secure the lid of the larger jar.
You now have the makings of a functioning ant colony and can
watch members of the colony, especially the workers, make
order out of the complete chaos. They set to work, tunneling in
all directions until finally all galleries are interconnected. They
gather all of the eggs, larvae, and cocoons and place them in
neat piles to be tended by other workers.
Feed the colony by pulling the cork and using a medicine
dropper to add honey water or sugar water as an energy food.
Bits of hard-boiled egg and dry pet food will provide the ants
with needed protein. Be sure not to overfeed the colony,
because any surplus will decompose and contaminate the nest.
Keep the soil damp but not wet. Ants must have at least
some water to survive. From time to time, add a few drops
of water from your finger, a dropper, or a spoon.
Ant Society
Although not the oldest living insect type (that honor probably
belongs to the silverfish, the dragonfly, and the cockroach),
the ant developed the first cooperative communities. While
their tasks vary among the species, citizens of ant colonies
hold roles as agriculturalists, livestock raisers, soldiers, and
even slave-makers.
As with any insects you collect and maintain at home,
keep the ant colony away from direct sunlight and
direct heat. Whenever you are not watching the colony,
wrap a piece of black paper or ruby-colored cellophane
around the outside of the jar and secure it with a rubber
band or tape.
Be extra careful
and observant,
and do not collect
fire ants or other
biting or stinging
ants. Get your
parent’s or
guardian’s
permission
before setting
up an ant farm.


68 INSECT STUDY
The Social Insects.
ANT CASTES
Ants have at least three castes, or groups of members that
perform specialized functions: queens, males, and workers.
The new queens and the males have wings, and when the
time comes for mating they all swarm out of the colonies by the
thousands and mate in the air. After mating, the males die. The
fertilized queens alight and rub or tear off their own wings.
Then they either return to the colony or make new nests away
from the original colony. Each nest can have several queens,
unlike a honeybee colony, which has only one queen.
After establishing a new colony, the ant queen stays in the
nest and tends the helpless young. When new workers emerge,
they take over the work of the colony and the queen restricts
herself to laying eggs. She might live for 15 years or longer.
A single colony can grow to more than a half-million ants and
survive longer than 20 years.
Most ants nest in the ground. The nests have tunnels,
chambers, and galleries sometimes extending over many acres
(as with the fungus-growing ants). A few ants nest in wood.
The workers enlarge and maintain the nest, gather food,
feed and care for the young, and defend the colony from its
enemies. Ants have a four-stage (complete) metamorphosis—
from egg to larva to pupa to adult. The care and feeding of the
young varies from species to species. Most ants eat both plant
and animal matter.
FARMING ANTS
Several types of ants farm in one way or another, but the most
interesting are the leafcutters. These ants spend much of their
time cutting pieces of leaves and bringing them back to the nest
to be used as mulch on the ants’ fungus gardens—practically
their only source of food. While some of the workers are
Although we commonly think of ants as pests that crawl into the picnic
basket or invade the kitchen, they are, on the whole, beneficial creatures.
They feed on countless dead or dying insects, thus helping dispose of
natural wastes.
Ants also are important in water conservation. Those that live in the
soil move great amounts of earth in making their tunnels and chambers.
They make the soil loose and porous so that it can absorb much water
that might otherwise run off.
There are about
9,000 species of
ants worldwide.


INSECT STUDY 69
.The Social Insects
bringing in new supplies of leaves, others carefully tend the
gardens so that only the desired fungus grows. All other
growths are destroyed. The size of the tunnel is controlled to
maintain just the amount of heat and moisture this fungus
needs. Some leafcutters fertilize their gardens with their own
excrement to increase yields.
Another interesting type of farming ant is the harvester ant,
which lives in southwestern portions of the United States and
on all of the other continents except Antarctica. Harvester ants
eat seeds that they gather and store. After a heavy rain, the ants
bring their stored seeds above ground and spread them out to
dry so that they will not become moldy. In some species, the
large-headed soldier–caste ants serve as millers and grind the
flinty seeds to a flourlike powder with their powerful jaws.
LIVESTOCK RAISERS
Some kinds of ants raise their own “livestock.” Plant lice, or
aphids, secrete a sweet, honeylike substance called honeydew
of which ants are very fond. The ants care for the aphids like
a human farmer cares for cattle.
The aphids live with the ants and are protected from harm.
When an ant wants some food, it strokes an aphid with its
antennae to obtain a drop of honeydew. In the fall, ants carry
young aphids or aphid eggs down into the nest so that they will
survive the winter.
Fungus-growing
leafcutter ants live
in North and
South America,
but the greatest
numbers of them
are seen in
tropical areas.
A Texas leafcutter worker ant Harvester ants


70 INSECT STUDY
The Social Insects.
HONEYPOT ANTS
Honeypot ants, another type of ant with a fondness for honey-
dew, have overcome the problem of storage in an unusual way.
Some of their workers, called repletes, become living honeypots,
consuming great amounts of the sweet fluid until their abdo-
mens expand to enormous proportions (the size of grapes).
They spend all their time—months or even years—clinging to
the ceilings of their underground chambers. When a hungry
worker passes by, she strokes a honeypot with her antennae
and gets a drop of nectar. Honeypot ants live in warm, dry
areas throughout the world, including western portions of
the United States.
SLAVE-MAKING ANTS
In the cool climates of Europe, Asia, and North America,
slave-making ant species make war on other ants to capture
their pupae. The pupae are brought to the nest and, when they
mature, must do the work of their adopted colony. A few slave-
makers have become so dependent upon these workers that
they have lost the ability to do work themselves. They must
continually kidnap workers from other colonies to survive.
Communication
among ants is
almost entirely by
touch and smell.
Soldier Ants
Many species of ants have a special class of workers
with large heads and strong jaws called soldiers. Their
duties include defending the colony and, in the case of
the harvesters, crushing seeds and other hard food.
A few ant species in Africa, North America, and
South America seem to be almost all soldiers. These
army ants—legionary ants in North and South America
and driver ants in Africa—are foragers. Periodically,
the whole colony goes on a long march, preying upon
creatures that cross their path. Small workers carry
the larvae while the larger ones, working together,
do the killing. Some of them march by night and make
temporary camps in the morning. They spend much of
each day in raiding parties that go out from headquarters
and kill whatever they find, including insects, mammals,
and birds that can’t get away quickly enough.


INSECT STUDY 71
.The Social Insects
Bee Society
Humans have been keeping the honeybee, Apis mellifera L., for
more than 4,000 years. This relationship between humans and
honeybees is symbiotic, or cooperative: Honeybees are managed
as domestic livestock, thus depending on humans; at the same
time, humans depend on bees to pollinate crops. Many fruit
trees cannot be pollinated profitably any other way. Trees would
not produce much fruit if not for honeybees going from blos-
som to blossom. These insects also provide honey and ingredi-
ents for the production of candy, beeswax, and candles.
Honeybee society is much more advanced than that of the
wasp, and it rivals the ant’s. In a beehive there are three castes
(the queen, the male or drone, and the worker), just as there
are in a wasp colony, but honeybees have many more divisions
of labor and more specialized tasks.
Unlike a wasp colony, a swarm of bees survives the winter,
although individual bees (especially workers) might live only a
few weeks during the active season. To live through the winter,
the colony must have high-energy food, which is why bees
make and store honey. A honeybee society has two goals: to
be sure the young will be cared for and survive, and to collect
enough food to see the whole colony (which might number
50,000 bees) through the dormant season.
Each bee has a task to do to ensure the proper working
of the colony. Let’s examine their roles.
THE QUEEN BEE
A honeybee colony has only one queen, who is the mother of
all the bees. All she does is lay eggs, some-
times at the rate of 1,500 to 2,000 a day.
She might live several years and lay more
than a million eggs.
A bee becomes a queen because she is
fed a creamy, highly nutritious substance
called royal jelly during all five or six days
of her larval stage. Workers and drones get
royal jelly during only the first three days of
the larval stage. Then they get beebread—
pollen mixed with honey.
It is estimated that
about one-third of
the U.S. diet
depends on hon-
eybee pollination.
Honeybees pro-
vide 80 percent of
the pollination for
vegetable, fruit,
seed, and
flower crops.
The queen honeybee sits among
workers on the honeycomb.


72 INSECT STUDY
The Social Insects.
Sixteen to 18 days after her own egg was laid, the young
queen emerges from her comb cell, and often will sting and kill
the other queens that are still developing. If two queens hatch
at the same time, they fight until one has been stung to death.
Then, the old queen must either leave or fight for her life.
Usually she leaves, taking with her a large number of workers
to start a new colony. Their flight is referred to as swarming.
After the young queen has gotten stronger, she leaves the
colony for her mating flight, then returns to the hive and begins
her lifework of laying eggs.
THE DRONES
While the new queen is maturing in the hive, a few hundred
male bees also are growing. They develop from unfertilized
eggs. Their sole purpose in the honeybee society is to mate
with the young queen.
When the new queen takes off on her mating flight, all
the drones trail her. Usually, the strongest and swiftest flier
among them mates with her in the air. After a drone mates
with the queen, he dies. The other drones, having been pampered
and cared for carefully until this time, find they are no longer
welcome in the hive. The workers might starve them to death
(drones cannot get food for themselves), drive them from the
hive, or sting them to death (drones cannot fight back because
they have no stingers).
THE WORKERS
Nearly all the thousands of honeybees in a hive are workers—
sterile females that cannot reproduce. Like the queen and
drones, they go through the stages of egg, larva, and pupa
within the cells of the comb. From the moment they step forth
as adult honeybees until they die, they spend all the daylight
hours at work.
Some stay in the comb to clean empty cells, bring food
to the young, make beeswax for more combs, and, within
their bodies, change the nectar into honey that is stored in
the combs. On hot days they might provide air-conditioning
by fanning their wings to move the air within the hive. Or,
these workers might guard the entrance against enemies.
After about six
weeks of hard
labor, the
honeybee worker
has literally
worked herself to
death. Workers
that develop late
in the summer
can live through
the winter
because they
rest during the
dormant season.


INSECT STUDY 73
.The Social Insects
Others work outside, gathering pollen and nectar to
provide the raw material for the colony’s food. They buzz
from flower to flower, packing pollen from the blossoms into
special baskets on their hind legs. They also bring home
nectar in honey sacs—a second stomach, or reservoir—within
their bodies.
INSIDE THE HIVE
A honeybee hive is divided into parts, each with its
own purpose. In one area there are cells full of grow-
ing larvae. Nearby are cells with beebread and others
with honey for the nurses that tend the larvae. In one
area of the nursery are larger cells that contain the
larvae of drones. Near the bottom of the nursery are
big peanut-shaped cells where a few queens develop.
At the top of the hive is the main storehouse of honey,
where most of the inside workers spend their time
making and storing the staple food for the colony.
Bee Ordeals
In the U.S., the bee population has decreased significantly over the past
several decades. Beekeepers across the country have tried to help by
providing bees with manufactured supers (framed boxes) that serve as
hives where they can thrive. Mites are believed to be a major cause of
population decline as well as natural habitat destruction. Tracheal mites
and varroa mites were discovered in bees in the U.S. in 1984 and 1987.
Colony collapse disorder, or CCD, is another reason for population
decline. CCD occurs when the majority of worker bees in a colony
disappear and leave behind a queen, plenty of food and a few nurse bees
to care for the remaining bees and the queen. Its direct cause, however, is
not known. Insecticide use, disease, mites, environmental stresses, and
malnutrition are some of the possible causes of this syndrome. Many
scientists believe it is likely a combination of several of these factors.
Honey in the Hive
There is an easy way to find out about how much honey is stored in a hive
or honey super. Just check the honey stores in the brood chamber. A deep
frame full of honey will weigh approximately 6 pounds. The bees will need
10 of these. Two shallow frames will equal one deep frame.





INSECT STUDY 75
.Insects and Humans
Insects and Humans
We often think of insects as pests that bite, sting, or make us
itch, or as the makers of pleasant sounds on a summer night.
They are much more than that. Some insects are very useful to
us. Others are highly destructive and dangerous to human health.
Helpful Insects
Insects are valuable to us in several ways. They help by
• Pollinating plants
• Producing useful materials such as honey, silk, dyes,
and beeswax
• Conserving soil and water
• Controlling harmful insects and weeds
• Getting rid of wastes
• Being subjects of scientific studies
• Being food for animals and some plants
Pollinators
Honeybees are so important as pollinators that many fruit
growers rent hives during the blossom season of their trees to
ensure pollination. Although honeybees are by no means the
only pollinators in the insect world, they are particularly good
at it because they usually travel among blossoms of the same
tree or plant and, therefore, are very efficient.
Many other insects are pollinators: other bee species,
butterflies, moths, wasps, beetles, and some species of flies—
especially the flower or syrphid fly. Several species of wild
bumblebees are the only pollinators of red clover in North
America. Without them no red clover (and few related species
that are important as animal feeds) could be grown here. Squash bee
Because they
pollinate crops
such as clover
and alfalfa that
cattle feed on,
bees are
important to the
production and
consumption of
meat and dairy.


76 INSECT STUDY
Insects and Humans.
Producers
Honeybees produce about 200 million pounds of honey for
beekeepers in the United States each year. They also make
about 4 million pounds of beeswax, which is used in lubricants,
ointments, furniture polish, candles, and other articles.
Silk, another insect product, is made chiefly in China, Japan,
and India by the larva of a particular moth, Bombyx mori (L.).
Other insects produce such useful materials as dyes, medic-
inal products, and the resinous substance called lac that is used
in making shellac.
Soil and Water Conservationists
The important role that ants play in water conservation, by
digging and making tunnels in the earth, has been mentioned
already. Other insects, such as certain beetles and wild bees
that nest in the ground, have the same effect.
Insects also improve the soil when they feed on decaying
plants and animals. They return organic (living or once-living)
matter to the earth faster than it would break down without
them. Their excrement also provides good fertilizer for the soil.
Beetle larvae, ants, flies, termites, earwigs, and some cockroaches
also are important in soil and water conservation.
Silkworm cocoons are slightly larger than a nickel.


INSECT STUDY 77
.Insects and Humans
Predators and Parasites
The predators and parasites of the insect
world help us by preying on other insects
that spread human diseases or destroy
valuable plants. Dragonflies and damselflies,
ground beetles, ladybird beetles, syrphid
flies, praying mantids, and the aphid lion
(the larva of the lacewing) are important
predators. They seek out and destroy such
insect pests as the mosquito, the aphid
(which kills plants by sucking out their
juices), scale insects, mealybugs, and mites
that feed on plants.
Among the helpful parasites are fly maggots (especially of
the family Tachinidae) and various species of the ichneumons
that were mentioned earlier. Usually, the insects do their deadly
work by depositing their eggs on or in the body of the prey. The
parasite’s larvae eat the host insect’s body gradually rather than
killing it with just a few bites as predators do.
Insects also are useful in controlling undesirable weeds.
Occasionally, certain insects are introduced into an area to kill
off a destructive weed. The U.S. Department of Agriculture,
for example, introduced chrysolina beetles from Australia into
grazing land in the West that was being overrun by Klamath
weed. Within a few years, the beetles had Klamath weed
under control.
Scavengers
Insects serve as nature’s garbage disposers. Many of them feed
on decaying animals and animal dung that, if left alone, would
breed disease-producing organisms or prevent plant growth.
The list of insects providing
this sanitation service is
long. Dung beetles, carrion
beetles, and blowflies are
among the more common
and important scavengers.
Some predators
of harmful insects
also destroy
beneficial insects
but, overall,
these predators
are helpful to us.
Margined carrion beetle
Hornworm with cocoons of a
wasp parasite


78 INSECT STUDY
Insects and Humans.
Subjects of Scientific Studies
Because many insects, such as the common fruit fly (Drosophila),
have many generations in a year, they are important in such
sciences as genetics, the study of heredity (how traits pass from
one generation to another), and genomics, how genes regulate
body functions in health and disease. They also are valuable in
studies of pollution problems and of ecology—the relationship
of living things to their surroundings.
Food
Many birds and some mammals live almost
entirely on insects. Insects are the major part
of the diet of frogs, toads, salamanders,
lizards, spiders, some snakes, fish, and
even some unique plants, such as the
Venus flytrap and other sundews, and
pitcher plants.
Today, scientists
use insects in
toxicology (the
study of poisons),
physiology (the
study of the bodily
processes of
organisms), and
cancer research.
Mediterranean fruit fly
Venus flytrap


INSECT STUDY 79
.Insects and Humans
Some people use insects as food. In South Africa,
some people roast termites and eat them by the handful,
like popcorn. Some people in Mexico make a cake from the
eggs of water boatmen. In Australia, grubs are roasted and
eaten by the Aborigines.
The Web of Life
Studying insects can help you discover how closely
connected all living things are. If every insect in the
world died tomorrow, many fruits would disappear.
Wildflowers would become rare or extinct because, like
fruit trees, they depend on insects for pollination. Many
songbirds that eat insects would die; game fish and
some mammals would disappear. There would be no
more honey or silk. We can never foresee all the conse-
quences of pulling a strand from the web of life.
Some people say insects make
tasty snacks, like these
mealworm larvae.


Insects and Humans.
Harmful Insects
A sting from a hornet or bite from a horsefly can be a painful
reminder that some insects are harmful. But the chief ways in
which insects harm us can go far beyond bites or stings.
• They carry disease-producing organisms.
• They consume stored grains and other foods.
• They destroy crops, as well as forest and shade trees.
• They are household pests.
Disease Carriers
Many insects transmit the germs that cause
disease. Mosquitoes are the worst offenders.
They carry the organisms that cause the
deadly West Nile virus, malaria, yellow
fever, encephalitis, and many other tropical
and subtropical diseases. Malaria alone kills
more than 1 million people and makes
more than 300 million people clinically sick
every year. Every case is transmitted by one
of only a few mosquito species, all of
which are in the single genus Anopheles.
Several other insects, such as blackflies, tsetse flies, sand
flies, and assassin bugs, are serious pests in other parts of the
world because they transmit disease. In the United States,
sickness can be transmitted by such disease carriers as
fleas, lice, ticks, deerflies, and horseflies.
Biting flies, mosquitoes, and bugs of several species,
as well as the housefly, are responsible for diseases in
animals. Some are parasites, living in and
on the host animal. Among the diseases
and conditions these insects transmit are
anthrax, botulism, tularemia, swine erysipe-
las, heartworm infestation, and swamp fever.
Some insects do not carry diseases but kill or
cripple an animal by living in its flesh. Among
these are the botflies and screwworm fly. Some
of these diseases affect people, too.
The harmless-looking housefly spreads more
than 100 human diseases, including typhoid,
tuberculosis, dysentery, and cholera.
Mosquito


INSECT STUDY 81
.Insects and Humans
Crop Destroyers
The damage insects do to useful trees, crops,
and other plants and to stored grain runs into
tens of billions of dollars each year in the
United States alone. Wherever there is organic
material, you can be sure some insect is either
in it or trying to get into it.
Among the insects that take a huge toll by
their feeding are corn borers, grasshoppers, corn
earworms, Hessian flies, chinch bugs, aphids,
leafhoppers, tussock and codling moths, scale
insects, borers such as the elm bark beetle
(which also transmits Dutch elm disease), and
other beetles. A few species of aphids
and leafhoppers spread crop-plant dis-
eases, causing hundreds of millions of
dollars in crop losses each year in the
United States alone.
Bark beetles are small (less than 1/4
inch), hard-bodied beetles that bore through
the protective bark of a tree to lay their eggs in
the moist phloem (inner bark) and feed on this
living tissue, cutting off the tree’s ability to
transport nutrients. Bark beetles survive in trees
that are stressed, diseased, or injured, either by
human activity or during storms or wildfires.
When beetle populations are low, healthy trees
often produce enough resinous pitch to drown
and “pitchout” the beetles that attempt to enter.
When trees are stressed, they may be unable to
produce sufficient amounts of defensive pitch. In
some years, more trees are killed by bark beetles
than by fire.
Household Pests
You can probably find a few unwelcome guests in your home.
Some ants will visit occasionally if you leave sweets on the
table. Cockroaches will nibble on uncovered food and, if noth-
ing better is around, will chew the bindings off books and mag-
azines. Silverfish and book lice also enjoy eating starched shirts
and rayon curtains. The larvae of clothes moths and carpet bee-
tles make meals of woolen and mohair garments, furniture,
feather dusters, silk stockings, and other dried animal products.
A termite queen
can live for
50 years or longer.
Termite damage
Corn earworm
Click beetle


82 INSECT STUDY
Insects and Humans.
Perhaps the most destructive household pests are termites,
carpenter ants, and other wood-destroying insects such as pow-
der-post beetles and carpenter bees. Left uncontrolled, these
insects can cause serious damage to a house and furniture.
Carpenter bees cause damage to wooden structures by drilling
circular holes to create shelters and tunnels in which to rear
their young. Termites are particularly damaging because they
rarely show on the surface of the wood, which makes it difficult
for property owners to know that termites are at work. The ter-
mites chew from the inside until only a shell remains. Rarely,
termites will excavate an opening when swarming.
Other beetles, flies, and moths of several species feed on
leather, wool, tobacco, spices, drugs, meats, dried fruits, nuts,
and cereal products.
Controlling Harmful Insects
The best insect controls are natural ones provided by animals
and other insects. Predators—including birds, small mammals,
spiders, and especially other insects—destroy far more harmful
insects than are ever destroyed by artificial means. Insects prey
on one another, and birds, skunks, shrews, moles, snakes, and
lizards are constantly on the lookout for insects.
Biological control—introducing predators, parasites, or
forms of life such as bacteria that will destroy an insect pest—
was introduced in the late 1800s, when California citrus
growers were being wiped out by an insect called the
cottony-cushion scale. The vedalia ladybird beetle (Rodolia
cardinalis Mulsant) was imported from Australia to eat the
cottony-cushion scale, and within two years the pest was
completely controlled.
Another kind of biological control is sterilizing the males
so that no eggs hatch. This was first done successfully in 1954
against a parasite called the screwworm fly that, in its larval
stage, lives in and feeds on the flesh of living livestock. Three
and a half billion male screwworm flies (males can mate repeat-
edly; females mate only once in their lives) were sterilized by
X-rays and released over Florida, Georgia, and Alabama,
the hardest-hit states. In less than a year the screwworm fly
menace was virtually wiped out in the Southeast because so
few young were hatched.
New synthetic insect-growth-regulating hormones are
sometimes spread as liquids, as granules, or in plaster pellets in


INSECT STUDY 83
.Insects and Humans
the habitats where the larvae of pest or disease-carrying species
live. These hormones slow or stop the insects’ development and
sometimes kill them. These materials are very safe for all animals
except arthropods.
Another way to keep the insect population within bounds
is cultural control. This is largely a matter of common sense. It
involves, for example, sanitation. You know that garbage and
filth attract the common housefly and many other insects. Getting
rid of such breeding material is an excellent control measure.
On the flip side, some nonnative insects, such as loosestrife
weevils and beetles, have been used to counterattack nonnative
plants like the purple loosestrife.
For farmers, cultural control also means planting more than
one crop. Many varieties of insects depend on one kind of plant
for their entire food supply. If there is plenty of that plant, the
insects will thrive; if it disappears, they die off.
Soil cultivation in the fall is another method of control
that farmers use. Cultivation destroys insect larvae and pupae
buried in the earth by crushing them or exposing them to the
surface cold.
Mosquitoes and other insects whose larvae live in water—
breathing air through a sort of snorkel at the surface—can be
controlled by spreading light oil over their breeding ponds. The
oil enters or jams the breathing system and suffocates the larvae.
Spiders, like this crab spider, feed on harmful insects. Spiders
eat grasshoppers and locusts that destroy crops; caterpillars
that damage plants; and disease-carrying flies and mosquitoes.


84 INSECT STUDY
Insects and Humans.
Lastly, there is chemical control. Insecticides have been
extremely important, particularly since World War II, when
DDT was introduced. DDT alone was credited with saving
5 million lives by controlling mosquitoes, lice, flies, and other
disease carriers. However, it was later discovered to be very
harmful to the environment.
In the 1960s, the public (including many scientists)
became increasingly alarmed about the side effects of insecti-
cides including DDT and related compounds. Many insecticides
persist for long periods in nature, killing not only harmful
insects but also useful ones, as well as birds and small animals.
Pesticides can build up over time in soil or water and bioaccu-
mulate in natural food chains (including that of humans); such
pesticides are now banned. In addition, some of the insects
brought under control by new insecticides are now resistant to
them and are thriving once more.
For these reasons, many scientists believe that the future
of insect control will be in integrated pest management (IPM).
This approach uses all environmentally sound techniques in
combinations that are compatible with local conditions.
Monitoring the pest or disease-carrying species; using biological,
cultural, sanitary, and other control methods; and resorting to
chemicals only when no other effective method is available
(and then using the lowest effective chemical dose possible)
are the basics of IPM.
The hemlock woolly adelgid is an example of integrated pest
management. These aphid-like insects (order Hemiptera) attack
North American hemlocks. Biological control is via introduction
of the beetle Laricobius nigrinus, and chemical control occurs
either by foliage spray
of insecticidal soap or
by root or trunk
injection of the
Imidacloprid, which is
taken up by the tree
and moves through the
sap to be ingested by
the adelgids.
Scientists use this
flight intercept trap
to help them study
adult red oak borers.


INSECT STUDY 85
.Insects and Humans
Keep Out!
Many of the worst insect pests in the United States,
including the boll weevil, Japanese beetle, spongy moth,
spotted lanternfly moth, Hessian fly, and imported
cabbageworm, came here from other countries. Some of
these nonnative invasive species, such as fire ants and
Africanized honeybees, are dangerous to both people
and wildlife. For this reason, quarantines are set up to try
to keep foreign pests out.
At the borders and chief points of entry into the
United States, agricultural quarantine inspectors examine
baggage and cargo for pests that might be imported
accidentally on ships, planes, or other vehicles. Within
the United States, there are also agriculture-related laws
that limit the transport of fresh fruits and vegetables
across state lines.
Boll weevil
Hessian fly
Spotted
lanternfly





INSECT STUDY 87
.Careers in Entomology
Careers in Entomology
People who study insects, either as a career or as a hobby, are
entomologists. Tens of thousands of amateur entomologists
have provided valuable information on insect distribution,
identification, life cycles, behavior, habits, and more.
Professional entomologists have a variety of career choices,
including controlling harmful insects, raising bees, teaching,
consulting with farmers and homeowners, enforcing quaran-
tines and regulations, doing insect surveys, selling insecticides,
or researching insect identification, classification, biology,
ecology, and behavior. They might work for private companies,
universities, or government agencies.
Beekeeping is one of many hobbies or professions an
entomologist could choose.


88 INSECT STUDY
Careers in Entomology.
The Wide World of Entomology
The work of entomologists can prevent the spread of disease,
help farmers grow crops, save endangered species, and help
solve crimes. Here are some examples of what entomologists
can achieve and where they find employment.
Preventing Epidemics of Disease
Entomologists do research to combat insects that transmit
malaria, yellow fever, plague, river blindness, sleeping sickness,
and other diseases such as typhus, typhoid fever, and Lyme
disease. Medical entomologists, who specialize in studying
and stopping the spread of insect-borne diseases, work for
the United Nations; the World Health Organization; the U.S.
Department of Defense; the Centers for Disease Control; federal,
state, and local public health departments; mosquito abatement
agencies; and universities.
Protecting Crops and Other Vegetation
Entomologists work to reduce the crop losses that insects
cause, which can help to relieve some of the food shortages
that exist in many parts of the world. Entomologists also
work with foresters to battle the insect pests that injure trees,
destroy timber, and damage the biological riches found in
forests. Plant protection entomologists study insect pests and
figure out ways to protect crops, trees, flowers, and other
plants from attack and injury by insects. These entomologists
work for the Department of Agriculture, the Forest Service,
the Department of the Interior, universities, nature centers,
conservation agencies, and private industries.
At least one-sixth
of the human
race suffers
from insect-borne
diseases.
A crop duster sprays pesticide on a crop of peas near
Walla Walla, Washington.


INSECT STUDY 89
.Careers in Entomology
Saving Endangered Species
By identifying endangered insect species and studying their
habitats, conservation entomologists can help rebuild threatened
ecosystems. Many are involved in education and outreach
programs at natural history
museums, nature centers,
zoos, conservation agencies,
and extension offices. They
encourage people to
appreciate insects.
Solving Crimes
Forensic entomologists help
in police investigations by
examining insects that inhabit
decomposing remains. For
example, insects can help
establish the time of death.
Among the first insects to
arrive on a newly dead body
are blowflies, and a female
blowfly usually lays eggs within a very short time after arriving.
The eggs develop into larvae, then pupae. A researcher who
knows how long it takes blowfly eggs to reach these different
stages can estimate the time of the victim’s death.
Few people are employed full-time as forensic entomolo-
gists. Most are affiliated with colleges or universities, teach
entomology or biology, and do research. Some work as consul-
tants to law enforcement and judicial agencies, or train crime-
scene technicians to recognize, collect, and properly preserve
the evidence that insects provide. Other forensic entomologists
might concentrate on food or other product contamination
cases, on insect problems in hospitals or nursing homes, or the
effects insects have on structures.
Insects can help investigators determine whether a
murder victim’s body was moved after death. If the
insects found on the body are different from those
that live where the body was discovered, that gives
investigators an important clue.


90 INSECT STUDY
Careers in Entomology.
Preparing for a Career
Acquainting yourself as early as possible with the science
of entomology will help you to recognize the variety of
career choices and begin to match your values, interests,
aptitudes, abilities, personal traits, and desired lifestyle to
your career decision.
For a career in entomology, you must have a thorough
understanding of math and science. Begin now to take all the
biology, zoology, botany, ecology, chemistry, math, statistics,
genetics, and physics courses you can. Also develop your
writing skills. Study foreign languages if you are interested in
traveling abroad.
In college, you will study basic and applied entomology,
as well as ecology, genetics, microbiology, biochemistry, and
statistics. A bachelor’s degree that includes coursework in
entomology should qualify you to work for government
agencies, chemical companies, or pest management industries.
Advanced degrees are required, however, for many positions
in entomology. You will need a master’s or a doctoral degree
to teach, conduct research, or work in extension services.
Get hands-on experience in entomology and biology
by volunteering at a museum, science center, or
zoo. Seek summer positions with universities, state
experiment stations, or government agencies that
work with insects. Join an entomology club. Getting
to know people who share your interest in insects
can help you decide whether you want to make
entomology your career.


INSECT STUDY 91
.Careers in Entomology
E.O. Wilson, A Scouting Story
Among the world’s most influential scientists, Edward
Osborne Wilson found the subjects that would
become his life’s work while he was a Scout.
“The Boy Scouts of America seemed invented
just for me,” he wrote in Naturalist, his bestselling
autobiography. “The 1940 Handbook for Boys,
which I purchased for half a dollar, became my
most cherished possession.”
That handbook was filled with information
about outdoor life, but what truly caught Wilson’s
attention were sections on zoology and botany
with “page after page of animals and plants
wonderfully well illustrated, explaining where to
find them, how to identify them.”
“The public schools and church had offered
nothing like this,” he continued. “The Boy Scouts
legitimated Nature as the center of my life.”
He recalled the impact of the Insect Life merit
badge. The requirements invited him to show an
examiner the natural surroundings in which
certain insects lived, find specimens of the
insects, and tell of their habits and of the nature of
their fitness for their particular surroundings.
While earning the merit badge, Wilson became
hooked on bugs.
He received a doctorate in biology from
Harvard University in 1955. Field research in many
parts of the world established him as an expert in
the study of ants. He expanded on what he
learned from them to encompass many species
and to develop sweeping theories of biodiversity
and sociobiology that have helped scientists understand
the foundations of entire societies.
Wilson received many awards for his work, including
two Pulitzer Prizes for General Nonfiction (for On Human
Nature in 1979, and The Ants in 1991).
And it all began with Scouting.


92 INSECT STUDY
Insect Study Resources.
Scouting Literature
Animal Science, Bird Study, Collections,
Environmental Science, Forestry,
Gardening, Mammal Study, Medicine,
Nature, Plant Science, Public Health,
Reptile and Amphibian Study, Soil and
Water Conservation, and Veterinary
Medicine merit badge pamphlets
Books and Brochures
Arnett Jr., Ross H. American Insects:
A Handbook of the Insects of
America North of Mexico, 2nd ed.
CRC Press, 2000.
Arnett Jr., Ross H., and Richard L.
Jacques Jr. Simon and Schuster’s
Guide to Insects, 2nd ed. Fireside
Books, 1981.
Berenbaum, May R. Ninety-Nine Gnats,
Nits, and Nibblers. University of
Illinois Press, 1989.
–——. Ninety-Nine More Maggots,
Mites, and Munchers. University of
Illinois Press, 1993.
Bland, Roger G., et al. How to Know the
Insects. McGraw-Hill, 1978.
Chu, H.F., and Laurence K. Cutkomp.
How to Know the Immature Insects.
McGraw-Hill, 1992.
Cranshaw, Whitney and David Shetlar.
Garden Insects of North America.
Princeton University Press, 2018.
Dashefsky, H. Steven. Insect Biology:
49 Science Fair Projects. Tab
Books, 1992.
Dunkle, Sidney W. Dragonflies Through
Binoculars: A Field Guide to
Dragonflies of North America.
Oxford University Press, 2000.
Eisner, Thomas. For Love of Insects,
2nd ed. Belknap Press, 2005.
Eisner, Thomas, Maria Eisner, and
Melody Siegler. Secret Weapons:
Defenses of Insects, Spiders,
Scorpions, and Other Many-Legged
Creatures. Belknap Press, 2007.
Evans, Howard E. The Pleasures of
Entomology. Smithsonian, 1985.
Holldobler, Bert, and Edward O. Wilson.
The Ants. Belknap Press, 1990.
Insect Study Resources
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


INSECT STUDY 93
.Insect Study Resources
Kavanagh, James. Bugs & Slugs: A
Folding Pocket Guide to Familiar
North American Invertebrates. NBN
Press, 2017.
Lehmkuhl, Dennis M., et al.
How to Know the Aquatic Insects.
McGraw-Hill, 1979.
Milne, Lorus J. National Audubon
Society Field Guide to North
American Insects and Spiders.
Knopf, 1980.
Mound, Laurence, and Stephen Brooks.
Insects. Sagebrush, 2003.
National Audubon Society. National
Audubon Society Field Guide to
North American Butterflies.
Chanticleer Press, 1981.
Opler, Paul A. Peterson First Guides:
Butterflies and Moths. Houghton
Mifflin, 1998.
Peterson, Roger Tory. Peterson First
Guides: Insects, 2nd rev. ed.
Houghton Mifflin, 1998.
Turpin, Tom. Insect Appreciation, 3rd ed.
Kendall Hunt Publishing Co., 2002.
West, Larry, and Julie Ridl. How to
Photograph Insects and Spiders.
Stackpole Books, 1994.
White, Richard E. A Field Guide to the
Beetles of North America. Houghton
Mifflin, 1998.
Wilsdon, Christina, et al. National
Audubon Society First Field Guide:
Insects. Scholastic, 1998.
Winston, Mark L. The Biology of
the Honey Bee. Harvard University
Press, 1991.
Wright, Amy Bartlett. Peterson First
Guides: Caterpillars. Houghton
Mifflin, 1998.
Zim, Herbert S., and Clarence Cottam.
Insects, rev. and updated ed. St.
Martin’s Press, 2002.
Organizations and Websites
American Beekeeping Federation
480 Town Center St. N, PMB #253
Mooresville, IN 46158-1379
317-503-0583
abfnet.org
Bee Culture
623 West Liberty St.
Medina, OH 44256
800-289-7668
beeculture.com
BugGuide.net
Iowa State University
2310 Pammel Dr.
Ames, IA 50011-1031
515-294-7401
bugguide.net
Carolina Biological Supply Company
800-334-5551
carolina.com
Entomological Society of America
3 Park Place, Suite 307
Annapolis, MD 21401-3722
(301) 731-4535
entsoc.org


94 INSECT STUDY
Insect Study Resources.
Journey North Arboretum
University of Wisconsin-Madison
journeynorth.org
Leave No Trace
P.O. Box 997
Boulder, CO 80304
lnt.org
Monarch Watch
monarchwatch.org
The Natural History Museum
“The glimmering world of glow-worms”
Cromwell Road
London SW7 5BD
nhm.ac.uk/discover/the-glimmering-
world-of-glow-worms.html
National Museum of Natural History
Department of Entomology
P.O. Box 37012, Smithsonian Institution
Washington, DC 20013-7012
naturalhistory.si.edu/research/
entomology
Natural Resources
Conservation Service
833-ONE-USDA
nrcs.usda.gov
University of Kansas
2021 Constant Avenue
Lawrence, KS 66047
785-864-4441
Xerces Society for
Invertebrate Conservation
855-232-6639
Xerces.org
Acknowledgments
For reviewing and suggesting updates
to this edition of the pamphlet,
Scouting America thanks Nathan
Brockman, Reiman Gardens, Iowa
State University, Director of
Entomology, Entomologist; Suse Bell,
SA Outdoor Ethics & Conservation
Committee; Gary Vaughn, National
Wilderness and Wild & Scenic Rivers
Specialist USDA; Michael Huneke,
National Program Manager – Forest
Service USDA; Stephen Scannell, SA
Outdoor Ethics & Conservation
Committee; and Perry Leong, National
Merit Badge Subcommittee.
Scouting America is grateful to all
the men and women serving on the
National Merit Badge Subcommittee for
the improvements made in updating
this pamphlet.
Scouting America is grateful to
those who have contributed to previous
editions of the Insect Study merit badge
pamphlet, upon which this edition is
closely based. We are grateful to:
Dr. John A. Jackman, Texas A&M
University; Gary A. Dunn, M.S., Young
Entomologists’ Society; Robert D. Hall,
Ph.D., J.D., University of Missouri; the
Entomological Society of America for
permission to adapt material from the
society’s website (entsoc.org); writer
and editor Deborah Lightfoot Sizemore;
Timothy Ebert, Ph.D.; Lt. Col. Harold J.
Harlan; and Gary A. Dunn.
Photo and Illustration Credits
David T. Almquist, University of
Florida, Bugwood.org, courtesy—
page 29 (bark beetle)


INSECT STUDY 95
.Insect Study Resources
Stephen Ausmus, USDA Agricultural
Research Service, Bugwood.org,
courtesy—page 86
(inspecting leaves)
Scott Bauer, USDA Agricultural
Resource Service, Bugwood.org,
courtesy—cover (potato beetle);
pages 58 (adult Colorado potato
beetle), 74, 78 (Mediterranean fruit
fly), 81 (termite damage), and 85
(Hessian fly)
Joseph Berger, Bugwood.org, courtesy—
cover (ladybird beetle); pages 28
(housefly), 48, 56 (blue-winged olive
mayfly), 64, and 80 (housefly)
Ronald F. Billings, Texas Forest Service,
Bugwood.org, courtesy—
page 69 (Texas leafcutter
worker ant)
Charles T. and John R. Bryson,
Bugwood.org, courtesy—
page 11 (Eastern tiger swallowtail)
David Cappaert, Michigan State
University, Bugwood.org, courtesy—
pages 5 (top), 14, 15 (ant), 16 (bee),
21 (eastern forktail damselfly), 23
(Delaware skipper), 26 (praying
mantis), 27 (mature calico pennant
dragonfly), 30, 49, 56 (whitetail drag-
onfly), 77 (margined carrion beetle),
81 (click beetle), and 83
Clemson University—USDA Cooperative
Extension Slide Series, Bugwood.org,
courtesy—pages 12 (cockroaches,
silverfish), 28 (camel cricket), 57,
and 85 (boll weevil)
Whitney Cranshaw, Colorado State
University, Bugwood.org, courtesy—
pages 63, 69 (harvester ants), 75,
and 81 (corn earworm)
Carl Dennis, Auburn University,
Bugwood.org, courtesy—page 71
Arnold T. Drooz, USDA Forest Service,
Bugwood.org, courtesy—page
39 (hibiscus)
Maria Eisner, Cornell University,
courtesy—page 10 (cat flea)
Susan Ellis, Bugwood.org, courtesy—
pages 24 and 61 (black
swallowtail larva)
Susan Ellis, forestryimages.org, cour-
tesy—page 21 (june beetle)
Chris Evans, River to River CWMA,
Bugwood.org, courtesy—page 39
(milkweed, phlox)
Wendy VanDyk Evans, Bugwood.org,
courtesy—page 39 (snapdragon)
Getty Images—pages 8, 11 (firefly), 13
(butterflies), 27 (snow fleas), 37, 85
(spotted lanternfly), and 86 (inset)
Peggy Greb, USDA Agricultural Research
Service, Bugwood.org, courtesy—
page 58 (potato beetle larva)
James Henderson, Gulf South Research
Corp., Bugwood.org, courtesy—page
78 (Venus flytrap)
Tom Heutte, USDA Forest Service,
Bugwood.org, courtesy—
page 39 (red clover)
Gerald J. Lenhard, Bugwood.org,
courtesy—pages 15 (black swallow-
tail adult butterfly) and 61 (black
swallowtail pupa, butterfly)
Edward L. Manigault, Clemson
University Donated Collection,
Bugwood.org, courtesy—pages
16 (grasshopper) and 56
(dragonfly nymph)


96 INSECT STUDY
Insect Study Resources.
Paolo Mazzei, Bugwood.org, courtesy—
page 40
John Moser, USDA Forest Service, forest-
ryimages.org, courtesy—page 12
(Texas leafcutting ant)
Jerry A. Payne, USDA Agricultural
Research Service,
forestryimages.org, courtesy—
page 62
J. Scott Peterson, USDA NRCS,
forestryimages.org, courtesy—
page 38
Herb Pilcher, USDA Agricultural
Research Service,
forestryimages.org, courtesy—page
12 (brown stinkbug)
Dave Powell, USDA Forest Service,
Bugwood.org, courtesy—
page 39 (goldenrod)
John Ruberson, University of Georgia,
Bugwood.org, courtesy—
cover (ants and leaf)
James Solomon, USDA Forest Service,
Bugwood.org, courtesy—page 54
Alton N. Sparks Jr., University of
Georgia, Bugwood.org, courtesy—
page 31
Terry Spivey, USDA Forest Service,
Bugwood.org, courtesy—
page 39 (sunflower)
Tim Tigner, Virginia Department of
Forestry, Bugwood.org, courtesy—
page 28 (periodical cicada nymph)
University of Arkansas Forest
Entomology Lab Archive, Bugwood.
org, courtesy—page 84
USDA Agricultural Research Service/
Stephen Ausmus, courtesy—page 53
USDA Agricultural Research Service/
Scott Bauer, courtesy—page 6
USDA APHIS PPQ Archives, USDA
Animal and Plant Health Inspection
Service, forestryimages.org, cour-
tesy—page 10 (red fire ant)
USDA APHIS PPQ Archives, USDA
APHIS PPQ, Bugwood.org,
courtesy—page 39 (marigold)
USDA Natural Resources Conservation
Service/Paul Fusco, courtesy—
page 10 (dragonfly)
USDA/Doug Wilson, courtesy—page 88
E.O. Wilson, courtesy—page 91
Wikipedia.org, courtesy—page 21
(male cecropia moth)
Wikipedia/Hectonichus, courtesy—
page 11 (Goliath beetle)
Wikipedia/J.T. Huber, courtesy—
page 11 (fairyfly)
Peter Wirtz, Bugwood.org, courtesy—
cover (chrysalis); page 60
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of
or are protected by Scouting America.
John McDearmon—all illustrations on
pages 17, 19, 22–23, 27, 36, 50–52,
55–56, 58–59, and 66
Brian Payne—page 87