STEM-Based
PLANT
SCIENCE


PLANT SCIENCE
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Plant Science
1. Make a drawing and identify five or more parts of a flowering plant. Tell what
each part does.
2. Explain photosynthesis and tell why this process is important. Tell at least five
ways that humans depend on plants.
3. Explain how honeybees and other pollinating insects are important to
plant life.
4. Explain how water, light, air, temperature, and pests affect plants. Describe the
nature and function of soil and explain its importance. Tell about the texture,
structure, and composition of fertile soil. Tell how soil may be improved.
5. Tell how to propagate plants by seeds, roots, cuttings, tubers, and grafting.
Grow a plant by ONE of these methods.
6. List by common name at least 10 native plants and 10 cultivated plants that
grow near your home. List five invasive nonnative plants in your area and tell
how they may be harmful. Tell how the spread of invasive plants may be
avoided or controlled in ways that are not damaging to humans, wildlife, and
the environment.
7. Name and tell about careers in agronomy, horticulture, and botany. Write a
paragraph about a career in one of these fields that interests you.
8. Choose ONE of the following options and complete each requirement:
Option 1: Agronomy
A. Describe how to prepare a seedbed.
B. Make and use a seed germination tester to test 50 seeds of four of the
following plants: corn, cotton, alfalfa, soybeans, clover, wheat, rice, rye,
barley. Determine the percentage of live seeds.
C. Tell about one important insect pest and one important disease that
damage each of the following: corn, small grains, cotton. Collect and
name five weeds that compete with crops in your locality. Tell how to
control these weeds without harming people, wildlife, or useful insects.
D. On a map of the United States, identify the chief regions where corn,
cotton, forage crops, small grain crops, and oil crops grow. Tell how
climate and location of these regions make them leaders in the production
of these crops.
E. Complete ONE of the following alternatives:
(1) Corn
(a) Grow a plot of corn and have your plot inspected by your
counselor. Record seed variety or experimental code number.


(b) Tell about modern methods of commercial corn farming and the
contributions that corn makes to today’s food and fuel supply.
(c) Tell about an insect that can damage corn, and explain how it
affects corn production and how it is controlled.
(2) Cotton
(a) Grow a plot of cotton and have your plot inspected by
your counselor.
(b) Tell about modern methods of commercial cotton farming, and
about the uses of cotton fiber and seed and the economic value of
this crop.
(c) Tell about an insect that can damage cotton, and explain how it
affects cotton production and how it is controlled.
(3) Forage Crops
(a) Collect, count, and label samples of each for display: perennial
grasses, annual grasses, legumes, and broadleaf weeds. Indicate how
each grass and legume is used. Keep a log of the site where you found
each sample and share it with your counselor.
(b) Explain how legumes can be used to enrich the soil and how they
may deplete it under certain conditions. Explain how livestock may
enrich or deplete the soil.
(c) Name five poisonous plants that are dangerous to livestock,
and tell the different ways of using forage crops as feed for livestock.
(4) Small Grains
(a) Give production figures for small grain crops listed in the U.S.
Statistical Report or Agricultural Statistics Handbook for the latest
year available.
(b) Help in harvesting a crop of grain. Tell how to reduce harvesting
losses and about modern methods of growing one small grain crop.
(c) Visit a grain elevator, flour mill, cereal plant, feed or seed com-
pany. Talk with the operator. Take notes, and describe the processes
used and tell your patrol, troop, or class about your visit.
(5) Oil Crops
(a) Grow a plot of soybeans and have your plot inspected by
your counselor.
(b) Tell about modern methods of growing soybeans on a commercial
scale, and discuss the contributions soybeans make to our food supply.
(c) Explain why a killing frost just after emergence is critical
for soybeans.
Option 2: Horticulture
A. Visit one of the following places and tell what you learned about horticul-
ture there: public garden, arboretum, retail nursery, wholesale nursery,
production greenhouse, or conservatory greenhouse.


B. Explain the following terms: hardiness zone, shade tolerance, pH,
moisture requirement, native habitat, texture, cultivar, ultimate size,
disease resistance, habit, evergreen, deciduous, annual, perennial.
Find out what hardiness zone you live in and list 10 landscape plants
you like that are suitable for your climate, giving the common name
and scientific name for each.
C. Do ONE of the following:
(1) Explain the difference between vegetative and sexual propagation
methods, and tell some horticultural advantages of each. Grow a plant
from a stem or root cutting or graft.
(2) Transplant 12 seedlings or rooted cuttings to larger containers and
grow them for at least one month.
(3) Demonstrate good pruning techniques and tell why pruning
is important.
(4) After obtaining permission, plant a tree or shrub properly in an
appropriate site.
D. Do EACH of the following:
(1) Explain the importance of good landscape design and selection of
plants that are suitable for particular sites and conditions.
(2) Tell why it is important to know how big a plant will grow.
(3) Tell why slower-growing landscape plants are sometimes a better
choice than faster-growing varieties.
E. Choose ONE of the following alternatives and complete EACH of
the requirements:
(1) Bedding Plants
(a) Grow bedding plants appropriate for your area in pots or flats
from seed or cuttings in a manufactured soil mix. Explain why you
chose the mix and tell what is in it.
(b) Transplant plants to a bed in the landscape and maintain the
bed until the end of the growing season. Record your activities,
observations, materials used, and costs.
(c) Demonstrate mulching, fertilizing, watering, weeding, and
deadheading, and tell how each practice helps your plants.
(d) Tell some differences between gardening with annuals and perennials.
(2) Fruit, Berry, and Nut Crops
(a) Plant five fruit or nut trees, grapevines, or berry plants that are
suited to your area. Take full care of fruit or nut trees, grapevines, or
berry plants through one season.
(b) Prune a tree, vine, or shrub properly. Explain why pruning
is necessary.
(c) Demonstrate one type of graft and tell why this method is useful.
(d) Describe how one fruit, nut, or berry crop is processed for use.


(3) Woody Ornamentals
(a) Plant five or more trees or shrubs in a landscape setting. Take full
care of the trees or shrubs you have planted for one growing season.
(b) Prune a tree or shrub properly. Explain why pruning is necessary.
(c) List 10 trees (in addition to those listed in general requirement 5
above) and tell your counselor how each is used in the landscape.
Give the common and scientific names.
(d) Describe the size, texture, color, flowers, leaves, fruit, hardiness,
cultural requirements, and any special characteristics that make each
type of tree or shrub attractive or interesting.
(e) Tell five ways trees help improve the quality of our environment.
(4) Home Gardening
(a) Design and plant a garden or landscape that is at least 10 by 10 feet.
(b) Plant 10 or more different types of plants in your garden. Tell why
you selected particular varieties of vegetables and flowers. Take care
of the plants in your garden for one season.
(c) Demonstrate soil preparation, staking, watering, weeding,
mulching, composting, fertilizing, pest management, and pruning.
Tell why each technique is used.
(d) Tell four types of things you could provide to make your home
landscape or park a better place for birds and wildlife. List the com-
mon and scientific names of 10 kinds of native plants that are benefi-
cial to birds and wildlife in your area.
Option 3: Field Botany
A. Visit a park, forest, Scout camp, or other natural area near your home.
While you are there:
(1) Determine which species of plants are the largest and which are the
most abundant. Note whether they cast shade on other plants.
(2) Record environmental factors that may influence the presence of plants
on your site, including latitude, climate, air and soil temperature, soil type
and pH, geology, hydrology, and topography.
(3) Record any differences in the types of plants you see at the edge of a
forest, near water, in burned areas, or near a road or railroad.
B. Select a study site that is at least 100 by 100 feet. Make a list of the plants
in the study site by groups of plants: canopy trees, small trees, shrubs,
herbaceous wildflowers and grasses, vines, ferns, mosses, algae, fungi,
lichens. Find out which of these are native plants and which are exotic
(or nonnative).
C. Tell how an identification key works and use a simple key to identify
10 kinds of plants (in addition to those in general requirement 5 above).
Tell the difference between common and scientific names and tell why
scientific names are important.


D. After gaining permission, collect, identify, press, mount, and label
10 different plants that are common in your area. Tell why voucher speci-
mens are important for documentation of a field botanist’s discoveries.
E. Obtain a list of rare plants of your state. Tell what is being done to protect
rare plants and natural areas in your state. Write a paragraph about one of
the rare plants in your state.
F. Choose ONE of the following alternatives and complete EACH of
its requirements:
(1) Tree Inventory
(a) Identify the trees of your neighborhood, a park, a section of your
town, or a Scout camp.
(b) Collect, press, and label leaves, flowers, or fruits to document
your inventory.
(c) List the types of trees by scientific name and give common
names. Note the number and size (diameter at 4 feet above ground)
of trees observed and determine the largest of each species in your
study area.
(d) Lead a walk to teach others about trees and their value, OR write
and distribute materials that will help others learn about trees.
(2) Transect Study
(a) Visit two sites, at least one of which is different from the one you
visited for Field Botany requirement 1.
(b) Use the transect method to study the two different kinds of plant
communities. The transects should be at least 500 feet long.
(c) At each site, record observations about the soil and other
influencing factors AND do the following. Then make a graph or
chart to show the results of your studies.
(1) Identify each tree within 10 feet of the transect line.
(2) Measure the diameter of each tree at 4 feet above the ground,
and map and list each tree.
(3) Nested Plot
(a) Visit two sites, at least one of which is different from the one you
visited for Field Botany requirement 1.
(b) Mark off nested plots and inventory two different kinds of
plant communities.
(c) At each site, record observations about the soil and other
influencing factors AND do the following. Then make a graph
or chart to show the results of your studies.
(1) Identify, measure, and map each tree in a 100-by-100-foot plot.
(Measure the diameter of each tree at 4 feet above the ground.)
(2) Identify and map all trees and shrubs in a 10-by-10-foot plot
within each of the larger areas.


(3) Identify and map all plants (wildflowers, ferns, grasses,
mosses, etc.) of a 4-by-4-foot plot within the 10-by-10-foot plot.
(4) Herbarium Visit
(a) Write ahead and arrange to visit an herbarium at a university, park,
or botanical garden; OR, visit an herbarium website (with your
parent’s permission).
(b) Tell how the specimens are arranged and how they are used by
researchers. If possible, observe voucher specimens of a plant that is rare
in your state.
(c) Tell how a voucher specimen is mounted and prepared for
permanent storage. Tell how specimens should be handled so that they
will not be damaged.
(d) Tell about the tools and references used by botanists in an herbarium.
(5) Plant Conservation Organization Visit
(a) Write ahead and arrange to visit a private conservation organization
or government agency that is concerned with protecting rare plants and
natural areas.
(b) Tell about the activities of the organization in studying and
protecting rare plants and natural areas.
(c) If possible, visit a nature preserve managed by the organization.
Tell about land management activities such as controlled burning, or
measures to eradicate invasive (nonnative) plants or other threats to the
plants that are native to the area.


94 PLANT SCIENCE
Plant Science Resources.
Scouting Literature
Fieldbook; Boy Scout Journal; Environ-
mental Science, Gardening, Landscape
Architecture, Soil and Water Conserva-
tion, Insect Study, Forestry, Nature, and
Sustainability merit badge pamphlets
Visit the Boy Scouts of America’s
official retail website (with
your parent’s permission) at
http://www.scoutstuff.org for a
complete listing of all merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.
Books
Bartholomew, Mel. All New Square
Foot Gardening, 2nd ed. Cool
Springs Press, 2013.
Bryant, Geoff. Plant Propagation A to
Z: Growing Plants for Free. Firefly
Books Ltd. 2006.
Elzer-Peters, Katie. Beginner’s
Illustrated Guide to Gardening:
Techniques to Help You Get Started.
Cool Springs Press, 2012.
Jeavons, John. How to Grow More
Vegetables, 8th ed. Ten Speed
Press, 2012.
Kujawski, Jennifer. The Week-by-Week
Vegetable Gardener’s Handbook:
Make the Most of Your Growing
Season. Storey Publishing, 2011.
Madigan, Carleen. The Backyard
Homestead: Produce All the Food
You Need on Just a Quarter Acre!
Story Publishing, 2009.
Pleasant, Barbara. Starter Vegetable
Gardens: 24 No-Fail Plans for
Small Organic Gardens. Storey
Publishing, 2010.
Organizations and Websites
American Association of Botanical
Gardens and Arboreta
Telephone: 302-655-7100
American Horticultural Society
Website: http://www.ahs.org
ATTRA—National Sustainable
Agriculture Information Service
Website: http://www.attra.ncat.org
Botanical Society of America
Website: http://www.botany.org
Center for Invasive Species and
Ecosystem Health
Website: http://www.invasive.org
Center for Plant Conservation
Telephone: 314-577-9450
Website: http://www.centerforplant-
conservation.org
Plant Science Resources


PLANT SCIENCE 95
.Plant Science Resources
Endangered Species Program
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
Website: http://www.fws.gov/endangered
National FFA Organization
Telephone: 317-802-6060
Website: http://www.ffa.org
Native Plant Information Network
Telephone: 512-292-4200
Website:
http://www.wildflower.org/explore/
The Nature Conservancy
Website: http://www.nature.org
University of Florida Herbarium
Telephone: 352-273-1990
Website:
http://www.flmnh.ufl.edu/herbarium
USDA Cooperative Extension
System Office Locator Map
Website: http://nifa.usda.gov/partners-
and-extension-map
USDA National Agricultural
Statistics Service
Website: http://www.nass.usda.gov
USDA Plants Database
Website: http://plants.usda.gov
U.S. National Arboretum
Website: http://www.usna.usda.gov
Acknowledgments
For his help in writing this edition
of the Plant Science merit badge
pamphlet, the Boy Scouts of America
thanks Eagle Scout Jeff Birkby, former
camp ranger and conservationist at
Philmont Scout Ranch.
The Boy Scouts of America is
grateful to the men and women serving
on the Merit Badge Maintenance Task
Force for the improvements made in
updating this pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration Credits
Lynn Betts, U.S. Department of
Agriculture, Natural Resources
Conservation Service, courtesy—
page 54
John D. Byrd, Mississippi State
University, Bugwood.org, courtesy—
page 46 (wild mustard)
Bill Cook, Michigan State University,
Forestryimages.org, courtesy—
page 84 (furrowed bark)
Steve Dewey, Utah State University,
Bugwood.org, courtesy—
page 46 (quackgrass)
Division of Plant Industry Archive,
Florida Department of Agriculture
and Consumer Services, Bugwood.
org, courtesy—page 45 (smuts)
Chris Evans, River to River CWMA,
Bugwood.org, courtesy—
page 46 (sow thistle)
HAAP Media Ltd., courtesy—cover
(grasshopper, ladybird beetle)
Linda Haugen, USDA Forest Service,
Bugwood.org, courtesy—page 30
George Markham, USA Forest Service,
Bugwood.org, courtesy—page 49
(leafy spurge)
Paul A. Mistrella, USDA Forest Service,
Bugwood.org, courtesy—page 44
National Renewable Energy Laboratory/
Warren Gretz, courtesy—page 34
Dave Powell, USDA Forest Service,
Bugwood.org, courtesy—pages 48
(locoweed) and 49 (meadow
death camas)
©Realworld Imagery Inc.—page 83 (all)
R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company Slide
Set, R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Co.,
Bugwood.org, courtesy—
page 43 (grasshopper)