FIRST AID

BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES

FIRST AID

The Boy Scouts of America is indebted to the American
Red Cross for its subject matter expertise, review,
and other assistance with this edition of the First Aid
merit badge pamphlet.

“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”

First Aid
1. Demonstrate to your counselor that you have current knowledge of all first-aid
requirements for Tenderfoot, Second Class, and First Class ranks.
2. Explain how you would obtain emergency medical assistance from:
(a) Your home
(b) A remote location on a wilderness camping trip
(c) An activity on open water
3. Define the term triage. Explain the steps necessary to assess and handle a
medical emergency until help arrives.

115

4. Explain the universal precautions as applied to the transmission of infections.
Discuss the ways you should protect yourself and the victim while
administering first aid.
5. Do the following:
(a) Prepare a first-aid kit for your home. Display and discuss its contents with
your counselor.
(b) With an adult leader, inspect your troop's first-aid kit. Evaluate it for
completeness. Report your findings to your counselor and Scout leader.
6. Describe the early signs and symptoms of each of the following and explain
what actions you should take:
(a) Shock
(b) Heart attack
(c) Stroke
7. Do the following:
(a) Describe the conditions that must exist before performing CPR on a
person. Then demonstrate proper CPR technique using a training device
approved by your counselor.
(b) Explain the use of an automated external defibrillator (AED). Identify the
location of the AED at your school, place of worship, and troop meeting place,
if one is present.
8. Do the following:
(a) Show the steps that need to be taken for someone who has a large open
wound or cut that is not bleeding severely.
(b) Show the steps that need to be taken for someone who has a large open
wound or cut that is severely bleeding.
(c) Tell the dangers in the use of a tourniquet and the conditions under which
its use is justified.
9. Explain when a bee sting could be life threatening and what action should be
taken for prevention and for first aid.
10. Describe the signs and symptoms and demonstrate the proper procedures for
handling and immobilizing suspected closed and open fractures or dislocations of the
(a) Forearm
(b) Wrist
(c) Upper leg
(d) Lower leg
(e) Ankle
11. Describe the signs, symptoms, and possible complications and demonstrate
care for someone with a suspected injury to the head, neck, or back.
12. Describe the symptoms, proper first-aid procedures, and possible prevention
measures for the following conditions:
116

(a) Anaphylaxis/allergic reactions
(b) Bruises
(c) Sprains or strains
(d) Hypothermia
(e) Frostbite
(f) Burns—first, second, and third degree
(g) Convulsions/seizures
(h) Dehydration
(i) Muscle cramps
(j) Heat exhaustion
(k) Heat stroke
(l) Abdominal pain
(m) Broken, chipped, or loosened tooth
13. Do the following:
(a) Describe the conditions under which an injured person should be moved.
(b) If a sick or an injured person must be moved, tell how you would determine the best method. Demonstrate this method.
(c) With helpers under your supervision, improvise a stretcher and move a
presumably unconscious person.
14. Teach another Scout a first-aid skill selected by your counselor.

117

.First-Aid Resources

First-Aid Resources
Scouting Literature
Boy Scout Handbook; Fieldbook; Deck of
First Aid; Basic Illustrated Wilderness
First Aid; Emergency First Aid pocket
guide; Be Prepared First Aid Book;
Dentistry, Emergency Preparedness,
Fire Safety, Lifesaving, Medicine, Public
Health, Safety, and Wilderness Survival
merit badge pamphlets
Visit the Boy Scouts of America’s
official retail website (with your
parent’s permission) at http://
www.scoutstuff.org for a complete listing of all merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.

Books
American Medical Association Handbook
of First Aid and Emergency Care,
revised ed. Random House, 2009.
Auerbach, Paul S. Medicine for the
Outdoors: The Essential Guide to First
Aid and Emergency Medicine, 5th ed.
Mosby, 2009.
Backer, Howard, et al. Wilderness
First Aid: Emergency Care for Remote
Locations. Jones and Bartlett, 2005.

Emergency Care and Safety Institute.
Standard First Aid, CPR, and
AED, 6th ed. Jones & Bartlett
Learning, 2011.
Emergency Care and Safety Institute.
Wilderness First Aid Field Guide.
Jones & Bartlett Learning, 2011.
First Aid, 6th ed. American Academy of
Orthopaedic Surgeons, 2011.
Forgey, William. Wilderness Medicine:
Beyond First Aid, 6th ed. Globe
Pequot Press, 2012.
Gill, Paul G. Wilderness First Aid:
A Pocket Guide. Ragged Mountain
Press, 2002.
Isaac, Jeffrey. The Outward Bound
Wilderness First-Aid Handbook.
Falcon Guides, 2013.
Rickey, Brad, and Kurt Duffens. FastAct
Pocket First Aid Guide. FastAct, 1999.
Schimelpfenig, Tod, and Linda Lindsey.
NOLS Wilderness First Aid, 3rd ed.
National Outdoor Leadership School
and Stackpole Books, 2000.
Tilton, Buck. Backcountry First Aid and
Extended Care, 5th ed. Falcon
Guides, 2007.

FIRST AID

93

First-Aid Resources.

Weiss, Eric A. Wilderness 911: A Step-byStep Guide for Medical Emergencies
and Improvised Care in the
Backcountry. The Mountaineers
Books, 2007.

American Red Cross
2025 E St. NW
Washington, DC 20006
Toll-free telephone: 800-733-2767
Website: http://www.redcross.org

Wilkerson, James A., ed. Medicine
for Mountaineering and Other
Wilderness Activities, 6th ed.
The Mountaineers Books, 2010.

Organizations and Websites

American Stroke Association
7272 Greenville Ave.
Dallas, TX 75231
Toll-free telephone: 888-478-7653
Website:
http://www.strokeassociation.org

American Heart Association
7272 Greenville Ave.
Dallas, TX 75231
Toll-free telephone: 800-242-8721
Website: http://www.heart.org

National Safety Council
1121 Spring Lake Drive
Itasca, IL 60143-3201
Toll-free telephone: 800-621-7615
Website: http://www.nsc.org

American Medical Association
AMA Plaza
330 N. Wabash Ave., Suite 39300
Chicago, IL 60611-5885
Toll-free telephone: 800-621-8335
Website: http://www.ama-assn.org
The American Red Cross produces
several resources that
may be of particular interest to
Scouts, Scout leaders, and merit
badge counselors.
American Red Cross. First Aid/CPR/
AED Participant’s Manual.
Staywell, 2011.
American Red Cross. Responding to
Emergencies. Staywell, 2012.
American Red Cross. Wilderness and
Remote First Aid. Staywell, 2010.

EMERGENCY REFERENCE GUIDE

Wilderness and Remote First Aid

Based on the Boy Scouts of America
Wilderness First Aid Curriculum and Doctrine Guidelines

Offers Enhanced Content to Meet OSHA’s
Best Practices for Workplace First Aid Training Programs

94

FIRST AID

