GENEALOGY

BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES

GENEALOGY

“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”

Requirements
1. Explain to your counselor what the words genealogy,
ancestor, and descendant mean.
2. Do ONE of the following:
a. Create a time line for yourself or for a relative. Then
write a short biography based on that time line.
b. Keep a journal for six weeks. You must write in it at least
once a week.
3. With your parent’s help, choose a relative or a family
acquaintance you can interview in person, by telephone,
or by email or letter. Record the information you collect
so you do not forget it.
4. Do the following:
a. Name three types of genealogical resources and explain
how these resources can help you chart your family tree.
b. Obtain at least one genealogical document that supports
an event that is or can be recorded on your pedigree
chart or family group record. The document could be
found at home or at a government office, religious organization, archive, or library.
c. Tell how you would evaluate the genealogical information
you found for requirement 4b.

35903
ISBN 978-0-8395-3383-2
©2013 Boy Scouts of America
2016 Printing

5. Contact ONE of the following individuals or institutions.
Ask what genealogical services, records, or activities this
individual or institution provides, and report the results:
a. A genealogical or lineage society
b. A professional genealogist (someone who gets paid for
doing genealogical research)
c. A surname organization, such as your
family’s organization
d. A genealogical educational facility or institution
e. A genealogical record repository of any type
(courthouse, genealogical library, state or national
archive, state library, etc.)
6. Begin your family tree by listing yourself and include at
least two additional generations. You may complete this
requirement by using the chart provided in this pamphlet
or the genealogy software program of your choice.
7. Complete a family group record form, listing yourself and
your brothers and sisters as the children. On another family
group record form, show one of your parents and his or her
brothers and sisters as the children. This requirement may
be completed using the chart provided or the genealogy
software program of your choice.
8. Do the following:
a. Explain the effect computers and the Internet are having
on the world of genealogy.
b. Explain how photography (including microfilming)
has influenced genealogy.
9. Discuss what you have learned about your family and your
family members through your genealogical research.

GENEALOGY    3

Genealogy Resources.

Genealogy Resources
Scouting Literature
Boy Scout Journal; American Heritage
merit badge pamphlet
Visit the Boy Scouts of America’s
official retail website at http://www.
scoutstuff.org for a complete listing
of all merit badge pamphlets and
other helpful Scouting materials
and supplies.

Books
Brockman, Terra. A Student’s Guide to
Italian American Genealogy. Oryx
Press, 1996.
Burroughs, Tony. Black Roots: A

Beginner’s Guide to Tracing the
African American Family Tree. Simon

& Schuster, 2001.
Hendrickson, Nancy. Finding Your Roots
Online. Betterway Books, 2003.
Kavasch, E. Barry. A Student’s Guide to
Native American Genealogy. Oryx
Press, 1996.
Kemp, Thomas Jay. International

Vital Records Handbook, 5th ed.

Genealogical Publishing, 2009.
McKenna, Erin. A Student’s Guide to Irish
American Genealogy. Oryx Press, 1996.

Paddock, Lisa Olson. A Student’s

Guide to Scandinavian American
Genealogy. Oryx Press, 1996.
Renick, Barbara. Genealogy 101: How
to Trace Your Family’s History and
Heritage. Rutledge Hill Press, 2003.
Robl, Gregory. A Student’s Guide to
German American Genealogy.
Oryx Press, 1996.
Rollyson, Carl Sokolnicki. A Student’s

Guide to Polish American Genealogy.

Oryx Press, 1996.
Ryskamp, George A. Finding Your

Mexican Ancestors: A Beginner’s
Guide to Mexican American
Genealogy. Ancestry Publishing, 2007.
Schleifer, Jay. A Student’s Guide to Jewish
American Genealogy. Oryx Press, 1996.
She, Colleen. A Student’s Guide to
Chinese American Genealogy.
Oryx Press, 1996.
United States National Archives and
Records Administration. Guide to

Genealogical Research in the National
Archives. National Archives and

Records Administration, 2001.

Wolfman, Ira. Climbing Your Family

Tree: Online and Offline Genealogy
for Kids. Workman Publishing, 2002.

Yamaguchi, Yoji. A Student’s Guide

to Japanese American Genealogy.
Oryx Press, 1996.

62    GENEALOGY

.Genealogy Resources

Magazines

Genealogy Websites

Family Chronicle
Toll-free telephone: 888-326-2476
Website:
http://www.familychronicle.com

AfriGeneas
Website: http://www.afrigeneas.com

Family Tree Magazine
Toll-free telephone: 855-840-5122
Website: http://www.familytree
magazine.com

Cyndi’s List of Genealogy Sites
on the Internet
Website: http://www.cyndislist.com

Archives and Libraries
National Archives and Records
Administration
Toll-free telephone: 866-272-6272
Website: http://www.archives.gov
Library of Congress
Local History and Genealogy
Reading Room
Website:
http://www.loc.gov/rr/genealogy
The Newberry Library
Website: http://www.newberry.org/
genealogy-and-local-history

Genealogical Societies

Ancestry.com
Website: http://www.ancestry.com

FamilySearch
Website: https://www.familysearch.org
Genealogy.com
Website: http://www.genealogy.com
The USGenWeb Project
Website: http://www.usgenweb.com
The WorldGenWeb Project
Website: http://www.worldgenweb.org

Genealogy Software
Family Tree Maker
Website:
http://www.familytreemaker.com
Genealogy Pro for Mac OS X
Website: http://www.macgenealogy.org

The Family History Library and
Family History Centers
Website: https://www.familysearch.org

Family Tree Maker® 2008
Website: http://www.genealogy.com/
softmain.html

National Genealogical Society
Website: http://www.ngsgenealogy.org

Legacy 6.0 Family Tree
Website:
http://www.legacyfamilytree.com

New England Historic
Genealogical Society
Website: http://www.nehgs.org

Personal Ancestral File
The Church of Jesus Christ
of Latter-day Saints
Website: https://www.familysearch.org
Reunion 9
Website: http://www.leisterpro.com

GENEALOGY    63

