Supernova Award Application
Please print or type all information. Provide the month, day, and year for all dates.
Do you have questions? Please email program.content@scouting.org.
Page 1
BSA - 2022 May 26
Part 1 – Personal Data
Name
Address
City State Zip code
Phone Date of birth Pack/Troop/Crew/Ship No.
Email
Council Region
Mentor’s name Phone
Email
Part 2 – Award
This is for a
 Cub Scout
 Scouts BSA
 Venturer/Sea Scout
Supernova Awards
 Dr. Luis W. Alvarez (Cub Scouts)
 Dr. Charles H. Townes (Webelos Scouts)
 Dr. Bernard Harris (Bronze—Scouts BSA)
 Thomas Edison (Silver—Scouts BSA)
 Dr. Sally Ride (Bronze—Venturers/Sea Scouts)
 Wright Brothers (Silver—Venturers/Sea Scout)
For Dr. Albert Einstein (Gold—Venturers /
Sea Scouts / Scouts BSA only), see separate
application form.


Supernova Award Application
Please print or type all information. Provide the month, day, and year for all dates.
Do you have questions? Please email program.content@scouting.org.
Page 2
BSA - 2022 May 26
Part 3 – Approval
Unit Leader’s Approval
The above-named candidate is currently registered with Unit and is eligible to apply for this award.
Leader’s signature Date
Statement of Candidate
On my honor, I have thoroughly read the requirements, have worked closely with my Mentor, and have successfully
completed all the requirements for this award. I am submitting this application, with all required signatures and approvals,
along with copies of my reports and other appropriate documentation, for consideration.
Applicant’s signature Date
Mentor’s Approval
I have worked closely with the applicant named above in the execution of the award requirements. I have reviewed this
application and recommend that the applicant receive the Supernova Award.
Mentor’s signature Date
Printed Name
Council/District STEM/Nova Committee Approval
(or Advancement Committee if Council has no STEM/Nova Committee)
The council/district advancement committee has reviewed this application and determined that the applicant has met all
requirements and has this committee’s approval and endorsement.
Chair’s signature Date
Printed Name