CRIME
PREVENTION


CRIME PREVENTION
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


CRIME PREVENTION 5
Contents
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Stay Informed About Crime Prevention . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Police and Citizens: Working Together . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
Inspecting Your Neighborhood . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
Neighborhood Watch. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
Drug Awareness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
Roles of Police and Sheriff’s Departments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
Crime Prevention Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63RequirementsScouts should go to www.scouting.org or check Scoutbook for the latest requriements.
The official merit badge pamphletss are now free and downloadable aat www.scouting.org
or an be purchased at the Scout Shop, www.scoutshop.org.35880
ISBN 978-0-8395-3400-6
©2025 Scouting America
2025 Printing





.Introduction
Introduction
Every citizen is affected by crime. Millions of crimes are reported
to law enforcement agencies every year and these acts affect you
and your family either directly or indirectly.
Crime is the violation of a law, a duty, or a moral principle.
Those arrested by law enforcement officers for committing crimes
face prosecution and punishment. In this pamphlet, you will
learn about the different types of crimes and steps that you, and
your family and neighbors, can take to help prevent crime.
In addition to being possible victims of crime, your family
and other citizens carry the financial burden of criminal acts.
Citizens must pay, usually through higher taxes, for additional
law enforcement officers, increased court costs, and more
prisons and jails. Because retail stores must recoup their losses
from theft and robbery, consumers also pay more for goods
when owners raise prices to cover their losses.
Citizens also pay a price when companies and governments
are victimized by less obvious criminal acts, such as theft by
employees. Some of these illegal activities involving national
or worldwide companies can be far-reaching and create huge
financial losses for consumers.
Identity theft is a growing
problem, too. This is when
criminals gain access to some-
one’s Social Security number
or some other kind of personal
identification. Criminals then
use this information for illegal
financial gains.
You can help prevent identity theft by creating
secure passwords for your accounts and when-
ever you are online. One trick is to use a number
or character in place of a letter. For instance, D = 5
or V = 7. Remember: Never give out your personal
information, and keep your passwords private.
Crime prevention
is defined by law
enforcement
agencies as
“the anticipation,
recognition, and
appraisal of a
crime risk and
the initiation of
some action
to remove or
reduce the risk.”
CRIME PREVENTION 7


8 CRIME PREVENTION
Introduction.
Internet Safety
These tips will help you stay safe
and protect your identity while
using the internet. Before you log on
to the internet, make sure you have
a parent or guardian’s permission.
Your parents, guardian, counselor,
or librarian might discuss other
precautions with you.
1. Follow your family’s rules for using the internet. Respect the limits
they set for how long and how often you are allowed to be online
and what sites you can visit. Your family also can consider installing
a software program that helps weed out undesirable sites.
2. Protect your privacy. Never exchange electronic pictures of your-
self with strangers, and never give out personal information or any
other identification, such as your phone number, address, last name,
where you go to school, or where your parent or guardian works,
without first asking your parent or guardian’s permission.
3. Do not open email or files you receive from people or businesses
you do not know or trust. If you get something suspicious, put it in
the trash just as you would any other electronic junk mail, which is
known as spam. Many computer viruses are sent via email attach-
ments. You should have updated virus protection software and,
especially with cable or DSL connections, a firewall. A firewall
will help prevent a hacker from obtaining information from your
computer or placing information and viruses on it.
4. If you receive or discover any information that makes you uncom-
fortable, tell your parent or guardian and let them look at it. Do not
respond to any message that is disturbing or hurtful.
5. Never agree to get together with someone you meet online, unless
your parent or guardian approves of the meeting and goes with you.
6. Never share your internet password with anyone other than respon-
sible adults in your family. Sometimes a fraudulent email will appear
official and request personal information.
7. Never shop online or offer a credit card number unless you have
your parent or guardian’s permission.


.Introduction
CRIME PREVENTION 9
City, state, and federal governments work to apprehend
and bring legal action against those who break the law. Because
of the amount of work, equipment, and personnel involved,
these agencies spend millions of dollars. Preventing crime is
less costly to citizens and society and helps save people from
the anguish of being victims.
If someone wants to commit a crime, there must be an
opportunity to do so. Therefore, many crimes can be prevented
by reducing or eliminating opportunities.
Citizens need to work with law enforcement agents to
avoid becoming victims and to help prevent crime. Crime
prevention by citizens is not vigilantism. Vigilantes are those
who take the law into their own hands, which is wrong.
8. Besides having an abundance of useful and accurate information,
the internet also has its dark side, including misinformation. Talk with
your counselor or other experienced internet users about ways to
tell the difference.
9. Be a good online citizen. Do not do anything that harms others or
is against the law. Be aware that information you provide such as
notes and personal remarks may be shared with others. A good rule
of thumb is to not post information you don’t want others, including
strangers, to see.
Cyberbullying is just what it sounds
like—bullying through internet
applications and technologies such
as instant messaging (IM), social
networking sites, and mobile phones.
It can start easily—with a rumor, a
photo, or a forwarded message—and
just as easily spiral out of control.
An embarrassing video posted to a
social networking site by someone in
Kansas tonight may be watched by
someone in Japan a few minutes later.
Cyberbullying victims may be targeted
anywhere, at any time.





CRIME PREVENTION 11
Stay Informed About Crime Prevention
Stay Informed About
Crime Prevention
A good way to become informed
about crime in your neighborhood
is to start a journal. Clip and
save articles from newspapers
and other sources relating to crime
and crime prevention in your area.
Talk to neighbors and watch or
listen to the news about crimes
and crime prevention. Write down
useful information to add to
your journal.
One of the first steps in crime
prevention is being aware of the types
of crimes being committed in your
community. Your journal probably
will have articles that mention many
of these crimes.
Burglary. Breaking into and entering a building with the intent
of committing a crime, often by stealing something.
Robbery. Taking someone else’s property unlawfully, by force
or fear.
Larceny. Unlawfully removing the personal goods of
another person with the intent to cheat the owner. Also
known as theft.
Crimes against people. These crimes include murder, robbery,
assault, and rape.
Crimes against property. These crimes include burglary,
larceny, motor-vehicle theft, arson, and vandalism.


12 CRIME PREVENTION
Stay Informed About Crime Prevention.
White-collar crime. This term, coined more than 60 years
ago, now includes a variety of nonviolent crimes committed
for the financial benefit of one or more persons. This could
include embezzlement as well as fraud, computer hacking, and
theft of office supplies and equipment.
Identity theft. Identity theft is a form of white-collar crime that
affects people of all ages, because all a thief needs is your Social
Security number. With that information, committing identity
theft is often easy. Identity thieves strike by digging through
communal dumpsters looking for credit card offers, posing as
a real business and sending “phishing” emails that ask you for
personal information, or even filing a change of address form to
divert your mail as a way to gather personal data.
You can help prevent identity theft by treating your Social
Security number as confidential information, committing all
passwords to memory, and not giving out personal information
over the phone or internet—especially if it is unsolicited. Shred
documents that contain personal information before throwing
them out—including “junk mail” credit card offers.
Embezzlement
is the act of
stealing money or
property that has
been entrusted to
one’s care. Fraud
includes tricking
or cheating
someone for
profit or to gain an
unfair advantage.
Computer hacking
includes using
a personal
computer to
gain unauthorized
access to
valuable private
information.
White-collar crime made the headlines at the turn
of the 21st century when executives at several large
companies were accused of insider stock trading,
falsifying company earnings reports, and using
company money in inappropriate ways.
Insider trading means that an officer or some
employee at a publicly owned company either sells
or buys the company’s stock based on knowledge
that other stockholders do not have. This informa-
tion also may be passed along to friends or business
associates so they can either buy or sell the stock
before the general public and other stockholders
become aware of the development.
When these schemes are discovered, the stocks
of these companies usually plummet and often cause
shareholders and company employees to lose thou-
sands of dollars. Many lose their entire investments.


CRIME PREVENTION 13
Stay Informed About Crime Prevention
Littering. Many people litter without thinking. How many
times have you seen people throw cups, paper, cans, and
cigarette butts from their car windows? They are showing
disrespect for neighborhoods and other people. Litter can be
harmful to plants and animals, depending on how the trash
decomposes. Also, fragments from plastic and glass can
harm animals and people if they step on them.
Your troop can organize and take part in community
cleanups. Encourage store owners to put trash cans near
entrances and exits. Conveniently located waste receptacles
are especially important for stores selling products that are
packaged in wrappers or containers. The trash cans should
be emptied regularly.
Cigarettes are the most littered item in the world.
The filters, made of cellulose acetate, take decades to
degrade. Cigarettes also can ignite a fire, especially
during dry months. These fires can be devastating
and deadly.


14 CRIME PREVENTION
Stay Informed About Crime Prevention.
Graffiti. Many of us associate graffiti-covered buildings and
bridges with high-crime neighborhoods and uncaring residents.
We may not consider it important in our own community. But
in addition to possibly igniting gang violence, graffiti makes
neighborhood property less valuable and makes people feel
unsafe. It also can make a negative impression on visitors.
Report any graffiti to your local law enforcement agency.
Shoplifting. This crime deprives the store owner of both the
merchandise and the profit from selling it. Thus, many store
owners might have to raise the prices on other goods to offset
the stolen merchandise.
It is almost impossible to spot a shoplifter in a crowd
because there is not just one kind of person who commits this
crime. Many shoplifters are well-dressed and have enough
money to pay for the items they steal.
In some neighborhoods, especially in big cities,
graffiti is the work of gang members, who use it to
mark their territories.
Graffiti needs to be cleaned up as soon as possible.
Another type of shoplifting is called “flash rob” mobs. Large groups
will enter a business at the same time, steal whatever merchandise
is easily grabbed, and then quickly flee the business. By the time a
storekeeper realizes what’s happening, the thieves are already gone!


CRIME PREVENTION 15
Stay Informed About Crime Prevention
There are three basic types of shoplifters: the average citizen,
the full-time amateur, and the professional. The average-citizen
shoplifter accounts for about 75 percent of shoplifting. About 20
percent of shoplifters are full-time amateurs. Professional shoplift-
ers make up only 5 percent of shoplifters, but they steal a much
higher quality and quantity of goods. Many of these people steal
to pay for drug habits. After they steal the merchandise, they sell
it cheaply. Professionals usually work in pairs and travel widely.
Many stores
have low profit
margins, and
they suffer when
someone shoplifts
as little as $2.
For example, if
a store has a
profit margin of
10 percent and
someone steals
an item that
costs $2, then the
store owner must
sell $20 worth of
merchandise to
offset the loss.
Something for Nothing
Shoplifters might start out wanting to get something
for nothing, but once caught, they find themselves get-
ting something they might not have expected. About
25 percent of apprehended shoplifters are juveniles
ages 13 to 17, and nearly all juvenile shoplifters are
caught. Retailers are more likely than ever to pros-
ecute all thieves—no matter how small the “take”
or whether it is a first-time offense—and hold them
accountable for their behavior. To the juvenile petty
thief, this may mean the police will go to the offender’s
school, question friends, and talk with parents or
guardians and neighbors. Some first-time offenders
are lucky. Their community might have a program to
help them make better choices in the future.





CRIME PREVENTION 17
.Police and Citizens: Working Together
Police and Citizens:
Working Together
Citizens, including you and other young people, are
responsible for the quality of life in their communities.
Law enforcement officers help keep the community
safe, and they often rely on cooperation from citizens
in their crime prevention efforts. Police are trained to enforce
the law and to give citizens information to help prevent crime.
It is up to citizens to protect their personal property, help
neighbors guard their property, and report to the police any
crime or suspicious activities. Citizens also can establish
programs within the community, such as Neighborhood Watch,
to help deter criminals.
Citizens can help prevent crime by cooperating not only
with law enforcement officers, but also with prosecutors and
courts in the criminal justice process. For those people who
do not obey laws and who might harm others through their
actions, it is up to law-abiding citizens to help thwart their
actions. Citizens have a duty to work with the justice system
to help identify, capture, and prosecute (bring legal action
against) lawbreakers.
It is sometimes easy to ignore acts of crime when they do
not directly affect you or your family. However, when someone
you know becomes a victim of a crime, you begin to realize
the serious effects of crime and the importance of prevention.
Remember, no one is immune from crime.
Scouts obey the laws of their community and country.
Because laws are designed to protect you and all citizens, it is
important for you to learn about laws, to obey them, and to
recognize the need to work for their improvement when they
need improvement. By knowing, respecting, and obeying laws,
you can help make your neighborhood, city, state, and nation
better and safer places to live.


18 CRIME PREVENTION
Police and Citizens: Working Together.
Gangs and Crime
Among the growing crime concerns in many neighborhoods
are gangs, gang violence, and the use and trafficking of drugs.
Gangs frequently include teenagers. To support their interests,
gangs often commit violent offenses, cause serious injuries,
and use lethal weapons.
Gangs can make neighborhoods unsafe and increase
security costs for businesses in those areas. Other costs to
citizens could be the devaluation of their property because
of living in an undesirable neighborhood.
The National Youth Gang Center estimates that there are
more than 650,000 members in more than 25,000 gangs in the
United States. However, it is difficult to get an accurate count
because law enforcement agencies have many different methods
of reporting gangs and because many rural communities are
not included in these tallies. Nevertheless, gangs pose a serious
threat and are responsible for much of the nation’s crime.
Characteristics of a gang may include:
• Links to a neighborhood or territory or ethnicity
• Identifiable leadership
• Members who regularly interact with one another
• Formal organization
• Harmful or violent behavior
Gang violence is not limited to gang members. Innocent
bystanders often are victims of gang violence. Here are some
suggestions for how you can protect yourself from violent crime:
• Do not use alcohol or other drugs. Stick with friends who
are not violent and who do not use alcohol or drugs. Avoid
known trouble spots and difficult situations.
Young people join
gangs for many
reasons, including
academic failure
and family
or peer-group
pressure.
Teenagers who join gangs and then decide it was not
such a good idea often have a rude awakening when
they try to quit. Not only do fellow gang members
make quitting tough for them—sometimes even dan-
gerous—but by then these youths have established
a reputation for being a member of a gang. Such a
stigma can be difficult (but not impossible) to shake.


CRIME PREVENTION 19
.Police and Citizens: Working Together
• Settle arguments with words, not fists or weapons. Do not
stand and watch while others are arguing because violence
often spreads to bystanders.
• Learn safe routes and good places to find help in your
neighborhood. If you sense danger, get away fast. Report
any crimes, suspicious actions, or suspicious people to law
enforcement officers, school authorities, or your parent or
guardian.
• Whenever you leave home, tell your parents, guardian,
relatives, or other responsible adults where you are going,
with whom, and when you expect to be home.
• Help teach younger children how to avoid being victims of
crime. Set a good example.
• Follow the Scout Oath and Scout Law in your daily life.
One of the best solutions to the gang problem is for
youngsters to become members of worthwhile youth groups,
such as Scouting America, that provide opportunity, fun, and
peer approval. Other programs that involve youths include
the Boys and Girls Clubs of America, PAL (Police Activities
League), YMCA, and the Juvenile Mentoring Program.
Since 1994,
the rate of
juvenile crime
has decreased.
Government
officials attribute
the decline to
a reduction in
the use of crack
cocaine and the
number of violent
gangs that
sell it. Police
crackdowns on
illegal guns
and expanded
after-school
crime prevention
programs also
have helped curb
juvenile crime.
Scouting America’s Venturing program is a great way for youth
to be involved in worthwhile activities with good friends.


20 CRIME PREVENTION
Police and Citizens: Working Together.
Reporting Crimes
Besides recognizing the types of crime in your neighborhood, it
is important to know how to report a crime should you witness
or know about one.
It is essential to law enforcement and to your community
that all crimes be reported accurately and promptly. Prompt
reports are vital in solving crimes. If a crime is committed
against you or any member of your family, or if you see a
crime, be sure to report it immediately. The information you
have might give law enforcement officers the last piece in
the puzzle of catching a criminal, establishing a pattern or
method, or preventing future crimes.


CRIME PREVENTION 21
.Police and Citizens: Working Together
You might feel it is embarrassing to admit that you have
been a victim. Your family might be tempted to avoid publicity
and simply file an insurance claim for any losses in an effort
to be rid of the problem. However, your silence might allow
a criminal to go on committing crimes. This approach could
worsen the problem because that same criminal could be
injuring others or damaging the overall quality of life in
your community.
A better choice is to report any crime or suspected crime
to your local law enforcement officers. It is their responsibility
to assist you, investigate, and, if probable cause exists, to file
charges and follow the case through the courts. When citizens
use this process, criminals have less of an opportunity to
commit the same crime in the future because you have set
a good example and helped to bring criminals to justice.
You should have emer-
gency and other helpful
numbers posted in a con-
venient place or near every
phone in your house for
easy access. Look online to
find listings for organiza-
tions that are involved in
preventing, reporting, or
responding to crime.
If you call the police department to report a
crime, you will talk to a dispatcher. Explain
to the dispatcher why you are calling. If it’s
decided that an officer should be sent to your
location, try to remain calm as you wait. Do not
hang up the phone until police have arrived
or you have been instructed to do so by the dis-
patcher. Wait for the police. For crimes in progress or
if your life is in danger, immediately call 911 rather
than the police number.
Probable cause
means that there’s
a good reason to
believe a crime
has occurred.


22 CRIME PREVENTION
Inspecting Your Neighborhood.
Inspecting Your
Neighborhood
Opportunities for crime can and must be eliminated or reduced.
Look around your neighborhood to see what can be done
to help prevent crime. Take a notebook and conduct a crime
survey of your neighborhood by creating a checklist of possible
problems. Go with a parent, guardian, or counselor when
conducting the survey.
Among things to look for are abandoned buildings with
broken windows, burned-out or broken street lights, overgrown
bushes, and unusual activities at certain residences or aban-
doned buildings. These residences or buildings could be used
by criminals to hide or sell drugs or stolen goods. Unusual
activities could be different cars or people visiting a house or
building at odd hours and for brief periods of time. This could
indicate that drugs or stolen merchandise are being sold.
Studies have
shown that crime
can decrease by
as much as 20
percent in well-lit
neighborhoods.
Eliminating or trimming bushes effectively reduces hiding places
for criminals.


CRIME PREVENTION 23
.Inspecting Your Neighborhood
Operation Identification is a program that involves marking personal
property with unique numbers to make identification possible if the
items are lost or stolen. This program aids police in identifying your
valuables. People who mark their properties have a better chance of
getting them back if they are stolen. Operation I.D. also deters burglars
by making it more difficult to sell stolen goods and by increasing the
burglar’s chances of being arrested.
Numbers can be engraved onto metal objects or marked with
indelible markers on other materials. Some police departments
recommend using a driver’s license number. Contact your local police
department to find out more about this program. Many police and
sheriff’s offices have engraving pens available for you to borrow.
Engraving pens also can be purchased in hardware stores. Make a
list of all your valuable items, including a description and any serial
numbers. It is also recommended that you take a photograph or video
of the items. Operation I.D. would be a good community service
project for your Scout troop.


24 CRIME PREVENTION
Inspecting Your Neighborhood.
Home Security Awareness
Most burglaries are committed by beginners, and the typical
burglar is a male teenager who lives either in or near the neigh-
borhood. Burglaries most often occur between 10 a.m. and
3 p.m. because those are the hours when families usually are
away from home.
Check your house to see how easy or difficult it would be
to break in. Especially check the windows, garage doors, and
front and back doors. Burglars usually enter a home through
windows and doors. A burglar wants to break in quickly to
avoid being seen. The more difficult it is to pry open a door or
window, the better chance the burglar will leave and seek an
easier target.
Avoid keeping all the family’s valuables in the master bed-
room because that usually is the first place a burglar will search.
Check to see if there are places outside the home where burglars
could hide when trying to break into your home. Bushes, trees
or anything else that could provide a shield for a burglar should
be removed or trimmed.
Home Security Checklist
Survey your home, using the following checklist. Every “no”
answer shows a weak point that might help a burglar. As you
and your family eliminate the “no” answers, you improve your
home and personal security.
1. Do you keep a list of all valuable property?
Make the list in duplicate, with at least one copy kept in a
place outside your home, such as a safe-deposit box. In case
of fire, the extra list that you keep will provide information
necessary for insurance claims.
2. Do you have a list of the serial numbers of your valuable
property, such as TVs, computers, DVDs, audio and video
components, cameras, watches, etc.?
3. Do you keep excess cash and other valuables in a bank?
Renting a safe-deposit box is a small investment compared
with the potential loss from theft or fire. The box should be
large enough to hold important papers and valuables that
are seldom used. Copies of valuable papers also could be
kept with another family member or relative.
Government
statistics show
that burglaries
have declined
over the past
several years.
However, it is
estimated that
one in six homes
is burglarized
every year.
Yes No
Yes No
Yes No


CRIME PREVENTION 25
.Inspecting Your Neighborhood
4. Do you leave the spare house key with a close friend or
reliable neighbor when you go out of town?
This practice is much safer than leaving a spare under the
doormat, where a nosy burglar is certain to look.
5. Do your family members know what to do if they discover
a burglar breaking into or already in your home?
If you find signs that your home has been entered, stay out-
side. Use your mobile phone or a neighbor’s phone to call
the police or sheriff. If you enter your home and find
a burglar inside, expect the burglar to be frightened and
dangerous. A scream might cause a burglar to flee, but
it might also provoke an attack. Never struggle with a
burglar unless you are forced to defend yourself. In that
case, scream, kick, gouge—use your hands, feet, and teeth
to fend off your attacker.
6. Do family members know to leave everything undisturbed
and call the sheriff or police if they discover that a burglary
has been committed?
You should not move things or otherwise disturb the inside
of your home or the grounds around your home until police
have checked it. Otherwise, valuable evidence might be lost.
7. Are trees and shrubs trimmed to eliminate hiding places?
Keep doorways, windows, and porches clear when plant-
ing bushes and tall flowers. Remember that the bushes that
give you privacy also give a burglar places to hide.
8. Do you have a security closet with a solid-core door,
nonremovable hinges, and a deadbolt lock?
A security closet can be a place to keep things of value.
Noises caused by someone breaking into a security closet
might betray a burglar.
9. Do you have emergency telephone numbers listed on your
phone or in an easily accessible place?
In most areas of the country, the 911 telephone number
will connect you with emergency services. With the 911
system, a computer immediately displays your address to
the person who answers your emergency call when you call
from a landline. If you call from a mobile phone, you will
need to provide your address.
Yes No
Yes No
Yes No
Yes No
Yes No
Yes No


26 CRIME PREVENTION
Inspecting Your Neighborhood.
10. Is the outside of your home well-lit?
11. Does your porch light have at least a 60-watt bulb?
Outside lighting is important in home security. Light yards,
windows, and doorways to prevent burglars from hiding
there. Porch lamps and yard post lamps can be used to
eliminate dark spots. Burn porch lights from dusk until
dawn, and encourage neighbors to do the same. This
denies burglars the cover of darkness, at a cost of about
5 cents per night, using a 60-watt bulb. In rural areas where
no streetlights exist, electric companies often will give
group discounts to customers who wish to install
security lighting. Contact your power company or rural
electric cooperative for further information.
12. Is your house number (address) easily visible from the
street at any hour?
If it is not possible to read your house number from the
street at night without using a flashlight, consider lighting
the number or having a visible curb number painted in
front of your house.
Nothing is more
frustrating to police
officers responding
to a call for help
than to have
trouble finding
the right house
because the house
number is not
visible. Every house
on a street should
have a number that
is uniform in size
and location and
visible at night.
A good troop project would be a house-numbering
service to ensure that all house numbers in your
neighborhood are uniform and easily seen.
Yes No
Yes No
Yes No


CRIME PREVENTION 27
.Inspecting Your Neighborhood
13. Have you made it more difficult for burglars by locking up
ladders and eliminating trellises and drainpipes that can
be climbed to reach an upper floor of your home, if you
have one?
14. Are your doors of solid-core construction?
A hollow-core door is fragile. It takes a burglar only a few
blows with a hammer to break through to reach the lock.
If you have hollow-core doors, consider replacing them
with solid doors.
15. Do your entry doors have wide-angle viewers or peepholes?
A wide-angle viewer or peephole lets you see who the visitor
is before you open the door.
16. Are the locks on your doors secure from being opened if
a burglar breaks out a pane of glass or a panel of light-
weight wood?
This calls for a lock that can be opened only from inside
with a key. Some communities do not permit this type of
lock because it can prevent escape from a fire if the key is
not in place. If you use this type of lock, be sure to leave
the key in the lock when anyone is at home; remove the
key only when the home is empty. Check with your local
law enforcement agency or building department to find
out if this type of lock is permitted.
17. Do exterior doors have cylinder-type deadbolt locks with at
least a 1-inch throw and a beveled cylinder guard?
18. Do doors without cylinder locks have a heavy deadbolt or
some similar security device that can be operated only from
the inside?
19. Can all of your doors (basement, porch, sliding, French,
balcony) be securely locked?
20. If you have a basement, do the doors have locks that allow
you to isolate that part of your home?
Basement windows are among the easiest for a burglar to
enter undetected. If your basement is securely locked from
the rest of your home, the burglar’s activity is limited to
that area.
Yes No
Yes No
Yes No
Yes No
Yes No
Yes No
Yes No
Yes No


28 CRIME PREVENTION
Inspecting Your Neighborhood.
21. Are all of your locks in good repair?
22. Are the door strike plates installed with 3-inch screws?
This size screw will reach the stud inside the wall.
23. Do you know everyone who has a key to your home?
Do not carry house keys on the same ring as car keys. It is
very easy to leave the keys together when the car is in a
garage for repairs or left in a commercial parking lot where
an attendant parks cars. Anyone who handles your house
keys can easily have duplicates made.
24. Do all out-swinging doors in your home have hinges with
nonremovable pins? These hinges have set screws to pre-
vent pin removal from the outside.
25. Do sliding doors have a lock that locks both the door panels
together or locks the active side to the frame?
You can place a wooden dowel in the floor track to prevent
a sliding door from opening.
Installing Security Devices
Using the contributed services of repair people or maintenance work-
ers in your neighborhood is a great way to help your neighbors install
locks, window pins and bars, peepholes, and other security devices.
Donated help saves the cost of instal-
lation and encourages more citizens to
take important security measures.
Neighborhood groups might
arrange to purchase locks and other
security devices in quantity at a dis-
count. Local authorities might install
security devices at little cost to
residents. Some residents, including
senior citizens, people with
disabilities, and burglary victims,
might receive services for free.
Yes No
Yes No
Yes No
Yes No
Yes No


CRIME PREVENTION 29
.Inspecting Your Neighborhood
26. Is the garage door secured with a padlock, hasp, or other
good lock?
Even garage doors with electric openers need separate locks.
In a double-car garage with a single long door, it’s important
to place a lock on each side of the door to keep a burglar
from pulling out one side and crawling through.
27. Do you lock your garage door at night?
28. Do you make sure your garage door is locked when you are
away from home?
29. Do you lock your car and take out the keys even when it is
parked in your garage?
30. Are all windows in your home equipped with key locks
or pinned?
You can secure a sliding window with a rod the same way
as you would secure a sliding glass door.
31. Are your window locks properly and securely mounted?
32. Do you keep your windows locked when they are shut?
33. Do you use locks that let you lock a window that is
partly open?
34. Have you replaced or secured louvered windows?
35. If you live in a high-burglary area, do you use window bars
or ornamental grilles?
Take care that bars or grilles do not create an escape hazard
in the event of a fire. They must have an inside mechanism
that allows them to swing out in an emergency.
36. Do you have secure locks on garage windows?
37. Do you cover garage windows with curtains or shades?
38. Are you as careful to secure basement and second-story
windows as you are to secure windows on the first floor?
39. Do you use good telephone security procedures?
Yes No
Yes No
Yes No
Yes No
Yes No
Yes No
Yes No
Yes No
Yes No
Yes No
Yes No
Yes No
Yes No
Yes No


30 CRIME PREVENTION
Inspecting Your Neighborhood.
40. When planning a trip, do you secure your telephone?
Use an answering machine or voice mail service from the
telephone company to record a message indicating all calls
will be returned at your earliest convenience. You can then
call home and retrieve your messages without anyone
knowing you are away. Never say that you are out of town.
41. When you go on a trip, do you arrange for someone to col-
lect newspapers, mail, packages, and other deliveries?
You also can request the post office and newspaper to stop
delivery until you return.
42. Do you arrange to make your home look lived-in while you
are away?
Leave some window shades up or curtains open so that your
home does not look deserted. Have a trusted neighbor or
relative periodically open and close drapes and turn different
lights on and off (or use timers) so that the house appears
occupied. You can also use a timer to turn a radio and/or
light on and off. Consider asking friends or relatives to live in
your home while you are away. Leave a car in the driveway
or ask neighbors to park in your driveway. Ask a neighbor
to put some trash in your trash cans, place them out for
pick up on trash days, and pick them up after they have
been emptied.
Telephone Security
• Never give personal information (name, age, address, etc.) to a
stranger on the telephone.
• Never let a stranger know that you are home alone.
• Never let strangers on the telephone know when you will or will not
be home.
• Instruct babysitters never to tell anyone who calls that they are home
alone with children.
• Teach children who are old enough to answer the phone never to tell
a stranger on the phone that their parent or guardian is gone. Teach
them to say, “My mom (or dad) is busy. May I take a message?”
Yes No
Yes No
Yes No


CRIME PREVENTION 31
.Inspecting Your Neighborhood
43. Do you notify a trusted neighbor that you will be gone?
44. Do you notify your police or sheriff’s department that you
will be gone?
45. Do you store all your valuables in a secure place while you
are gone, such as a safe-deposit box in a bank?
Apartment Precautions
There are special precautions to take if your family lives in
an apartment.
• Always tell trusted neighbors and the apartment manager
when you will be away
for an extended period.
• Does your apartment
management monitor
who enters and leaves the
building? If not, consider
starting an apartment
watch group that helps
monitor people entering
and leaving. An apart-
ment watch group could
start a tenant patrol.
• Walkways, parking areas,
hallways, laundry rooms,
and storage areas should
be among the places that
are well-lit at all times.
• Mailboxes should be in
a well-lit area and have
good locks.
• Get to know your neighbors.
• Work with the manager to make safety changes around the
apartments (trim bushes, for example) and to assure safety
at playgrounds and other areas.
Yes No
Yes No
Yes No


32 CRIME PREVENTION
Inspecting Your Neighborhood.
Safety When You Travel
Remind your parent or guardian that before going on a trip or
even when driving around town, they need to keep the car in
good repair. That means they should keep the gas tank full,
have properly inflated tires, and keep the car in good running
order. Before trips, the car should be checked by a mechanic
for possible problems, such as worn fan belts. You and your
family do not want the family vehicle to break down, especially
in unfamiliar, undesirable, or desolate places.
When driving, stay on well-lit, well-traveled roads. Select
your route ahead of time and become familiar with it to lessen
the chances of getting lost. Avoid high-crime areas, even if it
means going out of your way. If your family is a member of
an auto service club, you can obtain a map that usually shows
the best route to take. You also can obtain maps and directions
from the internet. Study the routes and make sure you avoid
going through undesirable places.


CRIME PREVENTION 33
Here are some other tips to remain safe
while traveling:
• Always check inside and underneath your
car before getting in to make sure no one
is hiding there.
• If you keep your car in a garage, make sure
to lock the door as you leave.
• Always keep the garage door closed,
whether you are away or at home.
• When the vehicle is on the road or parked,
keep all the doors and windows locked.
• Park in attended lots when possible,
especially in a strange area.
• If it is necessary to leave a key with an
attendant, leave only the valet key.
• Keep all packages or personal items out of view in the car—
preferably in the trunk, and try to place them there when
no one is looking.
• At night, park only in lighted areas and take note of
your surroundings so you will notice any changes when
you return.
• If it appears that you are in a dangerous situation and could
be harmed or robbed while in your car, lock your doors
and sound the horn until help arrives. After sounding the
horn, use your mobile phone, if you have one, to call an
emergency number.
• Never pick up a hitchhiker or a motorist next to a stalled
car, no matter how friendly or harmless the person appears.
You can call police to help the motorist.
• If you have a flat tire in an unsafe area, try to keep driving
until reaching a safe location. Ruining a tire and/or wheel
might be cheap compared with what could happen.
• If you believe a car is following you, drive to a police or
fire station. If there is not a station nearby, go to an open
service/gas station or business and signal for help. Do not
go to your home or, if you are out of town, your hotel or
motel. You also could sound your horn until the car leaves
or someone comes to your assistance.


34 CRIME PREVENTION
Inspecting Your Neighborhood.
• If a car intentionally blocks your path, make sure your doors
are locked, sound the horn repeatedly, and do not leave
your vehicle.
Park as close as possible to your destination.
• Pay attention when you return to your vehicle. If you see
someone waiting near it, walk past and find help.
• If your car breaks down, signal and pull onto the shoulder
of the road. Turn on the emergency flashers and tie a cloth
to the driver’s door handle or to the antenna. If you have
reflective material, wave it or use some other signaling
device. Call for assistance if you have a mobile phone. If
someone other than a uniformed law enforcement officer
stops, roll down the window only enough to ask the person
to call the police, auto club, or service station.
• If your car breaks down, signal and pull onto the shoulder
of the road. Turn on the emergency flashers and tie a cloth
to the driver’s door handle or to the antenna. If you have
reflective material, wave it or use some other signaling
device. Call for assistance if you have a mobile phone. If
someone other than a uniformed law enforcement officer
stops, roll down the window only enough to ask the person
to call the police, auto club, or service station.
School Safety
Schools are not immune from crime. To see if and how crime
might be affecting your school, visit your principal, teachers,
and school security officer. Ask what measures they have taken
to reduce crime. For example, has your school started any after-
school programs? Research and crime-fighting experience by
law enforcement agencies have shown that good after-school
programs can be a key element in fighting juvenile crime.
Reports by these agencies have shown that when youngsters are
without constructive after-school activities or adult supervision,
the rate of violent juvenile crime increases.
•


CRIME PREVENTION 35
.Inspecting Your Neighborhood
Crime Awareness at School
Help your classmates become more aware of crime at school by creat-
ing a poster that reflects some of the safety issues students face during
a typical school day. Among subjects you might consider would be gang
violence and drug issues. The poster could include clippings from news-
papers and magazines. You could exhibit this poster at your school,
with your principal’s or teacher’s permission.
As an alternative, consider creating a pagelong pub-
lic service announcement that could be read over your
school’s public address system or posted on the school’s
website. You will need permission from your principal or
other school official.
Consider sharing your poster or presentation
with your troop or a Cub Scout pack.





CRIME PREVENTION 37
.Neighborhood Watch
Neighborhood Watch
Neighborhood Watch, Block Watch, and Town Watch are
programs designed to prevent crime. They help neighborhoods
enhance home and personal security and reduce fear and isola-
tion. Civic involvement has helped cities and neighborhoods to
significantly reduce crime.
In early 1972, the National Sheriffs’ Association created a
model program for today’s Neighborhood Watch. The program,
among other things, forges strong bonds among residents.
To start a Neighborhood Watch program in your area,
you first will need to help your parent or guardian conduct a
survey of residents and business owners. Ask them about their
concerns, such as worries about burglaries or other crimes,
and their willingness to work for their neighborhood. Have
they done anything to protect their homes or businesses?
Would they be willing to attend a meeting to organize a
Neighborhood Watch group? Create a list of the people you sur-
vey and those who are interested in joining a neighborhood or
block watch. Include their addresses and telephone numbers.
Establish a planning committee of people who are interested.
Next, contact your local law enforcement agency. Request
that a crime prevention officer attend a meeting of neighbors to
discuss community needs, the level of interest, and local crime
problems. Schedule a date, time, and place for a Neighborhood
Watch kickoff meeting.
Planning a Successful First Meeting
To ensure a successful first meeting, get help from existing
communities that have a Neighborhood Watch or Block Watch
program. Their bylaws and mission statements might make
good models for your group. Have your planning committee
schedule the first meeting in a convenient location, such as a
private home, place of worship, community building, school,
or library.
Residents should
be aware
of possible
terrorist activities.
The Neighborhood
Watch program
has been expanded
to include
USAonWatch®
and the Citizen
Corps, terrorism
prevention
and response
programs.


38 CRIME PREVENTION
Neighborhood Watch.
Invite a police or sheriff’s officer to attend. The officer can
offer an assessment of the problems in your community. Ask
the police chief or sheriff for a letter of support to show the
Neighborhood Watch members.
Design a flier or letter of invitation and deliver, with a
parent, guardian, or counselor, a copy to each home in your
neighborhood. Follow up by calling or visiting the neighbors and
reminding them of the meeting time and location. Try to have
each household agree to send at least one adult member to the
meeting. Senior citizens, especially those who are retired, are an
asset to a Neighborhood Watch program. Because they might be
home more often, they can watch the neighborhood when other
adults are at work and children are at school.
Arrange to have refreshments, such as soft drinks and
cookies, after the meeting.
Conducting the First Meeting
Members of the planning committee should arrive early to
introduce the crime prevention officer and help everyone
get acquainted.
Start the meeting with participants introducing themselves,
sharing their concerns about crime in the neighborhood, and
offering any ideas they have. Prepare and distribute an atten-
dance sheet with each participant’s address and phone number.
Anticrime
programs achieve
good results when
citizens work with
law enforcement
agencies.


CRIME PREVENTION 39
.Neighborhood Watch
Ask the officer to give details on any part of the
Neighborhood Watch program that might not be clear, such
as training, signs, and other materials available. Some police
departments, for example, have access to used mobile phones
that are programmed for contacting only emergency services.
Plus, ask for ideas about using two-way radios and uniforms.
The officer could help develop safety patrols.
Discuss neighborhood crime statistics. When neighbors
learn about crimes and suspicious incidents or activities in your
neighborhood, they are more likely to make
a strong commitment to the program.
Your group should set an agenda and achievable
goals, and establish a mission statement. Your crime
prevention officer might help explain what the group
can realistically expect to accomplish. Develop strate-
gies for recruiting and involving a larger group of
residents. Develop an action plan that identifies specific com-
munity changes and specifies who will perform each task. Set a
timetable for each task and include people who have influence
in the community.
The group probably will not agree on everything and there
could be setbacks. But the group should be reminded that the
program is for the safety and welfare of the neighborhood.
Discuss how the program will be coordinated:
• Explain the responsibilities of the Neighborhood Watch coor-
dinator and block captains. (Their duties will be described
later in this section.)
• Have nominations and elect people to fill the positions, or ask
for volunteers to fill the positions. The group will need a sec-


40 CRIME PREVENTION
Neighborhood Watch.
retary to record the minutes (activities) of the meetings and
other events, and a treasurer, who will collect, record, and
distribute funds.
• The group can collect membership dues and donations to
raise funds for some projects.
• Establish committees, if possible, to involve more residents.
These committees could be charged with inviting guest
speakers, distributing fliers, and working on other events.
While many adults might be fearful or uneasy about
crime in their neighborhoods, the National Crime Prevention
Council has found that many are willing to become active in
their neighborhoods.
Program Coordination
Having individuals fill specific roles for your Neighborhood
Watch program will help ensure its success.
Coordinator. The coordinator’s responsibility is crucial to the
success of the program. This might be a position for a retiree
or other person who is often at home. Here are some responsi-
bilities a coordinator might have:
• Maintain a current list of participants and neighborhood
residents, including names, addresses, home and work
telephone numbers, and vehicle descriptions. By having a
list of neighborhood vehicles, it is easier to know when an
outside vehicle is roaming the neighborhood.
• Expand the program to include more residents and act as a
liaison between members, law enforcement officers, civic
groups, and block captains.
• Arrange neighborhood crime prevention training programs.
To maintain momentum for your Neighborhood Watch group, it is a
good idea to schedule monthly meetings. Besides reviewing crime in
the neighborhood, the meetings could be educational. There are many
resources to tap. Federal, state, and local law enforcement and judicial
agencies feature public affairs offices. Also, check with municipal or
county agencies, as well as public works departments, hospitals, and
public utilities, to see if they would provide information or speakers for
future meetings.


CRIME PREVENTION 41
.Neighborhood Watch
• Obtain and distribute crime prevention materials, such as
stickers and signs.
• Involve other volunteers to develop specific crime prevention
projects to meet the community’s needs.
• Encourage everyone in the neighborhood to participate in
Operation Identification, a program in which personal
property is marked with unique identifying numbers.
Block captains. The group should select one block captain for
every 10 to 15 homes. Block captains work directly with their
immediate neighbors. Here are some responsibilities a block
captain might have:
• Serve as a liaison between block residents and the coordinator.
• Conduct home-security inspections.
• Organize foot, bicycle, mobile, and building patrols.
Recognizing Suspicious Activity
All block captains and patrollers need to know how to recognize
suspicious activity. They need to be alert and notice anything
that seems out of place or is happening at an unusual time.
They should:
• Learn the techniques of obtaining an accurate description
of a suspect and/or a vehicle and how to give an accurate
description of the location.


42 CRIME PREVENTION
Neighborhood Watch.
• Know how to request assistance from police if anyone is
threatened or in danger.
• Leave the investigation of suspicious activity or people to
law enforcement agents.
• Call the police or sheriff’s department immediately instead
of taking risks to try to prevent a crime. Block captains
or members of a patrol should not be embarrassed if the
suspicions prove wrong. Law enforcement officers would
rather investigate than be called after it is too late.
Here are some incidents or activities that might be signs of
a criminal activity and should be reported:
• Open or broken doors or windows at a closed business or an
unoccupied residence.
• Sounds of breaking glass.
• Other unusual noises such as screaming, dogs barking
continuously, or gunshots.
• Someone exhibiting unusual mental or physical symptoms
that might indicate the person is injured, under the influence
of drugs, or in need of medical attention.
• Continuous repair work at a nonbusiness location,
suggesting that stolen property is being altered to
prevent identification.
• Unusual chemical odors that could indicate illegal
drug manufacturing.
Use your law enforcement
agency’s emergency number to
report life-threatening incidents
or a crime in progress. Use the
nonemergency number for crimes
that already have happened.
Speed and accuracy are critical
in reporting crimes or suspicious
events. Your call could save a life
or help prevent an injury or crime.
The information that you provide will be kept confi-
dential. You do not need to give your name, although
this often is helpful.


CRIME PREVENTION 43
.Neighborhood Watch
Recognizing Suspicious Incidents
Not every stranger who comes into your neighborhood is a crimi-
nal. Trustworthy door-to-door salespeople and repair people often
go into many residential areas. Occasionally, however, criminals
disguise themselves as one of these workers. Therefore, it is
important to be alert even to the activities of workers who
seem legitimate.
Call law enforcement officers if you see someone:
• Behaving suspiciously, such as a person who goes to the rear of
a residence or hangs around in front of an empty house or a
closed business.
• Forcing his or her way into a house or entering an
unoccupied residence.
• Running, but apparently not
for exercise. If this person is
carrying something of value or
carrying unwrapped property at
an unusual hour, it could suggest
the person is fleeing the scene
of a crime.
• Screaming.
• Standing around or peering into
cars, especially in parking lots or
on streets.
• Hanging around schools, parks,
or secluded areas.
• Offering goods for sale at very low
prices. The person might be trying to sell stolen goods.
• Loitering in or driving through a neighborhood several times.
• Seeming to be a delivery driver with a wrong address. It could
be a burglar looking for an easy target.
Heavy traffic to and from a residence, particularly if it happens
daily, also could indicate criminal activity, such as someone deal-
ing in drugs or stolen property.


44 CRIME PREVENTION
Neighborhood Watch.
Recognizing Suspicious Vehicles
Call 911 immediately if you see someone, especially a child or
woman, being forced into a vehicle. You could be witnessing a
kidnapping, an assault, or other serious crime.
Vehicles in the following situations also may be involved
in crimes and should be reported to authorities:
• Slow moving, without lights, and following an aimless course
on residential streets, around schools, near playgrounds, or
in any location.
• Parked and occupied by one or more persons, especially at an
unusual hour, suggesting lookouts for a burglary or robbery.
• Parked near a closed business or an unoccupied residence
and being loaded with valuables, suggesting burglary or theft.
• Abandoned in your neighborhood. It could possibly be a
stolen car.
• Containing weapons.
• Being forcibly entered by someone, especially in a parking lot.
• Being stripped of parts or accessories.
• Having objects thrown from it, which possibly could be the
disposing of illegal or stolen goods.
• Being used as a place for business dealings, especially
around schools or parks, which suggests selling of drugs
or stolen property.
Tip: If you
participate in
a school or
Scouting activity
that calls for you
to go door-to-door,
be sure to check
your local laws
beforehand.


CRIME PREVENTION 45
.Neighborhood Watch
Giving Descriptions
Practicing how to give quick, accurate descriptions is an excel-
lent Neighborhood Watch meeting activity. To describe events,
vehicles, or people precisely, write down the details of what
you have seen while they are fresh in your mind. You want the
descriptions that you will give to law enforcement officials to
be as accurate as possible.
When describing an event, write down:
• The problem or what happened.
• Where it happened, which could include the street, nearest
cross street, or address, or a landmark near the problem.
• Whether it is still happening, or when it occurred.
• Whether anyone is injured. Try to be as specific as possible;
this information could save a life.
• How many people were or are involved.
• Whether there are weapons involved and, if so, what type.
• What the people involved look like, including sex, race,
approximate age, approximate height, approximate weight
and build, hair color and length, facial hair, eye color, com-
plexion (light, dark, olive, ruddy), and type of clothes being
worn. Did they have any peculiar or identifying mannerisms,
physical disabilities, disfigurations, scars, tattoos, or voice
characteristics? Was the person wearing glasses? Jewelry?
• If there are vehicles involved, write
down the license number and the name
of the state where the license plate was
issued. Also, try to identify the make,
model, year, and color of the vehicle.
• Any special designs or unusual features,
such as a vinyl top, mag wheels, body
damage, or pinstripes.
• The direction the people and/or
vehicle headed.
• Your name, address, and telephone number.
It might help if you try to compare the weight and height
of the person or people involved with your own or someone
you know. Other information that could be helpful includes:
What was said? What was taken? Were there other witnesses?


46 CRIME PREVENTION
Neighborhood Watch.
Group Projects
Here are some other projects, ideas, and program topics that
your Neighborhood Watch group might want to consider.
Project Safe House
The Neighborhood Watch group could identify volunteer
residences as “safe houses.” These homes could be identified
by bright stickers on windows and doors. These safe houses
mean that people living there are “block parents” willing to
help any child who is frightened or being chased.
Retired people or those who have a home business and
are at home much of the day are well-suited to serve as block
parents. Your group might encourage these members to make
their homes “safe houses” or “block homes,” where children
can go for help. Law enforcement authorities should be aware
of designated safe houses.
If patrol groups
are organized,
it is important
that they work
together. Patrols
can share the
same frequency
if using walkie-
talkies and/or go
on joint patrols
when necessary.
Benefits of Neighborhood Watch
1. Reduces and deters criminal activity.
2. Creates a greater sense of security among residents
and reduces fear of crime.
3. Serves as an outlet for victims of crime.
4. Builds bonds with neighbors because residents
look out for one another.
5. Reduces the risk of becoming a crime victim.
6. Instructs residents on how to observe and report
suspicious activities.
7. Addresses quality-of-life issues and mutual inter-
ests in neighborhoods.


CRIME PREVENTION 47
.Neighborhood Watch
Youth Escort Service
A youth escort service is one way to
assist older people. Through this ser-
vice, organized by the Neighborhood
Watch group, two young people go
with an elderly person on regularly
scheduled trips or when the person
phones in a request to a central
escort service number.
A youth escort service is not a
security or bodyguard service, but a
program to ease the fears older people
might have about crime. A person’s
fear of crime often is worse than the
reality of the danger. Soothing this
fear is a worthwhile service.
Crime Stoppers
The successful, nationwide Crime
Stoppers program is based on the
simple idea that for every crime
committed, someone other than
the offender has information that
could solve the crime. Calls to Crime
Stoppers are anonymous so that
people can report a crime without
fear of getting involved or having
the criminal get revenge.
To ensure anonymity, callers
reporting crimes are not asked to
give their names. They are assigned code numbers, which are
used in all future communications. If the caller’s tip leads to an
arrest and conviction, Crime Stoppers pays a reward.
Your Neighborhood Watch group can help start a Crime
Stoppers program in your area or contribute to an existing one
by encouraging public, law enforcement, and media support.


48 CRIME PREVENTION
Neighborhood Watch.
Seasonal Crime Prevention Tips
Crime tips are a way your group can give timely information to
neighbors during holidays, special events, or different seasons
of the year. Examples of seasonal crime prevention tips include
advising Christmas shoppers to lock packages in the trunk of
their cars rather than leaving them in view on the seat or
offering summer vacationers tips on home security while they
are away.
The program can be done inexpensively. Your group simply
could print seasonal crime prevention tips on a postcard and
mail or hand them out throughout the community. Or, you
might provide tips in the form of public service announcements
on local radio and television stations.


CRIME PREVENTION 49
.Neighborhood Watch
Telephone Trees
Telephone trees can help neighbors quickly reach each other
with emergency information. Neighborhoods are divided into
small, workable areas, by streets or along natural boundaries.
Each neighborhood group prepares a chart that has the names
and phone numbers of all members.
Each group chooses a block captain or other person for the
police or sheriff’s office to contact with important information.
Every person on the telephone tree knows which neighbor or
neighbors to call when there is emergency information or other
communications to pass along in a hurry.
Mobilizing Scanner Owners
Owners of emergency radio scanners can play a vital role as
additional eyes and ears for the local enforcement agencies
and Neighborhood Watch groups. Because scanner owners
receive information immediately, they can instantly warn mem-
bers of their crime prevention group about emergencies
in their neighborhoods.
Beautification Projects
Your group could organize a project to remove trash, abandoned
autos, and other unsightly nuisances from your neighborhood.
Working to make a neighborhood more attractive and livable
builds community pride. Research has shown that these kinds
of improvements can reduce crime and lower the fear of crime
in a community.
Fire Prevention Programs
Fire prevention and other safety-related programs can be excel-
lent topics for your Neighborhood Watch meetings. Your group
could invite fire prevention officers to give programs on such
subjects as cardiopulmonary resuscitation, disaster prepared-
ness, and fire safety.
Operation Fingerprint
Thousands of children are reported missing every year. Finger-
printing children can help to identify them. Law enforcement
departments throughout the United States fingerprint children
at no cost. Neighborhood Watch parents can participate in this
effort and encourage others to participate.





CRIME PREVENTION 51
.Drug Awareness
You can help run
drug dealers out
of business by
not doing drugs,
by helping friends
either stay off
or refuse drugs,
and by reporting
dealers to police.
Drug Awareness
The U.S. government spends billions of taxpayer dollars every
year to combat illegal drugs. The crimes associated with drugs
go beyond the sale and use of the illegal substances. Some
drug users steal from others to get the money they need to buy
illegal drugs. While under the influence of drugs, users may
commit violent crimes, including assault and murder. Drug
dealers often resort to violence to protect their illegal business.
Programs exist to help you get the message about drugs to
your friends. The programs at many schools and communities
include the Partnership for a Drug-Free America, Drug Abuse
Resistance Education, and LifeSkills® Training. This prevention
and awareness program stimulates discussion in small groups
and in classrooms about the dangers of drug abuse.
Gateway Drugs
Nicotine, alcohol, and marijuana are sometimes described as
gateway drugs. That is because these drugs are addictive, and
their use can be a gateway to the use of other drugs. Though
substance abuse does not necessarily lead to delinquent
behavior, the two are strongly linked.
A national crime victimization survey found that 5.3 million
violent acts were committed against people 12 years old and
up. Among these victims of violence, 29 percent said that the
offender was using drugs, sometimes along with alcohol.
Nicotine, one of the main chemical components of tobacco,
is a habit-forming drug. A person can become chemically
dependent on nicotine either by smoking or using tobacco in
other forms. The health problems associated with smoking
cigarettes include lung cancer, cardiovascular and respira-
tory diseases, and burns. Breathing in secondhand smoke,
or smoke from someone else’s cigarette, also has been
attributed to some of these diseases.


52 CRIME PREVENTION
Drug Awareness.
Like nicotine, alcohol also is legal for adults and addictive,
and it can destroy the health of people who abuse it. Drinking
too much alcohol impairs the ability to speak clearly, control
body movements, or drive a car safely. Nearly 20,000 deaths are
caused each year by drunken drivers. Alcohol not only affects
the mind and body, it also causes a lack of judgment and coping
skills. It remains the No. 1 drug of choice among teens.
Marijuana, also called “weed,” “pot,” and “hash,” among
many other names, can be addictive. Many scientists classify
the drug as hallucinogenic, which means it plays tricks on the
mind and causes users to experience things that are not real.
Marijuana disrupts the way the brain handles thoughts and
emotions. Users find it difficult to think clearly, pay attention,
do ordinary tasks, and remember things. Possessing, using, or
selling marijuana is illegal under federal law in the
United States.
Uppers, Downers, and Club Drugs
In addition to gateway drugs, more dangerous and addictive
chemicals and drugs are illegally used every day. These types
of substances should be avoided at all costs.
Inhalants are substances such as model airplane glue,
lacquer thinner, lighter fluid, and propellants from aerosol
cans such as deodorant, hair spray, canned whipped topping,
and cleaning fluids.
Young people
who drink are
more likely to be
victims of violent
crime, including
rape, aggravated
assault, and
robbery. Also,
teens who drink
are more likely
to have behavior
and academic
problems.
The National
Institute on Drug
Abuse reports that
marijuana use by
children results in
lower achievement
than nonusers,
acceptance of
deviant behavior,
and aggression.


CRIME PREVENTION 53
.Drug Awareness
Some people will sniff these cheap and easily available
chemicals to get high and to win approval from their peers.
However, serious health consequences can result. Even a single
session of repeated inhalant abuse can disrupt heart rhythms
and cause death. Regular abuse can result in serious harm to
vital organs, including the brain, heart, kidneys, and liver.
When properly prescribed by a physician, tranquilizers
are legal drugs. However, when abused or combined with
alcohol or other depressants, they can be dangerous. Abuse
of tranquilizers can cause poor coordination, slurred speech,
tremors, nausea, mood swings, confusion, nightmares, and
possibly coma.
Besides marijuana, hallucinogens or psy-
chedelic drugs include LSD (or “acid,” which is
its more common street name), Ecstasy (XTC),
PCP (also known as “angel dust,” “ozone,”
and “wack”), mescaline, and psilocybin. These
drugs produce unpredictable effects, ranging
from hallucinations to convulsions. Users can
die from severe convulsions, overdose, and the
mixing of hallucinogens.
Designer or club drugs such as AMF
(“China white”) and MPTP (“new heroin”)
often take the form of a white powder meant
to resemble heroin. Designer drugs are meant
to mimic the effects of illegal drugs. They
depress the body’s circulation and respiratory
systems and can lead to death. Ecstasy and
PCP are examples of designer drugs.
The National Institute on Drug Abuse reports that
approximately 20 percent of eighth-graders have
abused inhalants. A national survey on drug use and
health shows that more than 2.6 million youths, ages
12 to 17, have used inhalants at least once.


54 CRIME PREVENTION
Drug Awareness.
Cocaine (also called “coke,” “C,” “flake,” “snow,” and
“stardust”) stimulates the central nervous system and, besides
causing a euphoric condition, can cause strong psychological
dependence. Bizarre behavior while under the influence of
cocaine can unwittingly lead to fatal accidents and to violence
such as suicide or murder. Freebasing (heating cocaine to dis-
solve it) often causes severe burn accidents.
Crack cocaine (also known as “crack,” “rock,” and
“readyrock”) is cocaine that has been processed from cocaine
hydrochloride to a freebase for smoking. The term “crack”
refers to the crackling sound heard when the mixture is
heated (“smoked”).
Common names for heroin include “dust,” “H,” “horse,”
“junk,” and “smack.” A user becomes dependent even with
occasional abuse and in low doses. Effects of heroin include
irregular breathing and heartbeat. Slowed breathing can lead to
brain damage. Death often results from the fatal lung and heart
complications caused by overdoses.
Narcotics include
codeine, methadone, mor-
phine, and other painkillers.
Their use is illegal unless
prescribed by a licensed
physician. Narcotics depress
breathing and all body
systems. Users risk the
dangerous impurity of
street drugs and the
hazards of needle use
(including AIDS infections).
Overdoses and taking
narcotics with other drugs
that have depressing effects
on the body can be fatal.
Amphetamines have
names such as “speed,”
“meth,” “methamphet-
amine,” “wire,” “bennies,”
“black beauties,” “copilots,”
“dexies,” and “uppers.”
These drugs overstimulate
and overwork the body,
causing a fast and irregular


CRIME PREVENTION 55
.Drug Awareness
heartbeat and breathing, severe depression, and paranoia.
Users can die from the collapse of blood vessels in the brain
and from heart failure.
Names for barbiturates include “barbs,” “downers,”
and “ludes.” Barbiturates are legal when medically prescribed.
Abusers risk life-threatening complications and severe with-
drawal symptoms. Death can result from stopped breathing,
lethal combinations with other drugs such as alcohol, extreme
withdrawal reactions, and suicide.
Anabolic steroids are synthetic substances related to the
male sex hormone testosterone, which controls the develop-
ment of masculine traits. Some athletes have abused steroids
in an effort to enhance their performance and physical build.
Long-term users can become dependent. Steroid abusers risk
cancer or severe damage of the liver, reproductive organs, and
cardiovascular system.
Child Abuse
With nearly a million children victimized annually by some
type of mistreatment, child abuse is a major problem for our
nation. Of these children, more than half are victims of neglect;
2 percent are medically neglected; 19 percent are physically
abused; 10 percent are sexually abused; and 7 percent are
psychologically mistreated. However, these numbers probably
are low because there is no way of knowing how many crimes
against children are never reported.
Studies show
that increased
aggression
may result
from abuse of
anabolic steroids.
While under the influence of amphetamines, users
can engage in violent behavior; the depression the
drugs cause can lead to suicide. Studies have shown
that the use of speed is associated with more violence
and antisocial behavior than any other illegal drug.
Each year, an estimated 1,300 children die in the
United States as a result of abuse or neglect.


56 CRIME PREVENTION
Drug Awareness.
Most of us can recognize bruises and other possible signs
of physical abuse. But there are cases of abuse that are not
so noticeable, such as sexual abuse by a family member or a
friend, emotional maltreatment, and, in some cases, physical
abuse that happens behind closed doors and can be hidden
by clothing.
To stop child abuse, it must first be identified. If someone
tries to abuse you or touch you in a way that makes you feel
uncomfortable, yell “No!” Get away from the person and tell
a trusted adult. If you have a friend who shows any indicators
of abuse, that friend might need your help in reporting
the abuse.
Signs of physical abuse include unexplained bruises,
broken bones, black eyes, burns, or appearing to be fearful of
parents or a guardian. Signs of neglect could include frequent
absence from school, begging or stealing money or food,
lack of medical or dental care, poor personal hygiene, lack of
proper clothing for the weather, and abuse of alcohol or other
drugs.
The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
lists these signs that may indicate a child who is
suffering from abuse or neglect.
• Sudden changes in behavior or school performance
• Physical or medical problems brought to a parent
or guardian’s attention that have been ignored
• Learning problems
• Pessimistic outlook on life, often expecting
something terrible to happen
• Lack of adult supervision
• Overly passive or withdrawn
• Arrives for school or activities early, stays late, and
does not want to go home


CRIME PREVENTION 57
.Drug Awareness
Signs of sexual abuse in a victim include:
• Having difficulty walking or sitting
• Refusing to change clothes for gym or other physical activities
• Reporting nightmares or bedwetting
• Having a sudden change in appetite
• Demonstrating unusual sexual knowledge or behavior
• Contracting a venereal disease
Signs of emotional mistreatment in a victim might include:
• Extremes in behavior
• Delayed physical or emotional development
• Threats or attempts of suicide
• Displaying a lack of attachment to the parent or guardian
Children’s lives can depend on caring citizens who
recognize and report signs of abuse. Report any suspicions
to your parent or guardian or a school official. If your sus-
picions are correct, you could be giving your friend the only
chance he or she has of growing up healthy. You could even
save your friend’s life.
Since 1985, Scouting America has emphasized the pre-
vention of child abuse. Materials that you should be familiar
with include section II of How to Protect Your Children From
Child Abuse: A Parent’s Guide in the front of each Scouts BSA
handbook. These resources introduce the three R’s of Scouting
America Youth Protection (Recognize, Respond, Report).
Scouts need to recognize that anyone could be
an abuser. They need to respond when someone
is doing something that goes against their gut or
against the safety guidelines. They should report
attempted or actual abuse or any activity that
they think is wrong to a parent, guardian or other
trusted adult.





CRIME PREVENTION 59
.Roles of Police and Sheriff’s Departments
Roles of Police and
Sheriff’s Departments
Cities hire and train police to help uphold the law and to
apprehend those who break it. Many police officers work with
residents of the community to help prevent crime by support-
ing programs such as Neighborhood Watch. Police often are
involved in programs at schools to help alleviate juvenile crime
by interacting with youths.
A sheriff’s department usually is headed by a sheriff elected
by residents of a county. Besides law enforcement duties, sher-
iffs’ roles can include operating a jail, providing courthouse
security, serving various types of civil court papers, collecting
taxes, and, in some cities, providing police services.
Crime Prevention Agencies
Discuss with your counselor the purposes and
operations of agencies that are involved in crime
prevention and those that help victims deal with
crime. If possible, visit one agency’s headquarters
and speak to an official. Find out how the work
done by that agency helps to prevent crime and
helps victims. Explain the relationship between
the agency and the criminal justice system.
Learn how that agency works with law enforce-
ment agencies in emergencies.
Depending on the size of your commu-
nity, you might find listings in the telephone
book for the police and sheriff’s departments,
alcohol- and drug-abuse counseling, Crime
Stoppers, FBI, U.S. Marshals Service, Secret Service,
youth and abuse hotlines, crisis intervention hotlines,
shelters for victims of domestic abuse, and victim
assistance agencies.


60 CRIME PREVENTION
Roles of Police and Sheriff’s Departments.
The Role of Private Security
Private security officers are not law enforcement officers and
usually do not have the same authority. They typically are
hired by businesses, individuals, or institutions to protect
everything from assets to lives. Although there are a few
exceptions, most private security officers are not permitted
by law to arrest anyone.
You probably have seen private security officers at muse-
ums, retail stores, office buildings, concerts, sports venues, and
airports. At many office buildings, for example, workers must
show an identification card to a private security officer before
being allowed to enter the building. Roles of the officers, then,
include enforcing rules of the individual or business that hired
them, controlling access to an employer’s property, preventing
loss or theft of property, managing traffic flow, and deterring
criminal activity on the property.
Private security is a big business with about 2 million people employed as officers.


CRIME PREVENTION 61
.Roles of Police and Sheriff’s Departments
Careers in Crime Prevention and Security
Because crime continues to be a major problem, a variety
of career possibilities exist in law enforcement and security.
Opportunities can be found at the federal, state, and local levels.
Law enforcement agencies include police, sheriff, highway
patrol, Drug Enforcement Agency, FBI, Secret Service, and U.S.
Marshals Service. You also could pursue a career as private
security guard, private investigator, corrections officer, airport
security officer, attorney, judge, or forensics expert.
At a minimum, these positions require a high school
diploma; many require a college degree. In addition, many
agencies have their own training programs.
There also are positions for those interested in computer
security. People in this field help to enforce security on the
internet by thwarting con artists, hackers, embezzlers, child
pornographers, and other criminals engaged in illegal activities.





CRIME PREVENTION 63
.Crime Prevention Resources
Scouting Literature
Citizenship in the Community,
Citizenship in the Nation,
Fingerprinting, Fire Safety, Law, and
Safety merit badge pamphlets
Books
Davidson, Tom, and Lorna Gentry.
The Complete Idiot’s Guide to Home
Security. Alpha Books, 2001.
DeBecker, Gavin. Protecting the Gift:
Keeping Children and Teenagers Safe
(and Parents Sane). Dell, 2000.
Giggans, Patricia Occhiuzzo, and Barrie
Levy. 50 Ways to a Safer World:
Everyday Actions You Can Take to
Prevent Violence in Neighborhoods,
Schools, and Communities. Seal
Press, 1997.
Hammer, Carl. Home Security: How to
Select Reliable Locks and Alarms for
Your Home, Office, or Car. Paladin
Press, 2001.
Kraizer, Sherryll. The Safe Child Book:
A Commonsense Approach to
Protecting Children and Teaching
Children to Protect Themselves.
Fireside, 1996.
Mann, Stephanie, and M.C. Blakeman.
Safe Homes, Safe Neighborhoods:
Stopping Crime Where You Live.
Nolo Press, 1993.
Rawls, Neal, and Sue Kovach. Be
Alert, Be Aware, Have a Plan: The
Complete Guide to Personal Security.
The Lyons Press, 2002.
Sechler, Jeff. Internet Safety for
Kids and Young Adults.
CreateSpace Independent
Publishing Platform, 2012.
Organizations and Websites
Bureau of Justice Assistance
U.S. Department of Justice
Telephone: 202-616-6500
bja.ojp.gov
Crime Prevention Through
Environmental Design
International CPTED Association
cpted.net
Crime Prevention Resources
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


64 CRIME PREVENTION
Crime Prevention Resources.
National Center for Missing &
Exploited Children
Toll-free hotline: 800-843-5678
missingkids.com
National Child Identification Program
Telephone: 972-934-2211
childidprogram.com
National Crime Prevention Council
Telephone: 443-292-4565
ncpc.org
National School Safety Center
Telephone: 805-373-9977
schoolsafety.us
National Sheriffs’ Association
Toll-free telephone: 800-424-7827
sheriffs.org
Prevent Child Abuse America
Toll-free telephone: 800-244-5373
preventchildabuse.org
Acknowledgments
Scouting America thanks Joanne
McDaniel, director, and William
Lassiter, school safety specialist, the
Center for the Prevention of School
Violence, North Carolina Department
of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency
Prevention.
Scouting America is grateful to
the men and women serving on the
National Merit Badge Subcommittee for
the improvements made in updating
this pamphlet.
Photo Credits
Getty Images—page 9
All other photos not mentioned above
are the property of or are protected by
Scouting America.
Jack Brown—page 19
Dan Bryant—pages 31–32 (both),
41, and 47
Frank McMahon—page 50
Randy Piland—page 14 (inset)
Doug Wilson—cover (Neighborhood
Watch sign)