ELECTRONICS
STEM-Based


ELECTRONICS
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Electronics or check Scoutbook
for the latest requirements.
Note to the Counselor
For requirement 4, with the Scout’s parent or guardian’s
approval and your acceptance, find an electronic kit in an
area of interest to the Scout. It should be easy to order,
build, and demonstrate.
Look for kits that use high-quality, durable
components that are safe for youth. Check for
certifications or endorsements from educational
organizations. The kit should have a mix of various
types of components and should require the Scout to
solder 15 or more connections in the kit assembly. One
kit per youth. Before building the kit, the Scout will
need to find or create the schematic of the project and
explain the function of all of its parts. Then the Scout
can build the components and demonstrate its operation.
35887
ISBN 978-0-8395-5003-7
©2025 Scouting America
2025 Printing


ELECTRONICS 3





ELECTRONICS 5
Contents
History and Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Tools for Electronics Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Basic Electronics Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
Schematic Diagrams . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
Soldering. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
Control Devices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
Digital Electronics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
Audio . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
Electronic Test Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
Careers in Electronics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
Electronics Resources. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86


Some people still collect old vacuum tubes and also antique
radios, in which vacuum tubes were used.


ELECTRONICS 7
.History and Introduction
History and Introduction
Electronics is the science that controls the behavior of electrons
so that some type of useful function is performed. (Electrons
will be explained more fully later in this book.) Today,
electronics is a fast-changing and exciting field.
The rapid growth of electronics started in the early 20th
century when vacuum tubes were introduced and used to
manipulate electronic signals. This was something that could
not be done with the telegraph and telephone circuits or the
high-voltage transmitters of those days. Vacuum tubes allowed
weak radio and powerful signals to be amplified, or to be
made louder or stronger, and be sent on powerful waves.
Electronics changed even more dramatically in 1948
when the transistor, a small, low-powered, solid-state electronic
device, was invented. Transistors are smaller than vacuum
tubes, require less power to function, and are more reliable. The
development of the integrated circuit, or IC, advanced
this technology further. ICs can contain tens of thousands of
tiny transistors built onto a small piece of conducting material.
This allows for the construction and production of complex
electronic circuits, which are more efficient than tubes in
processing electronic signals. ICs are used in many products
Vacuum tubes were an important breakthrough
in electronics, but they had their limitations. For
example, early computers using vacuum tubes
were so large that one computer would fill an
entire room. These computers had minimal pro-
cessing power because, for one reason, the tubes
needed a lot of power to function.


8 ELECTRONICS
History and Introduction.
today, including computers, audio equipment, cell phones,
appliances, and automobiles.
How to Earn the Electronics Merit Badge
The first step in earning your Electronics merit badge is to
discuss the requirements with your merit badge counselor.
To fulfill requirement 1, learn about the precautions you
should take when using, building, altering, or repairing elec-
tronic devices. Many electronic components (parts) could be
Tips for Repairing
Electronic Devices
1. Be sure to turn off and unplug the
power before operating on any electronic circuit.
2. Always wear safety goggles when working with
electronic devices, especially when soldering.
3. Be careful about electrostatic discharge—that
“zap” you feel after you run across a carpet in
socks and then touch metal. This can be a big
problem in your electronics work. It can actually
set materials on fire and damage electronic
components. Before handling components, touch
a piece of metal to discharge any static electricity.
4. Don’t force a component into anything you are
working with, and don’t overtighten anything.
5. Be careful when you are working with wires.
Bending a wire too often or tightening one too
tightly could cause it to break.
6. When inserting plugs and sockets, ease them in
and out. Never force them. Be aware that some
components must be installed a certain way.
7. Be careful when using tools such as pliers and
cutters so that you don’t nick any wires or cut
your fingers.
8. When bending component leads, don’t bend
them too closely to the body of the component
because the component will be strained.


ELECTRONICS 9
.History and Introduction
damaged if mishandled. Here are some basic safety precau-
tions; there are more safety suggestions later in this pamphlet.
As you read this pamphlet and work on the requirements, pay
attention to safety and see whether you can add to this list.
For requirement 2, study the chapter called “Schematic
Diagrams.” You may choose a schematic diagram from this
pamphlet, then copy it carefully with a pencil. Your drawing
must show resistors, capacitors, and transistors or integrated
circuits. Use the correct symbols for these components,
label all parts, and be prepared to tell the purpose of each
component. Show your drawing to your counselor and tell
what you have learned.
For requirement 3, learn how to solder and then practice
soldering and desoldering wires. When you think you are
ready, show your soldering skills to your counselor. Be pre-
pared to discuss soldering precautions, printed circuit boards,
and possible heat damage to components when using a
soldering iron.
Requirement 4 is demanding but fun because you will
actually build a working electronics circuit. Choose your project
carefully. Make sure that all the required parts are available
at an electronics parts store, from a catalogue, or over the
internet (only with your parent or guardian’s permission).
Also consider what tools you will need. You can choose a
project other than those in this pamphlet, but check with your
counselor first to make sure that the project is suitable. After
you are done with the project, show it to your counselor and
explain how it works.
For requirement 4 you will also learn the basic principles
of digital techniques, how you can use electronics for control
purposes, and about audio applications. Learn the binary sys-
tem so that you know how to change decimal numbers into
binary numbers and binary into decimal.
For requirement 5, you will need to solve a simple prob-
lem using Ohm’s law. You also should be able to discuss test
equipment, the different types, and what they’re used for.
For the final requirement, study three career opportunities
in electronics that interest you. Discuss with your counselor
the education and training needed for each.





ELECTRONICS 11
.Tools for Electronics Work
Tools for
Electronics Work
The basic tools you will need for most of your electronics
work are shown here. You can probably find some around
your home and get others at an electronics parts store.
Phillips screwdriver
Nut driver
Slotted (flat-bladed) screwdriver
Some Basic Tools
Cutting pliers, which cut either
flush or diagonally, cut wires
and trim soldered leads.
Long-nosed pliers are used to
bend leads on components and
hold parts while you solder.
Tweezers, straight or curved,
are used for handling small
components.


12 ELECTRONICS
Tools for Electronics Work.
For most projects, you can use any small-diameter solid
or stranded hookup wire. Some projects might also require
very small wire. A magnifier or magnifying work lamp is
recommended for examining the circuit board to check solder
connections. Most electronics parts stores have a selection of
perforated circuit boards made specially for wiring electronics
projects. Many come with small clips for mounting parts. These
boards are ideal for building simple circuits.
You also will need an electric soldering iron, which you
can buy at a hobby, electronics parts, or hardware store.
The soldering iron in a beginner’s tool kit should be a 15- to
40-watt iron with a fine chisel tip. Use 60/40 rosin-core solder
(60 percent tin, 40 percent lead) that is marked for “electronic
use.” Never use acid core solder. Most of the solder you will
need will have a diameter of 0.03 inch.
You also should have a solder wick
for desoldering a connection if you
make a mistake or want to
remove a component.
Electronic parts are called components, which
comes from the word meaning to put together.
An electronic circuit is composed of several
interconnected components. The leads on a
component are electrical conductors, such as
wires, that connect to an electrical device.
This multipur-
pose electrical
tool removes
insulation from
wires before
soldering. You
also can use a
hobby knife for
stripping wires
and trimming.
Basic soldering kit,
perforated boards


ELECTRONICS 13
.Tools for Electronics Work
Use a workbench for your project if you have one. If not,
you can use a kitchen table, desk, or sturdy card table. You
will need to have good light and ventilation and access to
power outlets. You also will need a few small boxes, trays,
or jars to hold parts.
Buying Parts
Most electronics parts stores will have the components you
will need for your project. If you do a project from scratch,
you will have to buy the parts separately. While you also can
buy a complete project as a kit, many electronics kits found in
retail stores are not soldering kits, and building a project from
scratch is challenging and rewarding. Scratch projects can be
inexpensive if you can scrounge for most of the parts.
However, a kit has a number of advantages. All the neces-
sary assembly instructions and parts are supplied, including
wire and solder. Special parts, such
as printed circuit boards, come with
the kit. In addition, fewer tools
are required because all necessary
holes are prepunched. Since the kit
has been carefully tested, you know
that the finished product will work.
A complete kit generally costs less
than buying the parts separately.
Investigate doing a project
both ways before you
invest your money.
Get your
counselor’s
approval before
you start
your project.
Kit project





ELECTRONICS 15
.Basic Electronics Theory
Basic Electronics Theory
Before you learn about electronic components, let’s look at the
theory behind electronics. Controlling electrons is the science
of electronics. So, our study of electronics theory begins with
the electron.
Atoms and Electrons
To understand electrons, we must learn about the makeup
of matter. All matter is composed of atoms, and an atom is
composed of three elementary particles: electrons, protons, and
neutrons. Negatively charged electrons revolve around the core
(the nucleus) of the atom, which is composed of positively
charged protons and neutral (not charged) neutrons.
Generally, a negatively charged electron is matched by a
positively charged proton. For example, copper has 29 electrons
revolving around a nucleus containing 29 protons. A basic law
of nature controls electrical charges. This law simply stated is
that unlike charges attract and like charges repel. This means a
negative charge is drawn to a positive charge but pushes away
from another negative charge. This is called electrostatic force.
Normally, the positively charged protons hold the nega-
tively charged electrons in place. However, an electron some-
times breaks away from an atom because of an outside force,
such as heat, light, magnetic fields, or chemical reactions.
Once freed, electrons can “float” among atoms. These free
electrons are what is important in electronics. Devices such as
resistors, capacitors, inductors, and transistors are used to con-
trol the behavior of these free electrons.
Electrons have a negative charge. So if an object loses
electrons, it becomes positively charged. If an object
gains electrons, it then has a negative charge. A unit of
electrical charge is called a coulomb.


16 ELECTRONICS
Basic Electronics Theory.
Conductors and Insulators
Conductors act as a pathway for free electrons. Most metals are
good conductors of electrons, so they can be used to “transport”
electrons from one place to another. Insulators act as walls or
barriers, preventing electrons from flowing where we do not
want them to flow. Insulators, for example, are used on most
electrical wires to protect us from electrical shock.
Copper, silver, and gold are popular conductors because
they have a large number of free electrons. As an example of
how to make the electrons flow, picture a length of copper wire
with one end connected to the positive terminal of a battery
and the other end connected to the negative terminal. The
positive terminal attracts the negatively charged free electrons
of the wire (remember: unlike charges attract) while at the
same time the negative terminal repels the electrons. The result
is a flow of electrons through the wire from the negative to the
positive terminal. This flow is called an electric current.
An insulator works just the opposite. In some materials,
such as plastics and glass, atoms hold their electrons tightly.
These materials have very few free electrons. Therefore, if a
length of insulator is connected to a battery the same way the
copper wire was attached, no measurable current would flow.
Current, Voltage, and Resistance
Here are some basic definitions of terms used in electronics.
• Current is the orderly movement of electrons through a
conductor. Current is measured in amperes, or amps, or
the rate at which electrons move past a given point. One
ampere is the movement of about 6 billion billion electrons
past that point in one second.
• Voltage is an electrical pressure that can cause current to
flow. Voltage forces current to flow through a wire in much
the same way that water pressure forces water to flow
through a pipe. This electrical pressure can be caused with
magnetism, chemicals, friction, light, or heat. The unit of
voltage is the volt.
• The opposition to current flow is resistance. The resistance
of a material is mainly determined by how many free
electrons it has. If the material doesn’t have many, it will
have little or no current flow. The unit of resistance is the


ELECTRONICS 17
.Basic Electronics Theory
ohm. One ohm is the amount of resistance that will allow 1
ampere of current to flow when the applied voltage is 1 volt.
Frequency
Frequency, or cycles per second, uses the term hertz as its unit
of measure. The electricity from electrical utilities is 60 Hertz
AC and the voltage changes in a sine wave pattern.
Ohm’s Law
Ohm’s law describes the basic relationships between current,
voltage, and resistance. The formula for Ohm’s law is:
Voltage (volts) = Current (amperes) × Resistance (ohms)
To determine current, the formula would be:
Current (amperes) = Voltage (volts) ÷ Resistance (ohms)
If you know current and resistance, you can find out the
voltage. For example, how much voltage is needed to force
2 amperes of current to flow through 10 ohms of resistance?
Ohm’s law tells us that we need to multiply our 2 amperes
(current) by the 10 ohms (resistance) to arrive at the answer:
20 volts.
A standard flashlight battery can produce 1.5 volts.
A car battery produces about 12 volts. A light bulb
in your home operates on 115 volts, while an electric
stove requires about 220 volts.
Know Your Units of Measure
• Electrical charge is measured in coulombs.
• Current is measured in amperes, or amps.
• Voltage is measured in volts.
• Resistance is measured in ohms.
• Electrical power is measured in watts.
• Capacitance is measured in farads.
• Frequency is measured in hertz.


18 ELECTRONICS
Basic Electronics Theory.
If you know voltage and resistance, you can figure out
current (Voltage ÷ Resistance). Therefore, how much current
will flow in a circuit having 5 ohms of resistance when 15
volts are applied?
15 volts ÷ 5 ohms = 3 amperes
With these formulas, you can solve simple problems involving
current, voltage, and resistance.
Power
Another electrical quantity is power. Power is the rate at
which work is done. The unit of electrical power is the watt
and can be compared to the unit of mechanical power, called
horsepower. One horsepower is equal to 746 watts. The
formula for power is
Power (watts) = Voltage (volts) × Current (amperes)
When this formula is applied, you can determine the amount
of power used by a circuit if you know the voltage and current.
For example, how much power is used by a 120-volt toaster
that draws 5 amperes?
120 volts × 5 amperes = 600 watts
The power used by the toaster is 600 watts. This power is
used, or dissipated, in the form of heat to toast the bread.
Current Delivery
Electrical signals are classified as either direct current (DC)
or alternating current (AC). Direct current signals are at a
constant voltage or at a constant polarity where AC signals
typically follow a sine wave or other pattern and alternate
between positive and negative voltages. If the AC signal follows
a specific pattern, the number of times the pattern repeats
James Watt, a Scottish engineer and inventor in the
18th and early 19th centuries, actually tested horses
hauling coal to help him arrive at the determination
that 1 horsepower is the amount of power required
to lift 33,000 pounds 1 foot in 1 minute. The watt is
named after him.


ELECTRONICS 19
.Basic Electronics Theory
within one second is the signal’s frequency. The electricity from
electrical utilities is 60 Hertz AC and the voltage changes in a
sine wave pattern.
Resistance and Resistors
You have learned that when you apply a voltage to the ends
of a conductor, it creates a current. Its strength depends on
the applied voltage and the resistance of the conductor. The
resistance of a conducting material depends on three factors:
1. The kind of material
2. The length of the material
3. The diameter or thickness of the material
Temperature also is a factor in resistance. In most materials, resis-
tance is increased when the temperature rises and decreased if
the temperature is colder. In most simple circuits, however, tem-
perature is not critical and is often ignored. The kind of
material is probably the most important factor in resistance.
Copper, for example, is a good conductor, while iron of a similar
size has a higher resistance. Carbon has even a higher resistance
than iron.
The longer the conductor, the higher the resistance will
be. For instance, if the length of a copper wire is doubled, the
resistance will be doubled. As an example, a 60-foot length of
copper wire might have a resistance of 1 ohm. A same-sized
copper wire that is 120 feet long would have a resistance of
2 ohms.
Size is important, too. A thick conductor will carry more
current and offer less resistance than a thin one. Think again
of water pipes. A large water pipe will allow more water to
flow than a small one. When a current flows through a resistor,
a component that limits or opposes the flow of a current, work
is being done to move the electrons. This work produces heat
and warms the resistor. Heat produced by an electric current is
the basis for the operation of many electrical devices and
appliances such as heaters, toasters, stoves, and soldering irons.
In a lightbulb, an electrical current causes a wire filament
to become so hot that it glows to produce light. Only a fraction
of the power that comes from the filament produces light.
The rest generates heat, which is why incandescent bulbs are
so inefficient. A resistor is designed to have a specific value
of resistance, and resistors are available in a wide range of
values. Standard power sizes are 1/4 watt, 1/2 watt, 1 watt,


20 ELECTRONICS
Basic Electronics Theory.
and 2 watts. These values indicate the maximum recommended
power that the resistor can dissipate. The higher the power
rating, the larger the resistor.
Capacitors and Capacitance
A capacitor is a device for storing electrons, or an electrical
charge, that can be released at a later time. Imagine two sheets of
aluminum foil (conducting plates) that are separated by a sheet
of waxed paper (an insulator). If you connect a battery to the
two aluminum sheets, electrons will flow from the sheet that is
connected to the positive terminal of the battery. Simultaneously,
the same number of electrons will flow from the negative termi-
nal of the battery to the other aluminum sheet. The number of
electrons that are transferred makes the voltage between the
aluminum sheets exactly that of the connected battery. If the
battery is removed, the aluminum sheets will remain in their
charged state. If there is no leakage through the waxed paper,
the sheets will remain charged indefinitely.
Any two conducting plates separated by an insulator make
up a capacitor. A capacitor can consist of many conducting
plates with insulating separators. Alternate plates would be
connected to form interleaved stacks.
The higher the voltage, the greater will be the amount
of charge that is transferred from one plate to the other. The
ratio of charge to voltage is defined as the capacitance of the
capacitor. Or you could also say that the “electrical size” of
a capacitor is its capacitance, which is the amount of elec-
tric charge it can hold. The unit of capacitance is the farad.
However, this unit is too large for most practical capacitors,
so capacitors are manufactured to measure millionths of a
farad (microfarads) and trillionths of a farad (picofarads,
which are micro-microfarads).
The insulators that separate conducting plates in a capacitor
can be made of several materials, including ceramic materials,
mica, certain types of paper, air, and oxide (a compound con-
taining oxygen). A popular capacitor has been the electrolytic
capacitor. In this capacitor, the insulator is an extremely thin
oxide layer. The leads of electrolytic capacitors are marked
positive and negative. These indicate how the capacitor must
be connected for proper operation.


ELECTRONICS 21
.Basic Electronics Theory
Electron Tubes
The electron tube made the science of electronics possible.
Although it largely has been replaced by transistors, it still has
special uses. Tubes for high power are still used today in lasers,
radars, strobe lights, and special-use vacuum tubes. Many
high-end stereo collectors still prefer the sound of a
tube amplifier over that of a transistor amplifier.
Semiconductors
The word semiconductor is used to name a wide variety of
electronic devices. Made of solid or liquid material, semi-
conductors generally are able to conduct electricity more
easily than an insulator, but not as easily as a metal.
The semiconductor diode performs the same basic func-
tion as the electron-tube diode. It allows current to flow in one
direction, but not the other. This diode consists of two different
types of silicon crystals. An impurity (some type of substance)
can be added to one area of the silicon to control the silicon’s
conductivity. The silicon is said to have been “doped” when
it has been treated with atoms from an impurity. These atoms
combine with the silicon atoms in such a way that electrons
float around freely inside the silicon. This type of silicon is
called N-type (or negative-type). The N-type silicon is the
cathode of the diode.
See the “Schematic
Diagrams” chapter
to help you
understand the
illustrations in
this section.
Semiconductor diode
N-TYPE P-TYPE
CATHODE
N P
CATHODE
ANODE
ANODE
ELECTRONS FLOW. ELECTRONS CANNOT FLOW.


22 ELECTRONICS
Basic Electronics Theory.
The other area of silicon also has an added impurity. But
the atoms of this impurity combine with the silicon atoms
in such a way that there is a shortage of one electron in the
bonding. The absence of an electron is called a “hole,” and
this hole can grab an electron from a neighboring atom. Thus,
a hole can “float” from atom to atom the same way an electron
might. The silicon with the holes is called P-type (positive).
For current to flow through the diode, the negative ter-
minal of the battery must connect to the N-type silicon (the
cathode) and the positive terminal to the P-type silicon (the
anode). The negative terminal repels the free electrons of the
N-type material. The electrons are forced toward the junction
where they fill the waiting holes. However, as the electrons
leave the anode, new holes form. This results in a constant
flow of current from cathode to anode.
Current cannot flow in the opposite direction (see the
illustration for the semiconductor diode). If the battery’s
connection is turned around, it attracts the electrons and the
holes away from the junction. Because there are no free
electrons at the junction, no current can flow.
The transistor is perhaps the most important invention
in the history of electronics so far. A transistor uses the P-type
and N-type silicon in much the same way as a diode. However,
the transistor has three electrodes, called the emitter, the base,
and the collector. The collector is connected to the positive
terminal of the battery, and the emitter is connected to the
negative terminal. Electrons will try to flow from the emitter
to the collector. However, a thin layer (the base) separates
these two elements. If the base is negative, it repels the free
electrons in the emitter. In this case, no current can flow
from the emitter to the collector.
NPN transistor
COLLECTOR
BASE
EMITTER
COLLECTOR
N
N
P
BASE
EMITTER
ELECTRONS FLOW
WHEN THE BASE IS
POSITIVE.


ELECTRONICS 23
.Basic Electronics Theory
If the base is positive, electrons can flow into the base
from the emitter. Some of the electrons will flow into the
positive base lead. But because the base is very thin, most
of the electrons travel through the base to the collector. Thus,
if the base is made more positive, more electrons will flow.
Conversely, making the base less positive will reduce the
current flow. You can see then that a small voltage on the
base will control the amount of current through the transistor.
For this reason, the transistor can be used as an amplifier in
much the same way as a vacuum tube.
Notice the symbol in the illustration used to represent
the NPN transistor. Another type of transistor is called the
PNP transistor. Its structure and schematic symbol are shown
in the following illustration. This transistor requires opposite
polarity voltages for proper operation.
NPN and PNP transistors are called bipolar transistors, and
they are the most popular types used.
Field Effect Transistor
The field effect transistor uses a single N-channel or P-channel
with an insulated metal plate used to control current flow.
Current enters the channel at the source lead and flows
toward the drain lead at the other end of the channel. The
voltage applied to the insulated plate, known as the gate,
limits the current flow through the channel from source to
drain. The most used FET is the metal-oxide semiconductor
FET or MOSFET. An N-channel MOSFET will not conduct
current if there is no voltage difference source to gate and
PNP transistor
COLLECTOR
BASE
EMITTER
COLLECTOR
BASE
EMITTER
ELECTRONS FLOW
WHEN THE BASE IS
NEGATIVE.
P
P
N


24 ELECTRONICS
Basic Electronics Theory.
allow current flow when a higher voltage is applied to the gate
(voltage difference with respect to the source pin). A P-channel
MOSFET will conduct current if there is no voltage difference
source to gate and allow current flow when a lower voltage
is applied to the gate (voltage difference with respect to the
source pin).
Complementary MOS or CMOS technologies use one
P-channel MOSFET and one N-channel MOSFET connected
such that the P-channel source pin connects to the circuit
higher voltage (typically power supply) and connects the
N-channel source to the lower voltage supply (typically 0-volt
or ground). The drain of the two MOSFETs are connected and
is the circuit output. The gates are tied together.
When the gates are connected to a low voltage (ground),
the source to gate voltage of the N-channel is 0 volts so the
channel transistor is “off” while the gate to source voltage of
the P-channel FET is the “hi” voltage, so that transistor is “on”
meaning the output voltage is connected to the power sup-
ply or high (for a low input). Conversely, if the two gates are
tied to the higher voltage, the N-channel gate to source is now
high, so it is “on” while the P-channel transistor gate to source
is voltage is low, so it is “off.”
Integrated Circuits
An integrated circuit (IC) is a complete circuit in a single pack-
age. Transistors, resistors, diodes, and capacitors can be formed
in a single chip of silicon, a semiconductor. One chip can
contain thousands or even millions of electronic components.
Integrated circuits have revolutionized many
fields, including communications, informa-
tion handling, and computing. They have
reduced the size of devices, while providing
faster speeds and increased reliability.
The individual components of ICs are
extremely small and are assembled to a pat-
tern that has been planned in advance. A
chip might look flat, but it has several layers
for circuits. Switches control the electrical cur-
rent through the chip. The switches manipu-
late the binary code (discussed below) with
“on” and “off” switches. The binary code
is at the core of how a computer operates.
The integrated circuit, or IC, has led to
smaller electronic devices that are faster
and more reliable.


ELECTRONICS 25
.Basic Electronics Theory
Chips come in many different sizes, with millions of transistors
being able to fit on chips the size of a postage stamp.
Two basic types of IC are called linear and digital. Linear
circuits include amplifiers, oscillators, regulators, and other cir-
cuits used in TV sets, audio amplifiers, radios, and hearing aids.
Digital circuits include memories and arithmetic circuits and
counters in watches, calculators, computers, and video games.
Microprocessors
The microprocessor is a type of ultra-large IC. By 1971,
the technique of making ICs had progressed to the point
where enough computing power could be put on a single
IC to form a tiny, primitive computer, or calculator. The
first microprocessor was born. Today, microprocessors can
incorporate more than a billion transistors, plus components
such as resistors, capacitors, diodes, and wires.
The microprocessor accepts input data, modifies that
data in some way, and produces an appropriate output. The
earliest application of the microprocessor was the calculator.
A calculator accepts numbers that the user enters on a key-
board, performs a mathematical operation on those numbers
that the user desires, and then sends the result to a display.
Today’s microprocessors function as the central processing unit
(CPU) of computers. They also are used in many electronics
systems such as cameras, printers, planes, and automobiles.
The microprocessor in an automobile, for instance, exam-
ines inputs from several sensors, makes decisions based on
those inputs, and adjusts such things as the mixture of air
and fuel and the timing of ignition firing. The microproces-
sor’s most important aspect is that it can be programmed to
perform an almost limitless number of applications.
Printed Circuit Boards
A printed circuit board (PCB) consists of a sheet of
some type of insulator, a composite material classified as
FR-4 made of woven fiberglass cloth with an epoxy resin
binder. The FR-4 material is an insulator with copper traces
printed or etched onto the FR-4 surface. The copper traces are
implementations of the wire lines of the schematic drawing.
Parts of traces may need to be routed from one side (layer)
to the other side (layer). To connect the traces, feed-through
holes are added to the circuit board.
A computer might
contain more
than 2 billion
transistors!


26 ELECTRONICS
Basic Electronics Theory.
Feed-through holes are drilled through the printed circuit
board then filled with solder. The solder connects the copper
of the top, bottom, and optional intermediate layers. Feed-
through hole’s solder is done during the fabrication of the
circuit board.
Optionally, feed-through holes can be used to hold
component leads. The feed through has a hole drilled
through the solder for the component lead. The drilled
hole is done during fabrication of the printed circuit
board. The completed printed circuit board is now
ready for insertion of the components drawn in the
schematic.
A feed-through hole used for a component lead
must be larger to allow room for the component
lead diameter plus some insertion clearance of the
lead into the hole. If no component lead is being
inserted in the hole, the diameter of the feed-
through hole can be much smaller and require
less printed circuit board space.
Later, during the assembly process, a component lead is
inserted into the hole and the hole and lead must be soldered
together to make solid electrical contact.
Several layers of traces, separated by FR-4 sheets may
be sandwiched together for more complex electronic designs
with feed-through holes connecting the traces as needed.
Through-Hole Technology
The technology used for placing component leads in holes
drilled through the printed circuit board reached a practical
limit when integrated circuits got over about 40 pins. A
feed-through hole with space for the lead and the insertion
tolerance meant that, based on PCB fabrication technologies
at the time, integrated circuit leads needed to be about 0.100"
apart. Various techniques were tried with larger IC packages
including longer packages, the IC pins in a grid pattern and
others. There was not a viable solution to reach what would
eventually be today’s package pin counts.
Surface-Mount Technology
By removing the component pin from going through the feed-
through hole, the feed-through could be much smaller and
Surface-mount
technology ball grid
array (about 800 pins)


ELECTRONICS 27
.Basic Electronics Theory
moved away from the component. The component pins could
be replaced with a square pad on the component and the
printed circuit board would have a matching pad on the “out-
side” copper layer. Without the constraint of the feed-through
hole with drilled lead space, component pins could be placed
much closer together or more pins could be placed around
the former through hole package sizes. This change led to the
very high pin count packages required for today’s integrated
circuits, such as the processor of your home computer.
Intel cofounder Gordon Moore wrote in 1965 that the number of
transistors in integrated circuits doubled approximately every two
years. This observation, called Moore’s law, still holds true today.





ELECTRONICS 29
.Schematic Diagrams
Schematic Diagrams
The illustrations in the previous section didn’t show you a
picture of a real diode or transistor. Instead, they showed
you a kind of illustrated outline, called a schematic diagram.
These diagrams are a simple way of showing how electronic
components are connected. In a schematic, symbols stand for
the different electronic components. The schematic diagram
illustrated here is for a code-practice oscillator, used to
practice Morse code. The corresponding pictorial representation
shows how the components actually look. In the schematic,
a different type of symbol represents each type of component:
long and short lines represent the battery; a zigzag line stands
for a resistor. In this section, you will learn these symbols so
that you can understand schematic diagrams.
+ 9V KEY
R1
56K
R2
100K
C1
.05
B
Q1 T1 SPEAKER
E
C
-
BLACK
-
9-VOLT
BATTERY
R1
R2 Q1
C2
T1BE
RED
+
SPEAKER
KEY
C1
Bottom: Pictorial representation,
code-practice oscillator
Top: Schematic diagram,
code-practice oscillator
Notice that each
component in
the schematic
diagram on
this page has
a reference
designator such
as 9V, Key, R1,
R2, C1, Q1, T1.
The designators
also appear in the
pictorial diagram
to clearly show
which component
is which. These
become more
important in
designs with many
more components.


30 ELECTRONICS
Schematic Diagrams.
To start, compare the schematic diagram with the pictorial
and match each symbol in the schematic with its equivalent
component in the pictorial. Also match each line in the sche-
matic with the appropriate wire in the pictorial. Notice where
two lines cross in the schematic. If the wires are to be connect-
ed, a dot shows at the crossing on the schematic. If there is no
dot, the two wires bypass each other and are not connected.
When you draw your schematic for requirement 2, you
will need a sharp pencil, paper, and a ruler or straight edge
for drawing straight lines. A compass might be helpful for
drawing circles. If you have a computer with a drawing pro-
gram, you might use that to draw a schematic. There are also
several freely available schematic capture tools.
Component Types
Before we look at the most common types of electronics
components, as well as the schematic symbol and a pictorial
of each one, let’s define and review some basic terms (also
see the Basic Electronics Theory section):
• Electricity is a property that electrons have that causes
them to behave in certain predictable ways.
• Electrical charge is a quantity of electricity.
• The electron is a tiny particle that has a negative
electrical charge.
• Current is defined as the flow of electrons.
• Voltage is the pressure that causes current to flow.
• Resistance is the opposition to current flow.
• Direct current (DC) is current that always flows in
the same direction.
• Alternating current (AC) is a current that reverses
its direction of flow many times each second.
• Frequency is the number of times that a repeats its pattern in
one second.
Passive Components
Fixed Resistor: Each resistor has a specific amount of
resistance. A resistor is like a nozzle on a water hose. For a
given water pressure, the nozzle controls the amount of water
that is allowed out of the hose. Similarly, for a given voltage, a
resistor controls the flow of electrical current.
To learn
more, read
the Electricity
merit badge
pamphlet.W W W.SCOUTSHOP.ORG
The Supply Group is
ready to be a partner
on your tr ail to
Eagle through high
adventure. The
adventure is your s,
and we are ready
with the gear you
will need. You can
depend on the latest
in lightweight,
dur able, qualit y
gear that will
meet and surpass
your toughest
requirements.
to
nture
rn tier
ea base
ranch
scout
summit
ELECTRICITY
STEM-Based


ELECTRONICS 31
.Schematic Diagrams
Most resistors are made of a carbon compound. Resistors
used for high currents often are made from special wire that is
wound on an insulating form. The type of compound or wire
used determines how much electrical current can flow for a
given voltage.
The value of a resistor is given in ohms. The symbol for the
ohm is the Greek capital letter omega (Ω). Thus, 1Ω designates
the resistance of 1 ohm. A 1kΩ resistor has a resistance of
1 kilohm, or 1,000 ohms. A 1MΩ resistor has a resistance of
1 megohm, or 1 million ohms.
The illustration below shows a variety of fixed resistors
and a cross-section of a fixed resistor. The values of fixed resis-
tors cannot be changed.
Schematic symbol
Fixed resistor packages
Know Your Prefixes
This table lists some prefixes used in the electronics industry. An example term is given
for each prefix; each prefix may be used with many other units of measure. For example,
microsecond, microvolt microamp, microohm, microhenry, and microfarad all use the
micro prefix to denote one millionth of the corresponding unit.
Prefix Abb. x10n Term Value
peta P x1015 1 petabyte 1 quadrillion bytes
tera T x1012 1 terabyte 1 trillion bytes
giga G x109 1 gigawatt 1 billion watts
mega M x106 1 megaohm 1 million ohms
kilo K x103 1 kilovolt 1 thousand volts
deci d x10-1 1 decibel 1 tenth bel
milli m x10-3 1 milliamp 1 thousandth amp
micro u x10-6 1 microsecond 1 millionth second
nano n x10-9 1 nanohenry 1 billionth henry
pico p x10-12 1 picofarad 1 trillionth farad


32 ELECTRONICS
Schematic Diagrams.
Older types of fixed resistors have bands of color that
allow you to determine their resistance value. (See “The Color
Code of Resistors” section on page 40.) The cross-section of
this fixed resistor shows the inside, which is made of carbon.
Note the schematic symbol for a fixed resistor.
Variable Resistor: The resistance of variable resistors can
be adjusted. Rheostats are two-leaded devices that vary in
resistance from 0 to the rated resistance value. Three leaded
variable resistors, known as potentiometers (pots), have a fixed
resistance between leads 1 and 3, and have a resistance on lead
2 proportional to the amount of rotation on the adjustment
arm. These variable resistors can be used in appliances that
need their currents adjusted or when the resistance needs to be
varied, such as with lights that can be dimmed.
Capacitor: A capacitor is a storage element for electrical
charge, similar to a bottle that stores a liquid. The basic unit
of capacitance is the farad (F). Practical capacitors have
capacitance values in microfarads (μF). The physical size of
a capacitor depends on its voltage rating and its capacitance
value. The higher the voltage rating and the larger the
capacitance value, the larger the capacitor must be.
Inductor: An inductor is a coil of wire usually wrapped
around some type of metal or hollow core material and is used
to smooth out variations in the current flow. When current is
applied to the coil, a magnetic field is established around the
Schematic symbols
Variable resistor packages


ELECTRONICS 33
.Schematic Diagrams
core. When the current flow stops, the magnetic field begins
to collapse and in doing so induces current back into the wire
until the field has collapsed. The magnetic field tends to col-
lapse at a rate that maintains the original current in the wire.
Single coil configurations are generally called a choke whereas
two or more coils can be configured either as a choke to filter
current changes or as a transformer for changing voltage and
current values.
Transformer: A transformer consists of two or more coils
each with multiple turns of wire around the magnetic core.
The primary coil is the coil where power is applied to the
transformer and the other coils are referred to as secondary
coil(s). The transformer uses the magnetic field established
by current flow in the primary coil to induce a current in the
Schematic symbol,
fixed capacitor
Schematic symbol,
variable capacitor
Capacitor packages
Inductor packages
Schematic symbols for inductors


34 ELECTRONICS
Schematic Diagrams.
secondary coil(s). The ratio of turns from the primary to a
secondary coil determines how much the incoming voltage is
multiplied on the secondary side and how much the secondary
current is divided by the primary current in the secondary.
Because transformers operate on changing magnetic fields
caused by changing current, transformers do not operate on
direct current (DC) currents.
Semiconductor Devices
Semiconductor devices are typically made of silicon-based
material. Diodes and transistors are two common semiconduc-
tor component types. Semiconductors come in various package
sizes based on the amount of power they must dissipate in
rated operation.
Diodes: Diodes operate as check valves, passing current in one
direction but not the other. A diode’s most common applica-
tion is in power supplies. It changes alternating current (AC)
into direct current (DC).
Diode packages Schematic
symbol:
Standard diode
Schematic symbol:
Light-emitting
diode (LED)
Transformer
packages
Schematic
symbols for
transformers


ELECTRONICS 35
.Schematic Diagrams
Transistor packages Schematic symbols
Transistors: Transistors are solid-state devices used for con-
trolling current. A very small input current controls a much
larger output current. For example, the small current from a
microphone can control a much larger current that drives a
loudspeaker. This is the idea behind the audio amplifiers used
in public address systems.
Integrated Circuits (ICs)
Complex circuits are available in integrated circuit (IC) form
at inexpensive prices. The IC, which typically consumes little
power, is reliable, cheap, and small. Because devices using ICs
can be improved and made cheaper, the IC has replaced tradi-
tional components in many applications. As shown here, ICs
come in several types of packages. The dual in-line package
(DIP) is the most popular style for most hobby applications.
Schematic symbols for ICs are typically very function-specific.
Integrated circuit
packages


36 ELECTRONICS
Schematic Diagrams.
Electromechanical Components
Microphone: A microphone changes sounds into electrical
impulses. Either a thin, flexible disk (a diaphragm) or a crystal
in the mike vibrates whenever sound strikes it. The vibrations
are changed into small electrical signals. These signals typically
need to be amplified before they are usable.
Speaker: A speaker then converts the electrical impulses back
into sounds. An electromagnet moves a speaker cone based
on the incoming audio signal. The speaker cone moves the air
around and it which causes the audio sound to spread across
the space and recreating the original sound.
Schematic
symbol
Schematic
symbol
Speakers


ELECTRONICS 37
.Schematic Diagrams
Switches: are an important part of almost all electronic equip-
ment. They come in a wide variety of shapes, sizes, and func-
tions. Switches are categorized by the number of circuits they
switch (single, double, triple, etc.) and then by the number of
switch position contacts. A switch may have an output contact
for each position of the switch. The switch will typically have
a default position. A circuit that makes contact in that position
is called a Normally Closed (NC) contact or in drawing below
from terminal A to C. If the switch is moved out of default
position, and makes contact with an electrical terminal, that
position is called Normally Open (NO) and is shown as con-
nections A to B in drawings below).
The simplest is the single-pole, single-throw type. When
closed, this switch completes a circuit, allowing an electric
current to flow. When it is open, the circuit is broken, and the
current does not flow. The on-off switches on most electronic
devices are of this type (above left).
A single-pole, double-throw switch has a contact arm that
can be set in either of two positions. In the example shown
here, terminal A can be connected to either terminal B or
terminal C. The dashed line between the switches shows the
mechanical connection (above center).
A double-pole, double-throw switch can simultaneously
switch two wires from one circuit to another. It can be thought
of as two single-pole, double-throw switches that operate
together (above right).
A rotary or selector switch has one or more arms (poles)
that can be set to various positions. A single pole 10-position
switch is shown below. Notice that the terminal at the very
bottom connects the signal to the rotatable arm.
Switches come
in many sizes
and shapes, so
only schematic
symbols are
shown here.
DPDT toggle
SPDT toggle
SPST toggle
normally open
SPST toggle
normally closed
1A
1C
1B
2C
2B2A


38 ELECTRONICS
Schematic Diagrams.
Relays: A relay is a magnetically operated switch. It has a
wire coil wrapped around an iron core forming an electro-
magnet. When current flows through the coil, a magnetic
field develops. The magnetic field attracts a movable part
called an armature, which moves all relay switch poles from
normally Closed (magnet off) to Normally Open (magnet
energized).
A relatively small current can cause the switch contacts
to close, but the contacts can handle a much heavier current.
The relay allows a small current to switch higher current(s)
on or off. By using several contact sets (single, double, triple
or more poles and single or double throw). A multi-pole relay
allows a single control (coil) current to control several different
currents simultaneously.
Chemical Components
Batteries: Batteries are made from several types of materials
for different uses. Alkaline, lithium, and mercury batteries are
used when long life is desired. Nickel-cadmium batteries give
shorter service but can be recharged. The nickel–metal hydride
battery is replacing the nickel-cadmium battery because it
doesn’t suffer the memory effect (that is, not allowing a par-
tially charged battery to fully recharge before use). Lithium-Ion
type batteries have replaced many of the older battery types.
Zinc-carbon also is used in many inexpensive dry-cell batteries.
Most electronic circuits and products operate at low sup-
ply voltages and have low power requirements. These devices
are often driven from small batteries or DC voltage sources.
Depending on the type of product, a coin battery, one, two or
four flashlight batteries are often adequate for relatively long
service.
Ordinary flashlight dry cells produce approximately 1.5
volts. Four 1.5-volt cells connected in a series can provide 6
volts. Single 9-volt batteries also are used.
Schematic symbol
Relay package
Batteries come
in many sizes
and shapes, so
only schematic
symbols are
shown here.


ELECTRONICS 39
.Schematic Diagrams
The development of electronics has benefited our
daily lives in many ways, including the protection
of life and property. Today, electronics and electronic
circuits play a vital role in the security field.
Whether it’s a burglar alarm motion sensor, door
contact, or the alarm panel and communication
devices, closed circuit television (CCTV), or devices
related to detecting smoke and fire, electronics is
what makes it all happen.
Photocells: A photoelectrical cell changes one or more of its
characteristics when exposed to light. It is popularly called the
electric eye, which controls operations such as traffic lights,
door openers, and devices that activate lights at dusk and
turn them off at dawn. One type of photoelectric cell is called
a photoconductive cell. Another name for this type of cell is
the light-dependent resistor (LDR). This special resistor has a
small window so that light can strike the resistance material.
Generally, such a cell has a high resistance when in darkness.
Another type is called a photovoltaic cell. This is the familiar
“solar cell” that is used to power electronic equipment on
spacecraft. It produces a low voltage across its terminals when
exposed to light, especially sunlight, thus converting light
energy into electrical energy.
Other Component Types: There are many other types of com-
ponents used in electronics but these are the more common
components that a hobbyist is likely to use.
Schematic symbols
Photoelectric cells


40 ELECTRONICS
Schematic Diagrams.
The Color Code of Resistors
The value of a resistor is speci-
fied in ohms and is indicated by
colored bands around one end
of the resistor. The electronics
industry devised this system
because small printed numbers
would be too hard to read or
might be concealed by the posi-
tion of the resistor.
Most resistors have four
bands, with the first three
(counting from the end of the
resistor) indicating the value
in ohms. The fourth, which is either silver or gold, indicates
the tolerance (discussed below). Colors used for the bands are
used in place of numbers. To determine the resistance value in
ohms, examine the color bands starting with the one closest
to the end of the resistor.
FIRST
DIGIT
SECOND DIGIT NUMBER OF ZEROES (EXCEPT
WHEN SILVER OR GOLD)
TOLERANCE
Resistors are labeled with colored bands. The
colors of the bands represent numbers that
determine a resistor’s value. The fourth band
represents the resistor’s tolerance.
Color First Band Second Band Third Band*
Black — 0 —
Brown 1 1 0
Red 2 2 00
Orange 3 3 000
Yellow 4 4 0,000
Green 5 5 00,000
Blue 6 6 000,000
Violet 7 7 0,000,000
Gray 8 8 00,000,000
White 9 9 000,000,000
*Add this many zeroes after the first two numbers.
If you need help remembering the order of the colors in this chart, you
can memorize this simple sentence, in which each word begins with the
same letter as the color: “Better Be Right Or Your Great Big Venture
Goes West.”


ELECTRONICS 41
.Schematic Diagrams
Resistor
Suppose a resistor has a brown, a black, and then a
brown band. The code chart shown here tells you that brown
represents the number 1. The second black band represents the
number 0. The third band tells you how many zeroes to add to
the first two numbers. In the example, the band is brown, so
you add one zero. Therefore, the value of this resistor is 1-0-0,
or 100 ohms.
Now try the example for the resistor
shown here, which has a red band first,
then a yellow band, and then an orange
band. The red band means that the first
number is 2. The yellow band corresponds
to the number 4. The orange band tells us
to add three zeroes. Thus, the value is 2-4-
000, which translates to 24,000 ohms, or 24
kilohms (kΩ).
Most surface mount components are
too small for color bands, so the color bands
are converted back to digits and printed
onto the top of the resistor as 243 for 24,000
ohms, or 24 kilohms (kΩ).
Resistors in an old radio





ELECTRONICS 43
.Soldering
Soldering
Before you begin working with a circuit, read and study this
chapter on soldering. Anyone working in electronics must
know how to solder well, and safely. It takes practice, but
once you learn, you will be able to properly assemble an
electronics project.
In all electronics work, the wiring connections must be
absolutely secure. A loose connection in a radio, for example,
could result in noise, scratching sounds, or no sounds at all.
Poor connections in a TV could disrupt the sound and picture.
And beyond just a radio and
a TV in someone’s home, the
safe operation of airplanes
and the lives of astronauts
in flight depend on secure
electronics connections.
Soldering is not just
gluing metals together like
you glue together pieces of
wood. Done correctly,
soldering unites the metals
so that electrically they
act as one piece of metal.
You do this with a mixture
of lead and tin solder and
a soldering iron.
Review the “Soldering Safety” tips on the next
page before you begin your soldering work on
requirement 3.


44 ELECTRONICS
Soldering.
Soldering Safety Tips
• Solder only under the constant
supervision of a responsible and
knowledgeable adult.
• Make sure that the power is off on the project
being soldered.
• Certain kinds of solder release fumes that can
be harmful to your eyes and lungs; therefore,
always work with solder in a well-ventilated area.
• Do not allow anyone to drink, eat, or smoke in
the soldering area.
• Wear safety goggles when soldering.
• Before you start soldering, protect any flamma-
ble material with a fireproof shield or wet rags,
and have a fire extinguisher nearby.
• Be careful not to let hot solder splash around
because it will burn you almost instantly.
• If possible, use a soldering iron stand or clamps
when you are soldering, leaving one hand free
to hold the solder.
• Don’t overheat components, circuit boards, or
plastic wires when soldering.
• Oxidation (rust) develops more rapidly when a
soldering iron is hot, so try to make sure the iron
doesn’t stay hot for long periods of time.
• Never touch the tip of a hot soldering iron; keep
the iron in a holder when you aren’t using it.
Don’t lay it down on your bench or work area.
• Never leave a soldering iron on unattended.
• When you are finished soldering and cleaning
up, thoroughly wash your hands.
Soldering
surface mount
components is
not covered in
this pamphlet.
With parent
or guardian’s
permission,
search online for
“how to solder
surface mount
components” to
learn how.


ELECTRONICS 45
.Soldering
The Soldering Iron
An inexpensive pencil-type soldering iron of no more than
40-watt capacity (15 to 25 watts are also suitable) is the best for
electronics work. The tip should be 1 to 2 millimeters (mm);
the solder should be 1 mm. It is helpful to get an iron with
interchangeable tips of different diameters or shapes to be used
on different kinds of work. The iron should be well-balanced
and have a handle that will remain cool while you work.
Tinning your iron means coating the tip of the solder
iron with a thin coat of solder. If your iron is new, read the
instructions about preparing it for use. Most new irons are
already tinned, so you might not have to tin it. If the tips are
silvery, you can use them as they are.
If instructions aren’t included with your iron and the tip
is not silvery, first use a fine file to file the tip until it is shiny.
Then heat the iron and coat the tip with rosin-core solder. Be
sure to coat all sides of the tip.
If you have an older iron that has been used and the point
is already silvery, just wipe it clean with a cloth and you are
ready for work. If it is dull or looks coppery, file and tin it.
You also should have a heat-resistant bench-type iron
holder so that the hot iron can safely be set down between
uses. Look for one that has a holder for tip-cleaning sponges.
How to Solder
A well-soldered joint, one that will be reliable in use, will be
nice and shiny looking. To achieve a well-soldered joint, make
sure you do the following:
1. Solder with a clean, well-tinned tip. Wipe the tip on
a damp sponge before soldering and between soldering.
2. Make sure all wires, parts, and the circuit board to be
soldered are clean.
3. Make a good mechanical joint before soldering.
4. Allow the joint to get hot enough before applying solder,
then apply an adequate amount of solder to the joint. Only
heat the joint with the solder iron, not the solder itself.
When you touch the solder to the joint, the solder will flow
onto the joint
5. Allow the solder to set before handling or moving
soldered parts.


46 ELECTRONICS
Soldering.
Remember that in preparing work for soldering, dirt is
the enemy of soldering. A solder will not take if parts are dirty,
so be sure to completely clean all wires and surfaces before
applying solder. Use fine sandpaper or emery paper to clean flat
surfaces or wire. If you do have dirty parts or a dirty surface,
you might try to use too much heat to force a connection.
When preparing wires, remove the insulation with wire
strippers or a hobby knife. If using a knife, hold the knife at an
angle as if you were sharpening a pencil. Do not cut straight
into the insulation because you could nick the wire and weaken
it. For enameled wire, use the back of the knife blade to scrape
the wire until it is clean and bright.
Next, tin the clean end of the wire. Hold the heated tip
of the soldering iron against the undersurface of the wire, and
place the end of the rosin-core solder against the upper surface.
As the solder melts, it will flow on to the clean end of the
wire. Hold the hot tip of the iron against the under surface of
the tinned wire and remove the excess solder by letting it flow
down the tip. When properly tinned, the exposed surface of
the wire should be covered with a thin, even coating of solder.
If you take the time and make the effort to solder a
perfect joint, you might save a lot of time later in
trying to troubleshoot problems with your circuit.
Remember that no amount of cleaning will allow
you to solder to aluminum. When making a con-
nection to a sheet of aluminum, you must connect
the wire by a solder lug or a screw.
Before you begin, secure your work so that it won’t
move during soldering. With circuit boards, you
could use holding frames. Use a modeler’s small
vice to hold other parts.


ELECTRONICS 47
.Soldering
Unless you are creating a temporary joint, the
next step is to make a good mechanical connection
between the parts to be soldered. For instance, wrap
the wire carefully and tightly around a soldering
terminal or soldering lug. (Bend wire and make con-
nections using long-nosed pliers.) When connecting
two wires, make a tight splice before soldering. Once
you have made a good mechanical contact, you are
ready to solder.
When you are working with an ordinary circuit
board, you will bend the wires of a component through
the board. For those parts, such as some resistors, that
become hot when in operation, raise them slightly
above the board to allow some air circulation.
The next step is to apply the soldering iron and
solder to the connection. The temperature of all the
parts that are being soldered should be raised to about
the same degree before applying the solder. If solder-
ing a spliced wire, hold the iron below the splice and
apply solder to the top of the splice. If the tip of the
iron has a bit of melted solder on the side held against
the splice, heat is transferred more readily to the splice,
and the soldering can be done more easily. Don’t
try to solder by applying solder to the joint and then
pressing down on it with the iron.
It usually takes two to three seconds to solder on
a printed circuit board. Remember: Too much solder
on a joint might cause short circuits with adjacent
joints. However, if you don’t apply enough solder, you
might not form a secure and fully working joint.
When soldering the wires of a component, you
might snip the extra wire leads off before soldering.
However, with some components, such as semi-
conductors, it might be best to snip the surplus
wire after you have made the joint.
Don’t disturb the soldered joint until the solder
has set. This might take several seconds, depending
on the amount of solder used to make the joint Then
take a good look at the joint. It should have a shiny,
smooth appearance. It should not be pitted or grainy.
If it is, then reheat the joint, scrape off the solder,
clean the connection, and start over.
Heat the wire and
the lug.
Apply solder to
both the tip and
the connection.
Attach the wire to a
soldering terminal or
soldering lug.


48 ELECTRONICS
Soldering.
After the solder is well set, pull slightly on the wire to see
whether it is a good, tight connection.
How to Desolder
In case you accidentally make a wrong connection or have to
move a component that has been placed incorrectly, you should
learn how to desolder connections. Take care when desoldering
to avoid breaking or destroying good parts. The leads on
components such as resistors or transistors and the lugs on
other parts might sometimes break off when desoldering a good,
tight joint. To avoid heat damage, use as much care in
desoldering delicate parts as you do in soldering them.
There are two ways to desolder. The first and usually
easiest way is to use a metal wick or braid on a small dispenser
reel to remove the melted solder. This braid is available at most
electronics parts stores. Place the braid against the joint that you
want to desolder. Use your heated soldering iron to gently press
the braid against the joint. As the solder melts, it is pulled into
the braid. Don’t let the joint cool while the
braid is resting against the joint. By repeating
this process, you can remove virtually all the
solder from the joint. Then reheat the joint
and lift off the component leads.
The second method involves using a
desoldering pump, or a vacuum device, to
suck up the molten solder. Most electronics
parts stores have these devices. Follow the
manufacturer’s instructions for the pump you
are using, but here are some general guide-
lines. Use your soldering iron to heat the joint
you want to desolder until the solder melts.
Desoldering braid
Let the connection harden
before moving the wire. Check
for a smooth, bright joint.
Poor connections look crystalline and
grainy, or the solder tends to blob.


ELECTRONICS 49
.Soldering
Then push down on the top of the pump to remove the air
inside. Next, quickly place the tip of the pump on the melted
solder you want to remove and press the button on the side.
This will cause the pump’s plunger to rise rapidly and create a
vacuum inside. The rush of air at the tip of the pump will pull
the melted solder in. Repeat until you have removed most of the
molten solder. Then reheat the joint and gently pry off the wires.
Experiment with and practice your soldering techniques to
fulfill requirement 3 before you begin working on your circuit.
Use pieces of wire or some old components and wire. Practice
until you can solder joints that are smooth, shiny, and tight.
Then practice desoldering some of the connections until you
are satisfied that you can do them quickly and without
breaking wires or lugs.
It’s important to responsibly dispose of solder
waste, which should be either recycled or treated
as hazardous waste because it contains lead. It
cannot be disposed of in your regular trash
collection bin. As you desolder, collect the waste
in a container clearly marked as solder waste—
including the solder from your sponge or
work towel. Throw your sponge or towel away.
Contact local authorities for information about
the proper disposal of solder waste in your area.
Remember these things
when desoldering:
• Be sure there is a little melted
solder on the tip of your iron so that
the joint will heat quickly.
• Work quickly and carefully to avoid damaging
parts with heat. Use long-nosed pliers to hold
the leads of components just as you did
while soldering.
• When loosening a wire head, be careful not to
bend the lug or tie point to which it is attached.
Desoldering
pump


50 ELECTRONICS
Soldering.
Soldering Printed Circuit Boards
Most electronic devices use one or more
printed circuit (PC) boards. A PC board is
made of a nonconducting material, such as a
thin sheet of fiberglass or phenolic resin
(plastic) that has a pattern of foil conduc-
tors “printed” on it and has predrilled holes
designed to hold components. You insert
component leads into the holes and solder
the leads to the foil pattern. This method of
assembly is widely used, and you probably
will use it if you choose to work with an
electronics kit.
Printed circuit boards make assembly
easier. First, insert component leads through
the correct holes in the board. Mount the
parts tightly against the circuit board unless
otherwise directed. Insert a lead and then
bend it slightly outward to hold the part in
place. Then follow these steps.
Step 1—Touch the tip of your soldering iron
to both the component lead and the foil
until they are uniformly hot enough to melt
the solder.
Step 2—Apply a small amount of solder to
both the tip and the connection.
Step 3—Remove the iron and let the solder
set before moving the wire or the board. The
finished connection, as you have learned,
should be smooth and shiny.
If you happen to get burned while soldering,
• Quickly cool the burned area with cold running water, an ice pack,
or something frozen (such as a bag of peas) until the pain is gone.
• Apply a sterile dressing to help protect against infection.
• Do not apply any ointments or lotions.
• Seek medical advice from your doctor if the burn is severe.
1
2
3


ELECTRONICS 51
.Soldering
Step 4—Finally, clip off the excess
wire length.
Occasionally a solder “bridge” will form
when solder connects between two adjacent
foil conductors. You must remove such bridges
or a short circuit will exist between the two
conductors and the circuit won’t function
properly. Remove the bridge by heating it
with your soldering iron and quickly wiping
away the melted solder with a soft cloth.
Be sure to remove all solder “bridges,”
which can cause short circuits.
A hole on the board could get
plugged by solder. Clear the hole by
heating the solder while pushing a
component lead through the hole
from the other side of the board.
Caring for Your Soldering Iron
• Keep your soldering iron cleaned and well-tinned.
• Keep a damp cloth or sponge on your workbench. Before soldering
a connection, wipe the tip of the iron across the damp cloth or
sponge and then touch some fresh solder to the tip.
• The tip eventually will become worn or pitted. Repair minor wear
by filing the tip back into shape. Be sure to tin the tip immediately
after filing it. If the tip is badly worn or pitted, replace it.
• Oxidation forms on the tip rapidly when the iron is hot, so don’t
keep the iron heated for long periods when you aren’t using it.
• Don’t try cooling the iron rapidly with ice or water. This could
damage the heating element, and water might get into the barrel
and cause rust.
4





ELECTRONICS 53
.Control Devices
Control Devices
An important application of electronics is the control of certain
operations with the use of control devices. For example, control
devices can make lights go on at certain times or open doors
automatically. To satisfy requirement 4, you will build a working
electronic circuit. You may choose to build a control device.
Building a Control Device From Scratch
You can build a control project from a kit, but you may want
to build a project from scratch. The one shown is easy to build
and fun to use. It is a control circuit that uses light to control
an audible alarm. This is a popular type of control circuit. It
could be used to detect when the sun is shining so you
can turn out your lights and save power.
The circuit is constructed on the single piece
of 3-by-4-inch perforated board. While the exact
size is not critical, a board that is too big is
better than one that is too small. The holes in
the board need to be 1/10 inch apart. This is
necessary so that the pins of the op amp will fit.
Many types of boards are available. The
board used (and shown in the photographs) for this
project has foil patterns designed especially for integrated
circuits, which makes the project easier. To use this type of
board, insert components through the board from the top and
solder to the foil patterns on the bottom of the board. You
make connections from one component to the next by using
short wires called jumpers.
Allow several days to find and buy the necessary
parts before you start building your circuit. See the
resources section in the back of this pamphlet for
information about suppliers.
This control
circuit uses
light to control
an alarm.


54 ELECTRONICS
Control Devices.
Procedure
To build this circuit, follow these steps.
Step 1—Gather the parts. You may be able
to buy parts at an electronics supply store,
but more easily today you can purchase
electronic components online (see the
resources section at the back of this book).
It’s a good idea to make sure you can find
all the parts before you buy any of them.
This circuit will work with a wide variety
of parts.
Step 2—Lay out the circuit board. Before
you begin, decide where each component
will go on the board. The illustration here
shows a suggested layout. Lay the compo-
nents on the board and trace the outline
of each to make sure everything will
fit properly.
Step 3—Drill the holes. You must drill
several holes (see the illustration for the
pattern) in the circuit board before mount-
ing any components. The four holes at the
outer corners are for the four standoffs, or
legs, that will hold the circuit board. It is
recommended that you buy a board that
has these four holes already drilled. This
will leave you with only three holes to drill.
The first is the small hole for the
battery holder. Make this hole slightly larger
than the screw that holds the battery holder
to the board. Two larger holes are required
for the potentiometer and the switch. In
each case, make the hole slightly larger
than the part that is to be inserted through
it. Drill the holes carefully so you don’t
damage the perforated board.
Step 4—Mount the IC. Attach the 741 op
amp first. It must be mounted so that its
pins are attached to foil patterns that allow
additional components to be attached.
Insert the IC in the top of the board.
Parts Needed
■■ R1 100 kΩ
potentiometer
■■ R2 100 kΩ resistor
■■ R3 10 kΩ resistor
■■ R4 4.7 kΩ resistor
Note: R2, R3, and R4 can be
5 percent or 10 percent
tolerance and either 1/2 or
1/4 watt.
■■ LDR Light-dependent
resistor, cadmium-
sulfide photocell
■■ Q1 NPN transistor
type 2N3053
■■ IC1 741 operational
amplifier (op amp)
■■ PB Piezoelectric buzzer
■■ S1 Single-pole,
single-throw switch
■■ Perforated board approx-
imately 3 × 4 inches
(described on page 53)
■■ Four standoffs (legs)
and screws
■■ Battery holder for
9-volt battery
■■ 9-volt battery
■■ Battery clip for
9-volt battery
■■ 4 feet of No. 24
insulated wire


ELECTRONICS 55
.Control Devices
Identify pin 1 of the 741 Op amp IC as
illustrated on the top of the next page.
Mark pin 1 on the board with a pencil
so that it is easier to identify each of the
pins as you solder components to them.
Step 5—Mount the LDR. Insert the
leads of the light-dependent resistor into
the board at the location shown and
solder the leads to the foil. Don’t worry
about which lead is which. The LDR
can be turned either way.
Step 6—Mount R2, R3, and R4. Insert the
leads of the resistors at the locations shown.
Bend the leads over so that you can insert
them through the board and solder them to the
bottom side. Don’t worry about which lead is
which. The resistors can be turned either way.
Step 7—Mount the transistor.
Insert the transistor (Q1) into the board, care-
fully observing the emitter,
base, and collector connec-
tions. The drawing illustrating
the 2N3053 transistor seen at
the bottom of the page shows
how to identify the three
elements.
Step 8—Mount the buzzer.
Insert the buzzer (PB) through
the board. Note that the minus
(–) and plus (+) sides must
be connected as shown in
the schematic.
Step 9—Mount the switch. First remove the retaining
nut. Mount the switch by pushing it through from the
bottom of the board. Attach it to the board with the
retaining nut. Cut two lengths of wire, each about
3 inches long. Remove 1/4 inch of the insulation from
each end of the wire. Turn the board upside down and
connect the center switch post to a foil pattern using a
prepared wire and one of the side of the switch posts
to another foil pattern using the other wire.
Hole pattern
2N3053 viewed
from bottom
COLLECTOR
BASE
EMITTER
Schematic diagram, circuit board
S1
R2
100K
R1
100K
R4
4.7K
R3
10K
Q1
IC1 741
7
6
4
2
3
PB +
-
+
-
+
-
9V
LDR
SWITCH LDR
BATTERY
BUZZERR1
R2 R4
R3
Q1
IC1
Suggested layout


56 ELECTRONICS
Control Devices.
Step 10—Mount the potentiometer. Remove the retain-
ing nut. Mount the potentiometer (R1) by pushing it
through from the bottom of the board. Attach it to the
board with the retaining nut. Cut three lengths of wire,
each about 3 inches long. Remove 1/4 inch of insulation
from each end of the wire. Turn the board upside down
and connect the potentiometer lugs to the foil patterns
by using the three prepared wires as seen in the top
view shown here.
Step 11—Mount the battery holder.
Step 12—Mount the battery clip. Strip 1/4 inch of insulation
from the ends of the battery clip’s black and red leads.
Solder the black and red leads to the board. Do not connect
the battery yet.
Step 13—Interconnect each of the components using small
jumper wires, being sure each wire is electrically connected
between the correct components. A good way to do this is to
refer to the schematic and color each line on the schematic as
you connect that jumper wire on the board. Cut each wire to
the length needed and remove 1/4 inch of insulation from each
end of the wire. Insert the jumper from the top of the board
and solder to the foil on the bottom.
Step 14—Check all wiring. Before you apply power, recheck
all wiring as described in the soldering section. Make certain
that all components are interconnected properly. Check the pins
of the op amp to make certain that you have the pin numbers
right. Also recheck the placement of the transistor (Q1).
Step 15—Apply power. Attach the battery clip to the battery. If
the buzzer sounds, flip the on-off switch to the opposite posi-
tion. Place the battery in the holder.
Step 16—Coarse-adjust R1. Flip the on-off switch to the “on”
position. If the buzzer does not sound, adjust the potentiometer
until you hear a sound from the buzzer. If you cannot make
the buzzer sound by turning the potentiometer, flip the switch
in the “off” position and adjust the potentiometer until the
buzzer sounds. If the buzzer will not sound in either switch
position, then immediately disconnect the battery and recheck
all wiring. Correct the problem by rewiring as necessary.
Repeat the process until you hear a tone from the buzzer.
1 2 3 4
741
8 7 6 5
Viewed from top


ELECTRONICS 57
.Control Devices
Step 17—Fine-adjust R1. Once you get a sound from the
buzzer, cover the LDR with a finger to block light from the
device. With the LDR covered, back off the setting of the
potentiometer just to the point where the buzzer no longer
sounds. The buzzer should now sound when the LDR is
uncovered but stop buzzing when the LDR is covered. The
circuit is detecting the presence of light and responding by
sounding the buzzer.
Circuit Operation
To understand how the circuit works, refer to the schematic
diagram shown on the previous page. Start at the buzzer (PB)
and work backward. The buzzer will sound when current
flows through it. Transistor Q1 controls the current through the
buzzer. When Q1 conducts, current flows through Q1 and the
buzzer, creating the sound. In turn, the 741 op amp controls
Q1. The 741 (IC1) is an integrated circuit that contains dozens
of transistors connected as a very high-gain amplifier. This
means that it can amplify extremely tiny differences in the
voltages applied to the two input terminals (pins 2 and 3).
The resistance of the light-dependent resistor (LDR)
determines the voltage on pin 3 of the op amp. If no light
strikes the LDR, the resistance across the LDR is high, which
causes the voltage at pin 3 of the op amp to be low. When
light hits the LDR, its resistance falls and the voltage on pin 3
of the op amp increases.
Before using the circuit, in steps 16 and 17, you adjusted
the setting of R1. Moving the arm of R1 changes the voltage at
pin 2 of the op amp. With the LDR shielded from light, you set
R1 just below the point at which the buzzer is activated. When
R1 is properly set, the voltage at pin 3 is slightly lower than
the voltage at pin 2. The op amp amplifies this tiny difference
in voltage and produces a very low voltage at its output. This
low output voltage holds Q1 cut off so that no current can flow
through the buzzer.
When light hits the LDR, as was noted, its resistance
drops. This increases the voltage at pin 3 of the op amp. The
op amp amplifies this difference, producing a high voltage at
its output. This turns Q1 on, forcing current through the
buzzer and sounding the alarm.





ELECTRONICS 59
.Digital Electronics
Digital Electronics
Since the use of transistors began in 1948, the field of electronics
has undergone a revolution that continues to allow for the
introduction of a vast array of new devices. The development
of digital electronic components has revolutionized fields such
as computing, communications, and information handling.
Such components have replaced many traditional circuits
and components.
Possibly the best example of this revolution is the personal
computer and related products. Other examples are digital
watches, digital thermometers, hand-held computers and games,
complex calculators, electronic games, televisions, and digitally
recorded music and videos.


60 ELECTRONICS
Digital Electronics.
Binary Number System
To understand digital electronics, you must first learn the
binary number system, which is used in digital equipment.
The decimal system of numbering uses 10 different digits:
0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9. This number system is suitable
for people but is too complex to be used by electronic circuits.
Digital logic is a simple process that can make only two
decisions: true or false. So the binary number system has
only two digits: 0 and 1. Thus, “true” can be represented by 1
and “false” by 0.
With only two digits, how are numbers larger than 1
represented? The answer is the same way numbers greater
than 9 are represented in the decimal system. In the decimal
system, the highest single-digit number is 9. We represent
numbers greater than this by using two or more digits in combi-
nation. That is, 10 is represented by using the
digits 1 and 0 together.
In the binary system, the highest single-
digit number is 1. To represent numbers
greater than this, we again use two or more
digits in combination. The number 2 cannot
be represented by the symbol “2” because this
digit is not used in the binary system. Instead,
the digits 1 and 0 must be used together, to
form 10. Therefore, in the binary system, 10
represents the number 2 and not the number
“ten.” The number 3 is represented by the
next larger two-digit number of 11.
Now, how do we represent the number 4
in binary? Since we no longer have two-digit
possibilities, we must use a three-digit number.
The lowest three-digit number is 100. In the
decimal system, this means “one hundred.” In
the binary system, 100 means “four.”
Here is a chart showing decimal numbers
up to 17 and how to represent them using the
binary system.
Study this table to help you understand
the binary sequence. Then try to continue the
list to 32 (decimal), or 100000 (binary).
Decimal Binary
0 0
1 1
2 10
3 11
4 100
5 101
6 110
7 111
8 1000
9 1001
10 1010
11 1011
12 1100
13 1101
14 1110
15 1111
16 10000
17 10001


ELECTRONICS 61
.Digital Electronics
Let’s convert the decimal number 8 to binary. You start by dividing
8 by 2, and then keep dividing the answer you get by 2.
8 divided by 2 = 4 with a remainder of 0
4 divided by 2 = 2 with a remainder of 0
2 divided by 2 = 1 with a remainder of 0
1 divided by 2 = 0 with a remainder of 1
We arrange the remainders like this: 1 0 0 0
This gives the binary number for 8: 1000. Check the decimal/binary chart
shown earlier to make sure you are correct.
To practice again, convert 13 to a binary number.
13 divided by 2 = 6 with a remainder of 1
6 divided by 2 = 3 with a remainder of 0
3 divided by 2 = 1 with a remainder of 1
1 divided by 2 = 0 with a remainder of 1
Arrange the remainders: 1 1 0 1
Check the decimal/binary chart and you will see that 1101 is the binary
equivalent of 13.
Changing Decimal to Binary
If you can divide by 2, you can convert decimal numbers to
binary numbers. By repeatedly dividing a number, we can
convert from decimal to binary. Remember that an even
number divided by 2 will have a remainder of 0. An odd
number divided by 2 will have a remainder of 1.


62 ELECTRONICS
Digital Electronics.
Changing Binary to Decimal
Changing numbers in the opposite direction is just as easy.
Try some conversions on your own, checking the answers
on the decimal/binary chart.
Logic Circuits
Digital electronic devices consist of circuits called logic gates. A
logic gate is a collection of transistors and resistors connected
to perform a desired operation. The three basic types of logic
gates are the AND gate, the OR gate, and the inverter, or NOT.
The AND Gate
The simplest AND gate has two inputs and one output. This
circuit examines the input voltage levels and produces an
appropriate output voltage level. Digital systems use the binary
number system. Therefore, only two voltage levels are used.
One voltage level stands for the number 0, and the otherAND gates
Let’s convert the binary number 1001 to its decimal equivalent. In a way,
we will do the opposite of what we just did; that is, instead of dividing
by 2, we’ll multiply by 2. First, write the binary number with the digits
spread apart, like this:
1 0 1 1
Under the digit on the right, write the number 1. Multiply 1 by 2; the
answer is 2. Write 2 under the next number. Multiply 2 by 2 (equals 4),
and write 4 under the next number. Multiply 4 by 2 (equals 8) and write 8
under the next number:
1 0 1 1
8 4 2 1
Now, add together the bottom numbers that appear under a 1.
In the example, 8, 2, and 1 are written under 1s, so 8 + 2 + 1 = 11. Check
the decimal/binary chart and you will see that 11 is the decimal number
for 1011.
Here’s another example. Convert the binary number 10110 to a
decimal number:
1 0 1 1 0
16 8 4 2 1
Adding the numbers under 1s, you get 16 + 4 + 2 = 22.


ELECTRONICS 63
.Digital Electronics
stands for the number 1. A common arrangement is to let 0
volts represent the number 0 and to let +5 volts represent the
number 1. An AND gate produces a 1 output only when all
inputs are 1s. Or, it could be said that the output of an AND
gate is true only if all inputs are true. So, for the arrangement
explained above, the output of the AND gate is +5 volts (1)
only when all inputs are +5 volts (1). If either input is 0 volts
(0), the output will be 0 volts (0).
This gate is called an AND gate because the output is 1
only if input one and input two are both 1s. Some AND gates
have more than two inputs. However, the operation performed
is the same. For this reason, the AND gate can be thought of as
an “all or nothing” decision circuit.
The illustration shows the logic symbol used in schematic
diagrams for the AND gate. The inputs are shown on the
straight side, the output on the curved side.
The OR Gate
The OR gate, which has two or more inputs and a single output,
also is a decision-making circuit. It produces a 1 (true) output
when any one or all of its inputs are 1. That is, it produces a
1 output when input one or input two or both inputs are 1s.
The only time the OR gate produces a 0 (false) output is when
all inputs are 0. Think of it as an “any or all” decision circuit
because if any or all of its inputs are 1, the output is 1.
Inverter
The inverter has a single input and a single output terminal. If
the input is 0, the output is 1. If the input is 1, the output is 0.
That is, the inverter reverses, or inverts, the input.
Other Gates
Two other types of logic gates are used in digital electronics.
One is the NAND gate. This circuit is composed of an AND
gate and an inverter that are connected together. The output of
the AND gate is applied to the input of the inverter as shown in
the diagram above right. The NAND gate is shown as an AND
gate with a bubble on the output to indicate that the result of
the AND operation is inverted.
The output of the OR gate is applied to the input of the
inverter as shown in the diagram above right. The NOR gate is
shown as an OR gate with a bubble on the output to indicate
that the result of the OR operation is inverted.
OR gates
NAND gate
Inverters
NOR gate
Logic gates
generally are
made in integrated
circuit form.
A single IC
package may
contain four
NAND gates
or six inverters.


64 ELECTRONICS
Digital Electronics.
Digital Equipment
Connected in various ways, the basic logic gates can perform
many different operations. Circuits have been devised to
count, add, subtract, remember numbers, and solve complex
problems. Large numbers of these circuits can be connected
to form an array of useful electronic equipment. Sometimes,
microprocessors perform many of the switching and timing
functions of individual logic elements. The processors are
programmed with instructions to perform a given task or
tasks. Let’s look at some popular digital devices.
Computers
A computer can rapidly solve a wide range of problems and
provide many other important functions. Computers are
complex enough to be used to control spacecraft and airliners
in flight. They are used in industry for calculating payrolls, for
keeping records, word processing, and for inventory control,
among other things. Besides “crunching numbers” for those
functions, computers also can store and process data that are
not mathematical in character. Such nonmathematical functions
include ticket control by airlines, library record-keeping, and
even translating languages.
In the 1950s, very few people had television sets. Now
almost everyone does. The same thing has happened with the
personal computer (PC) over the
past 25 years or so. Once rare, now
they are commonplace. Initially
designed for individual use, PCs can
be connected to form networks in a
single office or all over the world.
Laptop computer
with cover removed


ELECTRONICS 65
.Digital Electronics
Computers have essentially replaced the typewriter for writing
and have many other uses, such as for sending faxes, commu-
nicating through electronic mail (email), and drawing, as well
as for entertainment.
To use a computer, we must communicate with it. First,
a programmer must write a program, or a set of instructions,
that the computer’s processor can understand. The program is
designed to perform a needed task. The computer follows the
program’s instructions and performs the task. Most computer
programs are extremely complex and are developed by several
programmers at companies that specialize in developing these
programs. Consumers usually buy these programs in the form
of software. The computer and what it is connected with (such
as printers) are the hardware.
The user, or operator, communicates with the computer
through input devices such as a keyboard, a mouse, and a
monitor, which can resemble a small TV set. The user enters
information directly into the machine through the keyboard
or a touch screen and interacts with application programs that
usually have been stored on the PC’s storage device, such as a
hard disk (commonly called a hard drive). This is an inflexible
platter or platters that are coated with material that allows the
magnetic recording of data.


66 ELECTRONICS
Digital Electronics.
Electronic Calculators
A calculator uses the same type of arithmetic
circuits as a PC uses, but the method of entering
data and displaying the answer is more simplified.
The operations of early calculators were generally
limited to a few mathematical functions, but newer
ones can perform many complex functions.
Digital Clocks and Watches
Digital clocks and watches are replacing their
mechanical counterparts. In digital devices,
an extremely accurate oscillator produces
thousands of pulses each second. Electronic
circuits count these pulses and convert them
to a display of the time in hours, minutes,
and seconds. Smart watches with extremely
powerful microcontrollers and various types of
communications can do this function and many more.
Test Equipment and Other Devices
Digital techniques offer several advantages in
electronic test equipment (see the chapter “Electronic
Test Equipment” on page 75). Digital voltmeters
generally are more accurate and easier to read
than the meter-movement type of instrument.
Other test instruments include the frequency counter,
oscilloscope, multimeter, cable checker, and clamp meter.
Several other types of digital equipment are becoming
increasingly popular, especially in the fields of entertainment
and communications. Digital techniques now allow for better
TV reception, and digital techniques are used in electronic
musical instruments, audio and video recording, transmitters,
appliances, video games, and mobile phones.


ELECTRONICS 67
.Digital Electronics





ELECTRONICS 69
.Audio
Audio
The field of audio deals with frequencies that are within the
range of human hearing. Devices such as compact disc (CD)
players, DVD (digital versatile disc) players, MP3 (high-quality
sound files compressed into digital format) players, cassette
recorders, stereos, receivers, public address systems, and
electronic musical instruments are among audio equipment.
What Is Audio?
When we strike middle C key on a piano, the sound we hear is
caused by a vibrating wire. The wire vibrates about 260 times
each second. This causes the molecules in the air to vibrate at
the same rate, producing a mild shock wave that travels in all
directions. When the wave reaches us, our eardrums vibrate at
the same frequency. As a result, we hear a pleasing tone of the
same frequency produced by the piano.
Middle C frequency is about 260 cycles per second, or 260
hertz (Hz). The piano’s lowest note is about 27 Hz; the highest
is higher than 4,000 Hz. Most people easily hear both extremes.
A person with good ears can hear frequencies between 15 and


70 ELECTRONICS
Audio.
20,000 Hz. These extremes are considered the limits of the audio-
frequency range. Audio equipment is used to produce, record,
amplify, or reproduce frequencies in this range.
Most audio equipment falls in one of these categories:
• “Hi-fi stereo” field. A good CD player will faithfully
reproduce any sound within the audio range. That is, it
might have a frequency response from 15 to 20,000 Hz.
Newer technology includes DVD-audio and SACD (super
audio CD). DVD-audio has a frequency response up to
96,000 Hz, and SACD reaches 100,000 Hz.
• The spoken word. Public address systems and intercoms
are in this category. The human voice covers a narrow
frequency range (about 100 to 3,000 Hz), so the frequency
response of such systems need not cover the entire
audio range.
• Musical instruments. Electronic keyboards, synthesizers,
and electric guitars are examples. These instruments
produce a wide range of frequencies and can create
many special effects.
Audio Project
Low-cost electronics kits are available that will satisfy require-
ment 4. However, you can build a simple audio device from
scratch fairly easily, such as the electronic siren shown here.
It produces a sound similar to a police siren. The frequency
of the wail slowly increases as you hold down a push button,
and when you release the button, the frequency of the wail
slowly decreases.
Electronic siren


ELECTRONICS 71
.Audio
Circuit Operation and Construction
The schematic diagram shown here is for the electronic siren.
When S1 is closed, capacitor C1 begins to charge. As it does,
it makes the base of Q1 more and more positive. This slowly
turns on Q1. Current
through Q1 turns Q2 on;
Q1 and Q2 form a direct-
coupled amplifier.
Part of the output
from Q2 is applied to
the input of Q1 through
capacitor C2. This
provides the regenerative
(restoring) feedback
that causes the circuit
to oscillate (fluctuate).
When switch S1 is
opened, C1 discharges
Parts Needed
■■ Capacitor C1 50 microfarads, 12 volts, electrolytic
■■ Capacitor C2 0.018 microfarad, 25 volts or greater
■■ Transistor Q1 NPN, SK-3020 or equivalent
■■ Transistor Q2 PNP, SK-3009 or equivalent
■■ Resistor R1 27 kΩ, 1/2 watt, 10%
■■ Resistor R2 68 kΩ, 1/2 watt, 10%
■■ Resistor R3 56 kΩ, 1/2 watt, 10%
■■ Resistor R4 470 ohms, 1/2 watt, 10%
■■ Switch S1 Single-pole, push-button
■■ Switch S2 Single-pole, single-throw
■■ Speaker 3.2 to 8.0 ohms
■■ 9-volt battery
■■ Battery clip
■■ Perforated board
■■ Terminal posts (optional)
BOTTOM
VIEW S1
S2
9V
R1
27K
R2
68K
B
B
E
E
C
C
Q1
Q1
B
B
E
E
C
C
Q2
Q2
C1
50μF
12V
R3
56K
R4
470
C2
.018μF
Schematic diagram, electronic siren


72 ELECTRONICS
Audio.
through R2 and the base of Q1. You can change the “wailing
rate” of the siren by changing the values of R1 and C1. An
increase in the value of R1 or C1 lengthens the time period
during which the frequency of oscillation increases.
Battery drain with switch S1 open is only about 400 micro-
amperes. Therefore, power switch S2 is not necessary. But such
a switch will add to battery life.
You can get good results by building the circuit on a
perforated board. All components except the speaker mount
on top of the board. The illustration here shows all wiring
connections as viewed from the bottom of the board. You
can place the completed unit in a plastic box, or simply
support the board on standoffs (legs) as shown.
Wiring connections, bottom view
C2
S2
R1 R2 R3 R4
C1
S1
Q1
ON-OFF SWITCH
9-VOLT
BATTERY
SPEAKER
B
B
E
E
C
C
Q1
Q2
Q2


ELECTRONICS 73
.Audio





ELECTRONICS 75
.Electronic Test Equipment
Electronic Test
Equipment
Test equipment includes the instruments that are used to
diagnose the operation of electronic circuits. The most popular
types of test equipment are meters, oscilloscopes, and signal
generators. You should use such equipment with someone who
has experience using electronic test equipment.
Meters
Meter movement. In electronics, meters are used to measure
current, voltage, and resistance. Both analog and digital meters
are popular, although digital meters continue to replace most
analog meters. Digital meters are considered easier to use and
to read.
You have learned how basic digital technology works.
How does an analog meter work? The heart of the analog
meter is the meter movement. The meter movement consists
of a coil of fine wire wound on a tight aluminum frame. The
frame is suspended and free to rotate. The coil has leads
attached so that current can be forced through it. The coil is
suspended in the field of a permanent magnet. When current
flows through the coil, a magnetic field develops around it. This
field interacts with the field of the permanent magnet. The
interaction of the two fields causes the coil assembly to rotate.
In electronics, analog means a device or signal
that is continuously varying in strength or quantity,
such as a sound wave, rather than being based on
separate units, such as used in the binary system
of 0 and 1.


76 ELECTRONICS
.Electronic Test Equipment.
The coil has a pointer attached to it, and as the coil rotates,
it moves the pointer in front of a scale. The more current that
flows through the coil, the farther the coil will rotate. This
forces the pointer to move farther up the scale.
Ammeter. The ammeter is designed to measure current. The
meter movement alone can be used as an ammeter. Normally,
though, a range switch is added so that the meter can measure
a wide range of current. The schematic for the ammeter shows
a shunt. A shunt is a small value resistor that acts as a bypass.
It detours some of the current around the meter movement.
We can change the range of the ammeter by using a different
value shunt across the meter movement.
An ammeter is delicate and easily damaged. It must be
connected to the circuit so that the current to be measured
flows through the meter. For this reason, the circuit being
tested must be broken to insert the ammeter.
SCALE
POINTER
LEFT RETAINING PIN
PERMANENT MAGNET
SPIRAL SPRING
SOFT-IRON CORE
RIGHT RETAINING PIN
ZERO-ADJUST SCREW
COUNTERWEIGHTS
MOVING COIL
FULL-SCALE
DEFLECTION
Analog meter movement


ELECTRONICS 77
..Electronic Test Equipment
Voltmeter. The voltmeter is designed to measure voltage and
uses the same type of meter movement as an ammeter. The
voltmeter is connected across the voltage to be measured. To
measure voltage between two points, touch the negative lead
to the more negative point and the positive lead to the more
positive point. The circuit under test need not be broken or
interfered with in any way.
A low voltage can be applied directly to the meter move-
ment. A higher voltage, however, might cause a high enough
current to burn out the delicate coil. For this reason, a large-
value resistor is connected in series with the meter movement.
This resistor limits the amount of current flowing through the
coil. Also, the meter should be set at the proper range. For
instance, you shouldn’t try to measure 100 volts with the meter
set to the 1-volt range. Use the meter set on the high range if
you are unsure of the voltage being measured.
The range of the voltmeter is changed by switching differ-
ent values of resistors in series with the meter movement. On a
given range, the voltage across the connected leads determines
the current that flows through the meter. The meter scale can
be marked off in volts.
When using a
voltmeter, hold the
meter leads only
by the insulated
portions to
avoid getting an
electrical shock.
Schematic of an ammeter
– +
1mA
METER MOVEMENT
SHUNT
Schematic of an ammeter


78 ELECTRONICS
.Electronic Test Equipment.
Ohmmeter. The ohmmeter measures resistance. It consists
of a meter movement and a battery connected together. The
ohmmeter should not be connected to a circuit that has power
applied because the meter could be easily burned out if it is
connected across a voltage.
The resistance to be measured is connected across
the ohmmeter leads. The battery forces current through the
resistance and through the meter movement. The amount of
current depends on the resistance value under test. The range
of the ohmmeter can be adjusted. For example, if the range
is R × 1, then a reading of 9 would measure 9 ohms. But if
the range is set at R × 1,000, then a 9 reading would mean
9,000 ohms (or 9 kΩ).
Multimeter. The three types of meters we have just looked
at use the same type of meter movement. For this reason, the
ammeter, voltmeter, and ohmmeter can be combined in a
single instrument called a multimeter, which displays the
values of voltage, current, and resistance. A switch changes
the meter movement from one function to the other. The
multimeter is the most common piece of test equipment
used in electronics work.
Schematic of an ohmmeter
μA
METER MOVEMENT
SERIES RESISTANCE
TEST PROBES
UNKNOWN RESISTANCE
BATTERY
R1
R2
(RX)
–
+
Schematic of an ohmmeter


ELECTRONICS 79
..Electronic Test Equipment
These days, digital multimeters are the most popular.
Schematic of a multimeter
CURRENT
VOLTS
OHMS
FUNCTION
SWITCH
RANGE
SWITCH
R1
50μA
2000Ω
100mA8 7
R4
S2
4
5
L0 Ω 1.5V R7 22K
R8R9
HI Ω
B2
B1
270K
6K
18K
1.8M
R5
R6
198K
10mA
6
S1
1V
1
10V
2 100V
3
1mA
R2 10Ω
1Ω
R3 105Ω
TEST PROBES


80 ELECTRONICS
.Electronic Test Equipment.
Oscilloscopes and Signal Generators
An oscilloscope looks something like a small TV, but the screen,
or cathode-ray tube (CRT), shows voltage wave shapes. This
lets you know how the voltage in a circuit changes over time.
Oscilloscope


ELECTRONICS 81
..Electronic Test Equipment
Signal generator
Many different types of signal generators are used in elec-
tronics. The most common are used to align communications
equipment and diagnose problems. These signal generators
act as tiny replicas of transmitting stations. They allow service
technicians to inject the proper type of signal at various points
throughout the circuit. For this reason, the signal generator is a
valuable troubleshooting aid. Many of today’s signal generators
can be hooked up to a PC, and the diagnosis can be seen on
the computer monitor.





ELECTRONICS 83
.Careers in Electronics
Careers in Electronics
The electronics industry has several general areas with many
types of careers available in each area. These areas include
manufacturing, merchandising, operating, servicing or
maintaining, and engineering electronic parts and equipment.
Training requirements vary
in each area. Some positions
require a college degree, while
a degree from a vocational
school is adequate for other
careers. Some companies
allow on-the-job training,
but almost all require at least
a high school diploma.
In electronics manufacturing,
most positions are in factories.
Occupations include assemblers,
that is, the people who help
build electronic equipment. A
high school education is needed
as well as mechanical aptitude.
Merchandising, or sales,
is another field for those
interested in electronics.
Someone who has technical
knowledge and enjoys talking
with and meeting people could
do well in electronics sales.
Education can include a high
school diploma or degrees
from vocational schools
and/or college.


84 ELECTRONICS
.Careers in Electronics.
Many types of electronics equipment are so specialized
that they require trained operators. An operator might work
with computers and computer network systems, cameras,
satellite tracking devices, ship radios, or medical machines. In
some cases, the operators must maintain and repair their own
equipment. Education in a vocational school, a degree from
a college or university, or training in the military usually is
needed for these positions.
Because of the complexity of many electronic machines,
service and maintenance people are always needed. Any
electronic device can fail or malfunction from time to time, and
people are needed to make quick and expert repairs.


ELECTRONICS 85
..Careers in Electronics
Technicians can have a variety of positions. They might
be required, among other things, to turn engineering ideas
into hardware, to repair equipment, or to calibrate (adjust)
test instruments. Most technicians have one or two years of
technical training after high school. Some receive training in
the military, and others go to a vocational school or junior
college. Some receive on-the-job training or study at home by
correspondence. Many occupations require continuous training
so that technicians remain current with changing technology.
Electronic engineers usually have a bachelor’s degree or
higher in engineering. As with technicians, engineers must
constantly update their education to keep abreast of new
components and techniques. A highly trained electronics
engineer might design electronic equipment or large
electronic systems.


86 ELECTRONICS
Electronics Resources.
Scouting Literature
Computers, Electricity, Inventing, Radio,
and Robotics merit badge pamphlets
Books
Bartholomew, Alan. Electric Mischief:
Battery-Powered Gadgets Kids Can
Build. Kids Can Press, 2002.
Includes directions for an
assortment of electronics.
Bonnet, Bob, and Dan Keen. Science
Fair Projects With Electricity &
Electronics. Goodwill Publishing
House, 2014. Includes nearly
50 projects on electricity
and electronics.
Bridgman, Roger. Eyewitness:
Electronics. DK Publishing, 2000.
Traces the history, discoveries, and
devices of this fast-moving science.
Ceceri, Kathy. Robotics: Discover the
Science and Technology of the Future
with 20 Projects. Nomad Press, 2012.
Chirico, JoAnn. Electronics. VGM
Career Horizons, 1996. This book
explores career possibilities in
electronics and electricity.
Engelbert, Phillis. Technology in Action:
Science Applied to Everyday Life.
Gale, 1998. A general look at tech-
nology and technical applications of
scientific knowledge, with a section
on computers and electronics.
Leon, George deLucenay. Electronics
Projects for Young Scientists.
Franklin Watts, 1991. Introduces
the basic principles of electronics
and includes project ideas such as
a crystal radio, an intercom, and a
pair of electronic dice.
Maxfield, Clive “Max.” Bebop to the
Boolean Boogie: An Unconventional
Guide to Electronics, 3rd. ed.
Newnes, 2009. This book covers the
basics of electronics clearly, simply,
and in an entertaining style.
Predko, Myke. Digital Electronics
Guidebook: With Projects! McGraw-
Hill, 2002. Introduces the nuts and
bolts of digital electronics.
Electronics Resources
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


ELECTRONICS 87
.Digital Electronics
Rowh, Mark. Opportunities in
Electronics Careers. McGraw-Hill,
2007. Check out the many electron-
ics-related career opportunities fea-
tured in this book.
Slone, G. Randy. TAB Electronics Guide
to Understanding Electricity and
Electronics. 2nd ed. McGraw-Hill,
2000. A learn-as-you-go guide for
readers of any electronics skill level.
Magazines
Nuts & Volts
430 Princeland Court
Corona, CA 92879
Telephone: 951-371-8497
nutsvolts.com
Popular Science
popsci.com
Organizations and Websites
American Microsemiconductor Inc.
americanmicrosemi.com/tutorials
ePanorama.net
epanorama.net
HowStuffWorks
electronics.howstuffworks.com
101science.com
101science.com/Radio.htm
Electronics Parts and Suppliers
In many places, Radio Shack stores
can be the best source for electronics
parts. However, most Radio Shacks
have reduced their parts inventories,
which means you might have to look
elsewhere to find all the parts you
need for a project (or check out their
website, radioshack.com). Electronics
parts and kits also can be ordered over
the internet or via mail or toll-free tele-
phone from various suppliers.
Whenever you go online, be
sure you have your parent or
guardian’s permission first.
All Electronics
14928 Oxnard St.
Van Nuys CA, 91411-2610
Toll-free telephone: 818-904-0524
allelectronics.com
Allied Electronics & Automation
7151 Jack Newell Blvd. S.
Fort Worth, TX 76118
Toll-free telephone: 866-433-5722
alliedelec.com
C&S Sales Inc.
150 Carpenter Ave.
Wheeling, IL 60090
Toll-free telephone: 800-292-7711
cs-sales.net
Carl’s Electronics
484 Lakepark Ave., Suite 59
Oakland, CA 94610
Toll-free telephone: 866-664-0627
electronickits.com
Digi-Key Corporation
701 Brooks Ave. S.
Thief River Falls, MN 56701
Toll-free telephone: 800-344-4539
digikey.com
HobbyTron.com
24700 Avenue Rockefeller
Santa Clarita, CA 91355
Telephone: 818-675-9000
hobbytron.com


88 ELECTRONICS
Digital Electronics.
Institute of Electrical and
Electronics Engineers (IEEE)
445 Hoes Lane
Piscataway, NJ 08854-4141
Telephone: 732-981-0060
ieee.org
Jameco Electronic
1355 Shoreway Road
Belmont, CA 94002
Toll-free telephone: 800-831-4242
jameco.com
Mouser Electronics
1000 N. Main St.
Mansfield, TX 76063
Toll-free telephone: 800-346-6873
mouser.com
Newark
300 S. Riverside Plaza, Suite 2200
Chicago, Il 60606
Toll-free telephone: 800-463-9275
newark.com
SparkFun Electronics
6333 Dry Creek Parkway
Niwot, CO, 80503
sparkfun.com
Acknowledgments
Scouting America thanks Norman
McFadden for updating this version
of the pamphlet. Thanks also to
Mary Wiggins, director of educational
initiatives for the Electronic Industries
Foundation, for her assistance with this
edition of the Electronics merit badge
pamphlet. The EIF strives to create
new ways to engage young people in
the pursuit of science and technology,
including electronics.
Scouting America is grateful to
the men and women serving on the
National Merit Badge Subcommittee
for the improvements made in updating
this pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration Credits
University of Oklahoma, courtesy—
page 89
SPARK Museum of Electrical Invention,
sparkmuseum.org, courtesy—page 6
(all foreground)
Ultimate Symbols Inc., ©1996–2000—
page 49 (recycle symbol)
Wikipedia.org, courtesy—page 41
(resistors)
All other photos and illustrations
not mentioned above are the property
of or are protected by Scouting
America.
John McDearmon—all illustrations
on pages 21–25, 29, 31–41, 55–56,
62–63, 71–72, and 76-79