BASKETRY


BASKETRY
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


35864
ISBN 978-0-8395-3313-9
©2023 Boy Scouts of America
2023 Printing
Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Basketry or check Scoutbook
for the latest requirements.FPO


BASKETRY 3
Contents
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
Beginning to Weave. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Basketry Projects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
Square Basket . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
Round Basket . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
Campstool Seat . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
American Indian Basketry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
Basketry Terms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
Basketry Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46





BASKETRY 5
.Introduction
Introduction
No matter what part of the world your ancestors came from,
woven baskets were part of their lives. Long before the invention
of metal buckets, plastic containers, backpacks with built-in water
bladders,
and nylon duffel bags, your ancestors made baskets to carry and
store water, food, and valuables. Historically in many countries,
men were the primary basket makers.
Throughout recorded history, people all over the world have
gathered native fibers, branches, and vines to make baskets, woven
mats, sandals, bedding, and furniture. They devoted considerable
time and traveled long distances to find and harvest specific plants,
taking great care to ensure that the grasses, plants, bushes, trees,
and vines would regrow each year. After the harvest, these ancient peoples worked
diligently to strip, peel, shave, and cut the materials into various sizes for weaving.
Basket making and weaving were important even before the advent of clay pottery in
ancient times.
Today, basketry is both a practical and a visual art. Even
now, all baskets are made by a pair of hands. No machine
can make a basket. A handmade basket reflects the unique
techniques of the artist who created it, so each work can
become a one-of-a-kind article. Traditional basketry
techniques are being used, by both men and women, to
create beautiful contemporary works of art, categorized
as sculptures.
Basketry is a handy skill for a Scout. A basket can be
a sturdy companion on campouts, carrying clothes snugly
and efficiently, holding and rinsing potatoes and corn that
will later be roasted over a campfire, or carrying the day’s
fishing catch back to camp for dinner. Baskets and basket-
weaving projects also make great gifts for family and friends.
Imagination can be one of the most useful basketry tools, whether you
create a basket for its usefulness or simply for its beauty. As you complete the
required projects for the Basketry merit badge, remember that while the
interesting variations you experiment with might not turn out as you like,
these unique qualities could be the features that distinguish your
basket from the rest!





BASKETRY 7
.Beginning to Weave
Beginning to Weave
The projects needed to complete the Basketry merit badge were
designed to increase your weaving skills. Traditional styles of
basket weaving are perhaps as old as the art itself, and the
basic steps are easy to learn. This section will give you some
tips to help you understand the fundamentals.
Safety Issues
You can use a pocketknife to cut wil-
low or whatever natural materials you
can gather to make a basket. Knives must
be handled carefully to prevent injury. When using
a pocketknife, always cut away from your body.
When removing the branches or shoots from a plant,
brace the plant with your hand and cut with a diagonal slant to
encourage the plant’s growth to return. Keep your bracing hand
opposite the direction of the cut. Remember, a knife is not a
toy. Use caution when cutting your materials.
If minor cuts and scrapes occur, treat them by first
washing the area with soap and water and then covering
with a bandage. For wounds that are deep or that bleed
heavily, control the bleeding by applying direct pressure to
the wound with a sterile or clean dressing. If necessary,
treat the victim for shock. Get medical help immediately.
Reviewing the First Aid merit badge pamphlet will help you
be prepared in case of injury.
Basketry is not a dangerous hobby, but being mindful of
safety issues is always important. Move cautiously while you
work, and think before you act.
Note: The instructions and photos in this pamphlet
describe projects from a right-handed person’s view-
point. If you are left-handed, you may adjust the steps
so that you are more comfortable.


8 BASKETRY
Beginning to Weave.
Safety Checklist
Review this safety checklist with a parent before beginning a basketry project.
■■ When cutting materials, focus all your attention on the task at hand.
■■ Keep materials and workspace well-organized by picking up cut reed from
the floor as you go so that others do not slip or trip on the clippings.
■■ Never play in space devoted to craft projects.
■■ When walking around the craft area, point scissors and other sharp
objects downward and be mindful of others.
■■ Keep tools sharp and free from rust and dirt.
■■ Store tools in a safe place and away from children.
■■ Knives and scissors should never be thrown.
Point scissors and pliers away from your body when working
with reed. Keep your bracing hand away from the path of
the scissors.
Prevention goes hand in hand with mitigation, which means “to lessen
in force or intensity” and “to make less severe.” By taking precautions to
manage risk and the possibility of injury, you can be prepared to antici-
pate, help prevent, mitigate, and respond to just about any incident that
might happen while working with basketry tools and materials.


BASKETRY 9
.Beginning to Weave
What Is Reed?
Reed is the staple material of basket weavers and is the mate-
rial you most likely will use to create the three required projects
for the Basketry merit badge because it is easy to work with.
Basket reed is produced from the core of a thorny palm called
rattan, which is found in rainforest areas in South China,
Australia, Fiji, West Africa, and Madagascar. Rattan grows like
a vine and is harvested for commercial use mostly from the
jungles of Indonesia and Southeast Asia. Factories process the
reed into various sizes and shapes.
Flat reed comes in widths measured in fractions of inches:
for example, 3/16 inch, 1/4 inch, 1/2 inch, 5/8 inch. Round reed
is measured in numbered sizes, with the smallest numbers
signifying the smallest diameters. Round reed is measured by
its diameter in millimeters. Round reed #1 is very narrow,
whereas #6 is fairly large. Anything larger than #10 usu-
ally is used for making furniture.
Flat reed has a “right” side and a “wrong”
side, and the right side is always woven so
that it is on the outside of the basket. Even
though the right side is smoother, it is not
always easy to determine which side is
which. To find out, bend a wet piece of the
reed into a U shape, being careful not to
crease or crack the reed. If the reed’s fibers
splinter, the wrong side is out.
#10#6#1
Flat reedRound reed
8 MM4.45
MM
1.5 MM 3/16" 1/4" 1/2" 5/8"


10 BASKETRY
Beginning to Weave.
Types of Weaves
The following are common weaves used in this pamphlet.
Plain Weave. Sometimes called over-under weave, the plain
weave is done with rigid stakes or spokes, and weavers that
wrap around the stakes in an over-one, under-one pattern.
Spokes and stakes usually are more rigid and thicker reed
than weavers.
Continuous Weave. This weave is created over an odd number
of stakes. It is not done one row at a time, but continuously
from beginning to end, with additional weavers added when
more length is needed.
Twill Weave. This method of weaving involves the weaver
passing over two or more stakes and under two or more stakes
at a time.
Twining. This weave, sometimes called pairing, involves
two weavers, each alternately twisting over and under
consecutive spokes.
Plain weave TwiningTwill weave
Continuous weave looks much the same as plain
weave, but it is woven with a different technique.


Types of Baskets
Different baskets may look a lot alike, but you will begin to see
subtle differences as you learn more about weaving. Plaited
baskets are created with flat strips of reed passing over and
under flat stakes, giving the basket an interwoven look.
Ribbed baskets feature round or oval reed used to create a
sturdy skeleton. Flat or round reed is woven around the skeleton
to create the basket. Ribbed baskets are used to carry fragile
items, such as eggs, that need to be cradled to prevent breakage.
BASKETRY 11
Plaited baskets
Ribbed baskets


12 BASKETRY
Beginning to Weave.
Coiled baskets have no skeleton, or frame. An inner core of
natural material, such as pine needles, is wrapped solidly with
a soft, flexible material such as sinew. The coils are stacked and
sewn together in horizontal rows. Coiled baskets are far more
pliable than other types and are just as strong and durable.
Some traditional baskets created using this technique were so
tightly coiled that they could hold water and were used for
cooking food.
Wicker baskets, popularly used for picnic baskets, fishing
creels, and hampers, use round reed or any round, flexible
material such as willow that can be interwoven in a
rigid framework.
Wicker baskets
Coiled baskets


BASKETRY 13
.Beginning to Weave
Weaving Tips
Work with wet reed and cane. Basketry materials are too brittle to be
woven when they are dry. Reed and cane soaked in water for three
to five minutes becomes flexible and easy to use. Do not leave the
weaving material in the water for long periods, though, because it
might get slimy!
Avoid mildew. You will be working with damp materials, so don’t set
your half-finished basket down on a wet towel or wet surface. Mildew
is much easier to prevent than it is to clean. If your reed does mildew,
soak it in a mild bleach-water solution or dab it with a bleach-soaked
cotton swab, then leave it in the sun to dry, and it might come clean
again. Do not use bleach on colored reed.
Store your materials properly. Brown paper bags or cardboard boxes
are good choices for storage, or you could suspend different sizes of
reed from hooks. Hot and dry air or wet and humid conditions can
damage the reed. Never store reed in plastic containers unless it is
completely dry.
Use spring-type clothespins. These little gadgets are not just for laun-
dry anymore! They help keep weavers secure and the tension correct
as you begin a project. Clothespins can be used to hold the corners
of a square basket to help give it some shape. They also can anchor
the inside and outside rims at the top of the basket when you are
almost finished; you can release them one at a time as you lash the
rim to the basket.
Correct your mistakes. Whenever your weaving does not look right—
for example, if your plain weave suddenly has an over-over or under-
under pattern—you have miswoven the current or previous row.
Unweave along the row until you find a break in the pattern, then
resume weaving with the correct pattern.
Keep consistent tension and pack the rows as you go. Keeping proper
tension and packing the rows are separate functions that work together.
The key is to keep even tension on the weaver as you weave around
each stake. Pulling the weaver too tightly will cause the stakes to lean
inward. Weaving too loosely will keep the weaver from lying flat against
the stakes, resulting in a loose, lumpy basket. To weave a basket with
even sides, pack each row firmly against the previous row—without
any spaces between rows of weaving. Check frequently to ensure
that all stakes are equally spaced. To pack down the rows as you slide
them together, fit a small screwdriver or other packing tool between
the stakes and apply downward pressure on the weaver.





BASKETRY 15
.Basketry Projects
Basketry Projects
Beginning weavers should start with a simple project and
build on their skill by trying projects of increased difficulty.
The following projects can be used to meet the merit badge
requirements, but any qualifying project will do.
Materials for Three Projects
To earn the Basketry merit badge, you must weave a square
basket, a round basket, and a campstool seat. If you choose
to do the three projects described in this pamphlet, you
can make an economical choice for your materials
by purchasing all the reed at once and cutting the
lengths needed as you work on each project.
You will need:
• A 1-pound coil of 1/2-inch flat reed
• About 64 feet of 1/4-inch flat reed
• About 25 feet of #3 round reed
When preparing the weaving materials, uncoil the reed
and set aside the longest lengths of 1/2-inch flat reed to use
in weaving the campstool seat.* Then cut the longest lengths
for the baskets to help conserve the coil.
*If you have purchased a campstool kit, you may disregard this step.
For your convenience, the BSA
National Distribution Center has
prepackaged kits available for the
square basket, round basket,
and campstool seat featured in
this pamphlet.
National Distribution Center
Boy Scouts of America
P.O. Box 7143
Charlotte, NC 28241-7143
Toll-free telephone: 800-323-0736
Website: www.scoutshop.org


16 BASKETRY
Basketry Projects.
Square Basket
This project works well for the
beginner. It will use a plain weave
(over-under) and should take
about two hours to complete.
Preparation
Cut the following pieces of reed before you start to weave.
Stakes Cut ten 20-inch stakes from 1/2-inch flat reed
Locking weaver Cut one 27-inch locking weaver from 1/4-inch flat reed
Weavers Cut seven 27-inch weavers from 1/2-inch flat reed
Cut four 27-inch weavers from 1/4-inch flat reed
Rims Cut two 27-inch rims from 1/2-inch flat reed
Rim filler Cut one 25-inch rim filler from #3 round reed
Lasher Cut one 75-inch lasher from 1/4-inch flat reed
Basic Tools Needed
■■ Pencil
■■ Tape measure
■■ Scissors
■■ Small screwdriver or packing tool
■■ Spray bottle
■■ Container for water
■■ An old terrycloth towel
■■ Clothespins
■■ Fine sandpaper
■■ Masking tape or cable ties
■■ Small needle-nose pliers
■■ Office stapler with staples (for campstool only)
Basket Dimensions
Base: 5 by 5 inches
Height: 5 inches
Circumference: about 23 inches
Materials Needed
■■ 42 feet of 1/2-inch flat reed
■■ 22 feet of 1/4-inch flat reed
■■ 25 inches of #3 round reed


BASKETRY 17
.Basketry Projects
Weave the Base
Step 1—Soak the stakes and the locking weaver in
water for three to five minutes. Remove the stakes
from the water, and blot each with a towel.
Step 2—With a pencil, lightly mark the center of
all 10 stakes on the wrong side of the reed.
Step 3—Begin the base by laying five stakes, hori-
zontally and wrong side up, about 5/8 inch apart.
Line up the center marks.
Step 4—Weave stake 6, wrong side up, directly up the center
of the horizontal stakes, along the center marks. Begin weaving
from the bottom, over the first stake, under the second, over,
under, etc.
Step 5—Weave stake 7 to the right of 6. This weave is under,
over, under, over, under, opposite of the previous stake.
Step 6—Weave stake 8 to the right of stake 7. The weave is
over, under, over, under, over.
Step 7—Weave stakes 9 and 10 to the left of the center stake in
the same manner as 7 and 8.
Step 8—Adjust the stakes so
that they are evenly spaced in
all directions and the woven
base measures 5 by 5 inches.
Draw a light pencil line on
each side of all four corners
to help you align the corner
stakes if they are moved.
You always will
weave clockwise
if you are
right-handed;
you will weave
counter-clockwise
if you are
left-handed.
610 9 7 8
5
4
3
2
1
2
5
4
3
2
1
3
6 7 8
5
4
3
2
1
4
8


18 BASKETRY
Basketry Projects.
Step 9—Place the 1/4-inch flat locking weaver (9a), wrong side
facing up, on top of the center stake, along the outside edge of
the base. Weave over stake 6, under 7, and over 8. Turn the
corner (9b) by folding the reed 90 degrees so that it heads right
side up, down the right side of the base. Weave under stake 5
and over stake 4.
Step 10—Continue to weave under and over to the next corner,
again folding the weaver on a 90-degree angle as you turn the
corner (10a). The wrong side is now facing up. Continue around
the next two corners in the same manner and then back
to the center stake. Lay the end of the weaver directly
on top of the beginning weaver. Make sure that the
locking row is packed tightly against the edge of
the woven base. Cut the excess weaving material
even with the outside edge of stake 7 (10b). Be
careful not to cut the weaver too short. Tuck the
end of the weaver behind stake 7. This com-
pletes the locking row.
Step 11—Soak all 11 weavers in water for
three to five minutes.
Step 12—Mist the stakes with water to dampen
them, then gently upset each stake, one at a time,
by slowly bending it over the locking row. Be care-
ful not to bend the stake past the locking row. Do not
worry if the stakes crack.
6
5
7 8
7 8
5
4
7 1
8
9
5
4
6
7
9a 9b
10a 10b
12
7 8
5
4


BASKETRY 19
.Basketry Projects
Weaving the Sides
You are now ready to begin weaving the sides of the
basket. Keep in mind that you have been working on the inside
of the basket with all the wrong side of the reed
facing up. You are now going to work on the outside of the bas-
ket. As you work, remember that the right side of the reed needs
to be on the outside of the basket.
Step 1: Begin row 1—Choose a center stake that will allow
you to begin weaving opposite of the locking row. Use clothes-
pins to secure a 1/2-inch
flat weaver to the front side of that stake. Make
sure the right side of the weaver faces you.
Step 2—Begin weaving under and over around the sides
of the basket. As you weave around a corner, use
clothespins near the base to secure the two corner
stakes (2a). This helps to give the basket some shape.
When you return to the beginning, remove the first
clothespin and overlap the beginning of the weaver
by four stakes. Cut off any excess weaver and tuck it
behind the last stake (2b). Replace the first clothes-
pin to hold the weaver in place.
2a 2b
1
Avoid starting a new row in the same place that the weaver ended.
Doing so will concentrate overlap in the same area, causing the basket
to bulge. Also avoid overlapping the beginning or end of a weaver
around a corner; this can cause unappealing bulk in your basket.


20 BASKETRY
Basketry Projects.
Step 3—Check your weaving. Also check the tension in the
weave, tightening the weaver if it is too loose. Make sure that the
spacing between the stakes is the same as in the base and that
the first row of weaving is packed right next to the locking row.
Step 4: Begin row 2—Choose a stake on another side of the
basket that will allow you to weave opposite the first row. Use
a clothespin to join a 1/2-inch flat weaver, right side out, to the
front side of that stake and begin weaving as you did the first
row. As you weave around the basket, you can remove any
clothespins you placed.
Step 5—End the weaver by overlapping four stakes. Avoid
overlapping around a corner, because the weave would become
too bulky. Cut off the excess weaver and adjust the weave to
pack down the row against the previous row.
Step 6—Keep a close watch on the tension while weaving rows
3 through 11 as in steps 4 and 5, following the chart below to
determine what size reed to use for each row. As your weav-
ers and stakes begin to dry out, lightly mist them with water.
Remember to use a packing tool or small screwdriver to pack
down each row. If any of the stakes begin to lean inward,
loosen the tension of the weaving.
Row 3 1/2-inch flat weaver
Row 4 1/2-inch flat weaver
Row 5 1/2-inch flat weaver
Row 6 1/4-inch flat weaver
Row 7 1/4-inch flat weaver
Row 8 1/4-inch flat weaver
Row 9 1/2-inch flat weaver
Row 10 1/2-inch flat weaver
Row 11 1/4-inch flat weaver
4
Hint: It is helpful
to use clothespins
to help keep the
weaver and the
corner stakes in
place for the first
two or three rows
only. After the
third row the
basket sides
should stand
upright on
their own.


BASKETRY 21
.Basketry Projects
Step 7—Place the two rim pieces, #3 round reed, and the long
1/4-inch flat lasher in water to soak.
Cut and Tuck
Step 1—The stakes must be damp before proceeding. If
necessary, mist the spokes to dampen them.
Step 2—Cut off the stakes on the inside only of the last row,
level with the top of the basket. Be careful not to cut off the
wrong stakes!
Step 3—(Photos are of the inside of the basket.) Fold the out-
side stakes over the top of the last row of weaving and down
inside the basket (3a). Use a pencil (3b) to mark each stake
even with the bottom of the 1/2-inch weaver of row 9 (top row).
Trim the stakes at the lines and tuck the ends under the weav-
ing of row 9. Be careful not to cut the stakes too short. Use a
small screwdriver to help you lift the weaving as you tuck each
stake (3c).
2 3a
3b 3c


22 BASKETRY
Basketry Projects.
Apply the Rim
Step 1—Use clothespins to secure the outside rim reed, right
side out, to the center stake of any side of the basket. Begin
laying the reed so that the bottom of the rim piece covers the
last row of weaving. With clothespins, fasten the rim onto the
basket as you go (1a), placing clothespins at every other stake,
until you return to the beginning. Overlap the beginning of the
reed by 2 to 3 inches (1b), and trim any excess.
Step 2—Place the start of the inside rim on the opposite side
of the basket from the start/end of the outside rim, with the
wrong side of the reed touching the inside of the basket. Fasten
this rim to the basket using clothespins, and overlap it 2 to 3
inches as you did the outside rim. Trim any excess.
Step 3—Place the #3 round reed in the groove between the
rims, overlapping the ends about 1/4 inch. The reed should be
flush with the rims. Trim any excess.
1a 1b
3


BASKETRY 23
.Basketry Projects
Lashing
Step 1—Hide the beginning lasher.
Slip about 6 inches of the lasher,
wrong side out, up between the
inside rim and the inside wall of the
basket, under the rim filler, and down
between the outside basket wall and
the outside rim. This is the tail.
Step 2—Insert the long end of the lasher between two stakes
and under the last row of weaving going toward the outside
(but not under the outside rim). Bring the lasher around the
hidden row back to the inside of the basket by going under the
rim filler and between the inside rim and the inside wall of the
basket. The lasher will be coming out on the inside of the
basket. (This coming out into the inside is shown in figure 2.)
Step 3—Tighten the 6-inch tail in place by pulling it down.
Do not cut the tail at this time.
Be careful not to begin on a corner or anywhere that
the rim or rim filler is spliced or overlapped.
1
2
6 inches


24 BASKETRY
Basketry Projects.
Step 4—Lashing the rim. With the lasher
tail secured, bring the long end of the lasher
from the inside of the basket up and over the
top of the rims and insert the end to the right
of the hidden loop and between two adjacent
stakes, going from the outside of the basket
to the inside. Pull the lasher tight to the rims.
Repeat this looping and tightening process
between each stake, all the way around the
basket rims. Be careful to keep the lasher flat
against the rims and to keep it from twisting.
Step 5—Ending the lasher. Hide the other end of the lasher
by drawing the tail up between the inside rim and the inside
basket wall, under the rim filler, over the top of the last row,
and down between the basket wall and the outside rim. Repeat
steps 2 and 3, just as you did to hide the lasher in an earlier
step. Cut off the beginning tail and the excess lasher.
Step 6—When the basket dries, sand the reed and trim off any
frayed fibers. Use a fine-tip permanent marking pen to sign and
date your basket on the underside.
If you have hidden the lasher correctly, the right side of
the lasher will lay over the top of the rims as you lash.
4
5 6


BASKETRY 25
.Basketry Projects
Round Basket
A beginning weaver with a little experience can tackle this
project. It uses a continuous weave.
Preparation
Cut the following pieces of reed before you start to weave.
Weave the Base
Step 1—Soak the spokes and the
160 inches of #3 round reed in
water for three to five minutes.
Remove the spokes from the water,
and blot each with a towel.
Step 2—With a pencil, lightly
mark the center of all eight spokes
on the wrong side of the reed. On
four of the spokes, also mark
11/2 inches away from each side
of the center mark.
Basket Dimensions
Base: 5 inches
Height: 4 1/2 inches
Circumference: approximately
16 inches
Materials Needed
■■ About 20 feet of 1/2-inch flat reed
■■ About 20 feet of #3 round reed
■■ About 42 feet of 1/4-inch flat reed
Spokes Cut eight 18-inch spokes from 1/2-inch flat reed
Twining Cut one 180-inch length of twining from #3 round reed
Weavers Gather enough lengths of 1/4-inch flat reed to make 37 feet
Rims Cut two 20-inch rims from 1/2-inch flat reed
Rim filler Cut one 20-inch rim filler from #3 round reed
Lasher Cut one 60-inch lasher from 1/4-inch flat reed


26 BASKETRY
Basketry Projects.
Step 3—Lay the four spokes with the 11/2-inch marks across
each other, matching the center marks, so they resemble the
spokes in a wheel.
Step 4—Find the center of the #3 round reed and crimp the
reed at this midpoint with needle-nose pliers. Fold the reed at
the crimp. Loop the fold around the first half-inch spoke that
you laid down on your working surface. Place the loop directly
on top of the pencil mark so that half the weaver is on top of
the spoke and the other half is under the spoke. Both ends
should be on the inside of the basket. To twine correctly you
must keep all weaving material on top of the spokes.
Step 5—(Note: The first row of the twining should begin at
the 11/2-inch mark of each spoke. The marks create a guide to
help keep the circle’s shape.) To begin, take the weaver that is
on top of spoke 1 (weaver 1) and go down between spokes 1
and 2, under spoke 2, and up between spokes 2 and 3. Let go of
weaver 1, and pick up weaver 2 (5a). Go down between spokes
2 and 3, under spoke 3, and up between spokes 3 and 4. Let go
of weaver 2. Pick up weaver 1 and repeat this twisting process
by alternating weavers until you complete a full circle around
the base (5b). Keep tension in the weaver and pack the rows as
you go so no space remains between the weaving. Check after
each row to ensure that the circle has a good shape and that the
spokes are evenly spaced.
4
2
3
1
3
1
2
4
3
2
4
1
4
1
3
2
3 4
5a 5b


BASKETRY 27
.Basketry Projects
Step 6—Twine for three rows. Mist the weavers and spokes
with water.
Step 7—Lay the remaining four spokes in the spaces between
the first four spokes.
Step 8—Continue to twine for three more rows; include each
new spoke as you approach it. End by tucking the tails behind
previous rows of twining. The base should be 5 inches across.
Step 9—Place the 1/4-inch weavers in water.
Step 10—Mist the spokes with water, then gently upset them
by slowly bending them toward the center of the basket. Do
not worry if they crack.
If you run out of weaver during the twining
process, don’t worry. You can add a new
weaver as the old one runs out.
Be sure to end the twining by trimming
the excess and tucking the tails into
the last row of twining.
5
1
8
4
6
2
3
7
1
8
4
6
5
2
37
7 8


28 BASKETRY
Basketry Projects.
Weaving the Sides
Continuous weaving requires an odd number of spokes, so you
must split one down the middle to create two spokes before
you can begin weaving.
Step 1—Choose one spoke and use scissors to cut it into two
spokes all the way down to the twining.
Step 2—Remove a long piece of 1/4-
inch flat reed from the water. Taper the
weaver, beginning from about 6 inches
from the end. Using a tapered weaver
will ensure that a continuous-weave project
comes out level at the top.
Step 3—Insert the tip of the tapered weaver into the twining
behind the spoke that is to the right of the split spoke, mak-
ing sure the right side of the weaver will be on the outside of
the basket when you gently pull the weaver to the front of the
basket. Begin weaving over and under all the way around the
basket. When you come to the split spoke, treat it as two indi-
vidual spokes. If you have woven correctly you will be able to
continue weaving around the basket without interrupting the
weave. Note: Figure 3 shows three rows of weaving. The first
row is with the tapered tip, and the second and third are the
full-size reed.
Be careful not to put too much tension on the weaver, as that will cause
the basket to get narrower as you approach the top. Measure the basket
as you go to make sure that the cylinder shape remains the same size
from bottom to top. If the circumference of the basket is larger than
16 inches, the rims will not fit. If it gets smaller, there will not be enough
space between spokes to lash the rim.
1 2
3


BASKETRY 29
.Basketry Projects
Step 4—Weave 18 rows, adding a new length of weaver as you
run out. Make sure the right side of the reed is on the outside
of the basket and that you overlap four spokes when you
add the new weaver. Pack down each row snugly
against the previous row. About every three
rows, check to make sure the spacing between
each spoke is uniform. Note: Do not add a
new weaver at a split spoke.
Step 5—When you have completed the
18th row, you will be back to the split
spoke. Cut the excess weaver, leaving
enough length to weave behind three more
spokes. Taper the end of the weaver approxi-
mately 6 inches, and continue to weave,
finishing behind the third spoke to the right of
the split spoke (see the arrow). Leave a small tail
that can be folded down and tucked into the weavers
below it. Trim the excess weaver.
Step 6—Using a new piece of 1/4-inch weaver, weave one over-
under row, continuing to treat the split spoke as two spokes.
When you reach a point where the weaving follows the same
pattern as the previous row, weave over two spokes to correct
the problem (see the arrow). This will occur where the previ-
ous tapered row ended. Then return to the under-over weaving
pattern. Complete the last row of weaving by overlapping two
to four spokes.
Step 7—Soak the 1/2-inch rim pieces, rim filler, and 1/4-inch
lasher in warm water for three to five minutes.
Remember to
always pack each
row snugly against
the previous
row, carefully
monitor the
spacing between
each spoke, and
keep the spokes
and weaving
materials damp.
4
5 6
Adding a new weaver


30 BASKETRY
Basketry Projects.
Cut and Tuck
Step 1—If necessary, mist the spokes to dampen them.
Step 2—Cut off the spokes on the inside only of the last row,
level with the top of the basket. Be careful not to cut off the
wrong spokes!
Step 3—Fold the outside spokes over the top of the last row of
weaving and down inside the basket. Use a pencil to mark each
spoke about two or three rows from the top of the basket. Trim
the spokes at the lines and tuck the ends under two or three
rows of weaving.
2
3


BASKETRY 31
.Basketry Projects
Apply the Rim
Step 1—Use clothespins to fasten the outside rim reed, right
side out, to a spoke. Begin laying the reed so that the bottom
of the rim piece covers the last row of weaving. Use clothes-
pins along the rim as you go, placing one at every other spoke.
When you return to the beginning, overlap 2 to 3 inches of reed
and trim any excess.
Step 2—Place the inside rim on the opposite side of the basket
from the outside rim, with the wrong side of the reed touching
the inside of the basket. Fasten this rim to the basket using
clothespins and overlap it 2 to 3 inches. Trim any excess.
Step 3—Place the #3 round reed in the groove between the
rims, overlapping the ends about 1/4 inch. The reed should be
flush with the rim. Trim any excess.
21
3
Be careful not
to begin where
the rim or rim
filler is spliced
or overlapped.


32 BASKETRY
Basketry Projects.
Lashing
Step 1—Hide the beginning lasher. Slip about 6 inches of
the lasher, wrong side out, up between the inside rim and
the inside wall of the basket, under the rim filler and down
between the outside basket wall and the outside rim.
Step 2—Insert the long end of the lasher between two stakes
and under the last row of weaving going toward the outside
(but not under the outside rim). Bring the lasher around the
hidden row back to the inside of the basket by going under
the rim filler and between the inside rim and the inside wall
of the basket. The lasher will be coming out of the inside of
the basket.
Step 3—Tighten the 6-inch tail in place by pulling it down. Do
not cut the tail at this time.
If you have hidden the lasher correctly, the right side of the
lasher will lay over the top of the rims as you lash.
Step 4—Lashing the rim. With the lasher tail
secured, bring the long end of the lasher from
the inside of the basket up and over the top
of the rims. Insert the end to the right of the
hidden loop and between two adjacent stakes,
going from the outside of the basket to the
inside. Pull the lasher tight to the rims. Repeat
this looping and tightening process between
each spoke, all the way around the basket rims.
Be careful to keep the lasher flat against the
rims and to keep it from twisting.
Step 5—Ending the lasher. Hide the other
end of the lasher by drawing the tail up
between the inside rim and the inside
basket wall, under the rim filler, over the
top of the last row, and down between the
basket wall and the outside rim, repeat steps
2 and 3 as you did to hide the lasher in the
beginning. Cut off the beginning tail and the
excess lasher.
Step 6—When the basket dries, sand the reed and trim off any
stray fibers. Use a fine-tip permanent marking pen to sign and
date your basket on the underside.
4
5


BASKETRY 33
.Basketry Projects
Campstool Seat
This project, designed for the beginner who has considerable
practice in basket weaving, is both easy to make and durable.
It uses a twill weave.
Step 1—Assemble the frame.
Step 2—Soak several long pieces of reed in water.
Step 3—With the long end of the frame facing you and the
smooth side of the reed facing up as you weave the seat, use a
cable tie or masking tape to secure a long piece of reed to the
inside of the front left corner of the frame.
Seat Dimensions
9 by 12 inches
Materials Needed
■■ 9-by-12-inch frame
■■ Several very long
pieces of 1/2-inch flat
reed, about 77 feet
3


34 BASKETRY
Basketry Projects.
Step 4—Wrap the reed around the rails from front to back until
the rungs are covered, approximately 21 wraps. Keep the edges
of the reed touching as you add wraps. Keep the wrapping fairly
loose; the wraps will tighten up as you weave the seat.
Step 5—When you reach the last wrap, bring the weaver over
the back rail, around the inside of the leg, and over the side rail
toward the top of the frame. This will allow you to continue
using the same length of reed as you change direction on the
frame. When you complete this step, the weaver will be going
from right to left. Rotate the frame 180 degrees so that the
weaver goes from left to right.
During the wrapping process, you might need
to add another long weaver. Do this by over-
lapping the ends of the old and new weavers
about 3 inches and stapling them together two
or three times, with the staple points facing the
inside of the seat. Note: Overlap and staple the
two pieces of reed near the center of the seat
on the underneath side. This will make it easier
to hide the staples when you do the finish work
on the seat. Be careful when adding a new weaver
to keep the smooth side of the reed toward the out-
side of the seat. Later, staples will no longer be used
when adding a new weaver to the twill pattern; they
will simply be overlapped.
4 5


BASKETRY 35
.Basketry Projects
Weaving the Pattern
You will weave the top of the seat then turn it over and weave
the underneath side of the seat. As you weave this twill pat-
tern, pack the weaving closely together with the edges of the
rows touching. The twill pattern is woven in four rows. If you
pack the rows together tight enough, the pattern repeats three
full times, then one partial pattern (rows 1, 2, and 3 only). This
takes concentration because the weave is always changing. The
critical part is
starting each row correctly, because after the weave is started,
a simple over two–under two pattern follows. You can refer to
the master pattern chart to help you remember how to begin
each row.
Always add a
new weaver to
the twill weave
in the center of
the bottom side
of the seat by
overlapping three
or four stakes.
There is no
need to staple
the ends.
Master Pattern Chart
Row Begin the Weave
Row 1 Over two, then repeat under two–over two pattern
Row 2 Over one, then repeat under two–over two pattern
Row 3 Under two, then repeat over two–under two pattern
Row 4 Under one, then repeat over two–under two pattern
Row 1
Row 2
Row 3
Row 4


36 BASKETRY
Basketry Projects.
Step 1—Begin row 1 by weaving over two, then repeating an
under two, over two pattern until you complete this row on
the front side. (The row might not end with a complete over
two, under two pattern.) Turn the frame over, wrap the weaver
around the side of the frame, and weave row 1 again on the
backside. Turn the frame back over and begin row 2.
Step 2—Begin row 2 by weaving over one, then repeat an
under two, over two pattern until you complete this row on the
front side. Turn the frame over, wrap the weaver around the side
of the frame, and weave row 2 again on the backside. Turn the
frame back over and begin row 3.
Step 3—Begin row 3 by weaving under two, then repeat an
over two, under two pattern until you complete this row on the
front side. Turn the frame over, wrap the weaver around the
side of the frame, and weave row 3 again on the backside. Turn
the frame back over and begin row 4.
Step 4—Begin row 4 by weaving under one, then repeat an
over two, under two pattern until you complete this row on the
front side. Turn the frame over, wrap the weaver around the
side of the frame, and weave row 4 again on the backside.
Turn the frame back over, and you will be ready to begin
row 1 again.
1 2
3 4


BASKETRY 37
.Basketry Projects
Step 5—Repeat rows 1, 2, 3, and 4 as in steps 1 through 4
above. Then repeat rows 1, 2, 3, and 4 again.
Step 6—Repeat rows 1, 2, and 3. These last three rows of twill
weave will be difficult to weave because the weaving in the
seat begins to tighten up. You may have to use your needle
nose pliers to pinch the end of the reed and gently pull it
through the reeds.
Step 7—At the end
of the last row on
the bottom side of
the seat, cut the
remaining weaver
the length of the
stool and weave it
in as far as it will
go. Hide the end
under three or
four reeds.
Step 8—Remove
the cable tie or masking tape carefully and mist the reed with
water. Cut the remaining weaver the length of the stool and
weave it in as far as it will go, hiding the end under three
or four reeds.
Step 9 (optional)—To cover any vis-
ible staples underneath the seat, slide
a piece of reed directly over the top of
the reed that you stapled, then tuck the
ends under two or more woven reeds.
The staples also could be carefully
removed; the weaving will be secure
enough to hold.
Step 10—Allow the reed to dry com-
pletely, then sand any unwanted fibers
off the reed and trim. Use a fine-tip
permanent marking pen to sign and
date your seat on the bottom.
Remember to
mist your
weaving material
with water
to keep it from
drying out.
Be careful
not to wet the
wooden frame.
The projects in this pamphlet are available in kits
through the BSA National Distribution Center. See the
resources section in the back of the pamphlet.
6
9





BASKETRY 39
.American Indian Basketry
American
Indian* Basketry
*There is ongoing discussion of the changing terminology used
by indigenous peoples of the Americas to describe themselves,
as well as how they prefer to be referred to by others. Preferred
terms vary primarily by region and age. As indigenous people
and communities are diverse, there is no consensus on naming,
aside from the fact that most people prefer to be referred
to by their specific nation. For the purposes of this
pamphlet, the term “American Indian” is used.
American Indians have used woven objects in countless
ways. Their beds, thatched roofs, floor mats, sandals,
insulated boots, baby carriers, boat bailers, berry baskets,
rain hats, and backpacks were all fashioned from plants,
grasses, and tree bark. Baskets could even be used for
cooking over hot stones. Strong and lightweight, baskets
could be shaped to fit the user’s needs. Basketry entered
the home, furniture, clothing, armor, religion, and even-
tually the trade economy of American Indian peoples.
While baskets provided many common uses among
American Indian peoples, many tribes found basketry
to be a ready solution to problems that were unique to
their territory. The following examples illustrate how
the American Indian influence on basket making varied
across North America.
Plateau Indians. The Nez Perce tribe is remembered for
exquisite basketry that features bright geometric designs.
Nez Perce women wore basketwork hats woven from
plant fibers. The Wasco and Wishram tribes of Oregon
developed an unusual “X-ray” style for basketry designs.
The skeletons of the artists’ subjects could be seen in
designs portraying animals and humans, as though the
artists had looked through the flesh.


40 BASKETRY
American Indian Basketry.
Pueblo. In a.d. 400, the Pueblo
peoples of the Southwest used prairie
grasses to weave sandals that looked
similar to today’s flip-flops.
Navajo. The Navajo learned many of
their basketry skills from the Pueblos.
They made ceremonial trays and other
objects, as well as practical items like
water jugs and burden baskets for
gathering fruit. The Navajo prefer to
use sumac and yucca in their basketry,
mainly because Navajo legend holds
that a weaver who uses willow will go
blind. The most famous of the Navajo
basket designs is the wedding basket,
depicting the Earth and its mountains,
with a break in the design to allow the
spirits to emerge.
Cherokee. Throughout the 1700s and early 1800s, the Eastern
Cherokee used white oak and cane to create baskets. In more
recent times, they used honey-suckle vines and maple. River
cane, which grows up to 30 feet tall along river bottoms, has
been used throughout the tribe’s recorded history to fashion
arrow shafts, blowguns, mats, and baskets.
Hopi. The Hopi word for basket weaving means “peaceful.”
The works created by these quiet artisans carried the pride
and craftsmanship of their makers, and the finished pieces often
were elaborate works of art that were cherished in life and bur-
ied with the dead. The Hopi people used paints and dyes from
minerals and crushed berries, as well as beautiful stones and
shells, to decorate their works. They cut the sinew of small
animals into strings for handles and straps, and
used the animal skins as soft, strong lining for baskets, baby
carriers, and bags.
Pomo. Like other tribes from the California region, the Pomo
fashioned reeds, grasses, roots, and barks into all manner of
articles: trays, containers, cooking pots, hats, mats, fish traps,
The Cherokee
added color to
their work with
natural dyes,
including black
extracted from
butternut, orange
from bloodroot,
brown from
walnut, and a
pale yellow from
yellowroot. The
designs they
wove into their
baskets depicted
important tribal
and clan symbols.
On long trips, Californians
might wear yucca-fiber
sandals, with soles almost
1 inch thick.
Plateau tribes were
renowned for their
basketmaking.


BASKETRY 41
.American Indian Basketry
baby carriers, ceremonial objects, and even
boats. They decorated their finely crafted
baskets with shells and feathers.
O’odham and Tohono O’odham. These
tribes from southern Arizona made
detailed baskets and even wove cotton
fibers into fabric.
Other Tribes. Members of nomadic tribes
such as the Ute and Apache created water-
tight, lightweight baskets for traveling.
Shoshone and Athabaskan people made
canteens, pitchers, and small water storage
tanks from coiled or twined weaves sealed with pine tar
or asphaltum.
An O’odham carrying-basket
Respect for Mother Earth
American Indians share a deep and abiding respect
for the land and have practiced conservation
techniques for thousands of years.
For example, the Eastern Cherokee
people of North Carolina,
Tennessee, and northern
Georgia never took the first
plant they saw. Cherokee
weavers searched until
they discovered an area
where plants grew plentifully.
Then they would carefully cut
just a portion of each plant they
harvested so that the grasses, vines,
and trees would regenerate from year
to year. They took only what they needed,
then returned any leftover natural materials to
the Appalachian Mountains, scattering them with
thanks and gratitude to the Great Spirit for the
Earth’s abundance. This respect and stewardship
for all living things is still a fundamental principle
underlying the lives of all native peoples.
This 12-inch
coiled basket
was made
by Apache
Indians in the
early 1800s.


42 BASKETRY
American Indian Basketry.
Emergency Baskets
Makeshift emergency baskets are some of the most fascinating
woven crafts of all native peoples. These were made quickly
and could be used to catch rainwater, bail out a leaky boat,
transport goods to market, or carry all sorts of things—from
live animals to yams.
For example, in central Africa, potters could cut long
palm leaves to weave crude baskets that were shaped and
sized to fit their loads on the way to market. The people of
the Nicobar Islands near India wrapped palm leaves to create
buckets, using vines to support the leaf bottom and hold the
shape of the walls. In lower Thailand, leaves were folded and
stitched with a bit of rattan reed to be used as a boat bailer.
Throughout the tropics, temporary baskets were made of fresh
leaves from the cocoa palm to carry fish, game, or fruit.
Burden basket


BASKETRY 43
.American Indian Basketry
If you need to make an emergency basket, try to
choose weaving material from saplings—less than
a year old—with as few knots and buds as possible.
Plants become more brittle with age, so a young
plant is best suited for making an emergency basket
because it will bend easily.
Make note of the types of plants found in your
region that could be used to craft an emergency bas-
ket. Long-leaf pine needles are prevalent along the
southeastern coast, while sweetgrass, or sweet flag,
can be found in Georgia and South Carolina. Weavers
in the Northeast use materials like birch bark and
dogwood saplings, while Midwesterners could use
grasses such as rye and wheat, cattail leaves, willow,
sedges, and cornhusks. Various types of willow grow
from Alaska throughout most of the northern United
States. Grapevine and honeysuckle are abundant in
temperate climates like Texas.
Long-leaf
pine needles
Palmetto
leaves
English
willow
Sweetgrass


44 BASKETRY
Basketry Terms.
Basketry Terms
The following terms will be a useful reference as you complete your
basketry projects.*
base. The bottom of a basket; woven mat.
cane. The material harvested from the inner bark of a tropical vine called rattan.
coiling. A weaving technique using a rigid core that is wrapped and stitched with
a softer, more flexible material. Rows of the wrapped core are stacked and sewn
together rather than woven.
continuous weave. Weaving done continuously over an odd number of stakes.
It is not done one row at a time, but rather continuously from beginning to end,
adding weavers periodically.
cut and tuck. When the basket is woven, the outside stakes are bent over the
last row of weaving and tucked into the weaving on the inside of the basket; also
called down staking. The inside stakes are cut off even with the top edge of the
last row of weaving.
lasher. A piece of reed that secures the rim pieces; also referred to as lashing.
lashing. The act of wrapping all the rim pieces to the basket.
losing a lasher. Hiding the end of the reed within the rim or weaving.
packing. Pushing down each row snugly beside the previous woven row.
pairing. A method of weaving (usually with round reed) using two weavers
alternately in a twisting pattern in front of one spoke and behind one spoke;
also called twining.
plaited. Woven.
plaiting. A weaving technique in which flat strips pass over and under each other
at right angles.
plain weave. A simple over-one, under-one weave. Plain weave is sometimes
referred to as over-under weave and is generally known as basketweave.
*These terms are used with permission of Sterling Publishing Co. Inc., New York, N.Y., from The Basket
Book by Lyn Siler, ©1988 by Lyn Siler and Carolyn Kemp, a Sterling/Lark book.


.Basketry Terms
rattan. A climbing palm (vine) from which reed is made.
reed. The inner core of the tropical vine rattan that has been cut into flat, round,
flat-oval, half-round, or oval shapes and is used for baskets and furniture.
rib. The round or oval pieces that extend from one side of the basket to the other
and form the basic skeleton.
rim. The pieces, inside and outside, that fit over the top row of weaving to form an
edge and give stability to the sides of a basket.
rim filler. A piece of round reed or sea grass placed between the two rim pieces
of the basket.
spoke. The same as a stake but laid in a circle as spokes in a wheel.
stake. Pieces of the woven mat (base) that are upset to become the upright
elements of a basket.
twill. A method of weaving in which the weaver passes over and under two or
more stakes at a time.
twining. A method of weaving (usually with round reed) using two weavers
alternately in a twisting pattern in front of one spoke and behind one spoke;
also called pairing.
upset. To bend the stakes up and over upon themselves (toward the base),
creating a crease at the base of the stake. This action creates the side supports
of the basket.
weaver. The fiber, often reed,
that moves over and under
the stakes, spokes, or ribs.
wicker. A basketry
technique that
employs round,
vertical stakes or
spokes, and round
weavers, woven
perpendicular to
the spokes.
BASKETRY 45


46 BASKETRY
Basketry Resources.
Books
Barratt, Olivia Elton. Basketmaking.
Henry Holt, 1993.
Bibby, Brian. Essential Art: Native
Basketry from the California Indian
Heritage Center. Heyday, 2012.
Crawford, BJ. The Weekend Crafter:
Basketry. Lark Crafts, 2011.
Crook, Georgia. Basketmaking.
Crowood, 2000.
Doney, Meryl. Baskets.
Franklin Watts, 1997.
Fariello, M. Anna. Cherokee Basketry:
From the Hands of Our Elders. The
History Press, 2009.
Franz, Linda. Basic Basket Making: All
the Skills and Tools You Need to Get
Started. Stackpole Books, 2008.
Harding, Stella. Practical Basketry.
A&C Black, 2012.
Hoppe, Flo. Contemporary Wicker
Baskets. Lark Books, 1997.
LaFerla, Jane. Making the New Baskets:
Alternative Materials, Simple
Techniques. Sterling, 2000.
Peabody, Sarah, and William A.
Turnbaugh. Indian Baskets.
Schiffer Publishing, 1986.
Rossbach, Ed. The Nature of Basketry.
Schiffer Publishing, 1997.
Siler, Lyn. The Ultimate Basket Book:
A Cornucopia of Popular Designs to
Make. Lark Books, 2006.
Turnbaugh, Sarah P., and William A.
Turnbaugh. Indian Baskets, 3rd ed.
Schiffer Publishing, 2004.
Yamane, Linda. Weaving a
California Tradition: A Native
American Basketmaker.
Lerner Publications, 1997.
Basketry Resources
For your convenience,
the BSA National Distribution
Center has prepackaged kits
available for the square basket,
round basket, and campstool
seat featured in this pamphlet.
National Distribution Center
Boy Scouts of America
P.O. Box 7143
Charlotte, NC 28241-7143
Toll-free telephone:
800-323-0736
www.scoutshop.org


BASKETRY 47
Organizations and Websites
Association of Michigan
Basketmakers
www.michiganbasketmakers.com
BasketMakers
www.basketmakers.com
National Basketry Organization
Telephone: 617-863-0366
www.nationalbasketry.org
North Carolina
Basketmakers’ Association
www.ncbasketmakers.com
Basketry Suppliers
Basketweaving.com
V.I. Reed & Cane Inc.
Toll-free telephone: 800-852-0025
www.basketweaving.com/scouts
The Basket Maker’s Catalog
Toll-free telephone: 800-447-7008
www.basketmakerscatalog.com
The Basket Patch
Telephone: 715-447-8497
www.thebasketpatch.com
The Country Seat Inc.
Telephone: 610-756-6124
www.countryseat.com
Gina’s Baskets
Telephone: 231-215-6575
www.ginasbaskets.com
Inter-Mares Trading Co. Inc.
Toll-free telephone: 800-229-CANE
www.canefish.com
Suzanne Moore’s N.C. Basket Works
Toll-free telephone: 800-338-4972
www.ncbasketworks.com
Paul’s Supplies
Telephone: 303-948-2767
www.paulssupplies.com
Royalwood Ltd.
Toll-free telephone: 800-526-1630
www.royalwoodltd.com


48 BASKETRY
Basketry Resources.
Acknowledgments
Martha Bird is a nurse, artist, and bas-
ket weaver who took her first basket
class in 1994. The Minnesota Historical
Society acquired a series of her bas-
kets, and one of her sculptural baskets
was chosen to tour the United States
for a year with the National Basketry
Organization (NBO). The NBO has
described her work as “a benchmark of
excellence ... that demonstrate superior
technique and original concept and
design.” She is a national writer and
lecturer on basketry and its use as a
tool for healing and empowerment.
Jenalee Frazier has been a bas-
ket weaver for 20 years, authoring
many patterns for the beginner to the
advanced weaver. The BSA appreciates
her sharing her vast knowledge of this
art form and her beginner basketry
patterns for this pamphlet. She has
served as a Basketry merit badge
counselor and taught young people
how to weave as an artist-in-residence
in public schools. She has traveled
around the country to meet, teach,
and learn techniques from weavers
of many ethnic backgrounds. Mrs.
Frazier was invited to create and
weave an angel ornament for the
White House Christmas tree.
Mrs. Frazier revised, with permis-
sion, an original campstool pattern
written by Carol Matteson from The
Stool Collection, A Child’s Size Stool.
Linda Hebert has been a basket weaver
and basketry teacher for more than 40
years. She has both a BFA and MFA in
art education, with a master’s concentra-
tion in fiber arts, and has designed 50+
basketweaving kits. She has created and
taught basketweaving residencies at
schools, museums, and community
centers. Ms. Hebert founded V.I. Reed &
Cane Inc. with her husband, and it has
been their family business since 1981.
Basketweaving.com is operated by their
sons, Chris and Zack, both former
Scouts. The BSA appreciates Ms. Hebert’s
permission to use weaving tips from their
site, www.basketweaving.com.
Lyn Siler is the author of several
popular books on basketry. The BSA
thanks Ms. Siler for her basic weaving
terminology and weaves excerpted
from her book for this pamphlet.
These terms were used with permis-
sion of Sterling Publishing Co. Inc.
The Boy Scouts of America is
grateful to the men and women
serving on the National Merit Badge
Subcommittee for the improvements
made in updating this pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration Credits
U.S. Geological Survey, courtesy—
page 41 (coiled basket)
U.S. Library of Congress Prints and
Photographs Division, courtesy—
page 38
Wikipedia.org, courtesy—cover (pine
needle basket)
All other photos and illustrations are
the property of or are protected by the
Boy Scouts of America.
Vince Heptig—pages 4, 8 (both), 9 (reed),
14, 17 (measuring), 22 (clothespins),
23 (lashing), 24 (all), 26–30 (all), 31
(clothespins), 32, and 46–47 (both)
John McDearmon—all illustrations on
pages 9, 22–23, 31, 33, 35, and 39–42