Thomas Alva Edison
Supernova Award Requirements
1. Earn the Dr. Bernard Harris Supernova Award.
2. Complete ONE additional Scouts BSA Nova award for a total of four. (Note: This may be done at
any time after becoming a member of Scouts BSA.)
3. Earn FOUR additional Supernova-approved merit badges from the list below, other than the four
earned while working on the Harris Supernova Award for a total of eight. (Note: These may be
earned at any time after becoming a Scout.)
4. Complete TWO additional Supernova activity topics, one each in the two STEM areas NOT
completed for the Harris Supernova Award. (Note: The intent is that upon completion of the
Edison Supernova Award the Scout will have completed one Supernova activity topic in each of
the four STEM areas.)
Animal Science Environmental Science Plant Science
Archaeology Farm Mechanics Programming
Architecture Fish and Wildlife Management Pulp and Paper
Astronomy Forestry Radio
Automotive Maintenance Game Design Reptile and Amphibian Study
Aviation Gardening Robotics
Bird Study Geocaching Scuba Diving
Chemistry Geology Signs, Signals, and Codes
Composite Materials Insect Study Soil and Water Conservation
Dentistry Inventing Space Exploration
Digital Technology Mammal Study Surveying
Drafting Medicine Sustainability
Electricity Mining in Society Veterinary Medicine
Electronics Nature Weather
Energy Nuclear Science Welding
Engineering Oceanography


5. Participate in a local, state, or national science fair or mathematics competition OR any other
equally challenging STEM-oriented competition or workshop approved by your mentor. An
example of this would be an X-Prize type competition. (Note: The intent is that upon completion
of the Edison Supernova Award, the Scout will have participated in two such events.)
6. Working with your mentor, organize and present a Nova award or other STEM-related program
to a Cub Scout den or pack meeting. Be sure to receive approval from the appropriate unit
leader. If a Cub Scout den or pack is not available, your presentation may be given to another
youth group, such as your troop or at your place of worship. (Note: The intent is that upon
completion of the Edison Supernova Award the Scout will have completed two such
presentations.)
7. Research a scientific, technical, engineering, or mathematical breakthrough or invention of the
past 100 years that has affected our society in a meaningful way and present your hypothesis on
how it might further affect our society during your lifetime. Present either a 30-minute oral
report or a 1,500-word written report to your mentor.
8. Submit your Supernova Award application to the district or council Nova or advancement
committee for approval.