Wright Brothers
Supernova Award Requirements
1. Earn the Dr. Sally Ride Supernova Award while a registered Venturer or Sea Scout OR earn the
Dr. Bernard Harris Supernova Award while a registered Scout in Scouts BSA.
2. As a Venturer or Sea Scout complete ONE additional Venturer/Sea Scout Nova award for a total
of four. The Nova award completed is to be different from any Nova awards previously
completed.
3. Using the guidelines for Venturing/Sea Scout STEM Explorations, complete STEM explorations
for four of the topics listed below. Use of Scouts BSA Merit Badge content is encouraged.
Animal Science, Archaeology, Architecture, Astronomy, Automotive Maintenance, Aviation, Bird
Study, Chemistry, Composite Materials, Computers, Dentistry, Drafting, Electricity, Electronics,
Energy, Engineering, Environmental Science, Farm Mechanics, Fish and Wildlife Management,
Forestry, Gardening, Geocaching, Geology, Insect Study, Inventing, Mammal Study, Medicine,
Nature, Nuclear Science, Oceanography, Plant Science, Pulp and Paper, Radio, Reptile and
Amphibian Study, Robotics, Scuba Diving, Soil and Water Conservation, Space Exploration,
Surveying, Veterinary Medicine, Weather, Welding.
4. Complete TWO additional Supernova activity topics, one each in the two STEM areas not
completed for the Dr. Sally Ride Supernova Award or Dr. Bernard Harris Supernova Award.
(Upon completion of the Wright Brothers Supernova Award, the Venturer/Sea Scout will have
completed one Supernova activity topic in each of the four STEM areas.)
5. Participate in a local, state, or national science fair or mathematics competition OR any other
equally challenging STEM-oriented competition or workshop approved by your mentor. An
example of this would be an X-Prize type competition. (Note: The intent is that upon completion
of the Wright Brothers Supernova Award, the Venturer/Sea Scout will have participated in two
such events.)
6. Working with your mentor, organize and present a Nova award or other STEM-related program
at a Cub Scout den or pack meeting. Be sure to receive permission from the appropriate unit
leader. If a Cub Scout den or pack is not available, your presentation may be given to another
group. (Note: The intent is that upon completion of the Wright Brothers Supernova Award, the
Venturer/Sea Scout will have completed two such presentations.)
7. Research a scientific, technical, engineering, or mathematical breakthrough or invention of the
past 100 years that has affected our society in a meaningful way. Develop your hypothesis on
how this invention might further affect our society during your lifetime. Present either a 30-
minute oral report or a 1,500-word written report to your mentor.
8. Submit your application to the district or council Nova or advancement committee for approval.