MUSIC AND
BUGLING


MUSIC AND BUGLING
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Music and
www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Bugling or check Scoutbook for the latest requirements.
35921
ISBN 978-0-8395-3341-2
©2024 Scouting America/Boy Scouts of America
2024 Printing


MUSIC AND BUGLING 3


4 MUSIC AND BUGLING


MUSIC AND BUGLING 5
Contents
MUSIC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Music, Music, Music! . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Singing and Playing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Sound, Music, and Musical Instruments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
Music Appreciation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
Music in America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
Joining a Musical Group . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
Leading a Group . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
Composing Music . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
Traditional Instruments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
Cataloging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
BUGLING . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
The Bugle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
Music and Bugling Resources. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78





MUSIC AND BUGLING 7
.Music, Music, Music!
Music, Music, Music!
Music is woven into life, from the lullaby of your earliest
memories to the music you enjoy today. A person walking
alone and whistling or singing is making music. Many people
hear the sounds in nature—wind in trees, flowing water,
birdsong, a coyote’s howl—as a kind of music. Nature’s
sounds and even its silences have inspired people to make
music. Composers have translated the sounds of industry and
busy cities into music, too.
The history of music is rich and exciting. Through the
ages, new music has been created by people who learned from
tradition, then explored and innovated. All the great music has
not yet been written. Today, the possibilities for creating new
music are limitless.
What to Play?
Be sure to choose an instrument you will enjoy. You should
like its sound, and the action of playing it—fingers on keys, a
bow on strings—should appeal to you. Maybe you see yourself
playing trombone in a marching band, playing guitar in a rock
band, or trying out new pieces by yourself on the piano.
You can earn the Music merit badge with or with-
out playing an instrument or taking lessons. Either
way, this pamphlet will help you get your musical
bearings and choose your direction.
MUSIC


8 MUSIC AND BUGLING
Music, Music, Music!.
Buying an Instrument
Before buying an instrument, ask the advice of your music
instructor or a friend who is an accomplished musician. They
should know about the quality, cost, and the most reliable
places to buy musical instruments. Expert advice can save you
time, money, and disappointment.
Some instruments, such as a new piano, are costly, but
music dealers also offer rentals and payment plans. Secondhand
and “school” instruments (instruments designed for beginners)
also will cost less. If you are shopping for a used instrument,
ask if the dealer offers a guarantee.
Many schools lend instruments and provide instruction
for beginning students. You might be able to start your lessons
at school. Later, if you like the instrument, you could find a
private teacher for individual lessons.
Choosing a Teacher
A smaller community might have only one or two music
teachers. In a larger city, you will find a bewildering array
of instructors and music schools. Ask the advice of someone
knowledgeable, and be sure to check with friends at school
or in your unit who take lessons. A professional musician
experienced in performance might also be a good instructor.
If no one nearby teaches the instrument you want to play,
you might try a self-instruction course temporarily. Have some-
one who knows music help you with the basics: note values,
counting time, clef and note placement, as well as holding,
fingering, and caring for the instrument. A reliable instruction
book will be helpful. Ask your music teacher or merit badge
counselor for recommendations. Check your local music store,
school, or public library.
Your singing voice
is an instrument,
too. If you choose
vocal instruction,
you could become
a member of a
chorus or choir
at school or your
place of worship,
or start your own
singing group.
You will get more satisfaction and longer use
from a reconditioned instrument of good make
than from a new instrument of inferior quality.
Whatever instrument you buy, insure it against
loss or damage.


If an instructor’s students play well, it is a sign of good instruction.





MUSIC AND BUGLING 11
.Singing and Playing
Singing and Playing
Whether you sing, play an instrument, or whistle* to fulfill
requirement 1, it will help if you know how to read music. You
and your counselor can review the meanings of the instructions
and symbols on the piece you plan to play. Practice until you
can perform the piece using good technique, phrasing, tone,
rhythm, tempo, and dynamics.
Let’s look at these terms.
Technique. The way a musician handles the technical details
of playing an instrument or singing.
Phrasing. Grouping notes to form distinct musical phrases.
A phrase is a short musical thought, typically two to four
measures (bars) long.
Tone. Sound quality.
Rhythm. A steady pattern of beats or time units in a piece of
music. Some beats in the pattern are accented.
Tempo. The speed at which a piece of
music is played. A slow tempo is calm
and soothing, while a quick tempo can
be exciting. When practicing difficult
pieces of music, performers often play
at a slow tempo while they learn the
tough spots.
Dynamics. Degrees of sound volume
and the ways to change volume.
*Note: The counselor can accept whistling in
place of voice or instrument, if the quality of
whistling is superior. The whistler must show
definite technical ability and musicianship while
performing the assigned piece. Whistling a tune
pleasantly is not enough to satisfy requirement 1.
Some Common
Dynamics Terms
• Pianissimo (pp)—very soft
• Piano (p)—soft
• Mezzo forte (mf)—
moderately loud
• Forte (f)—loud
• Fortissimo (ff)—very loud
• Crescendo (cresc.)—getting
louder gradually
• Diminuendo (dim.)—getting
softer gradually





MUSIC AND BUGLING 13
.Sound, Music, and Musical Instruments
Sound, Music, and
Musical Instruments
To create sound, something must vibrate (move rapidly back
and forth). Your vocal cords vibrate when you speak, shout,
or sing. Put your hand on your throat as you speak and you
will feel the vibrations. The string of a guitar vibrates when
plucked. A drum’s surface vibrates when tapped with a drum-
stick. The vibrations, or sound waves, travel through the air to
your ears. The sound waves reach your eardrum, causing it to
vibrate so that you hear the sound.
Different sounds have different-shaped sound waves
according to each sound’s loudness (the force of the vibration)
and frequency (the number of times per second that the sound
wave vibrates). A high note on the violin has a fast vibration;
the sound waves are close together, creating a high frequency.
The tuba’s low-pitched notes indicate a slower vibration;
sound waves are farther apart, creating a low frequency.
Stretch a rubber
band between
two nails. Put your
ear close to the
taut rubber band
and pluck it.
What do you
hear? Pluck the
band again, this
time watching it
closely. What do
you see?
The distance between two notes with the same
name (C to C, for example) is called an octave.
The higher note has twice as many vibrations
per second as the lower note. That is why it has
a higher tone, or pitch (highness or lowness of
the sound).


14 MUSIC AND BUGLING
Sound, Music, and Musical Instruments.
Musical Instruments
Musical instruments usually are grouped according to how
they produce sound. The five main groups, or families, are
percussion, wind, stringed, keyboard, and electronic.
Percussion Instruments
Percussion means striking together to produce noise. All per-
cussion instruments are struck—some with sticks or hand mal-
lets, some by hand, and some by one part of the instrument
hitting another, as with cymbals or castanets. Some have a
definite pitch, such as the timpani, chimes, xylophone, and
glockenspiel. Some have an indefinite pitch, such as the
tambourine, drum, and castanets.
The most common drums are the snare drum and bass
drum. The snare drum has snares (cords) stretched across its
lower head. It has two forms: a smaller, shallower model called
the concert snare drum; and a larger, deeper model called the
field drum. Both are played with regular drumsticks.
Sound the Drum
Put a few paper clips on the top of a drum. (If you
do not have a real drum handy, stretch wrapping
paper over a coffee can and hold the paper in place
with a strong rubber band.) Tap on the drumhead.
What happens to the paper clips? What do you see
and hear? How do you explain your observations?
21
23
24
25
26
18 19 20 13 14
15
16
17
9 10
11
12
6
5 7
81
2 3
4
22
Diagram of typical orchestra seating, by families of instruments


MUSIC AND BUGLING 15
.Sound, Music, and Musical Instruments
The bass drum is
the large drum used to
mark the beats in music.
The drummer strikes it
with large mallets that are
handheld or mounted on
a foot pedal. Attached to
the bass drum, or ready
nearby, may be several
accessories: cymbals,
tom-toms, triangle, tam-
bourine, maracas, whistles,
cowbells, gongs, and other
instruments that produce exciting and unusual sounds.
In jazz and rock music, the drummer is the driving force
of the rhythm. The jazz or rock drum kit usually consists of
a snare drum, a bottom drum (bass or kick drum), crash
cymbals, a ride cymbal, and tom-toms. There is also a high
hat (often spelled hi-hat), which is a pair of cymbals the
drummer opens and closes with a foot pedal while playing
on the upper cymbal with a drumstick or brush.
Percussionists
must be mindful
of tempo. While
all musicians
should be aware
of the beat,
drummers often
are responsible
for keeping
a steady tempo.
Concert snare drum, field snare
drum, and bass drum
TOM-TOMS
CRASH CYMBAL RIDE CYMBAL
HI-HAT
BASS
DRUM
FLOOR
TOM
SNARE
DRUM


16 MUSIC AND BUGLING
Wind Instruments
The wind instruments include the woodwinds
(flute, piccolo, clarinet, saxophone, oboe, and
bassoon) and the brass instruments (trumpet,
French horn, tuba, and trombone).
All wind instruments are played by making
air vibrate within a hollow tube. The longer the
tube, the longer the column of vibrating air inside
the instrument, the slower the vibration, and the
lower the pitch. Each wind instrument has a way
for the player to change the length of the air column
to produce different notes.
Woodwind instruments. The flute and piccolo are
edge-blown instruments. They are played by blowing air
across a hole in the hollow tube of the instrument.
The other woodwind instruments are called reed instru-
ments. Sound is made when a reed—a thin piece of cane,
wood, or plastic—vibrates against a mouthpiece. The clarinet
and saxophone have a single-reed mouthpiece. The oboe and
Get five clean, empty bottles
of the same shape and size. Fill
four of the bottles with different
amounts of water and leave the
fifth one empty. Blow across
the top of each bottle. Compare
the sounds. What kind of pitch
is produced when you blow
across the empty bottle (the
longest column of air)? And what about the pitch produced from
the almost-full bottle (the shortest column of air)?
Flute, clarinet,
and saxophone


MUSIC AND BUGLING 17
.Sound, Music, and Musical Instruments
bassoon have two reeds bound together. These vibrate against
each other when air is blown through them.
A woodwind has holes along its length. The player shortens
or lengthens the column of vibrating air in the instrument by
opening and closing these holes. Vibrations occur only in the
air between the mouthpiece and the first open hole. If all the
holes are closed, the air column is at its longest and the lowest
possible note is made.
Brass instruments. A brass instrument is played by blowing
air into a cup-shaped or funnel-shaped mouthpiece, which
makes the air inside the instrument vibrate. Except for the
trombone and bugle, all brass instruments use finger-
operated valves to open sections of tubing to make different
notes. The trombonist lengthens the tube by moving the slide.
The bugle is a simple tube with no mechanical control.
Trombone
Tuba
French horn
Trumpet


18 MUSIC AND BUGLING
.
Stringed Instruments
Stringed instruments fall into two groups: those that are bowed,
such as the violin, viola, and cello; and those that are plucked,
such as the guitar, banjo, lute, and harp.
Bowed instruments. While these instruments can
also be plucked, they mainly are played by drawing
a bow back and forth across the strings. The pitch
is varied by pressing the strings with the fingers
of the other hand. The vibrations travel into the
body of the instrument, the sound box,
where they resonate.
Plucked instruments. Harp strings are
plucked with the fingers. Other plucked
instruments, also called fretted instruments,
have a series of frets, or ridges, that mark
where the strings should be pressed to vary the tones.
(The fingers are placed between the frets.) Guitars,
ukuleles, and banjos are stringed instruments that are
plucked with the fingers or with a small pick.
The weight,
length, and
tension of each
string varies the
pitch. A short, thin,
tight string makes
rapid vibrations
and a higher pitch.
A thicker, longer,
looser string makes
slower vibrations
and a lower pitch.
Pressing a string
changes its length
and tightness.
Stringed
instruments
that are bowed:
violin and cello
Stringed instruments
that are plucked:
banjo, guitar, and harp


MUSIC AND BUGLING 19
.Sound, Music, and Musical Instruments
Keyboard Instruments
Keyboard instruments combine many of the features of instru-
ments from other groups. For example, the piano is both a
percussion and a stringed instrument—it makes sound when
a felt-covered hammer strikes a metal string. When you press
a key on a harpsichord, a string is plucked. The organ uses
air forced through reeds or hollow tubes that are much like
whistles, or electric vibrations.
Piano
The accordion
is a handheld
version of the
forced-air organ,
with an additional
button keyboard
for bass notes.
Accordion
Organ


20 MUSIC AND BUGLING
Sound, Music, and Musical Instruments.
Electronic Instruments
Electronic instruments fall into two groups: traditional instru-
ments whose normal sound is altered electronically, such as
the electric guitar; and instruments that produce sound
electronically, such as the synthesizer.
An electric guitar uses
an electric pickup to sense
vibrations in a plucked
string. The pickup converts
the vibrations to electric
signals, which are sent to
an amplifier and then con-
verted back into vibrations
by a speaker. The speaker
produces the sound.
Synthesizers are
computerized machines
that can imitate the sounds
of many instruments and
produce a great variety of other
sounds. They generate electric signals
or replay pre-recorded signals (called
“sampled sounds”). These signals are
sent to an amplifier and converted to
vibrations by a speaker system.
MIDI
The musical instrument digital interface (MIDI) lets you
use a computer to record, edit, and play back music using
MIDI-compatible electronic instruments—usually keyboard
synthesizers. With MIDI, you can compose and edit your own
music, learn about music theory, or turn a home computer
into a do-it-yourself music-mixing studio.
Many composers today write music on a computer that
has MIDI instruments attached to it. Using special software, a
composer tells a MIDI synthesizer what notes to play, and at
what tempo and volume. The composer can “cut and paste”
to rearrange music sequences and fix mistakes by editing
individual notes.
Electric guitar and amplifier
Synthesizer


MUSIC AND BUGLING 21
.Sound, Music, and Musical Instruments
The composer selects what musical instrument the
synthesizer should sound like—a piano, for example, or
maybe a violin, guitar, flute, trumpet, or drum. Using MIDI
instruments, a composer working alone can play all the parts
in a musical composition, and all of the various instruments.
With a MIDI-equipped computer and synthesizer, a composer
can create a virtual orchestra at home and listen to composi-
tions at any time.
Noteworthy Inventors
In the 1760s, Benjamin Franklin invented the glass
harmonica, a set of glass bowls arranged by size
on a spindle. The player used a foot treadle to turn
the spindle and produced tones by touching the
rims of the rotating glasses. The instrument was
popular in the late 1700s and early 1800s, but it is
seldom played today.
Other musical inventions have been more
successful. Here are some important inventors and
their inventions. You can find out more about them
in an encyclopedia or on the internet (with your
parent or guardian’s permission).
Johann Christoph Denner—clarinet, about 1700
Bartolommeo Cristofori—piano, about 1710
Adolphe Sax—saxophone, about 1840
Thomas A. Edison—phonograph
(record player), 1877
Guglielmo Marconi—wireless telegraphy
(radio), 1895
Morse Robb—electronic organ, 1928
George Beauchamp, Adolph Rickenbacker, Les Paul,
Leo Fender, and Paul Bigsby—
electric guitars, 1930s and 1940s
Hugh Le Caine—synthesizer, 1945
Dave Smith—musical instrument digital interface
(MIDI), early 1980s





MUSIC AND BUGLING 23
.Music Appreciation
Music Appreciation
Attending live performances is the best way to experience
music. Look for concerts by popular artists, bands, community
orchestras and choruses, and at colleges and universities. Some
recitals by college students are open to the public for free.
If there are no live performances in your area, you can
listen to recordings—CDs or streaming. Check radio and public
television schedules, too. Internet radio offers music from all
genres (types) at your demand. Videos and DVDs of concerts
and operas are available at libraries and online. Also, many
artists and record labels offer free samples of their music
online. Whenever you download music from the internet, be
sure you have your parent or guardian’s permission and that
you are not infringing upon copyright laws.
The Scout Oath and Scout Law relate directly to observ-
ing intellectual property law. Young people frequently have an
opportunity to copy or share music, movies, or games with oth-
ers without permission of the publisher. However, Scouts who
knowingly make copies without permission are violating the
Scout Oath’s pledge to be “morally straight” and the point of the
Scout Law calling on Scouts to be “trustworthy.”Unauthorized
and illegal content sharing is not a victimless crime. This behav-
ior may disadvantage and discourage those who create intellec-
tual property economically and creatively.
If you choose requirements 3a or 3b, you might
find yourself listening to music more intently than
ever before. Take notes so you can recall your
impressions of each piece of music when you talk
with your counselor. Also note such information
as composers or songwriters, orchestras or
performers, conductors, and solo artists.
A concert is a
public musical
performance,
usually involving
more than two
performers. A
recital usually is
a more private
performance,
featuring music of
a single kind (or a
single composer),
sung or played by
one person or a
small group.


24 MUSIC AND BUGLING
Music Appreciation.


MUSIC AND BUGLING 25
.Music Appreciation
Classical Music
Classical music is written mostly for concerts, operas,
ballets, and religious services. Classical music is also called
“art music.” Here are some types of classical music and
performances to which you might listen.
Symphony. A major musical work played by an orchestra.
Most symphonies have four movements, or parts. Famous
symphonies include Beethoven’s Fifth (“da-da-da-DUM”)
and Mozart’s Symphony No. 41 (nicknamed the
Jupiter Symphony).
Opera. A drama that is sung rather than spoken, usually
accompanied by a full orchestra. Operas combine music, art,
and drama. They often are staged with impressive
costumes, scenery, and lighting. The term grand opera
describes operas with serious or tragic plots, in which
every word is sung. Some of the best-known operas are:
• Don Giovanni by Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart (1756–91)
• Aïda and Rigoletto by Giuseppe Verdi (1813–1901)
• Carmen by Georges Bizet (1838–75)
• Madame Butterfly by Giacomo Puccini (1858–1924)
Consider each piece of music. Did it make you
feel happy? Excited? Annoyed? Peaceful? Wistful?
Were you glad when it ended, or could you have
listened to it for hours? These are the questions
that matter. Great music cannot really be explained,
though critics might analyze it in endless detail.
What the composer or songwriter intended is inter-
esting to know, but what matters is your reaction to
the music.


26 MUSIC AND BUGLING
Music Appreciation.
Operetta. A shorter, less serious form of the operatic
art, with spoken dialogue and humorous romantic plots.
Some of the best-known operettas are:
• The Pirates of Penzance and The Mikado by composer
William S. Gilbert (1836–1911) and librettist Arthur
Sullivan (1842–1900)
• Babes in Toyland by Victor Herbert (1859–1924)
• The Student Prince by Sigmund Romberg (1887–1951)
• Rose Marie and The Vagabond King by Rudolf Friml
(1879–1972)
Oratorio. A serious composition sung by a chorus and solo-
ists accompanied by a full orchestra. It usually is religious and
based on the Bible. There are no costumes, scenery, or action.
Some of the great oratorios are:
• Saint Matthew Passion by Johann Sebastian Bach
(1685–1750)
• Messiah by George Frideric Handel (1685–1759)
• The Creation and The Seasons by Franz Joseph Haydn
(1732–1809)
• Saint Paul and Elijah by Felix Mendelssohn (1809–47)
If you are new to opera, you might want to start
with operas in English. Look for Amahl and the
Night Visitors (Gian-Carlo Menotti) and Porgy and
Bess (George Gershwin). Recordings are available
of operas based on American events and people,
such as Nixon in China (John Adams) and X:
The Life and Times of Malcolm X (Anthony Davis).
Be sure to read the story of an opera before
you listen to a performance. Many operas are in
German, French, or Italian. You might be able to
find and read the libretto (the entire text) in English.


MUSIC AND BUGLING 27
.Music Appreciation
Ballet. Great music has been created for classical ballet. Igor
Stravinsky (1882–1971) composed music for The Firebird,
Petrushka, and The Rite of Spring. Peter Tchaikovsky (1840–93)
created the music for Swan Lake, The Sleeping Beauty, and
The Nutcracker. The music has often been performed and
recorded apart from the ballet performances.
Program music. Program music describes something or tells
a story. Examples are Grand Canyon Suite by Ferde Grofé (1892–
1972), The Sorcerer’s Apprentice by Paul Dukas (1865–1935),
and Peter and the Wolf by Sergey Prokofiev (1891–1953). The
composer creates the piece to inspire certain images, thoughts,
and feelings for the listener. Sometimes the description is barely
suggested, or the title indicates the meaning. Sometimes the
entire story behind the music is printed in the program.
Popular Music
The many different styles of popular music include bluegrass,
blues, country, folk, gospel, jazz, rap, rock, and soul. Some
popular music loses its appeal quickly, but many pop songs
have lasted for decades, even centuries.
Scene from The Nutcracker


28 MUSIC AND BUGLING
Music in America.
Music in America
If these pages could play the music of what you are about
to read, you would hear the drums and chants of American
Indian tribal songs. You would hear the music that sailed
across the Atlantic from Europe: hymns, folk ballads, and
symphonies. And you would hear the rhythms of Africa
mingled with jazz, blues, and work songs.
American music is the sounds of American life—of people
praying, protesting, working, and celebrating. American music
is a true melting pot of styles, ethnic backgrounds, and bound-
less experimentation.
American Indian Musical Traditions
Some American Indian tribes believed new songs came in
dreams or visions. Each song had a purpose: to assure success
in hunting or battle, to heal the sick, or to praise a person’s
generosity. Traditional instruments included flutes, whistles,
drums, and rattles made from gourds.
As American music developed, it rarely borrowed from
American Indian music. Meanwhile, tribes preserved their own
music, songs, and dances. Today, many recording artists play
This section will help you trace the development of
music in America and fulfill requirement 3d. It will
give you ideas about composers and performers
whose lives and works you might like to investi-
gate. The best way to learn about them is through
listening to their music and reading books about
their lives.


MUSIC AND BUGLING 29
.Music in America
traditional American Indian instruments.
R. Carlos Nakai, who is of Navajo-
Ute heritage, has included traditional
tribal melodies in his compositions for
the American Indian flute. The work
of Mohican composer Brent Michael
Davids has been performed at the
Kennedy Center.
The Colonies
Religious music was a basic part of life
in the Colonies. Early New England
Puritans sang psalms, but they did
not use musical instruments in
their churches. The Moravians in
Pennsylvania, however, included sing-
ing, organ music, and orchestral instru-
ments in their religious services.
Settlers sang folk songs, lullabies,
and sailors’ chanteys from their home
countries. As musical instruments from
Europe became available, more music
was played in Colonial homes. Traveling music masters taught
the violin, flute, spinet, harpsichord, and guitar.
Slaves brought West African musical traditions and mixed
them with the European-style music they heard around them.
Techniques from Africa included complex rhythms, sliding
notes, and the call-and-response form.
The first book of entirely American music was the
New England Psalm Singer by William Billings, a
Boston tanner with a passion for creating music.
The book was published in 1770 on American-
made paper, with a frontispiece (illustration)
engraved by Paul Revere. Billings’ compositions
had an originality and energy that reflected the
frontier spirit.


30 MUSIC AND BUGLING
Music in America.
The 1800s
Following the Revolutionary War, Americans built theaters and
started philharmonic societies and symphony orchestras in the
larger cities. Professional musicians arrived from Europe and
gave concerts around the country. New Orleans became known
for opera.
America’s first hit was “Yankee Doodle.” The verse
that starts “Yankee Doodle came to town” was well-
known before the Revolutionary War. The British
sang it to insult the Colonials, but the Yankees
adopted the tune and marched to war with it.
Francis Scott Key wrote the national anthem of
the United States after the bombardment of Fort
McHenry at Baltimore, Maryland, during the War of
1812. When Key saw the bedraggled American flag
still flying above the fort at dawn, he dashed off to
pen the words to “The Star-Spangled Banner” and
set it to an old English tune called “To Anacreon
in Heaven.”
Revolutionary War–era drum and fife corps


MUSIC AND BUGLING 31
.Music in America
Settlers in the Southwest played the music of Spain
and Mexico. Singing and dancing at fiestas lasted for days.
Musicians favored the guitar but also played the violin, harp,
and flute. Missions had their own choirs.
Many American families played music from sheet music
and songbooks on upright pianos in their homes. In the mid-
1800s, Stephen Foster wrote popular songs you probably know,
such as “Oh! Susanna,” “De Camptown Races,” and “My Old
Kentucky Home.” The Civil War inspired an outpouring of
songs praising the bravery of soldiers and expressing the strong
feelings people had about the war.
Rural residents traveled to “camp meetings” to hear ser-
mons by circuit-riding preachers. People sang hymns, clapped
their hands, and jumped for joy, creating a new style of song
called the spiritual.
Among African Americans, spiritual style included
humming, joyful moaning, and improvisation
(spur-of-the-moment invention) around the melody—
more qualities from African heritage that would have
lasting influence on American music.
The mariachi band has a colorful history dating back hundreds
of years. The modern-day mariachi band, such as this one, often
will have violins, guitar, trumpets, the vihuela (a small five-string
guitar), and the guitarrón (six-string bass guitar).


32 MUSIC AND BUGLING
Music in America.
Blues songs
use “blue notes,”
notes that are
somewhere
between natural
and flat. The
blues often
express sorrow
or loneliness,
or speak of
life’s troubles
with humor
or defiance.
The 1890s and
Popular Music
In the 1890s, band music and
ragtime swept the nation. The
popularity of band music was due
mainly to John Philip Sousa, who
toured the country with his concert
band. Sousa’s marches, such as
“Washington Post” and “The Stars
and Stripes Forever,” are a perma-
nent part of American music.
By 1900, all of America
danced to ragtime. Written mainly
by African American pianists, the
name comes from “ragged time,” or
uneven rhythm. While the pianist’s
left hand played a regular beat,
the right hand played a syncopated
(irregularly accented) melody. It was technically challenging
music to play.
This complex, entertaining music has recently been
revived among pianists. The popular 1973 movie The Sting
used rags by composer Scott Joplin in its background score.
Into the 20th Century
Elements of popular, folk, and classical music began to mix
in the 20th century, thanks to new technologies and the
mass media. Some of the distinctly
American styles that grew out
of the mix are described briefly here.
The Blues
Around 1900, many African Americans
moved from the rural South to cities.
With them they brought “country” or
“down-home” blues that came from
work songs and spirituals. When this
music met urban song styles, “city
blues” resulted.
Scott Joplin, the leading
composer of ragtime,
said it was never right
to play ragtime fast.
Joplin’s compositions
include “Maple Leaf Rag”
and “The Entertainer.”
Guitarist/singer B.B. King carried on the
blues tradition until his death in 2015.


MUSIC AND BUGLING 33
.Music in America
Famous blues singers include Blind Lemon
Jefferson, Gertrude “Ma” Rainey, and Bessie Smith.
The composer W.C. Handy became known as
“Father of the Blues” because he brought the
music to a wide audience. Many consider
“St. Louis Blues” to be Handy’s masterpiece.
Jazz
Between 1900 and 1910, brass bands in the South
started to “rag” their marches, and horns wailed
like blues singers. Ragtime and blues set the stage
for jazz, which has had enormous influence on
both popular and classical music. New Orleans
was the cradle of early traditional jazz, though jazz
was played in other places, too. Elements typical of
jazz include improvisation around a melody, riffs
(short repeated phrases), blue notes, and call-and-
response between instruments or between a voice
and instruments.
Jazz often is described as America’s
greatest contribution to world music.
Important jazz pioneers include:
Charles “Buddy” Bolden, Edward
“Kid” Ory, Joseph “King” Oliver,
Ferdinand “Jelly Roll” Morton,
and Louis “Satchmo” Armstrong.
In New Orleans, African
American bands played for
parades, dances, and funerals.
The cornet, trombone, and clarinet
players would improvise, each
playing a different version of a
melody all at once. The result
was a happy, lively sound, in
numbers such as “When the
Saints Go Marching In.”
After Louis Armstrong started
improvising trumpet solos,
the solo became a basic in jazz.
He also introduced “scat”
singing, a solo of rhythmical
nonsense syllables.


34 MUSIC AND BUGLING
Music in America.
Big Band and Swing
Big band jazz came on the scene
in the late 1920s with more
instruments and danceable
music. The bandleader Benny
Goodman originated the lively
sound of swing in 1935. Edward
“Duke” Ellington—jazz pianist,
bandleader, and one of America’s
foremost composers—created
complex innovative jazz. Some
leading vocalists with swing
bands were Billie Holiday, Frank
Sinatra, and Ella Fitzgerald.
Bebop
Swing moved too far from its jazz roots for some musicians.
They rebelled in the early 1940s with bebop, or bop. Bop had
complicated rhythms and harmonies meant
for listening, not dancing. The trumpeter Dizzy
Gillespie, the pianist Thelonious Monk, and
the saxophonist Charlie “Bird” Parker, three
of the best jazz improvisers, were important
bop musicians.
Other Jazz Styles
More jazz styles followed. Cool, or progressive,
jazz had a smooth, mellow sound and some-
times included the French horn, flute, or cello.
The trumpeter Miles Davis was a leading
cool-jazz musician.
In the 1960s, saxophonists Ornette Coleman
and John Coltrane were important to free jazz. Free jazz gen-
erally allowed all musicians in a band to improvise without
being guided by a basic melody.
Jazz-rock fusion combined jazz’s improvisations with
rock’s rhythms and sound. This meant the addition of synthe-
sizers, along with the electric piano, guitar, and bass. Miles
Davis and the pianist Herbie Hancock were pioneers in jazz-rock
fusion, which started in the late 1960s.
Unlike early jazz
bands, big bands
and swing bands
relied more on
written music
than on
improvisation.


MUSIC AND BUGLING 35
.Music in America
Classical Music in the 20th Century
During the first half of the 20th century, adventur-
ous changes in classical music took place. Here are
a few important modern composers.
Charles Ives (1874–1954) used complex
rhythms and dissonances (combinations of tones
that seem to clash). His highly original music is
often playful and humorous. In his Holidays sym-
phony, he created the effect of three marching
bands playing different tunes all at once. His
well-known works include “Three Places in New
England” and “General William Booth Enters Into
Heaven.” Ives has been called the United States’
first great composer.
William Grant Still (1895–1978) was the
first African American composer whose classical
music was widely published and performed.
Still’s Afro-American symphony has a blues
theme. He set his Songs of Separation to the
writings of famous black poets. His Ennanga
suite is a tribute to his African heritage; his opera
Mota is set in Africa.
George Gershwin (1898–1937) wrote popular
songs, musical comedies, orchestral works, and
opera. At 20, he wrote his first Broadway musical and then a
string of hit songs and musicals. Gershwin’s famous Rhapsody
in Blue has a blues theme
and jazzlike rhythms. His
folk opera, Porgy and Bess,
has been performed all over
the world.
By the time he was 15,
Aaron Copland (1900–90)
knew he would be a composer.
He studied in Paris, then
returned home determined to
write music that would be
recognized as distinctly
American. His music for the
ballets Billy the Kid, Rodeo,
and Appalachian Spring drew
on American folklore.
George Gershwin’s brother,
Ira Gershwin (1896–1983),
right, usually wrote the lyrics
for George’s musicals.
Aaron Copland


36 MUSIC AND BUGLING
Music in America.
Milton Babbitt (1916–2011) built on the work of Arnold
Schoenberg (1874–1951), an Austrian composer whose “serial
music” repeated a pattern of 12 selected tones. Babbitt extended
this method to patterns of rhythm, timbre, dynamics, and
instruments for “total serialization.” The result is complex
interwoven music.
John Cage (1912–92) composed music based on chance.
Each performance of a Cage composition is unpredictable.
Some of Cage’s works are for “prepared piano,” a piano with
its tones altered by objects such as coins, screws, hairpins, and
bits of wood and rubber placed among the strings. In Fontana
Mix, Cage’s written music is a set of flowing-line drawings,
transparent pages, and a graph that can be combined in several
ways. Performers are free to interpret the result, which looks
like a cross between modern art and a road map.
Other Modern Composers
Listen to the works of modern composers to appreciate their
unique contributions to classical music. Here are some other
important composers:
John Adams (1947– )
Samuel Barber (1910–81)
Amy Beach (1867–1944)
Paul Bowles (1910–99)
Elliott Carter (1908–2012)
John Corigliano (1938– )
Henry Cowell (1897–1965)
Ruth Crawford-Seeger (1901–53)
Paul Creston (1906–85)
George Crumb (1929– )
Norman Dello Joio (1913–2008)
David Diamond (1915–2005)
Lukas Foss (1922–2009)
Philip Glass (1937– )
Morton Gould (1913–96)
Howard Hanson (1896–1981)
Roy Harris (1898–1979)
Barbara Kolb (1939– )
Ned Rorem (1923– )
Christopher Rouse (1949– )
Carl Ruggles (1876–1971)
William Schuman (1910–92)
Roger Sessions (1896–1985)
Virgil Thomson (1896–1989)
Joan Tower (1938– )
Andrew Lloyd Webber (1948– )
John Williams (1932– )
Ellen Taaffe Zwilich (1939– )
In the 1960s, Babbitt was one of the first composers of
electronic music. He also mixed electronic music with
live performances by singers and instrumentalists.


MUSIC AND BUGLING 37
.Music in America
Musical Theater
America’s first musicals were revues, in which
the plots were just excuses to tie songs together.
At that time, songwriters were more interested in
creating hit tunes that would sell sheet music than
telling stories.
But that changed in the 1920s when composers
and lyricists began to link better stories with songs.
Show Boat led the way, with its serious plot, music
by Jerome Kern, and lyrics by Oscar Hammerstein II.
Its songs, such as “Ol’ Man River,” were threaded
into the plot and helped the audience understand
the characters.
Leonard Bernstein (1918–90) was an extremely
versatile composer of musicals, opera, ballet,
choral works, and symphonies. He often used
syncopation and jazz and dance rhythms in his
work. He composed the exciting music for West
Side Story, which combined music, drama, and
dance in a new way.
The story, based on
Shakespeare’s Romeo
and Juliet, is set amid
New York tenements
and deals with young
love and teenage gangs.
The action is both
comic and tragic.
The songs, with lyrics
by Sondheim, range
from beautiful to
tough to funny.
Popular Music
Whatever style of today’s music you like, you can be sure
it has a history. The music sounds the way it does today
because it has been shaped along the way by songwriters
and performers. Pop, jazz, folk, blues, country, bluegrass,
gospel, rock, and rap have borrowed from one another,
and many artists work in several genres.
Other important
composers of
musicals were
Irving Berlin (who
also wrote “God
Bless America”),
Cole Porter,
Frank Loesser, and
Stephen Sondheim.
Oklahoma! began the modern
era in 1943. Richard Rodgers,
composer, and lyricist Oscar
Hammerstein II created songs
such as “Oh, What a Beautiful
Mornin’” to express the spirit
of the time, place, and charac-
ters. Together, the songs and
dances told the story.
Leonard Bernstein—composer,
conductor, pianist


38 MUSIC AND BUGLING
Music in America.
Pop
Pop covers a wide territory:
romantic songs, novelty tunes,
songs with messages, movie
themes, and more. Radio
“crooners” with soft, almost
whispering styles were popular
in the late 1920s. In the 1940s,
big-band singers like Frank
Sinatra became sensations.
After World War II, a stronger
economy meant teenagers had
money to buy records. New
music was written to appeal
to the young consumers.
Country
Country music developed from British ballads and folk songs
that were preserved in the South. In the mid-1920s, radio
shows such as the National Barn Dance in Chicago and the
Grand Ole Opry in Nashville began to broadcast this “hillbilly
music” to a wider audience.
But the music was already changing. Jimmie Rodgers
combined the Southern mountain ballad with the blues and a
vocal embellishment called the yodel to produce a new style
Countless artists
have been
pop musicians.
Barbra Streisand,
Quincy Jones,
Madonna,
Jennifer Lopez,
Celine Dion,
and Backstreet
Boys are some
examples.
Avril Lavigne and her band
have been described as
“nouveau-punk.”
Country music’s
popularity has
grown with the
rise of stars such
as Willie Nelson,
Dolly Parton,
Garth Brooks,
Tim McGraw,
Brooks & Dunn,
George Strait,
Alan Jackson (left),
Lee Ann Womack,
Faith Hill, and
many others.


MUSIC AND BUGLING 39
.Music in America
of country. Rodgers’ songs were among the first to attract a
national audience to rural Southern music.
Country music turned to the West with the success of
cowboy movies in the 1930s and 1940s. Honky-tonk music
followed and dealt with subjects like love and loss. Later, a
new relaxed style with an easy beat, known as “the Nashville
Sound,” developed.
Bluegrass
Country music gave birth to a new style called bluegrass,
pioneered by Bill Monroe and his band, the Blue Grass Boys,
beginning in 1939. Bluegrass is characterized by complicated
vocal and instrumental solos and distinctive vocal harmonies
including duet, trio, and quartet harmony singing. A typical
bluegrass band has guitar, banjo, fiddle, mandolin, and bass.
Bands sometimes feature a kind of steel guitar called a reso-
phonic guitar.
Lester Flatt and Earl Scruggs were important bluegrass
performers from the 1940s through the 1960s. Among the
major bluegrass groups of recent years are the Nashville
Bluegrass Band, Hot Rize, and Alison Krauss with her group
Union Station.
Gospel
The father of gospel music, most experts agree, is Thomas
A. Dorsey, composer of such well-known songs as “Take My
Hand, Precious Lord” and “There Will Be Peace in the Valley.”
As a young blues pianist, Dorsey accompanied blues singers
Bessie Smith and Ma Rainey. Then he began to write religious
music that had jazz rhythms and blues flavor. Gospel emerged
from the African American church to reach an ever-widening
The Carter Family,
Bob Wills, Roy
Acuff, Eddy
Arnold, Hank
Williams, Kitty
Wells, Patsy Cline,
Loretta Lynn,
Tammy Wynette,
Chet Atkins, and
Charley Pride
are some of the
founding artists of
country music.
Earl Scruggs wrote one of bluegrass music’s
most famous instrumentals, “Foggy Mountain
Breakdown,” which was used in the soundtrack of
the 1967 film Bonnie and Clyde. Deliverance (1972)
also featured bluegrass, the famous “Dueling
Banjos.” In 2001, the soundtrack for O Brother,
Where Art Thou? exposed more people to bluegrass
and traditional country music.


40 MUSIC AND BUGLING
Music in America.
audience. The golden age of gospel was
from 1945 to 1965, but the tradition and
the music thrive today.
The gospel style is vigorous, fervent,
and intensely spiritual. Famous gospel
performers include Mahalia Jackson,
Clara Ward, Sister Rosetta Tharpe, the
Mississippi Mass Choir, James Cleveland,
the Mighty Clouds of Joy, and the Five
Blind Boys of Alabama.
Folk
Folk music in the 20th century has often
featured songs of protest against conditions of
the day. Woody Guthrie wrote protest songs as
the nation struggled with the poverty brought on
by the dust storms and economic troubles of the
1930s. You might know his song “This Land Is
Your Land.”
In the late 1950s and early 1960s, folk sing-
ing became especially popular. Folk artists such
as Pete Seeger, Joan Baez, Judy Collins, Bob
Dylan, and Peter, Paul, and Mary rose to fame.
Gospel choirs sing in unison or in har-
mony, and often are led by a
principal singer or singers. Among
the best-known gospel choirs is
the Mississippi Mass Choir.
Pop singers who have been
heavily influenced by gospel
include Sam Cooke, Aretha
Franklin, Della Reese, Lou
Rawls, and Ray Charles.
Some major names among
contemporary gospel
performers are Kirk Franklin,
Jonathan McReynolds, and
CeCe Winans.
Singer-songwriter Bob Dylan,
a leader in the folk-rock move-
ment of the 1960s, wrote
meaningful lyrics about social
issues. Dylan’s classic songs
include “Blowin’ in the Wind”
and “The Times They Are
A-Changin’.”


MUSIC AND BUGLING 41
.Music in America
Rock
Teenagers claimed rock ’n’ roll, the new
music that emerged in the mid-1950s,
as their own music. Today’s rock music
evolved from early rock ’n’ roll to
cover a wide variety of vocal styles
and instrumentation. Rock music has
roots in rhythm and blues (R & B),
which combines blues, jazz, and gospel
styles. R & B has a powerful beat and
loud, intense music and vocals. Little
Richard and Chuck Berry were prominent
R & B artists. Rock also drew from coun-
try music. A typical rock song has
a driving beat, lots of volume, and simple
repetitive phrases.
The first rock ’n’ roll hit was
“Rock Around the Clock” by Bill Haley
and His Comets in 1954. In the late
1950s, Elvis Presley launched his career
and was on his way to becoming the King
of Rock ’N’ Roll.
In the 1960s, James Brown, Ray Charles, Aretha Franklin,
and others sang rock music called soul. Detroit became a
center for black singers, and the “Motown” sound developed
there. Well-known Motown singers include the Temptations,
Smokey Robinson and the Miracles, and Diana Ross and
the Supremes.
Some famous names in rock are the Beach Boys, Eric
Clapton, the Grateful Dead, Jimi Hendrix, the Rolling Stones,
Bruce Springsteen, Tina Turner, U2, and Stevie Wonder.
The Beatles from Liverpool, England,
toured the United States in 1964 and
revolutionized rock. They sang sophis-
ticated lyrics in styles that ranged
from ballads to hard rock. Their influ-
ence encouraged other rock groups to
expand styles, instrumentation, and
electronic effects.
From the 1970s through the early 2000s, rock
evolved and branched into different styles that, in
turn, influenced each other. Punk, heavy metal, and
rap are three main rock genres.


42 MUSIC AND BUGLING
Music in America.
Heavy Metal
Heavy metal is loud, theatrical, aggressive, wild and raw,
and often controversial. Metal music has been criticized for
its themes of death and destruction. Many heavy metal songs
express anger or desperation and intense feelings of alienation.
Metal music takes advantage of the modern electric guitar’s
abilities to make unusual sounds through effects such as feed-
back, distortion, and reverb (an electronically produced echo
effect). Metal borrows from rock ’n’ roll and the blues, with
influences from classical music.
Well-known heavy
metal or hard
rock bands from
the late 1960s
through the early
2000s include
Led Zeppelin,
Aerosmith, KISS,
Van Halen, and
Bon Jovi.
Early punk bands such as The Ramones and The
Clash set the stage for New Wave music (with
electronic influences) of the 1980s and Grunge
music (with heavy metal influences) of the 1990s,
inspiring artists such as Elvis Costello, New Order,
Talking Heads, and Nirvana.
The Scorpions


MUSIC AND BUGLING 43
.Music in America
Rap
Rap, with its rhythmic spoken lyrics, is a kind
of street poetry set to music. Rap speaks openly
about tough topics. Rap artists often talk about
the hardships and violence experienced by
many young African Americans in big cities.
The lyrics of some rap songs have caused
controversy for their emphasis on racism
and violence.
Rap grew out of African American street
culture in New York City during the 1970s. It
became the most popular new music to emerge in the late
20th century. Early rap groups included Grandmaster Flash
and Afrika Bambaataa. Performers
such as Salt-N-Pepa and MC Hammer
brought rap to a mainstream audi-
ence. Other influential rap perform-
ers have included Run-DMC, Queen
Latifah, and Arrested Development.
A Mixture of Music
Musicians today often blur the
line between classical and popular
music. Josh Groban sings pop,
rock, opera, and classical. Rock star
Sting and the group U2 blend opera
with their music. Jazz singer Bobby
McFerrin and classical cellist Yo-Yo
Ma performed together. Opera star
Kathleen Battle sang with pop star
Janet Jackson. Rock composer Prince
wrote the score for the Joffrey Ballet’s
Billboards. The Kronos Quartet (a
string quartet) performed works by Ornette Coleman, Charles
Ives, and Jimi Hendrix. Christopher Rouse composed work
influenced by Beethoven, Indian raga music, and Elvis Presley.
The music of America developed out of international
musical traditions and forms. But jazz, blues, and musical
theater are America’s unique contributions to the world
of music.
The term “rap” comes
from a 1960s slang
word for “conversation.”
Rappers often speak
or chant their songs to
electronic beats and
the sounds of records
being scratched.
Also a successful actor, Will Smith began
his career as a rapper in the mid-1980s.





MUSIC AND BUGLING 45
.Joining a Musical Group
Joining a Musical Group
Part of the fun of being a musician comes from sharing your
talent and love of music, practicing with other musicians, and
performing music for audiences to enjoy. If you sing or play an
instrument, it should be easy to find a musical group to join.
Schools have choruses, orchestras, marching bands, and
drum and bugle corps. Many have smaller groups such as
string quartets, brass ensembles, and jazz bands. Places of
worship have choir, bell choirs, and other vocal and instru-
mental groups. You might join a community orchestra or
chorus. Local groups might preserve cultural music traditions
and give you the chance to express your heritage.
Your teacher can help you decide when to join a group.
Singing or playing with others is quite different from working
solo. You watch the conductor and play exactly as he or
she directs: softly or loudly, more quickly or slowly. You
watch for your cue to play. You learn to continue with your
part while other instruments play around you. You also
learn to blend your part with the rest, developing a sense
of ensemble playing.
Why not take the lead in organizing a drum and
bugle corps that will be a source of pride to your
unit and a feature in community parades?
Scout units also have other kinds of musical
groups. Using the guidelines in this section,
you might help organize an ensemble, band, or
singing group, especially if there are no other local
musical groups for you to join for requirement 3c.


46 MUSIC AND BUGLING
Joining a Musical Group.
Drum and Bugle Corps
It takes only a few drums and bugles to sound like a sizable
unit. Two snare drums, a bass drum, and a couple of bugles
blend well together. For more impact, add cymbals, another
bugle or two, and perhaps three or four fifes. Now the combi-
nation can handle march music, bugle calls, drill signals, and
music for camp ceremonies and other Scouting occasions.
Ensembles
Two violins, a viola, and a cello make a string quartet. With
two trumpets, a French horn, a trombone, and a tuba, you can
have a brass quintet.


MUSIC AND BUGLING 47
.Joining a Musical Group
Jazz Combo
A jazz combo has two sections: a melody “front line” that
performs most of the solos, and a rhythm “back line.” The
front line has one to five brass and reed instruments: trum-
pet, trombone, clarinet, and alto and tenor saxophones. The
rhythm section has a piano, bass, drums, and sometimes an
acoustic or electric guitar.
Rock Band
Electric guitars and drums are the basic instruments in a rock
band. A piano or synthesizer might be included, too.
Many rock bands have four or five members. The Beatles
are a classic example of a four-instrument band, with lead
guitar, rhythm guitar, bass, and drums. Other bands are larger.
Chicago adds trumpet, trombone, and tenor sax to guitar, bass,
keyboards, and drums to total eight members.
A Cappella Group
A cappella is Italian for “in chapel style.” It means singing
without instrumental accompaniment.
A barbershop quartet is an example of an a cappella
group. An American style of harmony, it uses four voices:
tenor, lead, baritone, and bass. The four voices make a com-
plete four-part chord on almost every note, creating the distinc-
tive sound of barbershop quartets.
Think beyond
drums and guitars
to organize a rock
band, using the
available mix
of interested
musicians.
In most choral singing, the highest voice sings the
melody. But in barbershop quartets, the second-
highest voice, called the lead, sings the melody.





MUSIC AND BUGLING 49
.Leading a Group
Leading a Group
You will learn that you do not have to be the world’s best
singer to teach or lead songs.
Teaching a Song
These tips will get you started and help you relax and have
fun, too.
1. Practice the words and the melody of the song you will
teach until you know the song by heart.
2. Smile at the group. Be enthusiastic and act confident, even
if this is your first time teaching a song.
3. Start with a lively, well-known warm-up number, so
everyone (including you) can sing with confidence.
4. Tell the group the name of the song, and provide copies of
the lyrics. Use songbooks or song sheets, or write the lyrics
on a blackboard or large sheet of paper.
5. Sing the song through alone or with a small group that
already knows it.
6. Then sing phrase by phrase and have the group repeat
after you. If the song has several verses, teach one verse
at a time.
7. When the group has learned the phrases or verses, sing
the song all together. If the song is fast or difficult, sing it
slowly at first, then pick up speed as the singers master it.
8. Musical accompaniment helps. Piano, accordion, guitar,
and harmonica are good accompaniments because they can
play harmony, not just the melody.
9. When the group has sung the song a time or two, stop. Do
not work so hard that it is no longer fun. Go at once to a
familiar song.
For optional
requirement 4a,
you are to teach
three songs. Begin
with simple songs.
Save difficult
ones until you
are a more
experienced
teacher.


50 MUSIC AND BUGLING
Leading a Group.
Leading a Song
Because teaching is a part of song leading, many of the tips in
this chapter apply to both. Here are a few more hints to help
you lead songs successfully.
1. Give the starting note. Sing or hum a few bars of the song.
Or, have a few bars played, if an instrument is available.
Be careful not to pitch the song too high or low. If you
start the group on the wrong note, stop and start over.
2. Start with a slight upward arm motion followed by a
decisive downward motion (a downbeat), and begin
singing. Do not worry if some don’t start with the first
note. They will join in quickly.
3. Beat time with a simple down-and-up motion of the arm.
Hold your arm high enough for everyone to see, and make
your gestures definite and brisk. You are in command.
4. Control volume by raising your free hand for loudness and
lowering it for softness. Do not beat time with both hands
at once.
5. Move around a little, put some energy into it, and smile.
6. Stop while everyone is still having fun. Leave the group
wanting more.


MUSIC AND BUGLING 51
.Leading a Group
Keep the Beat
With songs that have 2/4, 3/4, and 6/8 time, make the downbeat on the
first beat of each measure.
With songs that have 4/4 time, make the downbeat on the first
beat of the measure, and also make the third beat a strong beat.
Demonstrate and explain these hand motions if your group is not
familiar with them.
1
2
2/4; 6/8
3
1 2
3/4
2
1
4
3
4/4





MUSIC AND BUGLING 53
.Composing Music
Composing Music
When you compose music, you bring your musical ideas and
sounds into the world. Creating one-of-a-kind, original work is
exciting and challenging.
Keys and Scales
Prepare for requirement 4b by reviewing what you know (or
need to learn) about keys. Music is said to be in a particular
key when it is based upon the scale starting with the key note
(the first note) of the same name.
For example, music in the key of C major is based on the
scale of C major. The scale of C major is C D E F G A B C.
Keys are indicated by key signatures—the sharps (#) or
flats ( ) are placed to the right of the clef.
The key signature for the key of C major has no sharps or flats.
The key of F major has one flat—B-flat—in the key signature.
The key of G major has one sharp—F-sharp—in the key signature.


54 MUSIC AND BUGLING
Composing Music.
Four-Note Composition
Pick a scale, and from it choose four notes. Play or sing them
as whole notes, half notes, and quarter notes. Rearrange
the order of the notes, sometimes omitting a note or two.
Experiment with and create patterns of notes and rhythms.
Repeat and vary the patterns.
Listen to the results. Trust what your ear tells you. When
you hear something you like, repeat it several times to help
you remember it. Change things you do not like. Experiment
freely, trying different musical ideas. Do not worry about
whether your tune is good. The important thing is to enjoy
making your own original music.
Many experienced musicians recommend using only four
notes for your first compositions. The four-note limit keeps
things simple, helps you focus, yet allows you to express many
distinct musical ideas.
The scale of G major is G A B C D E F-sharp G.
The scale of F major is F G A B-flat C D E F.
Play or sing these scales and the scale of C major;
they will sound very familiar.
Start and end your melody on the first note of the
scale. This will help give shape to your music and
also help you stay in one key.
Here are some four-note combinations you
might try. Explore other combinations, too.
C D F G
G B C D
F G B-flat C


MUSIC AND BUGLING 55
.Composing Music
Time Signatures
On the staff at the beginning of written music
you find two numbers. The numbers are the time
signature. They indicate how many beats are in
each bar, and the type (or value) of the beats.
In the 4/4 time signature, the top number says
there are four beats in the bar. The bottom number
indicates that these beats are quarter notes.
In music with four beats per bar, the first beat
is normally a little stronger than the others. The third
beat is also stronger, but not as strong as the first
beat. Try counting the following out loud, tapping
your foot at the same time, to get the feeling of the
four beats:
In 2/4 music, there are two quarter-note beats
in each bar. Music with two beats per bar tends to
have a driving rhythm: strong-weak, strong-weak.
In 3/4, or waltz, time there are three quarter-
note beats per bar. The first beat in each bar is the
strongest. The next two beats are weak. This gives
the distinctive waltz rhythm: one-two-three, one-
two-three (strong-weak-weak, strong-weak-weak).
Look at the drawings that show how to conduct
time in the “Leading a Group” section. Which motion
is used for 2/4 time? For 3/4 time? For 4/4 time?
4
4 STRONG WEAK MEDIUM WEAK
STRONG WEAK STRONG WEAK
2
4
3
4 STRONG WEAK WEAK
A bar, or measure,
is a way of
dividing music
into smaller
“compartments”
containing a
few beats.
The symbol C is
often substituted
for the 4/4 time
signature.


56 MUSIC AND BUGLING
Composing Music.
Notation
You probably know that written music is called notation and
is written on a five-lined staff. A composer can indicate much
more on this staff than the notes to be played. As you compose,
remember the following important points.
All music is made of two things: sound and silence. Sound
has the following qualities: pitch (the height or depth of the
sound), timbre (tone quality), duration (length), and dynamics
(loudness and softness). Music is linked to time and has move-
ment; one sound leads to the next. By organizing the sounds
through rhythm and tempo, a composer creates an original
piece of music.
A composer indicates the qualities of sound and move-
ment when writing a composition. Some of the qualities, such
as rhythm, pitch, and time, will appear as notation on the
staff. Others appear as written directions, such as “presto”
(fast) or “fortissimo” (very loud).
Your composition of 12 measures or more, which you
should write for your own instrument or voice, must include
these basic elements: (1) a staff, (2) a treble or bass clef sign,
(3) the key signature, (4) the time signature, and (5) the correct
time value in each measure of the score. (See the illustrations
that follow.) Give your composition a title that fits the mood
or spirit of the music. Add any written directions you need to
indicate tempo and expression, and there it is: an original
composition of your musical ideas, written down to keep.
Clefs indicate the pitch of the notes written on
the staff.
The treble clef shows music for the higher (soprano
and alto) voices and instruments, the guitar, or the
right hand on keyboard instruments.
The bass clef shows music for the lower (tenor and
bass) voices and instruments, or the left hand on
keyboard instruments.


MUSIC AND BUGLING 57
.Composing Music
Treble clef and staff
Key signature
Bass clef and staff
4
4
4
4
Correct time value in each measure of score
Time signature





MUSIC AND BUGLING 59
.Traditional Instruments
Traditional Instruments
All over the world, people sing and dance to the music of
instruments they make themselves from materials at hand.
For optional requirement 4c, you may make one of the
instruments shown here or an instrument of your own choice.
However, it must be an instrument actually used in a specific
culture. Your own cultural heritage or ethnic background
might give you ideas. Or, look in your local museum for native
instruments from your area. Visit the library to find ideas
from around the world. You may want to refer to the books
about making musical instruments that are listed in the
resources section of this pamphlet.
You should be able to tell who used the kind of
instrument you made, on what occasions the instrument
was played, and what materials were used to make it.
Bamboo xylophone—Southeast Asia.
Use pencil-thin sections of hollow
bamboo. Sand both ends of each
bamboo section. Arrange the sections
in scale order, then bind them into
place. To play, strike the bamboo with
a small wooden or hard-rubber mallet.


60 MUSIC AND BUGLING
Traditional Instruments.
Sansa (thumb piano)—Africa. Make a wooden box 6 or more inches
long. Drill a hole in the box lid. Attach a thin wooden crosspiece to the
lid to make a ridge or fret. Arrange five thin springy strips of metal in
order of length (as shown). Fasten one end of each metal strip to the
lid. To play, hold the sansa on your lap with the keys (the free ends of
the strips) pointing toward you, and use your thumbs or forefingers to
pluck the keys.
Gourd rattle—North America. Cut a gourd at its narrow end and clean it out. Let the
inside of the gourd dry. Insert pebbles. Make a handle to fit inside the narrow end of
the gourd. Push the handle into place and knot the tie as shown. Play by shaking.
DRILL
HOLE
NAIL
HERE
6”
CUT
HERE
CUT HOLE
HERE
PEBBLES DRILL HOLE
PEBBLES
KNOT
HERE
1
3
2
4


MUSIC AND BUGLING 61
.Traditional Instruments
To play, hold the pipes so that the
longest tube is on your left. Blow
forcefully across the open end of
a tube, the way you would blow
across the top of a bottle. Give each
note a definite beginning by saying
“Du” or “Tu.” The sound will be breathy.
Practice blowing across each tube in
scale order. Then try jumping from note
to note. Can you play a simple tune like
“Mary Had a Little Lamb”?
SAND EDGES SMOOTH
91/2" 81/2" 71/2" 7" 6"
DOWEL
CORK OR OTHER STOPPER,
ONE FOR EACH TUBE
Panpipes—used in many cultures.
With a hacksaw, cut a 31/2-foot length
of 1/2-inch PVC tubing into five pieces
of stepped lengths, as shown. Sand the
cut edges smooth. Align the top ends of
the tubes. Use masking or duct tape to
hold the pipes together. Close the bottom
of each tube with a cork, wad of plastic
wrap, or lump of modeling clay. With
the help of your music teacher or other
knowledgeable musician, tune the tubes
to G, A, B, D, E. (Pushing the stoppers in
raises the pitch; pushing them out with a
dowel or other stick lowers the pitch.)


62 MUSIC AND BUGLING
Cataloging.
Cataloging
Have you discovered the fun of starting your own music
library? With a collection of your favorite music and artists,
you can hear them perform as often and as long as you wish.
Classifying Your Collection
Classify (organize) your recordings in a way that suits you,
but keep your system simple and flexible.
You can classify recordings in several ways:
• In chronological order of the periods during which the
music was written
• In alphabetical order, by names of performers, composers,
or titles
• By category—classical, folk, jazz, country, rock, etc.
• In numerical order, by catalog numbers
• In combinations of these or according to your own
numbering system
Indexing Your Collection
As your collection grows, you might want a permanent list or
catalog so you will know what you have and where to look for
a recording. Your catalog can be a simple listing in a notebook
or record book with alphabetical index tabs.
Many collectors use a system of 3-by-5-inch cards. This
system makes it easy to cross-index, or list certain recordings
more than one way.
Suppose, for example, you are indexing a recording of
George Gershwin’s Rhapsody in Blue, played by the pianist
Oscar Levant and the Philadelphia Orchestra, and conducted
by Eugene Ormandy. You can make separate cards and file
them according to (1) the title, (2) the composer, (3) the


MUSIC AND BUGLING 63
.Cataloging
performing artist, (4) the conductor, and (5) the orchestra.
(See the samples that follow.)
In the upper-right corner of each card, write any classify-
ing mark or number you need to indicate the record’s location
in your collection.
You also can catalog your collection using a database or
spreadsheet program on your computer. The software makes
it easy to add and locate the recordings of any composer,
performer, orchestra, etc.
As a rule, put
classifying marks
on albums, cases,
or envelopes, not
on the records,
cassettes, or
discs themselves.


64 MUSIC AND BUGLING
Cataloging.
CD 4
CD 4
CD 4


MUSIC AND BUGLING 65
.Cataloging
The great thing about digital music is that it requires
no care or maintenance to preserve sound quality.
Digital media players have no moving parts to clean,
and the software used to manage digital music
collections makes organizing easy. You need only
take care that your digital files are for your personal
use only.
Most of us will not make five separate cards for each CD, tape,
or record. You might have some recordings, though, for which
you will want to make two or three cross-references.
CD 4
CD 4


66 MUSIC AND BUGLING
Cataloging.
Caring for Recordings
It makes sense to take care of your recordings so the sound
quality stays crisp and clear. Whether your equipment is
a handheld CD player or a room-size music system, for
your own collection or your family’s, here are tips on caring
for recordings.
Caring for Compact Discs (CDs) and Players
1. Handle CDs carefully by the edges.
2. After playing, store each CD in its protective plastic case.
CDs can be stored horizontally or vertically in storage units.
3. A carrying case is good for organizing CDs as well as for
transporting them.
4. Wipe carefully handled CDs with a soft cloth, stroking from
the center to the rim. If a CD has been soiled, you can
clean it gently with soap and water.
5. Place a CD player on a level surface, away from dampness,
high humidity, and extreme heat. Protect it from strong
vibrations or jolting.
6. CD players ordinarily need no maintenance. If the player
malfunctions, consult your dealer or a repair shop. Repair
requires a trained technician and specialized tools.


MUSIC AND BUGLING 67
.Cataloging
Caring for Tapes and Tape Players
1. Clean and demagnetize the tape heads after at least every
20 hours of use to remove tiny particles that tapes leave
behind. Do this especially before you plan to record an
important program or play a valuable tape. Use cotton
swabs soaked with denatured, not isopropyl (rubbing),
alcohol. You can buy denatured alcohol or a special clean-
ing solution from an electronics or music store. Allow the
heads to dry for 30 minutes before inserting a tape.
2. After you have cleaned the heads, use the swabs to clean
the metal guides along the tape path.
3. To avoid erasing a cassette tape by accident, remove the
small plastic tabs on the back of the cassette. Use a small
screwdriver to pry out the tabs. Commercially recorded
tapes already have the tabs removed.
Handling Records
1. Handle records by the edges. Avoid touching the grooved
surfaces. Use a soft brush or cloth to keep them free
of dust, making strokes in a circular direction along
the grooves.
2. When you play records manually, lower the tone arm onto
the record gently. A bumpy landing can scratch and injure
the record and damage the needle.
3. Be sure the needle (stylus) is in good condition at all times.
A worn needle can ruin your records. Replace diamond
needles after every 1,000 hours of play.
4. Discard records that are cracked or full of nicks. They can
damage the needle.
Storage
Store record albums in an upright position and fit snugly
against each other. Flat or slanted storage will cause records
to warp. Store tapes and CDs in a cabinet or case that
protects them from dust and allows you to keep them
organized and safe.





MUSIC AND BUGLING 69
.The Bugle
The Bugle
What would summer camp be without the bugle sounding
“Reveille” in the morning and “Taps” in the evening? Camp
and the bugle go together.
The basic technique is the same as that used to play
other brass instruments, but the bugle is a simpler instrument.
By varying the embouchure and the air speed through the
instrument, a bugle player produces a set of notes called
harmonics. All bugle calls are composed of these harmonics.
The embouchure
is the shape,
position, and
adjustment of
the lips, teeth,
and tongue to
the mouthpiece
of the instrument.
The bugle is an ideal instrument for the beginning
musician because most of the music uses only four
notes. The ability to read music is not necessary,
because the tunes are familiar and you can play by
ear. Also, the bugle is inexpensive.
The bugle, with no valves at all, is an excellent introduction to
brass instruments.
BUGLING


70 MUSIC AND BUGLING
The Bugle.
The trumpet, trombone, French horn, and tuba use
valves or a slide to vary the length of the tube and produce
the notes between the harmonics. The trumpet, for example,
has three valves that vary the length of the horn, allowing for
eight possible combinations. In effect, the trumpet player plays
a great many bugles with the ability to quickly change from
one to another.
History
The bugle is an ancient instrument used in many civilizations.
Many early bugles were made from sheep and goat horns
and elephant tusks. The Romans used the bugle for pageantry
and military purposes. They were the first to develop
techniques for tube bending, which allowed them to make
more compact instruments.
Playing Technique
As you learn to play the bugle, it helps if you understand how
the various sounds are made. The natural (or fundamental)
note of the instrument is determined by the length of the
tube and whether the tubing is the same diameter all the way
through or increases continuously, like a cone.
You do not have to blow a lot of air through a bugle
because the sound is made by getting your lips to vibrate
much like a rapidly opening and closing valve. Your blowing
technique varies the vibrations in the tube and produces
different notes. This has the same effect as changing the length
of the tube. For example, if you play a note and then adjust
your lips to play the same note an octave (eight whole tones)
higher, the higher note is the same as playing a bugle that has
had its length cut in half.
Stand straight as you play. Position the mouthpiece to
your lips with one-third on the upper lip and two-thirds on the
lower lip. Press your lips together tightly and blow into the
mouthpiece. (Without the bugle, this should make a buzzing
sound.) To make a higher note, accelerate the airflow, using
the lip muscles to close the lip aperture (opening) while at the
same time contracting the diaphragm (the muscle between
your chest and stomach).
Also, raise the tongue inside the mouth (think “eeee”
instead of “oooo”). This increases the air speed and makes
A pair of long,
straight bugles
was found in
the tomb of King
Tutankhamun,
which indicates
these instruments
were used in
Egypt more than
3,000 years ago.


MUSIC AND BUGLING 71
.The Bugle
higher notes easier to play. (Do not pull the instrument tighter
to your face as you play high notes.)
To play lower notes, loosen your lips. Drop the jaw and
lower the tongue. This slows the air and makes lower notes
resonate more.
You create a fuller, warmer sound when your throat is
wide open and relaxed—as if you are fogging a mirror. If you
blow hard and fast with tense muscles, as if you are trying to
blow out a candle, you produce a thin, edgy sound.
Anyone who teaches trumpet, cornet, or trombone can
help you learn to play the bugle. Perhaps you can arrange a
few sessions to get started.
Be sure to hold
the bugle
horizontally.
A downward
angle will interfere
with your
breathing. Also,
take deep breaths
so you will have
plenty of air.
Warming Up
The warm-up is the most important part of a practice
session. The two main parts of a warm-up are long
tones and lip flexibilities.
Long tones get the air flowing and the lips
buzzing. To start, take a full breath and play a mid-
range note. Hold it with a steady tone and constant
airflow. When you run out of air, inhale fully and
replay the same note. Stay relaxed—do not strain.
After a few long tones, go on to lip flexibilities.
Flexibilities are lip slurs. They help the lips
become more limber and help develop range.
Slowly slur from your first note (C in the third
space of the staff) down to the next harmonic
(G on the second line) and back again. As you slur
to a higher note, use faster air. Hold the last note
until your breath is gone. Then inhale fully and
repeat the exercise, following the scale downward.
If you are warming up on a trumpet, repeat the
slur exercises using different valve combinations
in order (that is, first with no valves, then with the
second valve down, and so on).


72 MUSIC AND BUGLING
The Bugle.
Care of the Bugle
The musical quality of the bugle comes from its basic shape.
Any dents or buildup of dirt in the tube will reduce the tone
quality and ease of playing. One easy cleaning method is to
pour cold water inside to wash out dust and saliva. Be sure
the bugle is dry before storing it. It is also a good idea to store
the bugle in a bag when it is not in use, to keep out dust.
Bugle Calls
“First Call” is used for getting attention. It is commonly
heard at horse races.
“Reveille” is the morning wake-up call.
A note sign with a number placed at the beginning of written music
indicates a specific tempo: the number of beats per minute. For
example, tells the bugler to play at a speed of 72 quarter-note
beats per minute.
A dotted quarter note lasts a beat and a half.
To fulfill Bugling requirement 3, you do not need to be so precise.
Just play the calls at quick, moderate, or slow tempos, as indicated
on the music.
= 72
FIRST CALL
Quick
REVEILLE
Quick


MUSIC AND BUGLING 73
.The Bugle
Articulation refers
to the way notes
are connected.
On written music,
a curved line over
or under notes
means the notes
should be con-
nected smoothly.
This style of
playing is called
legato. A dot
over or under
notes means
they should be
played as short
notes with brief
silences between
them. This type
of articulation
is staccato.
Composing Your Own Bugle Call
To help you fulfill requirement 2b to compose an
original bugle call, here are some tips from Jeff
Weir, director of the U.S. Naval Academy Drum and
Bugle Corps.
Because bugle calls were meant to sound
orders over great distances, they should be played
at a solid forte (loud) volume, with good breath sup-
port. Take in enough air to play an entire phrase on
one breath.
The tempo, phrasing, and articulation of the
bugle call should reflect the order you are trying to
give. For example, “Reveille” wakes people up, so
it is fast, lively, and played staccato. “Taps,” on the
other hand, is slow, soothing, and played legato.
Be precise with your articulation and phrasing
because muddy playing could confuse the order
you are trying to convey.
Whenever you play a bugle call for your unit,
make it sound exactly the same every time you
play it. The recognizability of the bugle calls is what
makes them effective ways to give orders. If your
bugle calls were played differently every time, how
would your unit know whether you wanted them to
charge or go to sleep?
Try to make your new bugle call balanced
with two phrases of equal length. Here is a hint
to compose your own original bugle call: To make
your bugle call sound more musical, have your first
phrase end on G and your second phrase end on C.
In music, those two points are called cadences. The
phrase that ends on G will sound like the middle of
your song because it ends on a half cadence. The
second phrase that ends on C will definitely sound
like the end of your piece because it ends with an
authentic cadence.
When sounding an order on a bugle, the entire
bugle call is usually repeated to make sure the
Scouts have heard and understood the order.
—Jeff Weir


74 MUSIC AND BUGLING
The Bugle.
“Assembly” signals everyone to gather at a designated
place. Some refer to this as “Fall In.”
“Mess” signals mealtime. This call is very popular!
“Drill” is a call first heard in military days. It is best
avoided unless your troop has agreed on what it signals.
For example, it could be used for camp cleanup or to report
for some camp activity.
The 4/4 time
signature is often
indicated by
the symbol C,
as shown
for “Assembly.”
MESS CALL
Quick
DRILL CALL
Quick
ASSEMBLY
Quick


MUSIC AND BUGLING 75
.The Bugle
“Fatigue” summons those who are to report for some type
of work activity. Because it is rarely heard, its message might
not be recognized unless your troop knows it well.
“Officers” would be played for a meeting of the troop
leaders. It is unfamiliar to most troops and you probably will
not use it.
“Recall” signals an end to something that is under way.
For example, a game of Capture the Flag when everyone is
scattered far and wide. “Assembly” also could be used.
“Church” announces that services are about to begin.
OFFICERS CALL
Quick
RECALL
Moderate
CHURCH CALLSlow
FATIGUE CALLQuick


76 MUSIC AND BUGLING
The Bugle.
“Swimming” signals the swimming period.
“Fire” is an alarm that signals danger. This call is unique
and will get almost anyone’s attention.
“Retreat” signals the end of the official day. It usually
is played just before “To the Colors” or the national anthem,
which are played during the lowering of the flag.
RETREAT
Slow
FIRE CALLQuick
Quick SWIMMING


MUSIC AND BUGLING 77
.The Bugle
“To the Colors” is played while the flag is raised
and lowered.
“Call to Quarters” signals everyone to get ready for bed.
“Taps” follows this call, at which time lights are turned off
for sleeping.
“Taps” signals the end of the day, when everyone is to go
to sleep. It is also played at funerals.
TO THE COLORS
Majestically but not too slow
TAPSSlow
CALL TO QUARTERSSlow


78 MUSIC AND BUGLING
Music and Bugling Resources.
Music and Bugling Resources
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.
Books
Barber, Nicola. Music: An A–Z Guide.
Franklin Watts, 2002.
Benjaminson, Peter. The Story of
Motown. Rare Bird Books, 2018.
Bouchier, David. Composers.
Workman Publishing
Company, 1999.
Cohn, Lawrence, ed. Nothing But the
Blues: The Music and the Musicians.
Abbeville, 1999.
Cooper, Helen. Basic Guide to How to
Read Music. Perigee, 1985.
Copland, Aaron, and Alan Rich.
What to Listen for in Music,
reissue ed. Signet Classics, 2011.
Danes, Emma. Music Theory for
Beginners. EDC, 1997.
Dearling, Robert. Keyboard Instruments
& Ensembles. Chelsea House, 2000.
———. Percussion & Electronic
Instruments. Chelsea House, 2000.
———. Stringed Instruments.
Chelsea House, 2000.
———. Woodwind & Brass Instruments.
Chelsea House, 2000.
Ench, Rick, and Jay Cravath. North
American Indian Music. Franklin
Watts, 2002.
Ganeri, Anita, and Benjamin Britten.
The Young Person’s Guide to the
Orchestra. Harcourt, 1996.
George, Nelson. Hip Hop America,
revised ed. Penguin Books, 2005.
Fichter, George S. American Indian
Music and Musical Instruments.
Random House, 1978.
Goulding, Phil G. Classical Music:
The 50 Greatest Composers and
Their 1,000 Greatest Works.
Ballantine Books, 1995.
Green, Douglas. Classic Country
Singers. Gibbs Smith, 2008.
Harnum, Jonathan. Basic Music
Theory: How to Read, Write, and
Understand Written Music, 4th ed.
Sol Ut Press, 2017.
Havighurst, Jay. Making Musical
Instruments by Hand.
Rockport, 1998.
Kallen, Stuart A. The Instruments of
Music, 2nd ed. Lucent, 2013.
Lehman, Glenn. You Can Lead
Singing: A Song Leader’s Manual.
Good Books, 2001.


MUSIC AND BUGLING 79
.Music and Bugling Resources
Palmer, Willard A., Morton Manus, and
Amanda Vick Lethco. The Complete
Book of Scales, Chords, Arpeggios
and Cadences. Alfred Music, 1994.
Rabbai, George. Fun with the Bugle.
Mel Bay, 2000.
———. Infantry Bugle Calls of the
American Civil War. Mel Bay, 1998.
Raph, Theodore, ed. The American
Song Treasury: 100 Favorites.
Dover, 1989.
Schneider, Richard H. Taps: Notes
From a Nation’s Heart. William
Morrow, 2002.
Sennett, Ted, and Andrew G. Hager.
Song & Dance: The Musicals of
Broadway. Friedman/Fairfax, 2001.
Smith, Richard D. Bluegrass:
An Informal Guide. A Cappella
Books, 1995.
Sullivan, Robert, ed. LIFE Rock & Roll
at 50: A History in Pictures.
Time, 2002.
Surmani, Andrew, Karen Surmani, and
Morton Manus. Alfred’s Essentials
of Music Theory: A Complete Self-
Study Course for All Musicians.
Alfred Music, 2004.
Thomas, Roger. Groups, Bands,
& Orchestras. Heinemann
Library, 2002.
Thompson, Wendy. The Great
Composers. Anness, 2009.
Ward, Geoffrey C., and Ken Burns.
Jazz: A History of America’s Music.
Knopf, 2002.
Wyatt, Keith, and Carl Schroeder. Hal
Leonard Pocket Music Theory: A
Comprehensive and Convenient
Source for All Musicians. Hal
Leonard, 2002.
Zinsser, William Knowlton. Easy to
Remember: The Great American
Songwriters and Their Songs.
David R. Godine, 2001.
Websites and Organizations
Barbershop Harmony Society
www.barbershop.org
The Blues Foundation
www.blues.org
Bugle Calls
venture190.tripod.com/bugle.html
Classical Music Archives
www.classicalarchives.com
Country Music Association
www.cmaworld.com
Drum Corps International
www.dci.org
International Bluegrass
Music Association
www.ibma.org
Red Hot Jazz Archive
www.redhotjazz.com
Rock and Roll Hall of Fame
and Museum
www.rockhall.com
Smithsonian Music
music.si.edu
U.S. Naval Academy Drum and
Bugle Corps
www.usna.edu/usnadb


80 MUSIC AND BUGLING
Music and Bugling Resources.
Acknowledgments
Scouting America gratefully acknowl-
edges the assistance of Thomas J.
Heany, former director of programming
for the National Music Foundation, and
Jeff Weir, director of the U.S. Naval
Academy Drum and Bugle Corps, in
revising and updating this edition of
the Music and Bugling merit badge
pamphlet and the requirements for the
two badges.
Thanks also to Eagle Scout James
Cook and his father, Jerry Cook, for
contributions to this edition and previ-
ous editions of the pamphlet.
Scouting America is grateful to
the men and women serving on the
National Merit Badge Subcommittee
for the improvements made in updat-
ing this pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration Credits
Ballet Arlington (Texas), 2002
Nutcracker, courtesy; photo by
Sharon K. Nolan—page 27
Copland House, courtesy—
page 35 (Aaron Copland)
The Ira and Leonore Gershwin
Trusts, courtesy—page 35 (George
and Ira Gershwin)
Library of Congress Prints and
Photographs Division,
courtesy—page 29
Roger Morgan, courtesy—
page 32 (B.B. King)
New Orleans Metropolitan Convention
and Visitors Bureau Inc.,
courtesy—page 33 (band)
New York Philharmonic Archives,
courtesy—page 37
(Leonard Bernstein)
Brian Payne, courtesy—page 42
Randy Piland, courtesy—
page 38 (Alan Jackson)
Wikipedia.org/ViršuLF, courtesy—page
25 (orchestra)
Yamaha Corporation of America,
courtesy—page 19 (top)
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of or
are protected by Scouting America.
Dan Jansen—page 4
John McDearmon—all illustrations on
pages 14 and 59–61
Brian Payne—pages 10, 44, 46, and 52