STEM-Based
PLANT
SCIENCE


PLANT SCIENCE
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Plant-Science or check
Scoutbook for the latest requirements.
35932
ISBN 978-0-8395-0122-0
©2025 Scouting America
2025 Printing FPO


PLANT SCIENCE 3


4 PLANT SCIENCE


PLANT SCIENCE 5


6 PLANT SCIENCE


PLANT SCIENCE 7


8 PLANT SCIENCE


PLANT SCIENCE 9


10 PLANT SCIENCE


PLANT SCIENCE 11
Contents
What Is Plant Science? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
The World of Plants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
Agronomy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
Horticulture. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
Field Botany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
Careers in Plant Science. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89
Plant Science Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92





PLANT SCIENCE 13
.What Is Plant Science?
What Is Plant Science?
Have you ever wondered why the leaves on a tree change from
green to yellow or red in the autumn, or why only certain types
of plants grow in valleys, while other types of plants grow on
mountains? If you have ever asked questions like these, then
you are on your way to becoming a plant scientist.
All scientists ask questions about things they observe, then
try to find answers. Plant scientists use their curiosity and
knowledge to develop questions about the world of plants. Then
they try to answer those questions with further observations
and experiments in the laboratory and in the field. As you earn
the Plant Science merit badge, you will develop a number of
the skills plant scientists use.
Using This Pamphlet
Botany is the scientific study of plants. The field of botany
encompasses more than a dozen specialties, including plant
pathology, agronomy, plant taxonomy, horticulture, floriculture,
paleobotany, forestry, and plant ecology. In this merit badge
pamphlet, you will explore three of the most important plant
science specialties—agronomy, horticulture, and field botany.
You will work on activities and projects in each of these
three areas of plant science and gain an appreciation for
the important work that plant scientists do.
Many farmers are plant scientists. They observe how
plants respond during the growing season, ask
questions about why plants grow in certain ways,
and adjust their farming methods to test their ideas
for growing better crops.





PLANT SCIENCE 15
.The World of Plants
The World of Plants
The world contains nearly 400,000 known species of plants
and probably thousands more that have yet to be discovered
and classified. You can find plant life almost everywhere in the
world. Deserts, prairies, shorelines, and urban parks abound
with a stunning variety of vegetation. Plant communities
thrive in the mountains, too, and bring richness and variety to
wetlands, woodlands, tundra, and forests.
Plant Divisions
Botanists have classified all plants as members of one
of five large divisions—mosses, club mosses, horsetails,
ferns and their allies, and seed plants. The following is
a brief description of each of these plant divisions.
Mosses
Mosses are small plants, usually less than an inch
tall, that grow in rock crevices, on forest floors and
tree trunks, and along stream banks. They may have
a small spore capsule at the end of a stalk that rises
above a leafy base. Haircap moss and apple moss are
types of mosses. Most of the mosses and their close
relatives live on land. Mosses are the closest living
descendants of the first plants to live on land.
Club Mosses
Club mosses differ from true mosses because they
are vascular—that is, they have tissue that is able to
move water and nutrients throughout the plant. In
prehistoric times, they were far more prevalent than
they are today. Present-day club mosses are small
plants with needlelike leaves that often grow on the
forest floor in tropical to temperate regions.
Apple Moss
Club moss


16 PLANT SCIENCE
The World of Plants.
Photosynthesis
All plants and animals need energy to keep them alive. Most plants
absorb energy from sunlight, which they use to convert carbon dioxide,
water, and soil nutrients into plant food. Chlorophyll, a chemical com-
pound that makes most plants appear green to the human eye, uses
the sun’s energy to convert water and carbon dioxide into simple sugars
called carbohydrates. This chemical process, called photosynthesis, also
returns oxygen to the atmosphere.
Photosynthesis
carbon dioxide + water + sunlight -------> glucose (sugar) + oxygen + water
PLANT
GROWTH
SUN
ENERGY
SOIL NUTRIENTS
FOOD FROM
ANIMALS
(AND OTHER
PRODUCTS)
DECAYING MATTER
CARBON DIOXIDE
CARBON DIOXIDE
ANIMAL FOOD
OXY- GEN
FOOD FROM PLANTS
P L
A N
T
F
O
O
D
Green plants produce the oxygen that supports all of Earth’s animal life,
including human life. During a single growing season, one mature broad-
leaved tree (such as an oak or a cottonwood) can produce enough oxygen to
keep 10 people alive for an entire year.


PLANT SCIENCE 17
.The World of Plants
Horsetails (Sphenophyta)
Horsetails are an ancient group of plants. They have
hollow, jointed, and usually grooved stems. Cone-
shaped structures atop the horsetail stems produce
spores from which horsetails reproduce.
Ferns (Filicophyta)
Ferns often have lacy leaves called fronds. Uncurling
in the spring, the fronds of some ferns resemble
the decorative ends of violins and thus are called
fiddleheads. Ferns are most abundant in the shade of
moist forests.
Seed Plants (Spermatophytes)
Seed plants make up the great majority of Earth’s
plants. Among them are the most ancient living
organisms on the planet, the 4,000-year-old bristlecone
pines, and some of the largest living organisms, the
giant sequoias, which can weigh more than 6,000 tons.
Seed plants are divided into two groups: nonflowering
plants (gymnosperms) such as conifers, ginkgos, and
cycads, and flowering plants (angiosperms) such as
wildflowers, grasses, and flowering trees and shrubs.
Horsetail
Flowering plants
Fern, showing
a fiddlehead
Fern, showing
a fiddlehead
Extremely hungry: More than 600 plant
species are carnivorous, which means that
they capture and digest insects and other
small animals. The Venus flytrap snaps
its leaves shut around insects that touch
trigger hairs on the leaves. The insects are
eventually digested by enzymes, providing
nutrients for the plant.


18 PLANT SCIENCE
The World of Plants.
Flowering Plants
All flowering plants share similar reproductive structures in
their flowers. The following cross section shows the major
parts of a typical flower.
Parts of the flowering plant
PETAL
The large, often
brightly colored
and fragrant
flower petals
occurring just
above the sepals.
FILAMENT
The thin stalk
that supports
the anther.
ANTHER
The structure
at the end of
the filament
that contains
pollen grains.
SEPAL
The layer of leafy
structures at the
base of the flower,
just beneath the
whorl of petals.
POLLEN
The dustlike particles
that pollinate the
flower. Pollen is often
carried by wind or
insects to the pistil.
STAMEN
The male part
of the flower,
consisting of
the filament,
anther, and
pollen.
PISTIL
The female part
of the flower,
consisting of the
stigma, style,
and ovary.
OVARY
The bottom
of the pistil,
beneath the
style, that
surrounds the
ovule. The
ovary develops
into the fruit
of the plant.
OVULES
The area surrounded
by the ovary that
develops into seeds.
STIGMA
The top
surface of
the pistil that
receives the
pollen.
STYLE
The tubelike
structure that
connects the
stigma to
the ovary.


PLANT SCIENCE 19
.The World of Plants
The Buzz About Bees
Did you realize that much of our existence depends on honeybees?
We rely on them not only for honey, but more importantly, for their
ability to pollinate many of the crops we eat and the feed farmers
give their livestock. Without honeybees, our food sources would be
significantly reduced. They contribute significantly in three ways:
• Honeybees are nature's most efficient pollinators. They visit only one
kind of flower on each foraging trip, so they transfer only pollen that
flower can use.
• A colony produces thousands of pollinators each season, creating a
workforce unrivaled by other pollinating species.
• Honeybees can be raised in hives made by humans, and those hives
can be transported to areas where their pollination skills are needed.
Pollination by honeybees is vital to humankind. Although birds, bats,
bumblebees, butterflies, and many other creatures help transfer pollen
as they flit from flower to flower or feed on the nectar of several flow-
ers, the honeybee pollinates with a purpose. Our world and eating
habits would be very different without the honeybee to pollinate
our plants.
Many of the fresh fruits and vegetables we enjoy today would not
survive or exist without the help of the honeybee. Farmers would
worry about the availability of many of the feeds for their animals.
Cows, horses, chickens, and pigs all eat feeds pollinated by the
honeybee. So, next time you see a honeybee in action, busy
pollinating, leave it alone and let it do its thing.


20 PLANT SCIENCE
The World of Plants.
Why Plants Are Important
Plants and plant communities are essential to human life.
Here are a few of the many ways that plants are important
to humans.
• Plants let us breathe. Plants produce oxygen as a
by-product of photosynthesis. Without plants, animals—
including humans—could not exist on Earth.
• Plants keep us healthy. Almost half of the medicines we
use were developed from wild plants. The chemicals in
many species of plants have been extracted and analyzed by
plant scientists. These chemicals are the raw materials of the
medicines you get from your doctor or pharmacist to help
prevent or treat illness.
• Plants feed us. Green plants convert the energy of the sun
into food, which is stored in plant leaves, stems, seeds, fruits,
and roots. About a dozen plant species, including rice, wheat,
corn, and potatoes, account for almost all of the food that
humans consume. Because animals eat plants, plants are
indirectly responsible for many other foods people eat, such
as meat, fish, milk, and eggs.
• Plants protect the soil and water. The deep roots of shrubs,
grasses, trees, and wildflowers hold soil in place during rain-
storms. Without plant cover, soil can quickly erode and may
wash into streams and lakes, causing pollution.
• Plants keep us cool. The world’s plants absorb sunlight and
provide shade. Plants also absorb carbon dioxide, a gas that
may cause Earth’s temperature to increase. The plants in the
Amazon rain forest in South America absorb a tremendous
amount of the world’s carbon dioxide gas. Many scientists
believe that global warming will increase if the plants in the
world’s forests are not preserved.
• Plants give us wild places. The meadows, forests, and
deserts are filled with plants that provide habitat for wild
animals. They also provide us with opportunities for hiking,
camping, and wildlife and flower photography.
• Plants give us shelter. Most people in the world use plant
materials to build their houses. Wood from trees is the most
common building material in much of the world. To help
protect our dwindling supply of trees, other plant materials
are now being used inside homes, including the stems of the
bamboo plant and pressed wheat stems.


PLANT SCIENCE 21
.The World of Plants
The Nature and Function of Soil
Soil is so familiar to us that we seldom give it a second thought,
but it is more complex than you may think. It consists of
mineral matter (a mix of silt, sand, and clay), water, air,
and dead and living organic material (plant roots, bacteria,
fungi, nematodes, protozoa, and arthropods).
Soil Composition
Soils begin their development from various kinds of rock. Over
thousands of years, sun, wind, rain, and other natural forces
break down rock into smaller and smaller pieces through
a process called weathering. These pieces eventually form
particles of sand, silt, and clay that together are called parent
material. Parent material then interacts with water (from
rain and snow) and organic material over thousands or even
millions of years to form soil. Soil owes its structure to the
proportions of sand, silt, and clay it contains, which create
spaces in the soil that hold water and air.
More than half of North America has been covered by
giant ice sheets called glaciers within the past 20,000 years.
Plant-Naming Systems
Plants are often identified by their common names, but
common names can vary from region to region. For example,
the wildflower jack-in-the-pulpit is also known as the Indian
turnip. To avoid confusion, scientists follow a universal naming
system that uses Latin terms to describe each plant species.
For example, botanists would refer to jack-in-the-pulpit by
its scientific name, Arisaema triphyllum. The first part of the
name identifies the genus (a general group of closely related
species) and the second part of the name identifies the species
(a specific kind of plant with similar characteristics). Without this
system, it would be impossible for scientists to be certain that
they were discussing the same plant.


22 PLANT SCIENCE
The World of Plants.
These glaciers were mostly found in Canada, but the most-
northern states in the United States, particularly those in the
East, were also covered by glaciers. The ice sheets moved
parent material from Canada into the United States as they
grew, then deposited the parent material as they melted away.
As a result, much of the soil we find today in the glaciated
parts of the United States came from parent material formed in
Canada and not from the weathering of rock where it is found.
Soil scientists have identified more than 70,000 kinds
of soil in the United States. Climate, the rock from which the
soil formed, plant and animal life, topography, and time all
affect the development of soils and cause soils to be different.
Particularly important is the climate, especially temperature
and precipitation. Climate determines how fast and in what
way rocks break down and what kinds of plants grow in a
particular place. In turn, the kinds of plants that grow (and
how fast they decay) and the activity of soil organisms help to
determine the kind of soil that develops.
Soil Texture
When soil experts refer to soil texture, they are talking about
the proportion and size of the three different types of solid
mineral particles it contains: sand, silt, and clay. To determine
soil texture, rub some soil between your fingers. If the soil feels
coarse and gritty and you can just barely see individual par-
ticles, it must contain a large proportion of sand—particles that
range from 0.05 millimeters to 2.0 millimeters in diameter.
Silty soil feels smooth, like flour. Moisten some soil and
work it into a thin ribbon between your thumb and forefin-
ger. If the ribbon breaks off near your fingers when you try to
lengthen it, chances are the soil is largely silt. Particles in a silty
soil typically range from 0.002 to 0.05 millimeters in diameter.
You cannot see the individual soil particles in a silty soil with-
out using a strong magnifying glass.
A clay soil will feel like fine powder when dry. After
you moisten it, you will be able to make at least an inch-
long ribbon when you rub it between your fingers. Clay soil
contains soil particles smaller than silt and less than 0.002
millimeters in diameter.
The amount of sand, silt, or clay in a soil is important
because it determines the belowground growing conditions for a
plant. Sand particles are the largest and the roundest, so when
packed together they leave the biggest spaces between particles.


PLANT SCIENCE 23
.The World of Plants
Nature’s forces slowly crumble rocks into mineral particles of clay, sand, and silt.


24 PLANT SCIENCE
The World of Plants.
As a result, water drains away quickly and sandy soils tend to
be dry, with a lot of air. Clay particles are very small and flat
so they pack together very closely, leaving only tiny spaces
between them. Smaller spaces are good at holding onto water
but are so small that there is little air. Nutrients often follow
water, so sandy soils are not only drier but have fewer nutrients,
and clay soils are moister and have more nutrients.
When a soil is identified as a loam (this term refers only to
the size of particles the soil contains), it means the soil contains
a relatively even mixture of sand and silt and a somewhat
smaller proportion of clay. Plants grow very well in loamy soil.
Soil Structure
Soil particles tend to cling together to form larger clumps of soil.
These clusters are called peds or aggregates, and the way they
group together is the soil structure. Organic matter—bacteria,
Soil particle profile
Try this experiment. Fill a jar two-thirds full of water and pour
in a cup of soil. Shake it vigorously and then let it stand for
several hours. Hold a piece of paper against the side of the jar
and draw a diagram of the layers to make your own soil chart.
Do the layers look like these? Explain why the largest particles
settle on the bottom.
CLAY
SILT
FINE
SAND
COARSE
SAND


PLANT SCIENCE 25
.The World of Plants
plant roots, fungi—is what helps soil clump together. Some
very loose soils, such as beach sand, do not clump at all, but
rather consist of single grains instead of structured soil.
A soil’s structure is important because it determines how
well that soil allows plants to access water, nutrients, and air.
The best soils for most plants are those that let water infiltrate,
or soak in, at a moderate rate.
Major Types of Soil Structures
PLATY
Flat, thin, flaky layers
in soil. Slow rate of
water infiltration.
PRISMATIC
Vertical columns in soil
that may be several
inches long and 1/2 to
2 inches in diameter.
Moderate rate of
infiltration.
BLOCKY
Angular blocks 1/2 to
2 inches in diameter.
Moderate rate of
infiltration.
GRANULAR OR CRUMB
Like a crumbly cake. The
crumbs or grains are
usually less than 1/4 inch
in diameter. Rapid rate
of infiltration. This soil
structure is usually
best for growing plants
because it has many
pores for water and air.
GRAVEL OR SAND
Loose, rounded particles
that do not stick together.
Rapid rate of infiltration.
HEAVY OR MASSIVE
Large clods of clumping
soil. No visible structure.
The clods are difficult
to break apart. Slow rate
of infiltration.
A soil’s structure may change over the years. For example, a fertile
crumb soil may deteriorate into a heavy or massive soil if it is continu-
ously tilled or if livestock constantly trample it.


26 PLANT SCIENCE
The World of Plants.
The pH of some common substances is shown on this pH scale.
Acid Neutral Base
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14
Battery
acid
Lemon
juice
Tomatoes Milk Pure
water
Soap
solutions
Hair
remover
Oven
cleaner
Soil pH
A scientific measurement called the pH scale is used to measure
the acidity and alkalinity of a soil. On the pH scale, a value
of zero indicates extremely strong acidity, while a value of 14.0
indicates extreme alkalinity. A soil with a pH of 7.0, midway
between zero and 14.0, represents a neutral soil. Certain plants,
such as blueberries, grow best in somewhat acidic soils with a
pH of 4.5; roses, as well as most annual flowers and vegetables,
grow best in a neutral to slightly acidic soil; farm crops thrive
best in soils ranging from pH 6.0 to 8.0. Very few plants will
grow in soils with a pH higher than 10.0 or lower than 3.5.
Plant Nutrients and Soil Fertility
Plants need three major chemical elements to thrive—nitrogen,
phosphorus, and potassium. In addition, plants also need
very small amounts of sulfur, calcium, iron, manganese,
magnesium, molybdenum, boron, copper, zinc, and a few
other trace elements. Even though most plants need only a
small amount of these elements, their presence is essential.
Most plant nutrients are located in the top layer of soil where
most of the organic matter is found. If some of these elements
are lacking in the soil, they can be added through the use of
natural or chemical fertilizers.
Common ways to maintain soil fertility is by rotating
crops (planting different crops on a piece of land in a planned
sequence from year to year), adding lime to soils to reduce
acidity, adding manure, and growing cover crops (such as alfalfa
and clover). Another way to increase fertility is to add compost.
Compost is a rich soil conditioner consisting of rotted organic
matter such as leaves, grass clippings, dead garden plants,
vegetable scraps, and other plant material. Most plant nutrients
are located in the top layer of soil where most of the organic
matter is found.
An added benefit
of composting is
that waste is
recycled instead
of being dumped
in a landfill.


PLANT SCIENCE 27
.The World of Plants
Plant Propagation
Propagation means reproduction. Although
many plants are propagated mainly by seed,
plants also can reproduce in other ways.
In addition to seed propagation, plants can
reproduce from roots, tubers, cuttings, and
grafts.
Propagation by Seed
Seed propagation is a form of sexual
reproduction. Both the male and the female
elements of a plant’s flower must join together
to create a new seed. Many of the seeds used
today in crop production were developed by
plant scientists through cross-fertilization. Plant
scientists discovered that taking the pollen
from one variety of a plant and using that
pollen to fertilize the stigma of another variety
of the same plant could produce a different
plant variety that would have the best qualities
of both parent plants.
Propagation by Roots
Certain plants can be reproduced by simply
planting portions of the plant roots in moist
soil or in a jar of water. You can demonstrate
root propagation with a sweet potato, which is
really the root of the plant.
In simplified
form, the cross-
fertilization of
corn plants
TASSEL
(MALE)
SILK
(FEMALE)
EAR
LEAVES
STALK
Extremely heavy: A single giant sequoia tree in
California weighs more than 8 million pounds. It
would take the combined weight of 30 blue whales—
the heaviest animal on Earth—to equal the weight
of one giant sequoia tree.
Extremely small: The tiny seeds of some orchids are
smaller than some bacteria. An ounce of orchid seeds
can contain more than 35 million individual seeds.


28 PLANT SCIENCE
Extremely big: The giant “double coco-
nut” seeds of the coco-de-mer palm are
found on the Seychelles, a thousand
miles off the coast of Africa. The monster
seed can grow more than a foot long
and weigh 40 pounds.
PROPAGATING A SWEET POTATO
Put a fresh sweet potato in a glass jar filled with water.
Leave about a third of the sweet potato exposed.
Stick toothpicks in the side of the sweet potato, with
the ends of the toothpicks extending over the jar rim
to balance the potato, so it is partially submerged
in water. Set the jar in a warm, sunny spot such as
a window ledge. Replace the water in the jar once a
week, making sure the water level doesn't drop below
the bottom of the potato. In two to three weeks, roots
will appear on the submerged portion of the sweet
potato, and leaves will sprout above the water line. If
you keep filling the jar with water, these leaves will
develop into vines that can grow up to several
feet long over four to six months.
Propagation by Tubers
A sweet potato is the root of the plant, but
a white potato is an example of a tuber, the
enlarged, fleshy growth of an underground
stem. White potatoes can be grown from seeds,
but many gardeners and commercial growers
instead plant cut-up pieces of potatoes, with
each piece containing the eyes, or buds, of
the potato. These potato pieces are called seed
potatoes. You can propagate your own potato
tubers by cutting up chunks of a large potato,
ensuring that each piece has two or more eyes.
Plant the potato chunks at least 2 inches deep
in gardening pots filled with potting soil. Keep
the soil moist and warm. After a few weeks,
you should see a new potato plant emerging
from the soil.


PLANT SCIENCE 29
.The World of Plants
Propagation Using Cuttings
Many gardeners and horticulturalists propagate plants by
stem cuttings. These cuttings can be rooted in soil to start
new plants that are identical genetic clones of the original
plant. Plants produced this way mature faster than those from
seeds, and they do not have the genetic variation that cross-
pollination would produce. The following diagram shows how
to plant cuttings of stems and leaves of such plants as juniper,
strawberry, rose, ivy, azalea, carnation, and geranium.
Steps for Propagating
Using Plant Cuttings
Step 1—Cut off a leafy stem about
6 inches long from the donor plant.
Step 2—Strip off all but a few leaves
at the tip of the stem.
Step 3—Plant the cutting in a con-
tainer filled with a layer of gravel on
the bottom followed by a good root-
ing soil mixture, leaving about one-
third of the height of the stem above
the soil.
Step 4—Cover the soil container
with a plastic bag and put it in a
light, warm place—but not in direct
sunlight. Keep the soil moist.
In two to four weeks, most plant
cuttings will have sent down roots,
and the newly rooted cuttings will be
ready for transplanting.
You also can start new plants
from leaf cuttings. Some leaf cut-
tings will start in water; others are
started in a bed of moist sand. When
the roots sent down from the leaf
are about 1 inch long, the young
plant can be planted in moist soil.
1
4
3
HEEL
1/2 INCH
SOIL
1 INCH OF
GRAVEL
RUBBER
BAND
PLASTIC
BAG


30 PLANT SCIENCE
The World of Plants.
Propagation by Grafting
Grafting is a form of propagation in which parts of two different
plants are joined together to make a new plant. Grafting is
discussed in the horticulture section of this pamphlet.
Native Plants, Exotics, and Weeds
Native plants are the natural inhabitants of an area. An
exotic, or nonnative, plant is one introduced to an area by
humans. Some nonnative plants spread aggressively, invading
crops and pushing out native species important to wildlife.
Any unwanted plant in a given area is often referred to as a
weed, and weeds are very often
invasive plants. A noxious plant
is an invasive plant designated by
law as undesirable and requiring
control. Noxious plants are usually
nonnative and are highly invasive.
Many native plants have fibrous
root systems that provide soil cover,
stability, and water infiltration, while
many invasive plants have narrow
taproots that leave bare soil exposed
to erosion. Other invasive plants
have roots that penetrate deeper than
those of native plants, allowing them
to tap more water and thus crowd
out native vegetation.
Invasive plant seeds can be
spread by wind, water, livestock,
wildlife, vehicles, and people. Boats
used for fishing and other recreation
might accidentally spread invasive
aquatic plants from lake to lake.
People traveling with horses, mules,
or other livestock in the backcountry
often carry hay that is specially
treated to prevent invasive seeds
from taking root.
Noxious plants in the United States
include purple loosestrife (left), Scotch
broom, and spotted knapweed.


PLANT SCIENCE 31
.The World of Plants
Controlling Invasive Plants
Among the most labor-intensive challenges facing
landowners is the spread of invasive plants. Use this
four-part plan to control outbreaks.
1. Prevention: Educate yourself on ways to avoid
transporting invasive plant seeds from one
area to another.
2. Removal: Remove invasive plants from an area,
using natural control methods whenever possible.
3. Restoration: Help native vegetation reestablish
itself.
4. Monitoring: Seek out and eliminate new invasive
plant growth.
Here are some guidelines to follow if you decide to
remove invasive plants.
• Properly identify the plant you think is invasive.
If you are not sure, do not remove it until it has
been identified.
• Pull invasive plants at the right time of the year—
ideally before they produce seed.
• Wear long-sleeved shirts, long pants, and gloves
when working with invasive plants that have
thorns or sap that can irritate the skin.
• Pull small infestations of invasive plants by hand,
especially when a noxious plant has first been
detected in an area. Hand-pulling also is a good
alternative in sites where herbicides (chemical
weed killers) and mechanical removal methods
cannot be used.
• If invasive plants have deep root systems and
cannot be pulled out by hand, try cutting them
flush with the ground or using shovels or other
tools to dig them out of the ground.
• Properly dispose of the invasive plants you
remove. Some plant parts and seeds can spread
and reestablish if left on the ground.





PLANT SCIENCE 33
.Agronomy
Agronomy
Plant scientists who study how to produce field crops
for food, fiber, or forage are called agronomists.
Agronomists include farmers who raise crops as
well as crop scientists who conduct field studies and
laboratory experiments. The goal of the agronomist
is to produce higher-quality crops more efficiently
and to develop methods to control crop pests. The
work of agronomists is essential for humans as well
as for Earth’s environmental health. Three grain
crops—wheat, rice, and corn—make up the majority
of the food we eat, either through direct consump-
tion or as feed for cattle, hogs, or other animals we
eat as meat. Agronomists study how to produce
these important crops with fewer chemicals, higher
yields, and more nutritional value. Agronomists also
work to find new plant species that can be adapted
for food production.
Chief Growing Regions for Major Crops
Corn. More than 10 billion bushels of corn
are produced every year in the United
States—more than twice as much as any
other crop. Corn grows best in climates
with warm, sunny days and lots of mois-
ture. Most corn production is centered in
Iowa, Illinois, Minnesota, Indiana, and
Nebraska. The majority of corn produced
in the nation is used for feeding livestock
such as cattle and hogs. Other uses of
corn include the production of high-fruc-
tose corn syrup, which is used to sweeten
food, and ethanol, which often is added
to gasoline.


34 PLANT SCIENCE
Agronomy.
Soybeans. More than 2 billion bushels of soybeans are pro-
duced yearly in the United States—more than 40 percent of
the world’s soybean crop. Like corn, soybeans are produced
primarily in the Midwest, with Iowa, Illinois, Indiana, Ohio,
and Minnesota leading production. Soybeans grow best in
warm, sunny weather, with daytime temperatures between 80
and 90 degrees. The United States is one of the largest soybean
producers in the world. Soybeans are legumes that remove
nitrogen from the air and deposit it into the soil, increasing
soil fertility. As a result, soybeans are often rotated in the same
field with other crops
The trend in soybean production is toward planting in nar-
row rows. The leaves form a canopy and shade the soil between
the rows, limiting the growth of weeds. Another advantage is
that the pods form higher on plants that are densely populated
because the sunlight doesn’t reach the lower parts of the plant.
That reduces crop losses that result when the harvesting
machines miss the low-growing bean pods.
Soybeans are a great source of low-fat protein. More than
90 percent of the U.S. soybean crop is used to feed livestock,
but soybeans are an increasingly popular food for humans.
Some of the more common foods produced from soybeans
include soybean milk, tofu, soy flour, and soybean oil.


PLANT SCIENCE 35
.Agronomy
Cotton. The United States grows about one-fifth of the world’s
cotton. Leading the nation in cotton production are the states
of Texas, California, Arkansas, Georgia, Mississippi, Arizona,
Louisiana, and North Carolina. Cotton is grown in a variety of
climates, including the humid Mississippi Delta, the West Texas
High Plains, and the deserts of the Southwest. Cotton needs
long, hot days and a good water supply, which is often pro-
vided through irrigation.
In the United States, all commercial cotton is harvested by
machine. A one-row cotton stripper can harvest 500 pounds
of cotton in an hour; a person can pick only 15 pounds in the
same time. The cotton stripper slices the bolls and some of the
leaves from the stalk. Growers try to keep trash (leaves, stems,
boll husks) out of the harvest because they earn more money
for clean, top-graded cotton. Another machine, the cotton
picker, pulls the cotton from the bolls. The cotton ginning
machines separate cottonseeds from the fiber. They also dry,
clean, and package the cotton into bales before it is delivered
to textile mills.
Cotton fiber is used in many items of clothing, including
blue jeans and T-shirts. Cottonseeds also are a valuable product
of the cotton harvest. Cottonseeds are pressed to make cotton-
seed oil, which is used in cooking and soap-making.
A single 500-pound
bale of cotton
contains enough
cotton fiber to
make more than
200 pairs of jeans.


36 PLANT SCIENCE
Agronomy.
Forage crops. Forage crops are plants other than grain that
are raised specifically for feeding to grazing or browsing
livestock, such as cattle, sheep, and horses. Forage crops
include many perennial grasses, such as timothy, fescue, and
bromegrass, and cover crops like alfalfa and clover.
Like soybeans, alfalfa and clover are legumes that are
often planted to help increase the fertility of soil. Although
legumes enrich soil, they also can deplete the soil’s
productivity after a few years of continuous planting. This
depletion occurs because legumes need phosphorus for their
own growth. Legumes eventually may reduce the phosphorus
available in the soil. Legumes also need lots of water to grow
and can deplete water supplies in soil over time. Farmers often
alternate plant species from year to year to restore the soil’s
nutrients that have been depleted by previous plantings.
Alfalfa is grown in every state. It is the third most valuable
crop in the United States, exceeded only by corn and soybeans
in total crop value. The yearly value of the nation’s alfalfa crop
exceeds $8 billion.
A legume converts
nitrogen found in
the atmosphere
into more
complex nitrogen
compounds such
as ammonia and
nitrates. These
complex nitrogen
compounds are
natural fertilizers
and help enrich
the soil to
promote better
plant growth.
Forage Crops as Feed
Farmers make hay, meal, and silage from forage crops.
Hay. Grass, alfalfa, or
clover cut and dried as a
bulky feed given to live-
stock for roughage.
Meal. Coarsely ground
unsifted edible
seeds produced by
legume crops.
Silage. Succulent feed
produced by storing a
forage crop in an airtight
silo and allowing it to
ferment. Silage is easier
to digest and is fed to
dairy cows.


PLANT SCIENCE 37
.Agronomy
Small grains. Small grains (often called cereal grains) include
wheat, rice, oats, barley, and rye. Wheat and rice are the two
most important small grain crops in the United States.
Wheat. Two main types of wheat are planted in the United
States—spring wheat and winter wheat. Spring wheat, planted
in April and May, is harvested in August and September. Spring
wheat does best in climates where the summers are fairly mild.
Most of the nation’s spring wheat crop is grown in the far
northern states of North Dakota, South Dakota, Minnesota, and
Montana. Winter wheat, which grows best in states with
a mild winter, is planted in the fall. The winter wheat seeds
sprout before the winter cold sets in. The sprouted wheat then
spends the winter months under a blanket of snow, which
provides insulation from cold temperatures that could harm or
kill the tender plants. As the spring sun warms the soil, winter
wheat quickly reemerges. It is harvested in early summer.
Most of the nation’s winter wheat crop is grown in Kansas,
Oklahoma, and Washington.
Rice. More than 2 billion people in the world, especially those
in Asia and India, get the majority of their daily calories
from eating rice. The major rice-producing countries are
China, India, Indonesia, and Bangladesh. These four
countries produce nearly 70 percent of the world’s rice
supply. In the United States, rice is grown in the south-
ern states. Arkansas alone accounts for close to half of
the nation’s rice crop. California, Texas, Louisiana, and
Mississippi are also important rice-producing states. Rice is
a semiaquatic plant, and rice fields are kept flooded with 6
to 8 inches of water until just before harvest.


38 PLANT SCIENCE
Agronomy.
Small Grain Production and Harvests
To improve production, farmers try to select the best small
grain varieties. High-quality seeds produce a greater yield.
Growers are concerned about disease resistance, grain quality,
straw strength, and plant height. If crops are tall and weak,
they may become lodged, or flattened down, by storms
or cultivation.
Closely grown small grain crops quickly develop a vegeta-
tive cover that protects the soil from wind and water erosion.
Fall-planted crops, such as winter wheat and rye, prevent many
spring weeds species from germinating. When small grain crops
are rotated with row crops like corn, cotton, and soybeans, the
overall erosion rate for the rotation decreases. Farmers may
limit how much they disturb the soil by reducing the number
of tillage trips across the field. Commercial equipment can
plant seed well into the remaining crop stubble.
Another way to reduce harvest losses is to use artificial
drying facilities to remove moisture from small grains. Good
storage management will prevent spoilage caused by mold
growth and insect activity.
Germination Testing
No crop can be better than its seed. In any bag of seeds, some
will not be viable; that is, they will not grow. Before farmers
plant a field crop, they need to determine how many of the
purchased seeds will germinate, or sprout. Calculating the ger-
mination rate of seeds helps a farmer know how many seeds
need to be planted to ensure a successful harvest.
How to Find Crop Production Statistics
The United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) maintains
the National Agricultural Statistics Service Reports website,
nass.usda.gov, which features yearly production figures for more than
a dozen crops, including wheat, barley, corn, alfalfa, rice, soybeans,
fruits, and nuts. You can also check the U.S. Statistical Report or
Agricultural Statistics Handbook, both of which may be available at
your public library. If you need help, ask your merit badge counselor or
county extension agent to access these statistics for you.


PLANT SCIENCE 39
.Agronomy
Conduct Your Own Seed-Germination Test
Step 1—Thoroughly moisten
one paper towel and lay it
flat on a table.
Step 2—Place 50 seeds of one
plant species on a wet paper
towel in 10 rows, with five
seeds per row. Make sure that
the seeds are not touching
each other. (Ungerminated
seeds can get moldy and
cause normal seeds to lose
their sprouting ability.)
Step 3—Moisten a second
paper towel and place it on
top of the rows of seeds.
Press down gently on the top
paper towel to make sure it
is touching all the seeds.
Step 4—Gently roll the paper
towel and seeds into the
shape of a tube.
Step 5—Place the rolled-up
tube in a plastic bag, and seal
the bag. Place the sealed bag
in a warm area (on top of
your refrigerator or on your
kitchen table).
Step 6—After a couple of
days, open the bag and make
sure that the paper towels
are still moist. If they are
starting to dry out, sprinkle
some more water on the
paper towels, and then reseal
the bag.
2
5


40 PLANT SCIENCE
Agronomy.
Raising Your Own Plot of Field Crops
To successfully raise a plot of field crops, you will need to plan
the size and location of your plot, prepare the seedbed, plant
and water your crop, deal with insect pests and weeds, and
harvest the mature crop. Farmers spend the winter months
planning their spring planting. The winter months are also the
best time for you to do your planning for raising your own plot
of field crops.
One of the first things you should do in your planning is
contact your merit badge counselor or county extension agent.
You also might contact local farmers, vocational agriculture
teachers from high schools or community colleges, or a chap-
ter of the Future Farmers of America (FFA). These experts
can provide you with specific information on growing field
crops that are specifically adapted to your local climate.
Step 7—Check
the bag once a
week to see if the
germination is
completed. Most
plant seeds will
germinate within
one to three weeks.
Step 8—When you
are certain that the
germination is
finished, count all
the seeds that have
germinated, and
then divide this
number by the total number of seeds you tested to determine the ger-
mination rate. For instance, if 40 seeds sprout in a test of 50 seeds, then
the germination rate is 40 divided by 50, which equals an 80 percent
germination rate. An acceptable germination rate for certified corn or
soybean seeds is typically above 90 percent.
Step 9—Repeat this germination test for three other plant species,
using fresh paper towels.
8


PLANT SCIENCE 41
.Agronomy
Corn, soybeans, cotton, and other field crops all have different
growing seasons, seedbed preparation requirements, and
moisture requirements.
Your merit badge counselor, extension agent, or other
advisor can give you advice on the size and location of your
plot, seedbed preparation, and many other practical matters.
Plan a meeting with your merit badge counselor or extension
agent a month or two before the local growing season starts
so you have time to get everything ready.
Your advisors also can help you with specific growing
issues, such as the proper planting date for your crop. For
example, soybeans are best planted in soil that is warmer than
50 degrees, temperatures that usually occur in May or June in
the Midwest. Planting soybeans earlier than this runs the risk
of the emergent soybeans encountering a killing frost. Cold
temperatures (below 32 degrees) will freeze the water in plant
cells and kill young soybeans. Farmers who plant too early
sometimes have to replant an entire field if a late spring frost
kills their young soybean plants.
Controlling Weeds, Insects, and Poisonous
Plants in Field Crops
The damage that insects and weeds cause to field crops and
stored grain runs into the tens of billions of dollars each year
in the United States. Wherever field crops are growing, you can
be sure that insects and weeds either are in the field already
or are trying to gain access to the crop. Poisonous plants that
invade fields of forage crops are another problem for farmers,
because livestock can become ill or even die after eating forage
contaminated with poisonous plants. Agronomists spend much
of their research time and dollars finding new ways to reduce
the damage of insects, weeds, and poisonous plants on field
crop production.
During the growing season, continue to seek advice from your expert
advisors. The most successful farmers consult with agronomic experts
and are constantly learning new farming techniques. Good farmers
learn not only from their successes, but also from their failures. They
try to apply what they learn from their harvests to produce a better
crop the next growing season.


42 PLANT SCIENCE
Agronomy.
Each field crop and climate region attracts different species
of poisonous plants, weeds, and insect pests. Your local county
extension agent will have identification guides and control
guidelines for the pest species that are most common in the
field crops in your area. A few of the more common insect
pests, poisonous plants, and weeds that infest field crops are
described on the following pages.
Insects Harmful to Field Crops
European corn borer. The European corn borer is responsible
for more than $1 billion in damage to corn crops each year,
making it the most costly insect pest in the United States.
The adult European corn borer is a small moth that lays eggs
on the underside of the corn plant’s leaves. When the eggs
hatch, the larvae (caterpillars) burrow into and consume all
parts of the corn plant, including the corn ears.
Many insects and plants are actually beneficial to
crops. Only a small percentage of insects and plants
cause damage. Many insect species pollinate crops,
while others prey on other pests that are harmful to
crops. Weeds, too, sometimes have a useful function.
Some weeds are left as a cover crop to help reduce
soil erosion, to retain soil nutrients, and to provide
forage for animals.
Extremely poisonous: Ricin, an extract from the
castor bean, is 12,000 times more poisonous than
rattlesnake venom.


PLANT SCIENCE 43
.Agronomy
Grasshopper. All plants are food for some of the many species
of grasshoppers. When conditions are just right, grasshopper
populations can explode, and large clouds of grasshoppers
(and locusts) can descend on a field crop, consuming entire
crops of alfalfa, cotton, corn, and other grains. Major outbreaks
of grasshoppers occurred in the United States in the late 1800s,
the 1930s, and as recently as 2020 in eastern Africa, threatening
the food supplies in many regions.
Cotton boll weevil. The cotton boll weevil can
do major damage to cotton crops. It is a gray
or brown insect that is native to Mexico and
Central America. Adult weevils are between
1/8 inch and 1/2 inch long. The adult female lays
eggs in cotton buds or fruit, and when the eggs
hatch, the larvae feed on the buds, destroying
them. They mature into adults that also eat and
destroy buds and bolls. Insect-control programs
have eradicated the boll weevil from certain
states where it was once a problem pest.
Army cutworm. Corn, alfalfa, wheat, soybeans,
and many other crops provide food for army
cutworms. These insects kill plants by eating
the leaves and cutting off the stems at or just
above the ground line. Most plant damage
occurs when the army cutworm is in the larval
stage. Look for small green or brown caterpillars
on plant foliage. The adult insect is a moth.
Army cutworms are found throughout the United
States east of the Rocky Mountains and in
California, New Mexico, and Arizona.
Cotton boll
weevil
Cotton boll
weevil
Army moth (top) and cutworm
Grasshopper


44 PLANT SCIENCE
Agronomy.
Common Plant Diseases
Serious crop losses may occur if a crop becomes infected with
a plant disease. Plant diseases may be caused by bacteria,
fungi, or viruses. Diseases are controlled through the use of
disease-resistant varieties of seeds and plants, crop rotation,
or treatment with chemicals such as fungicides.
Bacterial diseases are caused by single-celled organisms that
feed on plants. The host plant becomes diseased because the
bacteria take nutrients from and cause damage to the host plant.
Fungal diseases are caused by multicelled, threadlike
organisms called fungi. Fungi grow and produce spores that
are carried by wind, insects, or water. Fungal infections might
cause disease and kill the plant, or they might simply weaken
the plant and make it more vulnerable to other diseases. Plant
scientists have bred varieties of many types of plants to be
resistant to fungal diseases.
Viral diseases usually are spread by insects that carry the
virus. When an insect feeds on plant leaves or stems, the virus
enters the plant and begins to reproduce. Plants infected with
viral diseases may grow deformed leaves, flowers, or fruit and
might change color.
Common Plant Diseases in the United States
Wilt diseases. When plants wilt in large areas in a field during
hot and dry periods, it is often caused by the weather. But when
one plant turns yellow or wilts while the one next to it remains
green and healthy, it may indicate a wilt disease. Wilt diseases
may be caused by either fungi or bacteria. Corn wilt is a bacte-
rial wilt, which is spread by flea beetles that have the bacteria
in their bodies. When feeding on corn, the beetles transmit the
bacteria to the corn.
Fungal wilt is responsible for wilt
diseases of many plant species. The fungi can live for many
years in the soil and cause widespread destruction of cotton,
tomato, strawberry, and many other crops. One way to control
wilt diseases is to plant resistant varieties of the crops. Another
method is crop rotation, in which different crop species that
are not susceptible to the wilt disease are planted in the infect-
ed soil for several years.
Oak wilt


PLANT SCIENCE 45
.Agronomy
Leaf spots. These fungal diseases appear
as black, brown, or gray spots on leaves,
stems, and fruit. Various types of leaf spots
affect wheat, barley, oats, corn, and cotton.
Smuts. These diseases, caused by fungi,
produce swollen white to gray blisters or
boils filled with black spores on leaves,
stems, and seed of corn, wheat, oats, and
grasses. When the blisters break open, the
black spores are spread by wind.
Rust. Many of the rust diseases are caused
by unusual fungi that spend part of their
lives on one host and part on another,
producing orange or brown pustules on
each host plant. The wheat rust fungus
can alternate between the wheat and the
barberry plant, costing millions of dollars in
wheat crop losses. Rusts also affect
barley, oats, and rye. Control of rust has
been achieved through the introduction
of rust-resistant grain strains.
Rust
Smuts
Leaf spots


46 PLANT SCIENCE
Agronomy.
Common Weeds Harmful to
Crop Plants
Farmers spend billions every year to
control the hundreds of weed species
that compete with crop plants for nutri-
ents and moisture. Here are a few of
the most common weeds that infest
field crops.
Sow thistle (Sonchus arvensis).
There are several varieties of sow
thistle, all of which have strong roots
that spread rapidly. The sow thistle
has a bright yellow flower similar
to dandelions.
Wild mustard (Sinapis arvensis).
Wild mustard, also known as charlock
mustard, is easily recognized by its four
petals that form a cross. The leaves of
wild mustard are lobed, or notched,
with small hairs on the underside of
the leaves. Wild mustard is an invasive
weed in a variety of field crops, alfalfa,
and other forage crops. Besides being
a weed, wild mustard can poison live-
stock if they eat a large quantity of the
mustard seeds.
Quackgrass (Elymus repens).
A widespread weed, quackgrass is
difficult to control because it grows from
underground roots that live for several
years. These roots constantly send out
new shoots, so the weed spreads
rapidly. Quackgrass grows in a wide
variety of habitats, including crop
fields and pastures throughout the
United States. Like many other weeds,
quackgrass competes with cultivated
crops for nutrients, sunlight, and water.
Sow thistle
Quackgrass
Wild mustard


PLANT SCIENCE 47
.Agronomy
Canada thistle (Cirsium arvense).
A serious invasive weed in many areas,
this robust plant has deep, creeping
roots. Canada thistle is a large plant,
growing from 1 to 5 feet high. Its flowers
are a deep purple. Large colonies of
Canada thistle will spread from a single
plant, crowding out native plants and
field crops.
Redroot pigweed (Amaranthus
retroflexus). Redroot pigweed is
common in all parts of the United
States. Its roots are reddish or pinkish
in color, with oval leaves that narrow at
the tip. Pigweeds compete in soybean
and cornfields for nutrients and water,
which can reduce crop yields.
Spotted knapweed (Centaurea
biebersteinii). Spotted knapweed is an
invasive plant that has ruined millions
of acres of grazing land in the western
United States. The purple or pink flowers
occur on the end of narrow-branched
stems with short, hairy leaves. The fast-
growing plant crowds out native grasses
and other forage plants. It is difficult to
control, since it produces thousands of
seeds and has a deep taproot that can
regenerate even if the part of the plant
above ground is removed. Its leaves
and stems contain a compound that can
cause cancer in humans through contact
with unprotected hands.
Redroot pigweed
Spotted knapweed
Canada thistle


48 PLANT SCIENCE
Agronomy.
Livestock and Poisonous Plants
Cattle, sheep, and other livestock depend on farmers and
ranchers to protect them from poisonous plants in their pastures
and feedlots. Every year up to 5 percent of all horses, cattle,
and sheep that graze pastures in the western United States
become ill or die from eating poisonous plants. Ranchers and
farmers need a thorough knowledge of poisonous plants so
they can identify and eliminate them.
Common Poisonous Plants
Dangerous to Livestock
Purple locoweed (Oxytropis lambertii).
There are hundreds of species of
locoweed, but only about two dozen
are considered poisonous. The bright
purple flowers of purple locoweed
appear in 2- to 4-inch spikes close
to the ground, surrounded by leaflets
covered with silvery-white hairs.
Purple locoweed contains chemical
compounds that, if eaten, affect the
nervous system of livestock, causing the
animals to act crazy, or “loco.” Horses
that eat locoweed may start to stagger
and fall over. Locoweed is a native plant
in North America.
Poison hemlock (Conium maculatum).
Poison hemlock has tiny white flowers
in umbrella-shaped masses. The tall
stem of a poison hemlock plant has
feathery leaves that can each be over
a foot in length. The plant grows in
moist pastures in almost every state.
It can kill livestock that eat it. Poison
hemlock is an exotic plant from Europe
and north Africa.
Purple locoweed
Poison hemlock


PLANT SCIENCE 49
.Agronomy
Meadow death camas (Zigadenus
venenosus). Found in the forests,
foothills, and meadows of the western
United States, meadow death camas
has small, white, star-shaped flowers
with six petals. The plant has narrow
leaves rising from its base. All parts of
the meadow death camas are poisonous,
including the leaves, stem, pollen,
bulb, and flowers. Grazing animals—
including sheep, cattle, and horses—can
become ill or die from consuming large
quantities of this plant. Meadow death
camas is native to North America.
Leafy spurge (Euphorbia esula).
Leafy spurge can grow up to 3 feet
tall, with small yellowish-green leaves
surrounding the flowers. The root of the
leafy spurge can extend more than 20
feet into the ground. Livestock can die
from eating this plant in large amounts.
Leafy spurge is an exotic plant from
Europe and Asia.
Common milkweed (Asclepias
syriaca). Common milkweed is found
in the central and eastern United States,
where it grows in cultivated fields,
sunny dry pastures, and roadside
ditches. The crown-shaped pale purple
flowers grow in clusters, and the large
oval-shaped leaves are covered with
hairs. The leaves and sap of this plant
are poisonous and bitter-tasting to
livestock, and sheep can die after eating
large amounts of milkweed. Although
it is poisonous to livestock, milkweed
is the preferred diet of the caterpillars
of monarch butterflies. It is a good
example of a poisonous plant that
might need to be controlled in livestock
areas but not eliminated completely.
Milkweed is native to North America.
Meadow death camas
Leafy spurge
Common milkweed


50 PLANT SCIENCE
Agronomy.
Control of Insect Pests, Plant Diseases, and
Weeds in Field Crops
Traditional pesticides and herbicides contain toxic chemicals
that can kill beneficial wildlife and leave a chemical residue
on plants. Equally effective—and environmentally friendly—
pest- and weed-control options are now available to farmers
and ranchers. A few of these innovations include:
Biological Controls
This approach involves introducing predators, parasites, or
forms of life such as bacteria that will destroy invasive weeds
and insect pests. Among the earliest and most successful
examples of this form of control occurred in the 1880s. The
California citrus crop was being wiped out by an insect called
the cottony cushion scale. The citrus growers imported the
Vedalia ladybird beetle from Australia to eat the cottony
cushion scale, and within two years the pest was controlled.
Ladybird beetle


PLANT SCIENCE 51
.Agronomy
Cultural Controls
Farmers can change their normal farming routines so that they
interfere with the life cycles and feeding habits of harmful
insects. Some farmers plant more than one crop at a time in
their fields. Because many varieties of insects depend on one
kind of plant for their entire food supply, if farmers mix their
plantings then insects may not have enough to eat, and the
insect population will stay at a tolerable level.
Fall Cultivation
Soil cultivation in the fall destroys weed seeds and insect larvae
and pupae buried in the earth by crushing them or exposing
them to the surface cold.
Integrated Pest Management
Chemical pesticides have been used extensively in farming,
but many pesticides have a negative environmental impact,
killing beneficial insects and plants. They also may persist for
a long time in nature, creating danger to people and wildlife.
In fact, a number of pesticides have been banned. Because of
the concerns about pesticides, some farmers use a combination
approach called integrated pest management (IPM) to naturally
control insects and weeds. IPM uses all suitable pest-control
techniques in combinations that are environmentally sound
and compatible with local conditions. IPM techniques include
monitoring the insect or plant pest, using biological and cultural
control methods, and resorting to chemical controls only when
no other effective method is available.


52 PLANT SCIENCE
Agronomy.
Harvesting, Storing, and Processing
Field Crops
Simply growing a bountiful crop is not the end of a farmer’s
work. The crop must be harvested. Every field crop requires a
different method of harvest. For example, corn is usually har-
vested with a combine machine. The combine machine first
picks the ears of corn off of the cornstalks. The ears of corn
are then shucked, which means the husks surrounding the ear
are removed. Then the corn kernels are shelled, or removed
from the corncob. The combine machine then dumps the
shelled corn into a waiting truck or wagon. All these harvest-
ing steps are accomplished by the combine machine during
the harvest. Different harvesting methods are used for wheat,
barley, rice, and other crops.
Once the crop has been harvested, it is transported to
a storage area such as a grain elevator, or sold directly to a
processor. Ask your merit badge counselor or extension agent
where local field crops are sent after harvesting, and arrange to
visit these storage or processing operations.








PLANT SCIENCE 55
.Horticulture
Horticulture
The branch of plant science known as horticulture covers the
practice of growing fruits, vegetables, nuts, flowers, and orna-
mental plants in small gardens or orchards. A horticulturalist
could be a scientist studying how to eliminate plant diseases
in a community vegetable garden, a farmer raising fruits and
nuts in a commercial orchard, a grower producing new variet-
ies of trees and shrubs for the nursery trade, or a winemaker
growing grapes in a vineyard.
Hardiness Zones
Before horticulturalists plant gardens or trees, they need
to identify their climate zone. Plants will only thrive when
planted in a climate similar to the ones where they came from.
For example, a plant that grows well in the arid deserts of the
southwestern United States might quickly die if planted in the
cool, rainy climate of the Pacific Northwest.
Fortunately, there is an easy way to figure out what plants
grow in your area. The U.S. Department of Agriculture has
produced a hardiness zone map, a quick visual guide that
helps you know what plants will grow in different climates.
The hardiness zone map is divided into 13 zones; Zone 1 is the
coldest and Zone 13 is the warmest. (Only Hawaii and Puerto
Rico are in zones 12 and 13.) Each zone represents a 10-degree
difference in average minimum temperature.
You can access a more detailed map of U.S. plant
hardiness regions on the USDA National Arboretum
website: planthardiness.ars.usda.gov/
Use the map to locate your town and region.


56 PLANT SCIENCE
Horticulture.
Here’s an example of how the hardiness zones are
arranged. Zone 5, which includes Des Moines, Iowa, has
minimum winter temperatures between -10 to -20 degrees.
Zone 6, which is farther south than Zone 5, has minimum
temperatures between 0 and -10 degrees. Zone 6 includes the
city of St. Louis, Missouri. Colder zones are usually found
farther north and at higher elevations. Warmer zones are found
farther south and at lower elevations.
Factors other than the minimum temperature of the
hardiness zones also can influence which plants are suitable
for your area. Some of these factors include yearly rainfall,
wind conditions, soil types, and daytime temperatures.
The table shows a few plant species that are adapted for
each hardiness zone. To find more plants that you can grow
successfully in your hardiness zone, visit a local nursery or
check gardening reference books.


PLANT SCIENCE 57
.Horticulture
USDA Plant Hardiness Zone Map
Alaska, Hawaii and Puerto Rico
insets are not to scale
Mapping by the PRISM Climate Group, Oregon State University
Map courtesy of the USDA Agricultural Research Service


58 PLANT SCIENCE
Horticulture.


PLANT SCIENCE 59
.Horticulture
Landscape Design
Horticulturalists often use trees, flowers, and other plants to
design landscapes. Landscape design refers to the planning of
the look of land not covered by buildings or roads. Landscape
designers create outdoor spaces that are more pleasing to look
at and are safer and healthier than they would have been
without a planned design.
A landscape design changes as plants and trees grow,
flower, and eventually die. A landscape designer selects trees,
shrubs, and ground covers that will thrive in particular soil
and climate conditions. They choose plants for their unique
characteristics and contributions to the design plan.
In landscape design, scale is the relationship of the design
to the people who will use it. A person senses when the scale
feels too large, too small, or just right.
The plan on the left
is well-balanced; the
elements in the plan
are in proportion. The
plan on the right is
out of proportion.
When planning a landscape in an arid or semi-arid climate, landscape
designers and landscape architects (professionals who create outdoor
places that people care about and want to visit) use a concept called
xeriscape (pronounced ZEER-i-skape). This means they minimize areas
of turf (grass), improve the soil, and utilize indigenous (native) and
drought-tolerant plants. This saves water, money, and time because it
takes less water (and watering time) to keep such an area thriving.


60 PLANT SCIENCE
Horticulture.
Some Common Horticultural Terms
and Definitions
Annuals. Annual flowers and plants grow for one season and then die.
They usually grow and bloom during spring, summer, or fall, dying
after the first frost of winter. New annuals must be planted every year.
Perennials. Perennial plants come back year after year without replanting.
Many perennial plants lose their leaves and die back in the fall or after
the first frost. When the weather warms up, perennial plants grow back
again. They often increase in size over the years.
Shade tolerance. A plant’s shade tolerance describes how well it grows
in shade. Shade tolerance varies quite a bit. Many plants require full
sun to thrive, while others can tolerate half a day or more of shade.
Some plants, such as ferns, do fine in full shade.
Moisture requirement. All plants need water, but the amount they
need—their moisture requirement—varies. For example, blue flag iris
does best in the damp soil along the margins of ponds. Other plants,
including some native and ornamental grasses, are drought tolerant.
Mulch. A layer of material such as organic compost, bark chips, straw,
or weed fabric is placed on the surface of the soil. Mulch raises the
temperature of the soil, reduces weed growth, and helps hold
in moisture.
Propagation. Plant reproduction occurs either through seeds (sexual
reproduction) or through vegetative (asexual reproduction) techniques
like grafting and cloning by cuttings and tissue culture.
Pruning. Plant parts like stems or branches are removed to increase
the plant’s beauty, to remove dead material, and to reduce crowding
of the remaining living branches. Pruning also eliminates excess living
plant material that drains energy away from the production of fruits
and flowers.
Cultivar. A cultivar is a CULTIvated VARiety of a plant that has been
selected by horticulturalists for certain traits (such as unique taste and
color in apples). Cultivar traits are propagated through grafting, or
tissue culture (cloning) techniques, not through sexual reproduction.


PLANT SCIENCE 61
.Horticulture
Landscape designers consider plant size, form, texture,
and color, and then apply basic design principles to planting
arrangements. The ultimate sizes of trees, shrubs, flowers, and
ground cover are important landscape design considerations. If
you plant a tree in a small space that it eventually outgrows,
you may have to spend a lot of time and money removing that
tree from the landscape. Landscape designers must consider
whether the plants in any design grow slowly or quickly. For
example, a fast-growing tree, such as a Lombardy poplar, could
be a good choice for an area where you need to grow a wind-
break to shelter a house from the wind.
Plants that grow more slowly, such as a dense evergreen
tree, might be considered in areas where the landscape designer
wants to create deep shade in a few years. Another consider-
ation is texture, which is determined by the characteristics of a
plant’s various parts. For example, plant leaves may be shiny,
prickly, fuzzy, large, small, broad, or narrow. The textures of
the plants chosen for a landscape add to the overall effect.
Stem Grafting
As discussed earlier, plants can propagate, or reproduce, in
several ways—from seeds, tubers, roots, and cuttings. Another
important propagation method is grafting. Stem grafting involves
attaching a small upper branch called a scion, or bud stock,
to a lower branch or trunk called the rootstock.
The method of joining two plants together has many
advantages in horticulture. Some plant varieties cannot be
propagated from seeds, so grafting is the only method avail-
able. Plant varieties also can be grown in different areas of
the country by grafting the cultivar onto a rootstock that is
more adapted to the local climate. Plants that are often grafted
include grapevines, as well as a variety of fruit and nut trees
such as cherry, peach, apple, and pecans.
Deadheading. Removing dead flowers and seeds from a plant after they
have bloomed is called deadheading. Deadheading can cause plants to
produce a second set of blooms once the first flower heads have been
removed. Rose plants, for example, often produce blooms throughout
the summer and fall if they are deadheaded.


62 PLANT SCIENCE
Horticulture.
Grafting is usually
done in spring, just
prior to the start of
the growing season.
Here’s the procedure:
Step 1—Use trunks
1 1/2 to 3 1/2 inches in
diameter for rootstock.
Cut straight across the
trunk with a sharp saw.
Step 2—The scion should
be the same species as
the rootstock. Cut off 3 to
4 inches of a branch with
three or four buds. Taper
the ends of the scion.
Step 3— Use a small
hand ax and hammer to
make a cleft in the root-
stock. Spread the split
in the rootstock and
insert the scion pieces.
The cambium layer of
both rootstock and scion
must be in close contact.
(The cambium is the
soft tissue between the
wood and the bark.)
Step 4—Cut an 8- to 12-inch square of aluminum
foil. Wrap the foil around the rootstock. Tear or cut a
line down the center of the square as shown.
Step 5—Fold each side of the divided end of the foil
around the graft. Cover all cut surfaces.
1
5
43
2
SCION
ARE BEVELED
IN TWO
DIRECTIONS.
AND
2
1
MAKING
THE CLEFT
OPENING THE
CLEFT TO
INSERT SCION


PLANT SCIENCE 63
.Horticulture
Step 6—Cut off one
corner of a small plastic
bag. Slip the bag over
the graft and work the
graft through the hole at
the corner. Pull the bag
down gently.
Step 7—Tie the bag at
the cut corner around
the graft using a rubber
band, budding strip, raf-
fia, or polyethylene tape.
Step 8—Tie the lower
end of the bag around
the stock. Use tape or a
large rubber budding strip to secure the lower end
of the bag.
Step 9—Coat the cut surface of the tip end of the
graft with grafting wax.
6 7
9
8


64 PLANT SCIENCE
Horticulture.
Bedding Plants
Bedding plants are those started indoors in trays or “beds” to
be planted outside once the danger of frost has passed. They
can be propagated from seeds or cuttings. At home, you can
start bedding plants in specially designed potting soil or peat
pots. Once the seedlings sprout, put them under bright lights
and fertilize them with a liquid fertilizer. Bedding plants grow
best in well-lighted areas and with soil kept lightly damp.
About a week before you are ready to transfer your bedding
plants outdoors, you should harden off the plants. This means
you should gradually reduce the amount of water and fertilizer
the plants receive and put them outside for a few hours each
day to expose them to cooler air and drier conditions. This
helps the seedlings adjust to the harsher climate before you
transplant them outside.
Fruit, Berry, and Nut Crops
If you choose to plant an orchard, you must plan it carefully.
Although you must take full care of the trees for just one season
in order to meet this requirement, the trees may live for 30 or
more years.
Certain factors are critical to the success of your planting:
• Location—Most fruit and nut trees require full sunlight for
peak productivity.
• Air circulation—Wind movement away from the trees
reduces the risk of frost damage.


PLANT SCIENCE 65
.Horticulture
• Water drainage—Soil should be well-drained, with no
seepage places or wet spots.
• Soil fertility—Fruit trees need deep, rich soil with the same
essential elements required by other crops.
• Spacing—Trees must be planted according to their expected
size at maturation.
Some fruit crops (such as cherries, grapes, and peaches) can
pollinate themselves, but many do not produce pollen or are
sterile to their own pollen (such as blueberries and apples).
In order to produce fruit (or nuts or berries), the sterile plants
depend on cross-pollination and fertilization from a second
plant of a different variety that will bloom at the same time
and produce pollen. Get advice from an expert about choosing
plants for your fruit, berry, or nut crop. Variety cross-pollina-
tion charts are readily available online for each type of fruit.
The Dirt on Potting Soil Mixes
Manufactured potting mixes differ in quality, price, and ingredients,
but none contains real soil. Garden dirt has bacteria, insects, and weed
seeds, but commercially prepared potting soil mixes are sterile and can
be used straight from the bag.
To grow healthy plants, use a good quality potting mix that:
• Is dense enough to support the plants.
• Allows air and water to pass through, yet holds adequate moisture.
• Retains nutrients and slow-release fertilizers.
Most potting mixes combine organic matter (such as peat moss or
ground pine bark) and inorganic material (such as washed sand, perlite,
or vermiculite). The ingredients (and their textures) affect the charac-
teristics of the mix. For example, vermiculite increases water retention;
perlite speeds up water drainage.
The potting mix you choose will depend on how you plan to use it.
Plants grown from seeds require very light mixes that are full of air—
otherwise the seedlings will die in heavy, wet potting soil. Cuttings, on
the other hand, require a dense mix that will hold them up.


66 PLANT SCIENCE
Horticulture.
Bud Grafting
Many growers try to improve the quality of their trees by
grafting a desired variety onto a strong rootstock. They
may wish to encourage dwarfing in a high-density orchard,
provide a strong trunk for a different variety, or induce
cold tolerance or disease resistance. Fruit trees often are
propagated by this method.
Budding involves grafting a dormant side bud onto
rootstock during the growing season, usually in July or
August after new growth has stopped. Follow these steps for
the grafting technique known as T or shield budding:
Step 1—Make a T cut to bark depth on
one-year-old rootstock.
Step 2—Cut a bud from this year’s growth on a mature
healthy scion. The cutting should be shield-shaped, with
part of the leaf stem intact for a handle.
Step 3—Carefully slip the shield with the bud into the
T cut.
Step 4—Press the shield down snugly.
Step 5—Hold the bark flaps tightly against the bud and
wrap them securely in place with polyethylene budding
tape or rubber budding strips, which break down
by weathering.
Step 6—The next spring, when the bud begins to grow,
remove the wrapping and prune the rootstock 6 to 8 inches
above the bud. Use the rootstock as a stake to tie the
new shoot.
Step 7—At the end of the first growing season, cut off the
rootstock just above the new shoot.
Step 8—Eventually, the new shoot will grow straight.
1
2
4
5 6 7 8
3
3
⁄4"


PLANT SCIENCE 67
.Horticulture
Fresh to Processed
How long will you have to wait to pick your fruit, berries,
or nuts? Various fruit crops require different amounts of time
to produce their first good harvest. You can pick strawberries
in one year, but you will have to wait six to 10 years to
collect pecans.
Fruit crops can be consumed as fresh or processed foods.
For example, nuts are often processed for butters and oils.
Fruits may be cut up and canned or frozen, or processed for
jams and pie fillings. Berries, too, are canned or frozen,
or turned into syrup, juice, or wine.
Woody Ornamental Plants
Woody ornamentals are trees and shrubs that people grow
because of their attractive features. There are three major types
of woody ornamental plants: Coniferous trees and shrubs,
broadleaf evergreens, and deciduous trees and shrubs. They
produce a variety of growth forms, shapes, and sizes. Shrubs
are generally smaller than trees, often with multiple stems.
The characteristic form or manner of growth of a shrub or
tree is referred to as its habit. For example, evergreen habits
might include an upright evergreen shrub, a compact evergreen
hedge, or a sprawling evergreen bush.
Coniferous trees produce cones containing seeds.
Examples are pine, cedar, and fir trees. Most conifers are also
evergreens, retaining most of their needles from year to year.


68 PLANT SCIENCE
Horticulture.
Broadleaf evergreen trees and shrubs keep their green
leaves year-round. Examples are palms, citrus, many kinds of
rhododendrons, and some magnolias.
Deciduous trees lose all of their leaves at one time each
year, usually in the fall or early winter. Examples are dogwood,
oak, and pecan trees.


.Horticulture
Planting Your Own Trees or Shrubs
Planting trees and shrubs helps beautify an area and hold the
soil in place. Trees and shrubs also provide shade, shelter, and
food for wildlife. You need to consider many factors before
planting trees and shrubs, including your soil type, how long the
tree will likely live, the hardiness zone you live in, the size and
shape of the tree or shrub when fully grown, and the care the
tree or shrub will require as it grows. Because there are so many
things to consider before you plant a tree or shrub, it is a good
idea to consult gardening books, your merit badge counselor,
or a county extension agent for advice. Be sure to contact your
local utility companies before you dig to make sure power lines,
cables, or other utilities are not located where you hope to plant.
Once you get the tree or shrub you will plant, be sure
to keep it well-watered until you plant it. Dig planting holes
spaced according to the recommendations for the kind of tree
or shrub you are planting. It is important that the holes you
dig are large enough to hold all the roots without crowding
them. A general rule: the hole should be twice as wide as the
root ball of the tree or shrub you are planting. Be sure the soil
at the bottom of the hole is not packed so hard that it will
interfere with root growth. If the soil is dry, you might need
to put a little water in the hole. Press the soil
carefully and firmly about the roots as you fill
the hole, because air pockets in the root zone
could kill the tree or shrub seedling. Never
plant a plant deeper than the original soil level
of the topmost roots. Trees and shrubs with
a buried root ball will eventually rot and die.
Stake the tree, if necessary, and take care not to
damage the trunk or branches.
Prevent weeds, grass, and other plants
from competing with the new shrub or tree. A
layer of mulch will help keep weeds down; be
sure to leave the area around the trunk mulch-
free for about 6 inches. Mulch burying a trunk
will rot the bark, slowly killing the tree. See
that the tree or shrub gets regular water either
from rain or from watering. During its first
year, the tree or shrub needs pruning to train it
into a strong, well-shaped plant. In later years,
pruning is done to remove dead, diseased, or
damaged branches, or to redirect growth.


70 PLANT SCIENCE
Horticulture.
Pruning Techniques
Like people, plants require discipline and
training. Good pruning directs growth and
eliminates bad habits and problems. If you
understand the relationship between the
location of the buds on a branch and the
position of the pruning cuts, you can train
a plant to grow as you wish. Poor pruning
results in an unruly plant.
Terminal buds—at the ends of stems
and branches—produce a hormone that
encourages most of the growth to occur at
the tips of the plant. Lateral (side) buds on
a branch do not develop well as long as the
terminal bud is in place. If you prune the
terminal bud, the lateral buds will grow side
shoots. To encourage horizontal growth,
select an outward-facing bud and cut the
branch at an angle directly above the bud.
For vertical growth, cut the branch at an
angle directly above an inward-facing bud.
1. Pruning to opposite buds. Cut squarely
across the stem above a pair of buds (as
close as you can without touching or
damaging them). A pair of side shoots
will then grow.
2. Pruning for horizontal growth. Make
an angled cut directly above an outward-
facing bud.
3. Pruning for vertical growth. Make an
angled cut directly above an inward-
facing bud.
You should prune at different times
of the year depending on which type of
plant you have. The best time to prune
spring-flowering shrubs and vines is in the
spring, after they have flowered. The best
time for shade trees is in the midwinter
dormant season.
2
3
1


PLANT SCIENCE 71
.Horticulture
Prune a hedge so
the base of the
hedge is broader
than the top. This
shape will allow
sunlight to reach
all the foliage.
Use the right kind of pruning tools for the task, and keep
them sharpened and maintained to make clean cuts.
• Hand shears for twigs less than 1/2 inch in diameter
• Lopping shears for branches 1/2 to 1 inch in diameter
• Pruning saw for limbs more than 1 inch in diameter
• Hedge shears for formal pruning and shaping
• Electric hedge shears for faster pruning and shaping
Hand shears
Lopping shears
Hedge shears
Electric hedge shears
Pruning saw


72 PLANT SCIENCE
Horticulture.
Trees, the Environment,
and Humans
Trees are one of the largest plants on Earth and also
one of the most important. In addition to providing
us with fruit, nuts, and wood, trees benefit us and
Earth in the following ways:
• By protecting and nurturing the soil—The roots of
trees hold the soil together, reducing soil erosion.
When the leaves, branches, and other parts of a
tree die and fall to the ground, they decompose
and enrich the soil.
• By reducing energy use—Trees planted around a
house provide protection from cold winter winds
as well as hot sunshine, which reduces the need
to use energy for heating and air-conditioning.
The air-conditioning energy costs for a house can
be reduced by as much as half by simply planting
several shade trees near the house.
• By reducing air pollution—Carbon dioxide is a gas
emitted by the burning of fossil fuels. Scientists
believe that the amount of carbon dioxide gas is
increasing in the atmosphere, which may contrib-
ute to an accelerated warming of the planet. Trees
can help reduce the amount of carbon dioxide in
the air, because they absorb carbon dioxide during
photosynthesis.
• By providing habitats—Both living and dead trees
are home to thousands of species of other plants,
birds, insects, and mammals, including rare and
endangered species.
• By creating livable communities—Trees planted
in urban areas provide privacy around homes,
reduce the sound of traffic, and create an oasis of
quiet and calm in city parks.


PLANT SCIENCE 73
.Horticulture
Home Gardening
Growing a garden can provide you
with beautiful flowers as well as food.
There are many fruits and vegetables
you can grow in a garden. Plants that
grow best in cooler weather include
broccoli, Brussels sprouts, cabbage, cel-
ery, collards, kale, lettuce, okra, peas,
potatoes, and spinach. Other fruits
and vegetables grow better in warmer
weather, including beans, blackberries,
cantaloupe, carrots, corn, cucumber,
peppers, squash, tomatoes, and water-
melon. Consult gardening books, your
merit badge counselor, or your county
extension agent for more information
on which vegetables and flowers would
grow best in your garden. Also find out
how and when to plant your garden and
the pests and weeds you may encoun-
ter during the growing season.
Steps to Prepare the Soil
Step 1—For a new bed, use a hoe or square-bladed shovel to remove all
existing plant material.
Step 2—Turn the soil with a spade or tiller, working the topsoil to a depth
of 8 or more inches. Continue turning the soil until the particles are no
larger than golf balls. Remove rocks, roots, and other debris. Rake the
ground level.
Step 3—Cover the ground with a 3- or 4-inch layer of organic matter
(manure, compost, peat moss) to improve the soil. For clay soil, add 1
or 2 inches of washed brick sand. With a spade or spading fork, turn the
new material into the soil as before.
Step 4—Rake the ground again.


74 PLANT SCIENCE
Horticulture.
Planning and Soil Preparation
Plan the location of your garden. Using paper and pencil, map
your plantings. Decide what you need to do to prepare your plot.
Planting Your Garden
To thrive, flowers and vegetables must be spaced appropriately
and planted at the depth recommended for the particular
plants. Dig holes slightly larger than the diameter of the plant.
Water both the soil and the plants before setting them into the
ground. Spread the roots out, then sprinkle soil into the hole to
the level of the bed. Water in heavily to eliminate air pockets
around the roots. Add a layer of mulch around the plants to
control weeds, conserve moisture, and keep the soil cool.
Certain plants need extra support to stand straight. Set
metal, wood, or bamboo stakes next to the plant and tie the
stem to the stake with old nylon stockings or strips of cloth to
avoid damaging the plant. Certain vines may be staked to trel-
lises. Many gardeners use wire cages to support tomato plants.
Try to stake the flower or vegetable when you set the plant in
the garden to avoid damaging the root system when you push
the stake into the ground.
Feeding Your Garden
Your garden plot needs nutrients to help the plants thrive.
Fertilizing your garden may be necessary to promote better plant
growth. Dry fertilizers are often used to cover a large area such
as a lawn or a large garden. Liquid fertilizers are mixed with
water and are poured or sprayed onto foliage or around the
plant’s base. Liquid fertilizers work well for small garden plots.
• General fertilizers contain all of the primary plant nutrients—
nitrogen (for healthy foliage), phosphorus (for developing a
strong root system), and potassium (the “energy booster”).
Such fertilizers use a numbering system to measure these
nutrients. The number represents the percent of each
nutrient in the fertilizer. The first number measures nitrogen;
the second, phosphorus; the third, potassium. Fertilizers
with more nitrogen, such as 25-6-4, are used to increase
the growth of leaves and are common for fertilizing lawns.
Higher levels of phosphorous, such as 15-30-15, increase
blooming of flowers. The types of plants and soil you have
will help you determine which fertilizer to use.
• Special-purpose fertilizers contain nutrients for a particular
kind of plant. You might see fertilizers labeled “African
Chemical
fertilizers can
be toxic and
dangerous, just
like pesticides
and fungicides.
When using
fertilizers, be
sure to read
and follow the
manufacturer’s
instructions. Use
these chemicals
only under close
adult supervision.


PLANT SCIENCE 75
.Horticulture
violet food” or “camellia food.” These fertilizers are specially
mixed with the balance of nutrients these plants need most.
• Simple fertilizers contain only one of the primary nutrients.
• Natural fertilizers are made from the decayed remains of
living organisms. Blood meal, animal manure, compost from
yard or garden waste, and worm castings are examples of
natural fertilizers.
Caring for Your Garden Throughout the Season
Check your plants often. Pull weeds. Look for damage caused
by insects or disease, and treat appropriately. Are the leaves
wilted or yellow? Make sure the plants are getting the right
amount of water. You can encourage more blooms if you
deadhead any faded flowers.
To make a plant grow bushier and more compact,
pinch back the center shoot with your fingertips or scissors.
That will encourage side shoots to grow. Prune the plant
(only if necessary) to direct growth or remove damaged parts.
The best time to prune varies according to the type of plant,
so check before you cut.
Keeping Wildlife in Mind
Planting a garden or designing a landscape gives
you the opportunity to improve wildlife habitats:
• Plant native flowers that attract birds and butterflies.
Your local extension agent or merit badge counselor
can help you choose suitable plants for your area.
Also check native plant books to find species that
are beneficial to the wildlife in your area.
• Install birdhouses, bird feeders, and birdbaths.
Use different types of food (sunflower seeds, suet,
thistle seed) to attract different species of birds.
• Leave trees and shrubs unpruned to provide
more branches and hiding places for birds and
small mammals.
• Place tree logs on the ground to provide perching
places for birds and small animals. As the logs
rot, birds and animals may burrow into the wood
looking for insects.
Many gardeners
prefer to use
alternatives
to chemical
fertilizers and
pesticides.
Composting
(recycling grass
clippings, leaves,
raw kitchen
waste) and
biological controls
(using living
creatures such
as ladybugs to
control insects
and plant
diseases) are two
popular organic
methods.





PLANT SCIENCE 77
.Field Botany
Field Botany
Plant scientists who study plants in their natural environment
are called field botanists. These specialists are expert at iden-
tifying wild plants, describing the location and types of plant
communities, and observing the impact over time of climate,
animal, and human changes on plant diversity.
Field botanists study plants in their natural environment and
bring plant specimens back to laboratories for further study. By
collecting, pressing, and identifying plants, field botanists help
gather data on plant populations and locations—information that
can then be used in later research.
Observing Nature—The Essential Skill of
Field Botanists
Field botanists pay much closer attention to plants than
most people. You can learn many of the skills of field botanists
by becoming more aware of what is growing around you.
Begin by noticing the sizes and shapes of the trees at a park,
forest, or other natural area near your home. Note how close
together they are growing and which species are the largest
or most abundant. Which plants grow well in the shade?
Which grow in the sun? Is there evidence of fire, disease, or
strong winds? Study the network of fine lines crisscrossing
the surface of a leaf. Search the ground for fruit, seed pods,
or nuts, and break one open. Take a plant identification book
with you, and read about a plant’s uses, range, longevity, and
special characteristics.
Extremely smelly: The giant titan arum gives off the
smell of rotting flesh. This terrible smell attracts flies
and other insects that pollinate the flower.


78 PLANT SCIENCE
Field Botany.
The following questions can help you begin your field exploration:
• How is the plant similar to and different from nearby plants?
• How are the leaves or needles shaped?
• Does the plant bear flowers or fruiting bodies?
• What kind of soil is it growing in—wet, dry, sand, gravel, black dirt?
• What does the landscape near the plant look like?
• How do climate and latitude influence the plants?
• How is the plant affecting the environment around it?
Tips for Collecting Plants
• Always ask permission before taking a plant specimen from
private property.
• Take a notebook and a pen or pencil. Record as much information as
possible about the location where you found each plant.
• Take several plastic bags with you on your plant collecting trips. If
you do not have time to put each plant into a plant press when you
collect it, you can store it in a labeled, sealed plastic bag to keep it
fresh until you get home.
• Use a pair of plant shears or sharp scissors to cut the pieces of a
large plant specimen from the main plant. You will cause less damage
to the remaining plant than if you break off a leaf or stem.
• Wear gloves when collecting plant specimens with prickly stems.
• Some plants are dangerous to collect. In many parts of North
America, you may encounter poison ivy, poison oak, poison sumac,
or stinging nettles. If you touch the leaves of any of these three
plants, your skin may itch and blister. If you come in contact with one
of these plants, thoroughly wash the area with soap and water. Apply
hydrocortisone cream for itching if needed. Learn how to identify
these three plants, and avoid them.


PLANT SCIENCE 79
.Field Botany
Pressing Plant Specimens
Placing plant specimens in a plant press forces them to dry
without shriveling. The dried plant specimens can then be
mounted on a sheet of paper and used in the future for
identification and comparison to other similar plants.
Properly pressed plant specimens have been stored for
hundreds of years without losing their identifying shapes.
Use old newspapers to make a press. Place the
specimens in it carefully, so they dry flat and are not creased.
Arrange them in a lifelike position to show their parts to best
advantage. When the specimens are thoroughly dry, mount
them in a notebook or on
cardstock. Transparent glue
or small strips of gummed
cloth are preferred for
affixing specimens. For this
requirement, however, you
may use double-sided tape
to mount the specimens—
but it is not recommended
for a permanent collection.
Label each with the com-
mon name of the specimen,
the scientific name (genus
and species), the date, and
the place it was collected.
Voucher Specimens
Field botanists often find plants in areas where they previously were not
known. Sometimes they find new plant species never before identified
by scientists. In such cases, botanists often collect and preserve these
plants as voucher specimens. A voucher specimen is a plant sample that
is collected and stored for future study or comparison with other plant
samples from other areas—and from other years or even centuries. It
is important because it provides physical evidence that a plant species
existed in a specific location. Voucher specimens document the occur-
rence of rare plants and indicate the geographic spread of invasive
plant species.
A homemade press is suitable to dry and flatten plant
specimens before mounting. After mounting, keep the
specimens under pressure so they will not curl
or break.


80 PLANT SCIENCE
Field Botany.
Using a Plant Key
Among the useful tools for identifying plants are plant keys,
available both as books and as interactive websites. A plant
key guides you step-by-step to the identity of a plant species.
Each plant key addresses particular kinds of vegetation (trees,
for example) and may be further focused on a specific region
(such as North America).
Plant keys are typically constructed with an either/or
format, asking you to make a series of yes-or-no decisions that
will steadily narrow your choices until you come upon the
specific description of the plant you want to identify. A typical
sequence might lead you this way:
Needlelike leaves or broad-leaf leaves? If broad-leaf,
then . . .
Compound leaves or simple leaves? If compound,
then . . .
Thorns or spines present, or thorns or spines absent?
If thorns or spines absent, then . . .
Leaves smooth, toothed, or lobed? If lobed, then . . .
Leaves arranged opposite each other on the twigs, or do
they alternate? If opposite, then . . .
Are leaves heart-shaped or oval? If oval, then . . .
Once you have identified a plant, the plant key can pro-
vide a wealth of information about the species, often including
its normal geographic range, its general size and shape, and
descriptions of fruiting bodies, leaves, and bark. Plant identifi-
cation is most effective when it is done in a plant’s natural
setting where you have a wide range of clues to help you.
Identifying Trees
Identifying a tree can be simple. “You can tell a dogwood by its
bark,” the old-timers say, and they are right. The appearance
of bark is one of several important pieces of evidence that can
lead to discovering the name of a tree. Other characteristics
to notice when identifying trees for a tree inventory are their
shape, leaves, and the way they fit into their environment.


PLANT SCIENCE 81
.Field Botany
Tree Shape
Some trees spread great branches of leaves toward the sky to
absorb as much sunlight as possible. Other trees have shorter,
tighter shapes that help them endure storms and shed snow.
Here are some of the most common tree shapes.
Vase Pyramid Column
Palm Weeping Round
Cone Irregular Oval


82 PLANT SCIENCE
Field Botany.
Bark
Tree bark is notable for its
variation in shape and texture.
Some barks have distinctive
features. For instance, the bark
of the ponderosa pine smells of
vanilla. Some varieties of bark
are shown here.
Peeling
Plated
Flaked
Smooth
Furrowed


PLANT SCIENCE 83
.Field Botany
Leaves
Leaves are probably the most commonly
used clues for determining a tree’s identity.
For starters, leaves of conifer trees are shaped
like needles or scales. Those of deciduous
trees are broad, and might appear singly, in
various combinations, or in sets that alter-
nate on a branch or are opposite one anoth-
er. A few basic leaf shapes of broad-leaf trees
are shown here. Note that some leaves have
smooth margins while others are jagged and
toothed. The margins will also help properly
identify the plant.
Plant Communities,
Habitats, and Niches
A field botanist studies plants from
several different perspectives. In nature,
plants live in plant communities. A
plant community consists of many
different plant species living in the same area.
Two examples of plant communities are a tall-
grass prairie in Kansas that contains grasses
and wildflower species, and a plant com-
munity in the desert foothills of southern
Arizona populated by creosote trees,
shrubs, and giant saguaro cacti.
Within the plant community,
individual plant species also occupy
unique spaces. Just as humans live in
specific houses or apartments, plants
live in specific spaces. These places
where plants live are their habitats. The habitat of a cottonwood
tree is along the banks of meandering rivers in the Midwest
and western United States. The high mountain slopes of
Montana and Colorado are the habitat of whitebark pine trees.
Egg-shaped Heart-shaped
Veined fan Long pointed
Lobed fanNarrow


84 PLANT SCIENCE
Field Botany.
Field botanists have developed special methods for studying
plant communities. Because it would be impossible to identify
the characteristics of every single one of the hundreds of plant
species in a study area, field botanists conduct plant samplings
to estimate what a larger plant community is like. Even though
fewer plants are recorded with plant-sampling techniques, this
record still gives the field botanist an accurate estimate of what
the rest of the plant community is like.
Sampling Plant Communities With Transects
A transect is a continuous line laid out through one or more
plant communities. This line is used as a reference point for
taking samples of plant characteristics. Transects work best in
areas that contain widely spaced plants, such as an open forest.
Here’s how to set up a transect through a plant community
made up of trees.
• Use a string or tape measure to lay out a line at least 500 feet
long through an area containing some trees.
• Use a notebook to record the location of the transect, your
name, the date, and the weather conditions. Record any
information about the nonliving things along the transect,
as well as the type of soil.


PLANT SCIENCE 85
.Field Botany
• Draw a line 5 inches long across the middle of a sheet of
paper in your notebook. Make marks on the line at every
inch to represent every 100 feet of your transect.
• Starting at one end of the transect, walk slowly toward the
other end. Stop whenever you see a tree within 10 feet of
the transect line. Mark on your transect graph the location
of each tree. Measure the diameter of each tree at a height
of 4 feet off the ground, and record this measurement.
• Continue to identify, measure, and record every tree along
the transect line.
• When you have finished, you will have mapped a sampling
of the trees in the plant community.
• Make a graph or chart using the information you gathered.
Show the percentages of tree species present and the tree
trunk diameter measurements.
Sampling Plant Communities With Nested Plots
To sample mixed plant communities of trees, shrubs, and
grasses, field botanists often use nested plots. In nested-plot
sampling, plots of different sizes are used to sample vegetation
of different sizes. Large plots are used to sample large trees;
medium plots are used to sample smaller trees and shrubs;
and the smallest plots are used to sample wildflowers, ferns,
and other small plants. The smallest plot is located inside the
medium plot, which is located inside the largest plot—hence
all plots are nested.
Here’s how you can sample a plant community using the
nested-plot technique.
Find a plant community that contains a mix of large and
small plants, including trees, shrubs, grasses, and flowers.
Step 1—Use a notebook to record the location of the plant
community, your name, the date, and the weather conditions.
Record any information about the nonliving things. Note the
type of soil.
Step 2—Make a diagram in your notebook showing the plots
that you lay out.
Step 3—Use a tape measure to mark off a large plot that is
100 by 100 feet square. Identify and map all the large trees
that grow in this plot. Record your findings on the diagram
in your notebook.


86 PLANT SCIENCE
Field Botany.
Step 4—Inside of the large plot, make a second smaller plot
that is 10 by 10 feet square. Identify and map all medium-size
plants (small trees and shrubs) in this plot, and record your
findings in your notebook.
Step 5—Inside of the medium plot you
made in the previous step, mark off
your last (and smallest) plot, 4 by 4 feet
square. Identify and map all the small
plants in this plot, including grasses
and wildflowers.
Rare, Threatened, and Endangered Plants
Increasing population growth, cultivation of land for crops, and the growth
of cities and suburbs are causing plant habitat losses. As the habitat of a
plant is lost, the plant itself may no longer be able to propagate, and the
numbers of that plant species may begin to decline. Plants that were once
common may become rare or may disappear entirely.
Field botanists help identify habitats of plant species and measure
whether plant populations are increasing or decreasing over time. The
information gathered by field botanists helps alert land managers and
the public that certain plant species may be in danger. This knowledge
can then be used to develop land-use policies and to educate the public
to help protect the plants.
A plant or animal species that has so few individuals left that it is in
danger of dying out is called an endangered species. A threatened species
is a plant or animal species that is losing members at such a rate that they
will become endangered if nothing is done to change the situation. The
federal government has officially classified more than 1,300 threatened or
endangered plant species in the United States. Plant scientists believe that
between 94,000 and 144,000 plant species are threatened or endangered in
the world, in many cases due to loss of habitat.
Identify and map
all small plants in
this plot.
Identify and map all large trees in
this plot.
Identify and map
all medium-size
plants in this plot.
100 FEET
10 FEET 4 FEET


PLANT SCIENCE 87
.Field Botany
Visiting an Herbarium or Plant
Conservation Organization
Herbariums are plant specimen libraries, usually housed in
universities or botanical gardens. They are a valuable resource
for plant scientists and researchers because their collections
often include voucher specimens of rare or extinct plants. The
specimens are systematically arranged for reference. Some are
arranged alphabetically according to botanic classifications
(family, genus, and species). Others are arranged geographically.
Because these voucher specimens are intended for long-
term study and safekeeping, all mounting supplies and storage
materials must be durable and archival (free of acids and other
compounds that might cause deterioration or discoloration
over time). They must be handled carefully to avoid damaging
the fragile specimens. The collections are stored inside dust-
proof boxes or cabinets in areas with controlled temperature
and humidity.
Plant conservation organizations work to preserve diversity
in the plant world. They include private organizations such as
the Nature Conservancy and the Center for Plant Conservation,
as well as government agencies such as each state’s department
of natural resources. These organizations are concerned with
identifying plant species that may be in danger of dying out
and drafting plans to help such plants survive.
To arrange a visit to an herbarium or a plant conservation
organization, check a local telephone book or search the inter-
net (with your parent or guardian’s permission) to find out
if there is one close enough for you to visit. Before you visit,
prepare a list of questions. Take a notebook so you can write
down your observations and the answers to your questions.
If you cannot visit
an herbarium in
person, visit the
website (with
your parent
or guardian’s
permission) of one
of the herbariums
listed in the
resources section.
Sample Questions for an
Herbarium Visit
Sample Questions for a Conservation
Organization Visit
• How do researchers use the plant
specimens?
• What are some of the conservation
activities the organization carries out?
• Do you have any voucher speci-
mens of plants that are rare in
our state?
• What are some threats to rare plants?
• What tools and references do
botanists at the herbarium use?
• What land management techniques
does the organization use to protect
native plants?





PLANT SCIENCE 89
.Careers in Plant Science
Careers in Plant Science
Pursuing a career in plant science can be very rewarding. If you
enjoy being outdoors, then working in field botany or on a farm
might interest you. If you have both a green thumb and a flair
for design, you might pursue a career as a landscape designer.
Would you like helping other people with plant problems? Then
perhaps you could become a county extension agent for the
federal government, giving advice to community members.
Plant Science Careers You Might Choose
Agronomists help develop better and safer ways to produce
the food and plant materials that are essential to society.
Agronomists include laboratory researchers who study how
to produce safer pesticides and fertilizers. Other agronomists
study the genetic composition of plants and design methods
to improve plant characteristics. Agronomists who do research
with a government laboratory or corporation usually have a
master’s or doctorate degree.
A farmer could be considered an agronomist. To be a
good farmer in today’s world, you need to be a good plant
scientist. Growing crops requires knowledge of botany,
chemistry, soil science, and business management. On-farm
experience is one of the best ways to learn what is required
if you want to pursue a career in farming. If you do not live
on a farm, you can still gain valuable exposure to farm life
through vocational agriculture courses in high school, 4-H
clubs, the National FFA Organization (formerly Future Farmers
of America), or by volunteering to work on a farm. Many
farmers today have an associate or bachelor’s degree in some
field of agriculture or biology.
About 40 percent
of all plant
scientists in the
United States
work for some
government
agency, either as
county extension
agents, state
agricultural
department
employees, USDA
researchers, or
other positions.


90 PLANT SCIENCE
Careers in Plant Science.
Horticulturists study the science and art of growing flowers,
fruits, plants, and vegetables. Horticulturists often have
college degrees in landscape design, horticulture, or business
management. Horticulturists may work in greenhouses or
with farm agencies as producers, marketers, or inspectors. They
might also do landscape design at a zoo or park. They can
recommend the type of plants and flowers that would thrive in
a particular climate and soil as well as offer advice on how to
treat unhealthy plants.
Field botanists include plant ecologists, who study how
plants are influenced by climate, soils, other plants, and
animals, including humans. Field botanists are often hired by
state and federal agencies to conduct inventories of rare and
endangered plant species. Private organizations and universities
also employ field botanists to help them understand why plants
grow in certain areas and to discover new plant species that
might be used in new medicines and foods.
You will need at least a bachelor’s degree in botany or
plant ecology to be a field botanist. Most field botanists continue
their education, earning a master’s degree or doctorate. Field
botanists need to enjoy working outdoors, and must develop
observation skills. Many field botanists spend their summers
working in natural areas, observing and recording information
about plant species and plant communities.





92 PLANT SCIENCE
Plant Science Resources.
Scouting Literature
Fieldbook; Environmental Science,
Gardening, Landscape Architecture,
Soil and Water Conservation,
Insect Study, Forestry, Nature, and
Sustainability merit badge pamphlets
Books
Bartholomew, Mel. All New Square
Foot Gardening, 3rd ed. Cool
Springs Press, 2018.
Bryant, Geoff. Plant Propagation A to
Z: Growing Plants for Free. Firefly
Books Ltd. 2006.
Elzer-Peters, Katie. Beginner’s
Illustrated Guide to Gardening:
Techniques to Help You Get Started.
Cool Springs Press, 2012.
Jeavons, John. How to Grow More
Vegetables, 9th ed. Ten Speed
Press, 2017.
Kujawski, Jennifer. The Week-by-Week
Vegetable Gardener’s Handbook:
Make the Most of Your Growing
Season. Storey Publishing, 2011.
Madigan, Carleen. The Backyard
Homestead: Produce All the Food
You Need on Just a Quarter Acre!
Story Publishing, 2009.
Pleasant, Barbara. Starter Vegetable
Gardens: 24 No-Fail Plans for
Small Organic Gardens, 2nd ed.
Storey Publishing, 2023.
Organizations and Websites
American Horticultural Society
ahsgardening.org
American Public Gardens
Association
publicgardens.org
ATTRA—National Sustainable
Agriculture Information Service
attra.ncat.org
Botanical Society of America
botany.org
Center for Invasive Species and
Ecosystem Health
invasive.org
Center for Plant Conservation
Telephone: 314-577-9450
saveplants.org
Plant Science Resources
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


PLANT SCIENCE 93
.Plant Science Resources
Endangered Species Program
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
fws.gov/endangered
Lady Bird Johnson Wildflower Center
The University of Texas at Austin
Telephone: 512-232-0100
wildflower.org
National FFA Organization
Telephone: 317-802-6060
ffa.org
The Nature Conservancy
nature.org
University of Florida Herbarium
Telephone: 352-273-1990
floridamuseum.ufl.edu/herbarium
USDA Service Center Locator
offices.sc.egov.usda.gov/locator/app
USDA National Agricultural
Statistics Service
nass.usda.gov
USDA Plants Database
plants.usda.gov
U.S. National Arboretum
usna.usda.gov
Acknowledgments
For his help in writing this edition
of the Plant Science merit badge pam-
phlet, Scouting America thanks Shelly
Buckman.
Scouting America is grateful to
the men and women serving on the
National Merit Badge Subcommittee for
the improvements made in updating
this pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration Credits
Lynn Betts, U.S. Department of
Agriculture, Natural Resources
Conservation Service, courtesy—
page 54
John D. Byrd, Mississippi State
University, Bugwood.org, courtesy—
page 46 (wild mustard)
Bill Cook, Michigan State University,
Forestryimages.org, courtesy—
page 82 (furrowed bark)
Steve Dewey, Utah State University,
Bugwood.org, courtesy—
page 46 (quackgrass)
Division of Plant Industry Archive,
Florida Department of Agriculture
and Consumer Services, Bugwood.
org, courtesy—page 45 (smuts)
Chris Evans, River to River CWMA,
Bugwood.org, courtesy—
page 46 (sow thistle)
Getty Images—pages 32, 56, and 58
HAAP Media Ltd., courtesy—cover
(grasshopper, ladybird beetle)
Linda Haugen, USDA Forest Service,
Bugwood.org, courtesy—page 30
Scott Markewitz, Scouting America
file—page 58
George Markham, USA Forest Service,
Bugwood.org, courtesy—page 49
(leafy spurge)
National Renewable Energy Laboratory/
Warren Gretz, courtesy—page 34
Dave Powell, USDA Forest Service,
Bugwood.org, courtesy—pages 48
(locoweed) and 49 (meadow
death camas)
©Realworld Imagery Inc.—page 81 (all)


94 PLANT SCIENCE
Plant Science Resources.
R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company Slide
Set, R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Co.,
Bugwood.org, courtesy—
page 43 (grasshopper)
Jan Samanek, State Phytosanitary
Administration, Bugwood.org,
courtesy—page 48 (hemlock)
David Stephens, Bugwood.org,
courtesy—page 15 (club moss)
Jim Story, Montana State University,
Bugwood.org, courtesy—
page 47 (spotted knapweed)
Dan Tenaglia, Missouriplants.com,
Bugwood.org, courtesy—
page 47 (Canada thistle)
Barbara Tokarska-Guzik, University of
Silesia, Bugwood.org, courtesy—
page 47 (redwood pigweed)
University of Georgia Archive,
University of Georgia, Bugwood.org,
courtesy—page 43 (army moth
and cutworm)
University of Michigan Herbarium,
courtesy—page 18
U.S. Department of Agriculture,
courtesy—page 43 (boll weevil)
USDA Agricultural Resource Service,
courtesy—pages 37 (field), 45 (leaf
spots), and 82 (flaked bark)
USDA Agricultural Resource Service/
Scott Bauer, courtesy—pages 32, 33
(combine), 36, 56, 88, and 90
USDA Agricultural Resource Service/
Bruce Fritz, courtesy—page 53
USDA Agricultural Resource Service/
Yue Jin, courtesy—page 45 (rust)
USDA Agricultural Resource Service/
David Nance, courtesy—page 24
USDA Agricultural Resource Service/
Poisonous Research Laboratory,
courtesy—page 17 (horsetail)
USDA Agricultural Resource Service/
Keith Weller, courtesy—pages 37
(rice) and 42
U.S. Department of Agriculture/Charles
Herron, courtesy—page 33 (corn)
U.S. Department of Agriculture/Bob
Nichols, courtesy—page 91
Theodore Webster, USDA Agricultural
Resource Service, Bugwood.org,
courtesy—page 49 (milkweed)
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of
or are protected by Scouting America.
Daniel Giles—pages 12, 28 (kitchen,
potato), 39–40 (all), 63 (photo),
67–68 (all), 73, 76, and 84
John McDearmon—all illustrations on
pages 16, 24–25, 27, 29, 62–63, 66,
70, and 79


PLANT SCIENCE 95
.Notes


Alex: How can you tell
when a Scout has earned
the Cooking merit badge?
Andie: How?
Alex: They make good
use of their thyme.
— from a valued Scout Life reader
Make good use of your time by
reading Scout Life magazine.
It’s loaded with outdoor adventure,
games and comics, leadership
tips, life skills, stories about
other Scouts and more. It’s just
what you need to get ahead.
Use promo code SLMBP15 for
a special print + digital bundle
when you subscribe today at
go.scoutlife.org/subscribe