Dr. Albert Einstein Supernova Award Application
Please print or type all information. Provide the month, day, and year (MM/DD/YYYY) for all dates.
Page 1
512-054
©2022 Boy Scouts of America 2022 Printing
Part 1: Personal Data
Candidate’s name
Address
City State Zip code
Phone Date of birth Troop/Crew/Ship No.
Email
Unit type (select one): Troop Crew Ship
Council Territory
Supernova mentor’s name Phone
Email
Part 2: Approvals
Unit Leader’s Approval
The candidate is currently registered with Scouts BSA Troop, Venturing Crew or Sea Scout Ship No.___
and is eligible to apply for this award.
Unit Leader’s signature Date
(Scoutmaster/Advisor/Skipper)
Printed name
Statement of Candidate
On my honor, I have thoroughly read the requirements, have worked closely with my Supernova mentor, and have
successfully completed all the requirements for the Dr. Albert Einstein Supernova Award. To that end, I am submitting this
application with all required signatures and approvals, along with copies of all my reports and other appropriate
documentation for consideration.
Candidate’s signature Date
No. of hours spent in support of requirement 4
Supernova Mentor’s Approval
I have worked closely with the candidate in the execution of all award requirements. I have reviewed this application and
all supporting documentation, and I recommend that the candidate receive the Dr. Albert Einstein Supernova Award.
Supernova mentor’s signature Date
Printed name


Dr. Albert Einstein Supernova Award Application
Please print or type all information. Provide the month, day, and year (MM/DD/YYYY) for all dates.
Page 2
512-054
©2022 Boy Scouts of America 2022 Printing
Subject Matter Expert’s Approval
I have worked closely with the above-named candidate in the execution of the project requirements. I recommend that the
candidate receive the Dr. Albert Einstein Supernova Award.
Subject Matter Expert’s signature Date
Printed name
Council STEM Committee Approval
(or Advancement Committee, if the council has no STEM committee)
The council STEM committee members have reviewed this application and all the supporting documentation, including
a written outline for a new Nova award, as well as both written and oral presentations on the research project or
experiment. We have determined that the candidate has met all the requirements for the Dr. Albert EinsteinSupernova
Award.
Chair’s signature Date
Printed name
Date of oral presentation to the council STEM/Nova committee
Scout Executive’s Approval
I have reviewed this application and all the supporting documentation, including a written outline for a new Nova award,
as well as both written and oral presentations on the research project or experiment. I have determined that the
candidate has met all the requirements for the Dr. Albert Einstein Supernova Award, and I hereby confer this award.
Scout executive’s signature Date
Council City/State