VETERINARY
MEDICINE
STEM-Based


VETERINARY
MEDICINE
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Veterinary-Medicine or check
Scoutbook for the latest requirements.
35962
ISBN 978-0-8395-5004-4
©2024 Scouting America/Boy Scouts of America
2024 Printing FPO


VETERINARY MEDICINE 3





VETERINARY MEDICINE 5
Contents
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Veterinary Specialists . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
Veterinary Education and Career Development . . . . . . . . . . . 33
Veterinary Technicians . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
The Human-Animal Bond and the Veterinarian . . . . . . . . . . . 39
A Day in the Life of a Veterinarian . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
Veterinary Medicine Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44





VETERINARY MEDICINE 7
.Introduction
Introduction
Doctors of veterinary medicine are trained medical professionals
whose primary responsibility is to ensure and protect the health
and welfare of animals and people. The high-tech world of
today’s veterinary medicine, with its futuristic diagnostic
machines and state-of-the-art hospital facilities, is a product
of the long history of contact between humans and animals.
The earliest efforts to improve the quality of life of
domesticated animals probably involved nothing more than
improving basic animal husbandry practices. Better feed and
shelter improved the animals’ chances of living through another
winter and producing more offspring. Later, attention to hoof
needs decreased lameness and lengthened the working life
of hooved animals. The practice also gave rise to the farrier,
or horseshoer. When breeding sporting and hunting dogs and
horses became popular, commitment to the well-being of these
animals became commonplace.
The earliest evidence of veterinary medicine can
be traced to the ancient Egyptians. For as long
as humans have kept domesticated animals, first
as beasts of burden and then as companions, a
human-animal bond has existed between people
and animals. With that bond came a responsibility
to nurture the well-being of animals by keeping
them healthy and curing the many disease prob-
lems associated with human-animal contact.


8 VETERINARY MEDICINE
Introduction.
From the 1700s to
the early 1900s, as wars
in Europe and America
relied more heavily on
horses and other livestock
to move vast armies, the
need to care for those
animals became more
important. By the 1800s
in North America, special
schools had been estab-
lished to teach people
how to care for animals.
By 1920, there were 14
veterinary schools in the
United States, and by
1960, the number had
grown to 19. Today, there
are 33 veterinary schools
in the United States, with
more being planned for
the future.
Until the 1930s, a
veterinarian driving from
farm to farm in a pickup
truck provided most veter-
inary medical services. In
those days, before the discovery of antibiotics, we saw a different
type of animal health care than we witness today. Beginning in
the 1950s, when house pets became more common, the science
of veterinary medicine began to develop in leaps and bounds.
Today, it is estimated that the knowledge and technology of the
veterinary profession doubles every 24 to 36 months. Currently,
there are more than 120,000 veterinarians in the United States.
The field of veterinary medicine in the 21st century is
one of the most exciting medical professions. The skills of
a veterinarian are practiced with cutting-edge technology and
treatment options, and the profession offers a wide range of
career choices. Through their work, veterinarians also have
the opportunity to contribute to the health of the community
and the nation.
A farrier, or horseshoer, in action


VETERINARY MEDICINE 9
.Introduction
As you explore the world of veterinary medicine while
working on this merit badge, keep in mind that the long-term
goal of becoming a veterinarian starts with your successes
today. It also is helpful to have an open and curious mind.
But most important, you must care about animals and have
a cheerful and understanding nature toward people.
Now, let’s learn more about veterinarians and
veterinary medicine.


10 VETERINARY MEDICINE
Veterinary Specialists.
Veterinary Specialists
Because of the highly skilled scientific training they receive
in veterinary medical school, veterinarians are regarded as
well-qualified scientists capable of working in a number of
fields. As a result, veterinarians enjoy a wide variety of career
choices. In addition to practicing animal medicine, veterinarians
have been members of Congress, governors, directors of
government agencies and private organizations, consultants
on research projects, and even astronauts. Veterinarians also
serve as consultants to other veterinarians for medical and
business matters, and they serve as administrators for the
many veterinary associations within the profession.
Veterinarian’s Oath
Being admitted to the profession of veterinary
medicine, I solemnly swear to use my scientific
knowledge and skills for the benefit of society
through the protection of animal health, the relief
of animal suffering, the conservation of animal
resources, the promotion of public health, and the
advancement of medical knowledge.
I will practice my profession conscientiously,
with dignity, and in keeping with the principles of
veterinary medical ethics.
I accept as a lifelong obligation the continual
improvement of my professional knowledge
and competence.
This chapter
explores a
wide variety
of veterinary
specialties.


VETERINARY MEDICINE 11
.Veterinary Specialists
Companion Animal Veterinarians
If you had asked people 60 years ago what veterinarians do,
they likely would have answered that a veterinarian is a doctor
who treats horses and farm animals such as cattle, sheep, and
hogs. Today, however, when most people think of a veterinarian
they imagine a doctor who treats companion animals like dogs
and cats. Companion animal practice, also called small animal
practice, is the branch of veterinary medicine which deals with
dogs and cats kept as pets.
Since World War II, Americans have become more afflu-
ent and our pets have become more like family members. As
a result, veterinarians are expected to provide state-of-the-art
medical and surgical procedures and services for our pets.
Today, a modern companion animal hospital contains equip-
ment, medicine, and supplies that are more sophisticated
than those available to human hospitals only a few years ago.
Sophisticated equipment, such as ultrasound machines and
laser surgery units, often is commonplace. Some veterinary
facilities even have CAT scan and MRI capabilities, while some
major referral facilities can provide kidney transplants and
heart bypass surgeries.
The daily routine of a companion animal veterinarian is
varied and challenging, which provides the fun and excitement
of this area of veterinary medicine. No two days are the same.
In a given day, a veterinarian might rotate from being a surgeon
(fixing a fractured leg), to being an internist (doing an elec-
trocardiogram [EKG] on a dog’s failing heart), an obstetrician
As strange as it
might seem, all
domestic dogs,
from the very
small Chihuahua
to the massive
Saint Bernard,
all belong to the
same species,
Canis familiaris.
Likewise, all
domestic cats,
from the dignified
Siamese to the
homeless alley
cat, all belong
to the species
Felis catus.


12 VETERINARY MEDICINE
Veterinary Specialists.
(delivering a litter of
puppies), a behavioral
psychiatrist (helping
psychologically
challenged pets), a
nutritionist, or even
a grief counselor. In
addition, a companion
animal veterinarian
must shift gears to
provide these services
to completely different
species, as well as the
young and old and the
large and small.
Another important aspect of companion animal practice
is preventive medicine. Just as people take precautions against
catching diseases, companion animal veterinarians provide
vaccinations, medicines, and surgical procedures to prevent
diseases and other problems from affecting the quality of life
of our pets. It is far safer, less painful, and less expensive to
prevent a disease than to try to cure it after it has occurred.
Companion animal veterinarians also devote a lot of time
to educating pet owners about the importance of preventive
health care.
For many veterinarians, companion animal practice offers
a great opportunity to engage in sophisticated medicine in
comfortable conditions and with reasonable time off and a
decent income. A companion animal veterinarian might own
and operate a clinic or might work with a team of veterinarians
in a hospital. Companion animal veterinarians are vital members
of their community’s health-care system. Additionally, they are
a vital link in the human-animal bond, which all pet owners
cherish. Because of the many different health-care roles that
veterinarians fill, they generally are well-respected within
their community.
To become a companion animal veterinarian, a person
must complete high school, college, and veterinary school.
Also, due to pet owners’ demand for sophisticated medicine
and surgery, there is the additional opportunity, through
further study, to become a specialist with a concentration
in treating a particular species (cats only, for example) or a
specific aspect of medical care (such as diagnostics).


VETERINARY MEDICINE 13
.Veterinary Specialists
For veterinarians in
general and the companion
animal practitioner spe-
cifically, few vocations offer
more challenge, more diver-
sity, or more opportunity for
dedication to public service—
not only to animals, but the
pet-loving public as well.
Equine
Veterinarians
Historically, the field of
equine (horse) veterinary
medicine was limited to
taking care of draft horses,
“cowponies,” cavalry
mounts, and mules. In the
early 1900s, there were
about 27 million horses in
these categories in the United
States. Today, working with
an equine population of
about 4 million, the field
of equine veterinary medi-
cine uses technologically
advanced forms of medical
and surgical care, including
preventive care, nutrition,
conditioning and breeding
soundness, housing,
and transportation.
Equine veterinarians
might treat the “backyard”
pony or pleasure horse, cattle
horses, rodeo horses, or
parade or ceremonial horses
belonging to the military. Equine veterinarians enjoy great variety in their
day-to-day work.


14 VETERINARY MEDICINE
Veterinary Specialists.
There also are backcountry
packhorses and mules,
donkeys and burros, show
horses (Lipizzan stallions,
Clydesdale parade teams),
racehorses, breeding horses,
circus and zoo equines
(even zebras), large draft
horses, and miniature
horse breeds.
Equine veterinarians
work in a variety of settings.
Imagine traveling to a
ranch or farm to examine
a workhorse. A visit to a
thoroughbred racing stable
or a racetrack might be
another workplace. The local circus or zoo might ask you
to examine some of its animals. Because many people own
horses for riding, a house call to a suburban home might be
a common work site. Equine veterinarians also work in state-
of-the-art equine hospitals and teaching facilities. At these
institutions, CAT scans, MRIs, and sophisticated surgical
procedures are performed. Some equine veterinarians travel
with the military or Peace Corps to provide services in countries
where horses are still a major source of livelihood, much as
they were in our country a century ago.
Veterinary medicine has many areas of specialization. After completing
veterinary medical school, a veterinarian may pursue advanced training in
more than 30 different specialty fields. Completing the required advanced
training and passing a very comprehensive examination in the chosen
area gives a veterinarian “diplomat” status in that field as recognized by
the American Veterinary Medical Association.
Some examples of the many AVMA-recognized specialty areas
include toxicology, laboratory medicine, theriogenology (reproduction),
anesthesiology, clinical pharmacology, behavior, dermatology, cardiology,
neurology, oncology (cancer), microbiology, ophthalmology (eyes),
pathology (anatomic, clinical), preventive medicine, epidemiology,
radiation oncology, surgery, and equine, bovine, poultry, canine, feline,
porcine, and zoological medicine.
Specialized vehicle used by equine veterinarians


VETERINARY MEDICINE 15
.Veterinary Specialists
Equine veterinarians need many tools and skills, one of
the most important being the ability to work well with people.
The types of tools used depend on the type of medical service
the veterinarian provides. In general these tools are expensive
and large. Thus, many equine veterinarians have specially
built vehicles for traveling to farms and horse facilities for on-
site service. Also, due to the size and weight of their patients,
many equine veterinarians work with veterinary assistants.
As with all the veterinary fields, training to become an
equine veterinarian begins with a high school education
followed by a strong college education and graduation from
a veterinary medical school. Beyond doctorate of veterinary
medicine (D.V.M. or V.M.D.), some equine veterinarians seek
specialized training to become board-certified specialists in
equine medicine or related fields.
Large Animal Veterinarians
Think about the different types of meat we eat and their origin.
Hamburgers, steaks, and roasts come from cattle and even
buffalo (bovine). Bacon, sausage, ham, and barbecued pork
ribs come from pigs (porcine), and lamb chops come from
sheep (ovine). Now, think of the many dairy products we
consume. These mainly come from cattle and sometimes goats.
Some of the exotic pack animals, like llamas, do a number of
things for us. All of these
animals, whether raised
individually or in large
herds, must be healthy and
free of diseases. Ensuring
the health of these animals
is the responsibility of
the large animal, or food
animal, veterinarian.
Historically, most
food animals in the United
States were raised in small
groups on small plots of
land for use by a single
family. As the country’s
population grew, small
farms could not meet the
Where do
large animal
veterinarians
work? One place
might be a feedlot.
Feedlots, which
are densely
populated
animal-raising
facilities, might
have an on-site
veterinarian.
Some of the
largest feedlot
operations have
veterinarians
who fly from
feedlot to feedlot
to cover all
the herds.


16 VETERINARY MEDICINE
Veterinary Specialists.
nation’s demand for meat and dairy products.
Subsequently, larger production methods,
such as cattle and sheep ranches, developed.
More recently, when range land became
scarcer and the cost of raising livestock
became more competitive, range herds gave
way to feedlots. The same changes occurred
in the dairy industry. Today, many dairy
operations are so large that herds of milk
cows are milked in rotation 24 hours a day.
Large animal veterinarians work in a
variety of places. Every state in the United
States produces livestock. From the vastness
of the open ranges in many western states to
the densely populated eastern seaboard states,
large animal veterinarians are called upon
to ensure the health of our food-producing
animals. This challenge for the large animal
veterinarian helps guarantee the safety and
quality of our nation’s food supply.
Some areas well-suited to raising one
type of animal, such as pigs (swine), might
have dozens of veterinarians servicing
numerous swine producers. In some areas,
where cows, sheep, and pigs are raised on
small parcels of land, large animal veterinarians might make
house calls or the veterinarian might provide service from
a hospital designed for larger animals. Some large animal
veterinarians teach at universities while also tending livestock
kept for teaching purposes.
Large animal veterinarians in the dairy industry help
manage animal health and also work closely with the dairy
producer to manage the herd’s breeding program and the
dairy’s milking technology.
A large animal veterinarian uses a wide variety of equip-
ment and instruments. A vehicle specially adapted for large
animal veterinary work is a standard tool. They also use
specialized medicines, instruments, and restraint devices.
Whatever the location or the type of animal being treated,
the large animal veterinarian is guaranteed variety. With the
number of different animals and the assortment of health
problems each animal could have, it is easy to imagine that
no two days would be the same. The satisfaction of working


VETERINARY MEDICINE 17
.Veterinary Specialists
outdoors with hard-working ranchers and livestock producers
makes this an especially enjoyable area of veterinary medicine.
The work is more physical than other fields, but it is full of
rewards and challenges.
Training to become a food animal or large animal
veterinarian begins with a good high school education followed
by a strong college education and graduation from veterinary
medical school. Beyond the doctor of veterinary medicine
degree (D.V.M. or V.M.D.), some food animal or large animal
veterinarians seek specialized training to become board-
certified specialists in large animal medicine or related fields.
Exotic Animal Veterinarians
A typical day for an exotic animal veterinarian might start with
a turtle that cannot open its eyes, followed by a boa constrictor
The work of some large
animal veterinarians takes
them to extraordinary
places. For example, large
animal veterinarians might
work with a wild animal
reserve. Or, they might
work in other countries,
where water buffalo,
elephants, camels, llamas,
and other animals are as
vital to the quality of life
as a car, truck, or tractor
is to us.
Large animal veterinarians are the first line of defense against
diseases that can harm our nation’s food supply and the health of
our citizens. Countless exotic, or foreign, diseases can affect large
animals, and subsequently, people. Fortunately, our nation’s livestock
populations are largely free from these diseases. However, because
their exposure to such diseases is largely absent, our livestock
populations are susceptible to catching foreign diseases.


18 VETERINARY MEDICINE
Veterinary Specialists.
that will not eat, a jungle cat that
has swallowed a ball too large to
pass, an Indonesian parrot trying
but unable to lay an egg, and,
finally, a ferret with the flu. These
are just some of the problems likely
to be seen in the busy schedule of
an exotic animal veterinarian.
Exotic animals are animals
that are not native to the place
they are found. However, in the
veterinary profession, wildlife and
small caged animals like hamsters,
gerbils, ferrets, and reptiles are considered exotic animals, too.
Additionally, exotic animal veterinarians might treat wild
animals, which are not recommended as pets.
Exotic animals have many different physical and nutritional
needs and can develop a multitude of unusual diseases. It’s
what makes this practice extra challenging. Only in the past
20 or so years has there been much advancement in the field,
in particular the medical and surgical care of exotic species.
Thanks to exotic animal veterinarians, their research partners,
and modern scientific techniques, the health care and welfare
of exotic animals has substantially improved in recent years.
Exotic animal veterinarians often work in private practice,
where they have special equipment, medications, and cages
for various exotic animals. Exotic animal veterinarians also
work for zoos, circuses, or wild animal parks.
The educational requirements for exotic animal medicine
are the same as for other types of veterinary medicine. However,
a strong background in vertebrate zoology and postgraduate
The turtle is considered an exotic animal.
Prairie dog
Guinea pig
Arizona tiger
salamander
Exotic animal veterinarians might also aid wildlife
affected by natural disasters, such as wildfires
and floods, and industrial accidents, such as an oil
spill. Exotic animal veterinarians also help monitor
the numerous zoonotic diseases (diseases that
can infect both people and animals) that might
be carried into the United States by animals from
other countries.


VETERINARY MEDICINE 19
.Veterinary Specialists
training in exotic animal medicine is highly recommended
for this field.
Marine Animal Veterinarians
What comes to mind when you think of a doctor who treats
whales, dolphins, great white sharks, and other marine animals?
Undoubtedly, excitement, adventure, and danger pop into your
mind. Perhaps you imagine being part of the crew that conducts
research off the coast of Hawaii or Alaska or in the Caribbean.
Marine animal veterinarians deal with the mammals, fish,
and reptiles of the sea. Though marine animal veterinarians
treat a fewer number of species than other veterinarians, the
diversity of marine animals and marine animal habitats offers
unique challenges. The main challenge is the environment in
which marine animals live: the sea. Water quality, environ-
mental pollution, global influences on ocean warming,
All exotic animal veterinarians respect the wildness
of their patients. Most veterinarians would not
recommend exotic animals as pets. However, if an
exotic pet is presented for care, the exotic animal
veterinarian is the best-trained person for the task.
White rhino


20 VETERINARY MEDICINE
Veterinary Specialists.
red tides (a poisonous condition made
by the sudden overgrowth of algae),
and overfishing (which disrupts the
balance of the ocean’s food chain) all
affect the conditions that a marine
animal veterinarian might encounter.
In addition, marine animal veterinarians
must understand and consider the large
physical differences between species.
Marine animal veterinarians often
work with endangered and protected
species. Many wildlife experts, marine
biologists, and regulatory agents are involved with these
marine animals. However, only the veterinarian has the exper-
tise to address the medical needs of animals.
Marine animal medicine is a fairly young practice within
veterinary medicine. Although the knowledge base of the
practice grows each year, much research into the medicine and
disease of marine animals is needed. Although the field for
employment is small, tremendous opportunities exist for veteri-
narians who wish to enter it. Zoos and aquariums, government
and military agencies, universities and research institutions,
conservation organizations, and private industries all offer
opportunities to veterinarians with a serious interest in marine
animal medicine.
Did you know that the U.S.
Navy uses certain marine ani-
mals as part of its underwater
surveillance program? Small
underwater cameras can be
attached to the fins of specially
trained dolphins to help detect
mines and other underwater
hazards. These animals are
valuable, and it is the marine
animal veterinarian’s task to
help keep them healthy.


VETERINARY MEDICINE 21
.Veterinary Specialists
Educational requirements for marine animal veterinary
medicine include a doctorate of veterinary medicine and
a strong background in all types of biology, with a special
emphasis on marine biology.
Poultry Veterinarians
What do you think about when you hear the
word “poultry”? Chickens and turkeys might
come to mind. While this is correct, the term
“poultry” and the arena of poultry veterinary
medicine include more than just chickens
and turkeys.
Poultry veterinary medicine is different
than most areas of science. Instead of working
one-on-one with an individual animal, the
poultry veterinarian generally works with
very large flocks containing thousands of birds.
The poultry industry, in which the poultry
veterinarian works, deals with millions of
animals at any one time.
The production and disease management
of chickens and turkeys are the two biggest
areas of involvement for poultry veterinarians.
However, poultry veterinarians also treat
other species of birds, such as ducks, geese,
and ratites (ostriches and emus) that are
raised for meat, plumage, and eggs. Additionally,
poultry veterinarians provide care to birds at
zoo aviaries or special institutions involved in
the care of endangered species of wild birds,
such as the majestic California condor.
Very large production companies own
most of the poultry raised in the United
States, and they employ the largest number
of poultry veterinarians. Veterinarians who
work for these large companies help manage
the health of the entire flock as well as ensure
the safety of our country’s food supply. These
The white leghorn is a champion
egg-layer.
Emus


22 VETERINARY MEDICINE
Veterinary Specialists.
veterinarians also play
an important public
health role in the
prevention and control
of human foodborne
illnesses associated
with poultry, such as
salmonella poisoning.
Some poultry
veterinarians work for
pharmaceutical (drug)
companies that develop
vaccines for all species
of poultry. These veterinarians also help monitor the chemical
residues and toxins in poultry products. Other poultry veteri-
narians work for the U.S. Department of Agriculture in research
or at diagnostic labs where the detection of foreign diseases
is monitored.
Other poultry veterinarians work with ostriches and
emus. In other parts of the world, these large flightless birds
are considered a major source of food. Recently, they have
become popular in the United States as a food source, too.
The poultry industry is a multibillion-dollar industry in the
United States. When you consider that over 50 million chickens
and 1 billion eggs are produced each week in the United States,
one can see how important the poultry veterinarian’s work is
to our economy and the world food market.
Training to become a poultry veterinarian begins with a
good high school education followed by a strong college educa-
tion and graduation from a veterinary medical school. Beyond
a doctorate in veterinary medicine, the field requires advanced
study in poultry medicine and related fields.
Wildlife Veterinarians
It is Sunday morning; you have just finished breakfast when
the telephone rings. The state game protector (wildlife officer)
for your area asks if you could accompany the officer to a farm
some distance away. A farmer has reported that a large num-
ber of blue jays and crows are sick and dying on the farm and
on other farms in the area. You learn that the mosquitoes have
been particularly bad for several weeks, due to all the rain.
Poultry
veterinarians and
poultry veterinary
food inspectors
serve as our
country’s first line
of defense against
foreign diseases
that could destroy
the entire
poultry industry.


VETERINARY MEDICINE 23
.Veterinary Specialists
The wildlife officer asks if you have any idea what might
cause such a problem because you, as a wildlife veterinarian,
are an expert on the diseases of birds and wild animals. You
suspect West Nile virus, but you need to confirm the diagnosis.
You agree to accompany the wildlife officer to the farm.
Wildlife veterinarians face many situations similar to
the one described above. West Nile virus in birds and other
animals, wasting
disease in deer,
accidental poison-
ings from chemical
contamination, and
rabies control in
woodland mammals
(such as raccoons,
foxes, and skunks)
are a few of the
problems encoun-
tered routinely.
Human health
also is a concern
because many of the diseases that affect wildlife can be trans-
mitted to humans (zoonotic diseases).
Due to the many diseases that affect wildlife, nearly all
state wildlife agencies use the expertise of wildlife veterinarians
as part of the effort to keep wildlife populations as healthy
as possible and to reduce the risk of transmitting diseases
to humans.
Opportunities for wildlife veterinarians are not as numerous
as for other veterinarians, but positions are available in all parts
of the country. Special training beyond a doctorate in veterinary
medicine is necessary to practice wildlife medicine. Some
colleges of veterinary medicine have special postgraduate
training in wildlife medicine.
Aquaculture Veterinarians
The role of the veterinarian in aquaculture (fish and shellfish
farming) is gaining recognition. Recreational fisheries,
commercial producers of fish, large aquariums such as Sea
World, and pet and hobby fish enthusiasts have created a
growing demand for veterinary services.
The USDA is
responsible for
preventing foreign
diseases from
entering the United
States. Wildlife
veterinarians
serve as part
of the team that
protects our
country from
the foreign
diseases that
exotic species
might carry.


24 VETERINARY MEDICINE
Veterinary Specialists.
Aquaculture medicine uses
the principles of veterinary
medicine to maintain healthy
colonies of fish and other aquatic
animals. This field of veterinary
medicine is distinct from other
areas of aquatic science, such
as marine biology. As the world
population grows, aquaculture
will help provide an adequate
food supply, and the work of
aquaculture veterinarians will
be critical to the industry’s success.
Students interested in aquaculture medicine must earn
a doctorate in veterinary medicine. Postgraduate training in
aquaculture medicine is offered at some schools of veterinary
medicine. Many opportunities, especially in the coming years,
await individuals trained in aquaculture medicine.
Public Health Veterinarians
You might not hear much about public health veterinarians
because most of them work for local, state, and federal agencies.
Veterinarians who work in public health are the silent sentinels
protecting America’s public health and our quality of life.
Public health veterinarians work in a number of areas of
national and public concern. For example, they are involved in
matters related to terrorism and the use of disease agents for
biological warfare, such as anthrax and botulism. Also, public
health veterinarians monitor and prevent zoonotic diseases that
are spread by insects, such as Lyme disease, Rocky Mountain
spotted fever, and West Nile virus, and other diseases, such as
rabies, influenza, and plague.
Public health veterinarians also monitor water and food
supplies and inspect most of the meat and egg products
consumed in the United States.
The professional life of a public health veterinarian is
varied and exciting. Being a trained doctor and also
part detective, part researcher, part public servant,
and part watchdog for the nation’s health is what
being a public health veterinarian is all about.


VETERINARY MEDICINE 25
.Veterinary Specialists
Governmental agencies
that work with public
health veterinarians include
the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, the
Environmental Protection
Agency, the Food and Drug
Administration, the U.S.
Department of Agriculture,
state and federal fish and
wildlife agencies, and local
public health departments.
Additionally, public health veterinarians may work for the U.S.
Public Health Service on American Indian reservations, in the
military, or at the National Institutes of Health.
Public health veterinarians have monitored the potential
for zoonotic disease problems for Scouting America. Working
with other public health specialists, these veterinarians have
helped identify and solve public health issues before world
and national jamborees. Public health veterinarians also have
helped find ways to reduce contact between wildlife and
humans at Philmont Scout Ranch.
Military Veterinarians
In the early days of our nation’s military, when soldiers rode
horses, farriers accompanied the military on the frontier. These
individuals cared for the Army’s horses, mules, and other
livestock. In 1910, after the Spanish-American War, Congress
established the U.S. Army Veterinary Corps to inspect all
animals and animal products used by the military and other
governmental services.
Every veterinarian
has a federal and
state requirement
to keep a look out
for and report
zoonotic diseases.
During World War I, veterinarians performed a lot of
trauma surgery on horses in battle. When Congress
learned that veterinarians were far better at trauma
surgery than physicians, Congress decreed that
veterinarians be the first professionals mobilized—
before dentists and other health-care providers—to
assist physicians in performing trauma surgery on
injured soldiers.


26 VETERINARY MEDICINE
Veterinary Specialists.
When gas-powered vehicles replaced horses after World
War I, many thought it signaled the end of veterinary practice
in the military as well as the public sector. However, because
veterinarians were still required to inspect food, they continued
to be a part of the military. By the end of World War II,
veterinarians were inspecting all civilian industries seeking
to sell food to the military.
After World War II, veterinarians served in the U.S. Air
Force and provided the same services that U.S. Army
veterinarians did. In 1981, Congress decided that U.S. Air Force
veterinarians would manage communicable disease control
programs, while the U.S. Army veterinarians would continue
their traditional roles. Today, U.S. Army veterinarians also
provide services to the U.S. Navy and U.S. Marine Corps.
Today, U.S. Army veterinarians are stationed around the
world. They provide animal health care, monitor public and
environmental health, and inspect and obtain food. Veterinary
officers serve as members of special forces units, as instructors
at military training schools, and in all specialties of veterinary
medicine within the military system. Military veterinarians
also play a part in helping countries rebuild after wars or other
national disasters.
In addition to having a doctorate in veterinary medicine,
military veterinarians are commissioned officers in the U.S.
military and undergo special training to prepare them for
military assignments.
Over the years, military working
dogs have played an important role
in military functions. They have been
trained as attack dogs and sentries,
for tracking and rescue, and to detect
explosives and narcotics. Each of
these highly trained dogs is worth
several thousands of dollars, and
military veterinarians are their sole
health-care providers on and off
the battlefield.


VETERINARY MEDICINE 27
.Veterinary Specialists
Food Safety and Inspection Veterinarians
It is easy to take for granted the inspection and safety monitor-
ing of our food supplies. However, foodborne diseases such as
salmonella, E. coli, staphylococcus, pork trichina, tuberculosis,
and many others would be commonplace without food
safety inspections.
Food safety and inspection begins well before any food item
arrives at your local grocery store. Fresh meats, for example,
are inspected numerous times between the slaughterhouse
and the delivery truck. Fresh eggs and milk undergo similar
inspections for quality and wholesomeness. Even fruits,
vegetables, and nuts are inspected.
Who inspects all these food products and helps guarantee
the safety of our food supply? Veterinarians, along with legions
of veterinary science technicians. Why? Because veterinarians
have the training in animal health and disease to recognize
which animal products are safe to be eaten, and which are not.
They understand the requirements for the proper handling,
storage, and processing of food products. They also are trained
to recognize the presence of foreign diseases found in food
products that were processed in other countries.
Because the USDA handles food safety and inspection,
most veterinarians working in this field are employed by the
government. Food safety and inspection assignments also fall
on the shoulders of military veterinarians, who make sure that
all the food provided to troops—overseas and stateside—is
wholesome and safe.
Food safety and inspection veterinarians work in slaughter-
houses, packing plants, cold-storage facilities, receiving stations,
food manufacturing plants, food-
testing and toxicology laboratories,
and any other sites where food
products are processed.
To practice food safety and
inspection, a veterinarian with a
doctorate in veterinary medicine
must also have training in food
inspection techniques and USDA
health standards.


28 VETERINARY MEDICINE
Veterinary Specialists.
Laboratory Animal Medicine and
Research Veterinarians
Laboratory animal medicine and research veterinary medicine
have much in common. Both fields apply the skills learned in
veterinary school to a number of areas of study. Also, rather than
working in a practice setting, veterinarians in these specialties
usually work or teach at a college, university, pharmaceutical
company, government facility, or independent laboratory.
A veterinarian working in laboratory animal medicine
provides medical care for animals used in research. This means
performing surgery, treating diseases, and monitoring the
behavior of animals such as mice, rats, guinea pigs, hamsters,
rabbits, dogs, monkeys, cattle, sheep, goats, fish, amphibians,
and various species of birds.
To do all of these different tasks, laboratory animal
veterinarians must have specialized knowledge of surgery,
physiology, and toxicology (the science of dealing with the
effects, antidotes, and detection of poisons) in the laboratory
animals with which they work. The veterinarian sometimes is
a member of the research team and helps design studies, inter-
pret results, and publish articles about the research in
scientific journals. Of course, the humane and respectful care
and treatment of all animals is a major responsibility of
everyone doing experiments on animals, and the veterinarian
usually takes the lead role.
Research veterinarians investigate new medicines, biotech-
nical and diagnostic tests, food technologies, and other new
technologies. Research veterinarians might also investigate the
exotic and infectious diseases that threaten public health. Or,
research veterinarians might work in the emerging field
of genetic research.
Laboratory animal medicine and research vet-
erinarians usually work on a team of
scientists, much like an indi-
vidual Scout works with his or
her patrol. This means that people
skills are very important in these
fields. Working as a team means
sharing the workload and using good
communication skills to share informa-
tion. Good teamwork might help solve
the mysteries of a disease, for example.


VETERINARY MEDICINE 29
.Veterinary Specialists
To practice laboratory
animal medicine or to con-
duct research, veterinarians
must have a doctorate in
veterinary medicine and
possibly special training in
laboratory animal diseases,
anatomy, physiology, and
statistics. These special
training requirements call
for one to five years of
additional coursework.
A solid foundation in math
and science, starting at the
level of school in which
you are now, will be helpful.
Teaching Veterinarians
Many exciting and rewarding opportunities exist for
veterinarians who become educators. In most cases, teachers of
veterinary medicine have advanced training beyond the
doctorate of veterinary medicine that qualifies them to train
students in any number of subjects. Some of the specialty fields
at the forefront of veterinary education are molecular biology,
biotechnology, environmental toxicology, nanotechnology,
public health, and infectious diseases.
Most educators at the level of these specialty fields
teach at a school of veterinary medicine or at a university
or college. As an educator, your career would be challenging
and diverse, with a mixture of classroom instruction, research,
and clinical instruction.
Strong technical
skills and the
ability to work
well with people
are prime
requirements
for working
in veterinary
medicine.
An advantage of teaching at a university is having access to the
high-tech tools of medical research, such as an atomic force
microscope, gamma spectrometer, and PET scanner. These tools
are very expensive and are rarely found outside of a university set-
ting. Another advantage is the potential to work with well-regarded
experts in the field of veterinary medicine.


30 VETERINARY MEDICINE
Veterinary Specialists.
What subjects do you think you
would like to teach? Anatomy, biochem-
istry, surgery, pathology, genetics, and
clinical services are just a few of the
many subjects that veterinary students
must master. Added to the challenge of
teaching is the enjoyment of stimulating
contact with students.
Most educators also conduct research
on the topic area in which they are most
interested. While much of the satisfaction
of teaching comes from working with
and advising students, a great deal of
professional reward comes from contribut-
ing to science through research. Imagine
that your research efforts helped uncover
a new disease and then a treatment for
that disease. This type of opportunity,
offered to the veterinary teacher, could be
the achievement of a lifetime.
While the economic forecast for educators is quite good,
their salaries are governed by individual schools and might
be lower than income made in private practice. However,
professors usually receive many benefits, including vacation
schedules and retirement plans. Together, the salary and
benefits make this area of veterinary medicine very appealing.
Government Veterinarians
Veterinarians work for the government at federal, state, city,
township, and county levels. Although most government
veterinarians work in public health, the military, or for food
inspection programs, they can fill a variety of positions.
For example, most law enforcement agencies (such as the
FBI) use dogs for tracking and detection work. Think about
the number of dogs used in the aftermath of the World Trade
Center disaster. Veterinarians working for the government
looked after many of these dogs. Similarly, all animals in the
service of different government agencies (including emergency
response agencies and the Department of Homeland Security)
receive care from government veterinarians.


VETERINARY MEDICINE 31
.Veterinary Specialists
Two of our largest government agencies, the U.S. Depart-
ment of Agriculture and the Food and Drug Administration,
employ numerous veterinarians at various levels, from
directors and administrators to field officers stationed
throughout the country.
Animals commonly are an important part of space
exploration research, and veterinarians working for the
government are of critical importance in this work. In fact,
veterinarians have been members of space shuttle crews.
If you are interested in endangered species preservation,
you might find a position among the many
veterinarians who work for government
programs aimed at restoring these species.
Veterinary careers in government can include
wildlife veterinarians studying grizzly bears
and wolves in the Rocky Mountains and
exotic animal veterinarians caring for the wide
assortment of exotic animals at the National
Zoo in Washington, D.C.
Government
veterinarians fill
a vital role in
helping to ensure
the safety and
security of our
nation. Without
question, there
will always be
a need for
veterinarians at
all levels
of government.
This dog is searching for contraband.
NASA astronaut Richard M.
Linnehan, DVM, has used his
veterinary knowledge in space.





VETERINARY MEDICINE 33
.Veterinary Education and Career Development
Veterinary Education
and Career Development
Many individuals decide to become a veterinarian because
they love animals. That is, of course, vitally important.
However, a strong interest in science and helping people
is just as important.
Because becoming a veterinarian is challenging and takes
a lot of work and time, it is best to develop a plan early on
that will help you meet the entry requirements of an accredited
veterinary college. It is not easy to get into veterinary school,
and like most things worth pursuing, it will require much hard
work, dedication, and commitment. Think about your plans
for earning the Eagle Scout badge. Isn’t the same true?
Preparation to become a veterinarian begins today, long
before you enter college. Strive to develop academic strength
in the biological and physical sciences. Also, develop a well-
rounded education by participating in clubs, teams, and other
school activities. Along with your Scouting achievements, your
extracurricular activities will help admissions committees form
a positive picture of you.
Following graduation from high school, you must com-
plete an undergraduate program at a college or university
before attending veterinary school. Most students earn a bach-
elor of science degree before applying to a college of veterinary
medicine. Other students earn a master of science or a doctor
of philosophy beforehand, although it is not required to do so.
Plan to apply
14 to 18 months
before the date
you want to enter
veterinary school.
The Veterinary Medical School Admission
Requirements in the United States and Canada
provides a complete list of prerequisites required
by all of the U.S. and Canadian veterinary colleges
accredited by the AVMA.


34 VETERINARY MEDICINE
Veterinary Education and Career Development.
It also is not necessary to receive an undergraduate degree
from a university that houses a college of veterinary medicine.
In fact, many states do not have a veterinary college. However,
you should choose a college or university with strong
science programs.
It is not necessary to enroll in “pre-veterinary” or “pre-vet”
undergraduate programs, but you must make sure you complete
all the prerequisites required by the veterinary medical college
you wish to attend. Prerequisites vary from college to college.
If you plan to apply to more than one veterinary college, you
must meet the requirements for each school. Standardized
testing requirements also vary between schools: You might
need to take the Graduate Record Examination (GRE) and/or
the Medical College Admission Test (MCAT).
Make sure to include time for veterinary experience in
your plans. Working or volunteering at veterinary clinics,
animal shelters, farms, and ranches will provide many first-
hand insights into the career. Be sure to keep a record of your
veterinary experiences, including the dates of your involvement
and what you learned. This will make your application to
veterinary school more attractive to the admission boards.
If there is a veterinary college in your home state, develop
a relationship with that school. Most state-supported schools
show preference to state residents but do accept a limited
number of out-of-state applicants. These positions are highly
competitive, however. If you live in a state that does not have
a veterinary college, find out if a school in another state has
an arrangement for students from your state.
Before you apply, visit at least one veterinary college. Many
veterinary colleges hold annual open houses for prospective
applicants. This gives applicants the opportunity to tour the
A doctorate in
veterinary
medicine requires
six to eight years
of education after
high school.
When you are ready to apply to schools of veterinary
medicine, request informational packets from each
school in which you are interested. Ask about pre-
requisite courses and exams, admissions office
contacts, application deadlines, advanced-standing
policies, combined/dual-degree programs,
summer programs, and statistical data from
recent applicant pools.


VETERINARY MEDICINE 35
.Veterinary Education and Career Development
school and talk with faculty and students. You might be able
to visit a veterinary college while working on this merit badge.
Ask your merit badge counselor to help you arrange such
a visit.
Once in veterinary school, plan on at least four years of
rigorous training. The first two years involve basic classroom
study. In the first year, courses cover subjects such as anatomy,
physiology (the study of body chemistry), histology (microscopic
anatomy), and other subjects about the basic structure of
animals. The second year centers on disease mechanisms
such as microbiology, parasites, and pathology (how disease
affects tissue). In the third year, medical and surgical treatment
begins. The fourth year consists of clinical work ranging from
cardiology to urology, in-house clinical patients to outpatient
farm-call patients, and zoo animals and exotic pets to birds
and fish.
After completion of veterinary school, a veterinarian must
pass national and state board examinations before he or she
can practice veterinary medicine. Some veterinary graduates
pursue advanced training in one of over 20 specialties, such
as ophthalmology (eye diseases and eye surgery) or orthopedic
(bone) surgery.
Pursuing a doctor of veterinary medicine (D.V.M. or
V.M.D.) degree might seem like a long road. But just as with
earning your Eagle Scout badge, it is well worth the effort.
As with many other professional degrees, like dentistry, law,
human medicine, and engineering, there is a lot to learn. The
trick is to start early and do your best.


Veterinary Technicians.
Veterinary Technicians
Veterinary technicians are essential members of any veterinary
team. Called animal health technicians (A.H.T.) or registered
veterinary technicians (R.V.T.), they perform many of the same
tasks that nurses perform for physicians.
Veterinary technicians are trained in the care and handling
of normal and sick animals and can perform routine laboratory
and clinical tests, exams, and procedures. Veterinary technicians
must work under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian,
and they cannot diagnose, prescribe, or perform surgery on
their own. However, they generally assist in all aspects of the
medical and surgical care that veterinarians provide.
Though most veterinary technicians work for veterinarians
in companion or small animal medicine, many assist in equine
and large animal veterinary practices. However, career options


VETERINARY MEDICINE 37
.Veterinary Technicians
for veterinary technicians are increasing rapidly. Veterinary
technicians can now be found working in biomedical research,
schools, zoos, diagnostic laboratories, military and government
services, food inspection programs, drug and feed companies,
and humane societies and animal shelters. As with most careers,
the variety of employment opportunities offers a range of
salaries and benefits depending on ability and experience
and the responsibilities, assignments, and location of a
particular position.
The American Veterinary Medical Association accredits
veterinary technician programs throughout the United States.
Training to become a veterinary technician usually begins in
one of these programs. Most accredited programs lead to an
associate’s degree after two years of study. However, veterinary
technicians with a bachelor of science degree typically earn
a higher salary and have more responsibilities. In addition
to coursework, students of veterinary technician programs
complete a certain amount of hands-on training, which is a
critical part of all accredited programs. Finally, nearly every
state requires that veterinary technicians pass a state and/or
national examination to be eligible to practice.
For a complete list of veterinary technology programs, many
accredited by the American Veterinary Medical Association, visit
the AVMA’s website avma.org.
A career as a veterinary
technician might be for
you if you care about
animals, are good
at working with your
hands, understand
the basic sciences,
and enjoy working with
people while also jug-
gling a changing series
of responsibilities.





VETERINARY MEDICINE 39
.The Human-Animal Bond and the Veterinarian
The Human-Animal
Bond and the
Veterinarian
The human-animal bond has existed since humans first asked
animals to be their guardians around the cave and campfire,
their companions, their hunting partners, and their beasts of
burden. Hieroglyphics on the Egyptian pyramids illustrate the
human-animal bond, and Roman legends tell about it in stories
such as “Romulus and Remus,” who were nursed by a wolf.
Today, studies show that more than 75 percent of pet owners
consider their pets to be members of the family. Further, one
third of those pet owners consider their pets to be people.
The human-animal bond does not exist just because a
person is in the company of an animal. Rather, it is the bond
that develops because of the mutual benefit animals and
The highly
enjoyable writings
of James Herriot—
author of All
Creatures Great
and Small—tell
the human side of
the human-animal
bond.


40 VETERINARY MEDICINE
The Human-Animal Bond and the Veterinarian.
humans gain from each other. For humans, companionship,
security, and a sense of belonging are some of the rewards of
bonding with a pet. Having pets gives people a sense of per-
sonal responsibility, an opportunity for physical exercise and
play, and a perceived need to take better care of themselves, if
only for the welfare of the pet. Pets benefit from the care that
people provide.


VETERINARY MEDICINE 41
.The Human-Animal Bond and the Veterinarian
If you have a pet, you know how special that pet is to you.
Ask yourself why you feel the way you do about your pet. The
answers from your deepest feelings reflect your experience with
the human-animal bond. Beyond your day-to-day experience
with it, the human-animal bond affects people’s lives in subtle
yet significant ways. For example, the human-animal bond has
been shown to lower blood pressure, shorten recovery time
following surgery, reduce stress, and improve self-esteem and
emotional well-being.
The veterinarian’s role is to recognize and understand
the importance of the human-animal bond and to enhance it.
Veterinarians can do this by being compassionate advisers for
an animal’s health-care needs throughout the animal’s lifetime.
This includes providing quality medical care and giving advice
to people about animal care, preventive medical care, and how
to choose the right pet.





VETERINARY MEDICINE 43
.A Day in the Life of a Veterinarian
A Day in the Life of a
Veterinarian
With all of the different areas of practice and the different
animals and conditions to treat, it is easy to see that a
veterinarian’s day is never dull. Moreover, there is a lot of
overlap between fields. For example, a companion animal
veterinarian might see an exotic animal occasionally, or a large
animal veterinarian might treat a dog while on a farm call.
In fact, all of the veterinary fields described in this merit
badge pamphlet share common ground. For any veterinarian, a
day’s work might start in the middle of the night and continue
until midnight the next evening (emergencies do occur). In
addition, veterinarians often travel
and work weekends and holidays.
All veterinarians promise to work
at a certain level of excellence and
professional integrity. Within the
heart of all veterinarians is a basic
compassion for animals and their
owners. Lastly, common to all
veterinarians is a deep respect for
the veterinary profession itself.
If you decide to pursue a
career in veterinary medicine, you
are choosing a journey filled with
a variety of experiences, limitless
professional opportunities, and
deep personal satisfaction. This life
journey will provide you with the
pleasure of knowing that you have
made a difference in the lives of
both people and animals.


44 VETERINARY MEDICINE
Veterinary Medicine Resources.
Veterinary Medicine Resources
Scouting Literature
Animal Science, Bird Study, Dog
Care, Fish and Wildlife Management,
Horsemanship, Mammal Study,
Nature, Pets, Public Health, and
Reptile and Amphibian Study merit
badge pamphlets
Books
Association of American Veterinary
Medical Colleges, et al. Veterinary
Medical School Admission
Requirements in the United States
and Canada. Purdue University
Press, 2015.
Croke, Vicki, Philip C. Kosch, et al.
Animal ER: Extraordinary Stories
of Hope and Healing From One
of the World’s Leading Veterinary
Hospitals. Plume, 2000.
James Herriot. All Creatures Great and
Small. St. Martin’s Press, 2004.
———. All Things Bright and Beautiful.
St. Martin’s Press, 2004.
Lee, Mary Price, and Richard S. Lee.
Opportunities in Animal and Pet
Care Careers, 2nd ed. McGraw-Hill/
Contemporary Books, 2008.
Maynard, Thane, and Jane Goodall.
Working With Wildlife: A Guide
to Careers in the Animal World.
Franklin Watts, 2000.
Maze, Stephanie, and Catherine O’Neill
Grace. I Want to Be a Veterinarian.
Harcourt, 1997.
Pavia, Audrey. Careers With Animals.
Barron's Educational Series, 2001.
Organizations and Websites
American Animal
Hospital Association
12575 W. Bayaud Ave.
Lakewood, CO 80228-2012
800-252-2242
aaha.org
American Association of
Bovine Practitioners
1130 E. Main St., Suite 302
Ashland, Ohio 44805
419-496-0685
aabp.org
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


VETERINARY MEDICINE 45
.Veterinary Medicine Resources
American Association of
Equine Practitioners
4033 Iron Works Parkway
Lexington, KY 40511
859-233-0147
aaep.org
American Association of
Swine Veterinarians
830 26th St.
Perry, IA 50220-2328
515-465-5255
aasv.org
American Association of
Wildlife Veterinarians
aawv.net
American Association of
Zoo Veterinarians
581705 White Oak Road
Yulee, FL 32097
904-225-3275
aazv.org
American Veterinary
Medical Association
1931 N. Meacham Road, Suite 100
Schaumburg, IL 60173-4360
800-248-2862
avma.org
Association of Avian Veterinarians
P.O. Box 9
Teaneck, NJ 07666
720-458-4111
aav.org
Association of Reptilian and
Amphibian Veterinarians
5003 SW 41st Blvd.
Gainesville, FL 32608-4930
352-448-2385
arav.org
Canadian Veterinary
Medical Association
339 Booth St.
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada K1R 7K1
613-236-1162
canadianveterinarians.net
National Association of Veterinary
Technicians in America (NAVTA)
750 Route 202, Suite 200
Bridgewater, NJ 08807
888-996-2882
navta.net
Veterinary Medical Schools and
Colleges in the United States
and Canada Accredited by the
American Veterinary Medical
Association
U.S. Schools
University of Arizona
College of Veterinary Medicine
Tucson, Arizona
vetmed.arizona.edu Auburn University
College of Veterinary Medicine
Auburn, Alabama
vetmed.auburn.edu
University of California
School of Veterinary Medicine
Davis, California
vetmed.ucdavis.edu
Colorado State University
College of Veterinary Medicine and
Biomedical Sciences
Fort Collins, Colorado
cvmbs.colostate.edu


46 VETERINARY MEDICINE
Veterinary Medicine Resources.
Cornell University
College of Veterinary Medicine
Ithaca, New York
vet.cornell.edu
University of Florida
College of Veterinary Medicine
Gainesville, Florida
vetmed.ufl.edu
University of Georgia
College of Veterinary Medicine
Athens, Georgia
vet.uga.edu
University of Illinois
College of Veterinary Medicine
Urbana, Illinois
vetmed.illinois.edu
Iowa State University
College of Veterinary Medicine
Ames, Iowa
vetmed.iastate.edu
Kansas State University
College of Veterinary Medicine
Manhattan, Kansas
vet.k-state.edu
Lincoln Memorial University
College of Veterinary Medicine
Harrogate, Tennessee
lmunet.edu/college-of-veterinary-
medicine
Long Island University
College of Veterinary Medicine
Brookville, New York
liu.edu/vetmed
Louisiana State University
School of Veterinary Medicine
Baton Rouge, Louisiana
lsu.edu/vetmed
Michigan State University
College of Veterinary Medicine
East Lansing, Michigan
cvm.msu.edu
Midwestern University
College of Veterinary Medicine
Glendale, Arizona
midwestern.edu/academics/degrees-
and-programs/doctor-of-veterinary-
medicine-az
University of Minnesota
College of Veterinary Medicine
St. Paul, Minnesota
vetmed.umn.edu/
Mississippi State University
College of Veterinary Medicine
Mississippi State, Mississippi
vetmed.msstate.edu
University of Missouri
College of Veterinary Medicine
Columbia, Missouri
cvm.missouri.edu
North Carolina State University
College of Veterinary Medicine
Raleigh, North Carolina
cvm.ncsu.edu
The Ohio State University
College of Veterinary Medicine
Columbus, Ohio
vet.osu.edu


VETERINARY MEDICINE 47
.Veterinary Medicine Resources
Oklahoma State University
College of Veterinary Medicine
Stillwater, Oklahoma
vetmed.okstate.edu
Oregon State University
Carlson College of Veterinary Medicine
Corvallis, Oregon
vetmed.oregonstate.edu
University of Pennsylvania
School of Veterinary Medicine
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
vet.upenn.edu
Purdue University
College of Veterinary Medicine
West Lafayette, Indiana
vet.purdue.edu
University of Tennessee
College of Veterinary Medicine
Knoxville, Tennessee
vetmed.tennessee.edu
Texas A&M University
College of Veterinary Medicine and
Biomedical Sciences
College Station, Texas
vetmed.tamu.edu
Texas Tech University
School of Veterinary Medicine
Amarillo, Texas
depts.ttu.edu/vetschool
Tufts University
Cummings School of
Veterinary Medicine
North Grafton, Massachusetts
vet.tufts.edu
Tuskegee University
College of Veterinary Medicine
Tuskegee, Alabama
tuskegee.edu/programs-courses/
colleges-schools/cvm
Virginia-Maryland
College of Veterinary Medicine
Blacksburg, Virginia
vetmed.vt.edu
Washington State University
College of Veterinary Medicine
Pullman, Washington
vetmed.wsu.edu
Western University of Health Sciences
College of Veterinary Medicine
Pomona, California
westernu.edu/veterinary
University of Wisconsin-Madison
School of Veterinary Medicine
Madison, Wisconsin
vetmed.wisc.edu
Canadian Schools
University of Calgary
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine
Calgary, Alberta, Canada
vet.ucalgary.ca
University of Guelph
Ontario Veterinary College
Guelph, Ontario, Canada
ovc.uoguelph.ca
University of Montreal
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine
Saint-Hyacinthe, Quebec, Canada
medvet.umontreal.ca


48 VETERINARY MEDICINE
Veterinary Medicine Resources.
University of Prince Edward Island
Atlantic Veterinary College
Charlottetown,
Prince Edward Island, Canada
upei.ca/avc/
University of Saskatchewan
Western College of Veterinary Medicine
Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada
wcvm.usask.ca
Acknowledgments
Scouting America is grateful to the fol-
lowing individuals for their contribu-
tion to this edition of the Veterinary
Medicine merit badge pamphlet.
Steve Bowen, D.V.M., retired
companion animal veterinarian,
Seeley Lake, Montana
Tom Catanzaro, D.V.M.,
professional veterinary consultant,
Golden, Colorado
Bart Gledhill, V.M.D., research,
teaching, government veterinarian,
Alamo, California
Paul Stull, D.V.M., companion
animal and exotic animal
veterinarian, Dayton, Ohio
Scouting America is grateful to the men
and women serving on the National
Merit Badge Subcommittee for the
improvements made in updating this
pamphlet.
Photo Credits
NASA, courtesy—page 31 (astronaut)
Ringling Brothers Barnum and Bailey
Circus, courtesy—page 17
U.S. Department of Agriculture; photo
by Scott Bauer—page 30
U.S. Department of Agriculture; photo
by Jack Dykinga—page 27
U.S. Department of Agriculture; photo
by Ken Hammond—page 22
U.S. Department of Agriculture; photo
by Larry Rana—page 21 (emus)
U.S. Department of Agriculture,
Agricultural Research Service,
courtesy—page 21 (chicken)
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service,
courtesy—page 23
University of Georgia at Athens,
College of Veterinary Medicine,
courtesy—page 32
Wikimedia Commons; photo by
Agência Brasil—page 39
All other photos not mentioned above
are the property of or are protected by
Scouting America.
Brian Payne—pages 4, 6 (guinea pig),
8, 11, 13–14 (all), 16 (both), 18
(turtle), 29, 38, 40 (bird), and 42
Steve Seeger—pages 6 (kitten),
18 (guinea pig), 20 (dolphin),
and 26