SCOUTING
HERITAGE


SCOUTING
HERITAGE
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


213
Scouting Heritage
1. Discuss with your counselor the life and times of Lord Baden-Powell of
Gilwell. Explain why he felt a program like Scouting would be good for
the young men of his day. Include in your discussion how Scouting was
introduced in the United States, and the origins of Boy Scouting and Cub
Scouting under Baden-Powell.
2. Do the following:
(a) Give a short biographical summary of any TWO of the following, and
tell of their roles in how Scouting developed and grew in the United States.
(1) Daniel Carter Beard (4) Ernest Thompson Seton
(2) William D. Boyce (5) James E. West
(3) Waite Phillips (6) “Green Bar Bill” Hillcourt


214
(b) Discuss the significance to Scouting of any TWO of the following:
(1) Brownsea Island
(2) The First World Scout Jamboree
(3) Boy Scout Handbook
(4) Boys’ Life magazine
3. Discuss with your counselor how Scouting’s programs have developed over
time and been adapted to fit different age groups and interests
(Cub Scouting, Boy Scouting, Exploring, Venturing).
4. Do ONE of the following:
(a) Attend either a BSA national jamboree, OR world Scout jamboree, OR a
national BSA high-adventure base. While there, keep a journal documenting
your day-to-day experiences. Upon your return, report to your counselor what
you did, saw, and learned. You may include photos, brochures, and other doc-
uments in your report.
(b) Write or visit the National Scouting Museum. Obtain information about
this facility. Give a short report on what you think the role of this museum is
in the Scouting program.
(c) Visit an exhibit of Scouting memorabilia or a local museum with a
Scouting history gallery, or (with your parent’s permission and counselor’s
approval) visit with someone in your council who is recognized as a dedicated
Scouting historian or memorabilia collector. Learn what you can about the his-
tory of Boy Scouting. Give a short report to your counselor on what you saw
and learned.
5. Learn about the history of your unit or Scouting in your area. Interview at
least two people (one from the past and one from the present) associated with
your troop. These individuals could be adult unit leaders, Scouts, troop com-
mittee members, or representatives of your troop’s chartered organization.
Find out when your unit was originally chartered. Create a report of your find-
ings on the history of your troop, and present it to your patrol or troop or at a
court of honor, and then add it to the troop’s library. This presentation could
be in the form of an oral/written report, an exhibit, a scrapbook, or a com-
puter presentation such as a slide show.
6. Make a collection of some of your personal patches and other Scouting memo-
rabilia. With their permission, you may include items borrowed from family
members or friends who have been in Scouting in the past, or you may
include photographs of these items. Show this collection to your counselor,
and share what you have learned about items in the collection. (There is no
requirement regarding how large or small this collection must be.)


215
7. Reproduce the equipment for an old-time Scouting game such as those played
at Brownsea Island. You may find one on your own (with your counselor’s
approval), or pick one from the Scouting Heritage merit badge pamphlet.
Teach and play the game with other Scouts.
8. Interview at least three people (different from those you interviewed for
requirement 5) over the age of 40 who were Scouts. Find out about their
Scouting experiences. Ask about the impact that Scouting has had on their
lives. Share what you learned with your counselor.


70 SCOUTING HERITAGE
Scouting Heritage Resources.
Scouting Literature
American Heritage, Collections,
Communication, Genealogy, and
Journalism merit badge pamphlets;
Baden-Powell: The Two Lives of a Hero;
The Book of Camp-Lore and Woodcraft;
Boy Scouts of America: A Centennial
History Book; Cub Scouting: The First
75 Years of Doing Our Best; Handbook
for Boys (1911); Norman Rockwell’s
Boy Scouts of America
Visit the Boy Scouts of America’s
official retail website at
http://www.scoutstuff.org for a
complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other
helpful Scouting materials
and supplies.
Books
Anderson, H. Allen. The Chief:
Ernest Thompson Seton and
the Changing West. Texas A&M
University Press, 1986.
Baden-Powell, Robert. Scouting for
Boys (1908). Dover, 2007.
Beard, Daniel Carter. The Book of
Camp-Lore and Woodcraft (1882).
David R. Godine, 2008.
Birkby, Robert. Boy Scouts of America
Scout Stuff. DK Adult, 2011.
Csatari, Joseph. Norman Rockwell’s
Boy Scouts of America.
DK Publishing, 2009.
Hillcourt, William. Baden-Powell:
The Two Lives of a Hero (1965).
Gilwellian Press, 1992.
Moynihan, Paul. The Official History
of Scouts. Hamlyn, 2006.
Murray, William D. The History of
the Boy Scouts of America (1935).
Kessinger, 2007.
Petterchak, Janice A. Lone Scout:
W. D. Boyce and American Boy
Scouting. Legacy Press, 2003.
Rowan, Edward L. To Do My Best:
James E. West and the History of
the Boy Scouts of America.
PublishingWorks, 2005.
Seton, Ernest Thompson. Woodcraft and
Indian Lore (1912). Skyhorse, 2007.
Wallis, Michael. Beyond the Hills: The
Journey of Waite Phillips. Oklahoma
Heritage Association, 1995.
West, James E., and others. Handbook
for Boys (1911). Dover, 2005.
Wills, Chuck. Boy Scouts of America:
A Centennial History. DK Adult, 2013.
Scouting Heritage Resources


SCOUTING HERITAGE 71
.Scouting Heritage Resources.Scouting Heritage Resources
Zimmer, Stephen, and Larry Walker.
Philmont: A Brief History of the
New Mexico Scout Ranch.
Sunstone, 2000.
Organizations and Websites
International Scouting
Collectors Association
Website: http://www.scouttrader.org
National Scouting Museum
1329 West Walnut Hill Lane
Irving, TX 75038
Toll-free telephone: 800-303-3047
Website: http://www.bsamuseum.org
The Pine Tree Web
Website: http://www.pinetreeweb.com
Periodicals
Scouting Magazine
Website:
http://www.scoutingmagazine.org
Boys’ Life Magazine
Website: http://www.boyslife.org
Acknowledgments
The Boy Scouts of America is grateful
to Eagle Scout and longtime Scouter
Steve Bowen, D.V.M., El Centro,
California, for his role in bringing the
Scouting Heritage merit badge and
pamphlet to fruition.
Photo and Illustration Credits
Library of Congress Prints and
Photographs Division,
courtesy—page 7
Library of Congress Prints and
Photographs Division, George
Grantham Bain collection,
courtesy—page 10 (top)
Shutterstock.com, courtesy—page 59
(thanks graphic, ©Rosli Othman/
Shutterstock)
Wikipedia.org, courtesy—pages 6 (all),
8 (bottom), 9 (bottom), 10 (bottom),
14 (top, bottom), and 46
Wikipedia.org/Lord Harris, courtesy—
page 9 (top)
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of
or are protected by the Boy Scouts
of America.
Dan Bryant—page 44 (bottom)
Tom Copeland—page 52
Al Drago—page 51 (bottom right)
Daniel Giles—pages 65–67 (all),
68 (except bottom left), and 69
(top two)
Roy Jansen—pages 38 (bottom)
and 41 (bottom)
Brian Payne—pages 39 (bottom),
47, 68 (bottom left), and 69
(bottom two)
Randy Piland—pages 37 (top), 50,
and 64
The Summit Bechtel Family National
Scout Reserve, courtesy—page 48