FARM
MECHANICS
STEM-Based


FARM MECHANICS
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


35894
ISBN 978-0-8395-3346-7
©2024 Boy Scouts of America
2024 Printing
Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Farm-Mechanics or check
Scoutbook for the latest requirements.


FARM MECHANICS 3





FARM MECHANICS 5
Contents
Machinery, Technology, and You . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
Personal Protective Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Farm Shop Tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
Shop Design and Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
Farm Power . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
Safety With Agricultural Machinery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
Careers in Agricultural Mechanics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
Farm Mechanics Resources. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77


6 FARM MECHANICS
Machinery, Technology, and You.
Even in the
biggest city, you
can find what
you need to
complete the
requirements
for the Farm
Mechanics
merit badge.
Machinery, Technology,
and You
A lawn tractor with a 20-horsepower gasoline-fueled engine might
weigh about 400 pounds. A farm tractor with a 500-horsepower
diesel engine can weigh more than 40,000 pounds. But despite
their variations in size, all tractors are more alike than they are
different. For trouble-free operation, tractors and other engine-
powered machines need proper lubrication. Engines need clean
fuel, clean air, and clean filters. Hydraulic systems and trans-
missions must have the right amounts of the right fluids.
Cooling systems must be properly maintained to avoid
engine overheating.
If you live on a farm and help with the work, you prob-
ably have experience with this kind of machinery maintenance.
But if you live in a town or city and you have seldom, or never,
set foot on a farm or laid eyes on a big agricultural tractor, it is
still possible for you to earn the Farm Mechanics merit badge.
All you need are some basic hand tools, standard safety gear,
and access to a lawn tractor of the type often used in urban
locations. Or you might work on turfgrass equipment such as a
fairway mower that is used for groundskeeping on a golf course.
Work with your counselor to arrange for hands-on access to the
necessary equipment, gear, and tools.


FARM MECHANICS 7
.Machinery, Technology, and You
Careers in Agricultural Mechanics
People who are
mechanically inclined
will have numerous
career opportunities
in farm mechanics.
Many employers are
eager to hire trained
diesel mechanics,
heavy equipment
technicians, small-
engine repair and
service specialists,
agricultural engineers, and mechanized systems managers, to name a few
possible careers. Many mechanics-related fields have more open positions
than there are qualified people to fill them. With the right training and
education, you can turn your flair for machinery and your technical ability
into a great career. To explore the many possibilities, talk with your merit
badge counselor and see the careers section of this pamphlet.
Agriculture employs many different kinds of tools and equipment,
including pieces like tractors, combines, plows, planters, harvesters, balers,
tillers, mowers, and harrows, not all of which can be described in this
pamphlet. As you work on this merit badge, if you service a piece of
equipment or handle a tool that is not described in this pamphlet, be
sure to use the operator’s manual as your guide and get advice from a
knowledgeable adult.
This pamphlet can help guide you in fulfilling the requirements
for the Farm Mechanics merit badge. It is not as complete,
however, as the operator’s manuals that come with equipment,
so always use the operator’s manual that came with a piece
of machinery, and do your work under the supervision of a
knowledgeable and responsible adult.





FARM MECHANICS 9
.Personal Protective Equipment
Personal Protective
Equipment
Personal safety gear offers protection, from head to
toe, against many common work hazards. Use it.
Head Protection
A safety helmet or “hard hat” protects
against head injuries. Wear a hard hat for
construction work, machinery repair, or any
work where there is a possibility of bumping
your head or the chance of a falling object hitting
your head. Lightweight “bump caps” give some protection
but are not effective against hard hits. Use them for jobs where
dangers to the head are not extreme.
Eye Protection
To help save your eyes from flying debris, dust, and other irri-
tants, use eye protection when hammering, sawing, drilling,
chiseling, grinding, spray painting, working in dusty areas or
with chemicals, or doing anything that might cause an eye
injury. Three basic types of protective eyewear are safety glasses,
safety goggles, and face shields.
Protective equip-
ment doesn’t do
any good unless
you wear it.
Look for the marking “ANSI Z87.1” on safety
eyewear to be sure it meets American
National Standards Institute requirements.
Safety helmet


10 FARM MECHANICS
Personal Protective Equipment.
Safety glasses. Eyeglasses or sunglasses can protect against
thrown objects only from the front. Clip-on or slip-on side shields
add protection for the sides. If you wear glasses, be sure they have
impact-resistant lenses. Safety glasses have heavier lenses that
withstand greater shocks than ordinary eyeglass lenses, and their
wraparound or wrap-back designs provide side protection.
Safety goggles. Plastic goggles protect against impacts from the
front and sides. Special unvented goggles also protect against
chemical vapors or splashing.
Face shields. Face shields can protect the face from splashing,
dust, and chaff, but they offer little protection against impact. If
you need impact protection, wear safety glasses or goggles
under the shield or get a special impact-resistant shield that is
fitted to a hard hat. Be sure the face-shield headband fits prop-
erly; follow the manufacturer’s instructions on correct fit.
For dusty work, wear a disposable
dust mask. Avoid breathing chemical
vapors or fumes. Use paints, solvents,
and other chemicals only with proper
ventilation. Work outdoors, if possible.
Exhaust fumes from engines must be
vented to the outside.
Wearing gloves, a mask, and eye protection is important when
handling farm chemicals.


FARM MECHANICS 11
.Personal Protective Equipment
Hearing Protection
Sound levels as low as 85 to 90 decibels can damage hearing.
Many farm machines—tractors, combines, chain saws, etc.—
are louder than that. Wear earplugs or earmuffs whenever you
are exposed to a continuous noise level of 90 decibels or higher.
Wear hearing protectors when using power tools.
Earplugs. Rubber or plastic earplugs fit into the ear canal and
are effective noise suppressors. A snug fit is important. Don’t
use cotton plugs. They get dirty quickly and are not as effective.
Earmuffs. Acoustical earmuffs are especially good for intermittent
loud noises, as they are easy to put on and remove. Some
farmers prefer them to earplugs, finding them more
convenient. However, during certain types of operations
and hot, sweaty weather, earmuffs may be less
comfortable than earplugs.
Hand Protection
Gloves can protect you against cuts, scrapes,
chemicals, and skin irritation. Wear the right type
of gloves for the task.
• Leather gloves protect hands against rough or sharp
objects and give good gripping power.
• Rubber, neoprene, vinyl, or coated gloves are needed
when working with chemicals, solvents, or petroleum
products. Check the product label; it may specify the type
of chemical-resistant gloves that can safely be worn with
certain solvents or other products.
• Canvas or cotton gloves offer some protection when doing
light work.
Get the type of
hearing protection
that you prefer,
and use it.
Keep your
gloves clean.
Replace worn
or torn gloves.
Wear gloves that fit. Gloves
that are too big can get caught
in moving parts—you could
lose a hand. Gloves that are
too small are uncomfortable.


12 FARM MECHANICS
Personal Protective Equipment.
Foot Protection
It is a good idea to wear safety shoes for
all farm jobs, when working around
machinery, power tools, and live-
stock—even when using a lawn
mower. Safety shoes come in many
styles, from boots to oxfords,
and are as comfort-
able as soft-toed
shoes. The steel
toes and puncture-
and skid-resistant
soles of safety shoes
help protect your feet.
Body Protection
Aprons, rubber or vinyl garments, knee pads, and other types of
padding can help protect your body, but just as important to
your safety is your everyday clothing. It should fit comfortably
but snugly. Loose or floppy clothing near moving parts is dan-
gerous. Follow these guidelines when choosing what to wear.
• Button the cuffs of long-sleeved shirts.
Avoid rolled-up sleeves.
• Wear pants or overalls with straight or tapered legs.
Avoid baggy or cuffed pants.
• Wear shoes or boots with skid-resistant soles.
(Safety shoes are best.)
• Wear a visored cap or hat for sun protection.
• Zip or button your jacket.
• Do not wear jewelry or dangling drawstrings that
could catch in moving parts.
• Tie back long hair.
• Wear sunscreen to protect your skin.
Protective
clothing and
sunscreen help
save your skin.
To help avoid foot injuries, wear
boots with steel toe caps.


FARM MECHANICS 13
.Personal Protective Equipment
See the Signs
On all machinery that you operate, service, or repair, look for the hazard
symbols. Know what the symbols mean. Observe all warnings and
cautions. Follow the operating and maintenance instructions to avoid
hazards and reduce your risk of injury. Here are some examples of
warning signs you might see.
FIRE DANGER
BEWARE OF MOVING PARTS
WEAR EYE PROTECTION
EXPLOSION RISK
TOXIC FUMES
SHOCK DANGER
HOT SURFACE
DANGER OF FROSTBITE





FARM MECHANICS 15
.Farm Shop Tools
Farm Shop Tools
Do you have (or have access to) the necessary mechanic’s tools?
Do you know how to safely and properly use and care for them?
Take the time to master the use of these tools; it will help you to
avoid injuries and to do the job right.
Hand Tools
When using hand tools, follow four basic rules:
1. Select the right tool for the task.
2. Use the tool correctly.
3. Keep it in good condition.
4. Store the tool safely out of the way
when it is not in use.
Use a tool for its intended purpose—never for anything
else. A knife, for instance, is for cutting. Never pry with
a knife. The blade can snap and go flying.


16 FARM MECHANICS
Farm Shop Tools.
Screwdrivers
Use screwdrivers only to tighten or loosen screws. Never
use them as punches, chisels, scrapers, or pry bars, or for any
purpose other than turning screws.
Organize and store screwdrivers so it is easy to select the right
tool for the task.
WRONG—
POOR FIT DAMAGES
THE SCREWDRIVER
AND THE SCREW SLOT
Choose the correct
tip size and type
of screwdriver to
the screw.
RIGHT—
HOW A SCREWDRIVER
SHOULD FIT THE
SCREW SLOT
Never carry a
screwdriver in
the pocket of your
clothes. You could
get stabbed.
HEX
STAR (TORX®)
FLAT
PHILLIPS
INSULATED
For electrical work, always shut off
the power (never work near live
wires) and use insulated screw-
drivers that are specially designed
to protect against shock. Plastic or
cushion grips on tools are mainly for comfort;
they do not insulate you from electricity. Only
a tool specified as “insulated” will give any
degree of protection against electric shock.


FARM MECHANICS 17
.Farm Shop Tools
Use the correct screwdriver tip and size to fit the screw.
A driver of the wrong size or type can slip out of the screw
head and damage the work or stab you.
Do not use a screwdriver with a damaged
tip. Worn tips slip more easily than sharp-edged
tips. Dress a worn or rounded tip with a hand file
to restore a straight, square edge. Throw away any
screwdriver that has a split or broken handle.
Do not hold parts in your hand. Put the
work on a flat surface or secure it in a vise to avoid
piercing your skin with the screwdriver tip.
Work on a bench to keep a screwdriver from
gashing your skin. Keep the handle directly
over the screw head and turn with smooth,
even strokes while applying steady pressure.
Use a hand file (never a
grinding wheel) to dress
a worn or damaged
screwdriver tip.
WRONG RIGHT


18 FARM MECHANICS
Farm Shop Tools.
Wrenches
Box and socket wrenches completely encircle a nut, bolt head, or
fitting and grip it at all corners. Open-end wrenches have jaws
that grip at two corners.
Use wrenches that fit. Select a wrench with an opening
that exactly fits the nut. Wrenches that slip can damage bolt
heads and nuts, skin your knuckles, and possibly cause you to
lose your balance and fall.
Pull a wrench’s handle toward you whenever possible. If
it is not possible to pull toward you, use the open palm of your
hand to push on the wrench handle.
SOCKET WRENCH
BOX WRENCH
COMBINATION OPEN-END/BOX
Wrenches are used for holding and turning nuts, bolts, and various threaded parts,
fittings, and fasteners.
PULL WRENCH TOWARD YOU
To avoid injury, pull on the wrench or push with the open palm of your hand.
PUSH WITH OPEN PALM OF HAND


FARM MECHANICS 19
.Farm Shop Tools
Never tilt or angle an open-end wrench. Be sure the nut
or the bolt head is fully seated in the wrench’s jaws.
Never use an extension to increase the length of a
wrench handle. A wrench’s handle was made long enough for
the maximum safe force to be applied. Do not use a pipe on the
handle to give you more leverage. Excessive force can break the
wrench or bolt, or the wrench might slip and cause a fall. Don’t
hammer on a wrench unless it is designed for that type of use.
Do not use damaged wrenches. Discard any wrench
with spread, nicked, or severely worn jaws on the open end or
rounded, broken points on the box end. Discard wrenches with
bent handles; straightening a bent wrench weakens it.
Hammers
Use the right type of hammer for the task.
• A claw hammer is for driving and (with the claws) pulling
common nails.
• A ball-peen hammer is for striking steel chisels and punches
and (with the rounded, ball-like end) shaping and bending
soft metal.
• Soft-face hammers and mallets have two flat striking surfaces
made of wood, rawhide, rubber, or plastic. Their
nonmetallic surfaces will not strike sparks
from metal objects. Use a soft-face
hammer to bend sheet metal
or strike metal parts with-
out marring them. Use a
wooden mallet for hitting
wood or for tapping
plastic-handled wood
chisels. Never use a
soft-face hammer for
driving nails.
A dead blow
hammer has a
hollow head
partially filled
with steel shot to
deaden the impact
and prevent
the hammer
from bouncing
or recoiling.
Mallets
Claw hammers
Ball-peen
hammer


20 FARM MECHANICS
Farm Shop Tools.
When using a hammer:
• Wear eye protection. Nails may shatter when struck, or
the hammer face may chip. Wear safety glasses or goggles
to protect your eyes from flying metal chips.
• Strike surfaces squarely, using the face of the hammer.
Avoid glancing blows.
• Select the right hammer size for the task. A light
hammer will bounce off the work. One that is too
heavy is hard to control.
• Grip the handle close to the end. This gives
solid, less tiring blows. It also lessens the chance of
crushing your fingers between the handle and the
piece you are working on if you happen to miss.
Never use a hammer with a loose or damaged handle.
Keep handles tightly wedged in hammerheads. Replace cracked or
splintered handles. Do not use a hammer handle for prying or
bumping—handles are easily damaged.
Keep the handle dry and free of grease and oil. Swing in
a direction to avoid hitting anyone should the hammer slip from
your hand.
WRONG
RIGHT
Grip the hammer
near the end
and strike the
surface squarely.
Do not extend
your thumb
along the
hammer handle.
HANDLE
When you replace a hammer
handle, make sure it fits the
hammerhead. Wedge the
handle securely in the head.
HEAD
WEDGE


FARM MECHANICS 21
.Farm Shop Tools
Chisels and Punches
A cold chisel—that is, a steel chisel used on cold metal—is blunt
on the end that the hammer strikes. The blunt end is called the
struck face or the head. At the other end is the cutting edge that
is used for cutting, shaping, and removing metal.
A punch has a pointed end opposite its struck face. The
working ends of punches are designed to mark metal, drive and
remove pins and rivets, and align holes in different sections of
metal parts or other materials.
On metal, use only a cold chisel meant for shaping or cutting
metal. A wood chisel is a wood-cutting tool.
COLD CHISEL
WOOD CHISEL
CENTER PUNCH (FOR MARKING THE
CENTERS OF HOLES TO BE DRILLED)
Nail sets are used to drive the heads of
finishing nails below a wood surface. A
nail set, like a punch, has a struck face
and a pointed end. Despite its resem-
blance to a punch, however, a nail set
should never be used for punching holes
in metal, marking metal, aligning holes,
or driving pins or rivets. Always use the
right tool for the task.
The proper
hammer for
striking a tool
such as a chisel or
punch will have a
striking face about
3
⁄8 inch larger than
the struck face
of the tool. Never
use a nail hammer
to strike a steel
chisel or similarly
hardened object.
Nail set


22 FARM MECHANICS
Farm Shop Tools.
When using a chisel or a punch:
• Wear eye protection. The face of the hammer or the end
of the hammered tool can chip or shatter and send metal
fragments flying.
• Hold a chisel or punch with a protective holder whenever
possible, not with your hand.
• Clamp the piece securely in a bench vise. Cut or shave
toward the vise’s stationary jaw. Strike the tool squarely, not
off center. Use a chisel’s full cutting edge, not its point or corner.
Always aim the cutting edge away from your body and hands.
Choose a chisel only large enough for the task so that you use the full
cutting edge. Using only a corner of a large chisel could break the corner,
damage the cutting edge, and send a snapped piece of metal flying.
Choose the smallest cold chisel that suits the task—but not so small that
you risk breaking the tool.
When using a cold chisel, wear eye protection, secure the piece in
a vise, and hold the chisel near the head of the tool. Use a holder
to keep hands at a safe distance.
Use the full cutting
edge of the chisel.


FARM MECHANICS 23
.Farm Shop Tools
• Do not use chisels and punches for prying.
They are hard and brittle, and excessive force
could break them with a snap.
• Never use a punch with a mushroomed
head or with a chipped or deformed point.
Use a hand file to dress a mushroomed
head to its original shape.
• Never use a dull chisel or one with a
mushroomed head. A dull cutting edge
can be dressed using a hand file or
whetstone only, never a grinding wheel.
File or stone away from the cutting edge,
taking care to restore the edge’s original
shape and angle.
Hand Files
When using a hand file:
• Always wear safety eyewear when
filing metal.
• Fit a file handle on the tang (the pointed end) to give you a
safer and more controllable grip on the file.
• Never use a file on metal harder than itself.
• Use a soft wire brush or a special
tool called a file card to clean debris
from a file. Do not hit a file against
another piece of metal or strike it
against a hard surface to clean it.
You could damage the tool.
• Never use a file as a pry bar or hammer.
It could chip or break and injure you.
Use a hand file,
never a grinding
wheel, to dress
the mushroomed
head of a chisel
or punch.
Keep a handle on every file. This will keep the tang
(the prong or pointed end where the handle attaches)
from puncturing your palm or wrist if the file slips or
catches. File handles typically are sold separately from
files. Some handles are adjustable to fit any file.
File card


24 FARM MECHANICS
Farm Shop Tools.
Pliers and Cutters
Pliers come in many types and sizes. The familiar slip-joint
pliers are versatile tools designed for gripping, turning, and
bending. Long-nose or needle-nose pliers will hold small objects
and reach into tight places. Some pliers are specifically made
for pulling, twisting, and cutting wire. End-cutting pliers or
nippers are designed for cutting wire, nails, rivets, etc., close
to the work surface.
Choose the right pliers or other tool for the task:
• Do not substitute pliers for a wrench. They do not grip
as securely and can cause an injury or damage bolt heads and
nuts.
• Do not use pliers on the handle of a screwdriver to get
extra turning power.
• Never use pliers as a hammer. Never hammer on the
handles of pliers.
• Never extend the length of handles with pipe to get more
leverage. Use a larger pair of pliers or, if the task calls for it,
a bolt cutter.
• Do not bend stiff wire with light pliers. Needle-nose pliers
can be damaged if you use the tips to bend too-heavy wire.
Use a sturdier tool.
Guard against eye injuries. Many types of pliers have jaws for
cutting. Ends of wire often fly or whip through the air when cut.
Wear eye protection, secure one end of the wire in a vise or step
on it with your foot, and hold the other end with your free hand
to keep the cutoff piece from flying away. Warn anyone in the
area to stand clear to avoid being struck by flying pieces of wire.
Pliers of various types
have various uses.
Take care to avoid
pinching your
fingers between
the handles
of pliers.


FARM MECHANICS 25
.Farm Shop Tools
Different types of cutters are used to
cut steel wire and cable, steel strapping,
fencing, and bolts. When using cutters:
• Use the proper cutter for the task. Different cutters
are designed to cut specific types and sizes of metals.
Follow the manufacturers’ instructions.
• Wear safety goggles, protective gloves, and safety shoes.
• Remember that metal can fly when it is cut. Cover the
cutting jaws with a sturdy cloth or rag to keep shards of
metal from taking wing.
• Keep the cutting edges at right angles to the material
being cut. Do not rock the cutter or use it to pry or twist
the material.
When using cutting pliers, cover or secure the piece you are
cutting. Cut at right angles to the wire. Do not rock the pliers
from side to side or bend the wire back and forth against the
cutting edges.
Bolt cutters


26 FARM MECHANICS
Farm Shop Tools.
Power Tools
When you use a power tool to get a job done faster, also take
the necessary safety precautions. Read and follow the operator’s
manual. Wear eye protection. Wear snug-fitting clothes to keep
clothing from tangling with tools.
Many portable power tools are cordless. If you are using a
tool that has a power cord, arrange the cord out of the way of
the work. Be sure the switch is off before you plug in the power
cord. Carry a portable power tool by its handle, not its cord.
Keep your fingers away from the switch while you are carrying
the tool.
Before making adjustments or changing bits or cutters,
always unplug the power cord. Grasp the plug head, not the
cord, and pull straight out from the wall outlet or extension
cord. Repair or replace damaged extension cords and plugs.
Use power tools only for the work they are meant to do. Let
each tool work at its own speed without forcing it. Keep a firm
grip on handheld power tools so they do not get away from you.
Turn off the switch immediately if the tool stalls or jams.
Use portable tools in areas free of flammable vapors and
liquids. Sparks could cause a fire or explosion. Do not use a
power tool in a wet or damp area.
Give the task at hand your full atten-
tion. Stop if something distracts you.
Keep guards and shields in place. Keep
your hands clear of blades, bits, and
other cutting edges or moving parts.
Plug three-
prong cords into
grounded three-
hole outlets.
Never cut off the
ground prong
or use a two-
prong adapter.
Use power tools
only with adult
supervision. Store
tools safely to
prevent damage
to tools and cords
and to prevent
unauthorized use.
When using an elec-
tric drill, let the drill
do the drilling. Do not
apply excessive pressure.
Keep the drill running as you
finish the hole and gently pull out
the bit. Otherwise, the bit may bind (stick
in the hole) and you could bend or break the bit
trying to get it free.


FARM MECHANICS 27
.Farm Shop Tools
Drill Press
A drill press, like a portable electric drill, uses bits to
bore holes. A drill press, however, is generally a free-
standing or floor-mounted machine. It operates in a
vertical (upright) position, and the drill is “pressed” to
the work by a hand lever or by power.
Use clamps to hold the work.
Never hold the work piece by hand. The
drill bit could bite into it, wrenching
it from your hand at high speed and
whirling the work piece into you.
The thinner the material, the more
likely the bit will grab it. Sheet
metal must be clamped; lay the
piece on a wooden base (a scrap
piece of wood) and clamp it firmly
to the drill press table to keep it
from spinning.
Do not force the tool. It will
perform better and safer at the correct drilling speed for the type
of material and the bit size you are using. The larger the diameter
of the bit, the slower the drill press should be run.
Shut off the power before changing drill bits. Securely
lock drill bits or cutting tools in the chuck, and be sure to
remove the chuck key before turning the power back on.
When drilling metal, use cutting oil to lubricate the bit.
Make sure the drill bit is sharp. If drilling a deep hole, frequently
raise the drill bit from the hole to remove cuttings and cool the bit.
When operating a drill press, keep your hands and
fingers well away from spinning drill bits and other
cutting tools.
When operating a drill press, wear goggles or safety
glasses with side shields. But do not wear gloves—
they could catch in the machine’s rotating parts.
Chuck key


28 FARM MECHANICS
Farm Shop Tools.
Stationary Grinders
When using these powerful tools, always follow safe
working procedures.
• Wear appropriate clothing—long pants, long-sleeved
shirt with the tail tucked in, leather or safety shoes. Do
not wear gloves; they could catch on the grinding wheel.
• Wear eye protection—safety glasses and a face shield.
Protect your eyes even if the grinder is equipped with a
shatterproof eye shield.
• Keep shields in place. The eye shield and the wheel shield
are both needed to protect you from flying fragments if the
wheel breaks or shatters at high speed.
• Before installing a new grinding wheel, check it for
defects. Tap the wheel gently with a light metal object.
A clear ringing tone indicates a sound wheel. No ring
indicates a defective wheel that should not be used.
• Use compression washers and flanges on each side of
the wheel. Make sure the size of the arbor hole (the wheel’s
center hole) matches the diameter of the grinder shaft. If not,
obtain and install bushings of the proper size.
• Set the tool rest slightly above the center and 1
⁄8 inch
(3.2 mm) from the face of the grinding wheel. This position
will help prevent thin work pieces and keep your fingers from
getting wedged between the tool rest and the grinding wheel.
Before installing
a new grinding
wheel, make sure
the grinder
is unplugged.
Wear eye protection when using a grinder. Do not wear gloves.
Properly install the grinding wheel and adjust
the tool rest. Keep all shields in place.
SET THE TOOL
REST SLIGHTLY
ABOVE THE
CENTER OF THE
WHEEL AND
1/8 INCH FROM
THE WHEEL
FACE.
NUT
FLANGE FLANGE
GRINDER SHAFT
COMPRESSION
WASHER (FIBER)
COMPRESSION
WASHER (FIBER)
GRINDING WHEEL
WHEEL SHIELD SPARK ARRESTOR EYE SHIELD


FARM MECHANICS 29
.Farm Shop Tools
• Make sure the speed of the grinder does not exceed
the recommended speed for the wheel. Check the motor
template to determine grinder speed. The maximum recom-
mended speed for the wheel is indicated on the label glued to
the side of the wheel.
• When starting the grinder, stand to one side of the wheel,
turn on the switch, and let the grinder reach operating speed
before doing any grinding. Then grind with a light pressure
until the wheel warms up. Cold wheels can shatter.
• Grind only on the face of the wheel. Side pressure may
break the wheel if it is not specifically designed for side-
pressure grinding.
• Protect your fingers and hands. Never adjust the tool rest
while the wheel is turning. Use pliers or a locking wrench to
hold small pieces to be ground. Position work pieces on the
tool rest to prevent them from getting wedged between the
tool rest and the wheel.
• Grind with moderate pressure. Forcing the
piece against the wheel generates heat quickly,
wears the grinding wheel out of round, and
increases the chance that your fingers may slip
onto the wheel.
Wire Wheel Brushes
When using a wire wheel brush:
• Follow the safety rules for grinding. Wear
eye protection, use flanges to mount the
brush, and set the tool rest properly, if one is
used. Hold small pieces with pliers or a locking
wrench. Do not wear gloves.
• Hold the work piece at the proper angle. Hold it
with both hands at or below the horizontal center of the
brush, and angled as shown. Do not push the edge of the
work piece upward against the direction of wheel rotation.
If you do, the wheel could jerk the piece out of your hands
and hurt you.
• Let the brush tips do the work. Forcing the work piece
against the brush increases wire breakage and the chance
of snagging the work piece. Force does not make the wheel
clean faster—it merely bends the wires.
Frequently dip
the work piece
in water to
keep it cool.
Keep the work
piece angled
properly, in
the direction
of the wire
brush rotation.





FARM MECHANICS 31
.Shop Design and Management
Shop Design and
Management
A well-equipped, well-designed shop provides the tools and the
space needed to service, repair, overhaul, and adjust farm
machinery. Proper servicing and maintenance not only makes
equipment last longer, but also saves money and helps protect
the safety of those who use the equipment.
Shop Layout
Shown is one possible layout for
a shop that is set up in a
corner of a machinery storage
building. Workbenches and
places for tools are arranged
to one side of the service,
repair, and overhaul area.
This might be all that is
needed on a small farm. A
bigger farm operation could
have a shop in a separate
building. And a larger
shop might have an area
for repairs and mechani-
cal work that is separate
from the service bay—
the area equipped for
routine servicing such
as oil changes
and lubrication.
SLIDING DOORS
FIRE EXTINGUISHER OIL
STORAGE
LUBRICANTS
STORAGE
LONG
MATERIALS
STORAGE
SERVICE, REPAIR, AND
OVERHAUL AREA
WELDERS
METALS
STORAGE/
WELDING
RODS
ANVIL
GRINDER
WORKBENCH
DRILL
PRESS
PORTABLE
TOOLS
PARTS
BINS
MACHINERY STORAGE AREA
OFFICE OR CABINETS/SHELVES
FOR RECORDS AND MANUALS
FIRE
EXTINGUISHER
FIREPROOF STORAGEFIRST-AID KIT
WASH BIN


32 FARM MECHANICS
Shop Design and Management.
Design Features
As you draw a plan of your own, consider some important
features needed for a shop’s safety and convenience.
• Fire extinguishers in the welding area and near
entrance doors
• Well-stocked first-aid kit and emergency phone
numbers within easy reach
• Separate, designated work areas (the welding
area separated from the lubrication
—“lube”—area to reduce fire hazards)
• A wall-mounted exhaust fan or an exhaust
hood in the welding area
• An entry door across from the large
machinery-access doors to serve as a fire
exit and improve summer ventilation
• Oil and grease located near the large access
doors so that servicing of machinery can be
done inside or outside
• Floor space for large, free-standing power tools
• Storage space for nuts, bolts, screws, and parts
• Racks for long pieces of metal, pipe, and lumber
• Desk or shelves for keeping repair and service records and
machinery manuals
Ceiling-mounted
heaters leave
clear working
space below.
Use clear plastic jars to organize nails, screws, nuts, bolts, and washers.
Plastic mayonnaise and peanut butter jars work well. Nail or screw the
jar lids to the underside of
a wooden or melamine
shelf. (Be sure the nail or
screw does not poke through
the top of the shelf.) Then
put each type of hardware
in its own jar, and screw
each jar onto its lid. The
clear plastic lets you easily
see the contents.


FARM MECHANICS 33
.Shop Design and Management
Shop Management
Plan a shop to be as hazard-free as possible, and then manage it
to keep it that way.
• Keep all tools and service equipment in good condition. Use
tools and equipment only for tasks they were designed to do.
Put up tools after use.
• Keep floors and benches
clean to reduce fire and
tripping hazards. Clean
up all oil spills.
• Clean up as you work,
and clean the area
completely once the
project is done.
• Keep lighting, wiring,
heating, and ventilation
systems in good shape.
Use ground fault circuit
interrupters (GFCIs)
to help prevent
electrical shock.
• Lock the shop when
necessary to prevent
unauthorized use of
tools, equipment,
and supplies.
• Do not let anyone use
tools or equipment
unless they have been
properly trained.
• Keep guards and other
safety devices on
power tools in place
and functioning.
Workbenches, stationary tools, and main work areas
should be well-lit.


34 FARM MECHANICS
Shop Design and Management.
Fire Safety
Be prepared to fight these types of fires:
• Class A—Wood, cloth, paper, etc., needing the quenching
effect of water
• Class B—Burning liquids (oil, grease, gasoline) that require
a smothering effect
• Class C—Fires in live electrical equipment (motors,
switches, heaters) where a nonconducting extinguishing
agent must be used
Every shop should have at least one dry chemical, tri-class
(ABC) fire extinguisher. Make sure extinguishers are always
within easy reach, close to the areas where fire hazards
are greatest, and charged and ready to use.
Tri-class means
the extinguisher
is effective on
all three types
of fires.
Never use water on
a grease or oil fire,
or on an electrical
fire. Water spreads
grease fires and may
give you a fatal shock
if used on an electrical fire. In case of
fire, always call the fire department.
For more about
fire extinguishers
and how to use
them, see the
Fire Safety merit
badge pamphlet.FIRE SAFETY
SKU 649766
Keep fire extinguishers visible and
easy to reach. Mount extinguishers
at shoulder level near doorways.


FARM MECHANICS 35
.Shop Design and Management
Fireproof Storage
Every shop should have fireproof storage for flammable liquids,
solvents, cans of paint, paint stripper, or other such materials
that are kept in the work area. Fireproof cabinets should have
secure locks, leakproof bottoms, and double walls made of steel
that is heavy enough to withstand fires or explosions.
If you handle small amounts of flammable substances in a work
area that does not have special fireproof cabinets, follow these
general guidelines for safe storage:
• Keep containers tightly closed.
• Keep flammable liquids, cleanup rags, and oily or solvent-
soaked rags in closed metal safety cans.
• Keep flammable materials away from open flames, sparks,
frayed wiring, static electricity, and portable heaters.
• Do not store materials for long periods. See the
manufacturers’ instructions for storage and disposal.
Handle and store
all chemicals
according to the
instructions on
the labels.


36 FARM MECHANICS
Shop Design and Management.
Safety Data Sheets
A safety data sheet, or SDS, gives details about how to safely
handle, use, and store a potentially hazardous material or
product. The information on a data sheet is provided by the
manufacturer and is meant to supplement the information listed
on a product’s label.
SDSs have 16 sections that provide general information
about the chemical, identification, hazards, composition, safe
handling practices, and emergency control measures.
Additionally, other technical and scientific information
such as physical and chemical properties, exposure
control information, and toxicological information
is included.
• Section 1: Identification—identifies the
chemical and gives recommended uses. It also
includes contact information for the company
that makes or distributes the product.
• Section 2: Hazard(s) Identification—the
hazards of the product and the appropriate
warning information associated with those hazards.
• Section 3: Composition/Information on
Ingredients—the ingredient(s) contained in the
product indicated on the SDS. It includes information
including chemical names and common names of individual
substances, impurities, and additives in the product.
• Section 4: First-Aid Measures—describes the initial care
measures that should be given in cases of exposure, including
description of important symptoms or effects and recommen-
dations for immediate medical care and special treatment.
• Section 5: Firefighting Measures—recommendations for
fighting a fire caused by the product, including characteristics
of how the chemical burns and requirements for special
firefighting procedures.
• Section 6: Accidental Release Measures—how to respond
to spills and leaks, including cleanup practices and precautions
to follow to minimize exposure.
• Section 7: Handling and Storage—guidance on safe han-
dling practices and conditions for safe storage of the product.


FARM MECHANICS 37
.Shop Design and Management
• Section 8: Exposure Controls/Personal Protection—how
much of the material you can safely be exposed to, what kind
of processes should be used to control exposure, and what
personal protective equipment and measures you should
follow to prevent illness or injury from the product.
• Section 9: Physical and Chemical Properties—what
the chemical looks and smells like, and other physical
characteristics.
• Section 10: Stability and Reactivity—what conditions could
cause the material to react dangerously with other substances,
including when exposed to air, water, heat, and what physical
changes might be observed that could be dangerous.
• Section 11: Toxicological Information—how you can be
exposed to the product (inhalation, ingestion, skin and eye
contact), what effects and symptoms might be observed from
exposure.
• Section 12: Ecological Information—the environmental
impact of the chemical if it were to be released into the
environment.
• Section 13: Disposal Considerations—how to dispose of or
recycle the material safely and properly.
• Section 14: Transport Information—guidance on how to
properly ship or transport the material, including how it should
be handled and how much of it can be transported at a time.
• Section 15: Regulatory Information—safety, health, and
environmental regulations specific to the product that are not
listed elsewhere on the SDS.
• Section 16: Other Information—when the SDS was prepared
or last revised, including what changes have been made to
previous versions. Any other useful information for the product
may be included in this section.
Be sure to obtain and read the SDS for all the materials you
handle while working on the Farm Mechanics merit badge. Take
time to understand the hazards and warnings, and follow the
recommended safety practices. Your merit badge counselor or
shop teacher can also help you find the necessary data sheets.
Ask a farm
equipment dealer
or a tractor sales
and service
company for a
copy of every SDS
you need. Check
with companies
that sell oil
and lubricants,
and those that
service and repair
hydraulic systems.
You often can
find data sheets
online.





FARM MECHANICS 39
.Farm Power
Farm Power
Modern agriculture runs on engine-
powered equipment. Farmers, ranchers,
and mechanics must know how to
safely operate, maintain, and repair all
sorts of self-propelled farm machines—
tractors, combines, harvesters, and
many others. To complete the require-
ments for the Farm Mechanics merit
badge, you will need to demonstrate
your knowledge of proper equipment
maintenance. Begin by learning the basics
of how an engine works.
What Makes an Engine Run?
A series of controlled explosions—fuel burning inside the
engine—pushes farm machines along on tires and tracks.
The expanding gases from the burning fuel drive pistons.
The pistons turn a shaft. The shaft turns gears, and the gears
turn the wheels.
Engine-powered farm machines
work in tough conditions and require
regular preventive maintenance.


40 FARM MECHANICS
Farm Power.
Air that is
compressed
enough gets hot
enough to ignite
diesel fuel. That’s
what happens in
the cylinders of a
diesel engine,
so a diesel engine
does not need
spark plugs.
Most diesel engines used in agricultural machinery are
four-cycle engines. Let’s look at a four-cycle diesel engine and
see what makes it run.
As shown in the illustration, a diesel engine has pistons and
cylinders. Each cylinder has a fuel injector and valves.
A connecting rod attaches to the piston, and the piston moves
in the cylinder. The other end of the connecting rod attaches to
the crankshaft.
The crankshaft turns and pulls the piston down (the intake
stroke). The intake valve opens, sucking air into the cylinder.
The shaft continues to turn and forces the piston up. Because the
valves are closed, the air is squeezed (the compression stroke).
When the piston is almost to the top of the cylinder, the
fuel injector sprays fuel into the cylinder. The air is so hot from
compression that the fuel is ignited. The resulting combustion
pushes the piston down (the power stroke). After the piston goes
down, the exhaust valve opens and the burned gases rush out
(the exhaust stroke). This whole procedure or cycle takes little
time, and it takes place in every cylinder.
➊ ➋
➌ ➍
Intake stroke Compression stroke
Power stroke Exhaust stroke
EXHAUSTFUEL INJECTION
COMBUSTION
AIR ONLY
BOTH VALVES CLOSED
EXHAUST
VALVE
FUEL
INJECTION
NOZZLE
INTAKE
VALVE
FROM
AIR
CLEANER
PISTON
CYLINDER
CONNECTING
ROD
CRANKSHAFT


FARM MECHANICS 41
.Farm Power
Engine Maintenance
The engine is the heart of a self-propelled machine. Regular
maintenance helps prevent costly delays and breakdowns and
keeps an engine working longer.
Lubrication
Change the engine oil regularly as recommended in the
operator’s manual, even if the oil looks or feels clean. Use a
good-quality oil of the type recommended in the manual.
Changing an Engine’s Oil and Oil Filter
Always change the oil while the engine is warm. Heated oil will drain more
completely. Replace the oil filter each time the oil is changed. Here are the
steps in proper oil changing.
Step 1—Make sure the engine is level.
Step 2—With the engine off but still warm, remove the drain plug and
drain the oil into an appropriate receptacle. Let the oil drain for several
minutes to completely remove used oil.
Step 3—Replace the drain plug. Tighten it securely but carefully to avoid
stripping the threads.
Step 4—Wipe dirt from the area around the oil filter. Then remove the filter
as the operator’s manual instructs. Remove the old gasket and properly
discard the old filter and gasket.
42


42 FARM MECHANICS
Farm Power.
Step 5—Insert the new filter and install a new gasket. Before installing a
new filter of the spin-on type, lightly oil the filter gasket with fresh, clean
engine oil.
Step 6—Turn the filter until the seal touches the base. Then tighten no
more than one-half turn, or as specified in the operator’s manual.
Step 7—Recheck the drain plug to make sure it is secure.
Step 8—Add new oil of the recommended type and grade. Do not overfill.
Check the operator’s manual to see how much oil to use. Clean dirt or dust
from around the filler plug before loosening the cap; be sure the tops of oil
cans and funnels are clean so dirt does not get in the engine.
Step 9—Replace the filler plug. Start the engine and let it idle. Check for oil
leaks at the drain plug and around the filter. Check the oil pressure gauge.
Step 10—Stop the engine. Remove the dipstick, wipe it with a clean rag,
then reinsert it. Check that the oil comes up to the full mark. Add oil if
required, but do not go over the full line.
8
Keep the crankcase filled to the proper level. Check the dip-
stick each time before using the tractor, and add oil as needed.
9


FARM MECHANICS 43
.Farm Power
Air Intake System
An engine must breathe. A tractor engine takes in 12,000 to
15,000 gallons of air for each gallon of fuel used. The air must
be clean—any dirt sucked in can quickly ruin an engine.
Engines are equipped with air cleaners that remove dirt
and dust from the intake air. Most modern agricultural tractors
have a dry-element air cleaner. Air entering the engine is filtered
through a replaceable paper cartridge.
Check the operator’s manual to learn how to remove, clean,
and replace the filter (or filters) on an engine-powered machine.
Many dry-element air cleaners have a primary (outer) filter, a
secondary (inner) filter, and a dust cup. To remove dust from
the primary filter, tap it gently on the heel of your hand. Or use
compressed air (at a pressure of no more than 30 pounds per
square inch) and move up and down the pleats on the inside.
Blow only on the inside of the filter, never on the outside. Using
compressed air on the outside can force dirt into the filter and
damage it.
To see if the filter is washable, check the instructions on
the filter or in the operator’s manual. Determine what cleaner
or soap to use. (Never wash a dry-element filter in gasoline or a
solvent.) Soak and swirl the filter in the cleaning solution. Then
flush it with clear water from a garden hose, rinsing the filter
from the inside out to remove all the cleaning solution. Let the
Use a droplight or a flashlight to check the condition of a dry-
element (paper) air filter. Clean or replace a clogged filter.


44 FARM MECHANICS
Farm Power.
filter air-dry thoroughly, for a day or longer. Do not use com-
pressed air to dry a wet filter.
When the filter has dried completely, check it for damage
by dropping a light inside and looking for bright spots visible in
the paper from the outside. If you find holes or other damage,
replace the filter. Also replace any filter that has been used for
the recommended length of time, or that has been cleaned the
maximum number of times.
If a secondary filter is present, it acts as a backup for the
primary filter. If you find dust on the inner filter, it means that
the outer, primary filter has failed. In that case, replace both
filters. Do not clean a secondary filter or remove it except to
replace it.
Before replacing or reinstalling a filter, use a clean damp
cloth to wipe out the inside of the air cleaner case. Then install
the filter, gasket end first. Replace the cover.
Service the air cleaner as recommended in the operator’s
manual, or more often on a tractor that is working a dusty field.
Remove dirt and trash from screens, vents, and breathers. If the
air cleaner has a dust cup, empty it after every day of use.
Check the operator’s manual to learn how to remove, clean, and replace the air filter.


FARM MECHANICS 45
.Farm Power
Replacing a Fuel Filter
Step 1—Close the fuel tank shutoff valve.
Step 2—Clean dirt from the outside of the filter and the
surrounding area.
Step 3—Drain the filter if it is equipped with a
drain plug.
Step 4—Remove the filter as instructed in the
operator’s manual.
Step 5—If the engine has a cartridge filter,
thoroughly clean the bowl with a brush
or a lint-free rag.
Step 6—Replace the filter, installing new
gaskets if separate gaskets are used.
Step 7—Loosen the vent plug (the
bleed screw) and open the fuel tank
shutoff valve.
Step 8—Bleed the air out of the filter, as
instructed in the operator’s manual. Air in a
diesel fuel system will keep the tractor from
starting or running properly.
Fuel System
Use clean, fresh fuel. If the equipment’s fuel system has water
drains, use them often. Check daily for the presence of water or
sediment. Some newer equipment has a “water-in-fuel” sensor.
If the sensor indicates a contamination problem, promptly drain
the water from the fuel system and change the filters.
Change a first-stage fuel filter every 500 hours of tractor
operation, or more often if the filter becomes dirty. Replace the
second-stage filter every 1,000 hours or each season, or more
often if you are having fuel-quality problems, or as recom-
mended in the operator’s manual.
Not all fuel filters are alike. Check the operator’s manual for
instructions on removing and installing the filter (or filters). The
basic procedure for changing filters on a diesel-fueled farm trac-
tor is given here. For any tractor you service, however, always
follow the recommendations in the manual.
6
Always stop the
engine and let
it cool before
servicing the fuel
filter. On a lawn
tractor, drain the
fuel tank or close
the fuel shutoff
valve before
replacing the fuel
filter. Failure to
do so can cause
a hazardous
fuel leak.


46 FARM MECHANICS
Farm Power.
If the equipment
is leaking coolant,
the engine will
overheat. Look
for leaks every
day before taking
equipment into the
field. The most
visible sign is
dust sticking
and building up
at the site of a
leak. Check the
radiator, the
radiator cap
sealing gasket,
the hoses, and the
hose connections.
Cooling System
The cooling system keeps an engine at the proper operating
temperature. It protects against freeze damage, overheating,
and corrosion. Check the cooling system daily and keep the
radiator filled to the proper level—not overflowing—with the
proper coolant.
To check the condition of coolant, first wait for the engine
to cool. Then remove the radiator cap and check the coolant for
signs of deterioration such as gelling, rusty color, or corrosion.
Change engine coolant and coolant filters as recommended
in the operator’s manual—usually once a year or every two
years. Do not add unapproved conditioners or other additives to
coolant. Conditioners other than those that come in the coolant
itself can create a chemical imbalance and cause the coolant to
thicken and work poorly.
DO NOT remove the radiator cap while
the engine is hot. If the cap is removed
when the engine is at operating temper-
ature, hot steam and boiling liquid will
spew out. You could be severely burned.
Keep the radiator and external screens free of dust and plant
material. Dirt and dust will quickly block airflow.


FARM MECHANICS 47
.Farm Power
Cool Advice
• Warm an engine before starting work.
• Operate an engine within the range indicated as normal on the coolant
temperature gauge.
• To avoid being badly burned by steam and hot liquid, let an engine
cool before removing the radiator cap.
• Do not put cold water in a hot engine or hot water in a cold engine.
Think Green: Recycle
Waste materials from servicing and maintaining
equipment should be recycled or properly dis-
posed of so they will not endanger human or
animal health or pollute the environment.
• Used oil. Recycle it. Do not dump it
down the drain or on the ground. Some
service stations and oil-change stations
will accept oil for recycling. Some
waste disposal companies will collect
used oil from farms if quantities are
large enough.
• Oil filters. Recycle oil filters if a recycling
facility is available. State regulations vary on
oil filter disposal, but in general filters can be
taken to a landfill only if they have been “hot
drained” at engine temperature.
• Used batteries. They must be recycled. Battery retailers are required
to take one old battery for each one you buy. Manufacturers recycle
batteries to produce new ones.
• Used tires. Tire dealers are required to take your used tires when you
buy new ones. Some states have collection programs to clean up
existing tire dumps and are finding ways to use old tires for fuel and
for use in road resurfacing.


48 FARM MECHANICS
Farm Power.
A hydraulic
system should
contain no air
bubbles in the
fluid. That is
why you hear
mechanics talk
about “bleeding
the air” out of
brake lines.
Hydraulic System Maintenance
A hydraulic system operates by the pressure created when oil or
another fluid is forced through a line or hose. The hydraulic
fluid transmits the pressure applied at one point to another
point, multiplying the force in the process (a small applied force
produces a large working force). Hydraulics provide the stopping
power of brakes on a car, for example.
Fluid leakage is a fire hazard and, if left unrepaired, can
cause major damage to a hydraulic system. Check all hydraulic
lines and connections for leaks every 50 hours, or daily if your
operator’s manual recommends doing so. Look for:
• Pressure-side leaks. Locate leaks in the pressure side of the
system by inspecting the outside of lines and connections. Use
cardboard, not your hands, to check for hydraulic leaks.
• Air leaks. If the system is drawing in air, the fluid in the
reservoir will bubble and foam.
• Pinched or dented lines. Line restrictions can cause loss of
hydraulic power. Replace damaged lines.
Check the fluid level in the hydraulic system regularly. Keep it
filled to the proper level with clean hydraulic fluid of the type
recommended in the operator’s manual.


FARM MECHANICS 49
.Farm Power
Tighten any fittings that you find to be
leaking. Use two wrenches to avoid twisting
the lines. Tighten the fittings only until snug
and the leak stops. Do not overtighten.
Caution: Escaping fluid under
pressure can penetrate the skin,
causing serious injury. Avoid this
hazard by relieving pressure before
disconnecting hydraulic lines.
Tighten all connections before
applying pressure. Always use a
piece of cardboard to check for
hydraulic leaks—never use your
hands. If high-pressure fluids
enter your skin, seek medical
help immediately.
When tightening leaking hydraulic fittings, use two wrenches to
avoid twisting the line, and tighten only until snug.


50 FARM MECHANICS
Farm Power.
Electrical System Maintenance
Keep electrical connections and terminals tight and clean. Leave
connectors alone if you can. When handling those that must
regularly be pulled apart and reconnected, always pull them
apart by holding the connector, not the wire. Before reconnect-
ing them, check for dirt, debris, and corrosion.
Push connectors together firmly but do not force them. If
you must use force, that could indicate problems with corrosion
or misaligned pins. Connectors in corrosive environments, such
as on fertilizer equipment, are especially at risk of corrosion.
Clean them after each season of use.
Regularly inspect wires, cables, and harnesses for wear and
abrasion. Run your fingers over spots you can’t see. If you see
or feel any type of wear, or find wires rubbing against parts of
the machinery, move the wires if possible, or protect them with
pieces of PVC conduit. Rodents can chew and damage electrical
wires. Protect farm equipment from rodents during storage.
Wiring harnesses
are systems
of insulated
wires bound
together with
terminals ready
to be attached.
Make sure spade-type connectors grip firmly. Loose
spade connectors can lead to random electrical failures.
Inspect electrical wiring when the equipment is cold. Be sure
connections are solid and no wires are abraded.


FARM MECHANICS 51
.Farm Power
Keep battery fluid levels full (unnecessary on sealed bat-
teries) and make sure the terminals are clean. If the terminals
are corroded, loosen the corrosion with a stiff brush. Sprinkle a
baking-soda solution (4 tablespoons of baking soda mixed in a
quart of water) over the terminals, then flush it off with water.
Check that battery cables are in good shape, including the
ground connection. With more computer-based electronics in
tractors and other farm equipment today, a good ground is espe-
cially important. Replace worn battery cables.
Checking a 12-volt
Battery’s Voltage
Step 1—Connect a digital voltmeter’s positive lead to
the positive battery terminal.
Step 2—Connect the voltmeter’s negative lead to the
negative battery terminal.
Step 3—System voltage should read 12.0 to 12.6 volts
DC or higher with no electrical loads on the system.
To make a solution
for cleaning
battery terminals,
mix a quarter
pound of baking
soda in a quart
of water.


52 FARM MECHANICS
Farm Power.
Care of the Power Train
Power from the engine is transmitted to the drive wheels or the
power-output shaft of a machine by means of the power train.
The transmission is one component of the power train. A trans-
mission uses a series of gears to convert the power produced by
an engine into the turning force and speed required by the
wheels or the output shaft.
The connecting set of gears and shafts by which power
is transmitted from an engine to the machinery it is driving is
called the power train.
Different gear
combinations
transmit power at
different speeds
and with different
amounts of turning
force, or torque.
Low gear
combines low
speed with high
power. High gears
transmit more
speed but less
turning force.
Most farm tractors have manual transmissions. If you
know someone who drives a stick-shift car, then you are
familiar with the basics of a driver-operated clutch and
a movable gearshift lever. You manually shift gears to
operate at the appropriate speed and power.


FARM MECHANICS 53
.Farm Power
The transmission connects to the engine through the clutch.
When the clutch pedal is depressed, the engine and the trans-
mission are disconnected. When the clutch is engaged, the gears
inside the transmission engage, and power is transmitted from
the engine to the driven machine.
Many machines also have power takeoff (PTO) clutches. A PTO
shaft allows the engine power of a tractor to drive attached
machinery or implements. For safety, keep all PTO shields in place.
When the clutch pedal is depressed, the engine and transmission
are not connected.


54 FARM MECHANICS
Farm Power.
Transmission-Hydraulic Fluid
Most tractors use combined transmission-hydraulic fluid to
lubricate the power train and operate the hydraulic system. In
any tractor, use the type of fluid or fluids recommended in the
operator’s manual. Check fluid levels daily and maintain
their proper levels. Change fluids and filters at the
recommended intervals. Avoid contaminating fluids
with water or dirt. Always clean dust and dirt
from around fill plugs, dipsticks, and drain plugs
before removing them.
Greasing
For part of optional requirement 4a, you are to grease the fit-
tings on an engine-powered machine. For this task, you will use
a grease gun. Some grease guns are air-powered—compressed
air forces the grease from the gun and into the fittings on the
machinery. Other common types of grease guns are hand-
powered—you manually pump grease into the fittings.
Follow the instructions in the operator’s manual for greasing a
machine. The manual will tell you how often grease is needed,
where to put it, and what kind to use.
Transmission fluid level is checked with a
dipstick. The operator’s manual will specify
the correct fill level and what type and
weight of transmission fluid to use.


FARM MECHANICS 55
.Farm Power
Here are a few pointers on proper greasing.
• Keep grease in clean, dry containers. Dirt or moisture can
ruin moving parts.
• Clean fittings before applying grease, and wipe them clean
after applying grease.
• Lubricate a machine after using it, not just before. Warm
parts take grease better than cold metal.
• Do not overgrease. Applying too much lubricant is a
common mistake.
Maintenance Schedules
Keep a record of what you do to service and maintain machinery,
and when you do it. Routine maintenance tasks will need to be
done after every 10 hours of operation. Refer to the manufacturer’s
recommended service schedule. Also pay attention to the mainte-
nance reminders that pop up on the electronic instrument displays
of newer tractors and combines.
Before starting or using any engine-powered
machinery or equipment, perform a
preoperational check:
QQ Check the engine coolant.
QQ Check the engine oil.
QQ Check the hydraulic and
transmission fluid.
QQ Check the battery voltage.
Other items to check regularly, as
needed or recommended, may
include these:
QQ Tires—condition and pressure
QQ Drive belts—tension
QQ Nuts and bolts—tightened to
proper torques
QQ Other—___________________________
(add as appropriate for specific machinery)
Regularly check
the condition of
tires. Keep tires
properly inflated.


56 FARM MECHANICS
Farm Power.
Winter Storage
The operation of some machines does not stop at the end of the growing
season. In some areas, however, little or no field work is done for several
months, and farm machines are stored for the winter. One recommended
winter storage procedure is described here. You should follow the storage
instructions in the operator’s manual.
QQ Wash or clean the machine.
QQ Drain the engine oil and replace
the oil filter. Put in new oil that is a
lighter viscosity than the oil used
when the machine is being heavily
used. Let the engine run so all
parts get well oiled.
QQ Drain the transmission and hydrau-
lic systems. Refill with the correct
fluid and a corrosion and rust inhibitor, if recommended.
Operate the systems to circulate clean fluid.
QQ If you do not use antifreeze, drain
and flush the cooling system and
leave the drain plugs out.
QQ Drain the fuel tank (gasoline
and diesel only). Do not empty
an LP-gas fuel tank without
checking with your LP-gas dealer. Remove,
clean, and replace the fuel sediment bowl and
filters. Add 2 gallons of fuel (mixed with rust
inhibitor, if recommended) to the fuel tank. Run
the engine for several minutes and then drain
the tank again, as well as the fuel lines and
carburetor. Leave all drain cocks open.
QQ If recommended, add rust inhibitor to the
engine crankcase and air intake. Using
plastic bags and tape, seal the ends of
the air inlet pipe, exhaust pipe, crankcase
breather pipe, and hydraulic system
breather pipe.


FARM MECHANICS 57
.Farm Power
QQ Remove and check the bat-
tery. If it is properly charged,
store it in a cool, dry place
where the temperature will
stay above freezing. Check
the battery every month
during storage, and recharge
if necessary.
QQ Remove any weights from the
machine, including from the
tires. Drain water from the tires
if there is danger of freezing.
Remove the tires if the machine
is not to be supported off the
ground during storage. If you
do not want to remove the
tires, raise the machine so that
the tires are off the ground.
Support the machine securely
with support stands or blocks.
QQ Check and inflate tires to
normal pressures.
QQ On machines with a conven-
tional dry clutch, block the
clutch pedal in the disengaged
position. Release the tension on all drive belts and chains. Apply
grease or rust preventative to chains.
QQ Clean off rust, then prime and paint those areas to prevent
further rusting.
QQ Coat all exposed metal surfaces, such as axles and hydraulic piston
rods, with grease or a rust and corrosion preventative. Lubricate all
points that normally require lubrication.
QQ Make a list of parts or repairs that are needed to prepare the machine
for operation when it is removed from storage.
QQ Put the machine under cover. If the equipment is not stored in a
building, cover it with a tarpaulin.
If a machine must be serviced in the
raised position, use jack stands and
block it up.
SUPPORT RAISED
EQUIPMENT WHEN
SERVICING IT.





FARM MECHANICS 59
.Safety With Agricultural Machinery
Safety With
Agricultural Machinery
Anyone who operates farm machinery should follow these
safety practices.
• Conduct a preoperational inspection. Walk around the
machine, looking carefully for any safety hazards or problems
such as broken parts, loose nuts, or leaking hoses.
• Allow only one person to a machine—do not carry riders.
Never let anyone sit on a tractor’s fenders or ride on the
drawbar or on towed machinery.
• Wear the seatbelt on farm machinery thus equipped.
• Engage the clutch slowly, especially on a hill and when
pulling out of a ditch.
• On rough ground, use low gear. Never drive in high gear
when people are around.
• Keep the transmission in gear—do not “coast.”
• Wait for the tractor to stop and set the brakes before getting
off. Never jump from a moving tractor.
• Keep all safety shields and guards in place.
• Always shut off machinery before making adjustments
or repairs.
Any farm machine designed to travel between 25 and
40 miles per hour must display the speed identification
symbol (SIS), upper right, showing its maximum speed.
This symbol must be used with the slow-moving vehicle
(SMV) emblem, right, which identifies those vehicles that are
traveling at 25 mph or slower. Both symbols are displayed on
the rear of the vehicle when it is driven on a public road.
For all work in,
on, and around
machinery,
remember that
he who works the
safe way lives to
play another day.


60 FARM MECHANICS
Safety With Agricultural Machinery.
Safety With Tillage Tools
Plows cut and loosen the soil. A harrow is drawn over plowed
land to level the soil surface and break up clods. Cultivators
stir the soil and control weeds in growing crops. These and
other kinds of machines for working the soil are known as
tillage tools.
Keep equipment clean. Mud or grease on machinery
steps and surfaces can cause serious falls.
All farm machinery should carry a fire extinguisher.
Chisel plows do not invert soil.


FARM MECHANICS 61
.Safety With Agricultural Machinery
When hitching up a tractor to a tillage tool, stay in your
seat on the tractor. If the equipment does not have an automatic
hitch, you might use a long rod with a hook on one end to lift
the hitch bar or tongue into position. Then lean over and drop
the hitch pin into place. If you must get off the tractor to
hitch up machinery, be sure to come to a complete stop and
set the tractor brakes before you step down.
The drawbar is a heavy steel bar that extends
rearward from under the tractor. Tillage machines
and other farm implements attach to the drawbar
or to a three-point hitch. Never allow anyone to
ride on the drawbar or on towed machinery.
Harrows level the soil.
Field cultivators prepare a
seedbed for planting by
burying crop residue and
mixing the soil.
After the drawbar pin is in place,
above center, a keeper pin, or R-clip,
above, should be inserted into the
hole at the bottom of the drawbar
pin to keep it from loosening.


62 FARM MECHANICS
Safety With Agricultural Machinery.
Safety With Planting Equipment
Row-crop planters place seeds in the soil at the proper depth
and spacing. A grain drill plants small grains such as wheat and
oats close together. Air seeders that allow tilling, seeding, and
fertilizing in one pass are popular where grain is produced on
large, flat areas of land, such as the Great Plains. Transplanters
and other specialized planters are used for fruits and vegetables
such as strawberries and tomatoes, and even for planting trees.
A grain drill plants small grains.
A row-crop planter drops seeds at regular intervals within the
row. On newer machinery, electronic monitors count the seeds as
they drop and control the seeding rate so that neither too much
seed nor too little gets planted.


FARM MECHANICS 63
.Safety With Agricultural Machinery
Use the right-size planter for the project and for the tractor
you are using. If the weight of the planter is too much for the
tractor, it could overturn. Operate at a safe speed; allow plenty
of room for turning.
Make sure the planter has no broken, damaged, loose, or
missing parts. Lifting and lowering devices, especially, should
be in good working order. Be sure gears and chains are properly
and securely shielded.
An air seeder combines tilling, seeding, and fertilizing in one field pass.


64 FARM MECHANICS
Safety With Agricultural Machinery.
Safety With Harvesters
Mowers, windrowers, rakes, balers, combines, cotton strippers,
potato diggers—these and other kinds of harvesters bring in the
crops. A windrower cuts hay and places it in a row to dry. Balers
pick up hay and roll or tie it into round or rectangular bales.
Small grains and seed crops like wheat, oats, barley, rice, corn,
soybeans, sunflowers, and peanuts are harvested with combines.
Windrower
Large round hay baler


FARM MECHANICS 65
.Safety With Agricultural Machinery
Never make
adjustments
or repairs
when machinery
is running.
Harvesting equipment is complicated. The various machines
have cutters, knives, teeth, blades, beaters, and other mechanisms
that can inflict severe injuries. When you prepare a harvester for
the harvest season, make sure the safety releases work properly
and the shields or guards for cutters, gears, belts, and revolving
shafts are securely in place. Keep all equipment properly adjusted.
Always stop the tractor engine before working on a mower, baler,
or other harvesting equipment. Follow all safety precautions and
procedures listed in the operator’s manual.
Many harvesters have special attachments. Use the right
attachments for the task.
Small rectangular baler


66 FARM MECHANICS
Safety With Agricultural Machinery.
Combines
A combine carries out (“combines”) five steps in harvesting a
crop. It cuts, threshes, and cleans seed or grain, lifts the seed or
grain to a storage tank or bin, and returns the straw and stalks
to the ground, all in one operation.
Most self-propelled combines are powered by diesel engines
similar to tractor engines. Before starting a combine engine,
be certain no one is on or around the combine’s moving parts.
Keep a combine clean. Trash accumulating around the exhaust
system can catch fire. Every combine should carry a fire extin-
guisher. Before storing a combine, clean it of all dust and chaff,
inside and out.
Inspect a combine before taking it into the field. Before
you make any adjustments, be sure you know and understand
what takes place in the machine. Follow the instructions in the
operator’s manual.
Cotton Pickers and Strippers
Two basic types of self-propelled machines are used to harvest
cotton. Cotton pickers remove the cotton lint and seed from only
the bolls that have matured. Revolving spindles catch the lint
and pull it from the open bolls. Green bolls are left on the stalks
to be harvested after they have matured.
A combine with
a full grain bin is
top-heavy and can
easily overturn
if not driven
with care.
Corn combine


FARM MECHANICS 67
.Safety With Agricultural Machinery
Cotton strippers remove all the cotton bolls from the stalks,
the green ones as well as the mature bolls. A stream of air is
usually used to separate the lighter mature bolls from the heavy
green bolls.
Cleaning a cotton picker or stripper—cleaning it well and
often—is more critically important than with most
other machines. Leaf trash, dead plant parts, and
cotton lint are highly flammable. When such
materials build up, fires can easily start.
Help prevent fires during cotton harvest-
ing by keeping the engine clean and free of
lint, dust, and dead leaves. Regularly clean
the area between hot-running engine parts
and the hood. Also check exhaust pipes
and the muffler for leaks. Hot exhaust
gases or sparks can start fires. Let all
parts cool before you touch or
clean them.
Cotton stripper
Green cotton boll Mature cotton boll and cotton lint
Cotton pickers and strippers are uniquely
complex machines with more safety haz-
ards than most other equipment. You should
leave most of the maintenance and service work
on these machines to a knowledgeable adult.





FARM MECHANICS 69
.Careers in Agricultural Mechanics
Careers in Agricultural
Mechanics
Hundreds of different professions fall under the general
heading of “agricultural mechanics.” In this field,
you might work on engines small or large, on farm
implements, tractors, combines, chainsaws, lawn-
mowers, diesel trucks—the list is long. You might
work in a rural community or in a city. Agricultural
machinery is used in urban areas to install and
maintain turfgrass and other plants at ball fields, golf
courses, and parks. If you enjoy fixing things, if you
like working with tools and machinery, then you will
want to look into the great variety of career opportunities
involving agricultural mechanics.
Tractor or Farm Equipment Mechanic
From your work for the Farm Mechanics merit badge, you have a
good idea of what a mechanic does to maintain and repair farm
machinery and vehicles such as tractors and harvesters. Good
mechanics are logical thinkers and troubleshooters who are able
to figure out what is wrong with a piece of machinery and how to
fix it. They are good with details and careful in their work.
Not surprisingly, a mechanic needs manual dexterity.
Handling tools skillfully and making adjustments precisely are
essential abilities.
Also vital—and less obvious—are good communication
skills. When someone brings a malfunctioning machine into
the shop for repair, the mechanic starts to diagnose the trouble
by listening to the customer describe the problem, asking ques-
tions, and paying attention to the answers. Good listening skills
and people skills are important.


70 FARM MECHANICS
Careers in Agricultural Mechanics.
Education and Training Required
In school, take agriculture and shop classes that offer hands-on
experience in mechanics, welding, automotive repair, small-
engine repair, basic electronics, and (if offered) such specialties
as turfgrass management or greenhouse and grounds mainte-
nance. Join the National FFA Organization, an agricultural
education organization designed for students. Agriculture is
increasingly computerized. As a tractor or farm equipment
mechanic, you will work on computer-controlled machinery
and use computerized diagnostic tools.
Most farm equipment mechanics work for tractor and
equipment dealers, adjusting and repairing machines at the
dealership or in the field. Employers generally prefer to hire
people who have completed formal training programs after
graduating from high school. Many of the large trac-
tor and equipment manufacturers have training
programs to prepare individuals to work at their
authorized dealerships. These training programs
may be hosted at the dealerships or at com-
munity colleges or other technical institutes.
Graduates of these programs are ready to
work for specific manufacturer dealerships.
Community college programs give
students the chance to take additional course-
work to earn an associate’s (two-year) degree
in a technical field. The extra courses prepare
students to go beyond repair and maintenance
positions. With the additional training, graduates
may move into supervisory and business roles.
The different career paths you might follow can include
• Specialized training by machinery manufacturers
• Two-year technical (associate’s) degrees from
community colleges
• Four-year technical (bachelor’s) degrees from
universities and colleges
A mechanic who uses high-tech tools and techniques is
generally known as a technician.


FARM MECHANICS 71
.Careers in Agricultural Mechanics
Some colleges offer two-year certificate programs for
turfgrass and agricultural equipment service technicians.
Technicians who are formally trained in the maintenance
and repair of agricultural machinery are in demand.
Diesel Mechanics and
Service Technicians
Diesel engines power not only farm tractors,
combines, work trucks, and pickups, but also
big-rig trucks, buses, and passenger cars.
Bulldozers, cranes, road graders, and railroad
locomotives also are diesel-powered. Career
opportunities are good for qualified diesel mechanics
and service technicians.
Technicians may specialize in engine repair, transmission
work, electrical systems, or brake systems. In smaller shops, however,
a technician commonly handles all kinds of repairs, from working on
a vehicle’s electrical system one day to doing major engine repairs
the next.
A diesel engine can have various electronic controls and onboard
computers. In shops today, diesel service technicians use handheld or
laptop computers to diagnose engine problems and adjust settings.
To keep up with constant changes in technology, technicians must
take training and learn new techniques.
Many community colleges and vocational/technical schools offer
programs in diesel mechanics. Programs lasting one to two years
lead to a certificate of completion or to an associate’s degree. Many
employers prefer to hire graduates of these kinds of formal training
programs because they have a good foundation in the latest diesel
technology and electronics.
Experienced technicians may move into field service positions,
where they have more chances to tackle problems independently and
earn better pay. Technicians and mechanics with leadership skills may
become shop supervisors or service managers. Those who are good
at sales sometimes become sales representatives. Some experienced
mechanics open their own repair shops.


Careers in Agricultural Mechanics.
ASE Certification
The nonprofit National Institute for Automotive Service
Excellence has a voluntary certification program for mechanics
and technicians. The ASE administers more than 40 exams. The
tests are grouped into specialties for automobile, medium/heavy
truck, school bus, and other technicians as well as engine
machinists, parts specialists, and electronic diesel engine diag-
nosis specialists.
To become ASE-certified, a candidate must pass at least
one exam and provide proof of two years of relevant work
experience. To remain certified, those with ASE credentials must
be retested every five years. The tests are not easy. About one
out of three test-takers fails.
ASE-certified technicians usually wear ASE insignia and
carry credentials that list their exact areas of expertise (brakes,
engine repair, etc.). To learn more, visit the ASE website
with your parent’s permission (see the resources section of
this pamphlet).
College/University Programs
Earning a bachelor of science degree from a university or college
prepares graduates for management positions at machinery
dealerships or related businesses. There is less emphasis on you
“turning wrenches” and more on directing the people, money,
and machinery at a business or facility. Courses of study in this
area include agricultural systems management, agricultural
engineering technology, and agricultural business.


FARM MECHANICS 73
.Careers in Agricultural Mechanics
If you are interested in the design and manufacturing of
farm tractors and equipment, consider earning a degree in agri-
cultural engineering or a similarly named program. To teach
agriculture at the high school or college level, you will need a
degree in agricultural education.
Preparing for College
Get involved in the agriculture program if your school offers
one. Take English, math, biology, chemistry, physics, computer
classes, and business classes. At college you will study these
subjects as well as economics, communications, and mechanics.
Depending on your specialty area and interests, you may study
hydraulic systems, diesel power systems, power transmission,
machine instrumentation and controls, electronics and electrical
systems, soil and water conservation, natural resources, engi-
neering design, or machinery safety.
Computer skills
are essential.
Agricultural
mechanics
students learn to
use computers to
control machines,
plan layouts of
equipment and
buildings, and
create graphics
for written reports,
to name only a
few applications.
Agricultural systems management is a field of study that
combines agricultural sciences, engineering principles, and
business management. ASM students learn about soils, crops,
and natural resources. They also learn about engines, electronics,
and hydraulics. On the business side, they study economics,
finance, and accounting.


74 FARM MECHANICS
Careers in Agricultural Mechanics.
Career Prospects
College graduates with expertise in agricultural mechanics work
for many different kinds of manufacturers that make farm, for-
estry, construction, lawn-care, and landscaping equipment. They
may sell tractors or show customers how the equipment works,
or teach dealers how to install and service equipment. Some
graduates manage farms and agriculture-related businesses.
Some work in the food industry; others work for government
agencies or research centers.
Whichever path you choose—technical training or college
degree—a rewarding career awaits as you pursue oppor-
tunities in agricultural mechanics.
Ag engineers and ag systems graduates are in demand.
Farm equipment manufacturers need more engineers
than are graduating from universities. Their broad-
based, practical education qualifies them for a wide
variety of careers in management, marketing, sales,
and service.
In many ways, plant nurseries and greenhouses are like small,
enclosed farms. Some agricultural engineers specialize in designing
practical and efficient greenhouses. At NASA, engineers with this
special expertise are designing greenhouses that could someday be
built on Mars to help feed the first Martian colonists. Here on Earth,
engineers design planting and transplantation equipment for use in
greenhouse and nursery operations.


FARM MECHANICS 75
.Careers in Agricultural Mechanics
Possible Careers in Agricultural Mechanics
Technical Training
• Diesel mechanic or
service technician
• Heavy construction
equipment technician
• Lawn equipment
service mechanic
• Parts specialist
• Service manager
• Shop supervisor
• Small-engine mechanic
• Tractor or farm
equipment mechanic
• Turfgrass and agricultural
equipment service technician
• Welder
College Degree
• Agribusiness management
• Agricultural engineering
• Agricultural machinery
and safety
• Agricultural systems
management
• Farm management
• Food processing plant
operations
• Forest engineering
• Golf course management
• Machine systems engineering
• Manufacturing
• Marketing
• Natural resources conservation
and protection
• Nursery and
greenhouse engineering
• Power systems and
machinery design
• Product sales
• Technical support and service
• Vocational agriculture
instruction
Survey work can be one facet of a career
in natural resources conservation.





FARM MECHANICS 77
.Farm Mechanics Resources
Farm Mechanics Resources
Scouting Literature
Automotive Maintenance, Composite
Materials, Electricity, Electronics, Energy,
Engineering, Environmental Science, Fire
Safety, First Aid, Forestry, Plant Science,
Soil and Water Conservation, and
Woodwork merit badge pamphlets
Books
Bell, Brian. Farm Machinery. Old Pond
Publishing, 2005.
Ertel, P.W. The American Tractor: A
Century of Legendary Machines. MBI
Publishing, 2001.
Farm and Ranch Safety Management.
John Deere Publishing, 2009.
Fuels, Lubricants, Coolants and Filters.
John Deere Publishing, 2008.
Goering, Carroll E., and Alan C. Hansen.
Engine and Tractor Power. American
Society of Agricultural and Biological
Engineers, 2004.
Halberstadt, April, and Hans
Halberstadt. Farm Tractors. Barnes
& Noble Books, 1998.
Halberstadt, Hans. Combines and
Harvesters. MBI Publishing, 1994.
Hansen, Ann Larkin. Farm Machinery.
ABDO Publishing, 1998.
Herren, Ray. Agricultural Mechanics:
Fundamentals and Applications.
Delmar, 2009.
Hunt, Donnell. Farm Power and
Machinery Management. Waveland
Press, 2007.
Kubik, Rick. How to Keep Your Tractor
Running. MBI Publishing, 2005.
———. How to Set Up Your Farm
Workshop. Voyageur Press, 2007.
Leffingwell, Randy. John Deere:
A History of the Tractor. MBI
Publishing, 2006.
Preventive Maintenance. John Deere
Publishing, 2007.
Pripps, Robert N. The Big Book of Farm
Tractors: The Complete History of the
Tractor 1855 to Present. Voyageur
Press, 2002.
With your parent’s permission, visit
the Boy Scouts of America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org,
for a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


78 FARM MECHANICS
Farm Mechanics Resources.
Shop Tools. John Deere Publishing, 2012.
Stone, Lynn M. Farm Machinery.
Rourke, 2002.
Welding. John Deere Publishing, 2008.
Organizations and Websites
American Society of Agricultural and
Biological Engineers
2950 Niles Road
St. Joseph, MI 49085
Telephone: 269-429-0300
www.asabe.org
Associated Equipment Distributors
600 22nd St., Suite 220
Oak Brook, IL 60523
Telephone: 630-574-0650
www.aedcareers.com
Association of Diesel Specialists
400 Admiral Blvd.
Kansas City, MO 64106
Telephone: 816-285-0810
www.diesel.org
Case IH
621 State St.
Racine, WI 53404
Telephone: 877-422-7344
www.caseih.com
Deere & Company World
Headquarters
One John Deere Place
Moline, IL 61265
Telephone: 309-765-8000
www.deere.com
National Farm Machinery Show
P.O. Box 37130
Louisville, KY 40233-7130
Telephone: 502-367-5200
www.farmmachineryshow.org
National FFA Organization
6060 FFA Drive
P.O. Box 68960
Indianapolis, IN 46268-0960
Telephone: 317-802-6060
www.ffa.org
National Institute for Automotive
Service Excellence
101 Blue Seal Drive SE, Suite 101
Leesburg, VA 20175
Telephone: 703-669-6600
Toll-free information line: 888-ASE-TEST
www.ase.com
National Safety Council
Agricultural Safety
1121 Spring Lake Drive
Itasca, IL 60143-3201
Telephone: 800-621-7615
www.nsc.org
Planning Farm Shops for Work and
Energy Efficiency
Purdue University Cooperative
Extension Service
www.extension.purdue.edu/extmedia/
ae/ae-104.html


FARM MECHANICS 79
.Farm Mechanics Resources
Acknowledgments
The Boy Scouts of America is grateful to
Rick Elmore, program facilitator and
instructor at Dubiski Career High School
in Grand Prairie, Texas, and former
agriculture science and technology
teacher at Decatur High School, Decatur,
Texas, for his invaluable help in shaping
this edition of the Farm Mechanics merit
badge pamphlet and the merit badge
requirements. Special thanks to Richard
A. Cavaletto, Ph.D., P.E., professor and
department head, BioResource and
Agricultural Engineering, California
Polytechnic State University. Dr.
Cavaletto also has served as a Farm
Mechanics merit badge counselor. The
BSA also thanks George Arrants of
Automotive Youth Educational Systems
for his gracious support and input and
Dennis Buckmaster, Ph.D., P.E., associ-
ate professor of Agricultural and
Biological Engineering at Purdue
University for his help.
We appreciate Steve McMaster,
McMaster New Holland, Decatur,
Texas, for assistance with photography.
Mr. McMaster also provided access to
photograph much of the engine-powered
equipment you see in this pamphlet.
Thanks to John Deere Publishing,
Moline, Illinois, for permission to adapt
material from some John Deere pub-
lications for use in this and previous
editions of the Farm Mechanics merit
badge pamphlet.
The Boy Scouts of America is
grateful to the men and women serv-
ing on the National Merit Badge
Subcommittee for the improvements
made in updating this pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration Credits
AGCO Corporation, courtesy—pages
62–63 (all)
Cottonman.com, courtesy—page 67
(both top)
HAAP Media Ltd., courtesy—cover
(top left, tractor and sign in center,
bottom) and page 4
©Jupiterimages.com—cover (top right,
tools and equipment in center); pages
6, 11–12 (all), 15 (top), 47, 52, 65
(bottom), 69, and 76
Natural Resources Conservation Service/
Ken Hammond, courtesy—page 75
Natural Resources Conservation
Service/Tim McCabe, courtesy—
page 10 (bottom)
U.S. Department of Agriculture/
Dave Hein, courtesy—page 66
U.S. Department of Agriculture/
Bill Tarpenning, courtesy—
page 67 (bottom)
Wikipedia.org, courtesy—pages 61 (both
top; keeper pin), 64 (all), and 71
Wikipedia.org/Jesster79, courtesy—page
60 (bottom)
All other photos and illustrations not men-
tioned above are the property of or are
protected by the Boy Scouts of America.
John McDearmon—all illustrations on
pages 13, 16–17, 28, 31, 40, and 57


Get ahead in Scouting with
Scout Life magazine’s Merit Badge Minute.
You can learn about different merit badges in every
issue. Plus, the magazine is loaded with outdoor
adventure, games and comics, leadership
tips, life skills, stories about other Scouts
and more. It’s just what
you need to succeed.
UP YOUR
MERIT BADGE
GAME
Subscribe today at
go.scoutlife.org/subscribe
Use promo code SLMBP15 to
get a special
print + digital bundle offer
priced just for Scouts!