Headline
Lead
Important
Fact
Fact
Fact
Fact
Headline
Lead
Important
Fact
Fact
Fact
Fact
JOURNALISM


How to Use This Pamphlet
The secret to successfully earning a merit
badge is for you to use both the pamphlet and
the suggestions of your counselor.
Your counselor can be as important to you as a
coach is to an athlete. Use all of the resources
your counselor can make available to you. This
may be the best chance you will have to learn
about this particular subject. Make it count.
If you or your counselor feels that any information
in this pamphlet is incorrect, please let us know.
Please state your source of information.
Merit badge pamphlets are reprinted annually
and requirements updated regularly. Your
suggestions for improvement are welcome.
Who Pays for This Pamphlet?
This merit badge pamphlet is one in a series
of more than 100 covering all kinds of hobby and
career subjects. It is made available for you to buy
as a service of the national and local councils, Boy
Scouts of America. The costs of the development,
writing, and editing of the merit badge pamphlets are
paid for by the Boy Scouts of America in order to bring
you the best book at a reasonable price.
Send comments along with a brief statement about yourself to
Program Development Department
Boy Scouts of America • 1325 West Walnut Hill Lane • Irving, TX 75038
If you prefer, you may send your comments to merit.badge@scouting.org


JOURNALISM
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Journalism or check Scoutbook for
the latest requirements.
35912
ISBN 978-0-8395-3350-4
©2021 Boy Scouts of America
2021 Printing
FPO


JOURNALISM 3


4 JOURNALISM


JOURNALISM 5
Contents
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .7
How the News Media Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
Gathering the News . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
Writing for the News Media . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
Visual Journalism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
Careers in Journalism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
Journalism Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .78





JOURNALISM 7
.Introduction
Introduction
One thing is for sure about journalism: It is never boring. For a
reporter, almost every day is different from the last. One day
you might interview the mayor of the city, the next day report
on a car accident, and the day after that preview a new movie.
Sports writers may travel to cover the home team’s games
across the state or the nation. Foreign correspondents go to
faraway countries to write about wars and conflicts. Technology
reporters try out all the latest computers, video game machines,
digital cameras, and the like to tell readers how well they work.
Journalism is for people who love
excitement, who want to get involved and
see how the world operates. Journalists pur-
sue stories of interest to themselves and to
the general public, and this all makes jour-
nalism lots of fun. But journalism also is
hard work, and there are usually daily dead-
lines. Online journalism has brought about
the 24-hour news cycle, for which the dead-
line is mere minutes after the event happens.
Journalism can deal with matters of life and death—accidents,
fires, natural disasters, and war—and often involves victims of
personal tragedy.
Journalists write about crime and dishonesty. Their reports
may cause people to go to jail or lose their jobs for being corrupt.
Journalists help citizens form sound judgments when they vote
new leaders into power. Journalists expose problems affecting
the community, anything from a dangerous street intersection
to pollution in the drinking water. Journalism can change public
opinion and affect how governments spend money. It is not a
career to be taken lightly.
Journalists use social media to break news as fast as possible,
before taking the time to produce a longer story.


8 JOURNALISM
Introduction.
How the Free Press Was Born
Here in the United States, we tend to take freedom of the press
for granted. We have our pick of thousands of different books,
newspapers, magazines, broadcast stations, and internet news
outlets. Journalists here don’t need government permission to
report the news. They cover whatever stories they wish.
Many other countries do not have a free press; instead,
their governments control what people are permitted to read
in newspapers, see on television broadcasts, and browse on
the internet. Even in this country, the press has not always
been free. The freedoms we enjoy today came about after
many years of struggle.
Almost from the beginning, government exerted power
over the press. In England, the government forced printers to
get licenses. If its license was withdrawn, a print shop could
be shut down. When the first English newspapers began
appearing in London in the 1620s, the editors were so worried
about offending local officials that they filled their papers
mostly with news from other countries.
Journalism helps
shape history.
Not all journalists are reporters. The field also employs photographers, editors, graphic
artists, designers, producers, researchers, and others. But almost all journalists share
at least one trait: They are curious and eager to share what they know with others.


JOURNALISM 9
.Introduction
As newspapers became more popular, the government
found new ways to control them. Journalists who criticized
the government were punished under laws against treason
and “seditious libel.” In 1644, poet John Milton wrote a famous
tract, the Areopagitica, which appealed for freedom of the press.
One journalist repeatedly jailed or pilloried for his work in
England was Benjamin Harris. Hoping to escape such tyranny,
he fled to America and published, in 1690, what many regard
as the first American newspaper, Publick Occurrences, Both
Foreign and Domestic. Unfortunately, Boston authorities banned
Harris’ newspaper after just one issue. In 1704, a more frequent
newspaper appeared, the Boston News-Letter. Every article was
submitted to the governor of the colony for approval before
publication. Because of that, the newspaper was boring. It
attracted few readers.
In 1721 came the first newspaper edited to please readers
instead of government officials. It was the New-England Courant,
published by James Franklin. One writer for the paper was his
younger brother, Benjamin. Later, Benjamin Franklin would
publish his own newspaper and would become one of the
Founding Fathers of our nation.
Our press
freedom makes
the United States
the envy of the
world, but that
freedom is
not inevitable.
Freedom of
the press must
be constantly
protected.
The history of
modern journalism
begins with the
invention of the
printing press in
Germany in 1450.
Before long, books,
news sheets, and
pamphlets started
appearing across Europe.


10 JOURNALISM
Introduction.
During these years, American journalists could still be
arrested for what they wrote. In one famous case, John Peter
Zenger, publisher of the New York Weekly Journal, was put
on trial in 1735 for publishing articles critical of government
officials. In defending Zenger, his attorney argued that
criticizing the government should not be a crime when the
criticisms are based in truth.
In 1787, after America had won its independence in
the Revolutionary War, the Founding Fathers drafted the U.S.
Constitution. The Bill of Rights, consisting of 10 amendments
to the Constitution, took effect in 1791. The first amendment
established freedom of religion, freedom of speech, the right to
assemble, and freedom of the press. This amendment became
the foundation of a powerful American news media.
News However You Like It
The history of the press is closely linked to breakthroughs in
technology. The invention of the printing press put books and
news sheets into the hands of the common person, not just
rich people, helping to spread literacy around the world.
The first radio broadcasts in the 1920s, and the first televi-
sion stations in the 1950s, brought news to people who did not
read newspapers. In the early 1990s, mass communications
made a leap forward with the emergence of the World Wide
Web, which now brings almost unlimited information to
anyone with a home computer and network link. Today, news
is being zapped wirelessly to mobile phones and handheld
computers through social media resources that are constantly
updated. With each advance in technology have come
new opportunities—and new challenges—for journalists.
The government found another way to strangle the press—by imposing
taxes. This made newspapers more expensive, reducing readership. In
1765, England imposed one such tax, called the Stamp Tax, on paper used
in the American colonies. Outrage over this tax helped push the colonies
into war against England.
In 1837, the invention of the telegraph made it possible for
information to be transmitted instantly along wires over great
distances—even between nations.


JOURNALISM 11
.Introduction
What Is News?
News, simply put, is information about something new, rather
than something already known. Today’s weather is news;
yesterday’s weather is history. News is information of interest
to a particular audience. Reporters and editors decide which of
the many events that happen each day are newsworthy to their
particular audience. Here are some factors they consider.
Timing. When did it happen? Most news is about something
recent or upcoming—what happened yesterday, what is hap-
pening today, or what might happen tomorrow or next week.
This helps people get along in their daily lives and plan for
the near future. Different news media have different news
cycles. Radio may update its news reports hourly; television,
three times a day; print newspapers, every morning;
magazines, monthly; websites, constantly.
Distance. How close was it? The proximity of a news event
affects how interesting it is to your audience. A power outage
in your own town is much more newsworthy than one in the
town 50 miles away.


12 JOURNALISM
Introduction.
Impact. How strongly does it affect our audience? The news
that schools will be closed today due to snow has a big effect
on the audience, so it is a leading news item on radio and TV.
The fact that Mrs. Brown’s lost cat finally came home has
little consequence for other people, so it has little news value
(though it might still get covered in a small-town newspaper).
Fame. How famous are the people involved? If the mayor breaks
a leg, it is news to the whole city. If you do, it probably is not.
If a U.S. representative speaks at your troop meeting, the local
newspaper will probably cover it. If a Scout’s mom or dad gives
the speech, the newspaper probably won’t (though the troop
newsletter probably will).
Novelty. How unusual was it? An old saying in journalism
goes, “When a dog bites a man, it’s not news; when a man
bites a dog, it is.” People love to read about the odd, the
extreme, and the unexpected—a 1,400-pound pumpkin,
a balloonist circling the world, a dog going scuba diving.
“Firsts” often make the news, such as the first man to walk
on the moon (Neil Armstrong) and the first Eagle Scout to
explore Antarctica (Paul Siple).
Conflict. Who’s fighting whom over what? When people disagree,
the results can often make news—whether it is a war between
nations, an argument between city leaders over how much
money will be spent on the new town swimming pool, or a
conflict over which fundraisers the troop should hold to raise
money for summer camp. A particular challenge for journalists
covering conflict is to be fair to all sides of the argument.


JOURNALISM 13
.Introduction
Human Interest. Some stories are newsworthy simply because
they reveal something about our humanity. These are stories
that appeal to our emotions, making us laugh, cry, or feel
inspired. Examples include stories about Scouts doing Good
Turns for their communities, such as collecting blankets for
the homeless or helping victims of a flood or tornado clean
up their damaged homes. Acts of kindness and examples of
people overcoming adversity or hardship are often good topics
for human interest stories.
Fair and Balanced Reporting
It is a reporter’s responsibility to report the facts and keep
personal opinions out of the story. When the facts are unclear,
or people in the story disagree, the reporter must present the
conflicting information and cover all sides of the argument,
even if personally the reporter favors one side or another.
This is called being fair, balanced, and objective.
Objective reporting can be tricky. Suppose, for example,
that the highway department wants to add lanes to the freeway
going through your town. Some say the extra lanes will improve
traffic flow. Opponents disagree, saying a wider highway will
only encourage more people to drive instead of taking the
bus, making traffic worse.
A newsworthy story can be one that helps spur the community to action, such as
organizing a citywide cleanup effort.
Fair and balanced
reporting lets the
reader make up
his or her own
mind based on
the facts alone.


14 JOURNALISM
Introduction.
Say that you, the reporter covering the story, live next
to the highway, and that your backyard will be destroyed if
the highway is widened. You must be careful not to let your
personal stake in the matter affect your reporting. Instead, you
must present both arguments fairly and seek out more objective
sources, such as studies done on the highway plan by experts.
You must also avoid using “loaded” words or phrases that reveal
your own opinion in a subtle way. Then your readers can decide
on their own whether the highway should be widened.
Often, news events must be put into a broader perspective
to be understood. For this reason, some journalists take sides
on certain public issues and present their views on special
pages of the newspaper labeled as the “opinion” or “editorial”
section. Journalists who specialize in writing carefully thought-
out opinions are called “editorialists” or “columnists.” On TV
or radio, they are called “commentators.”
Suppose the mayor presents the town council an annual
budget spelling out how the city’s tax money will be spent. The
editorial writer, after weighing all the facts, may decide that the
mayor’s budget gives too much money to a new baseball sta-
dium and not enough to schools. By publishing that opinion on
the editorial page, readers know it is the newspaper’s opinion
and not a news report. The readers, in turn, may express their
own opinions in letters to the editor—or in a phone call to a
radio or TV station, to be played on the air. In this way, a news
outlet can inspire public debate about important community
issues and ensure a wide range of views.
Let’s say the Scouts of Troop 160 vote to sell American elm
trees to raise money for summer camp, although almost half the
troop wanted to sell lightbulbs instead. Good journalism in the
troop newsletter would cover both sides of the issue in an
objective report. Then, if he or she wishes, the newsletter editor
may decide to support one side or the other, persuasively
explaining the reasons in a clearly labeled editorial.


JOURNALISM 15
.Introduction
Troop Will Sell Trees
to Earn Money
Troop 160 will sell American elm trees again this fall
season to earn money for Scout camp next summer.
The decision came Tuesday night at the weekly troop
meeting at Springfield Recreation Center after a 15-13
vote. “There was a lively debate among patrols,” said
Scoutmaster Jim Robinson.
Members of the Eagle and Lion patrols proposed
selling lightbulbs instead of trees. “Lightbulbs can be
sold year-round and not just during the planting sea-
son,” said Eagle Patrol leader Jason Smith. “They’re a
smarter choice than trees.”
But selling trees makes a bigger profit, said Star
Patrol’s Bob Sawyer. “We can make all the money we
need in a short amount of time, and the trees will be
around a long time for their owners and others to
enjoy. We should stick with trees.” Agreeing with him
were the Badger, Mountain, and Rocket patrols.
“Regardless of how the vote came out,”
Scoutmaster Robinson said after the meeting, “I was
proud of the Scouts for making strong arguments on
both sides of the issue.”
Here’s how the objective news report might appear in
the newsletter.


16 JOURNALISM
Introduction.
Here is the same report written in an unprofessional way
by a reporter who allowed personal feelings to color the story.
Lightbulbs Are a Dim Idea,
Says Troop 160
Troop 160 wisely voted down a proposal to sell
lightbulbs this year instead of American elm trees to
earn money for summer camp. The 15-13 vote came
Tuesday night at the weekly troop meeting at
Springfield Recreation Center.
It was surprising how many Scouts were taken in
by Eagle Patrol leader Jason Smith’s arguments in favor
of lightbulbs. They must have believed his comment
that “everybody needs lightbulbs and we should make
lots of money selling them.” Luckily, Bob Sawyer of the
Star Patrol was more persuasive than Smith. He argued
that trees sell for higher prices than lightbulbs and
therefore make more profit. The trees won the vote.
Thank goodness.


JOURNALISM 17
.Introduction
Editorial: Scout Activities
Are More Important Than
Money Raising
This newsletter includes a report about a debate over
whether Troop 160 should sell American elm trees or
lightbulbs for earning money. Those in favor of selling
lightbulbs made strong arguments for their cause.
Patrol leader Jason Smith said that because lightbulbs
are not a seasonal item, the troop could sell them
whenever money was needed instead of only for a few
weeks a year.
That is true, but raising money is not our main
purpose. This troop exists so that our Scouts can enjoy
everything that Scouting has to offer. We are lucky that
a local tree farm lets us sell its trees during the planting
season. We raise the funds we need for summer camp
and other troop activities in a very short period. This
quick fundraiser lets us devote the rest of the year to
Scouting program activities and community service
projects, not money raising. This is how it should be.
Instead of this biased news report, a clearly labeled
“editorial” would have been a more appropriate way for
the troop newsletter editor to express an opinion.


18 JOURNALISM
Introduction.
Pitfalls to Avoid
Journalists must be careful to avoid committing defamation, or
damaging someone’s reputation with false statements. When the
damage comes from written words or photographs, it is called libel.
When the offending words are spoken, it is called slander. Libel or
slander happens, for example, when a journalist falsely reports that
someone has committed a crime. The person falsely accused can
sue the journalist and news organization in civil court.
People give up some of their privacy when they are
involved in an event of public interest, such as a fire, accident,
or public meeting. They may temporarily become a public
figure, subject to being reported on without giving their
permission. Other examples of public figures are celebrities
and entertainers who have thrust themselves into the limelight.
Journalists have the right to make fair comment and criticism
on the activities and performances of such people, as well as
those of public officials, such as politicians in office.
Journalists should
never write
something they
know in advance
to be false, nor
should they
write something
carelessly, with
reckless disregard
for the truth.
Doing so can be
used in a civil
court as evidence
of malice, the
intention of doing
someone harm.
Journalists should respect people’s privacy—their right
to be left alone, out of public view. That is why, in many
cases, you should seek permission before taking a
person’s picture or writing about the individual in a
news story.


JOURNALISM 19
.Introduction
Journalism Code of Ethics
Various journalism organizations, newspapers, and
broadcasters have developed codes of ethics, or
principles of good behavior, for journalists. Here are
some main principles common to many of them:
1. Be accurate. Present facts honestly and fully. Treat all
sides of a controversial issue fairly.
2. Name your sources. Whenever feasible, journalists
should say where they got their information.
3. Respect people’s privacy.
4. Correct your mistakes. If you publish something that
is wrong, publish a correction promptly.
5. Avoid conflicts of interest. Don’t report on something
in order to benefit yourself.
6. Clearly label as
opinion any
statements of your
own views on an
issue. Keep those
opinions on the
editorial page of the
newspaper or on a
commentary segment
of a newscast.
7. Never plagiarize, or
copy someone else’s
work without attribut-
ing the material to
the original author.
8. Avoid stereotyping people. That is, don’t present a
simplified image of a group of people—for example,
people of a particular race, age, religion, region, or
disability—based on the idea that all people in the
group are similar. Each person is an individual.


20 JOURNALISM
How the News Media Work.
How the News
Media Work
Newspapers, magazines, television, radio, social media, and the
internet are the main types of mass news media. But advancing
technology is causing rapid change in them all. In some cases,
news media are converging, or coming together—for example,
newspaper reporters appearing on TV news broadcasts, or cable
and network news broadcasts being posted on websites, or
journalists breaking stories on social media. This blurs the
dividing lines between media types.
Still, each medium has its advantages and disadvantages
and can require special reporting techniques. Well-informed
citizens need to be “media savvy,” that is, they need to have
the skills to evaluate the accuracy and believability of
information from many different sources. Then they see news
events from different angles and form judgments on their own.
How we get our news is rapidly changing, but the quality of the
news we find still depends on the skills and integrity of the
journalists who gather it.
Traditional print
media outlets
such as
magazines and
newspapers will
break news on
the internet via
social networking
or their own
websites before it
appears in print.


JOURNALISM 21
.How the News Media Work
News organizations need a variety of professionals to
operate. In general terms, there is the news or editorial staff;
the business staff, which includes marketing and advertising;
and the production or engineering staff, which handles the
technical aspects, such as getting the magazine into print or the
news broadcast on the air. Each of these staffs may have a
separate manager who reports to an overall manager of the
whole operation. The larger the medium, the more people
involved and the more specialized each person’s position. This
pamphlet focuses on the news side of the operation.
Newspapers
Newspapers provide the most thorough news reports on the
widest range of topics, especially local news.
Like the other news media, newspapers are in transition.
For years, newspapers have been suffering from falling
circulations, due to competition from television and, more
recently, the internet. These businesses, however, still make
money and aren’t going away anytime soon. Newspapers are
taking steps to attract more readers, such as offering their
content over the internet. Many large dailies also publish
scaled-down editions for younger readers.
Newspapers,
which employ
more than
32,000 newsroom
journalists
nationwide,
have the largest
newsgathering
staffs of any
news media.


22 JOURNALISM
How the News Media Work.
ORGANIZATION
The editor in chief or executive editor oversees the entire news-
room operation, often concentrating on administration, budget,
and editorial planning rather than hands-on editing. This editor
reports directly to the publisher, the business-side head, who
will hire or fire an editor but usually does not get involved in
daily editorial decisions.
The managing editor manages the day-to-day flow of
articles, often editing text as well as planning multipart series
and coordinating special sections with the production and
advertising departments. The “M.E.” runs daily news meetings
and serves as the newspaper’s “traffic cop,” making sure the
whole operation runs smoothly.
Newspapers are divided into sections, each handled by
a section editor. Typical sections include metro (city), state,
national, international, lifestyle, business, sports, and
entertainment (arts). Each section typically has its own
reporters, who gather and write the news. General assignment
reporters might have more than one section.
U.S. newspapers sold more copies each day (about 60 million) in 1965
than in 2014 (about 40 million), despite a large increase in the nation’s
population over that same time period. First it was afternoon newspapers
that suffered, but then morning dailies also started losing readers. In 1940,
there were 1,878 daily newspapers in the United States; by 2014, there
were only 1,331.


JOURNALISM 23
.How the News Media Work
Other important positions on a newspaper include copy
editors, who correct spelling, grammar, style, and factual errors;
photo editors, who manage the photography staff; and page
designers, who lay out the articles. The editorial page may have
its own staff of editors, who write editorials expressing the news-
paper’s opinions on timely events, edit letters to the editor from
readers, and select columns for the facing page—the “op-ed”
page—often written by nationally syndicated columnists.
Finally, the online department or webpage editors work to
upload content onto the newspaper’s website. At some
newspapers, the webpage editors also prepare original or
supporting content—such as audio or video clips or reader
forums—that augment the newspaper’s print content.
Magazines
Like newspapers, newsmagazines, such as Time and Newsweek,
have had to adapt quickly to changing technology in order to
survive. Improving digital content and distribution has become
an essential focus of magazines in order to stay relevant as
print circulation decreases. U.S. News & World Report, one of
the three main newsmagazines for many years, stopped
printing its weekly editions in 2010, choosing to emphasize its
website and print only special editions.
Most magazines appeal to particular groups of
readers—say, sports fans, guitar players, or travel
buffs—and are national in scope, rather than local. The trend in
magazine publishing has been away from large-circulation,
general-interest titles, such as Life and Look, toward
specialized magazines with smaller readerships highly devoted
to particular areas of interest. This trend of fragmenting the
audience into special groups, and customizing content to
appeal to those groups, is going on in most other mass news
media, including radio and cable television.
The magazine industry in the United States has changed significantly since
the late 1990s, when online publications emerged as an alternative to
traditional print editions. Since then magazine companies have frequently
revamped their websites to optimize for social media users and the latest
mobile devices. A study by the Rochester Institute of
Technology in 2014 showed digital subscriptions
had increased almost 600 percent in three years.


24 JOURNALISM
How the News Media Work.
ORGANIZATION
Magazine staffs vary greatly in size depending on the nature
and scope of the magazine but are usually much smaller than
newspaper staffs. The main positions on many magazine staffs,
however, are similar to those of newspapers: editor in chief,
executive editor, managing editor, senior editor, copy editor,
director of design, photography editor, and website editor.
Magazines may also have staff researchers, who do in-depth
fact checking, and contributing editors, who typically are not
staff members but rather freelance writers who get regular
assignments from the magazine.
Radio
Unlike TV, newspapers, or the internet, radio can be used
while the listener is also doing something else, such as jogging,
washing dishes, or driving a car. That makes it the most
convenient of news media. However, most radio stations today
are not good sources of in-depth news, especially local news.
Rather, they broadcast news headlines, often national or
international in scope.
To help keep their staff sizes to a minimum, magazines
tend to use freelance writers and photographers—
independent workers who sell their talents to a variety
of publications—more than do newspapers.
Many public radio
stations have their
own local news
staffs and also
carry “Morning
Edition” and
“All Things
Considered,”
the two major
news programs
produced daily
by National
Public Radio.


.How the News Media Work
This situation came about for two main reasons. In 1987,
the Federal Communication Commission, which grants radio
and television stations licenses to broadcast, repealed the
Fairness Doctrine. This rule had required stations to present
news of controversial issues of public importance, with all
viewpoints given fair treatment. After the repeal, many stations
reduced or eliminated their news staffs.
The other important development was consolidation.
A single company owning dozens or even hundreds of radio
stations could combine staffs and broadcast national—instead
of local—programming. Flourishing in this environment have
been “talk radio,” in which opinionated commentators interview
guests about current events, and public radio, which has filled
the need for in-depth news coverage in many communities.
ORGANIZATION
Most radio stations have small staffs overseen by a
general manager, who handles both the business and
news operations. If the station produces local news,
there may also be a news director, who makes story
assignments; staff reporters, who work in the field and
by telephone; and technicians. Larger stations that cover
local news or have an all-news format may also have news
anchors, who host drive-time news talk shows; a staff
meteorologist, or weather reporter; a sports reporter; a
traffic reporter, who helps steer commuters around
road problems; and staff writers, who write stories for
anchors and reporters. Some of these positions—particu-
larly traffic and weather reporters—may be shared with
other radio or television stations in the same market.
Radio ranks second only to television in how much time people use it each
day. Broadcast radio reaches some 93 percent of all Americans. In 2015,
there were 15,470 licensed broadcast radio stations in the United States,
a number that has been slowly increasing over the past 15 years.
Two national satellite radio networks brought new competition to broadcast
radio—XM in 2001 and Sirius in 2002. The companies merged in 2008 to form
Sirius XM, which transmits highly customized radio programming, mostly
commercial-free music, to nationwide listeners who pay a subscription fee.


26 JOURNALISM
How the News Media Work.
Television
More than 1,700 television stations operate in this country
today—an increase of almost 300 stations since 1990. Many
of them are affiliated with one of the national networks—NBC,
CBS, ABC, PBS, or Fox. A network affiliate broadcasts much of
the network’s programming, including such morning and
evening news programs as ABC’s “Good Morning America,”
“NBC Nightly News,” or “PBS NewsHour.”
Network affiliates also air newsmagazine shows such as
“60 Minutes,” “Frontline,” and “20/20,” as well as news com-
mentaries such as “Face the Nation” on CBS. In addition, most
TV stations originate local newscasts of their own,
typically aired early in the morning, at noon, in the evening
before the national newscast, and at 10 or 11 p.m., after
prime-time network programming has concluded.


JOURNALISM 27
.How the News Media Work
For an additional service fee, viewers may choose from
dozens of cable or satellite TV channels. Like magazines, many
subscription channels are focused by topic or format, be it
comedy, animals, science, or cartoons. There also are news-only
channels, including CNN and MSNBC, as well as ESPN for
sports, the Weather Channel, Court TV, and C-SPAN.
Cable TV news has steadily stolen viewers away from
network television. Studies show that since CNN was launched
in 1980, the viewership of the three commercial network evening
newscasts has declined by 54 percent. This is largely for cable
TV’s convenience appeal. Cable news can be watched at any
time of the day. Now, in turn, cable news is facing competition
from the internet, where viewers can find what they want
whenever they want it, rather than having to watch the program
being aired on TV at the moment. Many cable news shows make
certain segments available for free on the internet.
ORGANIZATION
Besides their star anchors, the network TV news operations
have extensive staffs of producers, assistant producers, assign-
ment editors, reporters (and foreign correspondents), news
writers, videographers, graphics designers and editors, film and
tape librarians, and others. Local TV stations have many of
these same positions, as well as meteorologists, sports anchors,
and reporters. The local TV station’s general manager is respon-
sible for everything that goes out over the air; the news director
runs the newsroom; a programming manager handles all non-
news programming.
One side benefit of cable and satellite TV
is public access or community television.
This service allows community groups,
ranging from Scout troops to religious
organizations to local universities, to use
a subscription station’s studios
and equipment to broadcast their own
programs. There are hundreds of public
access stations across the country.


28 JOURNALISM
How the News Media Work.
Online Media
The internet is the newest and fastest growing news medium.
Traditional print and broadcast news media provide much of the
news content on the internet. For instance, most newspapers,
magazines, and broadcast outlets have some sort of website
where you can read stories, listen to audio clips, or view
photographs or footage of newscasts. They also share much of
their content on social media.
In the past, the huge cost of printing presses and broadcast
equipment made it very expensive to become a publisher or
broadcaster. Now, almost anyone with access to a computer can
“spread the news.” As more and more people get high-speed
access to the internet, getting news online will become even
more convenient and the selection of news sources will grow.
The internet has many technical advantages—unlimited
storage capacity, the ability to search vast databases in mere
seconds—that journalists are only beginning to realize. A news
website can augment a news story with related materials such
as the full text of a presidential speech, or a list of victims’
names from an airplane crash. News websites come in many
varieties. Some consist almost entirely of links to other news
outlets, while others include original, in-depth reporting.
More recently, the journalism industry has seen a sharp rise in businesses
that do nothing but deliver news online, through their own websites and
through popular channels of social media. Without a print or broadcast
component, these news agencies likely could not have existed just 20
years ago, but are now relied upon by many for news coverage every day.


.How the News Media Work
The internet is fostering entirely new ways of distributing
information. One of these is the weblog, or blog, in which
journalists (or anyone) can publish diarylike entries for public
viewing on the web. Unlike a newspaper story, a blog can be
as long as the writer wants it to be.
There are millions of blogs, collectively referred to as the
blogosphere, some of which have broken news stories that the
traditional media have missed. Since almost anyone can start
a blog, some of them can be highly opinionated and partisan,
promoting certain political or personal views. These kinds of
blogs are unlikely to stick to the standards of accuracy common
among mainstream news media. At the same time, many main-
stream news organizations now use the blog format—along
with various social media outlets—to break legitimate news
with the same standards they use in their traditional outlets.
Yet another innovation in web publishing appeared when
the Google search engine began its automated news service in
2004. Today, news sites like Google update news from thousands
of sources continuously throughout the day. They do so by
using a computer program rather than a human editor to select
and present the stories.
ORGANIZATION
Internet news sites are still in their infancy and haven’t settled
into a standard model yet. Most operate as a department of
an established print or broadcast news outlet, repurposing or
enhancing content from the newspaper, magazine, or broadcast
station. A number of online operations are large enough to
have their own editors, producers, reporters, writers, graphic
designers, and programmers. Others outsource some of these
functions, typically the technical side, to independent web
production companies.
An audio version of blogging is called podcasting, in which people
record their own radio-type program and make it available on the
internet. You can listen to these audio files on a computer or download
them to a portable music player. Some commercial broadcast stations
now offer their own podcasts.
The Boy Scouts of America has a variety of podcasts on its
official website, which you can visit with your parent’s permission
at www.scouting.org.
JOURNALISM 29


30 JOURNALISM
How the News Media Work.
The Role of Wire Services and Syndicates
Almost every local newspaper carries more than just local news.
The paper will also cover major national and international news
events—say, a deadly earthquake or the discovery of a new
treatment for cancer. A wire service might transmit these stories
by telegraph wire, though now more often by satellite feed and
computer networks.
Wire services are also known as news agencies. The major
wire services include Reuters in the United Kingdom; Agence
France-Presse in France; and, in the United States, the Associated
Press, which is a nonprofit news cooperative. Newspapers and
broadcast stations receive articles, photographs, video, and audio
reports from the AP and, in return, make their own local content
available to other AP members.
The AP also maintains its own reporters and editors in more
than 250 news bureaus worldwide. They cover important news
events that may not have been covered by AP members. A
related type of news service is the feature syndicate, which sells
the right to use the work of noted writers, political cartoonists,
comic strip creators, and others to local newspapers. The news-
paper usually gets exclusive use of the work in its market so that
no other paper with the same readers can publish the same item.
Questions to Ask When You Tour
News Operations
When visiting a newspaper or magazine office, talk to
section editors, photo editors, copy editors, and some-
one on the business side, such as an advertisement
salesman or publisher.


JOURNALISM 31
.How the News Media Work
Print and Online Employees
• Where do you get story ideas?
• How far in advance of publication are the stories written?
• How does your publication utilize the internet and social media?
• Do you write for both online and print versions? What’s the difference
in style?
• How much of your publication consists of feature news? Hard news?
• Please explain the copy flow process. Which editors work on an article
after the reporter has written it?
• Ask to see a page layout in progress. Ask the designer what elements
make a good layout. Ask the copy editor what makes a good headline
or title.
• When are the newspaper’s deadlines each day? How much time do the
magazine editors have to prepare each issue?
• Ask to see a copy of the magazine’s production schedule and ask for an
explanation of the various steps in the schedule. Ask to see a story
schedule. Ask the editor about the process for creating an appealing mix of
articles for each issue. Ask for a copy of the publication’s writer’s guidelines.
• Visit the ad sales staff. Ask to see a rate card, which shows how much
advertising pages in the magazine cost. Ask for an explanation of the
different rates. Ask how important advertising is to the economics of
the publication.


32 JOURNALISM
How the News Media Work.
Broadcast Station Employees
• Ask for a tour of the studio and broadcast control room. Ask about
the essential equipment used in preparing the broadcast. Ask for a
demonstration of the editing equipment.
• Ask to watch a live broadcast from the control room (or to watch the
control room through a window). How many minutes in a typical news
broadcast are allotted for news, sports, weather, and commercials?
How do the producers keep everyone on time, second by second?
• Ask about the typical shifts (hours of work) for anchors and for reporters.
• Ask for a tour of a news van or truck and an explanation of the video
gear that is kept in the vehicle.
• What must be done to prepare a typical package (news story) for
broadcast that was shot in the field? Ask how to determine which of the
following elements to include: natural sound, narration (voice-over),
standup (reporter standing before the camera).
• How do you prepare your prerecorded packages for your website?
Do you offer the same material online exactly as you do over the air?
• How well is the station doing in local ratings? What steps has the
station taken in recent months to help improve its ratings?


JOURNALISM 33
.How the News Media Work
Freelance Writing
Most magazines (and some newspapers) rely on freelance
writers for some of their content. Freelance assignments
are a good opportunity for young journalists to get valuable
experience before landing their first staff position.
Most magazines want to receive a query letter that presents
the story proposal and suggests how the article will be tailored
to that magazine’s audience—rather than a finished manuscript.
On the other hand, newspapers often want to see the finished
manuscript first. Many newspapers, especially smaller ones, use
stringers, or freelance reporters. Stringers often cover events in
a nearby community or a suburb not regularly reported on by
the newspaper’s own staff.
To get an assignment as a stringer, study the newspaper
to find gaps in its coverage. Develop a list of story ideas to fill
those gaps. Then schedule a meeting with the city editor or a
section editor and present your ideas. Some newspapers will
accept news about your Scout troop, such as who was awarded
the Eagle rank at a recent court of honor, or a report about a
camporee or troop high-adventure outing.
Most magazines publish
writer’s guidelines that
spell out what type of
freelance work they
need and how they
like it presented. These
guidelines usually can
be found on the
magazine’s website.
Be sure you also study
copies of the publication
itself carefully before
trying to sell a story
idea.
If a magazine or newspaper doesn’t want to run your story in the print
version, it might be willing to use it online.


34 JOURNALISM
How the News Media Work.
When freelance journalist Scott Wallace takes on a
story, chances are he won’t be working on it from an
office. In fact, he’s much more likely to be packing his
bags and heading to some of the most far-flung places
on the planet. During more than 30 years in journalism,
Wallace has brought to life stories from the rice
paddies of Myanmar to the steppes of Russia and from
shepherds’ camps high in the Himalayas to indigenous
villages in the jungles of Peru, bringing diverse voices
and issues to his readers at home.
Wallace’s writing has appeared in magazines such
as Harper’s, National Geographic, and Smithsonian. He
specializes in stories that examine conflicts over land
and resources, preservation and progress. The complex
topics he explores require in-depth research and
immersion in his subjects, making them best suited for
the longer format of magazine articles or books.
For his best-selling book, The Unconquered,
Wallace journeyed deep into the Amazon rainforest in
Brazil to report on one of the last “uncontacted” native
tribes on Earth. Of his work, Wallace says, “This job
allows me to travel not as a tourist but as a writer with a
purpose—to tell my readers about important events, to
become a witness to history.”
Scott Wallace was a Boy Scout in his youth in
upstate New York. He has three sons and lives in
Washington, D.C.


JOURNALISM 35
.How the News Media Work
How the Media Make Money
Most media in the United States must make a profit in order
to stay in business. The print media make money by sales
of the publication itself—either on the newsstand or by home
subscriptions. They also sell advertising space in the publication
to clients who want to reach that publication’s readers with
messages about products or services.
Newspapers have a general, local readership, so the adver-
tisers are often local businesses, such as grocery stores and
automobile dealerships. Magazines tend to have a specialized,
national readership. Their advertisers are often equally special-
ized, selling guitar strings, for example, in a guitar magazine.
Most radio stations get all of their revenue from
advertising. They broadcast their programs over the airwaves
for free, receiving no direct payments from listeners. (An
exception is the satellite radio broadcaster Sirius XM, which
charges a subscription fee.) Television stations also get most
revenue from advertising but may also get payments from cable
or satellite TV companies that carry their programming. Public
radio and TV stations operate differently. They receive some
funding from taxpayers and also receive donations from
listeners and viewers. News websites might sell advertising,
require people to pay to access their site, or both.
Whenever a publication or broadcast station accepts
advertising, there is the danger that the advertiser will try to
influence editorial coverage. Journalists with integrity who adhere
to the ethical principles of their profession do not let advertisers
influence their reporting or editorial positions. They know that
doing so, in the long run, is not good for business. Readers or
viewers may lose their trust and abandon a publication or
broadcast station. Once that happens, the advertisers leave also.
Some publications
make all of their
revenue from
ads and give the
publication away
for free. Others do
just the opposite,
charging a high
price for the
publication but
carrying no
advertisements
at all.
Online news media are still searching for ways to be
profitable. Many rely on subsidies from their print or
broadcast parent or sell advertising space, offering free
access to the public in order to get as large a reader-
ship as possible. A few publications charge readers to
access their sites—or to see archived stories from past
issues. But with so much free content available on the
internet, many readers are not willing to pay for access.


36 JOURNALISM
Gathering the News.
Gathering the News
All news media have editors and managers (or directors) who
plan coverage and decide how much space, time, or emphasis
different stories should receive. These same editors and
managers may also edit the stories before they go into print or
on the air. But the most important people in the news process
are the news gatherers. These reporters or correspondents seek
the facts and write the news or feature articles or gather the
news footage and interviews to make a good broadcast report.
The news gathering process begins with planning. Early
in the day the editors look at their calendars, their lists of news
tips, and the future file (a list of upcoming events kept by date)
to see what events will be occurring in the city that day. They
plan where to send their reporters and photographers.
Some reporters have regular beats to cover, such as city hall, police
headquarters, or the city’s professional baseball, football, or basketball
team. Others are general assignment reporters who cover spot news
such as accidents or other events that cannot be predicted, such as an
elephant escaping from the zoo, or an unexpected public appearance in
town by a famous movie star.


JOURNALISM 37
.Gathering the News
In another meeting, editors decide what subjects to write
about on the editorial page that day and which opinion columns
will run on the op-ed page opposite the editorials. Meanwhile,
wire services send national and foreign editors their schedules
of the stories that are planned to be distributed that day via
satellite or internet.
When the news reporters arrive at work, they will check
their assignment sheets and might call sources to find out what
is happening on their beat. Then the reporter will have a quick
meeting or phone discussion with the city editor or other section
editor to help decide what to cover that day. After the decision
is made, the reporter might do some preliminary research online
(including reading earlier articles on the same topic or issue),
and then will go to a news event, conduct interviews in person,
make telephone calls to other sources, and finally, write the
article before deadline.
As the day progresses, news events will often occur that will
persuade the editors to shift assignments. Newsrooms typically
have a police scanner on at all times with someone assigned to
listen to it. Reporters may be called off one story and put onto
something more important—say, a broken water main that will
affect thousands of residents—as the day goes on.
The reporter’s
work revolves
around planning,
research,
covering news
events, and
finding and
cultivating the
right sources
of information.


38 JOURNALISM
Gathering the News.
Finding News
Most news stories emerge from sources and events. Sources are
identified, or attributed, so that readers know where the infor-
mation in the story came from and that the facts are not just
the reporter’s opinions. Following are examples of common
types of news sources and news events.
Witnesses and Participants. When reporters arrive at the scene
of any newsworthy event, their first instinct is to listen to what
is being said and to ask questions. Reporters interview people
who saw the event unfold, called witnesses, or someone who
was personally involved in the action, a participant.
Official and Expert Sources. Most news stories rely on official
and expert sources such as city council members, police officers,
economists, or forensic scientists. Reporters arriving at the scene
of an accident or disaster will talk to the police officer or
firefighter on hand. Beat reporters will “make the rounds”
each day to visit official sources such as city hall, the county
courthouse, the police department, the sheriff’s office, or the
school administration building. Good reporters will also keep
a file of important and knowledgeable people, as well as subject
experts who can be called upon for comments—perhaps a town
historian or a roster of faculty members at a local university.


JOURNALISM 39
.Gathering the News
Press Conferences and Speeches. Reporters spend a lot of
time covering speeches and press conferences. Speeches
generally are given to a public audience; press conferences are
held for reporters only. In both cases, someone of public
interest has a message to share.
Press Releases. Every day news outlets receive dozens of press
releases. Some can lead to a good news story. Others do not.
All of them are sent by organizations—government agencies,
private companies, universities, business or special-interest
groups—trying to get favorable news coverage, or public relations
firms hired to portray their clients favorably to the media. Most
news outlets won’t run the press release verbatim but may
assign a reporter to rewrite the release in an objective way,
doing additional reporting if necessary.
Accidents and Disasters. The public has a deep interest in
the causes and circumstances of accidents, fires, and disasters.
Thorough reporting can alert readers to dangers they may not
have known about. It may point out an unsafe road condition
or the need for a new traffic light. When a disaster happens,
readers want to know how effectively the emergency workers
responded. The readers’ own sense of safety is at stake.


40 JOURNALISM
Gathering the News.
Crime and the Courts. Criminal acts—robberies, murders, thefts,
assaults—are just as interesting to the public as accidents and
disasters. People want to know of dangers in their community
and how effectively the police and courts are protecting them
from those dangers. Because they must cover this important
type of story as the need arises, reporters should be skilled
at police reporting even if they aren’t on the police beat.
Reporters must be
careful in writing
crime stories so
as not to portray
a suspect as
guilty of a crime
before conviction.
Newspaper reporter Annie Sweeney lives a life of crime.
She is not a criminal herself. She is a reporter covering
the crime beat for the Chicago Tribune and earlier for
the Chicago Sun-Times, both large daily newspapers in
one of the nation’s largest cities. She writes news
articles about crimes committed in the city and the
police officers who work to solve them.
Sweeney’s biggest challenge, she says, is the sheer
size of her coverage area. “It’s a massive beat, with 25
separate police districts in the city.” Another challenge is
winning the trust of police officers, so they will give her
information. “Some officers think reporters are out to
make them look bad,” she said.


JOURNALISM 41
.Gathering the News
Meetings. Most matters of public importance—building new
schools, voting on zoning changes, granting new-business
permits, raising taxes, hiring new police officers—are discussed
at meetings. Such meetings are held by various public groups
and government agencies—the city council, school board,
chamber of commerce, special commissions appointed by the
mayor, and others.
Reporters try to get a list of what will be discussed at such
meetings—called an agenda—and will write a story announcing
the meeting beforehand and another story after the meeting to
report on what happened. Often such meetings are useful for
finding related ideas for more in-depth public affairs reports or
even feature stories, say, on the people whose homes may be
affected by a new highway or factory.
Documents and Stored Sources. Besides knowing how
to cover events and interview people, reporters also need
good research skills. They must know their way around the
public library, how to access online databases, and how to
search for documents and records. The federal government,
universities, and private foundations compile enormous
amounts of information about the economy, occupations,
population trends, the environment, and many other subjects
of interest to readers. Most of these studies and reports are
made available to reporters.
State and local governments also are treasure troves of
information—from marriage licenses to tax records to restaurant
inspection reports to building permits. Many states have open
records laws requiring government officials to keep public records
of their official activities. However, reporters must sometimes file
a freedom of information request to force federal government
agencies to make certain documents available.
Special-Interest Sources. The sources listed above are of
a general nature and of particular interest to newspapers and
broadcast stations that have mass audiences. Specialized media,
such as magazines and websites catering to very narrow
interests—sports cards, video games, travel, military history,
cars—have their own types of specialized sources. Journalists
who write for special-interest outlets often become experts
themselves, as they learn more about the subject their
publication covers.
State open
records laws
and the federal
Freedom of
Information Act
are part of the
checks-and-
balances system
of U.S. government.
Public access to
certain government
records ensures
that citizens can
be fully informed
about their
government.


42 JOURNALISM
Gathering the News.
Basic Tools for
Reporting and Writing
The main tools for reporting are a
pen and small notebook. Reporters
must write quickly yet legibly. They
must capture the important parts
of an interview and be able to read
their notes later, when transcribing
their notes to a computer. Many
reporters develop their own form of
shorthand, or abbreviated writing,
for more efficient note-taking.
A tape recorder, or even
better, a digital voice recorder, can be useful, but should be
used only to back up—not replace —note-taking. While taped
interviews ensure accurate quotations, there are drawbacks.
Some people feel uncomfortable about being recorded and may
not speak as openly during a taped interview. Also, when
writing a story, the reporter can get bogged down reviewing a
lengthy recording instead of just flipping quickly through notes.
Finally, there is always the danger of equipment failure (dead
batteries, for example); without good written notes, the story
would then be lost. It’s best to take notes manually and use a
recording only to verify facts or direct quotes.
Computers have become standard equipment for reporters,
not just for writing articles but also for story research and for
communicating with sources via email. Reporters who travel in
their work often have a laptop computer in addition to a desk-
top computer back at the office. Many reporters type their notes
directly into a computer while conducting telephone interviews.
Obviously, reporters need good keyboarding skills.
One of the most
convenient
modern tools a
journalist can use
is the device that
most people have
with them already:
their smartphones.
Reporters use
their phones to
take pictures,
shoot video, and
record interviews.. Reporters need a clear speaking voice and a firm but
courteous manner when asking questions. An editor
doesn’t always have time to fix a reporter’s grammatical
mistakes later on, so reporters also need solid writing
skills and knowledge of grammar, punctuation, and
spelling. Finally, reporters need curiosity and energy.


.Gathering the News
Conducting an Interview
Interviewing is a key way journalists gather information.
Good interviews also make stories and broadcasts more
lively and interesting. Developing good interviewing skills is
essential to becoming a good journalist. Here are some pointers.
• Decide what information you need and whom to interview
to get it.
• Research the interview topic so you know as much as
possible beforehand.
• Use a notebook and pencil to take notes. If you want to
record the conversation, ask permission first, but still take
notes—recorders don’t always work. Start by asking the
person to spell his or her name and title. If you reach the
person by phone, ask if it is a good time to talk. If it is not,
ask when you should call back.
• Prepare questions in advance, and speak clearly and slowly.
Use a closed-ended question to get a specific or concrete
answer. For example, the question “How many weeks did
you work on your Eagle Scout service project?” will get a
more precise answer than “How hard was your Eagle Scout
service project?” Use open-ended questions to gently coax
information from someone without appearing pushy. This
gives a person flexibility when answering a question. For
example, “How is your business doing financially?” sounds
less pushy than “Are you losing money?” Other
examples of open-ended questions: “What’s the best
thing about winning the marathon?” or “How has
being an Eagle Scout helped you in life?”


44 JOURNALISM
Gathering the News.
• If you don’t understand a response, ask the same question
in another way, or rephrase the response in your own words
and ask if you got it right. Use follow-up questions to delve
deeper into a subject.
• Keep the conversation on track but be prepared to follow it
where it leads, even if it departs from your script.
• Take note of the person’s clothing, gestures, or other interest-
ing attributes, such as photos and other personal effects that
may add interesting details to your article.
• Save your hardest questions for last. By then, your subject
should feel more comfortable and more willing to answer
difficult questions.
• Ask for the person’s permission to call back if necessary.
• Read your notes as soon as possible after the interview;
rewrite them more legibly or type them while the
conversation is still fresh in your mind.
Radio journalist Bob Edwards is one of
America’s most famous broadcast journalists.
For 25 years, he hosted National Public
Radio’s “Morning Edition,” a news program
reaching 13 million listeners a week. During
that time, he interviewed more than 20,000
people, including world leaders, actors,
musicians, and average people who found
themselves involved in the news of the day.
Edwards gained a reputation as a master of
the interview, asking brief questions in a low-
key manner and letting his subjects do most
of the talking. In 2004, Edwards left NPR to join XM Satellite Radio, where
he hosted “The Bob Edwards Show” until 2014, another morning program
that featured interviews with newsmakers. In November 2004, he was
inducted into the National Radio Hall of Fame.
“Give people the time to expand on their thoughts,” he advises young
journalists. “Don’t interrogate them. Make it like a conversation. Listen
to what is said and follow up. Be prepared with a list of questions, but be
willing to depart from the list and go where the interview leads.”


JOURNALISM 45
.Gathering the News
Handling Quotations
Here are some practical tips for using quotations.
• When writing your story, use direct quotes—that is, the
actual words spoken—when someone says something
unique or important.
“I’d rather have a tooth pulled than climb that
mountain again!”
“I have decided to resign from the presidency, effective
immediately,” the president said.
• Use direct quotes for pacing, that is, to add variety to the tone
of the text or to break up long passages of explanatory text.
During May, all Friday afternoon classes will be held outdoors,
Principal Mark Brown announced today, surprising teachers
and students alike. “We all need some fresh air!” he said.
Classes will be conducted in the school courtyard and in the
grassy area behind the gymnasium.
• Place direct quotations within quotations marks and attribute
the quote. Use the person’s whole name and title on first
reference only. Later you can use just the last name or a
pronoun (he or she).
“Quotes add color to a story,” says Bob Brown, editor of the
Troop 14 newsletter. “They make articles more readable.”
• Use quotes sparingly. Quotes add emphasis and can clarify
a point, but don’t rely on quotes to tell the whole story.
In addition, most speakers tend to ramble. So, for clarity,
paraphrase what someone said by restating it in simpler,
more direct language. When paraphrasing, don’t use
quotation marks.
Broadcast news quotes serve a similar purpose to printed quotes—adding
color and clarification to a story—but are usually much shorter. They usually
take the form of a sound bite—a short recorded segment of the person
being quoted. It is less common for the reporter or anchor to say someone
else’s quote, because that tends to be confusing to listeners and viewers.
When conducting a broadcast interview, refrain from making any sounds
while the respondent is talking. The “uh-huhs” and “I sees” common
during normal conversation are distracting to a broadcast audience.





JOURNALISM 47
.Writing for the News Media
Writing for the
News Media
A good news story is informative, easily understood, and
interesting. It’s a story that readers or viewers care about.
Most readers skim through newspapers and magazines, glance
at headlines, and read a few captions and maybe the first few
sentences of some articles. If the story doesn’t grab their atten-
tion, they move on. The same is true of broadcast stories. Here
are some principles of news writing we will call the “five C’s.”
Make Your Writing ...
Clear. Writing should be immediately understandable. If the
reader has to stop and reread a passage to get it, the writer
has failed. Choose simple, familiar words and write simple
sentences that aren’t too long. Make the parts of a story
flow in a logical, straightforward order. Be concrete
(“Today’s forecast is for thunderstorms and up to
2 inches of rain.”) instead of vague (“Today’s forecast is
for bad weather.”). Use transitions—connecting phrases or
sentences—to introduce new subjects.
Concise. Make your writing short and to the point.
Give readers a maximum amount of information
in a minimum of words. There is always a
shortage of time and space in the news media.
Edit yourself. Remove wordiness (for example,
change “at a later date” to “later” and “a small
number of” to “few”). Cut out
passages that are repetitious (saying the same
thing twice) or redundant (saying the same thing
in different words, such as “fellow classmates” or
“totally destroyed”).
Good writing
can make any
story better.


48 JOURNALISM
Writing for the News Media.
Complete. A good story covers the subject thoroughly.
Don’t leave readers with unanswered questions.
Correct. Get your facts straight. Use correct grammar and
spelling. Never spell someone’s name wrong.
Creative. Look for ways to make your writing vivid and lively
through careful observation, good reporting, and fresh expres-
sions. Avoid clichés—don’t use overused words and terms such
as “spectacular view” and “devastating flood.”
Be careful not to exaggerate or overdramatize a story, and avoid
writing in a fancy, overly clever way. Let the facts speak for
themselves. Solid reporting is at the heart of good news writing.
Hometown News
Scouts participating in national Scout jamborees have a unique
opportunity to exercise their journalism skills by submitting jamboree
news to their local newspapers, radio stations, and television stations.
Hometown News correspondents get special training from nationally
recognized journalists and teachers on how to write articles and scripts,
edit copy, and select photographs and video to accompany their stories,
and they have special
access to interview
celebrities attending the
jamboree. They also will
work with local media
contacts to get their
jamboree news to the
folks back home. Ask
your Scoutmaster how
you can participate as a
Hometown News
correspondent at the next
national Scout jamboree.
These Hometown News reporters were lucky enough
to ride a Blackhawk helicopter at the 2013 National
Scout Jamboree.


JOURNALISM 49
.Writing for the News Media
News Story Structure
News must be written for easy reading. A news story is usually
created using the inverted pyramid structure. The writer begins
with the most substantial details, followed by less important
details that can be trimmed, if necessary, without losing the gist
of the story. In practice, this means starting with a lead para-
graph that summarizes the story’s most important facts, with
information in descending order of importance in the middle,
and ending with the least important details.
Novels and storybooks usually present events in the order
in which they happen, or “chronological” order. The most impor-
tant parts of the story usually come near the end, not the begin-
ning. The chronological form keeps you reading clear through
to find out what happens. But news stories are different. News
writers put the essential information at the beginning, knowing
that readers want the meat up front for information, not just
for entertainment.
Compare these two stories written for a national readership.
One is written in inverted pyramid style; the other in chronolog-
ical style, as a storyteller might tell it to a group. As you read,
think of reasons why the inverted pyramid style works better
for newspaper readers than the storyteller style.
If children’s fairy
tales were written
in the inverted
pyramid instead
of chronological
style, they would
begin with “They
lived happily ever
after” instead
of “Once upon
a time.”


50 JOURNALISM
Writing for the News Media.
HOPE, W.Va., July 25—
“Time!” shouted one of the
Navy SEALs as eight Scouts
strained their forearms
attempting to do 10 pull-ups in
two minutes during the SEAL
Challenge offered at the 2013
National Scout Jamboree.
This followed a rigorous
proficiency test of a 500-yard
swim done in less than 12
minutes, 30 seconds; 50 to 90
push-ups completed in a two-
minute time frame; 50 curl-
ups in less than 2 minutes;
and a run of 1.5 miles
completed within 9 minutes,
30 seconds.
Scouts stood in line and
tried their best to look
confident. Asked if he thought
he would be able to succeed,
Ryan Vimba of Ridgewood,
N.J., said, “I don’t know, but
I’ll give it my best try.”
Eagle Scout Michael Williamson of Troop C221 competes in the NAVY Summit
Challenge. He had a 500-yard swim time of 8 minutes, 40 seconds.
INVERTED PYRAMID STYLE


JOURNALISM 51
.Writing for the News Media
Navy SEAL Capt. Duncan
Smith explained that the test
was exactly the same as the
test administered for all Navy
personnel trying to become
SEALs. At the jamboree, the
SEAL Challenge allowed
Scouts and Venturers to
sample the Navy’s training,
test their mettle, and find out
if they would make the cut.
“We were prepared for a
small number passing; we are
ecstatic such a large number
has passed,” says Smith.
The SEALs physical tests
build on one of their key
principles of strength of mind
to increase strength of body.
Smith says that the SEALs
believe “a human is capable
of ten times what the body is
thought to be capable of.”
Based upon these
principles, the SEALs asked a
lot for Scouts and Venturers
wanting to pass the Navy
SEAL Challenge. Even before
starting, Venturers were
required to have earned the
Ranger Award; Boy Scouts
needed Star rank or better, as
well as the following merit
badges: Citizenship in the
Nation, Personal Fitness,
Swimming, and Lifesaving.
All participants were required
to have completed their
jamboree curriculum.
Whether the participants
passed or failed in the
challenge, even taking part in
the demanding test was an
accomplishment in itself.
For those who passed, the
accomplishment is so much
the greater.
“I felt proud ... because I
was the only one in my troop
to be here, and I really tried,”
said Mason Buchanan after
receiving his patch and
certificate for completing the
SEAL Challenge successfully.


52 JOURNALISM
Writing for the News Media.
CHRONOLOGICAL STYLE
HOPE, W.Va., July 25—
“November alpha one sierra
sierra, this is kilo two bravo
sierra alpha, from the Summit
Bechtel Scout Reserve in West
Virginia, over over,” said
satellite radio operator Mike
Sprenger (W4UOO) at the
K2BSA station set up at the
2013 National Scout Jamboree.
Sprenger was transmitting
beyond the Summit, beyond
West Virginia, even beyond
Earth itself. For the first time,
on July 20, amateur radio
contact was being attempted
between the Summit and the
International Space Station.
“When I came to the
jamboree, I never thought that
I would be able to talk to
somebody in space,” said
Gavin Coyle of Nampa, Idaho.
With a motorized tracking
antenna provided by Paul
Trotter (AA4ZZ), satellite radio
Italian Air Force Maj. Luca Parmitano “juggles” fruit aboard the International
Space Station. Parmitano used a ham radio aboard the station to speak with
Scouts on the ground at the Summit.


JOURNALISM 53
.Writing for the News Media
operators Sprenger (W4UOO),
Trotter (AA4ZZ), and Ron
Wood (KØBRO) continued to
attempt contact with astronaut
Maj. Luca Parmitano
(KF5KDP) of the Italian Air
Force onboard the ISS. (Those
numbers after everyone’s
names are their ham radio
call signs, by the way.)
After several attempts,
contact was achieved at
precisely 11:34 a.m. as
Parmitano’s voice crackled
through the static.
“November alpha one
sierra sierra, good morning,
and I am waiting for your
questions,” said Maj.
Parmitano. Ten Scouts who
had completed the amateur
radio option for the Radio
merit badge at the jamboree
then asked questions provided
by NASA.
“How are robots used on
the space station?” asked Kyle
Jones of Forest Grove, Ore.
The next question came from
Will Wyland of Redding,
Conn., who asked, “How do
you communicate with your
family while you’re aboard the
space station?”
There were also Scouting-
related questions including,
“Were you in Scouting as a
youth or as an adult leader?”
as asked by Keenan Baird of
Mesa, Ariz. To the surprise of
the crowd, Maj. Parmitano
was not active in Scouting as
a youth, because he was too
“busy with other activities.”
After the nine-minute
contact with the space station,
Hometown News hosted a
press conference.
“I put this experience
as an out-of-this-world
experience,” Tyler Pincus
of Oro Valley, Ariz., said. “It
was really amazing, and I’ll
remember it for the rest
of my life.”
Andrew Brazeau of
Putnam Valley, N.Y., summed
up the extraterrestrial chat:
“This [was] a once-in-a-
lifetime experience, and I will
probably never do something
like this again.”


54 JOURNALISM
Writing for the News Media.
In the second article, some of the most interesting
information is buried in the story. Rather than stating from the
beginning that Scouts at the jamboree made contact with
astronaut Maj. Luca Parmitano at the International Space Station,
the story buries that information several paragraphs in. The
chronological story structure gives all the facts of the story
equal weight, instead of emphasizing the important facts.
The inverted pyramid method of writing news serves two
important purposes. First, it gives hurried news readers or
listeners the most important information immediately. They
need not read the whole article unless they have the time or
interest. Second, it makes the editor’s task easier. The inverted
pyramid story can be cut from the bottom, for reasons of time
or space, without losing essential details.
THE FIVE W’S AND H
The typical news story has two parts: the lead and the body.
The lead—first sentence or two—summarizes the important
facts. A good lead presents most of the six primary elements
of a news event, the “five W’s and H”: who, what, when,
where, why, and how.
If these six questions are answered in the first few sentences,
the main elements of the story should be clear to the reader.
The body of the story then elaborates on the important facts.
The least important facts are saved for last.
The Feature Story
Most news stories are hard news, full of information of
immediate importance to our lives. But readers also enjoy
soft news that entertains or inspires us, examining the people,
places, and things in our lives in a more relaxed way. Soft news
often takes the form of a feature story, offering more human
interest than the typical news article and sometimes greater
depth and more colorful writing. An announcement about the
troop’s pancake breakfast coming up this Saturday is a hard
news story. A profile of the Scoutmaster, revealing how he or
she has led 10 troop members to earn the Eagle Scout Award, is
a feature story.
You probably have read stories written using these common
forms of feature stories.


JOURNALISM 55
.Writing for the News Media
Personality profile. People have interesting lives.
This popular story form may tell how someone over-
came terrible hardship to succeed in life. It might cover
a narrow escape, an act of heroism, a grand adventure,
a secret pursuit, or community service.
Human interest story.
This story form looks
beyond hard news head-
lines to reveal how current
events are affecting real
people. Examples include
how tornado victims are
coping with the loss of
their homes; what area
high school seniors are
doing to prepare for
college; how a local
Scout troop is raising
money for summer camp.
Trend stories. These stories report on what is happening
in popular culture, such as the latest fads in clothing,
hairstyles, music, or technology. Examples include
articles on summer fashions or the popularity of
portable music players.
The how-to story. People love to learn new skills.
Whether it is how to cook a turkey, build a birdhouse,
or plan a summer vacation, the how-to story can break
a complicated task into a series of easy-to-follow steps,
usually numbered.
In-depth stories. Sometimes a feature story is an
extended report on a hard news topic. Say, for example,
the city’s subway trains are constantly breaking down.
An in-depth story, through extensive research and
interviews, may examine the causes of mechanical
failures, what engineers are doing to correct the
problems, and how repair work will affect the city
budget and the likelihood of fare increases in the future.


56 JOURNALISM
Writing for the News Media.
A good exercise for any young journalist is to interview
a person, probing with questions until you dig out
something exciting. There is something interesting
about almost everyone. Try your Scoutmaster or one
of the assistants, or a friend’s parent.
Finding Features
Finding an interesting feature story is pretty easy. Everyone
has at least one interesting story to tell. It is often just a
matter of talking to people to find out about their interests
and experiences. Or, look at the daily headlines, then find
people behind the headlines to write a feature story about.
This is a way of personalizing the news.
Features should be written in a crisp, colorful style, often
with more descriptions of actions and of people than a hard
news story. Good feature writing, like all good writing, is helped
by variety in vocabulary, sentence length, and sentence structure
and by the use of active rather than passive verbs.
Features about interesting people and in-depth articles
about community issues are important to newspapers. They
often have their own section called something like “Lifestyles,”
“Living,” “Style,” or simply “Features.”
Radio and TV news programs also make much use of
features-type material. A good example is “All Things
Considered,” a daily National Public Radio program that
includes, in addition to national news, slice-of-life stories
about everyday people all over the country and the world.
On television, news “magazine” shows like CBS’s “60 Minutes,”
PBS’s “Frontline,” and NBC’s “Dateline” offer compelling
investigative reports and personal profiles.
Writing for Magazines
Magazines were once filled with long, thoughtful articles that
covered a subject in-depth. Readers are now busier and have
far more types of mass media competing for their attention.
They don’t have the time to read a long article from beginning
to end. Editors of many magazines have responded by breaking
their pages up into shorter articles with more “points of entry.”
There may be information boxes, sidebars, maps, expanded
captions, timelines, and various other graphical displays
of information.
For more writing
tips, see the
Communication
merit badge
pamphlet.


JOURNALISM 57
.Writing for the News Media
Magazines still offer greater depth of coverage than newspa-
pers on specific subjects. But magazines often put less emphasis
on the writing and more emphasis on creative editing or pack-
aging of their content. For this reason, there is no one way to
write for magazines any longer. There is no one “magazine style”
of writing. Someone wanting to write for magazines will have
to look carefully at the target magazine and see what specific
style the magazine in question uses.
Opinion Journalism
Journalists are among the best informed citizens in the commu-
nity. They also have good skills in communicating ideas. For those
reasons, journalists are in a good position to make informed
judgments about events and to persuasively articulate those
opinions. People want objective and factual news, but citizens
also value the journalist’s informed opinions about current
events and issues.
The expression of informed opinion is almost as important
as the publication and broadcast of objective news. But news
media must take care to keep the two types of journalism
separate. That is, opinions should be segregated into clearly
labeled parts of the newspaper or broadcast, apart from the
news columns and reports. That way, readers and viewers will
know which parts are actual news and which are opinions
about the news. Then they can weigh it all and come to their
own conclusions.
THE EDITORIAL
The editorial is an expression of informed opinion. Editorial
writers try to persuade readers and listeners of their judgments
on important issues—say, that the mayor’s budget is wasteful
or that the town park should be closed at midnight to cut down
on crime. But editorial writers shouldn’t simply express these
opinions. Rather, they should carefully marshal the facts to
make a strong case in favor of these judgments. Facts are just
as important in editorials as they are in news writing.
Editorials seldom follow the inverted pyramid style. The
introduction states the issue, and the middle factually describes
important aspects of the issue. The conclusion summarizes the
points and restates the writer’s main opinion on the matter.
Many newspapers
publish unsigned
editorials,
indicating that
the judgment
expressed is not
just that of the
writer but rather
the opinion of
the newspaper’s
editorial page
staff or senior
management of
the newspaper.


58 JOURNALISM
Writing for the News Media.
THE NEWS ANALYSIS OR BACKGROUNDER
Newspapers or broadcast stations will sometimes clarify a
complex news story with a news analysis, or backgrounder.
In this special type of article or broadcast segment, a reporter
who may have been covering the story for weeks or months
steps back to explain current events by putting them into a
broader context, explaining how a situation got to be where it
is now. Examples might be an analysis of why test scores in
local schools have plummeted in recent years or how proposed
zoning changes might affect the downtown area. In this way
the reporter interprets the news, sifting through months of
reports to show readers which facts are most pertinent. This
type of article, since it involves the reporter’s opinions as
well as facts, usually is clearly labeled as analysis.
Columnist George Will is a professional
arguer. His job, he says, is to “make
arguments.” Twice a week he picks an
important topic out of the news—it
might involve politics, education,
popular culture, you name it—and
writes his opinion about it. His
columns appear on the op-ed page
in the Washington Post and are
syndicated to more than 450 other
newspapers around the United States
and Europe.
“A columnist’s job is not to tell
people what to think but to provoke
them to think,” Will says. “News
articles present the facts of the story
in the news pages of the paper.
Columnists like me, with various
points of view, hold those facts up to the bright light of opinion and
cause people to decide for themselves what they think. As columnists,
we’re paid to make arguments.”


.Writing for the News Media
COLUMNS PROVIDE VARIETY
Another form of editorial, or opinion, journalism is the column.
An opinion column is a personal essay; such columns are an
important part of journalism because citizens need a variety of
opinions and judgments from various sources.
Columns come in many forms and address numerous topics.
Columns that offer political or news commentary usually appear
on the op-ed page, opposite the editorials. Other columns may
appear in the lifestyle, metro, or community sections of the paper.
The popular “Q&A” (question and answer) format is found in
advice columns and in other columns written by experts that
answer questions about topics such as health, real estate,
auto care, home repair, travel, investing, or pets.
News media also often publish or broadcast personal
columns written by members of the community. These might
appear as guest columns on the op-ed page, or they could be
regular columns focusing on local community activities.
Right back at you with the “hi,” Chloe. As for your
question: Yes. h
DEAR PEDRO, What is your favorite topic to cover
in the magazine? Beckett D., Katy, Texas
Mostly, PB&J recipes that include tumbleweed
and alfalfa. But if you were to ask The Boss, he’d
probably say his favorite is everything. If it’s in a
Scout’s life, says he, it’s in Scout Life, says me. h
DEAR PEDRO, Show me The Boss show me
The Boss show me The Boss.
Brooks M., Brentwood, Tennessee
Trust me Brooks trust me Brooks trust me Brooks.
You don’t want to see him. h
DEAR COOLEST MAILBURRO IN THE WORLD,
I have a question: Did you ever get in trouble with
The Boss? Sebastian M., Fort Worth, Texas
Uh, maybe now … h
DEAR PEDRO, I was looking at Publication 100
of the USPS, a free history available online. It talks
about Mule Mail in 1996 delivering to the Havasupai
Indian Reservation, Supai, Arizona. I thought that’d
be interesting to you. Brant G., Indianapolis, Indiana
HEY, PEDRO! If I offered you a tumbleweed PB&J
sandwich, would you take it? Safa C., from the internet
TWPB&J? That is now all I can think about, Safa. h
DEAR PEDRO, I wanted to tell you that I find it
really amazing that you make a magazine that kids
of any age can read. I think that this is really great,
because it can allow families to share the same
magazine. This wide age range allows people to get
into Scouting and find out about Scouting.
Garrett E., Bellevue, Washington
Great thoughts, Garrett. Thanks to you — and your
entire family. As I’ve always said, at least since Safa’s
letter, the family that eats TWPB&Js together is a
family that I’d like to join. Or something like that. h
DEAR PEDRO, I have never tried alfalfa. Please
tell me: Is it good or not? Mason R., from the internet
Well, yeah … to me. Must try an APB&J. Or the
ultimate ATWP
HITCHIN’ RACK Pedro answers reader mail!GOGREEN Tell us how you helped
the environment and win!
CLICK HERE
Send your comments,
questions and anything else to
Hitchin’ Rack,
Scou
EDITORIAL DIRECTOR
Michael Goldman
MANAGING EDITOR
Paula Murphey
DESIGN DIRECTOR
Eric Ottinger
SENIOR EDITOR
Aaron Derr
ASSOCIATE EDITORS
Michael Freeman
Sheniece Chappell
SENIOR DIGITAL EDITOR
Bryan Wursten
DIGITAL EDITOR
Gina Circelli
COPY EDITOR
Lauren Iriarte
EDITORIAL ASSISTANT
Adryn Shackelford
FIELD EDITORS
Jenny Everett DiBenedetto,
Michael Lanza, Steve Mazzucchi,
Brian Payne, Bryan Wendell
ART DIRECTOR
Kevin Hurley
PHOTO EDITOR
Edna J. Lemons
PRODUCTION MANAGER
Stacy Lee
IMAGING ARTIST
Marcie Rodriguez
THE MAILBURRO
Pedro
FOR ADVERTISING INFORMATION:
877-929-5433
advertising@scouting.org
NATIONAL SALES DIRECTOR
Jay Spence
MEDIA SALES MANAGER
Nicole Cosme
AD PRODUCTION MANAGER
Kendra Tidwell
FOR SUBSCRIPTION INFORMATION
AND CUSTOMER SERVICE:
866-584-6589
scoutlife.org/contact-us
CUSTOMER SERVICE
Donna Steffy (Supervisor),
Andrea Gonzales,
Jennifer Ingram, Kermit Thomas
HONORARY CHAIR, BSA
PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES
Joe Biden
NATIONAL CHAIR, BSA
Daniel G. Ownby
PRESIDENT AND CEO
Roger C. Mosby
NATIONAL COMMISSIONER
Scott Sorrels
MAGAZINES ADVISORY CHAIR
David Talbot
NEWSSTAND CIRCULATION
DEPARTMENT:
NPS Media Group
From the publisher of Boys’ Life
since 1911, Scout Life is the
official youth publication of the
Boy Scouts of America
Dear Pedro,
When my troop went on
COVID-19 lockdown,
I wondered if we would
ever get back to meeting
in person. But with that
question still lingering, we
maintained Scout spirit, have
had quite a few Scouts rank up and
earn merit badges, and have done virtual
outings where we set up tents in our
backyards along with our stoves. Yes, COVID-19
may have limited what we can do, but my troop has
found a way to have fun in Scouting while online.
Seth H., Vancouver, Washington
One thing the pandemic has showed us, Seth,
is that Scouts are prepared for anything. Way
to keep on Scouting! Even as I write this, a lot
of us are still stuck in our corrals. If you are,
too, check out go.scoutlife.org/athome for
fun activities.
h


60 JOURNALISM
Writing for the News Media.
LETTERS TO THE EDITOR
News media are open to the opinions of their readers and
listeners. Online forums on media websites, guest editorial
columns, and the letters to the editor section of the newspaper
provide excellent opportunities to practice editorial journalism.
Try your hand at it. Write a letter to the editor of your
newspaper, or a guest editorial for your radio or TV station.
Express your opinion about global warming, school funding,
wilderness preservation, political candidates, or other issues
about which you feel strongly. You might be surprised at the
reaction you get. Many editors are delighted and surprised to
hear from younger readers, and might be more inclined to give
more space to a letter from someone younger than those they
usually hear from.
Here’s one example.
Dear Editor:
I was saddened to read your news article about
the litter problem in our community. I was especially
concerned about the large number of aluminum soft
drink and beer cans found in the park. There’s really
no excuse for that.
Scouts BSA Troop 62 has been collecting aluminum
containers—mostly cans—for recycling for more than
a year now. We collect about 5,000 cans a month, then
we take them to a recycling center. We use the money
we earn to help pay for campouts and Scouting equip-
ment. We also donate some to charity.
But our troop really is not recycling just for the
money. We’re doing it because it helps clean up our
community, and it helps Scouts to serve where we are
needed. If anyone wants us to help by recycling their
aluminum, please bring it to Parkwood Elementary
School on Olson and Elm streets between 10 a.m. and
2 p.m. on the first Saturday of each month. A Scout will
be there to take your aluminum.
Mike Brown, age 14
123 Oak St.
Central City


.Writing for the News Media
CRITICAL REVIEWS
Another form of opinion journalism is the critical review.
It provides readers and viewers with judgments about
products and services that are promoted and sold. These
may include books, movies, television shows, concerts,
sporting events, computer hardware and software, restaurant
meals, hotel accommodations, and musical recordings.
A critical review should not be just praise or criticism
about a performance or product. The review should present
an objective report based on facts. The review should explain
with illustration and example, not simply express opinions,
positive or negative.
THE ROUNDUP
Magazines often use this special type of review to cover con-
sumer products, travel destinations, or services. The roundup
can be applied to any subject category in which there are many
different examples to examine. Roundups usually start with
an overview about some trend, say, the popularity of digital
music players. Then it proceeds with individual descriptions of
numerous examples of the devices, explaining the best features
and shortcomings of each one. A travel roundup may briefly
profile a wide range of dude ranches, say, or island resorts that
specialize in scuba diving. A service roundup might describe
the pluses and minuses of all the internet service providers
available in a local community or offer a reviewer’s guide to
area barbecue restaurants, each one rated for food quality,
atmosphere, and service, with one to four stars.





.Visual Journalism
Visual Journalism
Images are an essential part of journalism. Practically every
newspaper and magazine uses pictures. In fact, the impact of
its cover photo often determines how well a particular edition
of a magazine sells on the newsstands. And of course visual
images, both still and in motion, are vital to TV news and
online news sites.
News and Feature Photography
Photography is an area of journalism where the amateur and
the hobbyist can break in on a freelance basis. If you want to
sharpen your photography skills, take your camera with you
when you travel or go an outing. Snap away if you see
something that catches your eye. It might be a bike rally,
a dozen turtles sunning themselves on a log, or members
of your Scout troop wakeboarding.
Taking a pretty picture is not what is important in
journalism. A good photo should tell a story or make a
statement. A photo of paramedics assisting injured passengers
tells a story; a photograph of an ambulance standing alone does
not. People are essential elements of almost all events. If they
are not in the picture, it probably is not the kind of visual
image that will make the viewer care about what is happening.
A professional photographer will take many shots, just
to be sure of getting the right one. A Scout Life photographer
on assignment, for example, may shoot hundreds of pictures
for one story. However, only a handful will appear
in the magazine.
Today’s cameras have advanced
features that make the photojournalist’s
job easier. For example, many cameras
have built-in motordrives or, in the case of
digital cameras, memory buffers, which let
you take multiple shots of fast-moving events
just by holding down the shutter.


64 JOURNALISM
Visual Journalism.
Let’s say a newspaper is covering the opening of the Maple Hills skate park.
Frank Brown’s editor sent a photographer to the opening ceremony with him.
The photographer shot a lot of pictures there: the mayor speaking, skaters
trying out the ramps for the first time, the mayor conversing with members
of the civic association, an accomplished skateboarder doing a stunt.
Should you ask permission to take a stranger’s picture? It is polite
to do so but not always possible. If your subject is clearly involved in a
newsworthy event, such as a traffic accident or fire, you can take pictures
without legally invading anyone’s privacy. But for a feature story that is
clearly not breaking news, you should be more respectful of people’s
privacy and talk to them about your story before asking to shoot pictures.
If you are taking photographs to be used commercially—in an advertise-
ment, for example—the subjects must give their approval and usually
must sign a model release form.
This feature allows the photographer to take more photos
in less time and capture several stop-action shots of one
motion—that skate stunt, for example. Another useful feature is
automatic bracketing, in which the camera shoots three or more
pictures in rapid succession, all at a slightly different exposure
(each a bit lighter or darker than the last). The idea is that one
of the three will be just right.


JOURNALISM 65
.Visual Journalism
Photojournalist Pete Souza has captured views of the world witnessed by
few others.
His photography has brought people to the battered streets of post-
Katrina New Orleans, the desolate mountains of Afghanistan, and
personal, revealing moments of the U.S. president. More important,
Souza’s work connects millions of readers with events and people in
powerful ways that words simply can’t.
Says Souza, “My goal is to make candid images of [the president]
that will be preserved for history. Whether I am with [the president] in
a situation room meeting or after hours with [the president’s] family,
my hope is that the body of my work will accurately and honestly show
what [he] is like as a person and as a president.”
Souza was the chief official White House photographer for President
Barack Obama and the director of the White House photo office.
A bestselling author of several photography collections, Souza has
also served as a national photographer for the Chicago Tribune
and had photographs featured in prominent publications including
National Geographic.
Pete Souza captured this
spontaneous image of
President Obama with
Jacob Philadelphia, who
had asked whether the
president’s hair was like
his own.
Pete Souza strides along the
tarmac, past the procession of
Roman Catholic cardinals who
stood ready to welcome Pope
Francis upon his arrival at Joint
Base Andrews in Maryland.


66 JOURNALISM
Visual Journalism.
Pictures Need Words
A picture may be worth a thousand words, but every picture
still needs a few words of explanation. This information, printed
on or near a photograph, is called a cutline in newspapers and
a caption in magazines. Whatever you call them, they are very
important. They are often the first (and sometimes the only)
part of the article that gets read. Here are some tips for writing
good captions and cutlines.
Digital video cameras have dropped dramatically in price, making it more
affordable to try videography. Footage can be loaded into a computer,
edited with voice-overs and text labels, then burned to a DVD. You can
create short news programs at home that might be of acceptable quality
for use by a local public access cable channel. Be sure that your video
tells an actual story—say, of your troop’s 100-mile bike ride—and that it
is presented in a news style.
Some photojournalists will tell you that the best camera is the one you
always have with you. Today, almost anyone with a smartphone
can be a photojournalist. You can use your phone to take pictures of your
latest Scout outing and publish them in your troop’s online newsletter,
or send them to Scout Life for consideration for use in the magazine
or on the website.


JOURNALISM 67
.Visual Journalism
• When you take a picture, jot down the names of all who
appear, so the names can be printed in the caption. Make
sure you spell the names correctly. If possible, sometimes it
is helpful to take an “I.D.” photo. Scout Life photographers
out on assignment, for example, will line up all the Scouts
involved in the story for a group shot, then will take down
the names and birthdates of each Scout, left to right. Having
a person’s birth date lets the editors of Scout Life get the ages
right in their story, even if the photograph is published
months after the picture was taken.
• Use the present tense in writing captions. “Scouts from Troop
19 reach (not reached) the summit of Mount Baldy.” This
makes the action of the photograph seem more immediate.
• Don’t state the obvious in a caption. “Scout sits on fallen
tree beside the trail” is obvious. “Scout Bob Smith rests after
hiking 12 miles of a 20-mile hike” brings new, interesting
information to the picture.
• Include details in the caption that aren’t found in the accom-
panying article. If possible, interview the photographer—and
the people pictured—to find out exactly what was going on
in the picture, then use a quote. This adds color and immedi-
acy, as in, “‘I was so tired I had to sit for 20 minutes before
going on,’ Bob said.”
• When laying out an article, use a different style of type for
the captions and cutlines so they are easily distinguished
from the main article.
Art, Cartoons, Typography, and Design
Journalism also needs graphic artists and designers. Many
feature articles carry line drawings instead of photographs.
In jurisdictions where cameras are not permitted in the court-
room, television stations and newspapers use artists to draw
individuals who cannot be photographed.
Graphics artists also produce maps, charts, symbols, tables,
and logos, which are names or labels in a particular style used
repeatedly to establish identity. Some magazines and the editorial
pages in newspapers use the work of editorial cartoonists. Their
cartoons project a particular point of view, often pointing up
something ironic, absurd, or dishonest. The Sunday paper would
not be complete without the Sunday comics, too.


68 JOURNALISM
Visual Journalism.
The readers of some maga-
zines—like The New Yorker and
Scout Life—expect a collection of
slice-of-life cartoons with every
issue. These cartoons often give
a periodical more appeal. What
would Scout Life be without “A
True Story of Scouts in Action”?
Besides artists, journalism
also needs graphic designers,
the people who assign the art-
work to be created and who
lay out the articles, finding
just the right arrangement
of text, display type, photo-
graphs, white (or blank)
space, and illustration. On
magazines, the director of
design is among the top
positions on the editorial
staff because the visual
impact of the publication
is so important.
Graphic design gives
a publication or website an identity, a personal-
ity that readers associate with that publication alone. Compare,
for example, the screaming headlines and the startling photo-
graphs in the National Enquirer with the much more conserva-
tive look of the New York Times, which uses more dignified
photographs and more thoughtful headlines. Even without
reading the articles, you know from the look alone that the
National Enquirer is going to be lurid and sensational, while
the New York Times is going to be reasonable and informative.
Don’t overlook the importance of typography, or the style
of type, to a publication’s design. Typography helps convey a
publication’s personality. Designers speak of families of type-
faces, such as Times New Roman or Bookman Old Style.
Within each family are sets of fonts, or all of the characters
(letters, numbers, punctuation, symbols) in a particular size
and style of type. Times New Roman, 12 point, italic, is one
font within the Times New Roman type family.
40 B O Y S L I F E . O R G F A P R I L 2 0 1 9
A TRUE STORY OF He Saved
His
Neighbor
From A
House Fire!
“Scouts In Action” subjects come from the National BSA Court of Honor. If you know
of an act of heroism that should be recognized, contact your local BSA council office for
a lifesaving or meritorious award application. Note: Consult approved safety guidelines,
as actions depicted here may not precisely follow standard procedures.
Gabriel Vivoni, 17, was returning to his
home in Mansfield, Texas, when he
saw a fire in the garage of a
neighbor’s house.
Gabriel
alerted his
parents and
called 911 as
he ran to the
garage. He knew
someone could
be inside the
home.
Gabriel pounded on the front door. When no
one answered, he ran into the burning,
smoke-filled garage.
Gabriel entered the
house through the
garage’s utility door
and yelled that there
was a fire, waking an
11-year-old boy who
was asleep on
the couch.
Gabriel helped the
startled boy leave
the home. Gabriel’s
parents met them
on the front lawn,
and everyone
quickly crossed
the street
to safety.
By the time the boy’s parents and the
fire department arrived, the fire had
spread through most of the house.
Gabriel gave the details of the
incident to the police, and the
boy’s parents thanked him
for saving their son.
First Class Scout
Gabriel Vivoni,
a member of
Troop 127
chartered to
St. Joseph
Catholic
Community
in Arlington,
Texas,
received an
Honor Medal
for his
actions.
40 S C O U T L I F E . O R G F J U N E • J U LY 2 0 2 1
GRANT MIEHM
SL_SIA.indd 40 4/22/21 10:58 AM


JOURNALISM 69
.Visual Journalism
Typography can help readers understand the layout and
architecture of a magazine, newspaper, or website. For example,
all the display headlines might use one style of type and all the
department labels (such as “Horoscope” or “Pets”) a slightly
different version within the same type family. Above all, typogra-
phy should be readable. Be particularly cautious about placing
type on photographs, which can make the letters hard to read.
Media websites need designers with specialized skills
and a good sense of graphic design, just like the designers of
print publications. They should also be familiar with the
software programs or computer programming languages that
bring interactivity and enhancements to a webpage. Some
media websites will use programmers to help designers. Others
require that the designers do the technical work themselves.
For practical purposes, a site will often use a set of forms,
or templates, with an established style. Updates—such as today’s
news headlines, pictures, and body text—can be imported into
these templates without reinventing the design each time. This
allows the designer to work on special sections or new features.





JOURNALISM 71
.Careers in Journalism
Careers in Journalism
The field of journalism needs people with a wide variety of
talents. Journalists should be broadly educated, not just focused
on one subject area. They need an informed view of the world,
and being conversant in history, geography, politics, and science
helps. A wide-ranging knowledge helps journalists distinguish
the important from the unimportant, the right from the wrong,
the true from the false in any number of subject areas they
might write about.
Journalists should be intelligent, well-organized, and
observant. They should be curious about everything—
people, current events, public affairs, science, sports,
you name it. Journalists should like people—you must
deal with news sources, public officials, editors, man-
agers, and celebrities. If you are shy, you will need to
learn how to overcome this trait.


72 JOURNALISM
Careers in Journalism.
Above all, journalists should be good communicators. An
ability to write well is at the heart of many journalism positions.
Even as a print journalist you should be able to speak well
because news is often gathered over the phone or in person.
Preparation for a Career
In journalism, hands-on learning such as through an internship
can give you the upper hand. With advances in technology,
never before has it been easier to try your hand at being a
journalist. Anyone with a computer, some basic software, and
an internet connection can do a grassroots form of journalism.
• Write or contribute to blogs, or post messages about current
events at newspapers’ reader forums.
• Design and write an online magazine (“webzine”).
• Create a newsletter and email it to your readers as an attach-
ment, and skip the postage to mail hard copies.
• Podcast your own radio-style show as an audio file on your
computer and then distribute it to listeners over the internet.
Whenever you use
the internet, be
sure you have
your parent’s
permission in
advance.
Creating your own blog is a great way to share news and opinions with
friends, family, fellow Scouts, or the world beyond. With your parent’s
permission, get online and search for free blogging services. Many require
only a name and an email address. (Establish a separate email for this
purpose; do not use your personal, everyday email.)
Start by writing about what interests you. If you have recently read a
good book or seen a good movie, you could post a review in the form of a
blog. You could write about a recent Scout outing and include photos and
quotes from your friends—all elements you would see in a mainstream
magazine or newspaper.
Unlike writers at newspapers and magazines, you won’t have an editor
when you first start your blog. You won’t have a boss telling you what to do
or how to write. This doesn’t mean your standards should be any different
from a respected, legitimate news organization. Be respectful of others in
your blog posts. Don’t post pictures without the permission of the subjects.
Be fair and balanced in your reporting. You can (and should) write posts
expressing your opinion, but resist the urge to lash out and be mean.
Most importantly, always assume that everyone you know will read
every word you post online. When you post something on the internet,
it is out there for everyone to read: parents, friends, foes, Scout leaders,
prospective or future employers—everyone.


JOURNALISM 73
.Careers in Journalism
GET INVOLVED
Most high schools have a newspaper or literary magazine.
Some have websites, radio facilities, and even TV studios.
Join a club or class that produces high school media. If your
school doesn’t have a newspaper or website, help create one.
Don’t overlook writing letters to the editor of your local
newspaper or a magazine as a way to get your ideas published.
You can also practice journalism for your Scout troop by start-
ing—or contributing to—a troop newsletter or website. The
same applies for almost every other group. Does your place
of worship or sports league have a newsletter? If so, get
involved; if not, start one.
The fastest way to improve your skills in journalism is
to have your work edited by professionals, so try to write for
established news outlets. Sometimes the local news media have
opportunities for eager young people who want to get started.
If you have proved yourself on the school newspaper, you might
get an assignment as a stringer. You might be asked to cover a
school function or sports event that the regular newspaper or
radio-TV staff can’t cover. With some luck, you might land a
part-time or summer position at a local newspaper or broad-
casting station. You might also try your hand at freelance
writing for magazines.
Always be on the lookout for good story ideas. Take your still or
video camera with you when you travel. If you see a newsworthy
event, click away and get the images to a local newspaper or TV
station as quickly as possible. They may buy your pictures or
footage and give you credit.


74 JOURNALISM
Careers in Journalism.
As a digital editor at The
Washington Post, Tim
Richardson wants his stories
to reach readers first—
wherever they happen to be.
With fewer online readers
using desktop computers,
reporters and editors must
choose headlines and images
that will quickly connect with
people scanning mobile
devices. Richardson works with the paper’s metro staff
to enhance local news coverage through a variety of
digital platforms, including breaking news, multimedia,
and social media. Noting the power of social media as
both a reporting tool and a tool for attracting roving
readers, Richardson says, “When readers find our
stories, we hope to convert them into loyal readers in
the future.”
Before arriving at The Post, Richardson was the
online managing editor at the Las Vegas Sun after an
earlier stint at The Washington Post as a multiplatform
editor. He also worked in digital media at the Naples
Daily News in Florida and The Topeka Capital-Journal
in Kansas.
Not everything in journalism has changed since
Richardson began his career. “Our responsibility to
readers remains the same: As journalists, we must
provide accurate, fair, and timely information, whether
in print, on a computer, or on a mobile phone.”
One of the best ways to get into journalism is by
studying it in college. In high school, take as many
English, history, social science, and science classes as
possible. If your school has journalism courses, take
them and also get involved with your school paper.


JOURNALISM 75
.Careers in Journalism
The Study of Journalism
More than 100 colleges and universities have journalism
departments accredited by the Accrediting Council on Education
in Journalism and Mass Communications. Colleges that don’t
have journalism courses may have campus media that you can
work on to get journalism experience while earning your degree
in another field.
A journalism degree calls for studying a broad range of
subjects. Journalism students take courses in the arts, humanities,
social sciences, physical sciences, and often foreign languages.
Hands-on learning includes newswriting, editing, photography,
computer-assisted reporting, design, television production,
typography, communication law, and journalism history. Special
fields of study include advertising and public relations. An
important part of most journalism educations is working as a staff
member on a campus newspaper or broadcast station.
Internships Open Doors. Many journalism programs help stu-
dents find paid or unpaid positions at print or broadcast outlets.
Getting good internships has become increasingly important in
the field. An internship can lead to one’s first post out of college,
simply because employers often prefer to hire someone they
have worked with as an intern rather than a stranger.
To land an internship, first check with your college
adviser about media outlets that regularly take interns from
your school. If assigned internships are part of the school’s
journalism program, you probably would earn academic credit,
too. If necessary, look for opportunities on your own by con-
tacting public relations firms and advertising agencies. Check
their websites or call the companies to inquire. In addition,
some professional organizations operate summer internship
programs for students (see the resources section at the end of
this pamphlet).
The Value of Networking. Practice networking, or keeping in
touch with a wide range of people in the field. It may land a
good internship or other opportunity for you. Start networking
in high school. Contacts you make while working for the school
paper may be valuable to you years later. The same is true of
contacts you make in college. The other journalism students
you meet, your professors, and the editors you meet during
internships all can become valuable sources.
Build your network.
Everyone you
work with as you
progress in the
field can become
a good contact
for the future.


76 JOURNALISM
Careers in Journalism.
Progressing in Journalism
How do you work your way up in journalism? You can travel
various routes, depending upon interests and opportunities.
One route is to go up the management ladder; another is to
become a specialist. A third route is a combination of the two.
A typical progression if you began as a college intern at a
newspaper might lead to an entry-level position as an editorial
assistant and cub reporter. You might then advance to general
assignment reporter. If you chose the management ladder, you
could seek editing assignments and then progress to assistant city
editor, city editor, national editor, sports editor, features editor,
or editorial page editor, and a few years as a copy editor. You
might someday become managing editor or editor in chief.
The only position above that would be the publisher or
owner of the newspaper.
An entry-level employee at a magazine would start as
editorial assistant, then assistant editor, associate editor, senior
editor, and then, perhaps, managing editor. Upper-level positions
include executive editor, deputy editor, and editor in chief.
Because of the trend toward special-interest magazines, the
profession provides opportunities to become an established
authority in a wide range of subjects.
In broadcast journalism, opportunities to specialize are
more limited than in the print media. The broadcast news
reporter can rise through the management ranks to become
the anchor (or on-the-air announcer of news), news director,
or general manager. Or, a reporter can specialize in an area
of broadcast news coverage, such as government and politics,
sports, weather, entertainment, or other fields.
The Rewards of Journalism
Most journalists don’t get rich, but salaries in the field have
improved in recent decades. The marketplace determines salary
levels. If your skills, or your specialty, are in great demand, you
will get paid more. As a general rule, news outlets with larger
readerships or audiences will pay more than those with smaller
audiences. Journalists with large national audiences, such as
network TV anchors or syndicated columnists, can make very
high incomes indeed.


JOURNALISM 77
.Careers in Journalism
Journalists make many positive contributions. By telling
the public of upcoming events, they help people get the most
out of life in their communities. By reporting on good causes,
they aid in the development of worthwhile institutions. These
personal satisfactions help make any field in journalism
meaningful and worthwhile. If you decide that this is the field
for you, welcome!
TV anchor, commentator, and
investigative reporter John Stossel
sheds light on American life like no
other newsman. He hosted a show on
Fox Business Network called “Stossel”
that focused on current consumer
issues. He also did special commentaries
on topics such as education, politics, and
parenting, and appeared on other Fox
Business Network and Fox News shows.
He has more than 40 years of experience
as a journalist. As a lung cancer patient,
he reported on the service he received
while hospitalized in New York. The
provocative account received
nearly 400,000 “likes.”
For years, Stossel worked as an
investigative reporter for ABC’s popular
newsmagazine “20/20” and also did hour-long special
reports. He became coanchor in 2003 and also hosted a
popular weekly segment titled “Give Me a Break,” that
pointed out some absurdity about modern life, from
popular culture to government regulations.
Stossel has received 19 Emmy Awards. The National
Press Club has honored him five times for excellence in
consumer reporting. He has also won the George Polk
Award for Outstanding Local Reporting and the George
Foster Peabody Award.


78 JOURNALISM
Journalism Resources.
Scouting Literature
Communication, Digital Technology,
Graphic Arts, Law, Moviemaking,
Photography, Public Speaking, Radio,
Signs, Signals, and Codes, and Theater
merit badge pamphlets
With your parent’s permission, visit
the Boy Scouts of America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org,
for a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.
Books
The Associated Press. The Associated
Press Stylebook and Briefing on
Media Law. Associated Press, 2020.
Briggs, Mark. Journalism Next:
A Practical Guide to Digital
Reporting and Publishing,
3rd ed. CQ Press, 2016.
Brooks, Brian S., and James L. Pinson.
The Art of Editing in the Age of
Convergence, 11th ed.
Routledge, 2018.
Cappon, Rene J. The Associated Press
Guide to News Writing, 4th ed.
Peterson’s, 2019.
Craig, Steve. Sports Writing:
A Beginner’s Guide. Discover
Writing Press, 2002.
Ferguson, Donald L., and Jim Patten.
Opportunities in Journalism Careers.
VGM Career Books, 2001.
Foust, James C. Online Journalism:
Principles and Practices of News
for the Web, 3rd ed. Routledge, 2011.
Gibbs, Cheryl K., and Tom Warhover.
Getting the Whole Story: Reporting
and Writing the News. Guilford
Press, 2002.
Gillmor, Dan. We the Media: Grassroots
Journalism by the People, for the
People. O’Reilly, 2006.
Goldberg, Jan. Careers in Journalism.
McGraw-Hill, 3rd ed., 2005.
Gormly, Eric K. Writing and
Producing Television News, 2nd ed.
Blackwell Publishing, 2004.
Hamilton, John Maxwell. Journalism’s
Roving Eye: A History of American
Foreign Reporting. LSU Press, 2009.
Hewitt, Hugh. Blog: Understanding
the Information Reformation
That’s Changing Your World.
Thomas Nelson, 2006.
Kalbfeld, Brad. Associated Press
Broadcast News Handbook.
McGraw-Hill, 2001.
Journalism Resources


JOURNALISM 79
.Journalism Resources
Kobre, Kenneth. Photojournalism:
The Professionals’ Approach,
7th ed. Routledge, 2016.
Rich, Carole. Writing and Reporting
News: A Coaching Method, 8th ed.
Cengage Learning, 2016.
Organizations and Websites
American Society of Journalists
and Authors
355 Lexington Ave., 15th Floor
New York, NY 10017-6603
www.asja.org
Associated Collegiate Press
2829 University Ave. SE, Suite 720
Minneapolis, MN 55414
www.studentpress.org/acp
Association of Magazine Media
www.magazine.org
National Association of Broadcasters
1771 N St. NW
Washington, DC 20036
www.nab.org
National Freedom of Information
Coalition
3208 Weimer Hall
P.O. Box 118400
University of Florida–College of
Journalism and Communications
Gainesville, FL 32611-8400
www.nfoic.org
National Institute for Computer-
Assisted Reporting Inc.
www.nicar.org
National Scholastic Press
Association
2829 University Ave. SE, Suite 720
Minneapolis, MN 55414
www.studentpress.org/nspa
The Poynter Institute
www.poynter.org
Society of Professional Journalists
Eugene S. Pulliam National
Journalism Center
3909 N. Meridian St., Suite 200
Indianapolis, IN 46208
www.spj.org
Student Press Law Center
splc.org
Acknowledgments
The Boy Scouts of America is
grateful to the men and women
serving on the National Merit Badge
Subcommittee for the improvements
made in updating this pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration Credits
American Broadcasting Co. (ABC),
courtesy—page 77
Chicago Sun-Times, courtesy—page 40
Grant Miehm—page 68
NASA, courtesy—page 52
Tim and Cara Richardson, courtesy—
page 74


80 JOURNALISM
Journalism Resources.
Shutterstock.com—cover (notebook,
©peerasak kamngoen; microphone,
©Richard Peterson; laptop, ©mstanley;
video camera, ©Andrey Zyk; photo
camera, ©Tatiana Popova); pages 2
(©Suslik1983), 3 (©Stock image), 5
(©Fotosr52), 6 (graduates, ©Rawpixel.
com; animals, ©dimakig; goalkeeper,
©Sergey Kuznecov, cheering crowd,
©dwphotos; cyclists, ©AHMAD FAIZAL
YAHYA), 7 (©TungCheung), 8
(©Monkey Business Images), 11 and
12 (©Rawpixel.com), 14 (©Tomislav
Zidanic), 18 (©bikeriderlondon), 19
(©GaudiLab), 20 (©Andrey_Popov), 22
(©Rawpixel.com), 23 (©Aigars
Reinholds), 24 (©antoniodiaz), 25
(©Dragon Images), 27 (©waldru), 30
(©Velychko), 33 (©GaudiLab), 36 (©DW
labs Incorporated), 37 (©Rido), 38
(©DW labs Incorporated), 42
(©Menna), 46 (©Stephen Coburn), 47
(©Scanrail1), 49 (keyboard, ©isak55),
61 (©Yeamake), 64 (©lzf), 71
(©Liukov), 73 (©mangostock), and 80
(©ESB Professional)
Scott Wallace, courtesy; photo by Jia
Liming—page 34
Washington Post Writers Group,
courtesy—page 58
The White House/Chuck Kennedy, cour-
tesy—page 65 (Catholic cardinals)
The White House/Pete Souza,
courtesy—pages 62 (all) and 65
(Jacob Philadelphia)
Wikipedia.org/Geni, courtesy—page 10
Wikipedia.org/George H. Williams,
courtesy—page 9
XM Satellite Radio, 2007, courtesy—
page 44
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of
or are protected by the Boy Scouts
of America.
Tom Copeland Jr.—page 50
Mark Duncan—page 63
M.P. King—page 48
Brian Payne—pages 13, 26, 31, 32, 43,
and 66
Michael Roytek—page 70 (iPhone
reporter)


MERIT BADGE LIBRARY
Though intended as an aid to youth in Scouts BSA, and qualified Venturers and Sea
Scouts in meeting merit badge requirements, these pamphlets are of general interest
and are made available by many schools and public libraries. The latest revision date
of each pamphlet might not correspond with the copyright date shown below, because
this list is corrected only once a year. Any number of merit badge pamphlets may
be revised throughout the year; others are simply reprinted until a revision becomes
necessary. Always check www.scouting.org for the latest requirements.
If a Scout has already started working on a merit badge when a new edition for that
pamphlet is introduced, they may continue to use the same merit badge pamphlet to
earn the badge and fulfill the requirements therein. In other words, the Scout need not
start over again with the new pamphlet and possibly revised requirements.
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA • SUPPLY GROUP
NATIONAL DISTRIBUTION CENTER To place an order,
2109 Westinghouse Boulevard call customer service
P.O. Box 7143 toll-free 800-323-0736
Charlotte, NC 28241-7143 or go to
www.scoutshop.org
Merit Badge Pamphlet Year
American Business 2020
American Cultures 2020
American Heritage 2020
American Labor 2018
Animal Science 2020
Animation 2020
Archaeology 2019
Archery 2019
Architecture and
Landscape Architecture 2020
Art 2020
Astronomy 2021
Automotive Maintenance 2020
Aviation 2019
Backpacking 2020
Basketry 2020
Bird Study 2019
Bugling (see Music)
Camping 2020
Canoeing 2019
Chemistry 2020
Chess 2020
Citizenship in the
Community 2020
Citizenship in the Nation 2020
Citizenship in the World 2020
Climbing 2020
Coin Collecting 2020
Communication 2019
Composite Materials 2008
Cooking 2020
Crime Prevention 2020
Cycling 2020
Dentistry 2020
Digital Technology 2020
Disabilities Awareness 2020
Dog Care 2020
Drafting 2008
Electricity 2021
Electronics 2020
Emergency Preparedness 2019
Energy 2019
Engineering 2019
Entrepreneurship 2019
Environmental Science 2020
Exploration 2016
Family Life 2016
Farm Mechanics 2019
Merit Badge Pamphlet Year
Fingerprinting 2019
Fire Safety 2020
First Aid 2020
Fish & Wildlife
Management 2020
Fishing 2019
Fly-Fishing 2019
Forestry 2019
Game Design 2020
Gardening 2020
Genealogy 2020
Geocaching 2020
Geology 2019
Golf 2020
Graphic Arts 2020
Hiking 2020
Health-Care Professions
(was Medicine) 2021
Home Repairs 2020
Horsemanship 2020
Indian Lore 2020
Insect Study 2019
Inventing 2019
Journalism 2019
Kayaking 2019
Law 2019
Leatherwork 2019
Lifesaving 2019
Mammals 2019
Medicine (see
Health-Care Professions)
Metalwork 2021
Mining in Society 2014
Model Design
and Building 2019
Motorboating 2021
Moviemaking 2019
Music and Bugling 2019
Nature 2020
Nuclear Science 2020
Oceanography 2020
Orienteering 2019
Painting 2019
Personal Fitness 2019
Personal Management 2020
Pets 2020
Photography 2020
Pioneering 2020
Merit Badge Pamphlet Year
Plant Science 2018
Plumbing 2020
Pottery 2020
Programming 2020
Public Health 2019
Public Speaking 2020
Pulp & Paper 2020
Radio 2020
Railroading 2019
Reading 2020
Reptile &
Amphibian Study 2020
Rifle Shooting 2020
Robotics 2020
Rowing 2019
Safety 2020
Salesmanship 2019
Scholarship 2019
Scouting Heritage 2019
Scuba 2009
Sculpture 2019
Search & Rescue 2020
Shotgun Shooting 2019
Signs, Signals, Codes 2015
Skating 2019
Small Boat Sailing 2019
Snow Sports 2020
Soil & Water Conservation 2019
Space Exploration 2020
Sports 2020
Stamp Collecting 2019
Surveying 2020
Sustainability 2019
Swimming 2019
Textile 2019
Theater 2019
Traffic Safety 2019
Truck Transportation 2008
Veterinary Medicine 2020
Water Sports 2019
Weather 2019
Welding 2019
Whitewater 2019
Wilderness Survival 2020
Woodcarving 2020
Woodwork 2020


W W W.SCOUTSHOP.ORG
The Supply Group is
ready to be a partner
on your tr ail to
Eagle through high
adventure. The
adventure is your s,
and we are ready
with the gear you
will need. You can
depend on the latest
in lightweight,
dur able, qualit y
gear that will
meet and surpass
your toughest
requirements.
n the road to
high adventure
northern tier
florida sea base
philmont scout ranch
eagle scout
the summitSKU 629415
35912 2021 Printing
FPO