JournAlism
e
Headlin
Lead

nt
Importta
Fac
Fact
Fact
Fact

BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES

JOURNALISM

J
Journalism
1. Explain what freedom of the press is and how the First Amendment
guarantees that you can voice your opinion. In your discussion, tell how
to distinguish between fact and opinion, and explain the terms libel,
slander, defamation, fair comment and criticism, public figure, privacy,
and malice. Discuss how these matters relate to ethics in journalism.
2. Do either A OR B:
(a) Newspaper, magazine, and online journalism
(1) All on the same day, read a local newspaper, a national newspaper,
a newsmagazine, and (with your parent’s permission) an online news
source. From each source, clip, read, and compare a story about the
same event. Tell your counselor how long each story is and how fair
and accurate the stories are in presenting different points of view.
Tell how each source handled the story differently, depending on its
purpose or audience.
(2) Visit the office of a newspaper, magazine, or internet news site.
Ask for a tour of the various divisions (editorial, business, and printing).
During your tour, talk to an executive from the business side about
management’s relations with reporters, editors, and photographers and
what makes a “good” newspaper, magazine, or internet news site.
(b) Radio and television journalism
(1) All on the same day, watch a local and national network newscast,
listen to a radio newscast, and (with your parent’s permission) view a
national broadcast news source online. List the different news items and
features presented, the different elements used, and the time in minutes
and seconds and the online space devoted to each story. Compare the
story lists and discuss whether the stories are fair and accurate. Explain
why different news outlets treated the stories differently and/or presented
a different point of view.
(2) Visit a radio or television station. Ask for a tour of the various
departments, concentrating on those related to news broadcasts. During
your tour, talk to the station manager or other station management
executive about station operations, particularly how management and
the news staff work together, and what makes a “good” station. If possible,
go with a reporter to cover a news event.
143

3. Discuss the differences between a hard news story and a feature story. Explain
what is the “five W’s and H.” Then do ONE of the following:
(a) Choose a current or an unusual event of interest to you, and write either
a hard news article OR a feature article about the event. Gear the article for
print OR audio OR video journalism. Share your article with your counselor.
(b) With your parent’s permission and counselor’s approval, interview someone in your community who is influential because of his or her leadership,
talent, career, or life experiences. Then present to your counselor either a
written or oral report telling what you learned about this person.
(c) With your parent’s permission and counselor’s approval, read an autobiography written by a journalist you want to learn more about. Write an article
that tells what you learned about this person and the contributions this person
has made to the field of journalism.
(d) Attend a Scouting event and write a 200-word article (feature or hard news)
about the event. Use either the inverted pyramid style or the chronological
style. Review the article with your counselor, then submit it to your community
newspaper or BSA local council or district newsletter for consideration.
4. Attend a public event and do ONE of the following:
(a) Write two newspaper articles about the event, one using the inverted
pyramid style and one using the chronological style.
(b) Using a radio or television broadcasting style, write a news story, a feature
story, and a critical review of the event.
(c) Take a series of photographs to help tell the story of the event in pictures.
Include news photos and feature photos in your presentation. Write a brief
synopsis of the event as well as captions for your photos.
5. Find out about three career opportunities in journalism. Pick one and find out
the education, training, and experience required for this profession. Discuss this
with your counselor, and explain why this profession might interest you.

144

Journalism Resources.

Journalism Resources
Scouting Literature
Cinematography, Communications,
Computers, Graphic Arts, Law,
Photography, Public Speaking, Radio,
and Theater merit badge pamphlets
For more information about
Scouting-related resources, visit
the BSA’s online retail catalog
(with your parent’s permission)
at http://www.scoutstuff.org.

Books
Brooks, Brian S., James L. Pinson, and
Jack Z. Sissors. The Art of Editing,
8th ed. Allyn & Bacon, 2005.
Cappon, Rene J. The Associated Press
Guide to News Writing, 2nd ed.
Associated Press, 1991.
Craig, Steve. Sports Writing:
A Beginner’s Guide. Discover
Writing Press, 2002.
Ferguson, Donald L. Opportunities
in Journalism Careers.
McGraw-Hill, 2001.
Foust, James C. Online Journalism:
Principles and Practices of News for
the Web. Holcomb Hathaway, 2005.

78    JOURNALISM

Gibbs, Cheryl K., and Tom Warhover.
Getting the Whole Story: Reporting
and Writing the News. Guilford
Press, 2002.
Gillmor, Dan. We the Media: Grassroots
Journalism by the People, for the
People. O’Reilly, 2004.
Goldberg, Jan. Careers in
Journalism. McGraw-Hill,
3rd ed., 2005.
Gormly, Eric K. Writing and
Producing Television News.
Blackwell Pub., 2004.
Hewitt, Hugh. Blog: Understanding
the Information Reformation
That’s Changing Your World.
Nelson Business, 2005.
Hohenberg, John. Foreign
Correspondence: The Great Reporters
and Their Times. Syracuse
University Press, 1995.
Kalbfeld, Brad. Associated Press
Broadcast News Handbook.
McGraw-Hill, 2001.
Sloan, W. David (editor).
American Journalism: History,
Principles, Practices. McFarland
& Company, 2002.

.Journalism Resources

Organizations and Web Sites
American Society of Journalists
and Authors
1501 Broadway, Suite 302
New York, NY 10036
Web site: http://www.asja.org
American Society
of Magazine Editors
Web site: http://www.magazine.org
Broadcast Education Association
Web site: http://www.beaweb.org
Freedom Forum First
Amendment Center
Web site:
http://www.firstamendmentcenter.org
Media Law Guide
The Freedom of Information Center
133 Neff Annex
University of Missouri–Columbia
Columbia, MO 65211
Web site: http://foi.missouri.edu
National Association of Broadcasters
1771 N Street NW
Washington, DC 20036
Web site: http://www.nab.org
National Institute for ComputerAssisted Reporting Inc.
Web site: http://www.nicar.org
The Poynter Institute
Web site: http://www.poynteronline.org
Society of Professional Journalists
Eugene S. Pulliam National
Journalism Center
3909 N. Meridian St.
Indianapolis, IN 46208
Web site: http://www.spj.org

Student Media Sourcebook
National Scholastic Press Association
Associated Collegiate Press
2221 University Ave. SE, Suite 121
Minneapolis, MN 55414
Web site: http://studentpress.journ
.umn.edu/sourcebook
Student Press Law Center
Web site:
http://www.splc.org/legalresearch.asp

Acknowledgments
The Boy Scouts of America is grateful
to Scott S. Stuckey for writing this
new edition of the Journalism merit
badge pamphlet. Mr. Stuckey is a
senior editor at National Geographic
Traveler magazine and is the former
editor of Boys’ Life magazine.
Thanks to members of the National
Newspaper Association, Columbia,
Missouri, who so graciously assisted
with reviewing the manuscript and
devoting their time and expertise to
this project. In particular, thanks to
Mike Buffington for coordinating
that effort.
We appreciate the Quicklist
Consulting Committee of the Association for Library Service to Children,
a division of the American Library
Association, for its assistance with
updating the resources section of this
merit badge pamphlet.

JOURNALISM    79

