STEM-Based
WELDING


WELDING
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


35974
ISBN 978-0-8395-3430-3
©2025 Scouting America
2025 Printing
Note to the Counselor
The Welding merit badge must be taught by a qualified person
who is highly experienced in welding and is knowledgeable about
various types of welding processes, specifically oxyacetylene
welding, shielded metal arc welding, gas metal arc welding, and
flux-cored arc welding.
The Welding merit badge offers Scouts an opportunity to learn
four welding processes commonly used in industrial workshops
and in home “garage” shops. Home versions of the equipment your
Scouts will need can usually be found without a great investment.
Portable versions for field use during Scout outings can sometimes
be found, as well. During summer camp, compact electrical
welding equipment can be powered from a simple 120-volt circuit
or from a portable generator or self-contained power supply. If you
are using oxy-fuel welding equipment, be aware that it is not
powered by electricity.
You are encouraged to enrich each Scout’s experience
by drawing upon your professional knowledge and expertise.
However, only the methods, techniques, and materials discussed
in this book as appropriate for the Welding merit badge should
be attempted. Keep in mind that as a merit badge counselor, you
may not add or delete requirements, or change them to make
them simpler or more difficult. If a Scout develops an enhanced
interest in welding and wants to acquire skills beyond the level of
this booklet, encourage the Scout to pursue additional training.
Many high schools, community colleges, technical schools, and
union halls offer training opportunities in welding to students
who are of appropriate age and ability level.


WELDING 3
See the First
Aid, Composite
Materials,
Home Repairs,
Woodwork,
Emergency
Preparedness,
and Safety
merit badge
pamphlets and the
Scouting Safely
webpage for more
information about
safety, first aid,
and managing
risks. The “Health
and Safety”
chapter includes
a useful checklist
for a welder’s
first-aid kit.
Scouts who are pursuing the Welding merit badge will
require direct adult supervision. They will be working with
molten metals, electric arcs, welding fumes, and power
tools that, if misused, can cause serious injury. Personal
protective equipment including eye protection, hearing
protection, heavy gloves, and sturdy footwear must be in use at all times
when Scouts are welding. There are no exceptions.


4 WELDING
Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Welding or check Scoutbook
for the latest requirements.


WELDING 5





WELDING 7
Contents
What Is Welding? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Health and Safety . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Welding and Cutting Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
Preparation for Welding and Cutting. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
Welding for the Novice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
Careers in Welding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80
Glossary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 82
Welding Resources. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87


During World War II, the country depended heavily on women to fill roles traditionally
held by men. These women arc welders worked at a plant that produced B-25
“Billy Mitchell” bombers and P-51 “Mustang” fighter planes.


WELDING 9
.What Is Welding?
What Is Welding?
You may wonder what it means to weld. Welding is the process
of joining with a weld—joining or combining similar pieces of
metal by heating them with a flame torch or an electric current,
then hammering or pressing them together while they are soft.
Welding can also be done by melting plastic or metal into the
joint of a similar material. The temperature range for welding
is 3,000 to 10,000 degrees Fahrenheit.
Welding plays a major role in our modern world, and
mastery of the skill can lead to exciting career opportunities.
Someday, you may have an opportunity to experience exciting
new career paths in welding. There are more than 80 welding,
cutting, and welding-related processes, only a few of which
will be covered in this booklet.
Terms in boldface,
like welding,
can be found in
the glossary at
the back of
this pamphlet.
Astronaut Buzz Aldrin, who was a Scout, gives credit
to welders for helping him become one of the first
humans to walk on the moon.
The American Welding
Society was formed in
1919 by 20 members of
the Wartime Welding Committee of the Emergency Fleet
Corporation under the leadership of Comfort Avery
Adams. This nonprofit organization is dedicated to the
advancement of welding and allied processes. It is also
closely involved with setting safety standards within
the industry.
®





WELDING 11
.Health and Safety
Health and Safety
On the following pages, you will learn safety procedures to
follow when arc welding.
Staying Safe While Welding
Arc welding uses an electric current that generates intense heat
and emits intense light, both extremely dangerous. It is essential
that you thoroughly understand all safety precautions before you
begin. Carelessness or ignoring safety practices can be damaging
or even fatal to you and to anyone who is nearby.
Always read the warning labels for every piece of equipment
or component and filler metals you use. If you are ever in doubt
about a safety issue, ask your merit badge counselor. Let’s take
a look at some of the risks.
Safety Basics
Arc welding, oxy-fuel welding, and oxy-fuel cutting all share one
characteristic: The harmful and intense infrared and ultraviolet
rays that are emitted by the welding process will damage unpro-
tected eyes and exposed skin, kind of like getting a sunburn—only
worse. When you are welding, you must always protect yourself.
The information presented here will help you stay safe during
welding activities.
Always have a fire extinguisher nearby. When welding,
you must always be conscious of fire protection and keep a class
ABC fire extinguisher within easy reach, mounted at shoulder
level. Fire extinguishers should be checked monthly to ensure
the tank is full and the pressure is normal. If anything appears
out of the ordinary, replace the extinguisher or have it profes-
sionally serviced.


12 WELDING
Health and Safety.
Welder’s First-Aid Kit
These items are typically found in a welder’s first-aid kit, which is
extensive and geared to treat burns, eye irritations, cuts, sprains, and
common welder injuries.
• 32 adhesive bandages (1” x 3”)
• 6 extra-large adhesive bandages
• 10 PVP iodine wipes
• 12 BZK antiseptic wipes
• 10 triple antibiotic individual packets
• 5 burn gel packets (1
⁄8 oz.)
• 1 Foille® burn ointment (1
⁄2-oz. tube)
• 1 burn dressing
• 10 sterile dressing pads (3” x 3”)
• 4 sterile oval eye pads
• Eye wash solution (three 1
⁄2-oz. bottles)
• 2 sterile combine pads (5” x 9”)
• 1 triangular bandage with pins (40” x 40” x 56”)
• 1 sterile conforming gauze bandage (3”)
• 1 instant cold pack
• 1 spool of adhesive tape (1
⁄2” x 5 yards)
• 1 pair of bandage scissors (steel, 5 1
⁄2”)
• 8 nonlatex vinyl gloves (large)
• 1 pair of forceps
• First-aid manual (such as one from the American Red Cross)


WELDING 13
.Health and Safety
Button up and wear the proper clothing for protection
from UV and infrared rays. Long-sleeved shirts of tightly
woven, 100 percent wool (never synthetic fabrics) with buttoned
cuffs and a collar (no pockets) provide the best protection from
UV and infrared radiation, flying sparks, hot or melted metal,
and flames. Wear long pants with no cuffs, no holes, and no
frays (which can collect sparks and hot metal), and do not tuck
pants into boots or shoes. It is best to wear dark colors, which
will not reflect as much light as light-colored clothing. Wear a
cap to help protect your head.
A class ABC fire extinguisher is a multipurpose,
dry-chemical extinguisher useful for a welding
environment. If you ever need to use an extinguisher,
make sure you are between the fire and an exit. If the
fire can’t be controlled, you need a quick way out. For
more information about fire extinguishers, see the
Fire Safety merit badge pamphlet.
It takes only one
spark to start a
fire. Be aware
of the location
of fire alarms
and evacuation
routes. Thoroughly
inspect your
entire area before
beginning a weld.
A fully protected welder wears the proper clothing along with a
welding helmet, safety glasses with side shields, leather sleeves,
leather gloves, and leather shoes or leather boots. Wearing
protective leather clothing minimizes the risk of fire and burns
from spatter. Store leather garments in a well-ventilated area.


14 WELDING
Health and Safety.
Dark clothing helps protect a welder from the arc’s harmful rays.
Wool offers the best protection, but heavy cotton will do. For
added safety, wear another layer of any of these: leather welding
jacket, trousers, aprons, sleeves, or bibs.
Wear close-fitting
clothing. Loose or
baggy clothes can
easily get caught
in machinery.
Spatter (liquid metal droplets) can spray up to 35 feet
from the work area. These sparks can quickly start
a fire if they touch flammable material. That is why
welders must wear only certain types of clothing.
Wearing proper clothing will also help prevent most
welding-related burns. Clothing and shoes made from
synthetic fabrics like polyester or rayon can melt from
the arc’s extreme heat, causing severe burns.
Clean clothing, free of grease, holes, frays or other
contaminants, is less likely to catch fire than dirty,
greasy clothing.


WELDING 15
.Health and Safety
During arc welding, never roll up your sleeves or cuff
your pants. All clothing should be completely buttoned with
no frays or tatters. It’s best to wear a shirt that has no pockets.
If your shirt has pockets, close, button, or tape them shut to
prevent sparks from falling into them.
Wear flame-resistant leather gloves. Keep your welding
gloves dry, and check them for tears and rips. Take care of your
gloves. If leather welding gloves get too close to excessive heat,
they will shrink and distort, making them uncomfortable and
eventually unusable.
Wear the proper footwear. Fully laced high-top leather
boots provide the best protection. Keep them dry. Because
sparks can fall into low-top shoes, wear smooth-top leather
work boots, preferably with steel toes. Wear pants outside your
work boots to prevent sparks from falling into your boots. Store
boots in a clean, dry area.
Never handle hot metal! Welding gloves are
not intended for handling hot metal. Use pliers
or vise grips when handling parts that have just
been welded.
Do not leave any skin exposed. A welding
helmet or welding shield is designed to protect your
eyes and face from the arc’s harmful rays and intense
light. You must wear face and eye protection during
any welding process. Tinted glasses with proper
shade, or goggles must be used with gas welding
and cutting.
During welding, any exposed skin may get burned from
spatter and UV rays. Always protect yourself.
Never handle
hot metal!
Safe welding starts
with the proper attire.


16 WELDING
Health and Safety.
Always wear eye protection when you are welding or
when you are near anyone else who is welding. Welder’s
flash, also described as sunburn on the eye, is known to doctors
as photokeratitis. It is caused by exposure to the ultraviolet
radiation given off by the welding arc. This affliction can
cause extreme pain, swelling, fluid secretion, and temporary
blindness. Usually, symptoms will begin to be felt several hours
after exposure. Do not let this happen to you. Prevent injury
from welder’s flash by always wearing eye protection with the
proper shade lens when you are welding or when you are near
any welding activity.
Protecting yourself is the first step in safe welding.
If you have been welding and your eyes feel sunburned
or you are having difficulty seeing, seek a doctor’s care
immediately. Welder’s flash is usually a temporary
condition, but repeated exposure can lead to permanent
injury. Protect yourself from the arc’s harmful rays
by always wearing proper protective equipment for
welding and cutting.
When welding,
always wear
a face shield
and protective
clothing.


WELDING 17
.Health and Safety
Remove all jewelry (watches, rings, etc.) before welding.
Since you will be working around electricity and very high
temperatures, wearing jewelry and watches is out of the question.
Keep the welding area neat and clean. With flying sparks,
anything flammable will pose a fire hazard. Remove all flammable
materials, trash, and any potential fire hazard.
Always be aware of others in the welding area.
Onlookers must be protected, either with a welding screen or
welding helmet with proper shade lens, depending on how
near they are to the welding activity. They should maintain a
proper distance from the arc and have adequate protection.
Even after you have finished welding, if you and others
remain in the work area, you must continue to wear eye
protection with side shields because of the risk of flying
sparks or debris, especially while chipping slag (the solidified
flux that forms on the weld bead) from a workpiece.
Protect Your Eyes
Something in the eye is not just painful—it could endanger your eyesight.
For protection, always wear safety goggles and additional protective
equipment as needed when welding or in an area where others are
welding. Protective eyewear will also keep harmful fumes and vapors
from hurting your eyes.
If a foreign object gets in your eye, do not rub the eye; rubbing might
scratch the cornea (the clear covering of the colored part of the eye). Blink
your eyes; tears might flush out the object. If that doesn’t work, wash your
hands with soap and water, then try to flush out the particles with clean
running water or clean water poured from a glass or bottle.
Foreign matter that is embedded in the eye or that will not wash out
must be treated by a physician.
Stabilize the object if possible
and cover the injured eye with
a dry, sterile gauze pad. Seek
immediate medical attention.


18 WELDING
Health and Safety.
Always wear a welding helmet for protection from
the arc’s dangerously bright light and harmful rays.
Be sure your helmet has no cracks or breaks that
could let light inside. Always use a plastic cover
inside and outside of the lens to protect the filter
lens. If the plastic cover lens becomes excessively
scratched or dirty, remove and/or replace it.
Guide for Shade Numbers
Operation Electrode Size
1
⁄32 Inch (mm)
Arc Current (A) Minimum
Protective
Shade
Suggested
Shade No.
(Comfort)
Shielded metal
arc welding
<3 (2.5)
3–5 (2.5–4)
5–8 (4–6.4)
>8 (6.4)
<60
60–160
160–250
250–500
7
8
10
11
—
10
12
14
Gas Metal
Arc Welding
and Flux Cored
Arc Welding
<60
60–160
160–250
250–500
7
10
10
10
—
11
12
14
Gas tungsten
arc welding
and plasma
arc cutting
<50
50–150
150–500
8
8
10
10
12
14
Oxy-fuel gas
welding
Plate thickness
<1
⁄8”
1
⁄8”–1
⁄2”
>1
⁄2”
Plate thickness
<3mm
3–13mm
>13mm
4 or 5
5 or 6
6 or 8
Oxy-fuel gas
cutting
Plate thickness
<1”
Plate thickness
<25mm
3 or 4
Proper filter lens shading for arc welding
The chart shows the appropriate shading for arc welding processes. Begin
with the darkest shade recommended for the process you are using; then
move one shade lighter at a time until you find the most comfortable one
while still adhering to the standard. Auto-darkening welding shields that
automatically darken when the arc is struck are also available.


WELDING 19
.Health and Safety
Always wear an approved welding helmet while welding.
Wearing a welding helmet allows you to safely view the arc through
a window with a filter plate that removes damaging rays and light.
The filter plate is protected from spatter and debris by a clear lens
made of plastic or glass. Filter plates are available in various shades,
ranging from darker to lighter. The higher the shade’s number, the
more shading it provides.
Risk of Burns and Fire
The electric arc is extremely hot. Temperatures can reach 10,000
degrees Fahrenheit or higher. Exposure to this intense heat poses
an extreme risk of burns or of starting a fire from the spatter.
Be sure your work area is free of combustible and
flammable materials, including gas, oil, and grease, and that
these materials are at least 35 feet from any welding activity.
Commonly ignited substances are trash, wood, fabric, boxes,
papers, rags, plastics, and chemicals. If you are welding in a
Prevention goes hand in hand with mitigation, which means “to lessen
in force or intensity” and “to make less severe.” By taking precautions
to manage risk and the possibility of injury, you can be prepared to
anticipate, help prevent, mitigate, and respond to just about any incident
that might happen while welding.
The American
Welding Society
sets the safety
standards for the
amount of shading
needed for any
welding process.
The shade you use
is specific to the
welding process,
the amount of
amperage, and the
size of electrode
you use.
Always read all warning labels on arc welding components and
filler metals container.


20 WELDING
Health and Safety.
questionable area, place fire shields or flame-resistant blankets
around the welding area, and have a responsible fire watcher
keep watch for you. Continue inspecting for fire for 30 minutes
after welding.
First Aid for Thermal Burns. Superficial burns are mild
burns that affect only the outer layer of skin. Treat them by
holding the burn under cold water or applying cool, wet com-
presses until the pain eases. Partial-thickness burns are more
serious than superficial burns and affect the outer layer of skin
and part of the layer of skin below it. They typically include a
reddening and blistering of the skin. To treat such burns, first
remove the person from the source of the burn. Cool the burned
area with cold, running water until the pain is relieved. Let the
burn dry, then protect it with a loosely applied, sterile gauze
pad and bandage.
Full-thickness burns are very serious. They
destroy the outer layer of skin and the layer below
it. A victim who has been exposed to open flames,
electricity, or chemicals may sustain full-thickness
burns. The skin may be burned away and the flesh
charred. If nerves are damaged, the victim may feel no pain.
Such burns constitute a medical emergency. Do not try to
remove any clothing, as it may be sticking to the victim’s
flesh. After cooling the burn, cover the burned area with dry,
sterile dressings. Seek immediate medical attention.
Risk of Electrical Shock
One of the most serious risks to the welder is electrical shock.
An electrical shock of more than 30 volts can be fatal. Arc welding
presents the risk of both primary voltage shock and secondary
voltage shock. Primary voltage shock occurs when the power is
on and someone simultaneously touches a lead inside the welding
machine and either the welding machine or other grounded metal.
The shock can be between 120 and 480 volts.
Secondary voltage shock will occur if you touch the electrode
while another part of your body touches the workpiece. If you
touch both of these components at the same time, you will receive
an electrical shock ranging from 60 to 100 volts. The higher the
voltage in an electrical circuit, the more serious the electrical shock
will be.
For more informa-
tion about burns,
see the First Aid
merit badge
pamphlet.
Leather high-top
work boots will
help protect your
ankles and feet.


WELDING 21
.Health and Safety
Always remember that electricity easily
flows through water. Therefore, when you
are arc welding, you must stay dry. Never
weld with wet gloves. Even wetness from
perspiration is dangerous. Wear proper
welding clothing to maintain insulation
between yourself and your work.
Before you begin welding, be sure your
work area is clean and dry. Inspect all of
the equipment you will be using. Cables,
electrodes, and electrode holders must be
dry and in good condition. Ask your counselor
to make a visual inspection and to replace any
damaged components. Do not attempt to repair
a welding machine yourself.
When welding,
stay safe and stay
dry—never stand
on a wet floor
and never
wear jewelry.
The shielded metal arc welding
electrode holder must be dry.
Always keep your welding work area clean and dry.
Be aware of risks at every stage of
the welding process.


22 WELDING
Health and Safety.
First Aid for Electrical Shock. If electricity travels through
a part of your body, you can get an electrical burn. Besides a
burn, too much electricity can even stop the heart from beating
correctly or damage other internal organs. Superficial and partial-
thickness burns from electricity look like burns from too much
heat; the skin may look charred. Full-thickness electrical burns
may not leave charred skin. Instead, the skin can look leathery
and white and be hard to the touch. Call 911 or the local
emergency-response number if someone has an electrical burn.
Risks of Harmful Fume Inhalation
The welding process can emit dangerous fumes. A visible,
smokelike cloud, known as the fume plume, arises directly from
the point of welding. The fume plume is never safe to breathe.
Long-term and short-term exposure may lead to severe respiratory
and skin problems. The fume plume contains metallic vapors that
have condensed into tiny particles of solid metal. These particles
are suspended in the air and can settle on the walls and floor of
the work area. Always protect yourself from the fume plume by
wearing protective clothing and headgear. Do not ever place
your head directly into the fume plume.
Never touch the electrode or metal parts of the electrode holder with skin or
wet clothing. Never rest your body on the workpiece. Welding in or on the
workpiece in damp or wet conditions will increase the risk of electrical shock.
When welding with most mild steel electrodes with clean materials, if
you are comfortable and can breathe easily, and the air is visibly clear,
you probably have adequate ventilation. However, if you have a headache,
chest pains, feel dizzy or nauseous, or have trouble breathing, turn off your
welder, seek fresh air immediately, and notify your merit badge counselor.
Also take note if you are pale, your eyes are tearing, or you feel a burning
sensation around the lips, tongue, or on the skin. Seek medical attention.
Always remember
that even though
the welder is in the
“off” position,
a charge still
exists inside the
machine. Never
open the housing
of a welder without
supervision by a
trained technician.
Never touch a person who is in contact with a live
electrical power source. If you encounter a victim of an
electrical burn, shut off the power at its source and call
an ambulance immediately.


WELDING 23
.Health and Safety
All welding areas must have good
ventilation. Air must be allowed to
circulate without blockages such as
dividing walls or equipment. Good
ventilation can be supplemented with
fans or exhausts that will direct fumes
away from your face. Always keep your
head away from the fume plume.
Some filler metals can produce toxic
fumes when used in welding, which
is why it is important to keep the area
well ventilated. Anyone who becomes
overwhelmed by fumes should seek
fresh air and loosen tight clothing at
the neck and waist for easier breathing.
Seek immediate medical attention. It is
important to let medical personnel know
the contaminants that might have been
released at the workplace.
Good ventilation and a safety-approved
welding helmet are essentials in protecting
yourself from the fume plume.
Never inhale the gases of the fume plume.


24 WELDING
Health and Safety.
Risk of Explosion
The shielding gases used in arc welding are commonly inert or
only slightly reactive. However, the cylinders that contain these
gases are under intense pressure. Always handle cylinders with
care. Do not heat or weld on a cylinder.
Above all, learn about the materials you are welding and
know the risks involved when working with them. Make sure
you have the correct base metals, electrode, and shielding gases.
This information can be found in the chapter “Welding and
Cutting Methods.” Never weld near flammable or combustible
materials. Notify your merit badge counselor if you detect any
damage to your welding equipment.
When using shielding gas, always observe safety precautions.


WELDING 25
.Health and Safety
Safety Data Sheets
Safety Data Sheets are available for the filler materials you may
be using. The SDS gives the proper procedures for working with,
handling, storing, and disposing of materials. The SDS will also
alert the user to any hazardous substances the product may con-
tain, such as a hazardous material in a particular welding rod or
that could evolve during welding with a particular welding rod.
Exercise great caution when attaching a regulator to a cylinder.
Information about health and safety procedures
is available from the American Welding Society,
OSHA, and the National Institute for Occupational
Safety and Health. Guidelines, definitions, and
facts that will help you learn how to remain safe
while welding can be downloaded free of charge
from the AWS at aws.org/technical/facts. Also
check out “Safety in Welding, Cutting, and Allied
Processes,” No. ANSI Z49.1, which can be found
at aws.org/safety.


26 WELDING
Health and Safety.
The format of the SDS may vary, but by U.S. law, all must
contain certain information presented in 16 sections. While all
sections must be included to comply with international regula-
tions, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration will
not enforce the content of sections 12 through 15.
Sections 1 through 11 and 16 are described below:
Section 1: Identification. This section identifies the chemical
on the SDS, lists its recommended uses, and provides the
manufacturer’s name, address, and emergency telephone
contact information.
Section 2: Hazard(s) Identification. This section identifies
the hazards of the chemical and provides appropriate
warning information.
Section 3: Composition/Information on Ingredients. This
section identifies the ingredients in the product.


WELDING 27
.Health and Safety
Section 4: First-Aid Measures. This section describes the
initial care that should be given by untrained responders to
someone who has been exposed to the chemical.
Section 5: Fire-Fighting Measures. This section provides
recommendations for fighting a fire caused by the chemical.
Section 6: Accidental Release Measures. This section provides
recommendations on the appropriate response to spills, leaks,
or releases.
Section 7: Handling and Storage. This section provides
guidance on safe handling and storage practices.
Section 8: Exposure Controls/Personal Protection. This
section identifies exposure limits and indicates personal
protective measures to minimize exposure.
Section 9: Physical and Chemical Properties. This section
identifies physical and chemical properties associated with
the material.
Section 10: Stability and Reactivity. This section describes
the reactivity hazards of the material and chemical
stability information.
Section 11: Toxicological Information. This section identifies
the toxicological and health effects information or states that
such information is not available.
Section 16: Other Information. This section includes other
information not covered in previous sections, including when
the SDS was prepared or last revised.
Most materials necessary for welding, such as tubing, bars, and sheets
of metal, are safe in their solid form. However, welding does create some
waste that can be toxic and should be disposed of properly and according
to the manufacturer. The industry has been going green in recent years,
though, and some welders have seen the environmental and economic
benefits of recycling slag from submerged arc welding. Processing recycled
slag into flux can be a significant savings over purchasing new flux.


Forge welding
©American Welding Society, Welding Handbook, 9th ed., vol. 1


WELDING 29
.Welding and Cutting Methods
Welding and
Cutting Methods
Welding has come a long way since its early Bronze Age beginning.
Forge welding is one of the oldest and simplest methods of join-
ing metals to create one “new” piece. The forge welder heats two
or more pieces of metal and hammers them together. Today, forge
welding has been largely replaced by gas and electric welding,
advances made during the Industrial Revolution.
This manual describes a number of conventional welding
and cutting methods. Each offers an opportunity for you to learn
new skills as you create, build, and alter objects or make artworks.
Welding and cutting are great skills to master.
Oxy-fuel welding is one of the simplest methods of joining metals and has been used
for more than a century.
©American Welding Society, Welding Handbook, 9th ed., vol. 1


30 WELDING
Welding and Cutting Methods.
Common Welding and Cutting Processes
Here are some of the more common welding and cutting
processes used in a garage or shop.
Oxy-Fuel Welding
Oxy-fuel welding (sometimes called oxyacetylene or gas welding)
and oxy-fuel cutting use fuel gases and oxygen to weld and cut
metals. This process involves oxidation, or the combination of a
substance with oxygen.
Oxy-fuel welding relies on the chemical reaction between the
oxyacetylene flame and the base metal. This provides the heat to
melt the base and usually a filler metal. Welders use this process
to weld sheet and thin plate, tubes, and small-diameter pipes.
Welder using shielded metal arc welding


WELDING 31
.Welding and Cutting Methods
ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES
OF OXY-FUEL WELDING
The primary advantage of oxy-fuel welding is that it allows good
control of the heat input. You can learn how to handle a torch
and control your weld at a slow speed. Skilled operators with
gentle movements can control the weld-bead size, shape, and
weld puddle. This method is also inexpensive and portable
when compared with other methods, and can even be set up
in a garage shop.
Oxy-fuel welding has its disadvantages:
• It requires a high skill level to minimize
discontinuities.
• The OAW flame is not as concentrated
as an electric arc.
• It is not economical for thick section
welding (more than ¼ inch thick).
• The welding speed is slower than arc
welding speed.
• Weld-metal properties are difficult
to control.
Oxy-fuel welding
Undercut at the toe of an oxy-fuel arc weld
Porosity
Incomplete joint penetration
©American Welding Society,
Welding Handbook, 9th ed., vol. 2
©American Welding Society,
Welding Handbook, 9th ed., vol. 2
©American Welding Society,
Welding Handbook, 9th ed., vol. 2


32 WELDING
Welding and Cutting Methods.
OXY-FUEL WELDING EQUIPMENT
Oxy-fuel welding requires two cylinders of gas—one for oxygen
and one for fuel gas. It also requires gas-flow regulators, hoses,
check valves, flashback arrestors, and a welding torch-and-tip
assembly. Oxy-fuel torches may be light or heavy duty. Nozzles
and tips attach to the torch head. Gas flows through the welding
tip just prior to ignition and burning. Manufacturers specify tips
by orifice diameter or drill size. Recommended tip sizes are based
on material thickness. The fuel-gas hose is red; the oxygen hose is
green. The T-grade hose is for use with all fuel gases; R-grade is
for acetylene only.
For safety, the oxygen fitting has right-hand threads; when
you turn the fitting to the right, it will tighten. The fuel-gas fitting
has left-hand threads with grooved nuts; when you turn it to the
left, it will tighten. This prevents someone from accidentally
connecting the fuel-gas to the oxygen receptacle, and vice versa.
In oxy-fuel welding, a welding torch is used to fuse the base
metals by heating the two pieces to a temperature that produces
a shared molten pool of metal. The molten pool is generally
supplied with additional filler metal.
When you are finished using the welding torch, turn off the flame, coil the
hoses, and store them on the appropriate brackets on the torch cart. If there
are no brackets, store the torch and hoses away from any heat sources, out
of the way to prevent a tripping hazard. Turn off the gas cylinders.
Store all hand tools safely in the appropriate place in a tool box or
cabinet. If there is weld spatter on the welding table, grind off the table to
remove the weld spatter. With a hand broom, sweep off the welding table.
With a floor broom, sweep the floor. Always leave the area neat and clean,
ready for the next welder and project.
Englishman Edmund Davy discovered acetylene in 1836, and the process
of welding with an oxy-fuel torch (oxyacetylene torch) was developed by
French chemist Henry-Louis Le Chatelier in 1895. Oxy-fuel welding was one
of the first modern fusion-welding processes. It has become less popular for
industrial applications but is still widely used for welding pipes and tubes,
repairing objects, and fabricating certain types of metal-based artwork.
When welding,
always wear
a face shield
and protective
clothing.


WELDING 33
.Welding and Cutting Methods
A valve is a device that prevents the flow of gas from a cylinder when it is
not in use.
TIP
WELDING TORCH
OXYGEN VALVE
OXYGEN HOSE CONNECTION
FUEL VALVE FUEL HOSE
CONNECTION
CYLINDER
PRESSURE
GAUGE
CYLINDER
PRESSURE
GAUGE
APPARATUS
WRENCH
WORKING
PRESSURE
GAUGE
FUEL
REGULATOR
WORKING
PRESSURE
GAUGE
FLASHBACK
ARRESTOR
OXYGEN
REGULATOR
FUEL HOSE
FUEL
CYLINDER
OXYGEN
CYLINDER
OXYGEN
HOSE
FLASHBACK
ARRESTOR
Setup for oxy-fuel welding (secure cylinders)


34 WELDING
Welding and Cutting Methods.
Oxy-Fuel Cutting
In oxy-fuel cutting, a cutting torch is used to heat metal to kindling
temperature (generally red for iron alloys). A stream of oxygen is
then trained on the metal to oxidize (burn) the metal. The slag, or
burned metal, is removed from the cut (kerf).
Oxy-fuel cutting
Oxy-fuel equipment
lends itself to
applications such
as iron or steel
welding, brazing,
metal heating
(for bending and
forming), and
oxy-fuel cutting.
Cutting to Size
If you are working with steel plate, tubing, or iron, you
may need to cut some materials to size before welding.
Cuts can be made mechanically or thermally. Thermal
cutting confines cuts to a narrow, well-defined zone of
controlled width, or kerf. Oxy-fuel cutting and plasma
arc cutting are two widely used thermal methods.
Oxy-fuel cutting severs ferrous metals by oxidizing
the iron in oxygen to form iron oxide slag.
©American Welding Society,
Welding Handbook, 9th ed., vol. 2


WELDING 35
.Welding and Cutting Methods
The setup for manual oxy-fuel cutting is similar to oxy-fuel
welding, although the torch attachment is different. The cutting
torch attachment functions are designed to (1) control the flow and
mixture of fuel gas and preheat the oxygen, (2) control the flow of
cutting oxygen, and (3) discharge the gases through the cutting tip
at the proper speed and volume for preheating and cutting.
(A) PURE ACETYLENE FLAME
Oxy-fuel flames
CONE: WHITE
NO ACETYLENE
FEATHER
NEARLY COLORLESS,
BLUISH TO ORANGE
(B) CARBURIZING FLAME
(C) NEUTRAL FLAME
CONE
ACETYLENE FEATHER:
INTENSE WHITE WITH
FEATHERY EDGE
LIGHT ORANGE
(D) OXIDIZING FLAME
CONE: WHITE
CONE: TWO-TENTHS
SHORTER
NEARLY
COLORLESS
Ferrous metals contain iron. Nonferrous metals do not.
©American Welding Society,
Welding Handbook, 9th ed., vol. 2
©American Welding Society,
Welding Handbook, 9th ed., vol. 2
©American Welding Society,
Welding Handbook, 9th ed., vol. 2


36 WELDING
Welding and Cutting Methods.
ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES
OF OXY-FUEL CUTTING
The advantages to oxy-fuel cutting are its low cost, portability,
and versatility of cutting direction and size. However, the disad-
vantages of oxy-fuel cutting are poorer tolerances compared
with machine tools, potential fire, fume and burn hazards, and
the requirements of adequate ventilation.
Shielded Metal Arc Welding
In 1890, C.L. Coffin of Detroit was awarded the first U.S. patent
for an arc welding process using a metal electrode. This was the
first record of the metal melted from the electrode carried across
the arc to deposit filler metal in the joint to make a weld. By 1900,
shielded metal arc welding (SMAW)—the process of using a
coated metal electrode—had been developed in Great Britain.
A thin coating of clay or lime was applied to the bare rod by
dipping short lengths into a thick paste and allowing the coating
to dry. This coating provided a more stable arc with the gas and
flux shielding to protect the molten weld puddle.
ELECTRODE COVERING
CORE WIRE
DIRECTION OF WELDING
METAL AND
SLAG DROPLETS
PENETRATION
DEPTH
SOLIDIFIED SLAG
WELD POOL
SHIELDING ATMOSPHERE
Shielded metal arc welding components
WELD METAL
BASE METAL


WELDING 37
.Welding and Cutting Methods
ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES OF SHIELDED
METAL ARC WELDING
Because of its versatility (a wide variety of metals can be used)
and simplicity, shielded metal arc welding (often called “stick
welding”) remains one of the world’s most popular and useful
welding processes. It involves using the heat of an electric
arc between a covered metal electrode and the work. SMAW
equipment is also inexpensive and can be used in remote areas.
Gasoline and diesel-powered generator/welding equipment
make the process portable; small, lightweight inverter power
sources are available. The process is less sensitive to wind and
draft than gas-shielded arc processes, making it more suitable
to the outdoors than other methods.
Compared with its advantages, shielded arc welding has
few disadvantages. The fumes this process emits can make it
undesirable to weld indoors, and the length of the electrodes
can limit its productivity. If not cleaned properly, a weld can
also contain slag inclusions, or pockets of material (most often
slag or flux) that get trapped in and between the weld metal and
the base metal, making the weld porous and weak.
Slag peeling off shielded metal arc welding workpiece


38 WELDING
Welding and Cutting Methods.
Gas Metal Arc Welding
In 1948, using the principle of shielding
the welding arc with inert gas, gas metal
arc welding (GMAW) was developed.
In this method, a continuously fed wire
electrode was used to create the electric
arc and as a consumable filler metal.
Improvements in welding power supplies
and the use of smaller-diameter wires
greatly improved the process. Because of
the high cost of inert gases (helium and
argon), this process was first developed
to join nonferrous metals. Later develop-
ments allowed the use of less expensive
CO2 shielding gases with steel, which led
to variations of the process, including
spray-arc, short-circuiting arc, and
pulsed-arc transfers.
Shielding means protecting the weld metal from contamination.
In shielded metal arc welding, as the weld is laid, the flux coating
of the electrode disintegrates, giving off vapors that shield the
weld area from atmospheric contamination.
Gas metal arc fillet weld
©American Welding Society, Welding Handbook, 9th ed., vol. 2


WELDING 39
.Welding and Cutting Methods
Gas metal arc welding uses the heat of an electric arc between
a continuously fed bare wire filler-metal electrode and the work.
Arc shielding comes from externally supplied gas.
A variation of gas metal
arc welding uses a tubular
electrode containing metallic
powders that also requires
a gas shield to protect the
molten weld pool from
atmospheric contamination.
For most home and shop
applications, the power source
and wire feeder controller
automatically control the arc
length and electrode feed.
Fume exhaust
Welding fixture used to hold parts in position
while welding
©American Welding Society, Welding Handbook, 9th ed., vol. 1


40 WELDING
Welding and Cutting Methods.
The gas metal arc process deposits the weld metal in
the joint by one of three methods: short-circuiting transfer,
globular transfer, or spray transfer. Several factors determine
the type of transfer, including magnitude and type of welding
current, electrode diameter, electrode composition, electrode
extension, and shielding gas.
Short-circuiting transfer uses the lowest range of welding
currents and electrode diameters. It produces a small, fast-freezing
weld pool that is generally suited for joining thin sections, for
out-of-position welding, and for bridging large root openings. In
short-circuiting transfer, the wire contacts the workpiece and the
arc is extinguished. Current continues to flow and the resistance
causes the wire to separate and the arc to reignite, thereby causing
the weld to be deposited drop by drop.
Globular transfer occurs at low currents in relation to the
size of the electrode, regardless of the type of shielding gas,
although CO2 is commonly used to weld mild steel. Low current
density at the electrode tip produces large, irregular drops of
Gas metal arc welding gun components
NOZZLE
ELECTRODE
EXTENSION CONTACT
TUBE-TO-WORK
DISTANCE
ARC LENGTH
NOZZLE-TO-WORK
DISTANCE
CONTACT TUBE
WORKPIECE


WELDING 41
.Welding and Cutting Methods
metal that transfer to the pool without much direction, and are
typically used only in the flat position. The result is increased
amounts of spatter, as compared to spray transfer.
With higher welding current and voltage and a shielding
gas greater than 80 percent argon, the welder can produce a
stable, spatter-free weld in the axial spray transfer mode. Above
the transition current level, the metal “pinches off” in fine drop-
lets many times per second. The current propels the droplets
axially down the center of the arc, away from the electrode, and
straight into the pool. This mode of transfer is best suited for flat
and horizontal position welding.
Shielding gases protect gas metal arc welds from the atmo-
sphere. Fluxes are not used in this process. All deoxidizers and
alloying elements are incorporated into the electrode wire. The
shielding gas and flow rate also effect arc characteristics, modes
of metal transfer, penetration and weld bead profile, speed of
welding, undercutting tendency, cleaning action, and weld metal
mechanical properties.
A typical gas metal arc welding setup (secure cylinder)
1 WORK LEAD
2 WATER TO GUN
3 WATER FROM GUN
4 GUN SWITCH CIRCUIT
5 SHIELDING GAS TO GUN
6 CABLE ASSEMBLY
7 SHIELDING GAS FROM CYLINDER
8 WELDING CONTACTOR CONTROL
9 POWER CABLE
10 PRIMARY INPUT POWER
SHIELDING GAS
REGULATOR
SHIELDING
GAS SUPPLY
POWER
SOURCE
WATER
CIRCULATOR
(OPTIONAL)
WELDING GUN
ELECTRODE FEED UNIT
ELECTRODE SUPPLY
1
6
2
3
4 5
9
10
7
8
WORKPIECE


42 WELDING
Welding and Cutting Methods.
ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES
OF GAS METAL ARC WELDING
Gas metal arc welding is useful when the presence of hydrogen
could cause problems. When no slag is present as with shielded
metal arc welding, the welder can more easily observe the action of
the arc and the weld puddle to improve control. With little or no
cleaning after welding, overall operator productivity is greatly
improved. Efficiency increases because the continuous spool of
wire does not require changing as often as the individual electrodes
used in shielded metal arc welding.
Gas metal arc welding has its disadvantages. For one, it
can result in most of the common weld discontinuities except
slag inclusions. Welding without adequate shielding permits
atmospheric oxygen and nitrogen to dissolve in the molten
metal, resulting in porosity. Higher shielding gas flow rates
may also result in porosity, due to the vortex action that draws
atmospheric gases into the arc region.
Drafts or wind may disperse shielding gases, making gas
metal arc welding unsuitable for field welding. Incomplete fusion
is possible, especially in welds made with short-circuiting transfer.
The presence of undercut and underfill reflects poor welding tech-
nique. Overlap is more prevalent in globular transfer and with the
short-circuiting arc. The equipment used is more complex than that
used for shielded metal arc welding, increasing the possibility of
mechanical problems that can affect quality.
EQUIPMENT FOR GAS METAL ARC WELDING
Gas metal arc welding requires a welding power supply, wire
feeder, welding gun, a supply of shielding gas with flow meter
and regulator, electric cables, and hoses to convey the shielding
gas and cooling water. The welding gun guides filler wire and
shielding gas into the weld puddle, transmitting current through
The American Welding Society lists specifications
for filler wires for various metals and related alloys.
Shielding gases that protect the weld puddle from the
atmosphere include carbon dioxide, argon, and helium,
used individually and in mixtures that may include
oxygen. Used for short-circuiting transfer to 200 amps,
carbon dioxide gives a stable arc. Additions of argon
smooth the arc and reduce spatter.


WELDING 43
.Welding and Cutting Methods
a cable from the power source. High-amperage guns come with
tubing for water to cool the gun.
Stored under pressure for ready access in cylinders or in
bulk containers, shielding gas travels through hoses, gun, and
into the weld zone. Regulators and flow meters control gas flow.
Cables are constructed of drawn copper strands. The electrode
lead carries current to the gun; the work lead, grounded, com-
pletes the circuit.
Gas hoses with accessories such as connectors and clamps
route the shielding gas from the cylinder or tank to the welding
gun. Water for cooling high-amperage guns comes through a
flexible hose. Gas metal arc welding typically uses solid wire,
spooled or reeled, for continuous feeding to the gun, with
diameters from 0.035 to 1
⁄16 inch.
Flux-Cored Arc Welding
After the introduction of CO2 with gas metal arc welding, flux-
cored arc welding (FCAW), a variation using a special electrode
wire, was developed. This wire was tubular in cross-section, with
the fluxing agents on the inside. More developments eliminated the
external gas, leading to the self-shielded welding wire. Flux-cored
arc welding uses the heat of an arc between the electrode wire and
the work.
TUBULAR ELECTRODE
ARC & METAL
TRANSFER
WELD METAL
WELD POOL
MOLTEN SLAG
SOLIDIFIED SLAG
WIRE GUIDE &
CONTACT TUBE
ARC SHIELD COMPOSED
OF VAPORIZED AND SLAG
FORMING COMPOUNDS
POWDERED METAL VAPOR
FORMING MATERIALS,
DEOXIDIZERS AND SCAVENGERS
DIRECTION
OF WELDINGSelf-shielded flux-cored arc welding process


44 WELDING
Welding and Cutting Methods.
Flux-cored arc welding owes its versatility to the wide variety
of ingredients that can be included in the core of a tubular elec-
trode. The tube contains granular flux, deoxidizers, and alloying
elements within the tubular wire. The selection of filler alloys
depends on the base metal composition, base metal cleanliness,
thickness, and service.
ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES
OF FLUX-CORED ARC WELDING
Due to increased deposition rates and a high tolerance for contam-
ination, flux-cored arc welding has replaced shielded metal arc
welding and gas metal arc welding in many applications. Flux-
cored arc welding can be used in both shop and field applications
and provides high productivity in terms of the amount of weld
metal that can be deposited in a given time, particularly for the
handheld process. This process is characterized by an aggressive,
deeply penetrating arc that tends to reduce the possibility of
fusion-type discontinuities. Flux-cored arc welding can be used in
all positions.
As for the disadvantages of flux-cored arc welding, because a
flux is present during flux-cored arc welding, a layer of solidified
slag must be removed. The flux also generates a significant amount
of smoke, which can be hazardous and can reduce the welder’s
visibility, making the weld puddle more difficult to observe. Often,
welders use welding guns equipped with built-in fume extractors
ducted to a filter canister and an exhaust pump.
The American Welding Society’s identification system
for flux-cored arc welding electrodes follows the general
pattern. Shielding is obtained, in whole or part, from a
flux contained within the tubular electrode. Self-shielded
electrodes require no external gas protection. Non-self-
shielded flux-cored electrodes use additional external
gas shielding (commonly, carbon dioxide or argon/
carbon dioxide mixes) supplied through the welding
gun. CO2, which is the least costly, gives globular
transfer. With a mix of 75 percent argon and 25 percent
CO2, transfer approaches spray. Inert gases increase the
efficiency of oxidizers in the wire core. Argon protects
the molten weld pool at all weld temperatures.


WELDING 45
.Welding and Cutting Methods
Gas shielded flux-cored arc welding process
GAS NOZZLE
WIRE GUIDE AND
CONTACT TUBE
SHIELDING GAS
TUBULAR ELECTRODE
POWDERED METAL,
FLUX, AND SLAG-
FORMING MATERIALS
DIRECTION
OF WELDING
ARC AND METAL
TRANSFER
WELD POOL
MOLTEN
SLAG
SOLIDIFIED WELD
METAL
SOLIDIFIED SLAG
Discontinuities in
Flux-Cored Arc Welding
The most prevalent discontinuities in flux-cored arc
welding are porosity and slag entrapment. Inadequate
shielding or a disruption in the shielding gas atmosphere
causes porosity. Improper travel speed or incorrect
manipulation of the welding gun often results in
slag entrapment.


46 WELDING
Welding and Cutting Methods.
Plasma Arc Cutting
Plasma arc cutting uses the heat of a plasma arc (40,000 degrees
Fahrenheit) to cut through any metal, ferrous or nonferrous. The
plasma arc torch, which features a copper electrode recessed
into a copper tip with a small opening, constricts the plasma gas
in order to heat and ionize it.
A trigger switch controls most manual torches: Press to
start the gas and cutting arc; release to stop. A pilot arc is estab-
lished, and when the torch is close enough to the workpiece
that the pilot arc touches it, an electrically conductive path from
the electrode to the workpiece is created. The material melts and
the cutting gas blows the molten metal away.
The plasma gas cuts a bevel on one side of the kerf and a
right-angle edge on the opposite side. The gas swirls clockwise,
placing the bevel on the left. This requires the worker to plan
for the bevel on the scrap side of the cut. The welder can rate
the cut quality according to surface smoothness, kerf width,
parallelism of faces, adherence of dross to the cut bottom, and
sharpness of the bottom faces.
ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES
OF PLASMA ARC CUTTING
Plasma arc cutting is faster than other types of thermal cutting for
material less than 1 inch (25.4 mm) thick. Because it works with
a high-velocity jet of gas, the plasma arc cuts molten material
without preheating.
Its disadvantages are that plasma arc cutting is noisy, bright,
and hot. All operators must wear ear protection (earplugs),
a shaded face shield or helmet, and protective clothing. This
method also involves hazards such as fire, electric shock, intense
light, fumes, gases, and high noise levels. Another disadvantage is
that the equipment costs more than oxy-fuel cutting equipment,
and setups require both compressed air or gas and electrical power.
In addition to thermal methods of cutting, there are
also mechanical methods such as grinding, shaping,
sawing, shearing, chipping, and milling. The major
concern for preparation after mechanical cutting is the
thorough removal of all oils and lubricants used during
cutting that will interfere with later welds.


WELDING 47
.Welding and Cutting Methods
Other Welding Methods
A few other welding and cutting methods are discussed
briefly here.
Submerged Arc Welding
In the 1930s, the automatic process of submerged arc welding
(SAW) was developed and became popular in the piping and
shipyard industries. In this process, the electric arc
is covered by a powdered flux that
protects the molten weld pool
from the detrimental effects of the
atmosphere. It is useful for filling
joints in heavy plate and pipe.
Self-propelled tractor used for submerged arc welding ships
©American Welding Society, Welding Handbook, 9th ed., vol. 2


48 WELDING
Welding and Cutting Methods.
Carbon Arc Welding
The production of an arc between two carbon electrodes using
a battery was first credited to the British chemist Sir Humphry
Davy in 1800. In 1885, Russian researcher Nikolai Benardos,
working in a French laboratory, was granted a patent for carbon
arc welding to join lead plates together for storage batteries.
Efforts were also made to join iron components, and the process
became popular in the late 1890s and early 1900s.
Carbon arc welding process
ARC FLAME
CARBON ELECTRODE
ARC CORE
ARC STREAM
FILLER ROD


WELDING 49
.Welding and Cutting Methods
Gas Tungsten Arc Welding
Gas tungsten arc welding (GTAW) uses a nonconsumable
tungsten electrode to produce an arc to melt the base metal.
The weld area is protected from atmospheric contamination
by a shielding gas (usually argon and a filler metal).
Plasma arc welding is a variation of gas tungsten arc welding
whereby the electric arc is contained inside the torch and the heat
energy is transferred to the work through a plasma jet. This pro-
cess can be used for metal spraying and for cutting. The plasma
arc has a higher temperature than a tungsten arc.
Gas tungsten arc welding
DIRECTION OF WELD
GTAW HEAD
POWER
SHIELDING GAS
CONTACT TUBE
TUNGSTEN ELECTRODE
(NONCONSUMABLE)
WELD BEAD
SHIELDING GAS
COPPER SHOE
(OPTIONAL)
ELECTRICAL ARC
FILLER ROD





WELDING 51
.Preparation for Welding and Cutting
Preparation for Welding
and Cutting
Determining the Method
Skilled welders know the right questions to ask themselves to
determine which method of welding or cutting is best suited for
the particular job they are doing. They consider weldability,
metallurgy, and discontinuities.
Weldability
Weldability is the capacity of a material to be welded. The thick-
ness of the metal often determines the best welding process to
use. For heavy sections, flux-cored arc welding or shielded metal
arc welding are good options. For sheet metal, oxy-fuel welding
or gas metal arc welding are good choices.
Metallurgy
Skilled welders have a knowledge of metallurgy, the physical
and chemical behavior of metals and their mixtures (alloys).
The welding position relates to the place where the two
pieces of metal meet. This is called the joint. When the joint is
not in the flat position, the force of gravity limits the use of arc
and gas welding.
Backside accessibility is sometimes a factor in determining
the welding or cutting process to use. When the back side of
a joint must be reached, the angle may be difficult to reach
and weld effectively. Incomplete fusion or incomplete joint
penetration can result.


52 WELDING
Preparation for Welding and Cutting.
Discontinuities
When welding, you may see discontinuities (or irregularities)
that you can correct:
1. Uniformly scattered porosity usually means the welding
technique was faulty or an improper filler metal was used,
or the base metal was contaminated.
2. Incomplete fusion of the base metal edges can occur when
the edges are inadvertently oxidized, even with the best
flame adjustment; it usually is the result of improper
torch manipulation.
3. Undercut, underfill, and overlap are weld faults attributable
to the skill of the welder.
4. Cracks are generally hot cracks in oxy-fuel welds.
5. Throat cracks may result if the weld deposit is too thin to
resist weld shrinkage stresses.
Discontinuities that result in a poor weld are porosity, incomplete fusion,
incomplete joint penetration, undercut, underfill, overlap, and cracks. You
can eliminate most problems by cleaning the joint and sides of the base
metal, and by using proper welding technique.
Weld joints
(A) BUTT JOINT
APPLICABLE WELDS
BEVEL GROOVE
FLARE BEVEL GROOVE
FLARE V-GROOVE
J-GROOVE
SQUARE GROOVE
U-GROOVE
V-GROOVE
BRAZE
(B) CORNER JOINT
APPLICABLE WELDS
FILLET
BEVEL GROOVE
FLARE BEVEL GROOVE
FLARE V-GROOVE
J-GROOVE
SQUARE GROOVE
U-GROOVE
V-GROOVE
PLUG
SLOT
SPOT
SEAM
PROJECTION
BRAZE


WELDING 53
.Preparation for Welding and Cutting
Weld joints
(C) T-JOINT
APPLICABLE WELDS
FILLET
BEVEL GROOVE
FLARE BEVEL GROOVE
J-GROOVE
SQUARE GROOVE
PLUG
SLOT
SPOT
SEAM
PROJECTION
BRAZE
(D) LAP JOINT
APPLICABLE WELDS
FILLET
BEVEL GROOVE
FLARE BEVEL GROOVE
J-GROOVE
PLUG
SLOT
SPOT
SEAM
PROJECTION
BRAZE
(E) EDGE JOINT
APPLICABLE WELDS
BEVEL GROOVE
FLARE BEVEL GROOVE
FLARE V-GROOVE
J-GROOVE
SQUARE GROOVE
U-GROOVE
V-GROOVE
EDGE
SEAM
SPOT
PROJECTION
BRAZE
Weld discontinuities
(F) UNDERFILL
(E)
UNDERFILL
UNDERFILL
(D)
UNDERCUT UNDERCUT
OVERLAP
OVERLAP(C)
UNDERCUT
OVERLAP
(B)
UNDERBEAD
CRACKS
UNDERBEAD CRACKS
(A)
TOE CRACKS


54 WELDING
Preparation for Welding and Cutting.
Types of cracks
LEGEND
1 CRATER CRACK
2 FACE CRACK
3 HEAT-AFFECTED ZONE CRACK
4 LAMELLAR TEAR
5 LONGITUDINAL CRACK
6 ROOT CRACK
7 ROOT SURFACE CRACK
8 THROAT CRACK
9 TOE CRACK
10 TRANSVERSE CRACK
11 UNDERBEAD CRACK
12 WELD INTERFACE CRACK
13 WELD METAL CRACK
1 2 13
4 2 5 8 13
3 11 6 13
7 13 3 6
3 1112
9
2 10 13
2 5 13(A)
(B)
13


WELDING 55
.Preparation for Welding and Cutting
Welding Equipment and Materials
The equipment and materials discussed here are conventional
tools of welding. For instance, common C-clamps and bar
clamps hold parts to ensure precise, repeatable alignment.
With portable grinders that are either electri-
cally or pneumatically powered, you
can bevel joints, grind off weld
spatter, remove weld reinforce-
ment, and help clean the scale
from base material before
welding. Discs and brushes
offer various finishes.
Welders can choose from a number of electrodes,
metals, and alloys. A welder must stop periodically to
replace electrodes and remove solidified slag. Low-
hydrogen electrodes must be kept in special storage to
minimize moisture absorption.
Cylinders
Electrodes


56 WELDING
Preparation for Welding and Cutting.
Gas regulators reduce the cylinder gases from storage pres-
sure to working pressure at the torch and maintain this lowered
pressure during gas flow. Each regulator is designed to work
with a specific gas. The oxygen-cylinder pressure, which can be
as high as 3,000 pounds per square inch, is reduced to a work-
ing pressure of 1 to 25 pounds per square inch. The fuel gas
storage pressure is reduced from 250 pounds per square inch
to 1 to 12 pounds per square inch.
Accessories
for oxy-fuel
include a friction
lighter to ignite
the gas, tip
cleaners, an
adjustable
wrench, a
cylinder truck,
and safety goggles
and clothing.
Filter lenses must be worn
when observing thermal cut-
ting (oxy-fuel or plasma arc)
operations. Safety goggles with
side shields are required to protect
eyes and face from sparks and spatter. Hearing
protection (wearing earplugs) is required, as noise can
exceed safe levels. Oil and grease in the presence of
oxygen may spontaneously combust and burn.
Gas metal arc welding gun
To prevent a flashback, which occurs when mixed gases
burn behind the torch mixer, a flashback arrestor should
be installed at the torch to protect the hose from burning.
©American Welding Society,
Welding Handbook, 9th ed., vol. 2


WELDING 57
.Preparation for Welding and Cutting
Revisit the
“Health and
Safety” chapter
whenever
necessary.
Base Metal Preparation
For any welding process, the first step is to clean the base metal
along the joint and sides to remove any buildup of dirt, oil, and
oxides that can cause a weak weld. Grinding the surface of the
base metal to a smooth, shiny finish typically removes the
oxides. Carefully space the part for welding; follow all specifica-
tions. The root opening should allow for bridging the gap but
should be large enough for full penetration.
Edge preparation depends on the material thickness. Sheet
metal can normally be butted together and welded. For material
that is 3
⁄16 to 1
⁄4 inch thick, a slight root opening or groove and
a filler metal are necessary for complete penetration. Thicker
materials should be beveled for better penetration and fusion at
the sides.
Cutting steel with an oxy-fuel torch
Hazards of oxy-fuel welding are heat and light radiation, fumes and
gases, noise, fire, and explosion. Proper use of equipment—especially of
compressed-gas cylinders—is vital. The oxy-fuel flame is less intense than
the electric arc but requires that shaded lenses be worn. For heat protec-
tion, wear a shaded or clear face shield. Always wear goggles to protect
your eyes from sparks, spatter, and molten slag. Keep your head out of the
fume plume.
©American Welding Society, Welding Handbook, 9th ed., vol. 2


58 WELDING
Preparation for Welding and Cutting.
Plasma arc cutting
Shielded metal arc welding (or “stick welding”)
©American Welding Society, Welding Handbook, 9th ed., vol. 2


WELDING 59
.Preparation for Welding and Cutting
Oxy-fuel welding equipment
Oxy-fuel operators should wear a number 4 or 5 lens
when welding material is less than 1
⁄8 inch thick, number
5 or 6 when welding material is 1
⁄8 inch to 1
⁄2 inch thick,
and number 6 or 8 when material is thicker than 1
⁄2 inch.
©American Welding Society Welding Handbook, 9th ed., vol. 2


60 WELDING
Preparation for Welding and Cutting.
Checklist for Abrasive
Wheel Equipment Grinders
Do side guards cover the spindle, nut and flange, and 75
percent of the wheel diameter?
Yes ❏ No ❏
Is the work rest used and kept adjusted to within 1
⁄8 inch
(0.3175 cm) of the wheel?
Yes ❏ No ❏
Is the adjustable tongue guard on the top side of the grinder
used and kept to within 1
⁄4 inch (0.6350 cm) of the wheel?
Yes ❏ No ❏
Is the maximum RPM rating of each abrasive wheel
compatible with the RPM rating of the grinder motor?
Yes ❏ No ❏
Before new abrasive wheels are mounted, are they
visually inspected and ring-tested?
Yes ❏ No ❏
Is cleanliness maintained around grinders? Yes ❏ No ❏
Are dust collectors and powered exhausts provided on
grinders used in operations that produce large amounts
of dust?
Yes ❏ No ❏
Are goggles or face shields always worn when grinding? Yes ❏ No ❏
Are bench and pedestal grinders permanently mounted? Yes ❏ No ❏
Is each electrically operated grinder effectively grounded? Yes ❏ No ❏
Are fixed or permanently mounted grinders connected
to their electrical supply system with metallic conduit or
other permanent method?
Yes ❏ No ❏
Does each grinder have an individual on and off
control switch?
Yes ❏ No ❏
Be sure the grinder you use is safe by using this checklist from the
Occupational Safety and Health Administration, which can also be found
at osha.gov/SLTC/machineguarding/new-grinder-checklist.html. Address
questions answered with a “no” before using the grinder.
Fume exhaust equipment removes chemical fumes and vapors, oil mist,
and dust. Equipment ranges from fans and blowers to exhaust hoods and
smoke-extraction welding guns.


WELDING 61
.Preparation for Welding and Cutting
Gases
Oxygen for welding and cutting should be at least 99.5 percent
pure. Burning acetylene gas with pure oxygen fed through a torch
produces the oxy-fuel flame. Oxygen in the air completes the
combustion. For most applications, the 5,600-degrees-Fahrenheit
flame provides both the heat and necessary shielding of the molten
metal. Fluxes improve the cleaning action on some materials.
Oil or grease in the presence of oxygen may spontaneously
combust and burn. Oxygen cylinders must be stored away from
flammable and combustible material. Do not store oxygen or
acetylene cylinders in confined spaces such as boxes, trunks,
or vehicles. Acetylene cylinders should be kept upright. Keep
equipment free of grease and oil.
Filler Metal and Electrodes
Filler rods, used for welding of material thicker than 1
⁄16 inch with
oxy-fuel welding, are fed manually. Rods are 1
⁄4 inch or slightly
less in diameter; standard lengths are 18, 24, and 36 inches.
Electrodes for shielded metal arc welding are usually 3
⁄16 inch or
less in diameter and standard lengths of 14 inches, while electrodes
for gas metal arc welding and flux cored arc welding are in coils.
Focus on the Arc
What happens in the weld puddle determines the weld quality.
For arc welding processes, the heat of the arc melts the base metal
and the tip of a consumable covered electrode. Understanding the
electrical circuit will help you become familiar with the process.
The following descriptions explain shielded metal arc welding but
are similar for other common arc welding processes.
Arc welding circuit
AC OR DC POWER
SOURCE AND CONTROLS
ARC
ELECTRODE
ELECTRODE
HOLDER
WORKELECTRODE LEADWORKPIECE LEAD


62 WELDING
Preparation for Welding and Cutting.
This circuit begins with the electric power source and includes
the welding cables, an electrode holder, a workpiece connection,
the workpiece (weldment), and an arc welding electrode.
One of the two cables from the power source is attached to
the work. The other is attached to the electrode holder. When the
arc strikes between the electrode and the workpiece, welding begins.
The heat of the arc, measured above 9,000 degrees Fahrenheit,
melts the tip of the electrode and the surface of the work, near the
arc. Tiny globules of molten metal rapidly form on the electrode tip,
then transfer through the arc stream into the weld pool, depositing
the filler metal as the electrode is consumed.
The amount of electric current needed at the arc depends
on the size of the electrode and the gap between the electrode
tip and the base metal. The sizes and types of electrodes for
shielded metal arc welding define the arc voltage and amperage
requirements. The current may be either alternating or direct
(electrode positive or electrode negative), depending on the
electrode being used. Manufacturers add alloying elements to
the electrode covering to strengthen a shielded metal arc weld.
Some ingredients and the binder in the covering can attract and
hold moisture, which may cause cracking.
Effect of travel angle on the weld bead profile, no matter
which process is used
DIRECTION OF WELDING
(A) FOREHAND
TECHNIQUE
(B) TORCH
PERPENDICULAR
(C) BACKHAND
TECHNIQUE


WELDING 63
.Preparation for Welding and Cutting
Arc Shielding
The method of shielding and the volume of slag produced vary
by type of electrode. On some electrodes, most of the covering
materials are converted to gas by the heat of the arc, with only
minimal slag. The gaseous shield prevents atmospheric contami-
nation. Other electrodes convert most of the covering to slag that
coats the globules of metal being transferred across the arc, then
floats to the surface of the weld puddle because it is lighter than
the metal. The slag solidifies after the weld metal has solidified.
The choice of electrode type depends on the application.
Electrodes that produce heavy slag can carry high amperage and
provide high deposition rates, ideal for heavy weldments in the
flat position. Those with a light slag and lower amperage and
deposition rates produce a smaller weld pool and work in all
welding positions.
How to Select an Electrode
Consider these factors in approximate order of importance:
1. Composition of the base material. For stainless steels,
low-alloy steels, nickel and copper alloys, and materials
that serve in corrosive atmospheres, chemical composition
is important.
2. Mechanical properties of the base material. Tensile strength
and yield strength of the weld metal should equal or exceed
that of the base material.
The American
Welding Society
classifies welding
rods and electrodes
for steel on the basis
of strength, position,
and chemistry.
The electrode coating:
1. Provides a gas to shield the arc and prevent excessive atmospheric
contamination of the molten filler metal.
2. Provides ingredients to cleanse the weld.
3. Establishes the electrical characteristics of the electrode.
4. Provides a slag blanket to protect the hot weld metal from the air
and enhance the mechanical properties, bead shape, and surface
cleanliness of the weld metal.
5. Provides a means of adding alloying elements to change the mechanical
properties of the weld metal.


64 WELDING
Preparation for Welding and Cutting.
3. Welding position. This is the first performance characteristic
to consider. High-cellulose coating, like those on E6010 and
E6011 electrodes, generate a light slag that makes for rapid
solidifying of the weld metal, good for out-of-position welds.
4. Weld current. Covered electrodes run on alternating current,
or direct current, or both. When welding DC, the positive lead
typically connects to the electrode (direct current electrode
positive, or reverse polarity). Some suppliers design electrodes
that weld with the electrode negative (direct current electrode
negative, or straight polarity). Ensure that the electrode will
perform with the type of current available.
5. Joint design and material thickness. Some electrodes create
an arc that penetrates deeply, performing well on thick
sections with narrow grooves or no bevel. Poor fit-up calls
for electrodes that can bridge wide gaps.
6. Productivity. Meeting all other conditions, select the electrode
that gives the highest deposition rate.
7. The American Welding Society electrode numbering for
shielded metal arc welding electrodes is shown in AWS A5.1,
Specification for Covered Carbon Steel Welding Electrodes.
“E” stands for electrode. The first two digits (or the first
three digits in a five-digit number) are the tensile strength
of the weld deposit times 1,000. For example, an E7014
electrode has a tensile strength of 70,000 psi (70 x 1,000).
The third digit is the position in which the electrode can be
used. “1” is all positions, “2” is flat and horizontal only, and
“4” is a vertical down low-hydrogen electrode. The last digit
is the composition of the flux coating.
Power Sources
A combination AC/DC power source is common at home. Power
sources use static converters (transformers), rotating converters
(generators/alternators), or inverters to produce the electrical
power needed for shielded metal arc welding. These produce
25 to 400 amps at 15 to 35 volts. Either AC or DC may be used,
depending on the current supplied by the power source and the
electrode selected. The type of current used influences the perfor-
mance of the electrode. Following are some factors to consider:
• Voltage drop in welding cables is lower with AC, thus improving
welding at a distance from the power supply.
For your own
comfort, choose
the smallest size
electrode holder
that will hold your
electrode without
overheating.


WELDING 65
.Preparation for Welding and Cutting
• Low current requirements of small-diameter electrodes and
low welding currents make DC a good choice for a more
stable arc and better operating characteristics.
• Arc starting is generally easier with DC, particularly if
small-diameter electrodes are used. With AC, the welding
current passes through zero each half-cycle; this can present
problems for arc starting and arc stability unless special
electrodes are used.
• Arc length is better controlled with DC when welding with
a short arc length (low arc voltage) than with AC.
• Arc blow is seldom a problem with AC because the magnetic
field is constantly reversing (120 times per second). Welding
position in the vertical and overhead is somewhat better
with DC because lower amperage can be used. With suitable
electrodes, however, satisfactory welds can be made in all
positions with AC.
Accessory Equipment
An electrode holder is a clamping device with an insulated handle
that allows the welder to hold the electrode. The electrode holder
conducts the welding current from the welding cable to the
electrode through the jaws of the holder. The jaws must be kept
clean and in good condition to prevent overheating and causing
an excessive voltage drop in the welding circuit.
The workpiece connection is a device that connects
the workpiece lead to the workpiece. It should produce
a strong connection, yet allow for quick and easy
attachment. For light duty, a spring-loaded clamp may
work. For high current, a screw clamp can provide
a good connection.
Welding cables connect the electrode holder and
workpiece clamp to the power source as part of the
welding circuit. The cable size depends on the maximum
amperage to be used for welding, the length of the weld-
ing circuit (welding and work cables combined), and the
duty cycle of the welding machine. Miscellaneous hand
tools include a steel wire brush, hammer, chisel, and
chipping hammer to clean dirt, slag, and foreign matter
from the welding area.





WELDING 67
.Welding for the Novice
Welding for the Novice
After you have set up an area for the welding process you have
chosen, your merit badge counselor will inspect and approve
the area. Before you begin, you must be trained in the proper
use of regulators, if they are required, and be supervised by
your merit badge counselor. Always follow the manufacturer’s
recommended procedures.
This section will outline the steps for only two of the most
common welding processes, oxy-fuel welding and shielded
metal arc welding.
Preparing to Weld With Oxy-Fuel Welding
Cylinders should be secured to a wall or post for stability. Select the
correct regulator, hose, torch, and nozzle; check to ensure that the
fittings are tight and grease-free. The regulator should be clean and
in good working condition at all times. When opening the cylinder
valve, always stand with the cylinder valve between you and the
regulator. Turn the oxygen cylinder valve slowly to full open in
order to gradually increase the pressure in the regulator. Turn the
oxygen regulator adjusting screw clockwise to working pressure.
Close the torch-oxygen valve; then open the acetylene cylinder
valve a quarter to one and a half turns.
Turn the adjusting screw on the acetylene regulator clockwise
to the recommended pressure, no more than 15 psi, or pounds per
square inch. Close the fuel gas torch valve. As the welder, you must
regulate the torch flame to burn under neutral condition. With the
primary reaction exactly balanced, yielding only carbon monoxide
and hydrogen, the flame atmosphere is then neither carburizing
nor oxidizing. This flame adjustment must be determined from
the appearance of the inner flame cone. The hot metal is then
protected from the atmosphere by the combustion products in the
neutral flame and the fluxes, if used.


68 WELDING
Welding for the Novice.
Torch and Tip Technique
Before you try it yourself, your merit badge counselor can
demonstrate how to hold the torch for the proper work and
travel angles to weld a bead.
How to Weld a Bead
To begin welding, rotate the torch flame in a small circle at the
starting edge to establish a puddle; then push the puddle along
the joint. Continue this action, oscillating the torch tip across
the joint in a circular or semicircular motion. Forehand and
backhand welding indicate the direction of the tip relative to
the completed weld.
APPLYING WELD BEADS
Once you get the hang of it, you can take your skills to the next
level and cover a plate with weld beads side by side. It will take a
steady hand, but with some guidance you will have fun with this
welding technique. Be sure to follow your counselor’s instructions.
There are three types of usable flames: carburizing, oxidizing, and neutral
(see page 35). A carburizing flame has an excess fuel gas in the flame,
while an oxidizing flame has excess oxygen. A neutral flame has no
excess of either gas and thus is the best flame for welding steel. Using
a carburizing or oxidizing flame can degrade the material properties.
Practice before
attempting to
weld a bead
into the shape of
your initial.
Welding beads with shielded metal arc welding


WELDING 69
.Welding for the Novice
How to Weld Two Plates Together
After practicing lighting the torch and running beads on a flat
steel plate, you will learn how to weld two pieces of metal.
Common joints are butt joints, T-joints, and lap joints. Welded
joints are designed primarily on the basis of the strength and
safety required of the weldment.
Thicker members normally require some edge preparation
to allow puddle to reach the point where the weld metal must
be deposited. Often on thick members, the bevel is on both
sides or weld backing is used to prevent the molten metal from
seeping through the root of the joint.
When you are ready to close down the equipment, turn off the torch-
oxygen valve; then, turn off the fuel valve. Close the cylinder valves, then
open the torch oxygen valve to allow the oxygen to drain, and close the
torch oxygen valve. Release the adjusting screw on the oxygen regulator.
Open the torch-fuel valve to drain fuel gas, and then close it. Release
the adjusting screw on the fuel-gas regulator. Always follow the manufac-
turer’s recommendations for startup and shutdown of the equipment
you are using.
3
⁄4
3
⁄4
60˚
60˚
V-groove weld


70 WELDING
Welding for the Novice.
Start with a butt joint. With a weld
bead, you can fill the space between the
two pieces to create a single piece of metal.
The two pieces can have a closed root with
a square groove, or an open root with a
square groove. For greater strength, you can
bevel a groove angle with either a closed
root or an open root with a root face.
In working with a deep groove, you
may need multiple beads to fill the space.
Between each pass, clean all slag from the
bead surface. To fill a groove, you can make
stringer beads (run beads side by side) or
create a series of weave beads.
Although the steps here are for oxy-fuel welding,
the same steps can be followed for most welding
processes in which your counselor has experience
and for the equipment available.
A weave bead means to move the weld puddle from side to side, or to
weave it the width of about two or three times the electrode diameter.
A tack or tack weld is a small weld bead, usually 1
⁄4 to 1
⁄2 inch long, used to
hold the two pieces of steel together while you complete the weld. If the
two pieces of steel have not been tacked together, the heat distortion will
cause them to move apart or cause what is called angular distortion once
you start to weld.
Tack holds weld in place as
weld progresses
Tack welds at bottom ends of plate


WELDING 71
.Welding for the Novice
Normally, in addition to clamps, a butt weld
will require a tack weld to hold the pieces in place
during the heating from the weld bead. Place the
tack welds on each end of the joint. Depending on
the shape of the workpiece, you may need to tack
welds in other places, too, to control warping.
T-joints and lap joints can be joined with fillet
welds at the intersection of the two workpieces.
If the pieces are square, no end preparation is
necessary. When possible, use double-fillet
welds (as shown here) on both sides of the joint,
between the two pieces.
A fillet weld requires holding the torch at a
45-degree work angle and the same 10-degree to
30-degree travel angle as in the flat position. Tack
weld the end and other points as needed, as with
a butt weld. Practice welding the flat and vertical
up and down positions to learn how the heat helps
or hinders your efforts.
A fillet weld is a right triangular–shaped
weld formed at the interface between the
vertical and horizontal members of a T-joint.
A double fillet weld is a T-joint with a fillet
weld on both sides of the vertical member
of the joint.
45°
45°
Work angle


72 WELDING
Welding for the Novice.
Preparing to Weld With Shielded
Metal Arc Welding
As a welder, you can control four shielded metal arc welding
parameters: current setting (amperes), arc length (voltage),
electrode angles (degrees), and travel speed (inches per minute).
You can see the results of your skills as you weld. Compare your
beads to the ones shown.
Electrical Current Setting
To test the effects of current settings, use a 1
⁄8-inch diameter
E6013 electrode at varying welding currents, beginning at 115 to
125 amps, then dropping down by 5 to 10 amps. Run beads at
each setting. As the amps are lowered, check the change in the
weld bead until the heat is insufficient to melt the base metal.
Then, start over with the 115- to 125-amp setting and increase
by 5 to 10 amps. With too much heat, the electrode covering
will turn black, the bead will be flat with a lot of spatter, and
the base metal will become hot. With practice, and by using the
manufacturer’s amp setting recommendations, you will soon
learn what your current settings should be.
Effects of parameters on shielded metal arc welds
A B C D E F G
(A) PROPER AMPERAGE, ARC LENGTH, AND TRAVEL SPEED
(B) AMPERAGE TOO LOW
(C) AMPERAGE TOO HIGH
(D) ARC LENGTH TOO SHORT
(E) ARC LENGTH TOO LONG
(F) TRAVEL SPEED TOO SLOW
(G) TRAVEL SPEED TOO FAST
©American Welding Society, Welding Handbook, 9th ed., vol. 2


WELDING 73
.Welding for the Novice
Arc Length
After striking the arc, the electrode is consumed, so the welder
must constantly correct the arc length—the distance between
the workpiece and the end of the electrode core wire. The length
is approximately the diameter of the core wire of the electrode.
A short arc will not generate enough heat to fully melt the base
metal or the electrode. This can result in the electrode sticking
to the base metal, shallow penetration, or an uneven bead with
irregular shape and slag trapped in the weld.
Electrode Angles
Shielded metal arc welding requires skill in holding the electrode
in two related angles—travel angle and work angle. The travel
angle, movement away from the weld bead, refers to the direction
of travel the welder holds the electrode during welding. When
welding on a flat plate, start with 15 to 25 degrees from vertical,
tilted in the direction of travel. The work angle is 0 degrees from
the vertical, or 90 degrees off the base metal.
Travel Speed
As you move the electrode along the joint, you can determine
the best travel speed for building the width and height of the
weld bead. The correct travel speed should create a weld bead
about twice as wide as the outer diameter of the electrode, with
half-moon or crescent-shaped ripples, similar to laying down
a stack of dimes.
Prepare and Practice
Use SMAW to practice striking arcs and running beads. Then,
learn to join two pieces of metal as butt joints, T-joints, and lap
joints. Follow the steps used with oxy-fuel welding. Hold
the correct electrode angle as you would when running the
beads on plate.
Discontinuities
If the SMAW process is not applied properly, the welder can
produce almost any discontinuity. Improper manipulation of the
electrode can cause mistakes like incomplete fusion, incomplete
joint penetration, undercut, overlap, incorrect weld size, and
improper weld profile.
Slow travel speed
produces a bead
with too much
height and width
and poor fusion
to the base metal.
High travel speed
results in a low,
narrow bead, a
V-shaped ripple,
and possible
undercut along
the edges.


74 WELDING
Welding for the Novice.
Porosity normally results when moisture or contamination
is present in the electrode coating on the surface of the material
or in the atmosphere. Faulty technique can also cause porosity.
Cluster porosity occurs due to long arcing at the start and stop
of the arc. Porosity can result from the presence of arc blow, the
deflection of an arc from its normal path because of magnetic
forces. As you develop your welding technique with your merit
badge counselor, you will learn to minimize arc blow.
Variables for Arc Welding Processes
The welder has control over a number of variables that affect
weld penetration, bead geometry, and overall weld quality.
The variables include:
1. Welding current (electrode feed speed)
2. Polarity
3. Arc voltage (arc length)
4. Travel speed
5. Electrode extension
6. Electrode orientation (trail or lead angle)
7. Weld joint position
8. Electrode diameter
9. Shielding gas composition and flow rate
To consistently produce a satisfactory weld, you will need
to learn how to control these variables. Generally, changing one
variable requires changing one or more of the other variables for
a good weld. Experience builds the skill to recognize how the
type of base metal, electrode composition, welding position, and
quality requirements affect optimum results. Your merit badge
counselor can help you build these welding skills. Practice
running beads on flat plate; then, work on the basic joint to
gain confidence and skill.
Slag inclusions
are most often
the result of
improper welding
technique, insuf-
ficient cleaning,
or insufficient
access for
welding within
the joint.
Take responsibility
and precautions
for minimizing
risk and avoiding
injury by following
the information in
the “Health and
Safety” chapter.
Safety First
Review safety practices before welding. Being prepared
will minimize accidents. Eye damage and skin burn are
the most common injuries resulting from gas metal arc
welding. Hazards include fumes, gaseous emissions,
and electrical shock.


WELDING 75
.Welding for the Novice
Build a Patrol Popcorn Popper
Now that you have some welding
knowledge, you can build this
patrol popcorn popper with
your fellow patrol members.
With your merit badge
counselor’s close supervision, this
makes an ideal
group project.
21"
5 1
⁄2"
(TYPICAL)
1
⁄2"
(TYPICAL)
5 1
⁄2"
(TYPICAL)
BEND 90° IN EIGHT
LOCATIONS.
19"


76 WELDING
Welding for the Novice.
Tools Needed
• Metal cutting shears
• Plasma cutting torch (optional,
for use in place of metal
cutting shears)
• Builder’s square
• Tape measure
• Paint pen
• Vise
• Sturdy table with square edge
• Scrap piece of plywood, at least 11" x 13"
• Hammer
• Hacksaw
• Pliers
• Small pry bar or screwdriver
• Punch
• 2 C-clamps
• Drill with 1
⁄4" bit and 3
⁄8" bit
• Angle grinder, 4 1
⁄2"
• Grinding disk and sanding disk
Materials Needed
• 22-gauge sheet, cut to 21" x 19"
• 22-gauge sheet, cut to 12 1
⁄4" x 10 5
⁄8"
• Round bar, 2 pieces, each 10" x 1
⁄4"
• Round bar, 1 piece, 8 1
⁄2" x 1
⁄4"
• Round bar, 2 pieces, each 6" x 1
⁄4"
• Round bar, 1 piece, 56" x 1
⁄4"
• Wooden knob


WELDING 77
.Welding for the Novice
Required Skills
The following skills are needed for this welding project: layout,
cutting, fitting, welding, grinding, drilling.
Let the Building Begin
This project can be built from mild steel or aluminum sheet,
depending on the welding process available. If it is built from
aluminum, you might need more insulation for the handle to
protect the cook’s hands.
If you need to alter the design, be sure to write down your
changes and make a new sketch on another piece of paper.
Include dimensions, material callouts, and welding symbols.
Have your counselor review your altered design to check for
constructability and strength.
Step 1—Place your 21" x 19" sheet metal on a flat surface,
and from all four corners, measure and mark 5 1
⁄2" vertically
and 5 1
⁄2" horizontally. Then, using the builder’s square,
draw straight lines from your marks to create a 5 1
⁄2" square
in each corner.
Step 2—Measure and mark the 1" x 1
⁄2" handle notch found at
one end.
Step 3—Using shears (or the plasma cutting
torch), cut out the squares in each corner.
Step 4—Cut the two 1
⁄2" lines for the handle
notch. (This tab will be folded back.)
Step 5—Next, measure and mark the fold lines,
1
⁄2" from the edge of the remaining outside lines.
The lines remaining in the center are also
fold lines.
Step 6—Line up the fold lines at the top edges with a sharp
metal table edge, and clamp securely. Tap with a hammer to
get the folds started; bend to 90 degrees.
Step 7—Line up the inside fold lines in the
same way, securely clamping, then tapping with
a hammer on a sharp metal table edge.
Step 8—Get all four folds started. Finish bending
by hand. Tack the full length of the inside edges,
tapping the outside edges with a hammer as
needed, to bring them together tightly.


78 WELDING
Welding for the Novice.
Step 9—Place a 1
⁄2" long fillet weld in each
corner to keep the popcorn oil from leaking. Full-
length welds are not necessary. You can clamp
thicker metal to the outside to absorb excess heat
if you have trouble with burn-through.
Step 10—To start the handle, use the hacksaw
to cut the 1
⁄4" round stock into pieces of the
following sizes:
• One 56" piece
• Two 10" pieces
• One 8 1
⁄2" piece
• Two 6" pieces
Step 11—Find the center of the 56" piece and
mark it. Place it in a vise with the mark at the
edge of the vise. Bend it in half, by hand, until
it has a slightly rounded middle. Place the two
6" pieces in between the bent rod and adjust them
until they fit securely together. Clamp and weld.
Step 12—For the end of the handle, measure
and mark each piece of the handle at 4 inches.
Place the pieces of the handle in the vise, lining
up the marks with the edge of the vise. Bend
each end outward.
Step 13—Turn the box upside down on the table
and place the remaining pieces of round stock
on each of the three sides of the box. The handle
becomes the fourth side of the box. Weld securely.
Smooth the rough corners by grinding.
Step 14—Build the lid from the 12 1
⁄4" x 10 3
⁄8"
sheet. Measure 3
⁄4" vertically and horizontally on
both sides of each of the four corners, and draw
lines to create four squares. Measure and mark
1 1
⁄2" on both sides of each corner, and draw
a straight line between the two. Cut off the
corners. Measure and mark the steam holes. In
the diagram, 1" blocks are used, but you may use
any hole pattern you want. Place the lid on a piece
of plywood and use a punch and hammer to mark
the holes.


WELDING 79
.Welding for the Novice
BEND TOP AND BOTTOM 1
⁄8"
12 1
⁄4"
10 5
⁄8"
BEND BOTH ENDS FLAT
3
⁄8"
3
⁄4"
1 1
⁄2"
1"
1"
Step 15—Clamp the lid to the table, lining up the 3
⁄4" fold lines
with the edge. Tap the edge with a hammer to get the fold
started. Do this on all four sides. Completely bend the two
shorter sides until they are flat.
Step 16—Bend the two longer sides to 90 degrees.
Place the lid upside down on the table and place
the box upside down on the lid. Use the hammer
to tap the 90-degree lid folds around the round
stock on the box. Turn it over, drill the punch
marks, first with the smaller drill bit, then with the
3
⁄8" drill bit. To prevent injury from the rough sides,
use an angle grinder with a flap, or a sanding disk,
to smooth both sides of the drilled holes. Use a
screwdriver to adjust the folds on the lid so it slides easily.
Attach a wooden knob to the lid, and you are finished!


80 WELDING
Careers in Welding.
Careers in Welding
Manufacturing businesses are experiencing a shortage of skilled
welders. As baby boomers (those born between 1946 and 1964)
continue to retire, skilled welders are needed to replace them.
Despite the lure of $40,000 to $70,000 salaries after college
graduation and on-the-job training, it has been difficult to recruit
newcomers. This may be because the dreary image of the past
century’s industrial age lingers. But that era has passed. Thanks
to advances in science and technology, welding has a new spark.
Skilled and talented welders
have a brand new place in our
contemporary world. Numerous
welding careers offer flexible and
appealing lifestyles. Skilled welders
can advance to robotic welding
technicians, inspectors, supervisors,
salespersons, professors, and business
owners. The best place to start is right
here. The American Welding Society
provides information about exciting
careers in the welding industry.
The American Welding Society
Foundation awards scholarships
to students seeking two-year technical
degrees, four-year degrees, and
postgraduate education. Welding
education programs are modernizing
and expanding. The Southeastern
Institute of Manufacturing and
Technology in Florence, South
Carolina, with the support of the
Lincoln Electric Company and
ESAB Welding and Cutting, has
invested heavily in new welding
and cutting equipment.
Welding can also be applied in the arts.
Sculptor Jean Woodham created this 28-foot-
high sculpture, which required a crane, cherry
picker, and flatbed truck for installation.


WELDING 81
.Careers in Welding
A large part of the U.S. economy
is dependent on welding; continued
advances will help drive our nation’s
productivity. Whether you enjoy
working with your hands, traveling
the world, inspecting and analyzing,
crunching numbers, communicating,
or inspiring others, a career in
welding may await you.
• If you enjoy building things,
try welding skyscrapers in the
construction industry.
• Swimmers and divers should
consider underwater welding.
• Car and aeronautics enthusiasts
should try the automotive or
aerospace industry.
• If you are a math and science
whiz, think about welding
engineering and technology.
• If traveling is in your blood,
welding inspection can take
you to faraway places.
• For those who enjoy working
with others, welding equipment manufacturers need sales
and service representatives.
• Artists can try their hand at metal sculpting and ironworks.
• Aspiring entrepreneurs and business owners can open a welding
repair shop.
For more information, with your parent or guardian’s
permission, check out the American Welding Society website:
aws.org/career-resources/.


82 WELDING
Glossary.
Glossary
alloy. The mixing together or dissolving
of one or more elements in a metallic
matrix. These solutions can create
complex microstructures (see micro-
structure) that can be modified with the
application of heat (see heat treatment)
or plastic deformation (cold working).
Alloys usually have different properties
from those of the component elements.
American Welding Society. A nonprofit
organization dedicated to the advance-
ment of welding and allied processes.
amperage. A unit of measurement that
indicates the amount of current flowing
in a circuit.
arc. The area in which electricity jumps
from the electrode to the workpiece.
The heat generated by the arc melts
the base metals.
arc welding. A fusion welding process
that uses electricity to generate heat to
melt the base metals.
auto-darkening welding shield.
A welding shield that automatically
darkens to the predetermined welding
shade when the arc is established.
base metal. The workpiece and the
materials to be joined.
combustible material. An object that
can quickly catch fire if it comes in
contact with sparks or fire. Combustibles
must never be present in a weld area.
discontinuities. Interruptions of the
typical structure of a material, such as
a lack of homogeneity in its mechanical,
metallurgical, or physical characteristics.
electric current. The flow of electrons
resulting from an electric charge. This
flow, when meeting resistance either
through metal or across an arc, generates
large quantities of heat.
electrical shock. The flow of electricity
through the human body that can
be fatal.
electrode. A device that conducts elec-
tricity. In welding, it is used to conduct
electrical current through a workpiece
to fuse two pieces together. Depending
upon the process, the electrode is either
consumable, in the case of gas metal arc
welding or shielded metal arc welding,
or nonconsumable, as in gas tungsten
arc welding. Electrodes can emit
harmful fumes.
electrode holder. The insulated handle
that clamps onto the electrode. The
electrode holder must be dry and in
good condition.


WELDING 83
.Glossary
element. A pure substance that cannot
be refined or purified further without
the loss of its unique properties.
exhaust. Any of various devices used
to suck harmful fumes.
face shield. A hand-held welding shield
used for the protection of bystanders.
filler metal. A metal that is added in
the making of a joint through welding,
brazing, or soldering.
filter plate. The shaded protective lens
inside the welder’s helmet that filters out
harmful rays and intensely bright light.
fire shield. A large, flame-resistant screen
placed around the welding area to protect
bystanders from spatter or from the arc’s
harmful rays and bright light.
fire watcher. A person who keeps
watch over the welding area for the
welder. The fire watcher must be able
to respond quickly in the event of a fire
or other emergency.
flammable material. An object that
can quickly catch fire if it comes in
contact with sparks or fire. Flammables
must never be present in a weld area.
flux. A chemical cleaning agent that
facilitates soldering, brazing, and
welding by removing oxidation from
the metals to be joined
flux-cored arc welding (FCAW). A
semiautomatic or automatic arc welding
process using a continuously fed consum-
able tubular electrode containing a flux.
An externally supplied shielding gas is
sometimes used, but often the flux itself
is relied upon to generate the necessary
protection from the atmosphere.
forge welding. A welding process in
which two or more pieces of metal are
heated, then hammered together. Used
since ancient times, it is one of the
simplest methods of joining metals.
fume. Metallic vapor emitted during
welding, solidified into tiny particles
in a weld area.
fume plume. A cloudlike area where
welding fume collects.
fusion. A process of heating metal
that results in the phase change of
a substance from solid to liquid.
The liquid metals flow together
and, when cooled, form a single,
uninterrupted connection.
gas metal arc welding (GMAW). Also
known as metal inert gas welding, or
MIG. A semiautomatic or automatic arc
welding process in which a continuous
and consumable wire electrode and
shielding gas are fed through a welding
gun. There are four primary methods
of metal transfer in GMAW: globular,
short-circuiting, spray, and pulsed-spray
(see pulsed-spray). Each has distinct
properties and corresponding advan-
tages and limitations.
©American Welding Society, Welding
Handbook, 9th ed., vol. 1


84 WELDING
Glossary.
gas tungsten arc welding (GTAW).
Also known as tungsten inert gas, or
TIG. An arc welding process that uses
a nonconsumable tungsten electrode to
produce an arc to melt the base metal.
globular transfer. A method of trans-
ferring the filler metal, typically from
a wire welding process, across the arc
in molten droplets larger than the
diameter of the wire.
heat treatment. A process of changing
the mechanical and physical properties
of metal by applying cycles of heating
and cooling controlled by specific
intervals of time.
inert. Gas that is inactive; not chemically
reactive. Many shielding gases are inert.
infrared rays. Invisible rays emitted
during welding; these rays can
damage vision.
insulation. Material that does not allow
for the easy flow of electricity.
iron. An elemental metal first smelted
during the Middle Ages (15th to 17th
century) as the early Bronze Age
civilizations transitioned into the
Iron Age. When alloyed with carbon,
it forms steel. When mixed with
slag, it becomes wrought iron
(see wrought iron).
joint. The junction of edges to be
joined during welding.
lead (welding lead or work lead).
A conductor that provides an easy
path for electricity to flow.
metal. A solid material, typically hard,
shiny, malleable, fusible, and easily
shaped; a good conductor of electricity
and heat. Metals normally have high
luster and density, and can be deformed
under stress without breaking.
metallurgy. The study of the physical
and chemical behavior of metals and
their mixtures (see alloy). It is also the
technology of metals, including extraction
from the ground and the manipulation
of the mechanical properties by the
application of heat (see smelting).
microstructure. The interaction of very
small structures of metals and alloys
generally not visible to the human eye
except under 25 times magnification.
The microstructure of a material can
strongly influence physical properties
such as strength, toughness, ease of
shaping, and hardness.
oxy-fuel welding and cutting. Some-
times called oxyacetylene or gas welding
and cutting, this process combines
pressurized fuel gases (usually
hydrogen, acetylene, or natural gas)
with oxygen to form a high-intensity
flame of up to 6,000 degrees Fahrenheit.
The addition of a concentrated oxygen
stream allows for efficient cutting of
most iron that contains alloys.
primary voltage shock. An electrical
shock from 120 to 480 volts that occurs
in arc welding from touching a lead
inside a switched-on welder and
touching the welder case or other
grounded metal at the same time.
pulsed-spray. Increasing and decreasing
(pulsing) the welding current to control
the properties of the electric arc and the
transfer of filler.


WELDING 85
.Glossary
regulator. A device controlling the
amount of gas flow from a cylinder
during a weld.
secondary voltage shock. An electrical
shock from 60 to 100 volts that occurs in
arc welding from touching the electrode
while another part of the body touches
the workpiece.
shielded metal arc welding (SMAW).
Also known as stick welding. A manual
arc welding process that uses a con-
sumable electrode coated in flux to
lay the weld. An electric current forms
an electric arc between the electrode
and the metals to be joined. As the
weld is laid, the flux coating of the
electrode disintegrates, giving off
vapors that serve as a shielding gas,
providing a layer of slag, which doubly
protect the weld area from atmospheric
contamination. Because of the versatil-
ity and simplicity of its equipment and
operation, shielded metal arc welding
is one of the world’s most popular
welding processes.
shielding. Protecting the weld metal
from contamination by means of the
decomposition of the flux coating the
electrode. The electrode core wire and
its covering supply the filler metal.
short-circuiting transfer. A method
of transferring the filler metal from a
wire welding process by a sequence of
events in which the filler metal touches
the base metal and then burns back to
reestablish the welding arc.
slag. Cooled flux that forms on top of
the weld bead. Slag protects the cooling
metal and is then chipped off.
smelting. A form of extractive metallurgy
used to produce a metal from the ore
extracted from the ground.
spatter. Liquid metal droplets expelled
from the welding process that can spray
up to 35 feet from the work area.
spray transfer. A method of transferring
the filler metal, typically from a wire
welding process, across the arc in
molten droplets, smaller than the
diameter of the wire.
steel. An alloy of iron and small amounts
of other elements such as carbon,
manganese, chromium, vanadium,
nickel, and tungsten.
submerged arc welding (SAW). An
automatic welding process in which
the electric welding arc is covered by
a powdered flux. It is useful for filling
joints in heavy plate and pipe. It is one
of the most productive and popular
welding processes.
tensile strength. The resistance to
breakage exhibited by material when
subjected to a pulling stress. The unit
of tensile strength is the psi.
©American Welding Society,
Welding Handbook, 9th ed., vol. 2


86 WELDING
Glossary.
thermoplastic. A plastic that turns to
liquid when heated, and freezes when
cooled. Thermoplastic differs from
thermosetting plastic, which can be
remelted and remolded.
ultraviolet rays. Harmful invisible rays
emitted by the arc during welding that
can damage a welder’s vision and
burn skin.
ventilation. A means of providing fresh
air for the welder’s safety.
weldability. The capacity of material to
be welded under imposed fabrication
conditions into a specific, suitably
designed structure and to perform
satisfactorily in the intended service.
welding. The process of joining metals
or thermoplastics by fusion. This is
often done by melting the workpieces
and adding a filler material to form a
pool of molten material (the weld pool)
that cools to become a strong joint.
welding helmet. A protective eye and
face device worn by the welder for
protection from the arc’s harmful rays
and intensely bright light. Sometimes
called welding shield.
welding screen. A large fire-resistant
screen placed around a weld area
to protect bystanders and to block
stray spatter.
weldment. An assembly of component
parts joined by welding.
weld pool. The molten metal in a weld
prior to its solidification as weld metal.
weld root. The point at which the weld
metal extends farthest into a joint and
intersects the base metal.
welder’s flash. An extremely painful
condition that can result from exposure
to UV rays. It can feel like sunburn
on the eye and is usually a temporary
condition.
work cable. The path used in welding
to conduct electricity from the welder
to the workpiece. To prevent injury, the
work cables must be correctly installed
and in good condition.
workpiece. The part that is welded,
brazed, soldered, thermally cut, or
thermally sprayed.
wrought iron. A pure form of iron mixed
with slag, creating a fibrous material with
the appearance of a “grain” resembling
wood that is visible when etched or bent
to the point of failure. Wrought iron
is tough, malleable, ductile, and
easily welded.


WELDING 87
.Welding Resources
Welding Resources
The resources listed below represent only a fraction of available welding information.
Check your local library, bookstores, and the internet for additional titles, including
older or out-of-print books. Most welding techniques are timeless.
Scouting Resources
Drafting, Electronics, Engineering, First
Aid, Inventing, Metalwork, Robotics,
and Safety merit badge pamphlets
Books
American National Standards Institute
(ANSI) Accredited Standards
Committee Z49. Safety in Welding,
Cutting, and Allied Processes. ANSI
Z49.1:2021. American Welding
Society, 2021.
American Welding Society. Welding
Handbook, Vol. 1 – Welding and
Cutting Science and Technology, 10th
ed. American Welding Society, 2018.
American Welding Society. Welding
Handbook, Vol. 2 – Welding Processes
Part 1, 9th ed. American Welding
Society, 2004.
American Welding Society. Welding
Handbook, Vol. 3 – Welding Processes
Part 2, 9th ed. American Welding
Society, 2007.
Geary, Don, and Rex Miller. Welding,
2nd ed. McGraw-Hill, 2011.
Minnick, William H. Gas Tungsten Arc
Welding Handbook, 7th ed.
Goodheart-Willcox Company, 2020.
O’Brien, Robert L. Jefferson’s Welding
Encyclopedia, 18th ed. American
Welding Society, 1997.
Organizations and Websites
American Welding Society
aws.org
ESAB Education Resources
esab.com/us/nam_en/esab-university
Hobart Institute of Welding
Technology
welding.org
James F. Lincoln Arc Welding
Foundation
jflf.org
Lincoln Electric Company
lincolnelectric.com
Miller Electric Manufacturing Co.
millerwelds.com/resources
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


88 WELDING
Welding Resources.
Photo and Illustration Credits
American Welding Society, courtesy—
pages 6, 9, 13 (welder), 15, 25 (book
cover), 28, 29, 31 (undercut, incom-
plete joint penetration, porosity),
34, 35 (carburizing flame, neutral
flame, oxidizing flame), 38 (shielding),
39 (fixture), 47, 56 (welding gun),
57, 58 (arc cutting, arc welding),
59, 72, 83, 85, and 88
David Landon, courtesy—pages 14, 18,
19, 24, 25 (cylinders), 55 (cylinders),
75 (plans), and 79 (plans)
Library of Congress Prints & Photographs
Division, courtesy—page 8
Lincoln Electric Company, Cleveland,
Ohio, USA, courtesy—pages 3, 21
(work area), 23 (fume plume, good
ventilation), 30, 37, 38 (fillet weld), 39
(fume exhaust), 66, 70 (oxy welding
steps), and 71 (T-joint)
Thermadyne Industries Inc., courtesy—
page 31 (oxy-fuel welding)
U.S. Navy/Ridge Leoni, courtesy—page 68
U.S. Navy/Andrew McKaskle, courtesy—
page 81
Jean Woodham, courtesy—page 80
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of
or are protected by Scouting America.
John McDearmon—all illustrations on
pages 33, 36, 40, 41, 43, 45, 48, 49,
52–54, 61–62, 69, 71, and 84
Acknowledgments
This Welding merit badge pamphlet
was written by a special committee to
the Professional Development Council
of the American Welding Society.
Committee members included:
• David Landon, Vermeer Corporation—
committee chair and vice president,
American Welding Society
• Jack Compton (retired), College of
the Canyons
• Richard Harris, retired editor, Welding
Design & Fabrication magazine
• J. Jones, Thermadyne Industries
• Ernest Levert, Lockheed Martin
• Roy Lanier, Pitt Community College
• Dennis Marks, American
Welding Society
• Neil Shannon, Carlson Testing
Special thanks to Ernest Levert and
J. Jones for their assistance
with photography.
The American Welding Society
has published guidelines, defini-
tions, and facts to help you gain
knowledge about being safe while
welding. This information can
be downloaded for free at
aws.org/technical/facts. Further
information about welding safety
can be found at the American
Welding Society’s website at
aws.org.
®