EMERGENCY
PREPAREDNESS


EMERGENCY
PREPAREDNESS
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


35888
ISBN 978-0-8395-3368-9
©2025 Scouting America
2025 Printing
Note to the Counselor
Scouting America believes that its youth members need adult
contacts to help them develop character, citizenship, and fitness.
As a merit badge counselor, you have subscribed to these aims
of Scouting.
The Guide to Safe Scouting, No. 34416, is updated every
year and is available from your local council Scout shop. It is
also accessible online at the official Scouting America website:
scouting.org/health-and-safety. As an Emergency Preparedness
merit badge counselor, this booklet may be particularly helpful
to you.
Some Scouting America local councils have both risk
management and health and safety committees; or these
committees may be combined. In Scouting America, risk
management is an administrative function (prevention,
funding); health and safety is a program function (assuring
implementation of safe programs). These committees may be
helpful as you plan Scouting activities in your area.
The protection of our youth members is as vital as
development of their career and hobby interests, which is the
merit badge program’s basic function. Your active participation
in and support of this goal is appreciated.
FPO


EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS 3
Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Emergency-Preparedness or check Scoutbook for the latest
requirements.


4 EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS


EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS 5


6 EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS


EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS 7





EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS 9
Contents
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Scouts Make a Difference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
Emergency Preparedness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
First Aid First . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
Protect, Respond, Recover, Prevent, and Mitigate . . . . . . . . . 21
The Five Aspects of Emergency Preparedness . . . . . . . . . 22
Questions for Emergency Preparedness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
Emergency Packs and Kits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
Types of Emergencies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
Emergency in the Home . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
Emergency in Your Car . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
Emergency in the Outdoors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
Weather-Related Emergencies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
Other Emergencies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
Saving Lives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
Community Emergency Service . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
Lending a Helping Hand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
Emergency Mobilization Plans and Preparation . . . . . . . . 88
Getting Involved: Emergency Service Projects. . . . . . . . . . 89
Emergency Preparedness Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93





EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS 11
.Introduction
Introduction
The Atlantic hurricane season of 2005 produced one of the five
deadliest hurricanes in U.S. history. Hurricane Katrina made
landfall on August 29, 2005. With peak winds up to 175 mph, the
storm caused great devastation along much of the country’s Gulf
Coast. The loss of life and property was particularly catastrophic
in New Orleans, Louisiana, where the city’s levee system failed.
Floodwaters consumed the area, and nearly 80 percent of the city
lay underwater.
The storm’s path caused severe damage to the entire
Mississippi coast. The damage reached as far as 100 miles from
the eye of the storm. Alabama and Florida also suffered flooding,
property damage, and loss of lives.
Damage from Hurricane Katrina has been estimated at
approximately $150 billion, making it the costliest natural
disaster in U.S. history. The cost in human lives: 1,836 fatalities.


12 EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
Introduction.
Scouts Make a Difference
More recently, the 2011 tornado season produced the second
highest number of tornadoes recorded in a single year in U.S.
history with 1,691 reported. One of those tornadoes—an EF-5,
which causes the most intense damage—destroyed much
of Joplin, Missouri, and became the deadliest tornado in the
United States since 1950.
With winds reaching more than 200 mph and a track three-
quarters of a mile wide and six miles long, the Joplin tornado
damaged or destroyed thousands of structures, injured more
than 1,000, and resulted in more than 150 deaths.
Almost immediately, the Ozark Trails Council, which serves
the Joplin area, began receiving inquiries from Scouts all over
the country who wanted to help the damaged city recover.
Half of Joplin’s public schools were damaged or destroyed in
the storm, and officials determined that preparing for the
upcoming school year would require a large-scale team effort.
The council planned a day of service on August 6 to benefit the
Joplin School District, bringing together more than 1,000 Scouts
from seven states to pick up debris, set up equipment, paint play-
ground fixtures, and distribute classroom supplies.
Additionally, the council hosted two days of camp programs
at the Frank Childress Scout Reservation in July for the city’s
summer school students. More than 700 children were able to
leave the devastation behind for a few hours and participate in
activities that included archery and swimming.
Troop 307 from Deshler, Nebraska, delivered bottled water,
furniture, and other donated supplies after a tornado hit Joplin,
Missouri, in May 2011.


EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS 13
.Introduction
Emergency Preparedness
What is an emergency? Usually, it is
something unforeseen, unexpected—
something that requires immediate
action. It can be related to weather,
such as a hurricane, a tornado, a
snowstorm, or a flood. An emergency
can be an accident, such as an explo-
sion, a fire, or a car accident. As a
Scout, you should try to learn the
actions that can be helpful and
needed before an emergency—what
preparedness is all about—as well as
during and after an emergency.
It is important to be calm during an emergency situation.
Being prepared with the knowledge to help others can help
you remain level-headed. These tips may also be helpful.
• When an emergency arises, first take a deep breath.
• Assess the situation and plan how to proceed.
• Focus on your task.
The Scout motto: Be Prepared. Nowhere do these words
carry more meaning than in emergency preparedness. And
these words, too, from the Scout Oath: I will do my best ...
to help other people at all times. And from the Scout Law:
A Scout is ... helpful ... brave.


14 EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
Introduction.
Scouts are often called on to help because they know first
aid and they know about the discipline and planning needed to
support a situation that requires leadership. Scouting gives you
the opportunity to understand and respond to your community’s
emergency preparedness plan. As you earn this merit badge,
you will learn how to handle many emergency situations as
an individual and as a member of a Scouting unit serving your
neighborhood and community. Whether you are needed as an
active member of a community response team, or whether you
gather the skills and information you need to help protect your
family or yourself from injury, everything you learn will help
you to be brave and prepared to help other people at all times.
The Federal Emergency Management Agency responds
to all types of disasters. Some are weather-related
emergencies such as hurricanes, tornados, tsunamis,
volcanic eruptions, earthquakes, and winter storms.
Other emergencies may be caused by humans and may
or may not be intentional. Such situations include chem-
ical or hazardous material emergencies, dam failures,
nuclear power plant emergencies, and acts of terrorism.


EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS 15
.Introduction
Prepared for a Good Turn
After the terrorist attacks on the United States on
September 11, 2001, thousands of American heroes
emerged. Among the police officers, firefighters, and
rescue workers who saved lives and worked around
the clock during this
pivotal moment in
American history
were other heroes
who rallied for their
country—Scouts.
Scouting
America commis-
sioned artist Joseph
Csatari to capture a
lasting image of the
Scouts who were
prepared for—and
who responded
to—this emergency.
The painting, called
“Prepared for a
Good Turn,” portrays
Scouts working to
provide relief along-
side police officers
and firefighters, and
illustrates true sto-
ries of Scout heroes.
Among them, Cub
Scouts from Illinois who sent work gloves to the crew
members at Ground Zero, and Scouts from New York
who donated cots for the relief workers to rest on at the
site and collected bottled drinks to help refresh them.
The painting also includes Scouts in Oklahoma who
started a “Helping Hands for Heroes” campaign to lend
a hand to the families of those suddenly called into
active military duty.





EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS 17
.First Aid First
First Aid First
One of the first requirements for this merit badge is to earn the First
Aid merit badge. First aid is emergency preparedness in action. You
need to be able to recognize what is wrong with a person and then
react to the emergency with the correct treatment until medical
help arrives.
You should know first aid so well that you would be able to
react to any situation immediately. What would you do in
these situations?
• You are eating pizza with some friends. Suddenly, your
friend’s little sister darts in and grabs some pizza. As
she runs away giggling and eating, she trips and starts
choking. She turns blue and stops breathing.
• You are camping out with your patrol. During some free
time, you offer to take a new patrol member on a hike around
the lake. When you are halfway around the lake, the Scout
complains of a sore heel and walking is becoming difficult.
Upon removing the shoe from that foot (the Scout is wearing
old running shoes rather than sturdy hiking boots), a
huge blister is found. You have two miles to walk in either
direction to get back to camp and the first-aid kit.
• You are horsing around with friends indoors on a rainy day.
One of them gets pushed and falls into a glass-topped coffee
table. The glass shatters and gashes your buddy’s wrist.
Blood starts spurting out.
• While skateboarding with you, a friend’s board hits a crack.
Thrown from the skateboard and not wearing a helmet, your
friend hits the cement bank headfirst and is knocked unconscious.
Now look at the situations again, and ask yourself how you
might have helped to prevent them—another important part of
emergency preparedness.
These emergencies call for immediate action. If you have
already earned the First Aid merit badge, review those skills so
you will be prepared to use them in an emergency.FIRST AID


18 EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
First Aid First.
The Latest First Aid for Wounds and CPR
Most of us are concerned
about the rapid spread of
blood-borne pathogens—
such as the hepatitis B
virus (HBV) and human
immunodeficiency virus
(HIV), the AIDS virus—and
try to avoid exposing
ourselves to this hazard.
Health professionals and
first aiders like those of
us in Scouting may find
ourselves faced with
special problems in this
regard.
The First Aid merit
badge pamphlet and
other Scouting America
handbooks used to
advocate direct hand
pressure to stop bleeding in injuries. However, this action could involve
getting the victim’s blood on the rescuer’s skin. If the victim has HIV or
some other blood-borne disease, the rescuer could be infected with the
virus. If the rescuer has open wounds on or near his or her hands, there is
the risk of exposure to the victim.
In rescue breathing there is the risk of passing airborne infectious
diseases such as influenza from victim to rescuer. But Scout leaders,
parents, guardians, and youth members should know that there is no
evidence that a rescuer can be infected by the hepatitis B virus or HIV
either through contact with human saliva or by giving rescue breathing.
Studies show that both hepatitis B and HIV are blood-borne illnesses.
Scouting America has checked with experts in the federal
government’s Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and with the
American Red Cross. These authorities suggest that we should:
• Maintain Scouting America’s tradition of rendering first aid to those in
need.
Local chapters of the American Red Cross and
American Heart Association offer classes in first-aid
training. Your Scout leaders can help you obtain more
information about first-aid training opportunities.


EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS 19
.First Aid First
• Recognize that very often the victims we treat with first aid are friends
and family members with whose health we are familiar. Therefore, in
such cases, except when we know they have infectious diseases, we
should not hesitate to render first aid.
The Scouting America Health and Safety Committee recommends the
following.
Treat all blood and other bodily fluids as if they are contaminated
with blood-borne viruses. Do not use bare hands to stop bleeding; always
use a protective barrier; always wash exposed skin areas with water and
soap immediately after treating the victim.
Have available and use personal protective equipment that helps
prevent direct contact with infected materials. This equipment includes
disposable, nonlatex gloves (nitrile or vinyl) and breathing barriers used
when performing rescue breathing.
To help reduce the risk of getting or transmitting infectious disease, follow
these guidelines for the use of protective equipment.
• Wear disposable, single-use gloves whenever giving care, particularly
if there is risk of contact with blood or bodily fluids.
• Wear protective coverings such as a mask, eyewear, or a gown when
you are likely to come in contact with blood or other bodily fluids that
may splash.
• Cover any cuts, scrapes, or sores prior to putting on protective equipment.
• Use breathing barriers such as resuscitation masks or face shields
when giving rescue breaths. A breathing barrier with a one-way HEPA
valve offers the best protection.
• Remove disposable gloves without contacting the soiled part of the
gloves, and dispose of them in a proper container.
• Change gloves before you care for a different victim.
• Remove jewelry such as rings, bracelets, and watches before putting
on disposable gloves.
• Do not clean or reuse disposable gloves.
• Do not use disposable gloves that are discolored, torn, or punctured.





EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS 21
Protect, Respond, Recover, Prevent, and Mitigate
Protect, Respond,
Recover, Prevent,
and Mitigate
In many ways, the world you live in today is much safer than
the world in which your elders grew up. For instance, medical
advances today give us better protection from some diseases
that were devastating in the past, such as smallpox. Weather
forecasting technology allows for more accurate predictions and
better planning for inclement weather.
Many institutions help us to be safer and deal with emer-
gencies, too. The Occupational Safety and Health Administration
helps ensure safe and healthful workplaces for employees in the
United States. The Federal Emergency Management Agency has
the mission of helping citizens plan for and respond to disasters
and emergencies of all kinds. The American Red Cross works
around the world to help people in need.
But it is not enough to rely on medicine, technology,
institutions, or the actions of others to keep us prepared and safe.
Look carefully at your home and your community, and educate
yourself about potential dangers. As you work on requirements
for the Emergency Preparedness merit badge, pay close attention
to four things: protection, response, recovery, and prevention
and mitigation.
Being prepared does not mean taking risk needlessly.
In situations where a Scout lacks the necessary skill
or knowledge for a task due to lack of training or
experience, or if proper equipment is unavailable,
the Scout has an obligation to advise the supervisor
on-site of the unsafe situation and to propose
alternative solutions.


22 EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
Protect, Respond, Recover, Prevent, and Mitigate.
The Five Aspects of
Emergency Preparedness
Emergency personnel, such as Red Cross and FEMA workers,
use many of the same terms when talking about emergency
management. That is just one reason it is a good idea to become
familiar with such terms: if you find yourself working with
emergency personnel, you will understand what your actions
are helping to accomplish.
1. Protection. When you take actions to develop a strategy for
emergency response, you recognize the possible threats from
natural, man-made, and other disasters. Making a plan and
practicing it, assembling an emergency or disaster supplies
kit, and installing warning devices are all actions you can
take to prepare for an emergency.
2. Response. In this phase of emergency management, you may
be called upon to help with shelter, first aid, and other
activities. On a personal level, your response to an emergency
can take many forms, such as evacuating an area. Your
response can help reduce the occurrence of secondary damage.
3. Recovery. After a disaster or other
emergency, the goal is to try to get things
back to “normal.” In addition to rebuilding
and repairing property, there is also work to
be done to try to bring physical and
emotional health back to a stable condition.
4. Prevention. By planning ahead and taking
prevention seriously, you can help prevent
accidents from happening.
5. Mitigation. You can help reduce the loss of
life and property by lessening the impact of
future disasters. That means taking action
before the next disaster.
FEMA uses a “whole community” approach for handling
emergency situations. This calls for the private and non-
profit sectors, the general public, and faith-based and
other organizations to be fully engaged with their local,
tribal, state, territorial, and federal government partners.
It is important to
be prepared to
offer assistance
in an emergency
situation.
However, be
aware that you
may never need
to use your
training and skills.


EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS 23
. Protect, Respond, Recover, Prevent, and Mitigate
Let’s say you live in an area that has a high tornado risk.
You can protect yourself and your family by recognizing that
a tornado emergency could happen and making a plan in case
of that emergency. You can respond by knowing what actions
you will take ahead of time. You may have to recover from a
tornado that damages your home. Services and resources can
be obtained from the Red Cross or other providers. But all along
the way, you can take actions to help prevent additional injuries
and accidents, and mitigate, or lessen, the impact on your fam-
ily. For instance, watching the news and being familiar with the
tornado sirens that sound in your area could give you more time
to respond. Taking shelter away from windows in a basement or
interior room of the house could lessen your chances of being hit
by flying objects. Even after a tornado, as you help with rebuild-
ing efforts, wearing a sturdy pair of work gloves can help keep
you from getting cuts and infections from handling debris.
A careful driver who follows traffic
laws and avoids distractions such as
cell phone use or texting is less likely
to have an accident. Such a driver is
taking preventative actions. However,
even the best driver may not be able
to respond quickly enough to prevent
a collision caused by another driver
losing control of their car. In that case,
prior decisions to wear safety belts and
to use appropriate restraints for infants
and small children will help mitigate
the emergency; that is, they will reduce
or lessen the chance of serious injury.
Likewise, household fires can be prevented by careful attention to
potential sources: People can clear debris from around a furnace, not
overload electrical circuits, and be attentive when using candles or
fireplaces. If a fire does break out, smoke alarms and a preplanned escape
route will help mitigate the situation. In other words, the emergency is
less severe if everyone gets out of the house alive. In public buildings
such as schools, automatic sprinkler systems can mitigate a fire by
keeping it from spreading throughout the building.


24 EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
Protect, Respond, Recover, Prevent, and Mitigate.
Questions for Emergency Preparedness
Here are the kinds of questions you may ask yourself as you
look around.
1. Questions that will help you protect against a risky situa-
tion or possibility of an emergency or accident occurring.
• Have I prepared a disaster supplies kit with supplies that
will last for at least three days? Is the kit packed and
stored in an easy-to-access area?
• Have I made an emergency plan with family members
in case of a disaster? Have I planned the quickest escape
routes from my home and evacuation routes from my
neighborhood? Does my family have a meeting place
outside our home in case of a fire and another place
outside the neighborhood in case we cannot return home?
Do we have an out-of-town contact person to call with
information about our safety and location in case local
lines are jammed?
• Do I know the safe places to go within my home in case my
family and I need shelter during extreme weather events
such as a tornado? Have I posted emergency numbers near
our home telephone where they can easily be found?
• Do I know how to be informed in case of an emergency?
Do I know how local authorities might contact me in the
event of a disaster, such as using warning sirens to sound
an alert? Do I know which radio and television stations
broadcast emergency warning information?
• Do I know which hazards are most likely to happen in my
community? Do I live in an area that may experience dan-
gerous weather (heat waves, hurricanes, tornadoes,
blizzard conditions)? During what time of year?
2. Questions that will help you respond
to an emergency situation in the best
way you can.
• How can I plan before a crisis?
Do I know what actions to take
for a potential emergency? Have I
gathered and positioned supplies
and contact numbers that might
be needed? Can I help educate
and train people about safety and
preparedness? Do I know which
neighbors may need help?
An important
concern during
an emergency
situation such as
a natural disaster
is access to clean
water. See “Family
Disaster Kit” later
in this chapter for
information about
how much clean
water to keep on
hand in case of
an emergency.


EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS 25
. Protect, Respond, Recover, Prevent, and Mitigate
• How can I react after a crisis? Is there a family or community
plan for reaction that I should know about? What resources
might be mobilized and needed, and how can I help?
3. Questions that will help you and your family to recover
from a dangerous situation or emergency.
• After a disaster, how can I help clean up the damage?
Do I have the skills and tools to help repair and rebuild
my home and my community?
• How can I help myself and my family recover emotionally
from the disaster?
• Do I understand that physical recovery and emotional
recovery take time?
4. Questions that will help prevent a dangerous situation or
emergency whenever possible.
• What can I do to make my home safer from fire or explosion?
• How do I check for household hazards?
• What can I do to be proactive in preparing my family for
weather-related emergencies typical for my local area
(such as hurricanes, tornadoes, and snowstorms)?
5. Questions that will help you mitigate, or reduce, loss in
an emergency situation.
• How can I help minimize, or
lessen, the damage that might
be caused during an emergency
(during violent weather,
for instance)?
• Can I help make sure that no
one would be injured during
an emergency?
• Can I help make sure that people
are acting in a safe manner
during an emergency or
dangerous situation, such as
when I am hiking with my troop
in the wilderness?
Some emergency
responders
specialize in
emotional first aid
so they are able
to treat a survivor
immediately
following a
traumatic event.
Understand how smoke detectors work. Make
sure to change their batteries regularly, such
as during a springtime holiday and again
during a fall holiday.


26 EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
Protect, Respond, Recover, Prevent, and Mitigate.
Emergency Packs and Kits
The following emergency kits will provide you with items that
will make your life easier in the event of an emergency. Also, by
assembling and maintaining such kits, you are thinking ahead
about how to deal with possible emergencies before they develop.
Family Disaster Kit
If you have received a warning that requires you and your
family to evacuate your home, you may have little time to throw
together a few items or dash to a well-stocked emergency shelter.
It would be better to have a waterproof box or suitcase of
emergency supplies and water on hand to meet your family’s
needs for a few days or, better, for a week. These items come in
handy in an emergency even if you do not have to evacuate.
Some families keep their supplies in a basement shelter area or in
a storm cellar, if they have one.
Five Aspects of Emergency Preparedness
This is what emergency preparedness is all about: preparing for, respond-
ing to, recovering from, mitigating, and preventing emergency situations.
Emergencies can be met and handled. Whether an emergency involves your
family or your entire community, on highways or waterways, in your home or
outdoors, you can bring your Scouting skills and knowledge to the situation
and help. Re-create this chart to help you complete requirement 2.
Emergency
Situation Protect Respond Recover Prevent Mitigate
Fire in
the home
Tornado
Car accident
According to Ready.gov, a campaign from the Federal
Emergency Management Agency, “When preparing
for a possible emergency situation, it’s best to think first
about the basics of survival: fresh water, food, clean air,
and warmth.” The website, ready.gov, has many helpful
resources related to specific types of emergencies.
For more
information about
emergency kits,
see the Ready.gov
or American Red
Cross entries in
the resources
section of
this pamphlet.


EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS 27
. Protect, Respond, Recover, Prevent, and Mitigate
Include the following items:
QQ Minimum of five-day supply of water (1 gallon per person per
day) stored in sealed, unbreakable containers such as plastic
jugs
QQ Nonperishable foods (including pet food) and a nonelectric
can opener (be sure to check expiration dates)
QQ Eating utensils
QQ Any special foods or other important items for babies, elderly
people, or family members such as extra eyeglasses, prescription
medications (if practical), portable devices, and battery chargers
QQ Family first-aid kit
QQ Battery- or crank-powered radio
QQ Flashlight or lantern or chemical light sticks
QQ Extra batteries (stored separately and rotated regularly
with fresh ones)
QQ Matches in waterproof container and fire starting kit
QQ Blankets or a sleeping bag for each family member
QQ Extra clothing appropriate for the season
QQ Dust masks for air filtering
QQ Soap, wipes, or antibacterial gel for hand sanitation
QQ Toilet paper
QQ Emergency toilet, if needed (Use a garbage container, bucket, or
similar watertight container lined with plastic bags. Tie the bags
near the top so as to allow for gas build-up. Throw sawdust, cat
litter, sand, or dirt into the bag after each use to help contain
odors and dry the waste.)
QQ Copies of important family documents (such as identification,
copies of insurance policies, prescriptions list, and emergency
contact list with phone numbers and email addresses) kept in
a waterproof container
QQ Whistle to signal for help
QQ Local maps (for navigating to shelters; be sure to obtain a
local map when you are visiting another area)
QQ Cash and coins
QQ Books, games, and other personal comfort items
QQ Sunscreen and insect repellent
It’s a good
idea to keep
prescription
medications
handy so that
they can be found
and taken in a
moment’s notice.


28 EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
Protect, Respond, Recover, Prevent, and Mitigate.
Major Disaster Preparedness Items
The following items are helpful during an emergency or if you
are safe staying in your home and an evacuation has not
been ordered.
QQ List of emergency telephone numbers and out-of-town
contact person in case local lines are busy
QQ Fire extinguisher (preferably a multipurpose one)
QQ Tool kit (ax, shovel, broom, screwdriver, pliers, hammer, coil
of 1
⁄2-inch rope, coil of baling wire, duct tape, razor blades,
adjustable wrench for turning off gas or water)
QQ Simple chart showing where shutoff valves are located,
including the main electrical switch
QQ Portable fire escape ladder for homes or buildings of more
than one level
QQ Portable stove with appropriate fuel (used outdoors away
from garage or carport to avoid the danger of carbon
monoxide poisoning)
QQ Gloves and rags
QQ Covered containers (that can be tightly sealed) for
storing refuse
QQ Garden hose kept near an outside faucet at all times
Be sure to store
any emergency
items in a place
free from
moisture, frost,
or too much heat.
In your area,
911 may be the
only number
needed for any
emergency.
During any type of emergency, it is always a good idea
to carry a mobile phone if you have one. Don’t forget
the phone charger, too.


EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS 29
. Protect, Respond, Recover, Prevent, and Mitigate
Personal Emergency Service Bag
Be prepared for a mobilization call with a personal emergency
service bag. You will be ready for many emergencies if you use
the following checklist as you equip your bag.
QQ Poncho or raincoat (with hood or rain hat)
QQ Change of underwear and socks
QQ Small bag with toothbrush, toothpaste, soap, comb,
needle, thread, shoelaces, and toilet paper
QQ Sleeping bag (or bedroll of two wool blankets) and
waterproof ground cloth
QQ Maps of areas where your troop is likely to serve
QQ 50 feet of No. 5 sash cord or similar-size nylon cord
QQ Pocket knife and ax and/or saw
QQ Water treatment equipment
QQ Cook kit and canteen
QQ Flashlight
QQ Battery-powered radio
QQ Extra batteries (stored separately)
QQ Hard hat
QQ Other equipment as determined by weather conditions
(winter jacket, rubber boots, gloves, etc.)
QQ Personal first-aid kit (You can order a personal first-aid kit
through your local council service center, or you can make
your own. Include gauze bandages and pads, adhesive
bandages, soap, antibiotic ointment for burns, and
roller bandages.)
QQ Matches in a waterproof container
QQ Emergency ration (such as energy bar, energy gel, etc.;
well-wrapped)
QQ Pencil and small notebook
QQ Bandanna
QQ Compass and map of the area (or a GPS; be sure you
have a set of fresh batteries)
QQ Watch (unless you usually wear one)
QQ Facial tissues
QQ Work gloves
QQ Dust masks for air filtering
QQ Boots, long-sleeved shirt, long pants, and goggles
or safety glasses
You should know
how to use a map
and compass or
your GPS before
an emergency
occurs.





EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS 31
.Types of Emergencies
Types of Emergencies
There are many types of emergencies and many ways they
can occur. Becoming familiar with emergencies and their
circumstances can help you protect, respond, recover, mitigate,
and prevent. Knowledge of hazards and dangers can help
prevent emergencies, too.
Emergency in the Home
Most people think of their homes as a safe haven. While our
homes are safe places, accidents can happen in or near them.
With good prevention techniques, many accidents can be
avoided. Learn to recognize possible hazards in your
environment or unsafe behaviors. However, in the case of
a true emergency, your response to the emergency situation
can help to prevent injuries or even to save lives.
Fire or Explosion
“An ounce of prevention is worth a pound of
cure”—so goes the old saying. And recogniz-
ing potentially hazardous situations that
might lead to fire or explosion is the first
step on the road to prevention.
Fire Safety in the Home. How safe from
fire or explosion is your home? You can do
a lot to prevent fires. With help from your
family, get rid of hazards. Clear closets, the
attic, the cellar, and storage areas of flammable
rubbish such as papers and empty cartons.
Check around the furnace and gas-fired water
heater, and move anything that could burn—such as
paper—at least 3 feet away from it. Move any flammable
liquids, such as oil-based paint, to another location.


32 EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
Types of Emergencies.
Properly dispose of partially filled or unneeded cans of
paint and varnish, paint-soaked brushes, and oily rags. Keep
turpentine and paint thinners in airtight cans. Store gasoline,
benzene, naphtha, charcoal lighter fluid, camp-stove fuel, and
other highly flammable liquids in tightly closed metal containers
outside the home. Throw out any trash that has collected around
the yard. All homes should have a 3- to 5-foot zone free of
overgrown grass, overhanging branches, and woodpiles. In areas
with high wildfire danger, the zone should be 30 feet.
Be alert to the danger of lightning strikes and electrical fire
hazards. If you find frayed cords, bare wires, or broken plugs in
your home, suggest to your parent or guardian that these should
be replaced. Do not plug too many appliances or devices into one
outlet or one circuit. This would be a good time to have a family
talk about the electrical system and the use of electricity in your
home. Learn the location of your household circuit box and how
to safely cut off power. Do not reset breakers without permission
and only if you have corrected the problem.
Fires can start even when safety measures are taken, so every
family should have a fire escape plan. Develop one for your family
that details two ways to escape each room in your home. Make
sure your family has a portable escape ladder at each window in
bedrooms above the first floor, and that can be used from most win-
dows. Talk about what you would do if your home caught on fire.
You can do much
to protect your
home from fire by
finding potential
hazards (prepare/
recognize) and
getting rid of them
or otherwise
making them
safe (prevention
and intervention
before a disaster).
Any substance that ignites or burns easily is said
to be flammable. Check with local authorities such as
the city’s sanitation department about how to properly
dispose of such materials. In some areas, you may need
to take them to a special drop-off location because they
cannot be thrown out with regular household trash.


EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS 33
.Types of Emergencies
For further reference and more fire preparedness ideas,
see the “Fire Safety Checklist” in the Fire Safety merit
badge pamphlet.
Test your smoke alarms once a month, and replace the batteries
once a year.
Practice Before It Happens
Practice fire escape drills at least once a year. Pick a place outside where
your family can meet if a fire breaks out. (You will find more information
about a family escape plan in the Fire Safety merit badge pamphlet.)
MAIN ROUTE ALTERNATE ROUTE
(WINDOWS OPEN ONTO PORCH ROOF)
BEDROOM 1
BEDROOM 3
HALLWAY AND
DOWNSTAIRS
BATHROOM
BEDROOM 2
UPSTAIRSDOWNSTAIRS
DINING ROOM KITCHEN
TO CELLAR EXIT
LIVING ROOM
FRONT PORCH
Draw a floor plan of your home to help you plot emergency escape routes. Agree on
a meeting place outdoors for all family members.
It is important to
have a smoke
alarm in each
bedroom, outside
each sleeping
area, and on every
level of the home.


34 EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
Types of Emergencies.
Lifesaving Fire Safety Tips. If you know how to react in the event
of a fire in your home, you can prevent injuries and possibly save
lives. Teach these tips to your family and discuss them.
1. If there is a fire, warn everyone possible—without endangering
your own safety—before investigating the source of the alarm
activation. Make sure everyone knows what the fire alarm
sounds like.
2. Get out of the building if your escape routes are clear. Keep
calm. Walk fast. Do not run.
3. Wait until you are in a safe area, but call 911 or the operator
as soon as possible to report the fire. Say, “I want to report a
fire,” and tell the operator your address. Do not hang up until
the dispatcher says it is OK to do so. Know your present
physical location, not just your home address.
4. If you are trapped in a multistory building, call 911 to report
your location. If you cannot get to a phone, call for help from
a window. Wave a towel to signal for attention.
5. Keep doors closed. Open doors and windows
cause drafts that can fan a fire and make it
more serious. If you think the door is the only
way out, feel it with the back of your hand. If it
is hot, do not open it. If it is not hot, duck to
one side, away from the door opening, when
you turn the knob. Open the door slowly. If the
door opens inward, brace it with your foot to
keep it from opening too fast.
6. If there is smoke in a room, crawl close to the
floor. The air is least toxic about 12 to 18
inches above the floor. Breathe under your
shirt or jacket in the space next to your body.
If you cannot see well, keep the back of one
hand in front of you. Using your hand, follow
the wall around to the nearest door or window.
7. If you can walk downstairs, do so carefully and
close to the wall if you cannot see.
Be sure
everyone knows
the sound of the
fire alarm before
an emergency
occurs.
During a fire, feel doors with the
back of your hand and do not
open them if they feel hot.


EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS 35
.Types of Emergencies
8. Buildings that are two or three stories high should have an
escape ladder. If you do not have one, get a sheet or other
bright cloth and hang it outside a window to get the attention
of people outside. Stay by the window and wait for the fire
department to arrive and rescue you. Avoid the urge to jump
out of the window—wait for help to arrive. Push towels or
clothes (wet is better than dry) against the bottom of the
door to keep smoke from entering the room.
9. Absolutely never use an elevator during a fire.
10. Remember that children may become very scared and hide
under beds or in closets. You can make sure that they
practice a fire escape plan so they know the right thing
to do in case of a fire.
11. Help guide others along your escape route, but do not
delay your escape by trying to rescue someone else. In an
emergency, do not place yourself in additional danger! Get
out of the burning building to save yourself and those with
you. Meet the fire department when it arrives, and tell
firefighters where you last saw other people.
Firefighters have training, protective clothing, and breathing
apparatus; let them do the rescuing. You will be most useful by
telling them where others might need their help. You will be
unable to direct firefighters to someone in trouble if you yourself
become a victim of the fire.
Most of the points above are just as important to know for a fire
emergency anywhere, such as in a public building. Look them
over again and think about how they might apply. And here are
three more important points.
• If you are in a hotel room or live in an apartment, be sure you
take the key whenever you leave your room or apartment.
Don’t get caught in the hallway without it.
• Never go inside a building that is on fire. Wait for the fire
department to arrive with the right equipment and gear to
rescue people and put the fire out.
• You probably have regular fire drills at school. This is
emergency preparedness in action. If you are in school when
a fire breaks out, follow your teacher’s instructions. Do not go
out on your own.
Never re-enter a
burning building.


36 EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
Types of Emergencies.
Gas Leak
Gases can kill. The fumes from natural gas or propane leaks
can cause explosions. Stoves that are left on but not lighted are
especially hazardous. If anyone creates a spark in a fume-filled
room, an explosion could happen.
Gases, and related fumes such as carbon monoxide, can
cause a person to stop breathing, followed by unconsciousness
and death. Sources of dangerous fumes include bad connections
for furnaces, ovens, stoves, clothes dryers, water heaters, and
other gas appliances. Garages, basements, and kitchens are a
home’s danger spots.
Smart homeowners have gas fixtures and appliances
inspected regularly and keep them in good repair. Have your
parent or guardian check the gas pipes in your home, especially
in damp areas such as the basement, to make sure that they are
not rusting. Natural gas has a distinctive odor.
Call 911 or your fire department or gas company if you
think you have a gas leak. Looking for the source of a leak
yourself could lead to an explosion, since many things can be
an ignition source—even such things as flashlights, mobile
phones, light switches, and garage door openers.
If someone is overcome by gas fumes, get the person out-
doors into fresh air. If the person is unconscious and cannot be
moved outside, open windows and doors to help disperse the
fumes and bring in fresh air. If the person has stopped breathing,
immediately give rescue breathing (see the First Aid merit badge
pamphlet). Call 911 or the fire department or rescue squad. Notify
the gas company.
If you smell gas
or suspect a leak
and a parent
or guardian is
not home, open
windows and get
everyone
outdoors. Once
safely outside,
call 911 or the
gas company
immediately
from a mobile
phone or a
neighbor’s phone.


EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS 37
.Types of Emergencies
Carbon Monoxide Poisoning
Carbon monoxide (CO) is an odorless and colorless gas—and it can kill.
Every year in the United States, CO poisoning kills more than 200 people
and sends thousands more to the hospital.
Carbon monoxide gas can come from a lot of places: gas-fired
appliances, charcoal grills, wood-burning furnaces or fireplaces, power
generators, chain saws and other gas-powered tools, and cars. Running
a car or a generator in a closed garage or even under a carport, for
instance, is a recipe for disaster.
Everyone is at risk for CO poisoning, but you can do some simple things
to prevent a problem:
• Install a CO alarm in your home, and be sure everyone knows the
sound of the alarm.
• Make sure a parent or guardian has any fuel-burning appliances, fur-
naces, and chimneys inspected by a professional at least once a year.
• Never use a charcoal grill in the garage or in your home—only outdoors!
Know the symptoms of carbon monoxide poisoning: headache, dizziness,
faintness, and ringing in the ears. A person might yawn a lot or feel like
vomiting. If you or someone else feels like this, get outside or open windows
right away for fresh air.
If someone is overcome by carbon monoxide poisoning, call 911 for
medical help. The person may not be able to breathe. Give rescue
breathing as you learned to do for the First Aid
merit badge. Make sure that all appliances
and sources of combustion are turned off.
A professional should investigate the
source of the CO buildup and repair it.
A carbon monoxide detector, similar to a
fire alarm, is a good way to mitigate
emergencies due to fumes from incomplete
combustion of poorly ventilated gas appliances.
Test CO detectors once a month, and replace the
batteries every six months.


38 EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
Types of Emergencies.
In an Emergency, Use the Phone
In many emergency situations, the first and smartest thing you can do
is call for help. In your home, post emergency numbers (such as the fire
department, police, and doctor) by all phones. Calling 911 will summon
fire, police, and ambulance services. Tell the 911 operator your name and
address and what the emergency is; then stay on the line
until you are sure help is on the way. In the case of fire or
gas leak, leave immediately and call from a neighbor’s
house or use a cell phone once outside. In the event of a
power outage, a corded phone may still work: Phone
lines are powered separately. If the phone lines are
down, try a mobile phone, which should work as long
as the nearby cell tower still has power. If 911 service
is not available in your area, dial “0” and tell the
operator your address and your emergency.
If you get trapped
somewhere while
traveling, remem-
ber that your car
horn can alert
rescuers as far as
a mile downwind.
However, the horn
will not work if the
battery is dead.
Emergency in Your Car
Road trips with your family or with your troop can be great fun.
But these trips need to be safe, too. Especially because you might
be far from home or from immediate help as you travel,
preparation is very important.
• Consider the weather you might encounter. Prepare for the
worst. Check weather reports and plan travel routes accordingly.
If severe weather is threatening, consider delaying your trip.
• Keep at least half a tank of gasoline in the car.
• Before you leave, let others know your route and when you
expect to arrive. Advise them of any route or time change.
• Pack food, water, medications, and extra clothing (appropriate
for the season and weather conditions).
• Carry a wool blanket for warmth, for patient transport, or to
suffocate a fire.
• Keep a first-aid kit, signal whistle, flares, and booster cables in
your car. Also carry reflective devices that are not sources of
ignition so you can use them safely around spilled flammables
or where there is wildfire danger.
• Always buckle up—every time, every seat, every person.
You can check out the Traffic Safety merit badge pamphlet for
more information about recognizing and preventing emergency
situations in vehicles.


EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS 39
.Types of Emergencies
Motor Vehicle Accident
Accidents sometimes just happen. As always, be prepared for
the unexpected. With car accidents, often the most important
thing you can do is to get yourself into a first-aid mind-set.
Is anyone hurt? Is anyone bleeding badly? Is anyone dazed
or in shock? In your work for the First Aid merit badge,
you learned how to respond to such situations.
Some people may want to move accident
victims or rush them to a hospital. Victims
themselves may wish to move about to check
on others. Urge them not to do so. Move only
those who are in danger or as needed to treat life-
threatening conditions. If victims are able to move,
help them to safety, have them lie down, and keep
them still and calm until medical help arrives. Treat for
shock and other conditions as needed.
The leading killer of Scout-age boys is motor
vehicle accidents. The more you can do
to recognize potentially hazardous condi-
tions that might contribute to an accident,
the more you can help save lives.
An important factor in responding to an emergency is situational
awareness—the ability to identify, process, and understand the current
environment. Put more simply by the U.S. Coast Guard, it is knowing what
is going on around you. Being aware of your surroundings can prevent
you from becoming a victim of the emergency.


40 EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
Types of Emergencies.
Trapped in a Blizzard. If you find yourself trapped in a blizzard,
use your ingenuity and always ask yourself, What is the safest
thing to do? Stay with the car and wait for help. Leave your car
only if you are sure of the way to the nearest building and you
know that it is a short distance away. But wait for the blizzard
conditions to lessen, too. Do not walk in a blizzard. It is easy to
lose sight of your car and become lost in blowing snow.
If you are on a well-traveled road, show a “trouble” signal.
Attract rescuers by flashing hazard lights or hanging a bright
cloth from the radio antenna or window.
Five things are essential to help prevent further injury
and loss of life after a motor vehicle accident:
1. Protect yourself first.
2. Call 911 for medical help.
3. Make the scene safe: Turn off the vehicle’s engine,
secure parking brakes, and help direct traffic if you
are trained to do so. (Be sure to wear a reflective
safety vest.) However, if you cannot readily secure
the scene, do not put yourself in danger trying to do so.
4. Stop severe bleeding.
5. Treat for shock.
Know your route when you travel, and plan for weather conditions
or terrain that might unexpectedly become dangerous. Be sure
someone knows of your travel plans.
When traveling
in severe cold
weather, keep the
following in your
car: blankets or
sleeping bags, at
least one snow
shovel, tire chains,
signal flares or
glow sticks,
ice scraper,
flashlight and
extra batteries,
bottled water,
high-energy
snacks such
as candy bars.


EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS 41
.Types of Emergencies
If possible, run the engine and heater just long enough
to remove the chill from the air—about 10 minutes each hour.
Conserve gasoline. But be careful when running the engine, too:
Do not let the exhaust pipe get clogged with snow. Blockage
can cause deadly carbon monoxide to leak into the passenger
compartment. You can also use a small, votive-type candle in a
fire-safe, stable container to raise the temperature inside a car.
In either case, open a window slightly on the side away from the
wind to provide ventilation. Occasionally, breathe deeply, and
rapidly move your arms and legs to increase blood circulation.
The inside of a car can protect you for a time. At night,
keep the inside dome light on to make it easier for rescuers
to see the car in the dark. The dome light uses only a small
amount of current from the battery; however, extended use
could drain the battery entirely. If you are stuck for more than
six hours and the cold in the car becomes unbearable, consider
moving into a snow hole or snow shelter. The temperature
inside a snow hole can be 15 to 20 degrees warmer than the air
outside the hole. For more about cold-weather shelters, see the
Wilderness Survival merit badge pamphlet.
Scouts are known for their resourcefulness. Look around and
make do with what you have. You could use the flat, round top
of the air filter in your car for digging in the snow. Use a cushion
from the car as a seat in your snow hole, or cut branches from a
tree to sit on. (You will need a seat so that you are not sitting in
melted snow; stay as dry as possible.) As soon as you can, build
a fire outside (not in the shelter). Use the car’s hubcaps as a fire-
place, or place logs on top of the snow. You might be able to start
a fire with the car’s lighter. For tinder, tear up road maps or other
paper you might have in the car, or strip fabric from the car seats.
If you do not have fuel for a fire, look through the car again.
Wooden handles of tools will burn, for example.
Try to avoid
burning synthetic
materials such as
plastic and nylon.
Doing so can emit
toxic fumes.
You may have heard that the universal distress signal “SOS” stands for
“Save Our Ship” or “Save Our Souls,” but it turns out that this is just a
myth. The Berlin Radiotelegraphic Conference of 1906 adopted SOS as a
danger signal merely because the Morse code for SOS—three dots, three
dashes, and three dots—was felt to be unmistakable when relayed by
telegraph. These days, “three” can mean “distress” in other contexts, too,
such as lighting three fires to indicate distress or arranging three piles of
debris that searchers might see.


42 EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
Types of Emergencies.
Make three small fires arranged in a triangle as a distress sig-
nal. If you cannot build a fire, stamp out a big “SOS” in the snow
near your car. Make the letters deep so that shadows are cast into
them or fill the letters with contrasting material, such as greenery,
dead branches, or dirt, to make them easier for rescuers to see.
If you are stuck with your car for more than a day, finding
food and water could become a problem. You can get water by
melting clean snow. If you do not have any food, work slowly
and rest often. In extremely cold weather, if you do not rest you
will tire quickly and become exhausted.
Stalled in the Desert
All deserts are dry, but deserts are not always hot. For example,
salt flats in Utah that reach temperatures well over 100 degrees
Fahrenheit during the day in summer will fall below freezing at
night during the winter. Although the most common concern is
dealing with excess heat, those stranded in deserts may also
have to deal with low temperatures at night.
If your car stalls in a hot desert, stay with the car but not in it.
If you are on a regularly traveled road, someone will come by soon
to help. Raise the hood and trunk (but disconnect the indicator
lights during the day to avoid draining the battery) to indicate you
need help. At night, attract attention any way you can: Set out an
emergency light, turn on the car flashers or turn signals, leave the
inside dome light on, or if possible build a fire outside.


EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS 43
.Types of Emergencies
If you are stalled in a remote desert area, stay with the car.
Sit in its shade on something, such as a car seat, that keeps
you a foot or so off the ground. (The temperature of the ground
can be 30 degrees higher than the air a foot off the ground.)
Stay calm and think; do not act hastily. You will need water and
you will need to protect yourself from the heat. Stay covered; do
not throw away clothing, no matter how hot it gets. Clothing will
guard against the sun, blowing sand, and insects.
Water is the most important thing. Know these potential sources
of water:
• Dew. If the night is cold, in the morning you can use a
sponge or small cloth to collect the dew that forms on cars,
rocks, and plants.
• Water holes. In the evening and early morning, listen for
birds and watch for circling flocks and freshly made animal
tracks. Follow the birds or tracks—they could lead to water.
Caution: Salty or soapy-tasting water may be poisonous.
If you must walk in search of things, leave a note at the car
telling anyone who arrives the direction you went. Normally,
you should not leave a car unless you know for certain that help
is close by in a given direction. Walk only after sundown or in
the early dawn if you need light to see. Rest during the day in
any shade that you can find or make.
Use signal fires to attract the attention of planes or other desert
travelers. A burning car tire, deflated to prevent explosion, should
be visible during the day due to the smoke. Use the car mirror as a
signaling device as described in the “Plane Signals” section later in
this pamphlet. Spell out “SOS” on the ground in letters at least 10
feet wide with rocks, rags, or strips of car seat covering—anything
you can find that contrasts in color with the ground.
If you find water, drink it. Do not ration it. Trying to make
water last longer does more harm than good. Do not
eat food unless you drink at least a pint of water a day
or unless the food is water-laden, such as fruit and
some vegetables.
Especially when
you are traveling
in or through
remote areas,
always be sure
someone knows
your travel plans.


44 EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
Types of Emergencies.
Emergency in the Outdoors
Many of the activities Scouting has to offer take place in
the great outdoors. Here are some things to think about
to keep your adventures as safe as possible and to be
prepared should an emergency arise.
Mountain/Backcountry Accident
Try to anticipate and recognize what hazards you
might face before you leave on a wilderness trip
by studying a map of the area where you are
going. Know the terrain. Take the map with you,
and always tell someone where and when you
are going and when you will return.
The best way to help prevent injury or loss of
life on a mountain or backcountry trip (or any hiking,
for that matter) is to follow the “rule of three”: Do not
travel alone; one buddy is good, but three or more hik-
ing together is better. If one person gets hurt, the second can
perform first aid and stay with the victim while the third can get
help. Following this guideline also will reduce your chances of
getting lost.
Carry a first-aid kit and a survival kit that has items such
as hooks and lines, emergency food, and a plastic bag for water
storage. Remember to bring basic hiking necessities, such as a
pocketknife, compass (or a GPS with fresh batteries), matches
(stored in a waterproof container), and adhesive bandages.
You can help
prevent mountain
accidents by
having the right
equipment and
clothing—along
with emergency
supplies—before
you set out.


EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS 45
.Types of Emergencies
Stay on Your Feet. In the mountains or backcountry, the most
common accident is a fall. Try to prevent falls. When going down
a hill or a steep bank, control your center of gravity; that is, lean
back slightly. If you fall, you will fall backward, and then you will
be in a sliding, rather than a tumbling, position. Leaning forward
and grabbing branches or other objects for support is not always
a good idea. The support might give way, roll, break, or slide—
and then you will tumble forward.
In rough-going areas, try to anticipate where you might fall.
That way, if you do fall, you will at least fall in the safest place
and manner.
Stay off fallen timber, which can be wet and mossy, making
for a slippery surface. Likewise, wet rocks can be slick and dan-
gerous. Even if you do not fall over, you can twist an ankle.
If you must wade across a stream, study it carefully first,
finding the safest place to cross. Carry a staff (hiker’s pole),
which you can use for support if the current is swift. Test the
bottom of the stream with the pole as you cross. Loosen pack
straps before you cross so that you can get the pack off easily
if trouble develops.
Watch Where You Step
Do not travel after dark, and stay on trails. A hiker in
Washington left a marked trail on Mount Si to follow a
mountain goat. But mountain goats are better at off-trail
hiking than people are. This hiker jumped to a ledge he
could not escape and had to spend the night there—
along with a lot of hungry mosquitoes.
Bradford Angier, author of How to Stay Alive in the Woods,
says, “Never step on anything you can step over, and
never step over anything you can step around”—simple
advice that may prevent an emergency situation.


46 EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
Types of Emergencies.
Be Weather Alert. Watch for lightning and thunderstorms. Take
shelter in a low area under a thick growth of small trees, ideally
away from the direction of the approaching storm. Do not stand
under a tall, isolated tree in an open space. Avoid bodies of
water and metal fences, hiking poles, climbing hardware, and
tent poles, and anything else that might conduct electricity.
If you are in a meadow, head for the lowest spot of the nearest
forest cover. If you get caught in a storm where you cannot quickly
get to a low, safe spot, be a short target: Until the storm passes,
crouch low with only the soles of your shoes (tiptoe if possible)
touching the ground. Place your hands over your ears. Do not lie
flat on the ground—which will make you a larger target—and do
not wear a baseball cap (the button on top probably is made
of metal). Spread your group out 100 feet from each other
if possible.
Do not camp in a gully or dry streambed. A thunderstorm
or flash flood miles away could send a rushing torrent of water
through your campsite.
National Incident
Management System
The purpose of the National Incident Management System
is to provide citizens with a routine that can be used by
the whole community for managing emergency situations.
This systematic approach helps guide individuals, groups,
and government agencies in working together to cope
with a range of threats and hazards. The principal goal is
to prevent loss of life, reduce property damage, and avert
harm to the environment. By using NIMS, communities
can more effectively respond to and manage emergency
situations (including natural disasters, terrorist activities,
and other incidents caused by humans) and utilize
resources such as personnel, food, water, and shelter
more efficiently.
Note to the
Counselor
One useful tool for
adult leaders
is Hazardous
Weather training,
an online module
at my.scouting.org.
The training
presents safety
precautions for
eight different
types of weather
and focuses
on planning,
preparation, and
traditional weather
signs.


EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS 47
.Types of Emergencies
Lost or Marooned
If you become lost or marooned with a group, such as your patrol,
be a leader. Stay calm and help others stay calm. Tell everyone to
sit and think. Clear an area on the ground and “build” a map to
help you estimate where you are. Mark landmarks that you can
see. Try to reconstruct your trail on the map. How long have you
been gone? Can anyone remember when and where they last saw
something familiar—a scarred tree? a creek or pond? a fence? Put
it on your map. Discuss every detail about your hike that anyone
can remember.
Rest and consider your options. Usually, it is best to stay put.
People searching can find you easier than you can find them.
If you must travel and everyone agrees to it, walk in a straight
line. Use the sighting system: If you can get to a high point safely,
go up and look over the land below, find a familiar landmark, and
head toward it. Leave a note or otherwise indicate your direction
of travel for searchers.
If there is any possibility that you will have to stay out
overnight, find a good campsite before dusk. Do not travel at
night, except in the desert with good visibility.
Help prevent getting lost by always using the buddy system when
you hike and knowing how to use a map and compass.


48 EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
Types of Emergencies.
Plane Signals
If you are lost, you might need to get the attention of a rescue
plane or helicopter. Fire and smoke get a pilot’s attention; how-
ever, also be aware of the hazards of wildfire in your area if a
drought situation is in effect.
Three fires arranged in a triangle convey a universal SOS.
Build fires in an open area where they can be seen. Keep a pile
of fuel (brush, twigs, leaves, or grass) nearby so that you can
quickly make the fires bigger. If you are short of fuel, lay a fire
and be ready to light it when you first hear a plane. During the
day, use green wood, damp leaves, rubber, or oil to produce
visible smoke. Smoky fires show wind direction. This could be
helpful to a pilot who has a chance to land.
With a smoky fire, you can send smoke signals. Cut off the
smoke with a wet blanket (or something similar). Release it, but
quickly cut off the smoke again. Do this so that you send three
short puffs in a row. Pause and repeat.
Three of anything—visual or audible—means “distress.”
The signal can be repeated at regular intervals. A pilot
might spot three piles of debris when looking for a lost
person. Three piles of cut branches or rocks might work.
Flashing SOS using Morse code—three short flashes,
three long flashes (twice as long as the short ones),
three short flashes—is another way to attract help, night
or day. The distress answer is two of anything.
In the daytime, a ground-level “sign language” of symbols
can attract an aircraft and communicate with the pilot. Because
geometric figures are not found in nature, symbols such as squares
and triangles will attract attention. For instance, an arrow is the
ground-to-air visual code meaning “proceeding in this direction.”
Make the symbols with strips of cloth, rocks, or branches.
Use any available material that will contrast with the background
that it is placed on. Make the symbols big—10 feet wide or
wider—in an open area where they can be seen. You can also
stamp the symbols in sand or snow. If possible, line the bottom
of such tracks with something dark, such as leafy green branches
(or powdered or rehydrated fruit drink in snowy conditions). Pile
sand or snow on one side so that the sun will throw a shadow
onto the symbols. When in doubt, use the international distress
symbol, SOS.


EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS 49
.Types of Emergencies
Take time to practice signaling
with a mirror. Try it with a buddy
in the distance as your “rescuer”
and signal to each other.
Signaling with a mirror can save your
life, but you must know how to aim it
effectively toward your rescuer. Hold
the mirror close to your face and toward
your signal target. Hold your other hand
outstretched in front of you as a sight line
and make a V with your fingers. Move the
mirror so that the sun reflects from the
mirror onto your outstretched hand and
through the V, and then move your hand
and the mirror together and point them
toward your target.
One way to get the attention of a rescue aircraft is to use a
mirror to aim a beam of reflected sunlight at the plane or helicopter
(see the sidebar on signaling with a mirror). If you do not see or
hear an aircraft, sweep the horizon with your reflected sunbeam
anyway. This tiny flash of light can be seen for 50 or more miles.
You can make a signaling mirror using an empty can. Cut out
the lid or bottom of the can, and you are ready to signal. You can
also use the blade of your knife. If you are lost and have none of
this equipment, you could use a smooth, wet piece of wood, a flat
rock, or anything that will reflect some sunlight.
When you hear a helicopter or low-flying search plane,
move to a safe place in an open area and lie on the ground on
your back with your arms and legs spread. This will provide an
excellent opportunity for detection by the air crew.


50 EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
Types of Emergencies.
You can also “talk” to a pilot with body signals. Most pilots
know this universal language. Learn the 11 standard body signals
illustrated in this chapter.
Know how to “read” a pilot, too. A pilot says “yes” by dipping
the nose of the plane up and down. Zigzagging—or fishtailing—the
plane means “no.” If your message has been understood, the pilot
will rock the plane from side to side or flash green lights with a
signal lamp. If your message has not been understood, the pilot
will make a complete right-hand circle or flash red lights.
Search and Rescue
In places where people get lost frequently, such as in mountainous
or wilderness areas, volunteer search-and-rescue teams have
formed to meet the need. Searchers in helicopters and on horse-
back, as well as trained dogs, all try to find lost people. In some
places, Scouts and Venturers have specialized search-and-rescue
activities and participate actively in operations. If your troop is
called to be part of a search-and-rescue team, you must be familiar
with basic search tactics and detection methods.
Practice signaling
before you need
to use it.
SEARCH TACTICS
A search director, such as a deputy sheriff or other official, handles the overall
planning for a search. A basic search plan follows something similar to this
five-step sequence.
1. Preliminary. Searchers receive their assignments and information about
the lost person (or people): Where was the person last seen? Did the person
have wilderness experience? How was the person dressed, and what
equipment did the person have?
2. Confinement. It is important to keep the lost person from wandering
outside of a known area. Barricades and string lines (for stanchions) might
be used. Searchers may be assigned to block roads or trails.
3. Detection. Searchers need to discover anything within the confined area
that might help find the lost person. See the “Lost-Person Search Method”
sidebar for one kind of structured grid sweep of an area.
4. Tracking. Dogs sometimes are used to track a lost person. Skilled searchers
can follow footprints and know how to read other tracking signs.
5. Evacuation. When found, the lost person needs to be treated for possible
injuries and evacuated.


EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS 51
.Types of Emergencies
PICK US UP, AIR-
CRAFT ABANDONED.
DO NOT TRY
TO LAND HERE.
ALL OK;
DO NOT WAIT.
AFFIRMATIVE (YES).
CAN PROCEED SHORTLY;
WAIT IF PRACTICAL.
URGENTLY NEED MEDICAL ASSISTANCE.
LAND HERE
(POINT IN DIRECTION
OF LANDING).
USE DROP MESSAGE.
OUR RECEIVER
IS OPERATING.
NEED MECHANICAL
HELP OR PARTS—
LONG DELAY. NEGATIVE (NO).
Standard Body Signals
Knowing these signals can help you communicate with a pilot in an emergency situation.


52 EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
Types of Emergencies.
Lost-Person Search Method
Type A sweep
Three teams shown
In these two diagrams, three teams are searching an area between a road
and a trail. Team 1 lays ribbon lines (dotted lines) at the edges of its search
lanes. Teams 2 and 3 pick up the ribbons and move them to the edges of
their search lanes as they begin searching. The area behind the teams is
therefore clearly identified as having been searched, and the area outside
the ribbons is identified for the “pivot” and continuing search pattern.
When teams pivot to continue the search, they move to the sides
(shown by the dotted arrows) to the outside of the ribbons. Teams move
the ribbons again to the outside of the search pattern. As they continue
“sweeping” in this way, the searched area will expand farther to the left
and right.
ROAD
TRAIL
TEAM 1
TEAM 2 TEAM 3
ROAD
TEAM 1
TEAM 2 TEAM 3
Type B sweep
Three teams shown


EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS 53
.Types of Emergencies
Along with the search method shown on the previous page,
a simple search might involve a large number of small teams
checking natural and artificial features in an area. This could
include trail checks (hiking a trail to see whether the lost person
is walking it), ridge-running (taking a quick route along high
ground to search valleys from above), and checking buildings,
drainage areas, caves, or other potential hazards. The emphasis
is on making a quick check of the most obvious places a person
may get lost.
Avalanche
An avalanche is a mass of snow, earth, rock, or other material
that sweeps down a mountainside or precipice. They are some-
times called snowslides, rockslides, or landslides. The best way to
protect yourself against any kind of avalanche is to avoid climbing
or skiing in dangerous high country without an experienced
guide. Experienced climbers and hikers know how to identify
and avoid places where snowslides or rockslides might start.
Avoid steep terrain; avalanches usually happen on slopes of 40 to
60 degrees.
The force of a
snow avalanche
can snap tree
trunks as though
they were
matchsticks.


54 EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
Types of Emergencies.
ROCKSLIDES
• Never throw rocks in high country, or worse yet, push
boulders off a high cliff. Falling rocks will hit and loosen other
rocks. Before you know it, a rockslide could be
tumbling down.
• Loose rocks are most likely to fall when early morning sun
melts any ice that held the rocks in place on rocky slopes.
• Heavy rains can weaken the soil that cements rocks
together. During rainstorms, do not hike, stand, or camp
in the fall zone of a cliff.
• Know the different types of rock. For example, shale
breaks apart more easily than other types of rock.
• You will often find piles of rocks, called talus, at the base
of cliffs. Avoid talus slopes when you can. If you must cross
one, do so carefully. Do not walk directly behind or below
someone else.
• As with all backcountry hiking, stick to trails. Do not take
shortcuts or cut across switchbacks.
SNOWSLIDES
According to FEMA, each year about 19 people die in snow-
slides (avalanches) in the United States. As skiing and
snowmobiling become more popular in many areas, snowslides
will become more common—unless people take precautions.
• Stay out of the mountains after a heavy snowfall or strong,
windy storm. Let the snow settle for at least three days.
Check state and local avalanche advisories before going out.
The USDA Forest Service can help.
• Stay off slopes that face the sun, which will melt the snow
and make it more dangerous. Sounds that suggest cracking or
settling of the snowpack may indicate danger.
• If there is high avalanche risk, avoid the backcountry. Within
ski area boundaries, the snowpack is carefully managed.
• Avoid the bottoms of narrow valleys, ravines, and gulches,
especially if they are below steep slopes.
• Always use the buddy system, and carry a shovel, snow
probe, and transceiver for communication. You can learn to
judge the “character” of snow with the probe.


EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS 55
.Types of Emergencies
If you find yourself on a snow slab or other avalanche danger
spot, go straight downward or upward—not across. Move one
person at a time. If you are likely to fall on your skis, it would
be safer to remove them and not fall.
If you are caught in a snowslide, try to get your skis off.
When the snow hits, move your arms and legs in a swimming
motion to keep yourself upright, and try to keep your head
above the surface. As the avalanche settles, use every bit of
strength you have to force your head to the surface. Push away
any accumulation of snow from your face to form an air pocket
that will allow you to breathe.
If you see others caught in a snowslide, watch carefully so
you will be able to tell rescuers the general area where they dis-
appeared. Also, keep an eye out for a second slide, which often
follows the first.
When skiing or snowmobiling, stay off slopes that
face the sun where its warmth can melt the snow.
If you will be
traveling in snowy,
mountainous
areas, it may be
wise to carry
a rescue
beacon and
a plastic whistle.
To help you learn about search-and-rescue
operations, see the Search and Rescue merit
badge pamphlet.


56 EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
Types of Emergencies.
Boating Accident
The two main causes of boating injuries are
• Not having Coast Guard–approved life jackets for everyone on
board a boat—and not wearing them.
• Not keeping a proper lookout; that is, not paying attention to
where the boat is going and then ramming into something.
OFFSHORE LIFE JACKET, TYPE
I, DESIGNED FOR USE BY
PASSENGERS ON CRUISING
VESSELS OVER LARGE BODIES
OF WATER
NEAR-SHORE BUOYANT VEST,
TYPE II, FOR SHORT PERIODS
OF RECREATIONAL BOATING
AND INSTRUCTION
FLOTATION AID, TYPE III,
USED MOST OFTEN FOR
WATER SPORTS SUCH AS
WAKEBOARDING, FISHING,
AND KAYAKING
Be sure everyone on board is wearing a life jacket.
More than 700 people die each year in boating accidents. To
help prevent and mitigate such accidents when you are on an
outing afloat, be sure everyone onboard is wearing a life jacket.


EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS 57
.Types of Emergencies
If your family has a boat, check the equipment and make
sure it and the boat are in good repair and working order. Be sure
to carry a waterproof emergency locator beacon or a cell phone
secured in a waterproof bag. If you have a powerboat, carry fire
extinguishers, proper lights, an emergency paddle, and an anchor.
Chain outboard motors to the boat. Know the boat’s capacity—
the number of people it can carry safely—which is shown on a
metal plate on the boat. Do not take more people aboard than the
stated capacity.
If you must move around in a boat, stay low and in the
center and hold on to the sides. If your boat capsizes, hang
on to it unless it is on fire. Wait for help. Do not try to swim for
land. It is easier for rescuers to see a capsized boat than a lone
swimmer. In cold water, huddle together in or on the capsized
boat to delay hypothermia.
Observe the rules for water travel (see the Motorboating
merit badge pamphlet). Do not run a motorboat through or
close to a swimming area. When you approach a landing place,
slow to a speed less than 5 mph.
Keep an eye on the weather. Head for home—or the nearest
place where you can tie up—before a storm reaches you.
Know standard distress codes, calls, and signals so that you
can give the proper call in case of an accident. If you have a
radiotelephone, you can send official distress calls, such as the
standard “Mayday.” Repeat the call three times, followed by the
boat’s call letters, name, and position, and describe the trouble.
You can also:
• Rapidly and repeatedly sound your horn, bell, or whistle.
• Fly your flag upside down.
• Blink your white range light or a spotlight using the standard
SOS signal (three short blinks, three longer blinks, three
short blinks).
• Fly an orange emergency signal flag (it shows an emblem of a
black circle and square on it) or send up a flare.
The standard
international
radiotelephone
distress call,
“Mayday,” comes
from the French
m’aidez, which
means “help me.”
Always wear a life jacket. Comfortable styles are
available that allow you to participate actively while
protecting against drowning. This is simple, effective
emergency prevention and preparedness.


58 EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
Types of Emergencies.
Weather-Related Emergencies
At the Storm Prediction Center in Norman, Oklahoma,
meteorologists keep a careful eye on the nation’s
weather. The center issues watches to local
National Weather Service forecast centers
when severe weather is possible. When severe
weather or dangerous conditions are occur-
ring, the local forecast office issues
warnings, which are announced on NOAA
Weather Radio as well as on commercial
radio and television. Watches and warn-
ings are issued for weather events such
as winter storms, tornadoes, severe
thunderstorms, high winds, and flash
floods. Advisories are issued when
weather might cause serious or dangerous
conditions. A common advisory may alert
motorists to hazards, such as slippery roads
during wintry weather, or boaters of rough
water during high winds, or people with health
considerations during heat waves.
Meteorologists rely on weather radar to provide
information about developing storms. The National Weather
Service has installed Doppler radar stations throughout the
country that allow them to issue lifesaving warnings before
severe weather hits.
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
(NOAA, pronounced “Noah”) runs NOAA Weather
Radio, which is the only government-operated radio
system that provides warnings to the public about
natural and structural hazards. NOAA Weather Radio
can be a lifesaver, and you can be, too, by listening
to it. For instance, during a deadly tornado outbreak in
Oklahoma and Kansas, a supervisor at a plant in Kansas
saved more than 100 people by responding to warnings
issued by the National Weather Service that he heard on
the plant’s NOAA Weather Radio. Shortly after he told
employees to move to the basement for safety, a tornado
destroyed the building. No one was hurt.


EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS 59
.Types of Emergencies
Flood
If you live along a river or any natural drainage system, floods
can be a threat even if it is not raining in your area. Your family
should learn the safest route from your home to high, safe ground
in case you must leave your home (evacuate). Your local Red Cross
chapter will be able to give you background information about the
flooding that has occurred in your area. Find out whether your
home is above or below flood stage level.
Flood watches and warnings are transmitted by radio, televi-
sion, loudspeakers, and sirens. Know what the warning system is
in your area. When a warning sounds, follow instructions. If you
are told to evacuate, do so using recommended roads. Know your
community flood evacuation plan.
Before a flood happens, you can do things to help prevent
injury to yourself and others and reduce property loss. Store
drinking water in as many portable containers as you can (but
not in juice or milk jugs or cartons) in case water service is cut
off. You could even fill bathtubs and sinks. Have emergency sup-
plies ready and get them to the highest inside part of your home.
If you must evacuate, take these supplies with you.
Floods can happen quickly. After a flood in Texas, one resident said,
“About 11:00 last night the water started coming in over the bridge.
Between 11:00 and 11:20 it was incredible how fast it rose. There
was really no time to move. Or get out. Or anything. . . .”


60 EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
Types of Emergencies.
During a flood watch, you can take other preventive measures—
if you have time.
• Bring outside equipment indoors or tie it down.
Garbage cans, outdoor grills, lawn furniture, tools—
anything that floats or can be carried along by
floodwaters—can be a danger.
• Sandbags can help keep floodwaters from
your home, but do not pile them up right
against the foundation of the house. It is
better if water can get into the cellar. This
will equalize the water pressure inside and
outside the foundation and help prevent
damage to the foundation and the house.
• Unplug electrical appliances and equip-
ment. Get your parent or guardian to turn off
the gas running to gas appliances. Remember
that a professional must turn the gas back on.
If there is time, help them move furniture to high
points in your home.
If you are caught in your home by rising waters, move to
the second floor if you have one, and then to the roof, if neces-
sary. Take your emergency supplies, including warm clothing,
flashlights, and a battery-operated radio, and wait for help. Do not
try to swim for safety. Rescue teams will be looking for you, and
floodwaters can be deadly.
If you are advised to evacuate by car, do so immediately. If
you wait, you could become trapped by flooded roads. Do not
drive over flooded roads. Parts of the roadway might already be
washed out. If your car stalls, abandon it. Floodwaters can rise
rapidly and sweep away a car—and whoever is in it.
When floodwaters go down, throw away food, even canned
goods, that came in contact with floodwaters because the water
may have been contaminated. If your home has its own water
well, have the water tested before anyone drinks it. Make sure
anything electrical is completely dry before you use it.
Do not try to cross
fast-moving water.
Fast-moving water
is more powerful
than you can
imagine, and
even a few inches
can knock you off
your feet.


EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS 61
.Types of Emergencies
Tornado
Tornadoes can lift a house off of its foundation and throw cars
up into the air. Even the most well-built home can be leveled.
So recognition and preparation are very important aspects of
tornado emergency preparedness. In some states, tornadoes
happen every year. Find out how often they occur where you live.
Tornadoes happen most often between April and June, but can
occur any time of the year. Be prepared by paying attention to
the weather; know and look for the signs of severe weather and
a potential tornado:
• Topsy-turvy clouds often appear, sometimes bulging down-
ward instead of upward.
• It may rain heavily or hail before a tornado.
• Skies may take on a dark greenish color.
• Before a tornado hits, the wind may die and everything may
become very still.
According to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, the 2011 tornado
season was unusually active, with 1,691 tornadoes—the second highest annual total—
reported across 48 states. The most number of tornadoes ever recorded on one day
occurred April 27 when 200 were reported.


62 EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
Types of Emergencies.
Everyone in your family should know the difference between
a tornado watch and a tornado warning. A watch means that
tornadoes are possible and conditions are favorable for them to
develop. A warning means that one has been sighted.
During a tornado warning, you and your family
should move to your preplanned place of safety. At
home, this should be in a basement or storm cellar,
or a windowless, interior room (even a closet) on
the lowest floor of your home. Stay away from
windows; windblown objects may break the glass.
Take cover under a piece of heavy furniture and
hold on to it. Cover yourself with blankets or pil-
lows if you can.
If you live in a mobile or manufactured
home, do not stay there. Get out and find shelter.
If you live in an area that has a lot of tornadoes,
your school will have plans for what to do during a
tornado warning. The safest place is in an interior hall-
way on the lowest floor. Auditoriums, cafeterias, or gyms
that have big, poorly supported roofs are not safe. This is good
advice for any public place, too: Go to an interior hallway or
restroom. Stay away from glass.
If you are in a car during a tornado warning, get out of the
car and find shelter in a building. If there is no building or no
time to get to one, lie flat in a nearby ditch, gully, or depression
away from the car. Shield your head with your hands and arms.
Never try to drive away from a tornado. They can do zigzags,
figure eights, and U-turns—you might suddenly find yourself
driving straight into one.
After a tornado, be prepared with your first-aid skills and
your duty to help other people.
Where Is Tornado Alley?
The central part of our country—from northern Minnesota and North Dakota
to southern Texas and Louisiana—is sometimes called “Tornado Alley.”
Generally, this is the area where dangerous tornadoes are most likely to
happen, although tornadoes have been reported in all 50 states. According
to a map from FEMA, the number of tornadoes recorded per 1,000 square
miles is highest in north Texas and central Oklahoma, with other danger
spots in southern Missouri, Arkansas, Mississippi, and Alabama.


EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS 63
.Types of Emergencies
Pets and Disaster
Be prepared to protect your pets when disaster strikes
and consider your pets in your family’s disaster plan.
If that includes plans for possible evacuation, plan to
evacuate your pets, too. Leaving them behind, even if
you think they are in a safe place, is likely to result in
their being lost, injured, or worse.
• Have a safe place to take your
pets. It may be difficult to find
shelter for your animals in the
midst of a disaster, so plan
ahead. Check boarding facili-
ties, animal shelters, friends
and relatives, and even hotels
and motels. Most Red Cross
shelters are unable to accept
pets due to state health and
safety regulations. However,
pet shelters may be co-located
near Red Cross facilities and
other shelters for people.
• Have a portable pet disaster
supplies kit that includes
items such as medications,
leashes or carriers, current photos in case your pet
gets lost, food and water, bowls, bed, and toys.
Make sure you have identification on your pets.
In addition to your own phone number, you might
want to have the phone number of a friend or
relative living outside your immediate area included
on the tag.
For more information about pets and disasters, contact
the American Veterinary Medical Association. See the
resources section of this pamphlet.


64 EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
Types of Emergencies.
Hurricane
Anyone living in a hurricane-prone area should be prepared for
hurricanes. Be weather alert during hurricane season; listen to
local weather reports and NOAA Weather Radio for hurricane
progress reports. A hurricane watch is issued when there might
be a hurricane within 24 to 36 hours. A warning is more serious
and is issued when hurricane conditions (winds of 74 miles per
hour or faster, and high water and rough seas) are expected in
24 hours or less. Plan with your family what to do during
hurricane watches or warnings.
Take patio furniture, tools, trash cans, and loose lumber inside
the house or tie them down. Have an adult shut off electricity and
water. Unless authorities advise differently, leave natural gas ser-
vice turned on because it may take many weeks for a professional
to restore gas service after a major storm, and you may need gas
for heating and cooking after the storm. Store a supply of safe
drinking water. Park your car in the garage or at least away from
trees and poles.
If there is time, help your parent or guardian close and board
up all the windows of your home. Do not leave any windows
uncovered because the direction of hurricane winds changes as
the storm passes overhead, threatening all sides of the home.
If your family
uses a generator
during a power
outage, be sure
the generator
is secured
outside in a well-
ventilated area,
never indoors.
Hurricanes are easily spotted by weather radar, as the weather pattern and clouds swirl
into the recognizable “eye” of the storm.


EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS 65
.Types of Emergencies
You might have to leave your home, especially if you live in
a coastal area. If local emergency managers—by means of radio,
television, or loudspeaker—advise people in your community to
evacuate, go where you are told and travel only on roads they
tell you to use. Government and disaster-relief agency officials
will tell you where to get emergency housing and food.
Top off fuel tanks well in advance of a storm moving your
way. Fueling during an evacuation may be time-consuming and
difficult. Be aware that traffic signal outages can occur when the
power is out.
If you are camping along or near a seashore when a hurricane
watch is issued, immediately strike camp and leave the area.
Family members sometimes become separated during an emergency.
Have a plan for getting the family back together. In case of fire in your
home, that might be as simple as meeting outside by a big tree or in the
neighbor’s front yard. But for other disaster situations, FEMA suggests
asking an out-of-town relative or friend to be the family contact. Everyone
in your family should know that person’s name, address, and phone
number. It is often easier to call long distance after an emergency.
Text messaging
is one of the most
reliable forms of
communication
during a disaster
when phone lines
are damaged
or overwhelmed.
All family
members should
learn how to text
prior to a disaster.


66 EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
Types of Emergencies.
Other Emergencies
Some emergency situations can occur when you are away
from home and far from your emergency kit and other crisis
tools. If you are alert and prepared when out in public,
you will be able to respond appropriately if faced with
an emergency situation. Do not panic, but remain
calm and clear-headed.
Earthquake
Find out how earthquake-prone your area is
and know how to be prepared. Additionally, if
you live near the coast you should be aware
that an earthquake can trigger a tsunami.
When an earthquake strikes, stay calm.
Do not run. If you are indoors, drop to the
floor, cover yourself with something (such as
blankets or pillows) for protection from falling
glass and other objects, and hold on to some-
thing sturdy. Get beneath the nearest table, bench,
desk, or other strong overhead support. If there is
no sturdy furniture nearby, sit against an inside wall,
preferably in the basement. Stay away from windows
and outside doors. If other people are in the building and can
hear you, shout instructions to them so that they know what to
do, too.
If you are outdoors, stay there. Do not run near buildings.
Head for the nearest vacant lot or the widest street. You should
be out in the open where you will not get hit by falling wires,
crumbling chimneys, or collapsing walls.
After the tremors are over, if a parent or guardian is at home,
get them to check for leaking gas. If you smell gas, open the win-
dows and doors and then get out of the house. Call 911 or the gas
company from a neighbor’s phone.
Earthquakes can
be felt in 39 states
in the United
States. They are
felt most often on
the West Coast
and in Alaska and
Hawaii, but they
also can happen
in the Midwest
and in other areas.
After an emergency situation, avoid the urge to walk
around and look at any destruction. You might endanger
yourself and get in the way of first-aid or rescue
work. Follow the instructions of your parent or guardian
and community officials.


EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS 67
.Types of Emergencies
If you are in a car during an earthquake, the driver should
pull off the road and park in the open, away from power lines and
wires. Stay in the car until the tremors are over. When you con-
tinue, drive slowly and help the driver watch for fallen objects,
downed power lines, and broken and otherwise
dangerous roadways.
Aftershocks are smaller quakes that can occur in the hours,
days, and weeks after a larger earthquake. Be prepared for them
as for an earthquake. They can be strong enough to knock down
anything that the main tremors may have weakened.
Food-Borne Disease
If you eat food or drink beverages that are contaminated with
harmful bacteria, toxins, or parasites, you could get a food-borne
disease, or food poisoning. Common symptoms are nausea,
vomiting, abdominal cramps, and diarrhea. About 250 different
food-borne diseases have been identified; such diseases can be a
big problem, but recognizing where and how the problems might
occur and taking some simple precautions can go a long way in
avoiding an emergency situation.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention suggests five
simple precautions that you can take to help reduce the risk of
getting a food-borne disease.
• Cook food thoroughly, particularly meat, poultry, and eggs.
• Separate your food to avoid cross-contamination, or bacteria
moving from one food or place to another. Wash your hands
after you touch raw meat; wash utensils and cutting boards,
too. Store food items separately.
• Chill leftovers right away. Bacteria grow quickly at
room temperature. Keep cold cuts, meat, and dairy
products covered and refrigerated. Discard any
food that has been left in an open container and
unrefrigerated for a long time. Cooking that food
and/or chilling it will not make it safe to eat.
• Clean fruits and vegetables thoroughly under
running water. Wash your hands with soap and
water before handling food.
Thoroughly wash knives, utensils, cutting
boards, dishes, and cookware after using.


68 EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
Types of Emergencies.
• Report any suspected food-borne illness to your local health
department. If agencies designed to help in emergency situations
do not know about when and how such situations arise, they
will not be able to develop ways to prevent future emergencies.
Botulism, caused by a toxin secreted from a bacterium, is
the most serious form of food poisoning. People usually become
infected by eating home-preserved food that was not properly
washed and preserved. Throw away any foods you think might be
spoiled. If you find yourself in an emergency situation and you must
eat home-canned food that may be spoiled, boil the food for at least
15 minutes. This process will make the toxin completely inactive.
FOOD AND CAMPING
Campers can easily get food-borne diseases—and having cramps,
nausea, or diarrhea when you are in the wilderness is not something
anyone wants. Here are some tips for safe camp food practices.
• Plan meals so that you do not have any leftovers; if you do have
leftovers, do not eat them. Throw them away or pack them out.
• Plan meals that require as little chilled food as possible. If you
have a camp cooler, do not “stretch” the ice—get more when
you need it so food stays cold enough.
• If food has been at room temperature for more than two
hours, do not eat it.
• Be absolutely certain that any edible foods you collect near
camp are safe to eat. With many plants, such as mushrooms,
only trained experts can identify which ones are safe.
Refrigerate leftovers right away; bacteria grow quickly at
room temperature.
If the power is out,
avoid opening the
refrigerator. Food
can stay safely
cold for 4 hours
in the refrigerator
and 48 hours in a
full freezer if they
are not opened.


EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS 69
.Types of Emergencies
Toxic Chemical Spills and Releases
Each year, approximately 29,000 liquid chemical spills or gas
releases—75 per day, or three events per hour*—are reported.
Some examples include the release of gases used by manufactur-
ers in their factories, a liquid chemical spill from a truck or train
involved in an accident, or chemicals released into a waterway.
Such events have caused many deaths and injuries, and have
resulted in evacuations from the spill or release areas. The
releases can be huge and affect entire cities or relatively small
and affect only a small neighborhood or the immediate site of
the spill. Whatever the size of the spill, you need to know what
to do if you are nearby.
All states and counties have an incident response program
for hazardous materials spills and releases. Many also have a
community warning system to notify residents by telephone,
text message, email, television scrolling banner, or a siren and
local loudspeaker system whenever an emergency occurs.
In most cases, the state or county system will tell you
whether it is best to evacuate the area or to shelter-in-place
(such as your home). If you are directed to shelter-in-place, go
inside right away and close all doors and windows. Don’t forget
to close the flue on any fireplace, and turn off any ventilation
systems that draw in outside air.
When local authorities
declare the event over and
the situation is safe again,
you can go about your normal
business. But if you or any-
one in your family is feeling
ill, having trouble breathing,
or complaining of a burning
sensation in their eyes, mouth,
throat, or lungs, you need
to make sure that they go to
their local hospital right away.
Nearly all of the symptoms
can be successfully treated if
addressed quickly enough.
*Source: U.S. Coast Guard’s National Response Center Database
To learn how
your city, county,
or state notifies
citizens in case of
a toxic chemical
spill, go to your
city, county, or
state website.


70 EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
Types of Emergencies.
Nuclear Power Plant Emergency
About 100 nuclear power plants currently operate in the United
States. While there have been few nuclear accidents at these
plants, an earthquake and tsunami in March 2011 triggered a
serious accident at a nuclear power plant in Fukushima, Japan.
A 12-mile exclusion zone around the plant displaced 78,000
people. During an emergency at a nuclear facility, radiation can
be released that is dangerous to people near the plant.
State and local governments have preparedness plans for
areas in a 10-mile radius and 50-mile radius from all nuclear
power plants. You can get emergency information from the
power company that operates the plant or from the local Office
of Emergency Management. You and your family should have
and be familiar with this information.
You also can become familiar with the warning systems that
will be in place. These could include sirens, alerts on radios, or
route alerting (the use of mobile public address systems) to notify
the public. If sirens are used in your area, find out when they will
be tested so that you can hear what they sound like and how well
you can hear them from your home. (This also is good advice for
warning sirens used for other emergencies such as tornadoes or
dangerous thunderstorms.)
The worst nuclear emergency in the United States happened in 1979 at the Three Mile
Island nuclear power plant in Pennsylvania. As a result of what officials learned during
that emergency, nuclear plants are even safer today.


EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS 71
.Types of Emergencies
Learn about the emergency plans at places where your fam-
ily members might be, such as schools, child care centers, and
nursing homes. Learn where people are supposed to go if there is
an evacuation. Be prepared to evacuate with emergency supplies,
as you might be for another emergency.
There are four levels of emergency at nuclear power plants:
• A notification of an unusual event is the least serious.
Something unusual or unexpected has happened at the
plant, but the public does not have to do anything special.
Emergency officials are notified.
• An alert means that something has happened to reduce plant
safety, but all the backup systems are still working and no
one is in danger.
• A site area emergency is more serious. Small amounts of
radiation might be released into the air or water, but these levels
are still expected to be safe outside the boundaries of the plant.
• A general emergency is the most serious problem. Radiation
could leak outside the plant and off the plant site. Sirens will
be sounded or other alert systems used. You should listen
to the radio and watch television. Local authorities will pro-
vide information and instructions. Follow their instructions
promptly—you may be advised to evacuate or take shelter.
If you are told to stay indoors, close doors, windows, and chim-
ney dampers. You want to keep outside air from getting in. Turn
off forced-air heating or air-conditioning. Put food in covered
containers or in the refrigerator. If you can, go to the basement
or another underground area. Stay there until you are told it is
safe to leave. Do not use the telephone unless absolutely neces-
sary; all lines will be needed for emergency calls.
Under the Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act, Local
Emergency Planning Committees (LEPCs) must provide information to
citizens about chemicals and hazardous substances in the community.
This includes developing an emergency notification and response plan
that is reviewed at least annually. Committee members may include
elected state and local officials; police, fire, civil defense, and public health
professionals; environment, transportation, and hospital officials; facility
representatives; and individuals from community groups and the media.
Source: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency


72 EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
Types of Emergencies.
If you are told to evacuate, stay calm. You will have plenty
of time to leave. When outdoors, cover your nose and mouth
with a handkerchief. When you go back indoors, change your
clothes and shower. Put the clothes you were wearing in a plastic
bag and seal it. When you leave your home, lock the doors and
windows. Keep car windows and vents closed. Listen to the radio
for updates, evacuation routes, and other instructions. Review the
emergency information you got from the power company, which
will include a map of evacuation routes and where you can find
relocation centers.
Authorities will monitor radiation release and will let the
public know when any danger has passed.
Emergency in a Public Place
It seems that we hear about emergencies in public places more
and more—in schools, office buildings, shopping malls, and
restaurants, and even in places of worship. As in your home,
recognizing potential emergency situations is the first step in
preparedness. In your school, for instance, do you see any fire
hazards in the building? Are conditions and practices in shops,
labs, and the gym safe? Are the waste collection, storage, and
disposal practices safe? If you see any unsafe conditions in
your school, tell a teacher, the principal, or another adult who
will listen.
One important thing you can always do when facing any
emergency is to stay calm and as clear-headed as you can. In a
public place, this can be especially important because there may
be other people around you who are afraid and not acting in a
safe manner. You may have heard the story of someone yelling
“Fire!” in a crowded theater. The audience members all react
at once, rushing for a door as they try to escape. Such sudden,
unthinking reactions can cause more serious accidents, and
even death, so learn how to control your own fear. Try not to
give in to it, as it can cloud your judgment. If you are calm, you
may be able to help other people stay calm. Set an example.
Always remember that you must never endanger yourself
when you are facing an emergency. If you can safely do so, call
911 for help. Otherwise, sometimes the wisest thing you can do
is to protect yourself and wait for help to come to you.


EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS 73
.Types of Emergencies
As much as possible, be prepared before trouble strikes
in public. For instance, get into the habit of looking for
exits in any public building you enter. Be aware that in
some situations, the best thing to do is to keep yourself
safe and possibly leave the scene if you can.
Saving Lives
During an emergency, you may help save lives by using your
knowledge of first aid and of situations that might be dangerous.
Earning the Lifesaving merit badge, for instance, will prepare you
to react safely and effectively in the event of water emergencies.
Here are some other emergency situations.
Contact With a Live Wire
Household wires. Electrical appliances usually are safe,
but eventually wires fray, plugs break, and parts loosen.
Furthermore, circuits in your home might be overloaded with
too many extension cords and appliances.
It is extremely dangerous to touch a “live” wire—that is,
a wire that has electrical current running through it. Someone
who has grabbed a bare spot on a live wire might not be able
to let go. Call 911 for help. Pull the plug or cord, grabbing it only
where it is well-insulated. Or, get to the main electrical switch
in your home and shut off the power.
If you cannot shut off the power, try to push a household
wire away with a dry, wooden stick (like a broom handle) or a
rolled-up newspaper, which does not conduct electricity. If that
does not work, you can separate the victim from the wire. But
make sure you are not standing on a wet surface, because water
conducts electricity. If possible, put on heavy, dry gloves before
trying the rescue. Otherwise, you can use a dry handkerchief,
towel, sheet, or other dry cloth to encircle the wire and pull the
wire from the victim’s hand. Do not touch the wire, the victim,
or any grounded object such as water pipes.


74 EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
Types of Emergencies.
The rule for
clothes on fire,
whether yours or
someone else’s,
is “Stop, drop, roll,
and cool.”
Rescuing a person who has come into
contact with a live power line outdoors
is extremely dangerous. A Scout should
not try such a rescue. Call 911 or the
fire department.
Power lines. Windstorms, rain, ice, and snowstorms can
down power lines and plunge towns into darkness.
If you see a power line down outdoors, call the electric
company, police, or fire department so that they can shut
off the power immediately. Stay nearby to warn others of
the danger, but stay away from the power line. Do not
attempt to rescue anyone in contact with a power line
using the advice given for someone in contact with a
household electrical wire. Both the current (amount of
electricity) and the voltage (the electrical “pressure”)
in a power line are extremely high, and simple insula-
tors such as a broom handle do not provide enough
protection. Be aware that an incidental electrical charge
could travel along a metal fence for a significant dis-
tance, so guard against the possibility of fallen power lines
you cannot see.
The Electricity merit badge pamphlet has more information
about electric shock, accident prevention, and rescue techniques
that will help you be prepared for electrical emergencies.
Clothes on Fire
Accidents involving burning clothes are among the most
common causes of serious burns. If your clothes catch fire,
remember to “stop, drop, roll, and cool.” Running will merely
fan the flames and cause them to burn more. Try to keep calm.
Stop where you are and drop to the ground. Roll over and over
to smother the flames. Cover your face with your hands.
You can use this technique if someone else’s clothes catch
fire, too. Get the person to stop and drop, then roll him or her
over and over several times. If you can, grab a rug, coat, jacket,
or blanket to wrap around the person to help smother the flames.
But do not waste time running off to look for something.
After the fire is out, cold water will help cool the skin and
reduce damage from burning. Call 911 for medical help as soon
as possible.


EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS 75
.Types of Emergencies
Drowning
If you know the rescue methods reach, throw, and row, then you
may not have to go; you might be able to save a drowning person—
and avoid drowning, yourself, during the rescue with a reaching
or throwing rescue. These are nonswimming methods of rescue.
If you see someone who is in the water and needs help, you
should use a reaching or throwing assist to help that victim. You
should never endanger yourself by going into the water and
swimming out to the victim unless you are trained to do so.
Reach with anything you can—your leg or arm, a broom,
branch, paddle, pole. Lying down on or otherwise bracing your-
self from a dock or solid ground, reach out with something the
victim can grab onto. Pull the person to shore. You can lengthen
your reach by wading into the water or by holding onto a dock
or another firmly anchored object.
Throw help to a victim if the person is out of reach. You may
find ring buoys attached to a line ready for use at most protected
beaches and pools. A throwing rescue does not have to involve
something with a line attached to it. Anything that floats well
enough to support someone will help—life jackets and flotation
cushions, inner tubes, air mattresses, kickboards, empty water
jugs, and even coolers.
Row to a person in trouble if you cannot reach or throw
help. When you get near the victim, row backward to him or her
to allow the person to grasp the back of the boat. Once the person
has calmed down, decide whether to tow the person a short dis-
tance to shore or to carefully help the person aboard over the back
end of the boat. If a buddy is with you, your buddy can hold onto
the victim while you tow the person ashore or help steady the boat
when helping in the victim.


76 EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
Types of Emergencies.
Throwing Lines
A useful skill in a water emergency is the ability to throw a line smoothly
and accurately: Practice first so that you can throw it accurately.
With a light line, tie a small bowline in the shore end of the line.
Loop this loosely around your left wrist to anchor the shore end when you
throw. (A tight wrist loop could result in your being pulled into the water.)
With a heavy line, you might have to tie a knot in the shore end and step
on it or tie it down.
Carefully coil a light line to form smooth loops in your left hand. Split
the coil and hold half in each hand to make throwing underhand easier
and more accurate.
Also throw a ring buoy underhand. Do not divide the coil—the extra
weight improves accuracy. Hold the buoy in your throwing hand and the
coiled line in your other hand. Throw the ring buoy to land beyond the
victim and the attached line will rest over his or her shoulder or within
easy reach. The victim can grab either the rope or the ring buoy as you
pull him or her to safety.
Quickly retrieve and coil the line for another throw if needed. If you
are right-handed, throw with your left foot forward and right foot back. To
retrieve the line, drop your left hand in position for holding the coil as you
pull in the line with your right hand. Save time by keeping your feet firmly
planted in the same position when throwing and pulling in the line.
For heavy line, use these same procedures. If you cannot coil the line
in your left hand, or if it is too heavy to hold, coil it neatly on the ground.
Step on the shore end of the line or tie it down. Hold only the portion
that you can grasp comfortably in your right hand and throw it toward
your target.


EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS 77
.Types of Emergencies
Use a boat with an outboard motor if you can, especially if
the victim is far from shore. Stop the motor as you get near the
victim, and then reach out with a paddle or pole.
If a canoe is the only craft handy, use it. Approach the
victim carefully. If you have a flotation aid, such as an extra life
jacket, throw it to the victim as you approach. Otherwise, sit on
the bottom of the canoe, extend your paddle to let the victim
grab it, and then swing the paddle so that the victim can grasp
one end of the canoe. Once the victim has calmed down, decide
whether to tow the person to shore holding onto the end of the
boat or whether to use your paddle to steady the canoe as the
victim climbs in over the side. If you overturn, get the victim to
hang on to the canoe. Swim to one end, and with a strong kick
push the canoe back to shore. Make sure you are wearing a life
jacket, particularly if you are not a strong swimmer.
In a tight spot, you also can use a surfboard, a paddleboard,
or an air mattress in the same way as a canoe, but only if you
are comfortable in the water. Such a rescue would be considered
a swimming method.
As a last resort, if you must go to a conscious victim, use a noncontact
assist and take any type of rescue aid available (life jacket, oar, air mat-
tresses, towel). Approach facing the victim and say what should be done.
Provide assurance that if the victim can hold on to the aid, things will be
all right. Present the aid and make sure the victim can reach it. Once the
victim has a secure grip, give an instruction to kick. Either escort or, with
the aid, tow the victim to safety. Stay nearby, but not close enough that the
victim could grab you. Keep encouraging the victim’s movements.


78 EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
Types of Emergencies.
Ice Rescue
Reach, throw, and go are ice-rescue methods. If you see someone
fall through ice, act quickly but think clearly. Decide on the best
rescue method. If you can, call an adult and 911 for help.
Reach. If you cannot reach out from shore and pull the person
in, you might be able to reach out to the person with a pole, tree
branch, oar, or ladder—anything that will reach. Push it over the
ice so that the person can grab it.
Throw. Throw a rope to the person if you can. Put a loop (bow-
line) in the end of the rope so the victim can slip it over himself
or herself if necessary. The person’s hands might be too cold to
hang on. If you have a ring buoy tied to the end of a heaving
line, slide it across the ice to the victim.
Go. If you cannot reach or throw, go—but carefully. Move
spread-eagle over the ice and wiggle your way to the person.
Once you get closer, reach to the person with something long.
You want to go out on the ice as little as possible.
After you rescue someone from ice water, get him or her
indoors right away. Hypothermia—or the lowering of the body’s
temperature to dangerous levels—can be another emergency.
If fully conscious and able to swallow, have the person drink
something warm such as warm water or broth. Move the person
to a shelter. Replace wet clothing with dry, warm clothes
or wrap the person in anything handy like jackets or
a sleeping bag. Wrap towels around water bottles
filled with warm fluid, then position the bottles in
the armpit and groin areas.
For more information on the symptoms and
treatment of hypothermia, see the First Aid merit
badge pamphlet.
Monitor a
hypothermia
victim closely
for any change
in condition. Do
not rewarm the
person too quickly
(for instance, by
immersing the
person in warm
water); doing so
can be dangerous
to the heart.
A “human chain” on ice
can save a life. Snake
out onto the ice while
someone holds your
ankles. Someone else
holds that person’s
ankles. Build your chain,
hands-on-ankles, until
you reach the victim.


EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS 79
.Types of Emergencies
Lowering a Person Using a Commercial Harness
Mountain rescue teams may have to lower an injured person
from a cliff or down rock faces. A firefighter may have to lower
someone from a window of a burning building. A commercial
harness, such as those that climbers and rappellers use, also can
be used in emergency rescue work. Many Scouting activities use
harnesses that can be self-tied, but for safety’s sake during an
emergency rescue, it is recommended to use a commercial har-
ness and carefully follow the manufacturer’s instructions.
A person who is conscious and not badly injured can hold
onto the rope as you pay it out. As you do so, turn the rope
around a firmly anchored object such as a tree or large boulder.
The person being lowered can use his or her feet to keep from
banging into anything on the way down. Work out the rope
hand over hand. If you let it slide through your hands, you
could burn them badly, lose control of the rope, and drop
the person.
Rope rescue
techniques and
equipment are
constantly being
revised. Lowering
an unconscious or
severely injured
person is very
difficult, especially
in remote areas,
and should only be
attempted if you
have had special
training or if you
are working with
an expert.


80 EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
Types of Emergencies.
Long-Distance Moving
The unexpected can happen anywhere—and sometimes far from
help. You may need to transport an injured person for a long
distance—and save a life by doing it.
When moving an injured person, no matter what method you
are using, make sure you rest enough so that you do not become a
second casualty. If just you and a buddy are doing the transporting,
stop every 30 to 60 minutes and rest 5 to 10 minutes. How often
you stop will depend on how much the victim weighs and how
rugged the terrain is.
Two first-aiders can transport a conscious person with the
four-handed seat. Use this carry only if the victim is conscious
and can hold on. Both bearers should grab their own right
wrist with the left hand. The two bearers then lock hands with
each other. Sitting on their hands, the person places both arms
around the bearers’ shoulders.
The two-handed seat can be used if the victim is conscious
but not seriously injured. The bearers kneel on either side of the
victim. Each bearer slides one arm under the victim’s back and
one under the thighs. The bearers grasp each other’s wrists and
shoulders, then rise from the ground with the victim supported
between them.


EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS 81
.Types of Emergencies
If you must carry an injured person for a long way, make
a litter or stretcher. You will need two strong poles, branches,
or small straight trees, and a blanket, tarp, sleeping bag, or two
shirts (or jackets). To make a sleeping bag litter, slip the two
poles inside the bag and cut the poles so that they are a foot
longer than the bag. Or, you can use two shirts for the litter.
Button all the buttons, then turn the shirts inside out onto
the poles, overlapping the bottoms of the shirts for a
more secure bedding.
Test the litter’s strength before you try
to carry anyone on it. Carry the person
feetfirst unless you have to go uphill,
and then carry him or her head-
first. Keep the litter as level
as you can. If the
injured person is
conscious and
you do not have
a way to make a
litter, use the four-
handed seat.
To make a blanket stretcher, place one pole on a
blanket. Fold over two-fifths of the blanket. Place the second
pole 6 inches from the edge of the folded-over part. Bring the
edge of the blanket over the pole. Fold over the remaining
part of the blanket. The person’s weight will keep the blanket
from unwinding.
When trans-
porting someone,
remember this
advice: Never step
on anything you
can step over, and
never step over
anything you can
step around.
OVERLAP BOTTOMS
OF THE SHIRTS.
Blanket stretcher


Participating in a practice drill will help you be prepared in case a real emergency happens.


EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS 83
.Community Emergency Service
Community Emergency
Service
For as long as there has been Scouting, Scouts have provided
outstanding services in emergencies of all kinds. You can learn
about emergency preparedness. You can learn to protect against,
respond to, recover from, help prevent, and mitigate emergency
situations. But carrying out emergency service work is the best
training of all.
As a Scout, you know about living outdoors, camping,
cooking, first aid, and how to make a shelter. With
knowledge like this, you and your troop can be
prepared for emergency service in your community.
Utilizing procedures established by the
National Incident Management System or
Incident Command System helps troops respond
more effectively during emergencies in their
community. The standardized framework
enables local, state, and federal organizations
and agencies to work together efficiently and
build shelters, for example, or distribute food,
water, and other vital supplies. Instead of operat-
ing individually, multiple entities can join forces
and combine resources.
Lending a Helping Hand
There are many important ways that Scouts can lend their
assistance after an emergency. Below are four of the major
services Scouts have provided the past. All of these skills take
planning and practice.


84 EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
Community Emergency Service.
Crowd and Traffic Control
Scout troops in the past have helped police and fire departments
and emergency management officials handle crowd and traffic
control. Today, it is felt that Scouts should do this only at official
Scouting America functions. In any case, crowd and traffic con-
trol must be done under the supervision of officials in charge of
the situation.
Each member of a crowd-control crew should have access
to caution tape. To move a crowd back, crew members can
use the caution tape, held at chest height, and advance slowly
toward the crowd. To keep the crowd back, form a chain with
other staff members. To direct the movement of a crowd,
indicate direction by pointing or blocking the way.
During daylight hours, a fluorescent or reflective vest
should be worn. After dark, every member of a crowd-control
crew should wear a reflective vest or high-visibility material on
the right ankle and arm.
Messenger Services and Communications
Providing messenger service during an emergency takes planning.
Your Scouting America local council, along with other com-
munity organizations, will assign a service area to your
troop—usually one that is near your meeting place.
Your troop should make a large-scale map of the area
and assign sections to each patrol. Each patrol then
prepares its own sectional map and learns it inside
out. Get to know shortcuts, easiest routes, dead-
end streets, traffic blocks, trails, even cow
paths—anything that will help you get from one
point to another during an emergency.
Bikes can speed up delivery but must
be in top condition for a reliable messenger
service. Cyclers also must know and practice
bicycle safety at all times (see the Cycling merit
badge pamphlet). In some areas, older Scouts and
leaders may deliver messages by car, snowmobile,
boat, horse, or skis.
During emergencies, it is essential that each
messenger carry personal identification, a list of critical
phone numbers, and a cell phone in addition to a flashlight,
personal first-aid kit, pencil, paper, map, multitool or bike tool
kit, and money. After delivering a written message, get a written
receipt and return it with any answer to the sender.


EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS 85
.Community Emergency Service
Scouts might deliver messages within a control center dur-
ing emergencies, freeing adults for other work. Troops also can
help with communications. If telephones are working, Scouts
can act as operators, taking incoming calls and relaying informa-
tion to officials. If phones do not work, signal teams might be
set up, with four Scouts to a team. One Scout acts as team chief
and observer, another as the signaler, the third as the recorder,
and the fourth as the messenger. Messages are sent by Morse
code using signal flags, signal lamps, blinkers, or flashlights or
by semaphore or hand signaling.
Some Scouts and leaders specialize in radio communica-
tions. Some are qualified as amateur radio operators, Radio
Amateur Civil Emergency Service (RACES) operators for emer-
gency situations, or citizens band (CB) operators. CB units can
consult and coordinate with local emergency management
organizations such as the Red Cross and can serve as a primary
means of communication.
The Radio Amateur Civil Emergency Service (RACES)
was founded in 1952 as a public service that provides
volunteer communications within government agen-
cies during times of extraordinary need. Each period of
RACES activation is different, but the common thread
is communications. See the resources section of this
pamphlet for more information about RACES.


86 EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
Community Emergency Service.
Collection and Distribution Services
During and after some disasters, such as floods and tornadoes,
many people may be without food and clothing. People may be
homeless for a time. Scout troops working under the direction of
their leaders and local officials can help collect needed items and
get them to a central distribution point. Usually, officials will set
up collection and distribution points at places such as places of
worship, fire stations, schools, and other public buildings. Your
troop meeting place might be used.
If your troop has developed a master map of your commu-
nity, you will know where food stores are. This will save time
in rounding up supplies. Scouts also can distribute leaflets or
instructions for the Red Cross, the local emergency management
agency, or other local authorities and volunteer groups.
Many Scouting units already know about and have experience collecting and distribut-
ing food through their work in the Scouting for Food National Good Turn.
It is important to
coordinate efforts
with local officials
who will know
what supplies are
most needed.


.Community Emergency Service
Mass Care Services (Sheltering/Feeding)
The San Francisco Bay Area Council once recruited Scout troops to
help the Red Cross feed 250 people during an emergency. Before
the Red Cross could move in its “big” equipment, the Scouts
arrived. Within three hours of the first mobilization signal, each
Scout patrol had enough water boiling in improvised 5-gallon-can
cookpots to make and serve hot soup and coffee.
If your troop is prepared with cooking cans (four per patrol),
grates and grills, trench shovels, axes, Scout staves (to assemble
a tripod), firestarters, twine or rope (to mark off serving areas),
and a fuel supply (such as charcoal), you will be prepared for
emergency mass feeding. Always coordinate activities with the
Red Cross or local authorities. Under the direction of the
officials in charge, Scouts could properly set up tents in
designated areas. Troop tents or family camping tents
can be used.
Scouts know more about emergency sanitation
than most people. Troops can help treat water if clean
water service is not available after an emergency.
Wherever an emergency shelter has been set up,
emergency sanitation often must be provided.
Troops also can round up covered containers for
garbage or come up with other possibilities
for dealing with trash.
Many people, such as police,
lifeguards, and the military,
use specific techniques for
emergencies based on need
and circumstance. Contact
these professionals for
more information about
their roles during an
emergency situation.


88 EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
Community Emergency Service.
Emergency Mobilization Plans
and Preparation
Is your troop prepared with a mobilization plan if your community
asks you to help during an emergency? In any disaster, your first
responsibility is to your family and home. But if a tornado has hit a
neighboring town, or a nearby community is threatened with a
flood or other emergency situation, your troop might be called
upon to help.
You will be asked to be at a specific place at a specific time.
If the telephones are working, use mobilization plan B; if phone
lines are down, your troop must use mobilization plan A. Your
troop should be prepared to use both plans.
Mobilization Plans
Use plan A when normal communications
systems are unavailable. This plan involves
planning and making contacts on the basis of
proximity, or nearness. Leaders and Scouts
make personal contact with troop members
living near them. A Scoutmaster may first learn
of the need for the troop’s services when a police car or other emergency
vehicle drives to the Scoutmaster’s home with an authorized and approved
request for the troop’s services. Under this plan, the Scoutmaster goes to
the home of a member in one direction from the Scoutmaster’s home, and
then to the home of a member in another direction. In a similar manner,
each Scout personally contacts two members of the troop. This process
continues until all have been notified of the mobilization call and the group
is en route to the assembly point.
Use plan B when normal phone
communications are available. Troops
mobilize by patrols. Members are
contacted by phone. To begin the
mobilization, the Scoutmaster calls
the assistant Scoutmaster and the
senior patrol leader. They each phone two patrol leaders. Each patrol
leader phones two patrol members. This procedure continues through the
entire troop roster. The word is passed from person to person. If a member
cannot be reached, contact must be assumed by the caller.
Plan A
Plan B


EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS 89
.Community Emergency Service
If your troop has never set up a mobilization plan, discuss
it with your Scoutmaster. Every community needs one. Any
emergency plan for community service should be worked
out by your Scoutmaster with the director of the local
office of emergency management or with a disaster/
emergency response coordinator in your area. If your
community does not have an emergency management
or civil defense office, your Scoutmaster should check
with the local American Red Cross chapter or the
police or fire department. These officials can advise
how your troop can help in an emergency.
Getting Involved: Emergency
Service Projects
To meet the emergency service project requirement for the
Emergency Preparedness merit badge, you must take an active role.
Merely being at an emergency is not enough. The part you play
must be one that you have been trained for (or trained yourself
for). You may participate in an emergency service project during a
real emergency, but normally you will have to perform a practice
drill with your troop or a local community service organization.
You can help your troop plan and conduct an activity that
involves an emergency service project. A practice mobilization
may be a part of the project but will not qualify as your emergency
service project. Your Scoutmaster and troop might consider one of
the following activities.


90 EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
Community Emergency Service.
Lost-Child Project
Scouts often are called on to help find people who are lost, and
they need to know how to do it. You can help train your troop
with a lost-child project.
Usually, Scouts are called together through a troop mobiliza-
tion plan. The plan is organized with the patrol leader to set it
into action. Be sure to announce the equipment needed for the
activity, either before or at the time of the mobilization call.
For the project, make one or more “lost child” dummies from
burlap sacks stuffed with straw or hay. Put a shirt on the lost child
so that searchers will recognize it. Before the mobilization call,
place the dummy somewhere in the search territory. Position it in
an area that will prove challenging and interesting to searchers.
To test the searchers’ powers of observation, plant some barely
noticeable “evidence” (such as clothing or footprints) of the
lost child.
After Scouts have been assembled by the mobilization call,
organize them into search parties and use the lost-person search
method. Be sure patrols have practiced. Mark the search area on
maps that are distributed to the Scouts. Agree on recall signals so
the search does not continue after the lost child has been found.
The search will be more dramatic and realistic if your troop
can arrange for a rescue squad, military unit, or police department
to work with you.
Have Scouts look for the prepared evidence of the lost child.
Once found, the lost child should be properly treated for any
injuries and transported safely to the starting point.
The American Red Cross is a humanitarian organization associated
with the International Red Cross Movement, which provides relief to
victims of disasters and helps people protect against, respond to, recover
from, and prevent emergencies. You or your Scoutmaster might contact
your local Red Cross chapter to find out how you might get involved in
emergency service projects.
The Community Emergency Response Team, administered through FEMA,
is a training program that prepares people to help themselves, their
families, and their neighbors in the event of a disaster in their community.
Members learn about disaster preparedness, receive training in basic
disaster response skills, and participate in community outreach activities.


EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS 91
.Community Emergency Service
Messenger Service Project
Operating a messenger service is one way Scouts can give mean-
ingful service during an emergency and help free community
officials so that they can utilize their specialized skills. This proj-
ect will test your troop’s ability to organize and work as a team.
At a convenient time (a weekday evening, perhaps, or a
Saturday afternoon), call an emergency mobilization of the troop.
When all patrols are at the unit meeting place, give each patrol
leader a list of 10 to 15 prominent places in the community, such
as police and fire stations, drugstores, service
stations, and places of busi-
ness or government. (Use
a different list of contacts
for each patrol so that busy
people are not disturbed
repeatedly to sign mes-
sages.) Give each patrol
leader enough copies of this
suggested note to cover
the list.
If you hold this mobi-
lization in the evening, you
could end it with a special
campfire program.
Other Projects
With the help of your
Scoutmaster and other troop leaders, you can follow the same
approach as for the preceding projects to alert your troop leaders to
select, plan for, and participate in an emergency service project.
Other action projects that will help you and your troop sharpen
emergency skills might include conducting a simulated, or mock,
bicycle or car accident, or setting up an emergency camp from
scratch (with sanitation, cooking, and dishwashing facilities for a
large number of people). Or you might simulate a building accident
or fire, with “victims” role-playing such emergencies as touching a
live electrical wire, having their clothes on fire, or experiencing
stopped breathing.
Greetings:
The Scouts of Troop [your troop number] are being tested
for their effectiveness as messengers in the event of a
community disaster. Please write or stamp on this note the
exact time of delivery and sign it so that the Scout may
show me the effectiveness of the effort.
Thank you,
[signature]
Scoutmaster





EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS 93
.Emergency Preparedness Resources
Scouting Literature
Boy Scout Journal; Backpacking,
Camping, Canoeing, Cooking, Cycling,
Electricity, Fire Safety, First Aid, Hiking,
Home Repairs, Lifesaving, Motorboating,
Nature, Orienteering, Pioneering,
Public Health, Radio, Rowing, Safety,
Search and Rescue, Signs, Signals,
and Codes, Small-Boat Sailing, Snow
Sports, Swimming, Traffic Safety,
Weather, and Wilderness Survival
merit badge pamphlets
Books
American Red Cross. American Red
Cross Water Safety Handbook, 3rd ed.
StayWell, 2009.
American Red Cross. First Aid/CPR/AED
for Schools and the Community
(participant’s manual), 3rd ed.
Staywell, 2006.
American Red Cross. Responding to
Emergencies (participant’s manual),
4th ed. Staywell, 2007.
Forgey, William W. Basic Essentials:
Wilderness First Aid, 3rd ed. Falcon
Guides, 2007.
Kelly, Kate. Living Safe in an Unsafe
World: The Complete Guide to Family
Preparedness. New American Library
Trade, 2000.
Meyer-Crissey, Pamela, and Brian L.
Crissey, Ph.D. Common Sense
in Uncommon Times, 2nd ed. Granite
Publishing, 2013.
U.S. Department of Transportation,
National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration. First There First Care:
Bystander Care for the Injured.
DOT HS 809 853, 2005.
Emergency Preparedness
Resources
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


94 EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
Emergency Preparedness Resources.
Organizations and Websites
American Red Cross
Toll-free telephone: 800-733-2767
redcross.org
American Veterinary
Medical Association
avma.org
Citizen Corps/Community
Emergency Response Teams
www.fema.gov/emergency-managers/
individuals-communities/preparedness-
activities-webinars/community-
emergency-response-team
Environmental Protection Agency
Telephone: 202-272-0167
Toll-free telephone for literature
requests only: 800-490-9198
epa.gov
Federal Emergency
Management Agency
Telephone: 800-621-3362
Toll-free telephone for literature
requests only: 800-480-2520
fema.gov
National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration
Telephone: 202-482-6090
noaa.gov
Radio Amateur Civil
Emergency Service
usraces.org
Ready.gov
Telephone: 202-282-8000 or
202-447-3543 TTY
ready.gov
U.S. Department of
Homeland Security
Telephone: 202-282-8000
dhs.gov
U.S. Department of Transportation
NHTSA Office of Emergency
Medical Services
Telephone: 202-366-5440
transportation.gov
U.S. Geological Survey
Toll-free telephone: 888-275-8747
usgs.gov


EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS 95
.Emergency Preparedness Resources
Acknowledgments
Scouting America gives special thanks
to members of the Scouting America
Health and Safety Committee, in
particular David Bell, Ph.D.; Rick
Mason; Arthur Mittelstaedt Jr., Ed.D.;
and Sven Rundman, for their assistance.
We also thank the following subject
matter experts from the Office of Health
Affairs, U.S. Department of Homeland
Security, for their contributions to this
pamphlet: Scouter Darrell Donahue,
Ph.D., American Association for the
Advancement of Science Fellow;
Assistant Secretary and Chief Medical
Officer Jeffrey Runge, M.D.; Donald
Noah, DVM, MPH, special advisor; and
Tom McGinn, DVM, chief veterinarian.
Scouting America thanks the
following individuals for their
assistance with the 2012 revision: Ken
Brinson, Bob Cameron, Wayne Fortin,
Laura Itogawa, Ken Matsumoto, Pat
Murphy, Peggy Orr, Steve Scarano, and
Stephen Steinberger.
Scouting America is grateful to
the men and women serving on the
National Merit Badge Subcommittee for
the improvements made in updating
this pamphlet.
Scouting America is grateful to the
American Red Cross for providing
hands-on assistance from begin-
ning to end with the 2008 edition
of the Emergency Preparedness
merit badge pamphlet upon which
this edition is based. In particular,
Scouting America would like to
thank the following individuals
from the American Red Cross
National Headquarters,
Preparedness and Health and
Safety Services: John E.
Hendrickson (who is also a mem-
ber of the Scouting America Health
and Safety Committee); Jean
Ertdmann; Victoria Melvin; Laurie
Willshire, MPH, BSN; and Joscelyn
Silsby, MPH, CHES.
Thanks also to Scott Meyer,
Disaster Services, Mass Care.


96 EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
Emergency Preparedness Resources.
Photo and Illustration Credits
American National Red Cross,
courtesy—page 94 (both)
David Bell, courtesy—page 56 (type I)
FEMA, courtesy—page 66
FEMA/George Armstrong, courtesy—
page 11
FEMA/Patricia Armstrong, courtesy—
page 59
FEMA/Mike Howard, courtesy—page 63
FEMA/Michael Raphael, courtesy—
page 62
FEMA/Mark Wolfe, courtesy—page 74
Byron Haverstick/Ozark Trails Council,
courtesy—page 12
Ingram Publishing, ©1994–2001—
page 91 (pen)
©Nate Luke Photography—page 79
NOAA/National Hurricane Center,
courtesy—page 64
NOAA Photo Library, NOAA Central
Library; OAR/ERL/National Severe
Storms Laboratory (NSSL),
courtesy—page 61
Three Mile Island, courtesy—page 70
Wikipedia.org, courtesy—cover
(emergency horns)
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of or
are protected by Scouting America.
Dan Bryant—page 28 (stove fuel)
Joseph Csatari—page 15
Daniel Giles—pages 5 and 85
Francis Giles—pages 3, 10 (all), and 13
John McDearmon—all illustrations on
pages 33, 49, 51, 75–76, 78, and 81
Frank McMahon—page 87
Brian Payne—pages 44 (Scouts),
49 (photo), 56 (type II), and
89 (disaster scene)
Randy Piland—pages 14, 16, 33 (alarm),
56 (sailing), and 89 (Scout)
Scott Stenjem—page 44 (mountaineers)
Tara Tamer—page 18