EMERGENCY
PREPAREDNESS

BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES

EMERGENCY
PREPAREDNESS

“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”

Emergency Preparedness
1. Earn the First Aid merit badge.
2. Do the following:
(a) Discuss with your counselor the aspects of emergency preparedness:
(1) Prevention
(2) Protection
(3) Mitigation
(4) Response
(5) Recovery
Include in your discussion the kinds of questions that are important to ask
yourself as you consider each of these.
(b) Using a chart, graph, spreadsheet, or another method approved by your
counselor, demonstrate your understanding of each aspect of emergency preparedness listed in requirement 2a (prevention, protection, mitigation, response,
and recovery) for 10 emergency situations from the list below. You must use the
first five situations listed below in boldface, plus any other five of your choice.
Discuss your findings with your counselor.
(1) Home kitchen fire
(2) Home basement/storage room/garage fire
(3) Explosion in the home
(4) Automobile crash
(5) Food-borne disease (food poisoning)
(6) Fire or explosion in a public place
(7) Vehicle stalled in the desert
(8) Vehicle trapped in a blizzard
(9) Earthquake or tsunami
(10) Mountain/backcountry accident
(11) Boating or water accident
(12) Gas leak in a home or a building
(13) Tornado or hurricane
(14) Major flooding or a flash flood
(15) Toxic chemical spills and releases

(16) Nuclear power plant emergency
(17) Avalanche (snowslide or rockslide)
(18) Violence in a public place
(c) Meet with and teach your family how to get or build a kit, make a plan,
and be informed for the situations on the chart you created for requirement
2b. Complete a family plan. Then meet with your counselor and report on
your family meeting, discuss their responses, and share your family plan.
3. Show how you could safely save a person from the following:
(a) Touching a live household electric wire
(b) A structure filled with carbon monoxide
(c) Clothes on fire
(d) Drowning, using nonswimming rescues (including accidents on ice)
4. Show three ways of attracting and communicating with rescue planes/aircraft.
5. With another person, show a good way to transport an injured person out of a
remote and/or rugged area, conserving the energy of rescuers while ensuring
the well-being and protection of the injured person.
6. Do the following:
(a) Describe the National Incident Management System (NIMS)/Incident and
the Incident Command System (ICS).
(b) Identify the local government or community agencies that normally handle and prepare for emergency services similar to those of the NIMS or ICS.
Explain to your counselor ONE of the following:
(1) How the NIMS/ICS can assist a Boy Scout troop when responding
in a disaster
(2) How a group of Scouts could volunteer to help in the event of these
types of emergencies
(c) Find out who is your community’s emergency management director and
learn what this person does to prevent, protect, mitigate, respond to, and
recover from emergency situations in your community. Discuss this information
with your counselor, utilizing the information you learned from requirement 2b.
7. Do the following:
(a) Take part in an emergency service project, either a real one or a practice
drill, with a Scouting unit or a community agency.
(b) Prepare a written plan for mobilizing your troop when needed to do
emergency service. If there is already a plan, explain it. Tell your part in
making it work.
8. Do the following:
(a) Tell the things a group of Scouts should be prepared to do, the training they need,
and the safety precautions they should take for the following emergency services:
(1) Crowd and traffic control

(2) Messenger service and communication
(3) Collection and distribution services
(4) Group feeding, shelter, and sanitation
(b) Prepare a personal emergency service pack for a mobilization call.
Prepare a family emergency kit (suitcase or waterproof box) for use by
your family in case an emergency evacuation is needed. Explain the needs
and uses of the contents.
9. Do ONE of the following:
(a) Using a safety checklist approved by your counselor, inspect your home for
potential hazards. Explain the hazards you find and how they can be corrected.
(b) Review or develop a plan of escape for your family in case of fire in
your home.
(c) Develop an accident prevention program for five family activities outside
the home (such as taking a picnic or seeing a movie) that includes an analysis
of possible hazards, a proposed plan to correct those hazards, and the reasons
for the corrections you propose.

.Emergency Preparedness Resources

Emergency Preparedness
Resources
Scouting Literature
Boy Scout Journal; Backpacking,
Camping, Canoeing, Cooking, Cycling,
Electricity, Fire Safety, First Aid, Hiking,
Home Repairs, Lifesaving, Motorboating,
Nature, Orienteering, Pioneering,
Public Health, Radio, Rowing, Safety,
Search and Rescue, Signs, Signals,
and Codes, Small-Boat Sailing, Snow
Sports, Swimming, Traffic Safety,
Weather, and Wilderness Survival
merit badge pamphlets
For more information about
Scouting-related resources, visit
the BSA’s official online retail catalog (with your parent’s permission)
at http://www.scoutstuff.org.

Books

———. Responding to Emergencies
(participant’s manual).
Staywell, 2007.
Forgey, William W. Basic Essentials:
Wilderness First Aid, 3rd ed. Falcon
Guides, 2007.
Kelly, Kate. Living Safe in an Unsafe
World: The Complete Guide to Family
Preparedness. New American Library
Trade, 2000.
Meyer-Crissey, Pamela, and Brian L.
Crissey, Ph.D. Common Sense
in Uncommon Times, 2nd ed. Granite
Publishing, 2013.
U.S. Department of Transportation,
National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration. First There First Care:
Bystander Care for the Injured.
DOT HS 809 853, 2005.

American Red Cross. American Red
Cross Water Safety Handbook.
StayWell, 2004.
———. First Aid/CPR/AED for Schools
and Communities (participant’s
manual). Staywell, 2006.

EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS    93

Emergency Preparedness Resources.

The following emergency
preparedness resources
from the American Red Cross
may be of particular interest
to Scouts, Scout leaders, and
merit badge counselors.
Masters of Disaster™
Educator’s Kit,
No. A1140EDU.
Masters of Disaster™
Family Kit,
No. A1140FAM.

Organizations and Websites
American Red Cross
Toll-free telephone: 800-733-2767
Website: http://www.redcross.org

National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration
Telephone: 202-482-6090
Website: http://www.noaa.gov

American Veterinary
Medical Association
Website: http://avma.org

Radio Amateur Civil
Emergency Service
Website: http://www.usraces.org

Citizen Corps/Community
Emergency Response Teams
Website:
http://www.citizencorps.gov/cert

Ready.gov
Telephone: 202-282-8000 or
202-447-3543 TTY
Website: http://www.ready.gov

Environmental Protection Agency
Telephone: 202-272-0167
Toll-free telephone for literature
requests only: 800-490-9198
Website: http://www.epa.gov

U.S. Department of
Homeland Security
Telephone: 202-282-8000
Website: www.dhs.gov

Federal Emergency
Management Agency
Telephone: 800-621-3362
Toll-free telephone for literature
requests only: 800-480-2520
Website: http://www.fema.gov

94    EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS

U.S. Department of Transportation
NHTSA Office of Emergency
Medical Services
Telephone: 202-366-5440
Website: www.dot.gov
U.S. Geological Survey
Toll-free telephone: 888-275-8747
Website: http://www.usgs.gov

