METALWORK


METALWORK
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Requirements
1. Read the safety rules for metalwork. Discuss how to be safe
while working with metal. Discuss with your counselor the
additional safety rules that apply to the metalwork option
you choose for requirement 5.
2. Define the terms native metal, malleable, metallurgy, alloy,
nonferrous, and ferrous. Then do the following:
a. Name two nonferrous alloys used by pre–Iron Age metal-
workers. Name the metals that are combined to form
these alloys.
b. Name three ferrous alloys used by modern metalworkers.
c. Describe how to work-harden a metal.
d. Describe how to anneal a nonferrous and a ferrous metal.
3. Do the following:
a. Work-harden a piece of 26- or 28-gauge sheet brass or
sheet copper. Put a 45-degree bend in the metal, then
heavily peen the area along the bend line to work-harden
it. Note the amount of effort that is required to overcome
the yield point in this unworked piece of metal.
b. Soften the work-hardened piece from requirement 3a by
annealing it, and then try to remove the 45-degree bend.
Note the amount of effort that is required to overcome
the yield point.
c. Make a temper color index from a flat piece of steel.
Using hand tools, make and temper a center punch of
medium-carbon or high-carbon steel.
METALWORK 3


4 METALWORK
4. Find out about three career opportunities in metalworking.
Pick one and find out the education, training, and
experience required for this profession. Discuss this
with your counselor, and explain why this profession
might interest you.
5. After completing the first four requirements, complete at
least ONE of the options listed below.
a. Option 1—Sheet Metal Mechanic/Tinsmith
1) Name and describe the use of the basic sheet
metalworking tools.
2) Create a sketch of two objects to make from sheet
metal. Include each component’s dimensions on your
sketch, which need not be to scale.
3) Make two objects out of 24- or 26-gauge sheet metal.
Use patterns either provided by your counselor
or made by you and approved by your counselor.
Construct these objects using a metal that is
appropriate to the object’s ultimate purpose,
and using cutting, bending, edging, and either
soldering or brazing.
a) One object also must include at least one
riveted component.
b) If you do not make your objects from zinc-plated
sheet steel or tin-plated sheet steel, preserve your
work from oxidation.


METALWORK 5
b. Option 2—Silversmith
1) Name and describe the use of a
silversmith’s basic tools.
2) Create a sketch of two objects to
make from sheet silver. Include each
component’s dimensions on your sketch,
which need not be to scale.
3) Make two objects out of 18- or 20-gauge
sheet copper. Use patterns either
provided by your counselor or made
by you and approved by your counselor.
Both objects must include a soldered
joint. If you have prior silversmithing
experience, you may substitute sterling
silver, nickel silver, or lead-free pewter.
a) At least one object must include
a sawed component you have
made yourself.
b) At least one object must include a sunken part you
have made yourself.
c) Clean and polish your objects.
c. Option 3—Founder
1) Name and describe the use of the basic parts of a
two-piece mold. Name at least three different types
of molds.
2) Create a sketch of two objects to cast in metal. Include
each component’s dimensions on your sketch, which
need not be to scale.
3) Make two molds, one using a pattern provided by
your counselor and another one you have made
yourself that has been approved by your counselor.
Position the pouring gate and vents yourself.
Do note use copyrighted materials as patterns.
a) Using lead-free pewter, make a casting using a mold
provided by your counselor.
b) Using lead-free pewter, make a casting using the
mold that you have made.


6 METALWORK
d. Option 4—Blacksmith
1) Name and describe the use of a blacksmith’s
basic tools.
2) Make a sketch of two objects to hot-forge. Include
each component’s dimensions on your sketch,
which need not be to scale.
3) Using low-carbon steel at least 1⁄4 inch thick,
perform the following exercises:
a) Draw out by forging a taper.
b) Use the horn of the anvil by forging a
U-shaped bend.
c) Form a decorative twist in a piece of square steel.
d) Use the edge of the anvil to bend metal by forging
an L-shaped bend.
4) Using low-carbon steel at least 1⁄4 inch thick, make
the two objects you sketched that require hot-forging.
Be sure you have your counselor’s approval before
you begin.
a) Include a decorative twist on one object.
b) Include a hammer-riveted joint in one object.
c) Preserve your work from oxidation.


94 METALWORK
Metalwork Resources.
Metalwork Resources
The resources listed below represent
only a fraction of those available to the
hobby metalworker. Check the local
library and bookstores for additional
titles, and don’t be afraid to purchase
out-of-print titles or titles with older
copyright dates—the majority of
metalworking techniques are timeless.
Books
Metalworking
McCreight, Tim. The Complete
Metalsmith: An Illustrated Handbook.
Davis Publications, 1991.
Repp, Victor E. Metalwork: Technology and
Practice, 9th ed. McGraw-Hill, 1993.
Walker, John R. Modern Metalworking,
9th ed. Goodheart-Wilcox Company
Inc., 2004.
Metal Can Craft
Hansson, Bobby. The Fine Art of
the Tin Can, revised ed. Lark
Books, 2005.
Maguire, Mary. Tin Crafts: Over
20 Projects for the Home.
Lorenz Books, 1999.
Tinsmithing/Tinware
DeVoe, Shirley Spaulding. The Art of
the Tinsmith—English and American.
Schiffer Publishing Ltd., 1981.
Handsberg, Ejner. Shop Drawings
of Shaker Iron and Tinware.
Berkshire House Publishing, 1993.
Vosburgh, H.K. The Tinsmith’s Helper
and Pattern Book. Astragal Press, 1994.
Silversmithing
Finegold, Rupert, and William Seitz.
Silversmithing. Iola, Wisconsin:
Krause Publications, 1997.
McCreight, Tim. Jewelry: The
Fundamentals of Metalsmithing.
Hand Books Press, 1997.
——. The Metalsmith’s Book of
Boxes and Lockets. Hand
Books Press, 1999.
Silvera, Joe. Soldering Made Simple.
Kalmbach Books, 2010.
Visit the Boy Scouts of America’s
official retail website at http://
www.scoutstuff.org for a com-
plete listing of all merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


METALWORK 95
.Metalwork Resources
Metal Casting
Ammen, C.W. The Complete Book of
Bronze Casting. Tab Books Inc., 1985.
McCreight, Tim. Practical Casting.
Brynmorgan Press, 1994.
Blacksmithing
Andrews, Jack. The New Edge of the
Anvil. Skipjack Press, 1994.
Bealer, Alex W. The Art of
Blacksmithing, revised ed. Castle
Books, 2009.
Blandford, Percy. Practical
Blacksmithing and Metalworking.
McGraw-Hill Professional, 1988.
Sims, Lorelei. The Backyard Blacksmith.
Quarry Books, 2006.
Weygers, Alexander G. The Complete
Modern Blacksmith. Ten Speed
Press, 1997.
Organizations and Websites
Artist-Blacksmith’s Association
of North America
Website: http://www.abana.org
The ArtMetal Resource to
Metalworking
Website: http://www.artmetal.com
Metal Museum
Website: http://www.metalmuseum.org
National Institute for
Metalworking Skills
Website: https://www.nims-skills.org
Society of American Silversmiths
Website: http://www.silversmithing.com
Materials and Supplies
Casting Metal, RTV Silicone,
Premade Molds Castings
Toll-free telephone: 888-429-1707
Website:
http://www.miniaturemolds.com
Centaur Forge
117 N. Spring St.
Burlington, WI 53105-0340
Toll-free telephone: 800-666-9175
Website: http://www.centaurforge.com
The Dunken Company Inc.
Toll-free telephone: 800-544-6653
Website: http://www.dunken.com
Rio Grande
Toll-free telephone: 800-545-6566
Website: http://www.riogrande.com
Shor International Corporation
Toll-free telephone: 800-295-6320
Website:
http://www.shorinternational.com
Stebgo Metals
Toll-free telephone: 800-289-0138
Website: http://www.stebgo.com
Widget Supply
Telephone: 541-926-1003
Website: http://www.widgetsupply.com