WEATHER
STEM-Based


WEATHER
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Weather
1. Define meteorology. Explain what weather is and what climate is. Discuss
how the weather affects farmers, sailors, aviators, and the outdoor construc-
tion industry. Tell why weather forecasts are important to each of these groups.
2. Name five dangerous weather-related conditions. Give the safety rules for each
when outdoors and explain the difference between a severe weather watch
and a warning. Discuss the safety rules with your family.
3. Explain the difference between high- and low-pressure systems in the atmosphere.
Tell which is related to good and to poor weather. Draw cross sections of a
cold front and a warm front, showing the location and movements of the cold
and warm air, the frontal slope, the location and types of clouds associated
with each type of front, and the location of precipitation.
4. Tell what causes wind, why it rains, and how lightning and hail are formed.
5. Identify and describe clouds in the low, middle, and upper levels of the
atmosphere. Relate these to specific types of weather.
6. Draw a diagram of the water cycle and label its major processes. Explain the
water cycle to your counselor.
7. Identify some human activities that can alter the environment, and describe
how they affect the climate and people.
8. Describe how the tilt of Earth’s axis helps determine the climate of a region
near the equator, near the poles, and across the area in between.
9. Do ONE of the following:
(a) Make one of the following instruments: wind vane, anemometer, rain
gauge, hygrometer. Keep a daily weather log for one week using information
from this instrument as well as from other sources such as local radio and
television stations, NOAA Weather Radio All Hazards, and internet sources
(with your parent’s permission). Record the following information at the same
time every day: wind direction and speed, temperature, precipitation, and
types of clouds. Be sure to make a note of any morning dew or frost. In the
log, also list the weather forecasts from radio or television at the same time
each day and show how the weather really turned out.


(b) Visit a National Weather Service office or talk with a local radio or television
weathercaster, private meteorologist, local agricultural extension service officer,
or university meteorology instructor. Find out what type of weather is most
dangerous or damaging to your community. Determine how severe weather
and flood warnings reach the homes in your community.
10. Give a talk of at least five minutes to a group (such as your unit or a Cub
Scout pack) explaining the outdoor safety rules in the event of lightning,
flash floods, and tornadoes. Before your talk, share your outline with your
counselor for approval.
11. Find out about a weather-related career opportunity that interests you.
Discuss with and explain to your counselor what training and education
are required for such a position, and the responsibilities required of such
a position.


WEATHER 77
.Weather Resources
Weather Resources
Scouting Literature
Basic Illustrated Weather Forecasting;
Fieldbook; Chemistry, Emergency
Preparedness, Environmental Science,
and Oceanography merit badge pamphlets
Books
Burt, Christopher C. Extreme Weather:
A Guide and Record Book.
W. W. Norton, 2007.
Ceban, Bonnie J. Tornadoes: Disaster and
Survival. Enslow Publishers, 2005.
Chaston, Peter R. Weather Maps: How to
Read and Interpret All the Basic Weather
Charts. Chaston Scientific Inc., 2009.
Cosgrove, Brian. Weather.
DK Publishing, 2007.
Day, John. A., and Vincent J. Schaefer.
Clouds and Weather: The Concise
Field Guide to the Atmosphere.
Houghton Mifflin, 1998.
Elsom, Derek M. Weather Explained:
A Beginner’s Guide to the Elements.
Henry Holt & Company, 1997.
Gardner, Robert, and David Webster.
Science Projects About Weather. Enslow
Publishers, 1994.
Kahl, Jonathan D. W. National Audubon
Society First Field Guide: Weather.
Scholastic, 1998.
Moran, Joseph M., and Micahel D.
Moran. Meteorology: The Atmosphere
and Science of Weather. Prentice
Hall, 1996.
Petheram, Louise. Acid Rain.
Bridgestone Books, 2006.
Sorbjan, Zbigniew. Hands-on
Meteorology: Stories, Theories,
and Simple Experiments. American
Meteorological Society, 1996.
Magazines
Weatherwise
325 Chestnut St., Suite 800
Philadelphia, PA 19106
Website: http://www.weatherwise.org
Visit the Boy Scouts of America’s
official retail website at
http://www.scoutstuff.org for a
complete listing of all merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


78 WEATHER
Weather Resources.
Organizations and Websites
Career Guide for the
Atmospheric Sciences
Website: http://www.ametsoc.org/
atmoscareers/index.html
Jetstream—Online School
for Weather
Website: http://www.srh.noaa.gov/
jetstream/
Lightning Protection Institute
P.O. Box 99
Maryville, MO 64468
Toll-free telephone: 800-488-6864
Website: http://www.lightning.org
Satellite Meteorology for
Grades 7–12
Website:
http://cimss.ssec.wisc.edu/satmet
The National Center for Atmospheric
Research and the UCAR Office
of Programs
P.O. Box 3000
Boulder, CO 80307-3000
Website: http://ncar.ucar.edu
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration’s
National Weather Service
1325 East West Highway
Silver Spring, MD 20910
Website: http://www.weather.gov
Acknowledgments
The Boy Scouts of America thanks
Kerry M. Jones, senior forecaster with
the National Weather Service in
Albuquerque, New Mexico. Mr. Jones
diligently provided his expertise, time,
and other resources for this new
edition of the Weather merit badge
pamphlet. We appreciate his thorough-
ness and his attentiveness during this
lengthy project.
The Boy Scouts of America is
grateful to the men and women serving
on the Merit Badge Maintenance Task
Force for the improvements made in
updating this pamphlet.