ARCHITECTURE
AND LANDSCAPE
ARCHITECTURE

STEM-Based

BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES

ARCHITECTURE
AND LANDSCAPE
ARCHITECTURE

“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”

Architecture
Requirements
1. Do the following:
a. Tour your community and list the different types of
buildings you see. Try to identify buildings that can
be associated with a specific period of history or style
of architecture. Make a sketch of the building you
most admire.
b. Select an architectural achievement that has had a major
impact on society. Using resources such as the Internet
(with your parent’s permission), books, and magazines,
find out how this achievement has influenced the world
today. Tell your counselor what you learned.
2. In the Outdoor Code, a Scout pledges to “be conservationminded.” Discuss the following with your counselor:
a. The term sustainable architecture. Identify three features
typical of green buildings.
b. The difference between renewable building materials
and recycled building materials, and how each can be
used in construction.
c. The relationship of architecture with its surrounding
environment and the community.
d. How entire buildings can be reused rather than torn
down when they no longer serve their original purpose.

35857
ISBN 978-0-8395-3304-7
©2014 Boy Scouts of America
2016 Printing

3. Do ONE of the following:
a.	With your parent’s and counselor’s permission and
approval, arrange to meet with an architect. Ask to
see the scale model of a building and the drawings
that a builder would use to construct this building.
Discuss why the different building
materials were selected. Look at
the details in the drawings and the
model to see how the materials and
components are attached to each other
during construction.

Thorncrown Chapel near Eureka
Springs, Arkansas; Fay Jones +
Maurice Jennings Architects

Pine Eagle Chapel at Camp Tiak Scout Camp, near Wiggins, Mississippi, makes an
impressive backdrop for outdoor gatherings; Fay Jones + Maurice Jennings Architects.
ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE    3

b.	With your parent’s and counselor’s permission and
approval, arrange to meet with an architect at a
construction site. Ask the architect to bring drawings
that the builder uses to construct the building. While
at the site, discuss why the different building materials
being used were selected. Discuss how the different
building materials and components are attached to
each other during construction.
	
Note: To visit a construction site will require advance
planning. You will need permission from your parents,
counselor, the architect, and the construction site
manager. A construction site is a very dangerous place.
While there, you will need to closely follow the site
manager’s directions and comply with all the safety
procedures, including wearing a hard hat, protective
eyewear, and proper footwear. Be aware of the changing
conditions at the site, and stay with the architect or
site manager.
c.	Interview someone who might be your client (such as
a prospective homeowner or business owner) if you
were an architect. Find out what your client’s requirements would be for designing a new home or business
building. Write a short program including a list of
requirements for the project, the functions of the
building and site, how the functions relate to one
another, and the goals of the project.
4. Measure a room such as one where you live or where
your troop meets. Make an accurately scaled drawing
of the room’s floor plan showing walls, doors, closets,
windows, and any built-in furniture or cabinets. Neatly
label your drawing with the following: your name, the
date, what room you drew, and the scale of the drawing.
(Drawing scale: 1⁄4 inch = 1 foot)
5. Find out about three career opportunities in architecture.
Pick one and find out the education, training, and
experience required for this profession. Discuss this
with your counselor, and explain why this profession
might interest you.

4    ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE

Architecture Resources.

Architecture Resources
Scouting Resources
Art, Computers, Drafting, Engineering,
Model Design and Building, Photography,
Surveying, and Sustainability merit
badge pamphlets
Visit the Boy Scouts of
America’s official retail website
(with your parent’s permission)
at http://www.scoutstuff.org for a
complete listing of all merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.

Books

Kostof, Spiro. A History of Architecture:
Settings and Rituals, 2nd ed.
Oxford University Press, 1995.
Macaulay, David. City: A Story of
Roman Planning and Construction.
HMH Books for Young Readers, 1983.
———. Cathedral: The Story of Its
Construction. Houghton Mifflin, 1973.
Nelson, Peter. The Tree House Book.
Universe, 2000.
Rifkind, Carole. A Field Guide to
American Architecture. Random
House Value Publishing, 1987.
Sharp, Dennis. Twentieth Century
Architecture: A Visual History.
Images. 2006.

ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN, HISTORY,
AND NOTABLE BUILDINGS

Susanka, Sarah, and Kira Obolensky. The
Not So Big House. Taunton Press, 2009.

Ching, Francis D.K. Architecture: Form,
Space, and Order, 3rd ed. John Wiley
and Sons, 2007.

Susanka, Sarah. Creating the Not So
Big House. Taunton Press. 2002.

———. Building Construction Illustrated,
5th ed. John Wiley and Sons. 2014.

Wilson, Forrest. What It Feels Like
to Be a Building. John Wiley
and Sons, 1988.

Gossel, Peter. Modern Architecture A–Z.
Taschen, 2010.
Isaacson, Phillip M. Round Buildings,
Square Buildings, and Buildings
That Wiggle Like a Fish. Knopf, 2001.

44    ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE

.Architecture Resources

Getty Center, Los Angeles, California;
Richard Meier, architect

BIOGRAPHIES
Heinz, Thomas A. The Vision of
Frank Lloyd Wright. Chartwell
Books, 2000.
Hoag, Edwin, and Joy Hoag.
Masters of Modern Architecture:
Frank Lloyd Wright, Le Corbusier,
Mies van der Rohe, and Walter
Gropius. Bobbs-Merrill, 1977.

Scout sketching the Philmont Museum and
Seton Memorial Library, Cimarron, New Mexico

DRAWINGS AND MODELS

Huxtable, Ada Louise. Frank Lloyd
Wright: A Life. Penguin, 2008.

Biesty, Stephen, and Richard Platt.
Stephen Biesty’s Incredible CrossSections. Knopf, 1992.

Ivey, Robert Adams. Fay Jones.
McGraw-Hill Professional, 2001.

Eisen, David. Fun With Architecture.
Viking Press, 1992.

Rubalcaba, Jill. I.M. Pei: Architect
of Time, Place and Purpose.
Skyscape. 2011.

Maddex, Diane. Architects Make Zigzags:
Looking at Architecture From A to Z.
John Wiley and Sons, 1986.

Sieden, L. Steven. A Fuller View:
Buckminster Fuller’s Vision of
Hope and Abundance for All.
Divine Arts, 2012.

Salvadori, Mario. The Art of Construction,
3rd ed. Chicago Review Press, 2000.
Werner, Megan. Model Making.
Princeton Architectural Press, 2011.

ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE    45

Architecture Resources.

Organizations and Websites

Acknowledgments

American Architectural Foundation
Telephone: 202-787-1001
Website: http://www.archfoundation.org

The Boy Scouts of America acknowledges and thanks the volunteers of
the Architecture Merit Badge Task
Group of the American Institute of
Architects for their work and expertise in preparing this pamphlet for the
Architecture merit badge.

The American Institute of Architects
1735 New York Ave. NW
Washington, DC 20006-5292
Telephone: 202-242-3837
Website: http://www.aia.org
The American Institute of
Architecture Students
Telephone: 202-626-7472
Website: http://www.aiasnatl.org
Association of Collegiate
Schools of Architecture
1735 New York Ave. NW
Washington, DC 20006-5292
Telephone: 202-785-2324
Website: http://www.acsa-arch.org
Association of Licensed Architects
Telephone: 847-382-0630
Website: http://www.alatoday.org
National Council of Architectural
Registration Boards
Telephone: 202-879-0520
Website: http://www.ncarb.org

Task Group Members, 2004 Edition
William J. Richardson, AIA (chairman)
Robert J. Kilduff, AIA (vice chairman)
Richard B. Ferrier, FAIA
Milton P. Anderson, AIA
Michael L. Archer, AIA
Christopher Q.A. Marrs, Associate AIA
Thomas S. Harrover, AIA (BSA adviser)
Thanks to members of Troop 219,
Plano, Texas, for assistance with
photography. We are grateful to Urban
Design Group, an architecture firm in
Dallas, Texas, for providing the venue
for photography.
The Boy Scouts of America is
grateful to the men and women serving
on the Merit Badge Maintenance Task
Force for the improvements made in
updating this pamphlet.

National Organization of
Minority Architects
Website: http://www.noma.net
The New York Society of Architects
Telephone: 212-385-8950
Website: http://www.nysarch.com
Society of American
Registered Architects
Toll-free telephone: 888-385-7272
Website: http://www.sara-national.org

46    ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE

