FINGERPRINTING

BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES

FINGERPRINTING

“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”

Requirements
1. Give a short history of fingerprinting. Tell the difference
between civil and criminal identification.
2. Explain the difference between the automated fingerprint
identification systems (AFIS) now used by law enforcement
agencies and the biometric fingerprint systems used to
control access to computers and places like buildings
and airports.
3. Do the following:
a. Name the surfaces of the body where friction or
papillary ridges are found.
b. Name the two basic principles supporting the
science of fingerprints and give a brief explanation
of each principle.
c. Explain what it takes to positively identify a person
using fingerprints.
4. Take a clear set of prints using ONE of the
following methods.
a. Make both rolled and plain impressions. Make these on
an 8-by-8-inch fingerprint identification card, available
from your local police department or your counselor.
b. Using clear adhesive tape, a pencil, and plain paper,
record your own fingerprints or those of another person.
5. Show your merit badge counselor you can identify the three
basic types of fingerprint patterns and their subcategories.
Using your own hand, identify the types of patterns you see.

35895
ISBN 978-0-8395-3287-3
©2014 Boy Scouts of America
2016 Printing

Fingerprinting Resources .

Fingerprinting Resources
Scouting Literature
Chemistry, Crime Prevention, Law, and
Photography merit badge pamphlets
For more information about or to
order Scouting-related resources,
see http://www.scoutstuff.org
(with your parent’s permission).

Books
Beavan, Colin. Fingerprints: The
Origins of Crime Detection and the
Murder Case that Launched Forensic
Science. Hyperion, 2002.
Beres, D.B. Dusted and Busted! The
Science of Fingerprinting. Children’s
Press, 2007.
Bertino, Anthony J., and Patricia
Bertino. Forensic Science:
Fundamentals and Investigations,
2nd ed. Cengage Learning, 2015.
Camenson, Blythe. Opportunities in
Forensic Science Careers, 2nd ed.
McGraw-Hill, 2008.
Deslich, Barbara, and John Funkhouser.
Forensic Science for High School, 2nd
ed. Kendall Hunt, 2009.
Evans, Colin. The Casebook of Forensic
Detection: How Science Solved 100
of the World’s Most Baffling Crimes,
updated ed. Berkley Trade, 2007.
34    FINGERPRINTING

Jones, Charlotte Foltz. Fingerprints and
Talking Bones: How Real-Life Crimes
Are Solved. Yearling Books, 1999.
Jones, Gary W. Introduction to
Fingerprint Comparison.
Staggs, 2000.
Rainis, Kenneth G. Crime-Solving
Science Projects: Forensic Science
Experiments. Enslow, 2005.
Schulz, Karen K. CSI Expert!
Forensic Science for Kids.
Prufrock Press, 2008.
Siegel, Jay. Forensic Science: A
Beginner’s Guide. Oneworld
Publications, 2009.
Thompson, Robert Bruce, and Barbara
Fritchman. Illustrated Guide to
Home Forensic Science Experiments.
Maker Media Inc., 2012.
Vacca, John. Biometric Technologies
and Verification Systems.
Butterworth-Heinemann, 2007.
Walker, Pam, and Elaine Wood.
Crime Scene Investigations: RealLife Science Labs for Grades 6–12.
Jossey-Bass, 2000.
Wiese, Jim. Detective Science: 40
Crime-Solving, Case-Breaking, CrookCatching Activities for Kids. John
Wiley and Sons, 1996.

.Fingerprinting Resources

Young, Karen Romano. Science Fair
Winners: Crime Scene Science.
National Geographic Kids, 2009.

Organizations and Websites
FBI Youth
Website: http://www.fbi.gov/fun-games/
kids/kids
Latent Print Examination:
Fingerprints, Palm Prints,
and Footprints
Website: http://onin.com/fp
Young Forensic Scientists Forum
Website: http://yfsf.aafs.org

Acknowledgments
For assistance with updates to the
Fingerprinting merit badge pamphlet
and the requirements, the Boy Scouts
of America thanks Ed German, a
certified latent print examiner (CLPE)
who works on fingerprint evidence
cases for American military investigators from his office at the U.S. Army
Criminal Investigation Laboratory.
Special Agent German serves as a
Fingerprinting merit badge counselor.
The BSA also thanks Lisa Vincent
Stout, art and information specialist,
Criminal Justice Information Services
Division, Federal Bureau of Investigation;
and Charles Jones, training supervisor,
Identification and Investigative
Services Section, FBI. Thanks also to
WRB Fingerprint Counseling Service,
Springfield, Virginia, and to the police
departments of Edison and New
Brunswick, New Jersey, for their
past assistance.

The Boy Scouts of America is
grateful to the men and women serving on the Merit Badge Maintenance
Task Force for the improvements made
in updating this pamphlet.

Photo and Illustration Credits
Coppell, Texas, Police Department,
courtesy—page 17 (both)
HAAP Media Ltd., courtesy—cover
(handprints, blue fingerprint, dusting brush/powder/print)
Shutterstock.com, courtesy—cover
(finger scan, ©chungking); pages 3
(©Maksim Kabakou), 4 (©Axstokes),
20 (©Vector Icon), 24 (©siebenia),
25 (forensic scientist, ©LeahAnne Thompson), 28 (©Tetiana
Yurchenko), 32 (©Black Jack), and
33 (©Johan Swanepoel)
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of or
are protected by the Boy Scouts
of America.
Dan Bryant—cover (fingerprint card)
John McDearmon—pages 6, 7, 8,
and 16

FINGERPRINTING    35

