FINGERPRINTING


FINGERPRINTING
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Fingerprinting or check Scoutbook
for the latest requirements.
35895
ISBN 978-0-8395-3287-3
©2025 Scouting America/Boy Scouts of America
2025 Printing
FPO


FINGERPRINTING 3
Contents
What Is a Fingerprint? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
History of Fingerprinting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Taking Fingerprints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
Fingerprint Pattern Types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
Latent Prints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
Comparing and Identifying Fingerprints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
Computers and Fingerprints. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
Careers in Fingerprinting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
Fingerprinting Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
Worksheet for Requirement 5. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38





FINGERPRINTING 5
.What Is a Fingerprint?
What Is a Fingerprint?
Imagine trying to pick up an ice-cold glass of water using the
inside of your arm at the elbow. The smooth skin on the inside
of your arm is not designed to grip or create friction the way
the ridged skin on your fingers and palms will grip. Using the
inside of your elbow, you are more likely to drop the glass
than if you use the “friction skin” on your fingers and palms.
The friction skin on your toes and the soles of your feet serves
the same purpose in giving you traction on slippery surfaces.
When you transfer dirt, oil, ink, or other substances from
the friction ridges of your fingers to a smooth surface, you make
fingerprints. Just like an ink stamp, the ridges make contact
patterns on the surface you touch. The shapes and paths of the
tops of the friction ridges appear as lines in a fingerprint.


6 FINGERPRINTING
What Is a Fingerprint?.
The friction skin covering the undersides of your
fingers, palms, soles, and toes resembles the
ridges of corrugated cardboard. Peel away the
paper covering from a piece of corrugated card-
board to see the alternating ridges and grooves.
Fingerprinting is mostly used by law enforcement
agencies in investigating crimes, but fingerprints have other
uses, too. Law enforcement officers use fingerprints, along
with other materials like matching dental records and DNA
sampling, to help identify amnesia victims, missing persons,
abducted children, and others.
In earning the Fingerprinting merit badge, you will
be learning about and using an important technique in
law enforcement.
Two Basic Principles of Fingerprinting
In the scientific community at large, the following terminology is
considered appropriate when speaking of the two basic principles
of fingerprints.
Persistence. Fingerprints never change. If you draw a face on an
uninflated balloon, then fill the balloon with air, the features of the face
will grow with the balloon as you blow it up. Fingerprints are similar
in that they remain permanent, only growing larger as a baby grows
into an adult. The small ridges that form on a person’s hands and feet
before birth do not change shape as long as that person lives.
Uniqueness. No two fingerprints are alike. The ridges on a person’s
hands and feet have distinctive, individual details that are never repeated
on the hands or feet of any other person. In more than 100 years of
comparisons of billions of fingerprints worldwide, no two fingerprints
have been found to have the same features. Even identical twins have
different fingerprints.


FINGERPRINTING 7
.What Is a Fingerprint?
The skin has three layers: epidermis, dermis, and (not
shown in this illustration) subcutaneous tissue. The
epidermis, the outermost layer, is about as thick as
a sheet of paper over most of the body. The dermis,
the middle layer, is between 15 and 40 times as
thick as the epidermis. The surface of the dermis has
many tiny “pegs,” the papillae, that fit into pits on the
underside of the epidermis. The papillae help fasten
the dermis to the epidermis.
Friction ridges are technically known as papillary
ridges. Scrapes, cuts, and other minor injuries do not
change the ridge structure or the papillae; the original
ridge pattern reappears in any new skin that grows.
Structure of friction skin
EPIDERMIS
DERMIS
DUCT OF
SWEAT
GLAND
DOT
ENCLOSUREBIFURCATION
RIDGE ENDING SWEAT PORES
SWEAT GLAND
PAPILLAE





FINGERPRINTING 9
.History of Fingerprinting
History of Fingerprinting
People have long been aware of the ridge patterns on their
fingers and palms. On a cliff face in Nova Scotia, prehistoric
“picture writing” shows a hand with ridge patterns. For centu-
ries the Chinese used thumbprints to seal documents.
In 14th-century Persia, official government papers were
impressed with fingerprints. One government official, a
physician, observed that no two people’s fingerprints were
exactly alike.
Despite this early awareness that fingerprints were indi-
vidual and unique, the scientific approach to fingerprinting did
not begin for another three centuries. Here is a summary* of
the major scientific observations that have led to the modern
science of fingerprinting.
Marcello Malpighi—1686
During his studies of human skin, Italian anatomist and
physician Marcello Malpighi used a microscope to study and
describe the ridges, spirals, and loops in fingerprints. While
his work was invaluable in the early use of the microscope,
Malpighi made no mention of the value of fingerprints as a tool
for identifying individuals.
Johannes Evangelista Purkinje—1823
Johannes Purkinje, a Czech physiologist, created a classification
system for the variety of friction ridge patterns, but his
system failed to generate much interest in the value of using
fingerprints for personal identification.
William Herschel—1858
The English began using fingerprints in 1858 when Sir William
Herschel, a British official in India, had a businessman press
his handprint on the back of a contract to discourage the man
from not honoring the agreement. The locals believed this per-
sonal contact with the document made the contract more bind-
ing than if they had simply signed it. Herschel began requiring
*Much of the information in this section was adapted from http://onin.com/fp.


10 FINGERPRINTING
History of Fingerprinting.
palm prints—and later, simply the prints of the right index and
middle fingers—on every contract.
Herschel’s experience in India suggests that the first wide-
scale, modern-day use of fingerprints was based on superstition,
not science. However, as Herschel’s fingerprint collection grew,
he began to see that the inked impressions could, in fact,
prove or disprove identity. He widened his use of fingerprints,
convinced that the prints were unique to the individual and
permanent throughout that individual’s life.
Henry Faulds—1880
During the 1870s, Dr. Henry Faulds, a Scottish physician
working in Japan, not only recognized the importance of
fingerprints for identification, but also created a method
of classifying prints. In 1880, the scientific journal Nature
published Faulds’ article about using fingerprints for personal
identification and using printer’s ink for taking prints. Faulds
is credited with the first fingerprint identification, of a greasy
print left on an alcohol bottle.
Gilbert Thompson—1882
In 1882, geologist Gilbert Thompson became the first American
to use fingerprints for identification. He printed his own finger-
prints on documents to prevent other people from forging
his work.
Mark Twain—1883
Author Mark Twain, whose real name was Samuel L. Clemens,
brought fingerprinting into the literary world with his 1883 book
Life on the Mississippi, in which a murderer is identified by his
thumbprint. Twain’s 1894 novel, Pudd’nhead Wilson, describes a
dramatic fingerprint identification during a court trial.
Francis Galton—1892
In the 1880s, Sir Francis Galton, a British anthropologist and
cousin of Charles Darwin, began his studies of fingerprints as
a means of identification. In 1892, Galton published his book,
Finger Prints, describing the uniqueness and persistence of fin-
In 1880, Henry Faulds sent Charles Darwin an explana-
tion of his classification system and a sample of the
forms he designed for recording inked impressions.
Darwin later passed the materials on to his cousin,
Francis Galton.


FINGERPRINTING 11
.History of Fingerprinting
gerprints. Galton was able to scientifically prove what Herschel
and Faulds already suspected: that fingerprints are permanent
and unique to each individual. According to Galton’s calcula-
tions, the odds of two individual fingerprints being the same
were 1 in 64 billion.
Juan Vucetich—1892
In 1891, Juan Vucetich, an Argentine police official, began the
first fingerprint files based on Galton pattern types. In 1892,
Vucetich made the first criminal fingerprint identification. He
was able to identify a murder suspect from bloody fingerprints
at a crime scene.
The Henry System—1901
In 1901, fingerprints began to be used for criminal identification
in England and Wales. The classification system was based
on Galton’s observations, as revised by Sir Edward Richard
Henry. This began the Henry Classification System, which is
still used today for noncomputerized fingerprint files in English-
speaking countries.
First Uses in the United States—1902–1903
Systematic fingerprinting was introduced in the United States
in 1902 when the New York Civil Service Commission began
fingerprinting its job applicants. In 1903, the New York State
prison system became the first agency in the United States to
regularly use fingerprints to identify criminals.
Fingerprint Bureaus—1904
The penitentiary at Leavenworth, Kansas, and the St. Louis
Police Department established fingerprint bureaus in 1904.
The Leavenworth bureau became the first to operate on more
than a local basis. It gradually began to offer a free fingerprint
exchange service among a growing list of participating law
enforcement officers.
First American Military Use—1905
The U.S. Army adopted a fingerprint system for its soldiers in
1905. Two years later the U.S. Navy started using fingerprints,
followed by the Marine Corps in 1908.
FBI Identification Division—1924
In the early years of the 20th century, more and more law
enforcement agencies began using fingerprint systems. In 1924,
Congress established the Identification Division of the Federal
Bureau of Investigation. More than 810,000 fingerprint cards
were collected from other agencies to form the core of the FBI
fingerprint files.
Francis Galton
defined
characteristics
by which
fingerprints can
be identified.
These same basic
characteristics
(minutia) are
still in use today.
They are often
referred to as
“Galton’s details.”


12 FINGERPRINTING
History of Fingerprinting.
International Exchange—1932
The FBI Identification Division began to exchange fingerprint
information with foreign countries in 1932.
First Print Taken From Human Skin—1979
In a 1979 Miami, Florida, murder case, a latent (invisible)
fingerprint lifted from the victim’s hand led to the identification
of the suspect. This was the first case in which a fingerprint
was taken from human skin and successfully used to identify
and convict a criminal.
Integrated Automated Fingerprint Identification
System—1999
Today, computers perform fast electronic searches for finger-
print matches. In 1999, the FBI implemented its 21st-century
Integrated Automated Fingerprint Identification System, which
allows users to quickly scan every fingerprint card in the FBI
criminal files. Whereas a single physical search through finger-
prints on paper cards could take 40 days, the IAFIS can do it
in two hours or less. The system also allows users to electroni-
cally transmit fingerprint data quickly, eliminating the need to
exchange paper cards.
The Automated Fingerprint Identification System is the first
phase of IAFIS development. When this technology was intro-
duced in 1999, the fingerprint files were split into computerized
criminal files and manually maintained civil files. The finger-
prints of people who have been charged with serious crimes are
in the criminal files. AFIS computers compare submitted finger-
prints against approximately 70 million criminal files.
Fingerprint Processing Today
In 2011, the FBI began a multi-year Next Generation
Identification (NGI) project to expand the capabilities of
Today, the FBI
has more than
250 million sets
of fingerprint
records.
In this video, the FBI shows the story of how its Criminal
Justice Information Services division evolved from
manual methods for filing and matching fingerprints
taking weeks to computers that process fingerprints in
seconds or minutes: fbi.gov/video-repository/newss-
from-fingerprints-to-a-new-era-of-biometrics-1/view/.


FINGERPRINTING 13
.History of Fingerprinting
and to replace the IAFIS. The NGI system allows fingerprint
matching to 99.6% accuracy, faster response times of less
than 10 seconds, palm print searches, photo storage from state
repositories, facial recognition searches, and iris searches. In
January 2024, the FBI received an average of more than 170,000
fingerprint sets daily.
The IAFIS) is
the largest
person-centered
database in
the world with
over 40 million
records, providing
automated
fingerprint
searches and
exchanges and
text searches of
information.
Scouts learn how law enforcement agencies use computers to
operate the Automated Fingerprint Identification System.
A Fingerprint Jigsaw
A man was arrested for trying to enter the United States illegally. His
fingerprints showed he had intentionally scarred his fingertips, which
raised suspicion immediately: Why would he do that unless he had
something to hide?
Suspicious authorities sent the suspect’s prints to the FBI, where a
fingerprint examiner discovered that the man had had several triangles
of skin cut from each finger and surgically rearranged. The examiner
enlarged the prints, cut them apart, and pieced them back together in
their original positions like a jigsaw puzzle.
The rebuilt prints matched a set in the FBI’s vast fingerprint files,
identifying the man as a fugitive who had been convicted on a drug
charge years earlier. If the man had been able to hide his true identity,
he would have served no more than six months for having an illegal
passport, rather than the 25-year sentence he got for the drug conviction.


14 FINGERPRINTING
Taking Fingerprints.
Taking Fingerprints
Your Fingerprinting merit badge counselor may arrange for you
to do your fingerprinting at the local police station, at a unit
meeting, or at another convenient location. Your counselor
may provide the necessary equipment.
If you or your unit choose to assemble your own equip-
ment, you can use it for demonstrations at unit meetings or
Scouting shows.
Several types of equipment can be used. The oldest finger-
printing method uses a tube of black printer’s ink, a roller, an
inking plate, 8-by-8-inch personal identification fingerprint cards,
and possibly a card holder. The card holder is not essential, but
it helps hold the fingerprint card in place while printing so that
the prints do not blur or smudge.
You may complete requirement 4 for the Fingerprinting
merit badge by recording a set of fingerprints using a conven-
tional fingerprint card or using lifting tape. Both methods are
described here.
Some fingerprinting
systems use a
preinked pad
instead of a roller
and inking plate.
In another system,
the ink is applied
from a sheet of film
that is coated with
black printer’s ink.
An inkless system
uses a chemical to
make fingerprint
impressions.
An advanced
method uses a
computerized
live-scan device
for recording
fingerprints.


FINGERPRINTING 15
.Taking Fingerprints
Using Lifting Tape
To take fingerprints using lifting tape,
you need a sheet of white paper, a pen-
cil, and clear adhesive tape (3/4-inch
tape works better than 1/2-inch tape).
Follow these steps.
Step 1—Draw a 2-by-1-inch rectangle
near one corner of the paper.
Step 2—Using the long side of the
pencil lead, blacken the rectangle, as
black as you can make it.
Step 3—Thoroughly rub your
thumb or the bulb of a finger on
the black rectangle.
Step 4—Apply a piece of adhesive
tape to the coated (gray) area of your
thumb or finger, working smoothly
from the tip down or from the first
joint up.
Step 5—Touching as little as possible
of one corner of the tape, peel the tape
off. Carefully stick it on your paper.
Alongside the fingerprint, write what
hand and finger it came from.
Repeat steps 1 through 5 until you
have taken a clear, complete set
of prints from one hand.
1
2
3
4 5


16 FINGERPRINTING
Taking Fingerprints.
Using Fingerprint Cards
To make rolled and plain impressions on a fingerprint identifi-
cation card, you need the following equipment.
• Black printer’s ink gives the best results because it dries
quickly. You can handle fresh work immediately with little
danger of smudging. Plain writing ink or ordinary stamp-
pad ink is not satisfactory; prints taken with such inks
usually are illegible.
• The roller best suited to fingerprinting work is similar to
the rubber roller that printers use to apply ink to the press.
• A metal plate or an ordinary piece of glass 1/4 inch thick,
6 inches wide, and 12 to 14 inches long makes a good
inking plate.
• You will need cleansing fluid and a cloth to prepare the
subject’s fingers and to clean the roller and inking plate
thoroughly after each use. Denatured alcohol works well
as a cleansing fluid.
• You can get paper fingerprint cards from your local
police department. Be sure to ask for the personal
identification type.
When you have
learned the three
basic types
of fingerprint
patterns (see
the next chapter,
“Fingerprint
Pattern Types”),
identify and label
your fingerprints
by pattern type.
ARCH
LOOP LOOP
LOOP
WHORL
LOOP
LOOP
LOOP
ARCH
WHORL
Set 2
The drawing shows two sets of fingerprints, taken from the left hands of two
different people. Notice that each set has three loop patterns, one arch pattern,
and one whorl, but the order of the patterns in each set is different. The order of
the patterns helps to identify different people.
Set 1


FINGERPRINTING 17
.Taking Fingerprints
Reproduce this form at 200 percent to get a standard 8-by-8-inch
card for requirement 4(a).
For requirement 4(a),
complete the card as
shown here.


18 FINGERPRINTING
Taking Fingerprints.
Making Prints
Position the inking plate at a height that lets the
subject’s forearm be horizontal while the fingers
are being inked. The subject’s arm may be placed
on the edge of a counter or a table of counter
height. With the arm in such a position, you can
avoid strain and pressure on the fingers and you
should be able to make uniform impressions.
Take finger impressions on 8-by-8-inch finger-
print cards, a size that has been generally adopted
because the cards are easy to file. Complete the
form as shown on the previous page.
The illustration shows two types of impres-
sions. The upper 10 prints are taken individu-
ally and are known as rolled impressions. The
smaller prints at the bottom of the card are taken
by printing the thumbs separately but printing
all the fingers of each hand together. These are
called plain impressions and are used as a check
on the rolled impressions.
ROLLED IMPRESSIONS
To start printing, place a small daub of printer’s
ink on the inking glass or plate. Roll it thoroughly
with the roller until a thin, even film of ink covers
the plate’s entire surface.
Have the subject stand in front of and at fore-
arm’s length from the inking plate. Place the entire
first joint of the finger upon the inking plate, with
the plane of the fingernail at right angles to the
plane of the plate. Roll the finger from one side
of the fingernail to the other, in one continuous
movement. Do not roll it back and forth. Take care
to see that the finger is inked evenly from the tip
to just below the first joint.
Ink the finger evenly. Roll
thumbs toward and fingers
away from the center of the
subject’s body.
Roll the inked finger on the
card in the same way you
applied the ink. If you want,
practice on plain paper first.
Printing a rolled impression
Just how much pressure to apply in inking and taking rolled impressions
is important. You learn this best by experience and observation. Tell the
subject to relax and not try to help you by exerting any pressure. If the
subject does apply pressure, you cannot gauge or estimate the pressure
on the paper, and you will get blurred results.


FINGERPRINTING 19
.Taking Fingerprints
Then lift the finger to the card and roll it
using the same technique, until the bulb of the
finger faces the opposite direction. Always roll the
thumbs toward and the fingers away from the
center of the subject’s body. This leaves the fin-
gers relaxed at the completion of rolling, so they
may be raised easily from the printed surface
without danger of smudging the impression.
By pressing the finger lightly on the card
and rolling as just described, you can get a clear
impression of the finger. You get the best results
by inking and printing each finger separately,
beginning with the right thumb and then, in
order, the index, middle, ring, and little fingers.
PLAIN IMPRESSIONS
To take plain impressions, lightly press all the
fingers of the right hand on the inking plate,
then press them simultaneously at a 45 degree
angle on the card in the space provided. After
doing the same thing with the left hand, ink and
print the thumbs of both hands.
Finishing the Card
There is more to do in preparing a fingerprint
card than just taking the subject’s finger impressions. You must
type or plainly print the subject’s name, age, date of birth, sex,
and other identifying information on the fingerprint card, as
soon as possible after fingerprinting.
To record plain impressions, ink
fingers as shown; do the same
with the thumb.
Print the plain impressions by
placing inked fingers on the
card at the same time.
If any of the subject’s fingers are amputated, mark the
space for the missing finger “AMP.” If any of the fingers
cannot be printed because of cuts, burns, or bandages,
print them later.
Prints of all the person’s fingers are necessary to com-
plete the classification by which a set of fingerprints
may be filed and then retrieved in the future.





FINGERPRINTING 21
.Fingerprint Pattern Types
Fingerprint Pattern Types
Fingerprints are classified into three basic types—loops, arches,
and whorls—based on the patterns made by the ridges that
cover the skin of the fingertips. Learning to recognize these
general patterns and their subcategories is not hard. Study the
examples shown in this pamphlet, then complete the worksheet
found on page 38 to show your counselor you can identify the
three basic types of fingerprint patterns. Also identify the pattern
types of your own fingerprints.
Loops
In the loop pattern, the ridges begin on one side of the finger,
curve or turn back sharply, and end on the same side. The loop
may slope or “lean” toward either the thumb or the little finger.
If you can identify the two bones in your forearm—the
radius and ulna—then you can remember the two subcategories
of loops. The ridges of a radial loop begin and end on the same
side of the hand as the thumb (or the radius, the bone that is on
the inside of the arm). The ridges of an ulnar loop begin and end
on the outside of the hand (closest to the ulna). You must know
which hand a loop print is from to correctly identify it as
a radial loop or an ulnar loop.
The loop is the most common fingerprint pattern. Loops
make up about 65 percent of all fingerprints.
LOOPS


22 FINGERPRINTING
Fingerprint Pattern Types.
Arches
In an arch, the ridges enter from one side of the pattern and
flow or tend to flow out the other side. If the ridges have a
slight rise or wave in the center, the pattern forms a plain arch.
In a tented arch, the ridges at the center make a taller, more
definite angle or upthrust.
The plain arch is the simplest of all fingerprint patterns
and it usually is easy to identify. Tented arches can sometimes
be confused, however, with forms of the loop pattern. To tell
the two patterns apart, remember that a ridge must curve
sharply back on itself to make a loop. A ridge that flows from
one side of the fingerprint impression to the other, even if it
rises noticeably in the center, forms an arch, not a loop. Study
the illustrations of arches and loops until you are able to recog-
nize the differences between them.
The arch is the least common type of fingerprint pattern.
Only 5 percent of fingerprints are arches.
Whorls
In a whorl pattern, the ridges form circles, spirals, or ovals.
Whorls make up about 30 percent of all fingerprint patterns.
The plain whorl consists of one or more ridges that make
a complete circuit. It can be best identified by looking for two
deltas, or the point near the outside of the pattern where two
ridges diverge. The delta is so named because it looks like the
formation at the mouth of a river that you may remember from
your study in geography. If an imaginary line is drawn between
the two deltas in a plain whorl, it will dissect or touch at least
one of the ridges in the complete circuit.
TENTED ARCHPLAIN ARCH


FINGERPRINTING 23
.Fingerprint Pattern Types
The central pocket loop is similar to the plain whorl with
its recurving ridges, but this loop features an “obstruction”
that appears at right angles to the direction in which the
pattern flows. The central pocket loop also has two deltas,
but an imaginary line drawn between them would not cut or
touch the recurving ridge.
The double loop type of whorl pattern consists of two
separate loop formations. The pattern is marked by two deltas
and two separate and distinct sets of shoulders, or where the
loop pattern seems to dead-end.
A fingerprint identified as an accidental whorl contains
two or more distinct types of patterns with two or more deltas,
or a pattern that has some of the requirements for two or
more different types, or a pattern that conforms to none of
the definitions.
DOUBLE LOOP ACCIDENTAL
PLAIN WHORL CENTRAL
POCKET LOOP





FINGERPRINTING 25
.Latent Prints
Latent Prints
If you have something on your hands—mud, wet
paint, ink, grease, dirt, chocolate, blood—and you
touch an object, you will leave a visible fingerprint.
Visible prints are out in the open and easy to see.
Touch a substance like softened soap, putty,
wax, or tar—some squishy material your fingers
sink into—and you will leave your fingerprints
pressed into the material. This type of fingerprint
impression is called plastic. It also is a visible print;
it is easily seen.
Handle an object with your clean, bare hands and you will
leave faint, invisible fingerprints on it. Invisible or “hidden”
prints are called latent fingerprints.
In a criminal investigation, police
experts search a crime scene look-
ing for latent fingerprints. When the
police are able to find and recover
these latent prints, they can use them
to identify the suspect, if the person’s
prints are in police files. A finger-
print specialist compares latent prints
recovered from a crime scene with the
known (inked) fingerprints of suspects
in the case or of other people who
might have left the impressions.


26 FINGERPRINTING
Latent Prints.
How the Process Works
To earn the Fingerprinting merit badge, you do not have to
know how the police recover fingerprints left at the scene of
a crime. But the process is interesting, and learning about it will
help you better understand the value of fingerprinting in
law enforcement.
The human body naturally gives off perspiration and oils.
Sweat pores dot the friction ridges on the fingers and palms,
and a little perspiration builds up on the ridges. Sweat is
about 99 percent water, but it also contains solids such as salt
and acids.
Anytime people touch an object with their bare hands,
they transfer some perspiration and body oils to the object,
leaving a fingerprint or palm print. These prints are latent
prints—usually they are invisible or only partially visible.
Latent impressions on hard surfaces such as glass, metal,
or furniture can be developed (made visible) by dusting with
fine powder. The fingerprint expert uses the tip of a brush to
carefully apply a colored powder to the surface. The powder
sticks to the oils in the print and makes the print show up.
When the latent print becomes visible, it can be photo-
graphed for preservation. The print also can be “lifted” from the
surface with sticky tape and fixed onto a
card as a permanent record.
Latent prints on porous surfaces
such as paper, cloth, and unpainted wood
may be chemically developed. Different
chemicals react with different substances
that may be in the print, such as oil or fat,
acids, or salt. The reactions make a col-
ored image show up; this image then can
be photographed.
Special X-ray techniques can make
fingerprint impressions on skin become
visible. Some latent prints can be devel-
oped only with a laser, a device that
emits a powerful ray of light. The laser
light makes the perspiration in a finger-
print shine, and while it shines the print
can be photographed.
Comparing a
fingerprint found
at a crime scene
with impressions
taken from a
suspect is a
highly skilled
job. Most police
forces have
specially trained
officers who
do the work.
You can try dusting for fingerprints
using the techniques described on the
following page.


FINGERPRINTING 27
.Latent Prints
Prints that are
already visible—
those made by
dirty hands or
pressed into a
soft, yielding
surface—are
photographed as
they are. They do
not need to be
developed with
powder or
chemicals or by
other means.
Dusting for Prints
Do you want to try dusting for prints, the way a
fingerprint specialist would at a crime scene?
You will need:
 1 clean, clear glass or plastic cup, or a clean jar
such as a baby-food jar, wiped clear of fingerprints
 1 small container of talcum powder or
graphite powder
 1 feather or a soft brush
 Adhesive tape
 Construction paper (black if you use talcum
powder; white if you use graphite powder)
 Magnifying glass
Step 1—Rub your finger on your nose to get more oil
on your finger.
Step 2—Carefully put your other hand inside the vessel
(the glass, cup, or jar) to hold it still. Then touch your
oily finger to the outside of the vessel to make a finger-
print. Do not otherwise touch the outside of the vessel.
Step 3—Look for the fingerprint you just made. Can
you see it?
Step 4—Now dust or tap a tiny amount of talcum
or graphite powder onto the print. Use the brush or
the bottom half of the feather (the part closest to the
quill) to smooth the powder gently and evenly over
the print. Gently blow off any excess powder.
Step 5—Stick a small piece of adhesive tape to the
print. Holding the tape by one corner, carefully lift it
off. The print should come up with the tape.
Step 6—Stick the print on black construction paper
if you used talcum powder, or on white construction
paper if you used graphite powder.
Step 7—Use a magnifying glass to examine the print.
What pattern type is it?


28 FINGERPRINTING
Comparing and Identifying Fingerprints.
Comparing and
Identifying Fingerprints
Just as you can see an overall view of a plowed farm field from
an airplane, you can easily see the general ridge flow or pattern
shape of a fingerprint, often without needing a magnifying glass.
An overall view of a fingerprint will show parallel ridge lines in
typical loop, arch, or whorl shapes. If you are comparing two
fingerprints and you can see that the basic pattern or ridge flow
shape of the two prints is quite different, then you know the two
impressions are not from the same finger (or the same palm,
foot, etc., if you are comparing palm prints, footprints, etc.).
If the two prints have the same
general ridge flow or pattern shape,
the next step is to compare the
details of the two impressions: the
ridge endings, bifurcations (Y-shaped
deltas in which one ridge splits into
two), dots (very short ridges that look
like dots), and combinations of these
features. The fingerprint expert looks
closely at the latent (unidentified)
impression, selects a small group of its
features, and memorizes their relation-
ship to each other and to the ridge
flow. Then the expert compares those
features against an inked (known)
impression to see whether the same
features exist in the same relation-
ship to each other. If they are present
in both impressions, these features
are used like road maps to determine
the presence or absence of additional
similarities between the impressions.


FINGERPRINTING 29
.Comparing and Identifying Fingerprints
Beyond this level of detail, even finer features of unique
ridge shape and thickness, and the location and shape of individ-
ual sweat pores (seen as small white circles on some fingerprint
ridges), are used in comparison and identification.
Human skin is flexible, and people move. Fingerprints left at
the scene of a crime may be blurred and incomplete, unlike the
carefully inked impressions set out in the numbered boxes of a
fingerprint card. Because of these factors, there will always be some
dissimilarities between any two fingerprints made by the same
finger. Fingerprint experts study the nature of friction-ridge impres-
sions for years to understand what are normal variations and what
are unexplainable differences caused by truly different fingers.
Fibers, Flecks, Fingerprints: Forensics
Forensic scientists apply science to the detection of crime. Forensic
scientists known as criminalists use their knowledge of science to
analyze the physical evidence of a crime—evidence that can include
not only fingerprints but also fibers, hair, bloodstains, broken glass,
twisted metal, wood splinters, paint flecks, and handwriting samples.
Physical evidence may be anything: evidence as big as an airplane,
or so tiny you would need a microscope to see it.
Criminalists try to link pieces of evidence together to show how a
crime was committed, or—sometimes—to help prove that a crime really
occurred. Forensic scientists are sharp thinkers, good with details, good at
putting pieces of a puzzle together, and endlessly curious.
Does that describe you? If you want to learn more about becoming a
criminalist, here are a few things you can do now to explore this career field.
• Contact your local police department and ask if you can tour the
crime lab.
• In school, take courses in chemistry, biology, physics, math, and English
composition. You will need to be good in science and also good at
writing an understandable scientific report.
• Practice taking fingerprints, using the methods described in this
pamphlet. Compare different sets of prints and see if you can
correctly identify them.


30 FINGERPRINTING
Comparing and Identifying Fingerprints.
For an identification to be made, the friction-ridge details
from two impressions must match without any unexplainable
dissimilarities. Even one unexplainable difference means the
fingerprints are not from the same finger.
No minimum amount of area or minimum number of
features or points is required to make an identification. Often,
an area as small as the tip of a pencil eraser may be identified,
if the friction-ridge detail that is present is clearly represented.
If the quality of the impression is poor, then a larger area of
detail may be required before an identification is possible.
Civil Versus Criminal Identification
Fingerprinting is usually associated with police work. Identifying
the parties who commit crimes is criminal identification. But
fingerprinting has other uses, too.
Missing persons, amnesia victims, casualties of war, and
people killed in catastrophes such as explosions, fires, airplane
crashes, epidemics, floods, and hurricanes may be positively
identified by fingerprints. Often, if there are no known inked
fingerprint records of a person killed in a disaster, it is possible
to find latent prints on personal belongings at the victim’s
home or business. By comparing these latents with prints taken
from the deceased, experts may make positive identifications.
Lost and Found
From a phone booth in a southwestern city, a man
called the police, asking for help. When the officers
arrived, they found a tall, young, red-haired man
waiting for them. He had a gun in a shoulder holster
and he told police he did not know who he was or
where he came from. The police took the man’s fin-
gerprints and sent them to the FBI. The FBI matched
the prints with a set that had been taken when the
young man enlisted in the Navy, 11 years before.
Using this information, the police were able to tell the
amnesia victim his name and give him many details
of his forgotten life.


FINGERPRINTING 31
.Comparing and Identifying Fingerprints
This type of identification is known as civil—involving the
general public. Several states allow children to be fingerprinted
to help police identify them if they get lost or are missing.
People enlisting in the military, applying for gun permits, and
seeking jobs in law enforcement, government, and child care
are also usually fingerprinted.
It is fascinating to realize that the ridges we all have on
our fingers, palms, toes, and soles can be used to identify the
criminal, to clear the innocent, and to give back something
precious—their names—to missing persons, lost relatives,
disaster victims, and the unknown dead.
Fingers are not the only body surfaces that have distinctive ridges.
Ridges also occur on the toes, soles of the feet, and palms of the
hands. Shown here is a hospital record of a new baby’s footprints.


32 FINGERPRINTING
Computers and Fingerprints.
Computers and
Fingerprints
Today, computers greatly simplify the process of analyzing and
identifying fingerprints. Computers work with fingerprints in
two different ways:
• Automated Fingerprint Identification Systems are used
to help positively identify people from records in large
fingerprint files.
• Biometric fingerprint systems are used to help control access
and stop unauthorized people from entering a building, for
example, or using a computer system.
The main difference in the two methods is that the AFIS gives
positive identification of a fingerprint in a file of thousands
or millions of records. Biometric systems usually determine
only that a fingerprint is somewhat similar (not necessarily
a positive match) when compared against one fingerprint
registered to that person.
AFIS
Most police and government
agencies with large finger-
print files use the Automated
Fingerprint Identification
Systems to make fast compari-
sons and positive identifications
in a database of millions of
fingerprints. Before the AFIS, it
was necessary for police to care-
fully classify or group fingerprint
records according to complicated
rules, to avoid having to com-
pare the thousands of fingerprint
Biometric means
“life measuring,”
and fingerprints
are only one of
many unique
features of human
beings that can
be measured and
compared. Some
other biometric
methods measure
hand shape, eyes,
and faces.


FINGERPRINTING 33
.Computers and Fingerprints
records already on file against each fingerprint card or crime-
scene fingerprint received.
Using computers, thousands of comparisons per second can
be made and it is no longer necessary to limit searches to only a
small portion of the entire file. Dividing fingerprint files into small
sections using elaborate rules based on the person’s sex; age;
presence of scars; presence of whorl, loop, and arch formations
in various fingers; and other intricate classification steps are no
longer required. The AFIS generally uses only loop, arch, and
whorl pattern classifications. These are the same three pattern
types you learn in earning the Fingerprinting merit badge.
Biometric Systems
Some banks, military bases, and government buildings, among
others, have computers that check the fingerprints of employees
before letting people into certain areas. These biometric access
systems are designed to control access, and they keep people out
about like a combination lock. The chance that an unauthorized
person might be able to guess the combination for a padlock is
small. Similarly, the chance is small that an unauthorized person
will have a fingerprint similar enough to an authorized person’s
finger to fool a biometric system.
A person may be positively identified from only one fingerprint, or even
from a portion of one fingerprint. The purpose of having all 10 fingerprints
on fingerprint cards was
historically not because all
10 fingers were completely
compared against each
other to make an identifica-
tion. All 10 fingers had to
be on record for the compli-
cated classification formulas
to work, so that only a small
part of a large fingerprint
file (that portion with similar
pattern features on each fin-
ger) needed to be searched.


34 FINGERPRINTING
Computers and Fingerprints.
Biometrics in our Society
People can identify themselves for access and for privileges
in several general ways. Token-based identification systems
include driver’s licenses and passports. Knowledge-based
identification systems include a computer password, a
personal identification number, and security questions for
password recovery.
Because biometric
identifiers are unique to
individuals, biometric
identification systems are
more reliable than token- or
knowledge-based systems.
Biometrics are body
measurements used to identify
people. Biometrics can include
behaviometrics, namely,
measurements of patterns
of behavior of individuals,
such as gait, signature, voice,
typing rhythm, and mouse
movements.
Fingerprints are a prime
example of biometrics. U.S.
embassies and consulates
abroad collect electronic fingerprints of all 10 fingers and
a digital photo when they issue visas to travelers to the
United States. These procedures reduce the use of stolen
and counterfeit visas and prevent terrorists and criminals
from entering the U.S. Collecting fingerprints when a visa
is created and verifying fingerprints at a port of entry make
travel and American security safer.
Other biometric body measurements used for
identification include patterns of palm prints, palm veins,
hand geometry, retinal arteries and veins, iris scans, and face
measurements and shapes.
These systems can enhance security of access to
computer systems and their data and to buildings,
laboratories, and warehouses. They can confirm identity for
access to medical records and bank accounts and for proper
use of travel documents.
The iris of the eye has been described as an ideal
part of the body for biometric identification (this
is a photo illustration of what the data might look
like to a scientist or investigator.


FINGERPRINTING 35
.Careers in Fingerprinting
Careers in Fingerprinting
People with knowledge and skills related to fingerprinting are
valuable employees in government agencies or companies
using scientific techniques to investigate crimes and examining
evidence for presentation in a court of law. Fingerprint
technicians, officers, and analysts play important roles
in recording fingerprints manually and electronically for
identification systems and for crime-related situations. They are
experts in record keeping and managing computer imaging and
processing systems. They may participate with other service
personnel to identify victims of mass disasters or of war.
Crime scene investigators usually work for law
enforcement agencies. They collect evidence of many types,
including fingerprints, at crime scenes and suspected crime
scenes, such as fires where the crime of arson might be the
cause. Their work is usually in the field. They support forensic
scientists and engineers and pathologists in their laboratory
studies of evidentiary materials that they collect.
Forensic scientists, engineers, and pathologists are
based in laboratories or testing sites. They hold college and
postgraduate degrees in science, having studied biology,
chemistry, physics, and
medicine. After graduate
school, they often
will have completed
internships with military
or government agencies
or university training
programs. Some may
have training in fields
of computer science
like image processing
and manipulation, data
storage, and artificial
intelligence.
A forensic
investigator,
also known as
a crime scene
investigator
(CSI), is a law
enforcement
professional
who collects
and analyzes
evidence to help
solve crimes.


36 FINGERPRINTING
Fingerprinting Resources .
Scouting Literature
Chemistry, Crime Prevention, Law, and
Photography merit badge pamphlets
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.
Books
Beres, D.B. Dusted and Busted! The
Science of Fingerprinting. Children’s
Press, 2007.
Bertino, Anthony J., and Patricia
Bertino. Forensic Science:
Fundamentals and Investigations,
2nd ed. Cengage Learning, 2015.
Camenson, Blythe. Opportunities in
Forensic Science Careers, 2nd ed.
McGraw-Hill, 2008.
Deslich, Barbara, and John Funkhouser.
Forensic Science for High School, 2nd
ed. Kendall Hunt, 2009.
Evans, Colin. The Casebook of Forensic
Detection: How Science Solved 100
of the World’s Most Baffling Crimes,
updated ed. Berkley Trade, 2007.
Rainis, Kenneth G. Crime-Solving
Science Projects: Forensic Science
Experiments. Enslow, 2005.
Schulz, Karen K. CSI Expert!
Forensic Science for Kids.
Prufrock Press, 2008.
Siegel, Jay. Forensic Science: A
Beginner’s Guide. Oneworld
Publications, 2009.
Thompson, Robert Bruce, and Barbara
Fritchman. Illustrated Guide to
Home Forensic Science Experiments.
Maker Media Inc., 2012.
Vacca, John. Biometric Technologies
and Verification Systems.
Butterworth-Heinemann, 2007.
Young, Karen Romano. Science Fair
Winners: Crime Scene Science.
National Geographic Kids, 2009.
Organizations and Websites
American Academy of Forensic
Sciences
aafs.org/careers-forensic-science
The Fingerprint Sourcebook
Published by U.S. Department of
Justice, Office of Justice Programs
ojp.gov/pdffiles1/nij/225321.pdf
Fingerprinting Resources


FINGERPRINTING 37
.Fingerprinting Resources
Acknowledgments
For assistance with updates to the
Fingerprinting merit badge pamphlet
and the requirements, Scouting
America thanks Ed German, a certified
latent print examiner (CLPE) who
works on fingerprint evidence cases for
American military investigators from
his office at the U.S. Army Criminal
Investigation Laboratory. Special Agent
German serves as a Fingerprinting
merit badge counselor.
We also thank Lisa Vincent Stout,
art and information specialist, Criminal
Justice Information Services Division,
Federal Bureau of Investigation; and
Charles Jones, training supervisor,
Identification and Investigative
Services Section, FBI. Thanks also to
WRB Fingerprint Counseling Service,
Springfield, Virginia, and to the police
departments of Edison and New
Brunswick, New Jersey, for their past
assistance.
Scouting America is grateful to
the men and women serving on the
National Merit Badge Subcommittee
for the improvements made in
updating this pamphlet.
Thanks go out to Bill Litton and to
Dan Ferguson for their contributions to
the 2025 review and update.
Photo and Illustration Credits
Coppell, Texas, Police Department,
courtesy—page 17 (both)
Getty Images—pages 34 and 35
HAAP Media Ltd., courtesy—cover
(handprints, blue fingerprint,
dusting brush/powder/print)
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of or
are protected by Scouting America.
Dan Bryant—cover (fingerprint card)
John McDearmon—pages 6, 7, 8,
and 16


38 FINGERPRINTING
Fingerprinting Resources .
Worksheet for Requirement 5
Shown on this page are the three basic fingerprint pattern types. For each type,
two typical examples are given. Fill in the blanks beside each pattern type at the
bottom of the page with the two letters identifying examples of that type.
A B C
D FE
1. Loops
______ and ______
2. Arches—plain and tented
______ and ______
3. Whorls—plain, central pocket loop, double loop, and accidental
______ and ______


FINGERPRINTING 39
.Fingerprinting Resources
Notes


Get ahead in Scouting with Scout Life magazine. It’s loaded with the
latest news on merit badges and other advancement tools. Plus, it’s got
outdoor adventure, games and comics, leadership tips, life skills, stories
about other Scouts and more. It’s just what you need to succeed.
Subscribe today at go.scoutlife.org/subscribe
Use promo code SLMBP15 to get a special
print + digital bundle offer priced just for Scouts.