K AYAKING
STEM-Based


K AYAKING
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Note to the Counselor
Merit badge counselors are responsible for following the requirements, procedures,
and techniques presented in this pamphlet and ensuring that each Scout earning the
merit badge is able to demonstrate knowledge and skills at a level consistent with
the requirements. In addition, counselors must ensure that all applicable Scouting
America safety policies, including Safe Swim Defense and Safety Afloat, are followed
during training, practice, and review.
Counselors for the Kayaking merit badge must be registered members of Scouting
America, have current training in both Safe Swim Defense and Safety Afloat, and be
approved by the local council advancement committee. Councils with an aquatics
committee should utilize that committee to coordinate with the advancement
committee for approval of qualified counselors.
All counselors should have formal training in the knowledge and skills
indicated by the requirements, experience in teaching such skills to youth, and
experience in identifying and managing risks associated with the activities involved.
For the Kayaking merit badge, appropriate credentials include: current or previous
certification as Aquatics Instructor, designation as an instructor or successful
completion of council-sponsored or council-approved training courses in kayaking
such as Scouting America Paddle Craft Safety, current American Canoe Association
Level 1 Kayak Instructor Certification, or a higher level of ACA Kayak Instructor
Certification. The council Advancement Committee may approve counselors with
similar experience and training in knowledge, skill, safety, and instruction.
Teaching Conditions and Equipment
This merit badge should be taught on quiet water without significant
wind, waves, or current. The boats should be hard-shell kayaks with large,
open cockpits from which the Scout can easily perform a wet exit, or they
should be sit-on-tops or inflatable crafts. The boats should preferably be
solo boats, and all testing should be done with the Scout as a solo paddler.
A kayak with a spray skirt should be permitted only when the Scout has
had prior kayak training and is able to perform a wet exit with a skirt to
the counselor’s satisfaction.
35702
ISBN 978-0-8395-0010-0
©2025 Scouting America/Boy Scouts of America
2025 Printing


KAYAKING 3
Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Kayaking or check Scoutbook for the latest requirements.


4 KAYAKING


KAYAKING 5
Contents
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Safety and First Aid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Kayaks and Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
Transportation and Rescues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
Skills and Maneuvers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
Glossary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80
Kayaking Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83





KAYAKING 7
.Introduction
Introduction
Kayaking has become one of the fastest-growing paddlesports in
the United States. An estimated nine million Americans enjoy this
sport. The most popular style of kayaking is recreational kayaking
(6.2 million), followed by touring/sea kayaking (1.8 million), and
whitewater kayaking (1.2 million). This merit badge will introduce
you to recreational kayaking and help prepare you for advanced
paddlesports such as touring/sea and whitewater kayaking.
The first kayaks were made by the native people of the
Arctic, the Inuits and Aleuts. They stretched seal or walrus skins
over frames of driftwood or whale bones. The boats were used
primarily for hunting. The word kayak in Inuit actually means
“hunter’s boat.” These early kayaks varied greatly in design
from region to region. The kayaks of the Inuits were short, wide,
very stable, and easy to use. A similar boat called a baidarka by
the Aleuts was long, fast, and very seaworthy.
In the 1800s, Europeans
began to make kayaks that
were covered in fabric. This
continued until the 1950s,
when fiberglass was intro-
duced. In 1984, the first
plastic kayak was made.
Today, kayaks are made
of modern materials in
many designs.
Italicized terms
such as touring/
sea kayaking
can be found
in the glossary
toward the end of
this pamphlet.





KAYAKING 9
.Safety and First Aid
Safety and First Aid
When you are earning any of the aquatic merit badges, it is important
to follow safety rules and use self-discipline and good judgment.
Safety
Learning to paddle a kayak can be fun and safe if you under-
stand and follow the nine points of Scouting America’s
Safety Afloat policy. These guidelines were developed to pro-
mote boating and boating safety and to set standards for safe
unit activity afloat. They apply to all kayaking activities.
Scouting America Safety Afloat
The following version of the Safety Afloat policy has
been modified for this merit badge. The complete version is
found in the Guide to Safe Scouting.
1. Qualified Supervision. All kayaking must be supervised by a
mature and conscientious adult age 21 or older. The supervisor
must understand and knowingly accept responsibility for the
well-being and safety of those in his or her care and must be
trained in and committed to compliance with the nine points of
Scouting America Safety Afloat and Safe Swim Defense. That
supervisor must be skilled in safe kayaking, knowledgeable in
accident prevention, and prepared for emergencies. If the adult
with Safety Afloat training lacks the necessary paddling, safety,
and rescue skills, then he or she may serve as the supervisor only
if assisted by other adults, camp staff personnel, or professional
tour guides who have the appropriate skills. Additional leadership
(adults age 18 or older) is provided in ratios of one trained adult,
staff member, or guide for every 10 participants, with a minimum
of two adults. At least one leader must be trained in first aid,
including CPR. Any swimming done in conjunction with the
activity afloat must be supervised in accordance with Scouting
America Safe Swim Defense standards. It is strongly
recommended that all units have at least one adult or older youth


10 KAYAKING
Safety and First Aid.
member currently trained in Scouting America Aquatics
Supervision: Paddle Craft Safety to assist in the planning and
conducting of all kayaking activities.
2. Personal Health Review. A complete health history is
required of all participants as evidence of fitness for kayaking
activities. Forms for minors must be signed by a parent or
legal guardian. Participants should be asked to relate any
recent incidents of illness or injury just prior to the activity.
Supervision and protection should be adjusted to anticipate
any potential risks associated with individual health
conditions. For significant health conditions, the adult
supervisor should require an examination by a physician and
consult with the participant’s parent, guardian, or caregiver
for appropriate precautions.
3. Swimming Ability. Operation of a kayak is limited to youth
and adults who have completed the Scouting America
swimmer classification test: Jump feetfirst into water over the
head in depth. Level off and swim 75 yards in a strong
manner using one or more of the following strokes: sidestroke,
breaststroke, trudgen, or crawl; then swim 25 yards using an
easy, resting backstroke. The 100 yards must be completed in
one swim without stops and must include at least one sharp
turn. After completing the swim, rest by floating.
Anyone not classified as a swimmer may ride in a kayak as
a buddy with an adult swimmer who is skilled in that craft.
4. Life Jackets. Properly fitted U.S. Coast Guard–approved life
jackets must be worn by every person in a kayak. Type III life
jackets are recommended for general recreational use.
5. Buddy System. All kayaking participants are paired as buddies
who are always aware of each other’s situation and prepared to
sound an alarm and lend assistance immediately. When several
kayaks are used on a float trip, each kayak on the water should
have a buddy boat. All buddy pairs must be accounted for at
regular intervals during the activity and checked off the water
by the qualified supervisor at the conclusion of the activity.
Buddies should ride in the same kayak or stay near one another
in single-person kayaks.
6. Skill Proficiency. Everyone in a kayaking activity must have
enough knowledge and skill to participate safely. Passengers
should know how their movement affects the kayak’s stability
All persons
onboard must
wear a properly
sized and fitted
life jacket.


KAYAKING 11
.Safety and First Aid
and should have a basic understanding of self-rescue. Paddlers
must meet government requirements, be able to control the
kayak, know how changes in the environment influence that
control, and participate only in activities within their or the
group’s capabilities.
• Participants should be instructed in basic safety procedures
before launch and allowed to proceed once they have
demonstrated the ability to control the kayak adequately
to return to shore.
• Before embarking on a long float trip or outing lasting
more than four hours, paddlers should have three hours
of kayak training and supervised practice or should be
able to successfully complete a 100-yard course and
recover from a capsize.
• Unit trips on Class III whitewater must be done with a
professional guide in each craft or after all participants
have received American Canoe Association or equivalent
training for the class of water and type of craft involved.
Unit trips on Class IV whitewater are not allowed in kaya-
king—only in rafts, with a professionally trained guide in
each raft. Trips above Class IV are not allowed.
7. Planning. Proper planning is necessary to ensure a safe and
enjoyable kayaking experience. All plans should include
a scheduled itinerary, notification of appropriate parties,
communication arrangements, contingencies in case of
inclement weather or equipment failure, and options for
emergency response.
• Preparation—Any kayaking activity requires access to
the proper equipment and transportation of gear and
participants. Determine what state and local regulations
apply. Get permission to use or cross private property.
Determine whether personal resources will be used
or outfitters will supply equipment, food, and shuttle
services. Lists of group and personal equipment and
supplies must be compiled and checked.
Training should
be appropriate for
the age, size, and
experience of the
kayakers. It should
cover basic skills
on calm water
before proceeding
to advanced skills
involving current,
waves, high winds,
or extended
distance. At
a minimum,
instructors
should be able to
demonstrate the
handling and rescue
skills required for
Paddle Craft Safety.
There should be at
least one assistant
who can recognize
and respond
appropriately if the
instructor’s safety is
compromised.
Even short trips require selecting a route, checking water
levels, and determining alternative pull-out locations.
Changes in water level, especially on moving water, may
pose significant, variable safety concerns. Obtain current
charts and information about the waterway.


12 KAYAKING
Safety and First Aid.
• Float plan—Complete the preparation by writing a detailed
itinerary, or float plan, noting put-in and take-out locations and
waypoints, along with the approximate time the group should
arrive at each. Travel time should be estimated generously.
• Notification—File the float plan with parent or guardian,
the local council office if traveling on running water, and
local authorities if appropriate. Assign a member of the unit
committee to alert authorities if prearranged check-ins are
overdue. Make sure everyone is promptly notified when the trip
is concluded.
• Weather—Check the weather forecast just before setting out,
and keep an alert weather eye. Anticipate changes and bring
all craft ashore when rough weather threatens. Wait at least
30 minutes before resuming activities after the last incidence
of thunder or lightning.
Review the float plan with others who have traveled the
course recently. Remember to obtain written permission
in advance to use or cross private property.
Sample float plan


KAYAKING 13
.Safety and First Aid
• Contingencies—Planning must identify possible
emergencies and other circumstances that could force
a change of plans. Develop alternative plans for each
situation. Identify local emergency resources such as
EMS systems, sheriff’s departments, or ranger stations.
Check your primary communication system, and
identify backups, such as the nearest residence to a
campsite. Cell phones and radios may lose coverage, run
out of power, or suffer water damage.
8. Equipment. All kayaks must be seaworthy and suitable for the
activity, and must float if capsized. All kayaks and equipment
must meet regulatory standards, be properly sized, and be in
good repair. Spare equipment (such as paddles), repair
materials, extra food and water, dry clothes, and emergency
gear must be carried and should be appropriate for the activity.
Life jackets and paddles must be sized to the participants.
Properly designed and fitted helmets must be worn when
running rapids rated Class II and above. Emergency
equipment such as throw bags, signal devices, flashlights,
heat sources, first-aid kits, radios, and maps must be
ready for use.
9. Discipline. Rules are effective only when
followed. All participants should know, understand,
and respect the rules and procedures for safe kayaking
provided by Safety Afloat guidelines. Applicable rules should
be discussed prior to the outing and reviewed for all
participants near the boarding area just before the activity
afloat begins. People are more likely to follow directions when
they know the reasons for rules and procedures. Consistent,
impartially applied rules supported by skill and good
judgment provide steppingstones to a safe, enjoyable outing.
All gear should
be stowed to
prevent loss and
water damage.
In kayaking, as with any aquatic activity, the quality of
the water can be a concern. What are some clues you
should use to evaluate the water’s safety for kayaking?
Steer clear of obvious hazards such as tree branches in
the water. Avoid areas with garbage, abundant foam
or algae, foul smells, and areas polluted by waterfowl
or livestock. Obey any signs posted by local health
departments. Consult local paddlers to find safe places
for learning to kayak.


14 KAYAKING
Safety and First Aid.
Common Paddling Hazards
Safe kayaking includes being aware of potential weather and
water-related hazards such as storms, wind, and waves. Always
be prepared for unexpected weather and water conditions.
Storms and Lightning
Depending on the area and the time of year, storms can be
predicted with some accuracy. However, storms can develop at
any time and with surprising speed. Once you notice an
approaching storm, get off the water as quickly as possible. If
caught in a storm, paddle as quickly as possible to shore. Be
prepared to bail water out of the kayak if the rain is heavy. Once
the shore is reached, carry the kayaks up onto shore and use
ropes to secure them against blowing winds and high waters.
Hearing thunder or seeing lightning should prompt the
same actions. During a thunderstorm, there is no safe place
in the outdoors from lightning. The vast majority of lightning
injuries and deaths on boats occur on small boats such as
canoes, kayaks, or motorboats with no cabin. All float plans
should include a contingency plan for thunderstorms.
Get off and stay off the water before the storm arrives. If
caught in a sudden storm, stay away from open or exposed
shorelines. On shore, the safest place is a building when you
can be indoors. If no building is available, any fully enclosed,
metal-topped vehicle such as a hard-topped car, minivan, bus,
truck, etc., can provide shelter.
In the outdoors, stay away from the high ground; avoid
open fields, tops of ridges, or hills. Stay away from metal fences,
telephone or power lines, or towers. Stay away from isolated or
tall trees; seek large groups of trees about the same height. Seek
dry ditches, trenches, or the low ground. Stay out of caves.
Do not huddle as a group. Spread out so you are at least 20
feet—or even 100 feet—from the next closest person. As a last
resort when there is no safe shelter and you are caught out in
the open, you may be able to reduce your risk of being struck
by lightning by assuming a low, crouching position with feet
together, a bent-over position, kneeling or sitting cross-legged
or sitting with your arms around your legs. You can place hands
on ears to help minimize acoustic shock from thunder. These
positions will help reduce the chances of lightning injuring
you, but they are no substitute for getting to safer terrain or
a structure if it is immediately available.
Check weather
advisories before
starting, and
know what to do
when hazardous
conditions occur.


KAYAKING 15
.Safety and First Aid
Wind and Waves
Wind and the waves it creates have the potential to give you
a thrilling ride or to swamp your kayak. Learning about wind
and waves and their hazards is an essential part of kayaking.
Wind is created when air moves from a high-pressure area to
a low-pressure area. Usually absent in the early morning, wind
increases as the rising sun heats the ground and air throughout
the late morning and early afternoon. Winds often reach
maximum strength by midafternoon. By sundown, they
usually subside to an occasional breeze.
Waves result when wind interacts with the water. A keen
eye will see the ripple effect on the water surface as a gentle
wind moves across it. As the wind increases, so will the size
of the waves until they become frothy whitecaps. Waves can
become so big that they can easily swamp a kayak. Always
anticipate wind as part of any kayaking activity.
If you are on a kayaking trip, start before the winds
increase and land before midafternoon to avoid the peak wind
periods. Paddle along the shoreline to minimize the effects of
wind and waves. Whether you are paddling with or against the
wind, it is wise to work your way gradually to the downwind
side of an island or point of land.
If strong winds
make paddling
difficult, go
ashore until the
winds die down
enough to make
paddling safe and
fun again.
One hazard from storms is lightning. There are about 25 million lightning
flashes every year in the United States, each a potential killer. Lightning is
a random event. Where it strikes cannot be predicted with any accuracy. It
cannot be prevented. Understanding the dangers of lightning is important
so you can get to safety when thunderstorms threaten. If you hear thunder—
even a distant rumble or a crackling aloft—you are in danger of becoming
a lightning victim.
How far away was that lightning? The sound of thunder travels about
a mile every 5 seconds. If you count the seconds between the flash of
lightning and the sound of thunder and divide by 5, you get the number
of miles away from you (20 seconds is 4 miles).


16 KAYAKING
Safety and First Aid.
First Aid
Because kayaking is a physical activity that takes place in the
outdoors, participants are susceptible to a range of injuries that
occur from repetitive action or exposure to the elements. Knowing
how to deal with these conditions, should they occur, is a key to
ensuring that your kayak outings remain safe and fun.
Blisters
A blister develops from repeated rubbing on the skin. This is
called a friction blister. A small pocket of fluid forms between
the skin’s upper layers. For kayakers, blisters often occur where
the paddle shaft rubs against the thumbs or pads of the fingers.
Wet skin increases the likelihood of blisters, so try to keep
your hands and fingers as dry as possible. Blisters can best be
prevented by wearing gloves designed for paddling. If no gloves
are available and the skin starts to look hot and red but no
blister has formed, cover the area with a dry dressing and
waterproof bandage to reduce friction on the skin.
Prevention goes hand in hand with mitigation, which
means “to lessen in force or intensity” and “to make
less severe.” By taking precautions to manage risk
and the possibility of injury, you can be prepared to
anticipate, help prevent, mitigate, and respond to just
about any incident that might happen while kayaking.
If a blister has already burst open and the roof is gone,
treat it like a blister that has already been opened with
a needle or knife, as described.


KAYAKING 17
.Safety and First Aid
Once a blister forms, it is best to immediately drain it.
First, clean the area thoroughly and then use a sterilized needle
or point of a knife to open the blister from the side in several
places, leaving the roof of skin in place as a protective cover for
the layers of skin below. Draining the blister usually provides
immediate pain relief. Wash the area with soap and water and
then apply a thin layer of an antibiotic ointment to prevent
infection. Cover with a dry dressing and hold it in place with
waterproof tape or a compressive elastic bandage. This should
protect the blister and prevent further friction to the affected
area. Try to avoid getting the area wet.
Cold-Water–Related Illnesses
There are two primary dangers from falling into cold water. As
quickly as the first minute, a paddler can experience cold-water
shock. This can happen in water as warm as 69 to 77 degrees
Fahrenheit. The second danger is called hypothermia. This is
a gradual lowering of the body’s core temperature over minutes
to hours in water colder than 80 degrees.
Cold-water shock occurs when a paddler falls into very
cold water, especially less than 60 degrees. The effects of cold-
water shock can lead to death in just a few minutes. The colder
the water, the more severe and the more rapid the effects will
be. The body’s response to cold water will be completely out of
the person’s control.
The first response will be the reflex to take a deep, gasp-
ing breath. Wearing a life jacket could save the person’s life by
keeping the head above water when he or she instinctively tries
to inhale. Next, the person will start taking many quick, short
breaths, as many as 3 to 4 times the normal rate. This can lead
to light-headedness and dizziness. It will also prevent the person
from holding their breath. In fact, cold-water shock reduces the
time one’s breath can be held to 25 to 50 percent of normal.
The only treatment for cold-water shock is to get the
paddler out of the water as soon as possible. Then the
victim will need to be treated for hypothermia. Take care
when paddling in cold waters. The best prevention
for cold-water shock and related injuries is to dress
appropriately for the weather and stay dry—stay in
the kayak, or get off the water if necessary.


18 KAYAKING
Safety and First Aid.
During this time, the person should concentrate on
controlling his or her breathing and avoiding panic. The heart
rate will rise quickly, as will blood pressure. If the blood gets
cold enough, it may cause the heart to stop from irregular heart
rhythms. All of these effects can occur in about 60 seconds.
Hypothermia occurs when the body’s internal temperature
falls below the normal range. Exposure to cold or even
cool water can lower a person’s inner, or core, temperature
dangerously. Early signs of heat loss include bluish lips and
shivering. Next, the person will lose the coordinated use of
his or her fingers, arms, and legs. Further cooling will affect
the ability to think clearly. Continued chilling will lead to
unconsciousness and, eventually, death.
During cold-water immersion, it is important that you
concentrate on self-rescue initially. If that isn’t possible,
minimize your exposure to the water by using the H.E.L.P.
position discussed later in this book and wait for help.


KAYAKING 19
.Safety and First Aid
Treatment for hypothermia involves carefully removing the
person from the water, removing wet clothing, and drying the
body. Put dry clothing on the person, and wrap blankets around
the body for warmth. Pay special attention to covering the head,
as most heat loss occurs from the head. Warm the person’s trunk
first, not the hands and feet. Warming arms and legs first can
cause shock. If using hot-water bottles or chemical hot packs,
wrap them in cloth; don’t apply them directly to the skin. Place
the heating sources on the chest, neck, and groin.
Avoid rough handling or jerking, especially if the person is
lethargic or unconscious. This may cause the heart to develop life-
threatening irregular rhythms. If the person is conscious, provide a
warm drink. Avoid caffeine or alcohol. Once the body temperature
begins to rise, keep the person dry and wrapped in a warm blanket.
Cover the person’s head and neck as well. Avoid rapid rewarming
as it, too, can induce fatal heart rhythms.
Heat-Related Illnesses
Heat-related illnesses range from having flu-like symptoms to
life-threatening hyperthermia. Heat-related illnesses result when
the body cannot keep itself cool enough. One way the body can
cool itself is by losing heat to either the air or water around it.
As the air or water temperature outside the body approaches
the body’s normal temperature of 98 degrees Fahrenheit, the
harder it is for the body to lose heat. When the surrounding
temperatures are above normal body temperature, the body will
begin to absorb heat.
An important way that body loses heat is through sweating.
As the water in sweat evaporates from the skin, the process uses
energy and lowers body temperature. However, if a person is
dehydrated and cannot sweat or the air is already saturated
with water so there is no room in the air for more water, the
risks of heat-related illnesses go up dramatically. For this
reason, exercising when the temperature and humidity are
high is especially dangerous.
Before setting out during hot weather, paddlers should check
with the National Weather Service to see what the predicted
heat index is. If the air temperature is 90 degrees and the relative
humidity is 100 percent, the heat index—how hot it feels—is 132
degrees. Strong winds, particularly with very hot, dry air, can
be extremely hazardous, as rapidly moving air can further alter
a body’s temperature from the normal range.
A body temperature
at or greater
than 106 degrees
Fahrenheit is
a life-threatening
medical condition
that requires
immediate medical
treatment by health
care professionals.


20 KAYAKING
Safety and First Aid.
Heat Exhaustion. If someone feels dizzy, faint, nauseated, or
weak; develops a headache or muscle cramps; or looks pale and
is sweating heavily, treat for heat exhaustion. Have the person
rest in a cool, shady spot. Loosen or remove clothing to promote
heat loss. Wet the skin with a damp cloth and then fan to
promote cooling through evaporation. Have the victim sip
water with a pinch of table salt, water with a salty snack, or
a diluted sports drink. Gently massage and stretch cramped
muscles. If the condition worsens, get medical help. Recovery
should be rapid but may take up to 24 hours.
Heatstroke. This can be caused by dehydration (water loss),
over-exercising, or both when there is a high heat index. The skin
may be wet or dry but always will be flushed and hot. The pulse
will be extremely rapid, and the person may be disoriented or
unconscious. Cool the victim immediately through immersion or
with cold packs in the groin and arm pits. Increase the body’s
fluid level by having a victim who is conscious sip water. Seek
emergency help immediately and treat for shock.
Since heat index values are calculated for shady
conditions with a light wind, exposure to direct
sunlight can increase heat index values by as much
as 15 degrees.
Whenever you go kayaking, it’s important to stay
well-hydrated—no matter what the weather conditions
might be.


.Safety and First Aid
Sunburn
Sunburn is a condition often associated with aquatic activities.
Remember that sunlight can reflect from the water’s surface.
This sunlight can be as damaging as direct exposure. Cover up
and use a water-resistant sunscreen. Apply sunscreen with a
sun protection factor (SPF) of at least 15 every two hours, and
limit your exposure time. If your skin begins to redden or if
you feel discomfort, get out of the sun or cover the area with
clothing that will block the sun’s rays.
You can get sunburn even on cloudy days. The best
prevention for sunburn is to apply sunscreen with an
SPF of at least 15, and reapply as needed.
KAYAKING 21


22 KAYAKING
Safety and First Aid.
Dehydration
When we lose more water than we take in, we become dehy-
drated. Symptoms of mild dehydration include increased thirst,
dry lips, and dark yellow urine. Symptoms of moderate to severe
dehydration include severe thirst, dry mouth with little saliva,
dry skin, weakness, dizziness, confusion, nausea, cramping,
loss of appetite, decreased sweating (even with exertion),
decreased urine production, and dark brown urine.
For mild dehydration, drink a quart or two of water or sports
drink over two to four hours. Rest for 24 hours and continue
drinking fluids. See a physician for moderate to severe dehydration,
which requires emergency care. Prevent dehydration by drinking
plenty of fluids whenever you are kayaking, in hot or cold weather.
Drink enough so that your urine stays clear.
Sprains and Strains
A sprain involves a joint’s ligaments—a short band of tough,
flexible tissue that connects bones or holds a joint together.
A sprain usually means that some or all of the fibers of the
ligament were overstretched or possibly torn, such as when
the joint is put in an unnatural position and force is suddenly
applied to the joint. For kayakers, sprains are more likely to
affect the arm and shoulder joints.
A strain affects muscles or the ropelike ends of the muscles,
called tendons, which attach the muscle to the bone it moves.
Strains can happen when muscles are made to work extra hard
or are overused. Because a kayaker uses the same muscles
repeatedly, the muscles and tendons can become strained.
Sprains and strains have three common symptoms: pain,
swelling, and spasms. The pain from a joint sprain is immediate.
Muscle strains may not be painful until the day after using a
muscle over and over again. The muscle/tendon or ligament
will then begin to swell. Once pain and swelling occur, the
muscles surrounding the injured area often will begin to
contract and tighten (spasm).
Sprains and strains
are sometimes
unavoidable, but
you can take
some preventive
precautions.
When you are
transporting a
kayak or on the
trail, watch where
you step, every
step of the way,
and don’t get
distracted.
Avoid dehydration by drinking plenty of fluids
and eating enough throughout the day to keep
your body well-balanced. If you become weary or
develop a headache or body aches, or if you become
confused, rest in the shade and sip water until the
symptoms subside.


KAYAKING 23
.Safety and First Aid
The treatment of sprains and strains involves rest,
immobilization, cold therapy, and elevation. This is
called R.I.C.E. therapy.
R = Rest. Avoid any movements or activities that
cause pain.
I = Immobilize. Stabilize the injured area in the position
that it was found or that is most comfortable. If the
person must be moved, a splint and/or sling may
be needed.
C = Cold. Apply cold or ice packs to reduce pain and
swelling. Choose a cold pack or crushed ice wrapped in
a thin towel. Apply to the injured area for no more than
20 minutes to avoid ice burn or frostbite. Remove the
pack for 40 to 60 minutes before repeating.
E = Elevate. If possible, hold the injured part above the
level of the heart to reduce swelling.


SEAT
GRAB LOOP FOOT BRACE SEAT
BOW COCKPIT STERN
STERN
GRAB LOOP
FOOT BRACE
COCKPIT
BOW


KAYAKING 25
.Kayaks and Equipment
Kayaks and Equipment
Paddlers today have many choices of kayaks, paddles, life jackets,
and other equipment. Selecting the best boat for where you
want to paddle, the correct paddle size, a good life jacket, and
appropriate rescue equipment can make the difference between
a safe and enjoyable experience and an unsafe, unpleasant one.
Boats
No matter where you want to paddle, there is a kayak best
suited for that location and water conditions. To make the best
choice for your needs, you will need to learn the parts of a
kayak, the types of kayaks, and the effects of various design
features. With all of these choices, look at where you want to
kayak and do your best to match your boat to that location.
Types of Kayaks
Often, one boat design can be used in different locations and
conditions. However, using a boat in conditions for which it was
not designed can result in an unsafe situation. As you grow in
the sport of kayaking, you will better understand the importance
of boat design and choosing the right boat.
Recreational. Recreational kayaks are designed for the paddler
interested in a peaceful paddle on a lake, on a flat-water stream,
or in the ocean near the shore. More recreational kayaks are sold
than any other type. Compared with other kayaks, recreational
kayaks have a larger cockpit for easier entry and exit. They are
also wider for increased stability. They are usually
shorter than 12 feet and have limited cargo
space. These boats are relatively
inexpensive. They do not perform
as well on the ocean as on
quiet water.


26 KAYAKING
Kayaks and Equipment.
Touring or Sea.
The touring or sea
kayak has a longer
hull, usually at least 16
feet. The cockpit will have
a lip around the edge for
attaching a spray skirt, which is
used to keep water out. A spray skirt
is made of nylon or synthetic rubber and
looks like an odd- shaped donut. The edges
have elastic cords that fit around the paddler’s
waist and around the edge of the cockpit to keep water
out of the boat.
Because touring/sea kayaks are often used for trips, they
have below-deck storage areas for cargo called hatches. Sea
kayaks may also have rudders or skegs and upturned bow or
stern profiles for wave shedding. Sea kayaks often have two or
more sealed compartments called bulkheads. Bulkheads with
air in them provide flotation for the boat. Some models can
accommodate two or three paddlers.
Whitewater. Whitewater kayaks are generally less than 10 feet
long with a rounded hull. They can turn quickly but don’t easily
travel in a straight line. They are equipped with foot braces and
have foam blocks attached to the inside of the hull and deck to
brace the knees, thighs, and hips. As in sea kayaks, paddlers
normally use spray skirts.
There are many
different designs for
different kinds of rivers.
Creek boats are about
8 to 9 feet long and
perform well on narrow
creeks and big waterfalls.
Play boats are also called
“freestyle” or “rodeo boats.”
They are short and designed for
surfing waves and holes and doing
acrobatic tricks. Between the creek
boats and play boats are the river-running
kayaks. These are medium-sized boats
designed for rivers of moderate to high
volumes of water.


KAYAKING 27
.Kayaks and Equipment
Kayak Designs
Kayaks have many designs. The three types that will generally
be used for this merit badge are described below.
Decked. A decked kayak is the traditional kayak where the top
part of the boat is covered. It also has one or more cockpits
where the paddler sits in a bucket seat. A decked kayak is
designed to keep water from waves or spray from getting into
the boat. Depending on the materials used to make the kayak,
it may be made as a single piece or as two halves, the deck and
the hull, that are joined together.
Sit-On-Top. Sit-on-top kayaks have sealed hulls with permanent
air chambers that make them float. Sit-on-tops were developed
from paddle boards equipped with a backrest and footrests.
Instead of sitting in a cockpit inside the boat, the paddler sits in
a seat in the cockpit on top of the boat. Water that enters the
cockpit drains out through scupper holes, or tubes that run from
the cockpit through the boat to the bottom of the hull.
Sit-on-top kayaks are popular for fishing and SCUBA diving.
Paddlers can easily enter and exit the water, change seating
positions, and even stand. The center of gravity for the paddler
in a sit-on-top is higher than in a decked kayak because its seat
is slightly above water level. To compensate for the higher
center of gravity, sit-on-tops are often wider and slower than
traditional kayaks of the same length.
Inflatable (IK). As the name suggests, these kayaks are made of
multiple compartments or tubes that can be inflated with air.
Also called a ducky or an IK, this type of kayak can be inflated
by foot, hand, or electric pump. Low air pressure is used,
usually less than 3 pounds per square inch (psi). Having
multiple compartments makes the boat more rigid and
increases its safety and stability. Inflatable kayaks
appeal to paddlers because they are portable,
durable, and easy to store. They are very
stable and can be turned in a small
area. Generally, they take more
effort to paddle and are slower
than traditional kayaks.


28 KAYAKING
Kayaks and Equipment.
Kayak Design Characteristics
Some key design characteristics help identify how a kayak will
perform. If you understand these design principles and the design
of your kayak, you will be able to predict how your kayak will
perform when it comes to speed, stability, and turning.
Length is an important measurement; it plays a big part
in determining maximum speed and helps indicate capacity.
Longer boats are typically faster than shorter ones. A longer
kayak will also go straighter or “track” better than a shorter
boat. A boat’s capacity is determined by its length and depth.
A longer kayak will be able to hold a bigger paddler or carry
more cargo than a shorter one.
Width and fullness indicate forward efficiency, seaworthi-
ness, and the ability to travel straight, or “track.” Narrow boats
that slice through the water are efficient trackers. They will
require less effort to achieve the same speed as wider boats.
Narrow boats may track well but give up some stability. They
will feel more tippy and unstable than a wider kayak. Flat-bottom
recreational boats are very stable but tend to be slower.
Cross-sectional shaping affects stability, tracking, and
speed. Flat-bottom hulls have good initial stability; that is, they
make the paddler feel very secure and unlikely to tip over. These
boats have a somewhat square angle where the boat’s bottom
and sides join. This is called a hard “chine.” This type of boat
will feel stable until it passes its tipping point, and then it will
tip over quickly. A kayak with good initial stability will often be
more unstable in rolling waves.
Boats that are more rounded and less square where the side
and bottom meet are said to have a “soft” chine. These rounded or
U-shaped hulls will have less initial stability but better secondary
stability. A kayak with good secondary stability will feel more
unstable when entered. It can be more easily rolled on its side
and then rolled back up without tipping over. These boats are
more stable in rolling waves.
The streamlined shape of a rounded hull will plow through
the water efficiently and is faster than a flat-bottom hull. A
V-hull is a compromise between a flat hull and a rounded hull.
The V-shaped hull provides an effect like a keel down the center
line of the boat. V-shaped hulls provide good tracking and also
maximize secondary stability in waves.


KAYAKING 29
.Kayaks and Equipment
Rocker is the upturn of the hull along the center line from
bow to stern. It affects maneuverability and handling. Added
rocker allows a kayak to turn more easily but makes tracking
more difficult. Boats with less rocker track more easily but
have reduced turning ability. If you plan on kayaking for long
distances, you will want a kayak with little rocker.
Volume is an important factor in selecting a kayak. Select a
kayak with the appropriate volume for the weight being carried.
Be sure to factor in the weight of the paddler and the gear. An
overloaded boat can make paddling difficult and can be a hazard
on the water.
ROUNDED V-SHAPED FLAT
Rounded, V-shaped, and flat hulls


30 KAYAKING
Kayaks and Equipment.
Kayak Building Materials
Most kayaks today are made from plastic or a synthetic cloth
such as fiberglass combined with a liquid resin. Plastic
recreational kayaks and sit-on-top boats are commonly made
from polyethylene. They are durable and retain their shape even
after being bent, but they scratch easily. Polyethylene kayaks are
usually made by roto-molding. Pellets of plastics are poured into
a mold that is rotated and heated until the pellets melt and take
on the shape of the boat mold.
Another way to make a plastic boat is by a process called
thermoforming. To make a thermoformed kayak, sheets of
special plastic are heated and stretched over a mold like a
blanket. Thermoformed plastic kayaks are
stiffer and glossier than the roto-
molded polyethylene boats.
The
most common
cloth material
used to make kayaks
is fiberglass. First the
kayak mold is coated with a
combination of chemicals called a
gelcoat that provides coloring, stiffening, and a protective
layer. Then several layers of fiberglass cloth are laid in the
mold and impregnated with a liquid resin such epoxy resin,
which hardens. When fiberglass or other cloth materials such
as Kevlar or carbon are used, these kayaks are simply called
“glass” or “composite” boats.


KAYAKING 31
.Kayaks and Equipment
Kevlar is an extremely strong material (it is used to make
bulletproof vests), so less can be used, but it is also very
expensive. Carbon fiber cloth is extremely light and even
more costly than Kevlar. Boats made from carbon fiber
are very light, so they glide across the water and are
easy to carry. A composite kayak must be made
by hand. The hull and the deck are made
separately and then joined by a seam.
A handmade fiberglass boat usually
costs at least twice as much as
a polyethylene plastic boat,
depending on the materials
used to make it.
Inflatable kayaks are
made from a kind of a syn-
thetic rubber material called
Hypalon, a rubberized fabric called Nitrilon, or cloth coated in
polyvinyl chloride (PVC) or polyurethane (PU). PVC and PU
kayaks are significantly less expensive than Hypalon or Nitrilon,
and they are lighter, more portable, and require less storage
space. They can be heat-welded in a machine, while Hypalon
and Nitrilon must be glued by hand—increasing the cost of
manufacturing—but also are more resistant to abrasion, sunlight,
and chemicals such as gas and oil.
Although some kayaks are still made from wood, these
boats must be made by hand, are very expensive, and require
careful upkeep. Kits are available that use precut special marine
plywood and require hand assembly. Another type of kayak
is the folding kayak, which combines the convenience
of easy transportation with the seaworthiness of a
fiberglass kayak. These kayaks are made from
lightweight space-age metals and durable
fabrics. A folding kayak can easily be
packed into cases that can be carried
on small airplanes or in the back
seat of a car. Assembly usually
takes 15 to 30 minutes.


32 KAYAKING
Kayaks and Equipment.
Care and Storage
One nice thing about kayaking is that the equipment you use will be
relatively maintenance free. Follow the manufacturer’s instructions for
specifics on the care and maintenance. In general, observing these basic
tips will allow you to enjoy your kayak, paddles, and related equipment
for many years.
• After using your equipment (kayaks, paddles, life jackets, wet suits, etc.),
rinse clean and allow everything to dry thoroughly. Never store any
equipment, clothing, or other gear until completely dry.
• Make repairs to equipment now, and apply any necessary treatments
before storage.
• Store your clothing and gear together in a dry place, away from
direct sunlight.
• Store kayaks out of the water and upside down, covered and in an
area away from direct sunlight and extreme temperatures.
• Before the season starts, inspect everything to make sure any
necessary repairs and adjustments have been made before you
plan to use your equipment.
Following these tips will help you be better prepared from season to season.


KAYAKING 33
.Kayaks and Equipment
Paddles
Your paddle transfers effort into movement. Proper paddle size
and style increase the boat’s responsiveness and make paddling
more fun. Just as boats come in a variety of sizes, shapes, and
materials, so do paddles.
Selecting Your Paddle
Kayak paddles vary in style to conform with the type of water
you will be paddling. In general, a shorter paddle performs
maneuvering strokes more quickly than a longer paddle. A longer
paddle is better for touring, particularly in longer boats. Longer
paddles are also more efficient in wider boats. A longer paddle
can reach farther across the kayak to catch the water on each
stroke. Regardless of the length of the paddle, a paddler will
appreciate a lighter paddle at the end of a full day on the water.
TIP—THE FAR END OF THE BLADE
FROM THE THROAT.
BLADE—THE WIDE, FLAT PART
OF THE PADDLE AT THE ENDS
OF THE SHAFT.
THROAT—THE POINT WHERE THE
BLADE MEETS THE SHAFT.
SHAFT—THE LONG PART OF THE
PADDLE BETWEEN THE BLADES. MAY
BE ROUND OR OVAL.
POWER FACE—THE SMOOTH SIDE OF
THE BLADE THAT PRESSES AGAINST
THE WATER IN A KAYAKING STROKE.
BACK FACE—THE SIDE OF THE
BLADE OPPOSITE THE POWER FACE.
SHAFT
THROAT
TIP
Paddle Parts
BLADE
SHAFT
POWER FACE
(BACK FACE IS
OPPOSITE SIDE)


34 KAYAKING
Kayaks and Equipment.
In selecting a kayak paddle, the most important thing to
consider is the comfort of the paddle in your hands. Quality
paddles have an oval shaft, which provides better control and
comfort and helps you set the correct angle. Most paddles have
straight shafts, but a few designs are bent at the grip positions
to ease strain on the wrists.
The actual length of the paddle will be determined by a
number of factors, including the type of water being paddled,
the width of your kayak, your size, the length of the blades,
your style of paddling, and your personal preferences. Paddles
for recreational kayaks are normally sized in centimeters, with
typical lengths between 200 and 220 centimeters.
Given these differences, a general rule of thumb for sizing a
kayak paddle is to hold the paddle above your head horizontally.
With your elbows at 90-degree angles, your hands should be 6 to
8 inches from the throat on either end of the paddle.
The blades of kayak paddles come in various designs. Large
blades provide more power per stroke; smaller blades take less
energy per stroke and are gentler to arm and shoulder joints.
Many blades are lightly cupped or spooned for increased water
resistance over a flat blade of the same size. The curve is oriented
to scoop water toward the stern. Some blades are asymmetrical;
that is, the shape of the blade above the centerline of the shaft is
different from that below. The shape is designed to balance the
force on the top and bottom parts of the blade when the blade is
put in the water at an angle.


KAYAKING 35
.Kayaks and Equipment
Many paddles have the blades set at an angle to one
another. The offset angle automatically feathers the blade out
of the water when the other blade in the water is perpendicular
to the boat’s centerline. For touring kayaks, the blades are often
offset 30 to 70 degrees and sometimes as much as 90 degrees.
The greater the angle of the offset, the more the paddler’s wrist
must be flexed to turn the shaft for each stroke.
Try paddles with different angles of offset to find the one best
for you. Touring paddles often come in two sections that, when
assembled, allow the feathering angle to be varied. A paddle with
spooned, asymmetrical blades set at an angle has top and bottom
sides and right and left ends. Depending on how the blade angles
are set, paddles are either right-hand- or left-hand-controlled.
Most are set in the right-hand control position. That is, the grip
of the right hand will not change during use. The wrist of the
right hand is rotated to set the proper blade angle on each side
of the boat. The shaft rotates freely in the left hand.
Feathering reduces
wind and splash
resistance.


Kayaks and Equipment.
Essential Equipment
While kayaking equipment comes in several designs geared
toward the style of paddling desired, some gear on the water
is standard no matter the style of the boat. These items—life
jackets, clothing that protects the kayaker in various weather
conditions, proper footwear, and safety equipment—help ensure
a fun-filled, safe day of paddling.
Life Jackets
According to the United States Coast Guard, most paddlers who
drown were not wearing life jackets. Scouting America requires
that life jackets be worn at all times during paddlesport pro-
grams. Many states have similar requirements, and the USCG
requires that everyone under age 13 wear a properly sized and
fitted life jacket while paddling. Life jackets are also called per-
sonal flotation devices (PFDs) in federal boating regulations and
are categorized by types: Type I, Type II, etc.
Life jackets provide buoyancy and work best when properly
fitted—snug and secure. This means all zippers should be zipped,
buckles be buckled, and adjustment straps be “snugged” up.
Properly fitted life jackets fit tightly enough around the
paddler’s torso so that if one lifts the jacket by the
shoulder straps, the straps do not ride up above
the ears and the front of the jacket does not
reach the chin.
The most popular style of life
jacket used by paddlers is the vest
style, or Type III PFD. This style
allows the paddler a comfortable
fit and an increased range
of motion for paddling and
swimming. It is designed to
float a conscious swimmer in
a vertical (feet down, head up)
position. However, it does not
guarantee that an unconscious
swimmer’s face will stay out of
the water.
36 KAYAKING


KAYAKING 37
.Kayaks and Equipment
Clothing
The clothing you wear while paddling can make a big difference
in the success of a trip on the water. When you think of what to
wear and what to bring with you, remember to plan for the worst
and dress for immersion. You should always dress appropriately
for the water temperature, not the air temperature.
To avoid potentially life-threatening situations, wear the
proper clothing for the conditions. A layering system of clothing
is important. This system allows the paddler to add or remove
layers as needed, enhancing comfort when on the water. When
you are planning your layering system, a simple “three W’s”
approach is easy to remember.
Sizing Your Life Jacket
On land, have a buddy stand behind you and firmly pull up both shoulder
straps. If the shoulder straps pull up to ear level, the life jacket doesn’t fit
snugly enough. Readjust the jacket or try a smaller size or different style.
In calm, shallow water, test the fit of a life jacket by relaxing your body
and tilting your head back. It should keep your chin well above water.
If it doesn’t, readjust for a snugger fit or try a life jacket with a higher
buoyancy rating. Check the label to find the rating.


38 KAYAKING
Kayaks and Equipment.
Wicking. This is the first layer of clothing next to your skin.
This layer should draw moisture away from the skin through the
fabric and then let it evaporate into the air. The best materials
are synthetic fabrics such as spandex or polyester. Choose a
short-sleeved T-shirt for when it is hot and a long-sleeved shirt
for colder weather.
Warmth. The next layer is for insulation or warmth. The best
fabrics for this layer are wool or polyester fleece. These fabrics
should allow moisture to move through them. Polyester fleece
comes in different weights or thicknesses. It is durable,
breathable, warm even when wet, wind- and odor-resistant, and
often made from recycled plastic products. Fleece also dries
quickly, especially if the water is wrung out.
Weather. The outer layer of clothing should protect you from
rain, wind, and water splashes. Nylon is a good fabric for this
layer because it is wind- and water-resistant. It is a good choice
for pants/shorts and jackets. Other modern materials, such
as GORE-TEX®, combine cloth inner and outer layers with a
membrane in between that keeps water out but allows water
vapor to escape.
Hypothermia and cold-water shock can be real dangers
if you are not dressed appropriately. Water conducts
heat away from your body 24 times better than air.
Wicking Warmth


KAYAKING 39
.Kayaks and Equipment
A common piece of paddling gear is a paddle jacket. It is
made from coated nylon with cuffs at the neck and wrists that
prevent water from entering. Paddle jackets are not waterproof,
but they will help contain heat even if they are wet. An alterna-
tive to a paddle jacket is a dry top. This type of jacket is made of
waterproof material with synthetic rubber wrist closures, a neck
seal, and a drawstring at the waist. A dry top prevents water
from getting in but is not very comfortable when it is new.
For water temperatures below 60 degrees Fahrenheit, wet
suits or dry suits are highly recommended. A wet suit is made
from synthetic rubber and comes in various thicknesses and
styles. The suit is used by scuba divers to keep them warm in
cold water. A dry suit is made of waterproof fabric with rubber
gaskets at the neck, wrists, and ankles to prevent water from
entering the suit.
One of the most expensive parts of a dry suit is its special
waterproof zipper. This provides the paddler with a way to get in
and out of the suit, which can be rather complicated. The zipper
was originally developed for the U.S. space program to hold air
inside a space suit.
Dry suits will keep water from getting in but will also
prevent water vapor and perspiration from escaping and
evaporating. They can cause a paddler to overheat if the air
temperature is too warm. Life jackets add a valuable layer of
insulation while supplying essential flotation.
Paddle jacket with PFD Dry suit
For cold-water
conditions, a
neoprene wet suit
can be used for
added warmth
and protection.


40 KAYAKING
Kayaks and Equipment.
Don’t forget to protect your feet. Good footwear is a crucial
piece of paddling gear. Cuts to the feet and sprained ankles are
common injuries among inexperienced paddlers. In warm weather,
plastic shoes with treaded soles and holes in the upper parts work
well. Water shoes are also a good option along with webbed
sandals or sneaker-sandals for water activities.
The best protection against cold water is a pair of synthetic
rubber booties or boots. Flip-flops should not be used, because
they can fall off in the water. Sandals with straps should be
avoided because the straps can get caught on foot pegs.
Choosing the right footwear for kayaking will help protect your
feet and make your outing more enjoyable.
Whether you are carrying your boat over rugged, wet,
and slippery terrain, or launching in ankle-deep water,
choose footwear with good support and sturdy soles.
Synthetic rubber socks can be worn inside a pair of
old athletics shoes or sneakers for added warmth
and protection.


KAYAKING 41
.Kayaks and Equipment
Paddling gloves are also useful. In warm weather, lightweight
gloves with three-quarter-length fingers will protect against
blisters and sun. For cold weather, full-fingered paddling gloves
or mittens made from rubber, called pogies, will protect against
the numbing effect of constant exposure to icy water.
Another essential item is head covering. In cold weather,
a cap made from wool or synthetic fleece makes it easy to stay
warm. In warmer weather, a good, wide-brimmed hat and
sunglasses will protect against direct sunlight and sunburn
and will also keep you cooler.
The best hats are made of cotton duck or
a fast-drying synthetic fabric such as
nylon. In a rainstorm, a rain hat can be
a lifesaver. The hat should be made
of waterproof material and have a good
brim to keep water from dripping in
your eyes.


42 KAYAKING
Kayaks and Equipment.
Safety Equipment
Every paddler should have a personal set
of safety equipment. Here are a few items
to consider.
Whistle. The U.S. Coast Guard regulations
require that all paddlers carry an audible
distress signal. A whistle is simple and easy to
use. It can also be attached to your life jacket.
As an emergency signaling device, a whistle
can be used to attract the attention of other
paddlers if assistance is needed.
Spare paddle. In case the original is damaged
or lost.
First-aid kit. A simple kit to manage common
injuries such as blisters or cuts.
Sponge. An easy way to keep the inside of the
kayak dry and clean.
Bilge pump. A short, hand-operated pump
that can quickly empty a kayak full of water.


KAYAKING 43
.Kayaks and Equipment
Dry bags. Specially made bags of waterproof
material with a roll-down closure at the top.
Throw bag. A bag containing a disk of
closed-cell foam at the bottom and a length
of polypropylene rope (which floats) attached
to the bottom of the bag through the disk.
The rest of the rope is loosely stuffed into the
bag with a drawstring at the top.
Map and compass. Using these devices will
keep a paddler on course and out of trouble.
Water and food. Kayakers have high water
needs, and extra water is a must. High-calorie
food provides an important source of energy
for kayakers, who can burn thousands of
calories in a day.





KAYAKING 45
.Transportation and Rescues
Transportation and
Rescues
Wherever you want to paddle your kayak, you will need to
get it there. Since kayaks are usually too big to fit inside a car,
they are secured onto roof racks or onto a trailer. Specially
designed trailers can transport many kayaks at once. Making
sure your kayak stays secure to the car or trailer is very
important; if a boat falls off in transit it could cause
a serious accident.
There are many ways to make securing a boat easier. These
include straps with cam buckles, hooks, ratchets, or carabiners.
The simplest way to secure a kayak to a rack and secure the ends
of the boat is by using a sturdy rope with a few simple knots.
Knots
When you are tying down a kayak, it is important to use the
right kind of rope and knots that will not slip. Secure one end
of polypropylene rope with a bowline and tie off the other
end using an adjustable knot to set tension. The taut line is a
common adjustable knot, but it requires that the rope be tight
to keep it from slipping. Unfortunately, when the car is in
motion, wind vibrations will cause this knot to slide and
become ineffective. Using the trucker’s hitch will help to solve
this problem. This knot provides a mechanical advantage and,
when tied properly, does not slip.
Ideally, you will want to practice how to secure a kayak
to a vehicle on a real car or trailer. If neither is available,
you can demonstrate this skill on a specially made rack
on land. Make sure you have a hook or stake mounted
to the ground or a heavy object so you can practice bow
and stern lines.


46 KAYAKING
Transportation and Rescues.
The trucker’s hitch does not slip
when tied properly.
Secure the kayak to the racks using cam straps,
bungee cords, or lines using a trucker’s hitch.
The lines should be tight and secure, but be
careful: It is possible to tighten hard enough
to damage the hull.
Tying a trucker’s hitch
1 2
3 4


KAYAKING 47
.Transportation and Rescues
Securing the Kayak to the Rack
A roof rack consists of two horizontal bars about 42 inches apart
(trailers might be as far as 60 inches apart). The kayak needs to
be tied down to each bar. To protect the bottom of the kayak from
being warped by the rack, it is best to put the cockpit down. If
they are available, you can use specially made cradles to transport
the kayak cockpit up. Tie one end of the rope to the rack using a
bowline as an anchor point and then use a trucker’s hitch to tie
the other end. Make sure the rope catches the inside of the rack
support so it doesn’t fall off the end. If the rack has a vertical
support like those found on trailers, several kayaks can be placed
on their sides to maximize space.
Tying on to a horizontal rack.


48 KAYAKING
Transportation and Rescues.
Securing the Ends
In addition to being secured to the roof rack, long kayaks require
the end of the boat to be tied to the vehicle’s bumpers to keep
the boat from twisting off. Tie a bowline knot to the grab loops
at the bow and the stern of the kayak. After securing the kayak
to the rack, thread the line to the bumpers of the car and secure
with a trucker’s hitch.
If your kayak extends more than 4 feet past the back bumper, put a red flag on the end
so other drivers can see it.
Most modern cars do not have a space between the car and the bumper,
so you will usually have to thread through a towing mount or trailer hitch.
If the there is no way to connect to the ends of the car, another vehicle
with that capability should be used.
Although it is possible to secure an inflatable kayak onto a car in the same
manner, these craft are usually transported inside the vehicle in deflated
form and then inflated at the place where you are going to paddle. Make
sure you have an appropriate pump.


KAYAKING 49
.Transportation and Rescues
Carrying Your Kayak
The easiest way to carry a kayak is with the help of a buddy.
When a kayak has grab loops, toggle handles, or fixed handles,
it is convenient for two people to easily carry two kayaks. Put all
your gear inside the kayak and then position the kayaks parallel
to each other on the ground. Now you and your buddy stand
between the ends of the boats facing in the same direction.
Bend at the knees and reach for a kayak with each hand. After
taking hold of the grab loops, stand up together. When you are
both ready, you may begin to walk forward.
A kayak can be carried without a buddy by lifting it to your
shoulder. However, carrying a kayak by yourself is awkward and
can lead to bruising and a sore shoulder. Support the kayak with
your arms and do not let the full weight of the kayak rest on
your shoulder. You should never drag your kayak, as this could
damage it. It is always best to use the help of your buddy.
Loading and Trimming
It is important that a kayak sit evenly in the water so that the
ends are equally out of the water. The boat is considered
“trimmed” when it is balanced at each end. If one end is higher
than the other, you can adjust the seat forward or backward until
it is even. This is called “trimming the kayak.” If you are going to
pack gear (e.g., lunch, camping supplies, etc.) in a boat, make
sure that equal weight is put in the bow and the stern.
Take a rest when
you need it. If
you are walking
across uneven
ground, you and
your buddy will
want to carry
your kayaks one
at a time.


50 KAYAKING
Transportation and Rescues.
Fitting Your Kayak
Because kayaks come in multiple sizes, it is important to find
one that fits you properly. Generally speaking if you are a big
person, you need a big kayak. Likewise, a small person needs
a smaller kayak. Paddling a boat that is the wrong size will
affect the kayak’s stability and your ability to maneuver it.
Before you put your kayak in the water, get into it while it
is on land. Make sure that you can get in and out comfortably.
You do not want to capsize and then realize that the boat is too
tight to easily exit. Adjust the foot pegs so that your legs are
slightly bent when you are sitting on the seat. When you are
using a sit-on-top kayak, simply choose the foothold that feels
the most comfortable.
Getting In and Out
Like a bicycle in motion, kayaks become more stable when
you paddle them, but getting in and out of them can be a bit
challenging as they can be tippy. To stabilize your kayak for
entry, bring the boat parallel to the shore or dock. Use your
paddle for balance by placing one end on the bank or dock
and the other end just behind the cockpit rim.
Always try to keep three points of contact with the boat,
such as both hands and foot, or both feet and your seat.
Never try to stand in a kayak. Instead, slide your legs
in and out of the cockpit. Move slowly, and keep your
weight low. Reverse the process to exit.


KAYAKING 51
.Transportation and Rescues


52 KAYAKING
Transportation and Rescues.
H.E.L.P. The Heat Escape
Lessening Posture
(H.E.L.P.) slows
heat loss. It per-
mits you to float
effortlessly and
protect those
areas of the body
most likely to lose
heat. The H.E.L.P.
position protects
the armpits, sides
of the chest, groin, and back of the knees. Because heat
loss is concentrated at the head, floating techniques with
the head in the water should not be used in cold water
(e.g., facedown survival floating or floating on the back).
Rescues
Although not likely, kayaks can capsize; paddlers should be
prepared if this occurs. It is important that you ALWAYS wear your
life jacket. Make sure it has been properly fitted, fully buckled up
and, most important, is on your body. Even if you are learning your
rescue skills in a swimming pool, learning how to move in the
water while wearing a life jacket is an important skill.
Plan to Get Wet
Make sure you dress to get wet every time you paddle. Water
conducts heat 24 times faster than air, so dress properly to protect
against hypothermia. Hypothermia is a very real danger, even on
nice days. When the combined air and water temperatures add
up to less than 120 degrees Fahrenheit, consider wearing a wet
suit or a dry suit. A paddler who accidently falls into cold water
should get out as quickly as possible. If immersion occurs within
a few yards of shore, abandon your boat and gear and swim the
short distance to get out of the water.
Your chances of
surviving in cold
water improve
greatly if you are
wearing a life
jacket—before
you hit the water.


KAYAKING 53
.Transportation and Rescues
Although swimming will generate heat through exercise, the
increased water flow caused by swimming will rapidly conduct
that heat away. Consequently, even a good swimmer will not be
able to swim very far in cold water. If the distance is more than a
few yards, the paddler should wait for assistance from the kayak’s
buddy boat. To minimize loss of heat, the paddler should assume
the H.E.L.P. position until rescue arrives.
The Capsized Kayak
Kayaks are stable enough so that capsizing in calm water should
be a rare occurrence. However, if you find yourself losing balance,
the first thing you should do is to lean forward with your head
in a protective tuck position. There is always a possibility that
shallow objects could be in the water directly below you, so by
developing the habit of automatically getting into the protective
tuck position, you will be better able to avoid injury.
Practicing with your buddy will prepare you for when you need to
rescue others. Build confidence by practicing rescue on a nice day in
a safe environment.
By their nature, sit-on-tops and inflatable kayaks usually do not take on
water. However, if water does get into the floatation chamber (as in the case
of a flooded storage hatch), you can empty a sit-on-top in the same manner
as a decked kayak.


54 KAYAKING
Transportation and Rescues.
Wet Exit
To make sure you are safe in all water conditions, it is important
to practice how to capsize in a calm and controlled area. Start
by leaning forward into the protective tuck position. With your
head facing the deck, hold your breath and lean to one side to
begin to capsize. Once your boat has stopped upside down,
slide out of the cockpit as if you were removing your pants.
Once free of the kayak, take hold of the boat so as to not get
separated, and surface next to the cockpit.
Stay with your boat, as it offers useful flotation and is more
visible to rescuers. Use the same technique for a sit-on-top or an
inflatable kayak. However, you will find that thanks to gravity,
you will fall out of the boat. It is important to immediately get
hold of your boat and to not get separated.


KAYAKING 55
.Transportation and Rescues
Towing a Kayak
When you paddle, you should always have a buddy who can
help if you are out of your boat. Since it is easiest to empty a
kayak while on land, your buddy can tow you to shore if you
are close enough. First, get to the end of your kayak so you can
grasp your grab loop. You will need to hold your paddle in the
same hand that holds your boat. With your other hand, grasp
the stern grab loop of the rescue boat. As the rescuer paddles to
shore, use a swimming kick to assist the boat’s forward motion.
Swimming a Kayak
Although you should never kayak alone, you might find times
when you need to swim a short distance to be rescued. In
addition, you may be so close to shore that it is easier to just
swim there. To swim with your kayak, get to the end of your
boat and hold your paddle and grab loop in one hand. Your
other hand is now free to use a sidestroke and scissor kick to
tow your kayak to shore.
Towing a kayak
is hard work, and
you need to do
your part to help.
Keep the Kayak Upside Down. When your boat has capsized, do not flip
it right-side up. With the kayak upside down, air will be trapped in the
cockpit and prevent more water from entering. This air inside the boat will
make the kayak-over-kayak rescue much easier to perform.


56 KAYAKING
Transportation and Rescues.
Open-Water Rescue
If a kayak is capsized far from land or in very cold water, it may
not be possible to safely tow the boat to shore. With practice, a
kayak can be emptied and then re-boarded in open water using
the T-rescue and heel hook entry techniques.
Kayak-Over-Kayak Rescue
The paddler being rescued swims to the far end of the capsized
boat. The paddler being rescued and the rescuer align the
capsized boat perpendicular to the rescue boat, making a “T.”
This maneuver is sometimes called a “T-rescue” because of
this configuration.
Step 1—The rescuer pulls and the paddler
in the water pushes the capsized kayak
across the deck of the rescue boat so both
ends are out of the water. By rocking the
capsized boat like a teeter-totter on top of the
rescue kayak, most of the water can be
quickly drained. The paddler in the water
should hold on to the end of the rescue boat
or hold on to the end of the capsized kayak.
Step 2—Once the boat is empty, the
rescuer flips it away from himself and
turns the kayak upright. The rescue
paddler returns the kayak to the water by
holding on to the end. The rescuer then
assists the paddler’s re-entry using the
heel hook entry.
To avoid injury, it
is important that
the paddler in the
water never get
between both
kayaks during
this rescue.
1
2


KAYAKING 57
.Transportation and Rescues
Heel Hook Entry
The heel hook entry is an easy way for
a paddler in the water to reenter his or
her kayak.
Step 1—Position the kayaks so they are side
by side with the bows facing opposite direc-
tions. The paddler in the water floats
face-up next to the side of the empty kayak,
with feet pointing toward the bow of the
boat. The rescuer stows both paddles and
keeps both boats stable while being mindful
of his or her fingers between the hulls. The
rescuer leans across the bow deck of the
empty boat and holds the kayak securely.
Step 2—The paddler in the water rolls on
his or her side toward the kayak, then places
the outside foot in the cockpit. The paddler
in the water either reaches up toward the
rescuer with the outside hand and grasps the
rescuer’s wrist (wrist to wrist) or reaches
across the stern deck and grabs hold of the
opposite side of the empty boat.
Step 3—The paddler in the water—using
the leverage provided by having a leg in the
cockpit and a grip across the stern to the
rescuer or the other side of the kayak—can
now straighten out the leg while sliding his
or her hips and upper body onto the stern
deck and staying as low as possible. At this
point, the rescuer lets go of the paddler’s
hand, which allows the paddler to roll the
rest of the way over.
Step 4—The paddler is now lying chest
down on the stern deck of his or her boat
and facing the stern with one leg in the
cockpit. The paddler’s other leg can now be
lifted into the cockpit. With both legs in the
kayak, the paddler twists around and sits
down in the seat of the boat facing the bow.
The rescuer maintains contact with the
kayak until the paddler is situated, stable,
and ready to paddle.
1
2
3
4


58 KAYAKING
Transportation and Rescues.
Belly-to-Seat Entry
If you are using a sit-on-top or
an inflatable kayak, there is no
cockpit in which to hook your foot.
Therefore, the heel hook entry will
not work. To reenter either of these
watercraft, the rescuer stabilizes
the boats parallel as with the heel
hook entry, with the boats facing
in opposite directions (see 1).
However, with this rescue, the
paddler pulls up onto the center
of the boat so his or her belly is in
the middle (see 2). The rescuer can
assist by stabilizing the boat and
pulling some, but without straining.
The paddler rolls over to a seated
position (see 3) and turns to face
the bow (see 4).
1
2
3
4


KAYAKING 59
.Transportation and Rescues
Emptying Water on Shore
The easiest place to empty water from your kayak is on
shore. Turn the kayak upright and pull the bow of the
kayak onto shore. Next, turn the kayak upside down
and lift up on the stern to empty the water through
the open cockpit. Make sure to lift with your legs and
not your back.
Repeat this in a seesaw motion to allow the water
to empty out as it goes between the bow and the stern.
Having your buddy help will make this easier. Once the
boat is empty, turn it upright while it is out of the water
and then reenter.





KAYAKING 61
.Skills and Maneuvers
Skills and Maneuvers
You have the right kayak for your body type and the outings you
plan to make. You have learned how to get into it and out of it on
land and on water. Now you have to make it go. The paddling
skills that will allow you to maneuver your craft through the
water begin with proper form and body balance.
Kayaking Foundations
No matter what kind of kayak they paddle, good kayakers use
the same set of skills to keep their boat under control. Whether
they’re in a 6-foot-long whitewater boat, an 18-foot-long sea
kayak, or something in between, kayakers need to keep their
boat upright and make it go where they want. This merit badge
will teach you how to do that by using your body and paddle.
Paddler Comfort
The first step to controlling a kayak is one that is often overlooked:
paddler comfort. It’s hard to learn paddling if the paddler is not
comfortable sitting in the boat. When a kayak fits well, it is easier
for the paddler to control the boat and respond to changing
water conditions.
Comfort starts with gear that fits well and is appropriate
for the area paddled. A well-fitted life jacket is obvious,
but warm clothes, closed-toe shoes, and head protection
are just as important. A boat and paddle that fit help
kayakers be more comfortable and have more fun on
the water. Beyond these basics, food and water, rescue
gear, and a group of fellow paddlers can make each trip
on the water more fun and more safe.


62 KAYAKING
Skills and Maneuvers.
Good Posture
Once a paddler is comfortable wearing gear and sitting in a
boat, the next thing to work on is good posture. When paddlers
sit in a kayak for the first time, they often feel as if the boat
will tip over if they move the wrong way. To fix that feeling,
a beginner needs to learn the right way to sit in a boat. The
paddler’s back should be straight, so the head rests on top of the
spine. Paddlers shouldn’t lean forward or backward. In fact,
leaning back will make the boat less steady.
Good Balance
Good posture leads to good balance. Balance is important
because it is a lot harder to paddle when you are upside down.
Good balance comes from keeping the head over the centerline
of the boat. Kayaking in a slouching position will make it
difficult to keep one’s head centered as the boat moves. When
sitting up straight and relaxed, a paddler can flex the middle of
the spine right to left as he or she paddles. This will keep the
head in line with the boat’s centerline.
To help with
posture, some
paddlers imagine
that their head
is being lifted
up, lengthening
their spine.
Good posture gives huge benefits. It allows a paddler
better flexibility and vision, places the shoulders into
optimal position for paddling, and allows deeper
breathing. All of these will help you have more fun
in your kayak.


KAYAKING 63
.Skills and Maneuvers
Good Posture and Balance Practice
To help demonstrate why good posture is so important, kayakers
can practice controlling how much their boat edges. Start by
sitting in the boat with good posture, so that the boat sits flat.
To start edging, slowly shift some of your weight to the left side,
so the right side of the boat lifts a little.
If you keep your back in a straight line (looking from the
back of the boat to the front), the boat will feel tippy. Some
paddlers describe this as a “bell-buoy lean.” Instead, if you let
your head shift to the right a bit, so it stays centered over the
boat, the boat will be much more stable. This more stable and
comfortable lean is often called a “J-lean.”
Skilled boaters use the J-lean and edging to keep the boat upright
and to help control turns.
This paddler’s head is away from the centerline of his kayak, and
he is about to capsize.


64 KAYAKING
Skills and Maneuvers.
If your boat is equipped with thigh straps or thigh braces,
you also can put a little pressure on those with your right leg, to
make the boat feel even more stable. You can flatten the boat by
bringing your weight back to the boat’s center. Practice moving
from a flat boat to a boat on edge to practice keeping good
posture and balance.
Good Shoulder Position
Good posture and balance lead
to a strong position for a paddler’s
shoulders. Keeping a strong shoulder
position sometimes is referred to as
“staying in the box” or “staying in
the cube.” Shoulders are both the
most mobile joint in the body and
the most mobile point between
the paddle and the boat. To make
shoulders work well, paddlers
generally should keep their elbows
low (at or below chin height), bent,
and in front of the body.
Elbows can be sharply bent or
almost fully extended. Maintaining
some degree of bend allows elbows
to act as shock absorbers, protecting both the elbow and the
shoulder. This is the same position you would hold your arms
if you were doing pushups.
To feel why the strong shoulder position is important, stand
up and lift your arms out from your sides until your elbows are
as high as they can go and it looks like you are ready to do a
pushup against the air. After a few minutes, your shoulders will
get tired and uncomfortable. Next, keep your hands in place and
relax your elbows. When you drop your elbows down below the
shoulders and close to your body, you will feel a lot better.
New kayakers tend to have tight hips and lean away
from the kayak when it rides up on edge. Unfortunately,
this can lead to an unplanned capsize.


KAYAKING 65
.Skills and Maneuvers
Stay In the Box
Some paddlers find it easiest to think of a box, created by their hands
moving with the above restrictions. Others find it easier to just think about
keeping the elbows in front of the chest. In either case, shoulders stay
strong and protected.
Next, try sitting in your kayak in the water, holding your
arms straight out away from your body, and practice your boat
edging as described in the balance section. With arms all the
way out, the boat can feel very tippy, particularly if you are
in a narrow craft. Now, see how it feels when you drop your
arms and let your elbows come closer to your chest and closer
to the water line. Your boat should feel a lot more stable when
everything is close to your body.
In this photo, the
kayaker has his
elbows raised
too high.


66 KAYAKING
Skills and Maneuvers.
Anchored Paddle
Once a kayaker can sit in the boat
comfortably, with good posture,
good balance, and a strong shoulder
position, it is time to start using the
paddle. When you hold a paddle, your
elbows should be bent at about 90
degrees and the knuckles of your right
hand should line up with the edge of
your right blade. When the paddle
blade is put in the water, it should be
placed in a way so the boat moves in
the direction you want to go.
Ideally, all the energy applied to the
paddle should make the boat go where
the paddler wants. For this to happen,
it helps to anchor a few things in place.
First, the paddler needs to anchor
himself in the boat. Good outfitting
helps, as does gently pushing with the
feet, legs, and buttocks during each
paddle stroke. Second, the paddle needs
to be well-anchored to the paddler. A
solid grip and a strong arm position
help transmit the paddle’s power from
the water through the paddler’s body
to the boat. Finally, the paddle needs to
be anchored into the water, so the boat
moves instead of the paddle.
It will be important to learn what each stroke is
supposed to do and the specifics of each stroke’s
catch, power, and release/recovery phases.
Paddle oriented to turn to the left (away
from the paddle)
Paddle oriented to move forward


KAYAKING 67
.Skills and Maneuvers
There are several ways you can anchor the blade. The easiest
and most common way is to insert it into the water, in a position
to move the boat in the direction you want to go. Then, apply
power to the blade by taking a slow, deliberate stroke to move
your boat. You will know you are doing this correctly if, as the
boat moves, the paddle blade stays close to where you put it in
the water. To move faster, simply apply a little more power to
the blade.
However, if a lot of bubbles and splash form around the
paddle blade, the blade is not working as effectively as possible.
This could happen because you are pulling too hard on the
paddle. The result is just like spinning a car’s wheels in mud.
You will put out a lot of effort and generate a lot of splash
without going anywhere. To fix this problem, slow the paddle
blade down until the bubbles and splashing stop.
Bubbles can also form if your paddle blade is not completely
submerged. To fix that, make sure your paddle blade is completely
under water when you apply power. Remember: It’s your blade,
so use all of it!
Gentle pushing
helps keep the
paddler from
sliding in the
seat when
applying power
to the paddle.
Paddle oriented to move sideways (toward the paddle)


68 KAYAKING
Skills and Maneuvers.
Focus
Once you have good posture and balance, strong shoulders, and a
consistently anchored paddle, the last step is your focus. At its most
basic level, focus in kayaking means “look where you’re going.”
However, this simple act has some powerful consequences. First,
the paddler will see where he or she is going, which is a good
thing. Second, keeping the head up and looking toward a
destination helps a paddler improve posture and balance. Finally, it
helps set up good torso rotation, which makes it easier to have
good balance and use strong shoulders.
To sum up the foundations of paddling, we start with a
kayaker’s comfort. Comfort helps a kayaker have good posture.
Good posture leads to good balance and puts shoulders into a
strong position. Good traction allows kayakers to apply power
from their strong shoulders, and focus helps them get where
they want to go. Good paddlers put these foundations together
every time they get in a boat.


KAYAKING 69
.Skills and Maneuvers
Kayak Strokes
Once a kayaker has a solid paddling foundation, it is time to
work on specific paddle strokes. The strokes can make the
kayak go forward, backward and sideways, turn, spin, and stop.
By learning six simple strokes, a paddler can perform each of
these maneuvers. Each stroke has three phases—C.P.R., or
catch, power, and release/recovery. During the catch phase, the
body is wound up to obtain power and the paddle is anchored
in the water. Power is then applied to the paddle and boat by
torso rotation. Finally, in the release/recovery phase, power is
released from the blade and the blade returns to its original
position for the next catch phase as the boat glides.
Turning Strokes
You will need to learn how to turn effectively in order to maintain
control of your kayak.
Forward Sweep
Kayaks turn easily, so the first stroke taught to new kayakers is
often one that helps them turn while maintaining control. The
forward sweep can make a kayak spin in place or, once the boat
is moving ahead, turn and continue moving forward with speed.
The forward sweep also helps a new kayaker learn how to
generate power from the torso instead of the arms, leading to
stronger and safer strokes. A forward sweep on the right side
will make the bow of the boat turn to the left, away from
the paddle.
At the beginning of each stroke, the paddler should be
looking forward with the paddle held comfortably in
front of the body. Each stroke below is described as if
performed on the right side of the body, but all strokes
can and should be done on both sides of the body. In
some cases, reference will be made to the working
blade (the one in the water), the working hand (the one
close to the working blade), and the top hand (the hand
farthest from the working blade).


70 KAYAKING
Skills and Maneuvers.
To reach the forward sweep’s catch
phase (1), rotate the torso and right
shoulder forward so the right blade is near
the right foot. Then place the right blade
in the water so the blade is as close to
the right side of the boat as possible. The
blade should be oriented so it is as close
to parallel with centerline of the boat as
the paddler can comfortably place it. In
practice, this is typically about 30 degrees
from center line. The left hand should
be about shoulder height and the right
hand just above the deck of the boat
(or the right leg if the kayaker is paddling
a sit-on-top).
From here, the forward sweep’s
power phase (2) happens when the torso
rotates the boat away from the blade.
Ideally, the arms do not move much in
relation to the body, so the shoulders stay
in a strong position. The blade should
separate from the boat in a broad curve.
Once the body rotates as far as it can go,
the release phase (3) happens as the right
shoulder lifts the blade out of the water,
like a knife slicing out of butter.
To do another forward sweep on
the right, rotate the torso to bring
the blade forward to the original
starting position.
1
2
3


KAYAKING 71
.Skills and Maneuvers
Reverse Sweep
The reverse sweep also spins the boat or turns
it while underway. In addition, it can help
slow or stop the boat. As its name suggests,
the reverse sweep looks like the opposite of a
forward sweep. To begin the stroke, rotate the
torso so the right blade is behind you. Make
sure to maintain a strong shoulder position
when doing this. The catch (1) begins when
the blade drops in the water, with the right
elbow tucked close to the paddler’s back and
the left hand raised to about shoulder height.
The blade should be roughly parallel with the
midline of the kayak.
To apply power (2), rotate the torso
so the back of the blade moves toward
the nose of the bow. As with the forward
sweep, make sure the blade is completely in
the water. Once the back face of the blade is
almost touching the kayak near the feet, the
release phase (3) happens when the right
shoulder lifts the blade out of the water.
To do another reverse sweep on the
right, turn the upper body to bring
the paddle blade back to the stern.
1
2
3


72 KAYAKING
Skills and Maneuvers.
Power Strokes
Forward Stroke
The forward power stroke (or “forward
stroke”) is the boat’s engine, the stroke
that moves the boat forward. It is the
most commonly used stroke in kayaking.
It can be used to go in a straight line or
to paddle on a curving path. The forward
stroke’s starting catch position is similar
to a forward sweep’s catch position. The
torso rotates forward and the right blade
enters the water near the right ankle.
However, the top hand is higher than in
a sweep, allowing the blade to turn so it
will move the boat forward rather than
sideways. The blade should be roughly
perpendicular to the midline of the kayak.
To apply power, unwind the torso
and keep the top hand at the same height,
so the blade stays close to the boat. The
top hand should move toward the center
of the boat. Release power by slicing the
blade sideways out of the water once the
blade reaches the thighs. This will set the
left blade up to take a stroke on the left
side of the boat.


KAYAKING 73
.Skills and Maneuvers
Reverse Stroke
There are times when it is important for a
kayaker to paddle backward. The reverse
power stroke, or just “reverse stroke,” will
move the kayak backward. To begin,
rotate the torso to the right and put the
right paddle blade in the water next to the
boat near the hips. Keep the left hand
fairly high and the blade perpendicular to
the centerline of the boat. To apply power,
unwind the torso and push the back face
of the blade forward, alongside the boat.
Power is released when the blade nears
the ankles and is lifted out of the water.
When you are paddling backward,
make sure to look over your
shoulder every few strokes so
you can avoid hitting things. 1
23


74 KAYAKING
Skills and Maneuvers.
Controlling Strokes
Once a new paddler has learned to propel a boat forward and
backward, controlling strokes must be added to achieve more
dynamic maneuverability. Learning these strokes will allow the
paddler to move the kayak sideways through the water, sidle up
to piers and other boats, and make an aggressive turn against
the water that keeps the kayak moving forward.
Draw Stroke
The draw moves a boat sideways. It’s
very useful when trying to get next to
a pier or to raft up next to another
kayak. The draw can be done two
ways—a side draw (often just called a
draw) or a sculling draw. For this merit
badge, only the side draw will be used.
The draw stroke starts by rotating the
upper body so you are looking out to the
side of the boat. It may help to imagine
you have eyes on your shoulders, and
those eyes need to see the direction
you want to move.
For the catch position, place the
paddle in the water out away from the
boat and your hips so the power face of
the blade faces you. Keep the top hand
high so the shaft and the blade stay fairly
straight up and down (vertical). From
this catch position, apply power by gently
pulling the boat toward the paddle. The
top hand should not move. When the
boat comes close to the paddle and
your lower elbow comes close to your
body, release power by rolling your
hand so your palm moves toward your
forearm. This will turn the blade so that
the paddle blade can slice back out to
the starting point.


KAYAKING 75
.Skills and Maneuvers
Stern Draw
The stern draw is a powerful turning
stroke that most often is used to help keep
a kayak going straight. It can be done
alone, at the end of a forward stroke, or
at the end of a forward sweep. Advanced
kayakers use stern draws to help with
surfing and other fun maneuvers.
To start a stern draw, place the
blade in the water away from your
boat, so the blade looks like it is near
the middle of a forward sweep. If the
boat were sitting on a clock, the paddle
would go in between 3 o’clock and 4
o’clock. The left hand should be fairly
low. From the catch, apply power by
bringing the right elbow in toward the
small of the back and the blade toward
the stern. At the end of the stroke, the
paddle should be nearly parallel to the
length of the kayak. Release power
when the blade is close to the stern by
slicing the blade out of the water. After
the blade comes out of the water, rotate
the torso to set up for the next stroke.
Although there are times when a kayaker might use two or more stern
draws, most of the time you’ll need only one to make your correction, and
your next stroke will be a forward power stroke on the other side.
Beginning paddlers often hit the boat with the paddle,
which can feel awkward. If you go slow and learn how
the draw works, you can avoid this awkward feeling.


76 KAYAKING
Skills and Maneuvers.
Kayak Maneuvers
Paddlers who have learned the six basic strokes can then put
these strokes together to make their boats do what they want.
Spins
Because kayaks turn easily, the first maneuver most paddlers learn
is spinning the boat in one spot. There are several ways to spin.
The easiest way is to do repeated forward sweeps on one side of
the boat. To make the spin even more powerful, do a forward
sweep on one side, followed by a reverse sweep on the other.
No matter how you spin the boat, a few things will help
make your spins as powerful as possible. First, make sure your
paddle is well-anchored in the water. Once the boat is moving,
keep the paddle in one spot when you put it in the water. Instead
of the paddle moving, only the boat moves. Look at a point on
land to see how well you have anchored your blade. Second, look
at the paddle blade throughout the spin. As you learn how to
control your boat, looking at the blade helps make sure the blade
stays anchored, the torso rotates, and the blade moves out away
from the boat.
As you become more skilled, you will almost always look
where you are going when you paddle and won’t look at the
blade. For now, though, looking at the blade will help improve
your basic skills.
Moving Abeam (Sideways)
The next maneuver to learn is moving sideways, or moving
“abeam.” Kayakers paddle sideways to raft up with other kayakers,
to come close to a pier, or to maneuver around obstacles. To move
sideways, rotate the upper body so you can see where you are
going and your body is facing where you want to go. Then, use
a series of draws on the side you want to move toward.
As a variation,
use a stern draw
instead of a
forward sweep.
Remember that going in a straight line in a kayak can be hard and requires
practice. Everyone you see paddling straight across a lake started out
having trouble, and with practice they all learned how to do it.
If your boat spins instead of traveling sideways, try
moving the paddle forward or backward a little.


KAYAKING 77
.Skills and Maneuvers
Paddling in a Straight Course
Besides learning how to spin and move sideways, it is vital to
learn how to paddle straight. Because kayaks turn easily, going
in a straight line can be challenging for beginning kayakers.
Once a kayak starts turning, it tends to keep turning, which
makes paddling in a straight line even more difficult. However,
there are some tools you can use to make it easier.
First, look where you are going. If you look down at the nose
of the boat instead of at your destination, it is hard to stay on
track. Second, take your time. Once you start paddling hard, it is
easy to get off track before you have time to make a correction.
Slowing down gives you more time to correct. Third, remember
that your boat will turn a little with each stroke, no matter what
you do. Imagine you are paddling on top of a clock, and your
destination is at 12 o’ clock. Try to keep the nose of your boat
between 11:30 and 12:30. If it’s not in that range, then you need
to make a corrective stroke. Finally, use stern draws at the end
of your forward stroke to bring you back on track.
To stop, simply use reverse power strokes or reverse
sweeps. If you hold the blade in the water for a reverse stroke,
you will slow down, spin, and eventually stop. If you take
reverse strokes back and forth on both sides, you will quickly
come to a stop without turning.
If you paddle in a straight line long enough, you will
eventually need to turn. There are a lot of ways to effectively
turn your boat. The easiest is to look where you are going and
do a forward sweep. If you want to go left, sweep on the right;
if you want to go right, sweep on the left. Once you are headed
where you want to go, stop your turn with a forward stroke or
a stern draw on the side opposite your sweep. This technique
lets you keep your momentum.
Edging
If you want to make your turns as effective as possible, practice paddling
in a circle. The boat edge on the inside of the turn will sink a little bit if you
are looking toward the inside of the circle, in the direction you are turning.
Experienced paddlers call this “edging” and use it to help control the boat
for more advanced maneuvers. Most of the time, edging the boat makes
turns more effective and helps make the boat feel more stable as it turns.


78 KAYAKING
Skills and Maneuvers.
In kayaking, you want to make your boat go where you want
and have fun while you do it. With the skills you have learned
in this chapter, you can begin to learn how to reach these goals.
Remember that kayaking isn’t learned in a day. If you keep
practicing, you will keep improving. Before you know it, you will
have strong skills. With those skills, you will have more fun on
the protected waters where you have been learning. Gradually,
you will be ready to move on to harder water conditions, such as
those covered in the Whitewater merit badge.
If you need to turn and slow down, you can use a
reverse sweep on the side you want to turn. This
technique will spin your boat and quickly slow you
down, but it is also a very effective means of turning.
Most skilled paddlers prefer to maintain their speed, so
a reverse sweep is not the preferred method.


KAYAKING 79
.Skills and Maneuvers
Stroke Summary
Stroke (blade
face used)
Catch Power Release
Forward sweep
(use power face).
In near ankles,
oriented to turn.
Unwind torso
toward stern,
move blade out
from boat, ending
with the elbow
tucked near the
small of the back.
Lift out
like a knife
toward stern.
Reverse sweep
(use back face).
In near stern,
oriented to turn.
Unwind torso
toward bow,
move blade out
from boat, ending
near the ankles.
Lift out like a
knife near bow.
Forward power
stroke (use
power face).
In near ankles,
oriented to
move forward.
Unwind torso,
keep blade close
to boat, power
with power face.
Slice out
near hips.
Reverse power
stroke (use
back face).
In near hips,
oriented to
move backward.
Unwind torso,
keep blade close
to boat.
Lift out
near ankles.
Draw (use
power face).
Rotate torso to
look amidships
and insert paddle,
power face
toward hips.
Pull boat
to blade.
Rotate palm
toward forearm
and slice blade
back out.
Stern draw (use
power face).
Slice in amid-
ships, oriented
to move forward,
with blade out
from boat.
Unwind torso to
bring power face
to stern, ending
with the elbow
tucked near the
small of the back.
Lift out like a
knife at the end
of the stroke.
Paddle shaft is
roughly parallel
to boat.


80 KAYAKING
Glossary.
Glossary
abeam. The direction that is
perpendicular or at 90 degrees to
the center line.
back face. The side of the blade
opposite the power face.
blade. The wide, flat part of the
paddle at the ends of the shaft.
bow. The front end or portion of
the kayak.
catch. The phase of the paddle stroke
where the paddle blade is placed in the
water and initial resistance can be felt.
carry handle. A handle attached to the
deck of the kayak to assist in carrying.
center line. A real or imaginary line
from end to end down the center of
the kayak.
cockpit. The area around where the
paddler sits in the kayak.
deck. The top of the kayak.
feather. Turning the paddle blade
sideways so that the edge of the blade
cuts through the air or water to reduce
resistance.
foot braces. Pedals, walls, blocks,
or ridges to rest your feet on (often
adjustable); sometimes connected
to a rudder.
hatch. A storage area inside the hull
that is watertight and secured with
a cover.
hull. The bottom part of the boat below
the deck. Hulls come in different shapes
(rounded, V-shaped, flat) and lengths.
initial stability. The ability of the
kayak to stay steady and not tip over.
The flatter and wider the bottom kayak
hull, the more initial stability the boat
will have.
ROUNDED V-SHAPED FLAT


KAYAKING 81
.Glossary
inflatable kayak. A kayak made
of waterproof cloth with multiple
compartments that can be inflated
with air.
power. The second phase of a kayaking
stroke, where force is applied to the
paddle by the paddler’s upper body.
power face. The side of the blade
that presses against the water in a
kayaking stroke.
recreational kayak. A kayak usually
shorter than 12 feet and designed for
quiet water, slow-moving current or
the ocean near shore.
release/recovery. Phase of the paddle
stroke where power is released from
the blade and the blade returns to its
original position for the next catch
phase as the boat glides.
rocker. The curve of the hull along the
centerline from bow to stern.
rudder. A fin attached to the bottom
of some kayaks in the stern that helps
a kayak go straight or turn and can be
lifted up when not in use. These are
usually controlled by foot braces.
secondary stability. The ability of a
kayak to return upright when leaned
to the side.
shaft. The long part of the paddle
between the blades. May be round
or oval in shape.
skeg. A fixed rudder on the bottom of
the hull. In some boats the skeg can be
raised or lowered; in other boats it is
fixed in place.
stern. The back end or portion of
the kayak.
throat. The point where the blade
meets the shaft.
tip. The far end of blade from
the throat.
toggle handle. A loop of rope attached
to the bow and stern with a short length
of hard, round plastic for a handle.
touring/sea kayak. A boat with a hull
16 feet or longer and designed with
storage compartments that can be used
for supplies for trips.
tracking. The ability of a kayak to travel
in a straight course.
Recreational kayak
Inflatable kayak





KAYAKING 83
.Kayaking Resources
Kayaking Resources
Scouting Literature
Scouts BSA Handbook for Boys; Scouts
BSA Handbook for Girls; Fieldbook;
Aquatics Supervision; Camping,
Canoeing, First Aid, Lifesaving, Rowing,
Scuba Diving, Small-Boat Sailing,
Swimming, Water Sports, and
Whitewater merit badge pamphlets.
Books
American Canoe Association. Essentials
of Kayak Touring. Menasha Ridge
Press, 2005.
American Canoe Association, Dillon,
Pam, and Jeremy Oyen, eds.
Kayaking. Human Kinetics, 2009.
Burnham, Bill, and Mary Burnham.
Kayaking for Everyone. Globe Pequot
Press, 2010.
Whiting, Ken. Recreational Kayaking:
The Ultimate Guide. The Heliconia
Press, 2008.
KAYAKING 83
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


84 KAYAKING
Kayaking Resources.
Organizations and Websites
American Canoe Association
108 Hanover St.
Fredericksburg, VA 22401
Telephone: 540-907-4460
americancanoe.org
Paddling.net
paddling.net
Acknowledgments
This merit badge was produced through
the combined skills and efforts of a team
of Scouting America and American
Canoe Association paddlers and
Scouting America aquatic leaders.
Special thanks to Pat Noack, Aquatics
Instructor and chair, National Aquatics
Task Force, for his leadership and guid-
ance of the project. The following
individuals also were members of the
workgroup that developed and refined
the requirements for this merit badge as
well as served as reviewers of the text:
David Bell, Mike Chicanowski, Keith
Cooke, Jay Fox, Jeremy Oyen, Robin
Pope, Charles Rose, Richard Thomas,
and Jim Virgin. The writing team con-
sisted of the following adult volunteer
Scouters and American Canoe
Association leaders and trainers:
• Richard Thomas, Aquatics Instructor;
member, Scouting America National
Aquatics Task Force; ACA Canoeing
Instructor Trainer; and Kayaking merit
badge project leader
• Jeremy Oyen, REI Curriculum
and Training coordinator; former
ACA director of Safety Education,
Instruction, and Outreach; and ACA
Coastal Kayaking Instructor Trainer
Educator and Canoeing/Adaptive
Paddling Instructor Trainer
• Robin Pope, president, ACA board of
directors; chair, ACA Safety Education
and Instruction Council; and ACA
Advanced Whitewater Kayaking
Instructor Trainer Educator
• Jim Virgin, member, Scouting
America National Aquatics Task
Force; vice president, ACA board of
directors; and ACA Costal Kayaking
and Whitewater Kayaking Instructor
The Kayaking merit badge and pamphlet were prepared with the support
of the American Canoe Association and its leadership.


KAYAKING 85
.Kayaking Resources
Special thanks to Dave Slover and his staff at Alder Creek Kayak and
Canoe in Portland, Oregon, for making possible the photography of many
types of boats, equipment, and paddling gear.
Photo and Illustration Credits
American Canoe Association—page 84
Edward S. Curtis—page 7
Publicdomainpictures.net—page 19
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property
of or are protected by Scouting America.
Dan Bryant—pages 10 and 36
John McDearmon—illustrations on
pages 24, 29, 46, 52, 59, 64, and 80


86 KAYAKING
Notes


KAYAKING 87
Notes


88 KAYAKING
Subscribe today at go.scoutlife.org/subscribe
Use promo code SLMBP15 to get a special
print + digital bundle offer priced just for Scouts!
Get ideas
for your next
merit badge
adventure in
every issue
of Scout Life
magazine.