K AYAKING

BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES

K AYAKING

“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”

Kayaking
1. Do the following:
(a) Explain to your counselor the hazards you are most likely to encounter
while participating in kayaking activities, including weather and water-related
hazards, and what you should do to anticipate, help prevent, mitigate, and
respond to these hazards.
(b) Review prevention, symptoms, and first-aid treatment for the following
injuries or illnesses that can occur while kayaking: blisters, cold-water shock
and hypothermia, heat-related illnesses, dehydration, sunburn, sprains,
and strains.
(c) Review the BSA Safety Afloat policy. Explain to your counselor how this
applies to kayaking.
2. Before doing requirements 3 through 8, successfully complete the BSA swimmer
test: Jump feetfirst into water over the head in depth. Level off and swim 75 yards
in a strong manner using one or more of the following strokes: sidestroke, breaststroke, trudgen, or crawl; then swim 25 yards using an easy, resting backstroke.
The 100 yards must be completed in one swim without stops and must include at
least one sharp turn. After completing the swim, rest by floating.
3. Do the following:
(a) Review the characteristics of life jackets most appropriate for kayaking and
understand why one must always be worn while paddling. Then demonstrate
how to select and fit a life jacket for kayaking.
(b) Review the importance of safety equipment such as a signal device, extra
paddle, sponge, bilge pump, flotation bags, and throw bag.
4. Do the following:
(a) Name and point out the major parts of a kayak.
(b) Review the differences in the design between recreational, whitewater, and
sea or touring kayaks. Include how length, width, stability, and rocker are
involved in the design of each type.
(c) Explain the care, maintenance, and storage of a kayak.

5. Discuss the following:
(a) How to use a kayak paddle.
(b) Parts of a paddle.
(c) The care and maintenance of a paddle.
6. Using a properly equipped kayak with an open cockpit, a sit-on-top, or an
inflatable kayak, do the following:
(a) Safely capsize and perform a wet exit.
(b) Reenter the kayak with assistance from a buddy boat.
(c) Demonstrate a kayak-over-kayak rescue.
(d) Demonstrate the HELP position.
(e) Capsize the kayak, swim it and the paddle to shore, and empty water from
the kayak with assistance, if needed.
7. As a solo paddler, use a properly equipped kayak to demonstrate the following:
(a) Forward stroke
(b) Reverse stroke
(c) Forward sweep
(d) Reverse sweep
(e) Draw stroke
(f) Stern draw
8. As a solo paddler, use a properly equipped kayak to demonstrate the following:
(a) Paddle a straight line for 15 to 20 boat lengths using appropriate strokes
while maintaining trim and balance of the kayak.
(b) Spin or pivot from a stationary position 180 degrees (half circle) to the
right and left within two boat lengths.
(c) Move abeam to the right 10 feet and to the left 10 feet.
(d) Stop the boat in one boat length.
(e) While maintaining forward motion, turn the kayak 90 degrees to the right
and left.
(f) Move the kayak backward three to four boat lengths using appropriate and
effective reverse strokes.
(g) Paddle the kayak in a buoyed figure 8 course around markers three to four
boat lengths apart.

.Kayaking Resources

Kayaking Resources
Scouting Literature
Boy Scout Handbook; Fieldbook;
Aquatics Supervision; Kayaking BSA;
Camping, Canoeing, First Aid,
Lifesaving, Rowing, Scuba Diving, SmallBoat Sailing, Swimming, Water Sports,
and Whitewater merit badge pamphlets.

Visit the Boy Scouts of America’s
official retail website (with your
parent’s permission) at
http://www.scoutstuff.org for a
complete listing of all merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.

Books
American Canoe Association. Essentials
of Kayak Touring. Menasha Ridge
Press, 2005.
American Canoe Association, Dillon,
Pam, and Jeremy Oyen, eds.
Kayaking. Human Kinetics, 2009.
Burnham, Bill, and Mary Burnham.
Kayaking for Everyone. Globe Pequot
Press, 2010.
Whiting, Ken. Recreational Kayaking:
The Ultimate Guide. The Heliconia
Press, 2008.

KAYAKING

83

Kayaking Resources.

Organizations and Websites
American Canoe Association
108 Hanover St.
Fredericksburg, VA 22401
Telephone: 540-907-4460
Website: www.americancanoe.org
Paddling.net
Website: www.paddling.net

Acknowledgments
This merit badge was produced through
the combined skills and efforts of a team
of Boy Scout and American Canoe
Association paddlers and BSA aquatic
leaders. Special thanks to Pat Noack,
Aquatics Instructor BSA and chair, BSA
National Aquatics Task Force, for his
leadership and guidance of the project.
The following individuals also were
members of the workgroup that developed and refined the requirements for
this merit badge as well as served as
reviewers of the text: David Bell, Mike
Chicanowski, Keith Cooke, Jay Fox,
Jeremy Oyen, Robin Pope, Charles Rose,
Richard Thomas, and Jim Virgin. The
writing team consisted of the following
adult volunteer Scouters and American
Canoe Association leaders and trainers:

• Richard Thomas, BSA Aquatics
Instructor; member, BSA National
Aquatics Task Force; ACA Canoeing
Instructor Trainer; and Kayaking merit
badge project leader
• Jeremy Oyen, REI Curriculum
and Training coordinator; former
ACA director of Safety Education,
Instruction, and Outreach; and ACA
Coastal Kayaking Instructor Trainer
Educator and Canoeing/Adaptive
Paddling Instructor Trainer
• Robin Pope, president, ACA board of
directors; chair, ACA Safety Education
and Instruction Council; and ACA
Advanced Whitewater Kayaking
Instructor Trainer Educator
• Jim Virgin, member, BSA National
Aquatics Task Force; vice president,
ACA board of directors; and ACA
Costal Kayaking and Whitewater
Kayaking Instructor

The Kayaking merit badge and pamphlet were prepared with the support
of the American Canoe Association and its leadership.

84

KAYAKING

