FIRE SAFETY


SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
FIRE SAFETY
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Fire-Safety or check
Scoutbook for the latest requirements.
35896
ISBN 978-0-8395-3318-4
©2024 Scouting America/Boy Scouts of America
2024 Printing
FPO


FIRE SAFETY 3





FIRE SAFETY 5
Contents
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
Preventing Fires. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Handling Fire Safely . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
Fire Safety Outdoors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
Careers in Fire Safety. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
Fire Safety Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63


6 FIRE SAFETY
Introduction.
Introduction
The ability to use fire safely is essential
to human survival. Fire is a part of life.
By learning the skills described in this
merit badge pamphlet, you will be
better prepared to use fire safely.
This merit badge pamphlet will
provide you with information on the
science of fire, how to prevent home
fires, and how to handle fire safely.
There are also sections on burn pre-
vention, outdoor and camping safety,
and your local fire service.
The goal of this merit badge
pamphlet is to help you develop the
knowledge and the skills necessary to
prevent and to survive fires and burns.
The Chemistry and Physics of Fire
Fire is a chemical reaction between oxygen and vapors known
as volatiles. When the oxygen and vapors interact, two types of
energies—heat and light—are given off in the form of flames.
So when you see a burning log, the flames are not eating the
wood; they are just a visible sign of fast oxidation (interaction
of oxygen and another substance) known as combustion.
What causes something to give off volatile vapors? Usually,
the answer is heat. When a substance is heated to a certain
temperature, it gives off combustible vapors. Some substances
require a lot of heat to give off these vapors, while others give
off combustible vapors at room temperature or colder. It all
depends on the substance and its condition. For instance,
kindling, or small sticks of wood, catches fire more quickly
than a big log. Both are made of the same material—wood—but


FIRE SAFETY 7
.Introduction
because the sticks have more surface area exposed to oxygen,
they are more easily combustible. So, vapors are important to
the burning process because it is the vapors that are burning.
You may be wondering why a log turns into a pile of ashes if
it is not being eaten by the flames—if the flames are just visible
signs of the combustion taking place. Well, when the wood gives
off combustible vapors, the chemistry of the wood changes and
the wood decomposes (breaks down) until it is mostly just
carbon—a simple element that all living things have in common.
If you are having trouble picturing this concept, imagine
a s’more. If you take away the marshmallow, and then the
chocolate, you no longer have a s’more. You have only graham
crackers. When materials send vapors up and out, they change
into a simpler thing.
What Is Flammable?
Any substance that ignites or burns easily is said to be flammable.
Examples are things like gasoline, paint thinner, and aerosols. Fire
warnings are usually on the containers to warn consumers that such
substances should be treated carefully. Check with local authorities such
as the city’s sanitation department about how to properly dispose of
such materials. In some areas, you may need to take them to a special
drop-off location because they may not be thrown out with regular
household trash.


8 FIRE SAFETY
Introduction.
The Fire Tetrahedron
For a fire to occur, four factors must be present: fuel, oxygen,
heat, and a continuous chemical chain reaction. These four
elements are known as the fire tetrahedron. A tetrahedron
(pronounced te’-truh-hee’-drohn) is a solid shape with four
(tetra) triangular faces (hedron).
Simply put, firefighting and
fire prevention are attempts to
remove one or more elements
of the fire tetrahedron. For
instance, when you pour water
on a campfire, you are removing
heat. When you slide a lid on a
pan fire, you are cutting off the
supply of oxygen. When you
keep newspapers away from a
stove, you are separating fuel
from a heat source.
The four elements of the fire tetrahedron are:
Fuel. Anything that will produce combustible vapors qualifies as fuel.
There are solid fuels (like wood), liquid fuels (like gasoline), and
gaseous fuels (like methane).
Oxygen. An oxidizing agent is needed for the chemistry of fire. Most
often, oxygen is that agent. The air we breathe, which is 21 percent
oxygen, is usually enough to provide this piece of the fire tetrahedron.
Heat. When a substance is at a temperature sufficient for it to produce
combustible vapors, all it takes to start a fire is the heat from an
ignition source, such as the flame from a match.
Unbroken chemical chain reaction. This is the uninterrupted interaction
of the heat, fuel, and oxygen that allows the fire to continue to burn.
For instance, once you have lit a candle’s wick, the heat from the
candle’s flame continues to melt the wax. The melted wax releases
combustible vapors. Those new vapors mix with the oxygen in the
air, creating more heat, which melts more wax, which gives off more
combustible vapors.
FUEL
OXYGEN
CHAIN
REACTIONS
HEAT


FIRE SAFETY 9
.Introduction
Products of Combustion
When a fire burns, it produces light, heat, gases, and particles,
all of which affect humans in specific ways.
Heat. Your skin will start to burn at around 115 to 177 degrees.
Inhaling air at this temperature will damage your lungs. Because
the temperature in a house fire can reach approximately 2,000
degrees in less than 10 minutes, it is easy to understand why
many people caught in house fires suffer inhalation burns.
Gas. The most common harmful gas produced by a fire is
carbon monoxide, which is odorless, colorless, and tasteless.
When you breathe in carbon monoxide, you become disoriented
and sleepy, and you may fall unconscious and die. Carbon
monoxide detectors can be purchased for your home and are
especially helpful if your heating sources—like propane or
natural gas heaters—use open flames.
Particles. The particles produced in a fire are called soot. Soot
is mostly carbon particles of incompletely burned fuel. These
particles combine with the gases of the fire and make smoke.
The particles in the air irritate your eyes, make you cough, and
block your vision.
Fire Dynamics
If paper is burning in a metal wastepaper basket in the middle
of an empty parking lot, the danger of fire damage is small.
The heat, gases, and particles will rise and scatter through the
air. Eventually, all of the fuel in the basket will burn up and
the fire will go out.
However, if the wastepaper basket is in your living room,
the danger increases dramatically. Embers from the wastepaper
basket may pop or float over to the couch and set it on fire.
Then, the heat, gases, and particles can rise up, hit the ceiling,
and spread. The heat and smoke will travel and set other fuels
on fire—like plaster, electrical wires, plastics, and curtains.
Large amounts of dangerous gases will be produced and fill
the entire house in a matter of minutes, damaging property
and killing or injuring the people and animals in the house.
This chain of events is called fire dynamics.





FIRE SAFETY 11
.Preventing Fires
Preventing Fires
To prevent fires, you need to know what causes them. Most fires
occur outside the home, but most deaths and injuries, and the
greatest dollar loss, occur in residential fires. Individuals can have
the biggest impact preventing residential fires.
Sources of Fire
Fires can be started almost anywhere with almost any materials.
The key to fire safety is knowing what types of materials and con-
ditions are most susceptible to fire, then practicing safety precautions
to minimize the chances of fire.
Smoking
Cigarettes and matches, whether they are burning or merely smolder-
ing, are sources of ignition and can easily set things like furniture
and papers on fire. Fires caused by smoking can be avoided easily.
• The best way to keep cigarettes and pipes from starting a fire
in your home is to have no smoking in your home. However, if
someone does smoke where you live, be sure the smoker uses
an ashtray.
• People should never smoke while sleepy, while in bed, or when
drinking alcohol or taking medication, as they might be more
careless in their handling of a lit cigarette.
• Cigarette butts should be cool before they are discarded, and
ashtrays should be emptied into containers that will not catch
fire, like a metal trash can.
In the United States, a fire department responds to a fire every 21 seconds.
In 2022, firefighters responded to more than 1.5 million fires. Property
damage caused by fire was an estimated $18 billion. Nearly 3,790 deaths
occurred due to fire, and nearly 13,250 people were injured in civilian fires.
Cooking was the leading cause of home fires.
Source: National Fire Administration


12 FIRE SAFETY
Preventing Fires.
Furnaces
While the thermometer drops in the winter months, the chance
of a furnace fire rises. Following a few precautions can help
lower the probability of this type of fire.
• Keep a 3-foot area around the furnace clear of anything that
could catch fire.
• Change the furnace filter regularly.
• Have the furnace professionally inspected as recommended
by the manufacturer or at least once a year at the beginning
of the heating season.
Space Heaters
Space heaters usually are electric, but some burn fuel like
propane, natural gas, or kerosene. While they are a convenient
way to generate a great deal of heat in a small area, space
heaters can be dangerous if certain safety measures are
not followed.
• Keep a 3-foot area around and above the space heater clear
of anything that could catch fire.
• Keep children away from the space heater, and make sure
there is adult supervision in the room at all times the heater
is turned on.
• Use a space heater only as a supplemental heat source.
• Make sure the wires of an electric heater are not frayed and
that the outlet you use is grounded and not overloaded.
• Have wood burners and other solid-fuel devices inspected at
least once a year.
• Use the correct fuel, and fuel the heater outside.
Read and follow the manufacturer’s instructions when using space heaters.


FIRE SAFETY 13
.Preventing Fires
Fireplaces
Sitting in front of a roaring
fireplace can be one of the
joys of winter, but following
a few safety rules can help
keep the fire in its place.
• Always put a screen in
front of the fireplace to
keep embers from escaping
and igniting materials like
rugs or clothing.
• Keep things that could
catch fire at least 3 feet
away from the fireplace.
• Make sure children do not
get too near the fireplace.
• Take ashes out and away from the house for proper disposal.
• Have the fireplace and chimney professionally cleaned and
inspected at least once a year.
• Do not burn pressure-treated wood, shiny or metallic
paper, or plastics in a fireplace or furnace. They give off
toxic gases.
• Do not burn green wood in a fireplace. It gives off too much
smoke, burns unpredictably, and causes heavy creosote
buildup, which is a fire hazard.
• Keep outside tree branches away from the chimney. Keep
the roof clean of leaves and other debris. Consider covering
the chimney with a mesh spark arrester screen.
When removing ashes, place them in a covered metal container and
set the container on a concrete or other noncombustible surface for
several hours until cool. When thoroughly cooled, ashes can be thrown
away with household trash. Cooled ashes also make good garden or
flower fertilizer.


14 FIRE SAFETY
Preventing Fires.
Cooking
Simply whipping up breakfast can be a fire hazard. Be sure to
follow these precautions in the kitchen.
• Stay in the kitchen while you are cooking, and keep small
children away from the stove.
• Turn cookware handles toward the back of the stove so hot
pots and pans will not accidentally be bumped.
• Keep items that could easily catch fire, like pot holders and
dish towels, away from the stove.
• Wipe up all grease spills immediately.
• Put a lid on pan fires.
• If there is an oven fire, close the oven door and turn the
oven off.
Wear close-fitting
clothing or an
apron when you
cook. Be careful
to keep unfastened
sleeves and
other loose
clothing away
from the stove.


FIRE SAFETY 15
.Preventing Fires
Electrical Appliances
All electrical appliances should be operated according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. Exercise care when using anything
that has to be plugged into an electrical supply.
• Unplug appliances when they are not in use. This is
especially important for appliances such as toaster
ovens, irons, and other appliances that get hot.
• Keep combustibles away from heat-producing appliances
such as toasters and irons.
• Do not drape material over lamps. Use the correct bulb
wattage for your lamp and shade; some lampshades are
flammable if used with bulbs brighter than 30 watts.
Make sure lamps are secure and level, and that they will
not easily fall over.
• Turn off halogen lamps whenever you leave a room because
halogen bulbs get especially hot.
• Keep appliances in good repair, and make sure the electrical
cords are not frayed or damaged.
• Keep electrical appliances away from water.
If an electrical appliance is
plugged into an outlet and falls
into water, do not reach into the
water to retrieve it. The massive
electrical
shock the
water would
deliver could
kill you.
Heating
appliances are
responsible for
many fires that
occur during the
winter months.
The safe use
and handling
of heating
appliances is
discussed in
the chapter
titled “Handling
Fire Safely.”


16 FIRE SAFETY
Preventing Fires.
Electrical Distribution Equipment
Extension cords and other wiring are essential to a modern
home, but any use of electricity should be handled with care.
Follow these precautions to stay safe.
• Always treat wiring as though it is on, “hot,” or energized.
• Use the proper extension cord with the proper appliance. Use
as few extension cords as possible, and do not overload them.
• Make sure extension cords are not under rugs or in any area
where they might get worn down, stepped on, or damaged.
• Put plug covers on outlets if there are children around.
• Only plug appliances and other approved devices into
an outlet.
• Keep ladders, especially metal ones, away from overhead
wires. A ladder that touches an overhead wire can conduct
massive amounts of electricity and electrocute anyone who
touches it.
Arson
Arson is the crime of purposely setting a fire for wrongdoing.
About one in four fires in the U.S. is caused by arson. Arson
is the second leading cause of death by fire. Only fires caused
by smoking cause more residential-fire deaths. Arson is
also the major cause of deaths, injuries, and dollar loss in
commercial properties.
Arson is a felony that is punishable with a lengthy jail
sentence. If the fire causes human injury, more time could be
added to the arsonist’s sentence. In most countries, if a fire set
by an arsonist results in death, that arsonist is guilty of murder.
Most arsonists are under the age of 20. According to the
U.S. Fire Administration, children start approximately 10,000
fires annually. In recent years, playing with fire has been the
leading cause of fire deaths among preschoolers.
Some older kids start fires because they are bored or
curious about fire. They do not respect or understand fire and
the damage it can do. Professional firefighters know that fire
is unpredictable and hard to control.
Other kids start fires because they are frustrated with some
part of their lives. But fire is not the way to solve problems. In
fact, arson can make a person’s life much worse. These types
of fire starters need counseling to address personal issues.
If an electrical
outlet or switch
feels warm,
immediately shut
off the circuit and
call an electrician.


FIRE SAFETY 17
.Preventing Fires
Seasonal and Holiday Fire Safety
Fires occur frequently during holidays and times of seasonal
change. Following is a look at the major calendar-related fires
and how they can be prevented.
December–February
More fires occur during these cold winter months than during
any other time of year. One reason is Christmas, Hanukkah,
and New Year’s holiday festivities. Especially important is the
role of holiday decorations.
TREES AND DECORATIONS
Artificial trees should be flame-resistant. Never string a metal
tree with electric lights. Families who put up Christmas trees
and who prefer natural trees to artificial trees should follow
these guidelines.
• Be cautious about buying a tree that was cut weeks earlier.
These trees will already be getting dangerously dry. Choose
a tree whose needles do not fall off easily from its branch-
es—shake it to see. If you buy a natural tree, try to get one
locally, and cut it a few days before Christmas so that it
does not dry out too much.
Here’s what you can do to help prevent arson.
• Refuse anyone who tries to get you involved in
setting a fire or experimenting with fire.
• Report anyone involved in fire play to your
parents, counselor, fire department, or
police department.
• Report any suspicious activity around buildings. Firefighters are
three times more likely to be injured fighting an abandoned-building
fire than one in an occupied building.
• If you know a child who plays with fire, treat that situation as if the
child were playing with guns: Report it immediately. Remember
that children as young as 2 are capable of setting fires.


18 FIRE SAFETY
Preventing Fires.
• At home, place the tree away from all sources of heat—
at least 3 feet from heaters, fireplaces, and furnaces—and
make sure it does not block an exit. See that your tree is
stable and will not tip over and harm someone, or fall in
such a way that it could catch fire. Tie the tree with a nylon
cord to the wall or ceiling for extra support.
• Cut the base of the natural tree at a 45-degree angle and place
the trunk in water. Make sure that there is always water in the
tree stand—some trees “drink” about a gallon a day.
• Inspect the tree daily, checking the electric lights and water
in the base container. Shake the tree gently; if needles fall
out, the tree has dried to the point it is dangerous and
should be taken out.
• After the holidays, promptly dispose of the tree, boxes,
wrapping paper, and ribbon from your opened gifts. Never
burn your tree, wrapping paper, boxes, or plastics in the
fireplace or wood stove. These materials can give off toxic
smoke; the evergreen materials burn extremely hot and can
easily get out of control. Also, burning embers from these
materials can float up the chimney, putting your home—and
your neighborhood—in jeopardy.
Buy and use only decorative electric lights with labels that
indicate they have been listed by an approved testing facility
like Underwriters Laboratories.
Never leave
lights turned
on unattended;
before going to
bed or leaving
the house, make
sure all lights are
turned off.


FIRE SAFETY 19
.Preventing Fires
• Use indoor lights on your tree, never outdoor lights. Inspect
all light and electrical cords for fraying and other defects
before use.
Many people enjoy lighting candles during the winter holidays.
Candles, like other sources of heat or flame, should never
be used near a natural tree or around flammable decorations.
Never put candles in windows. The candle flame, or the hot
wax, could set wood, curtains, blinds, and carpeting on fire.
If you use a menorah (the special candleholder used in
celebrating the Jewish festival of Hanukkah) or a kinara
(the ceremonial candleholder used in the celebration of
Kwanzaa), be sure to keep it away from drafty areas and
combustible materials like curtains. Do not use paper
to catch the hot wax that will fall from the candles. A large
metal tray or other nonflammable material placed under-
neath the candleholder will prevent a candle from falling
onto carpeting or some other combustible material.
Candle Safety
Whenever possible, try to use flameless, battery-operated candles.
If that’s not an option, follow these tips from the National Fire
Protection Association:
• Use sturdy candle holders that won’t tip over easily, and place them
on a sturdy, uncluttered surface and away from open windows or
breezes such as from a ceiling fan.
• Light candles carefully, keeping your hair and loose clothing away
from the flame.
• Put out a candle before it burns all the way down or gets too close
to the holder or container.
• Never use a candle if oxygen is used in the home.
• Use flashlights and battery-powered lighting in place of candles
during a power outage.


20 FIRE SAFETY
Preventing Fires.
Never put candles near exits. If a fire starts, your way out will
be blocked. Never leave candles unattended. Leave the room
or go to bed only after all candles have been extinguished.
FROZEN WATER PIPES
Use a hair dryer to safely thaw pipes. Using a blowtorch or other
open-flame device to thaw pipes is careless and dangerous.
The high heat from the flames will travel along the pipe and
could ignite materials in the wall many feet away.
March–May
Fire problems in spring shift outdoors. As the weather improves,
we spend more time outside, especially cooking and camping.
Outdoor fire safety is discussed in detail in the chapter titled
“Fire Safety Outdoors.”
Before spring rains trigger the growth of new plants, grass
and brush from the previous season is highly flammable.
Extreme care must be taken with open flames outside. Where
possible, cut back or remove dead, fire-prone vegetation.
June–August
Fireworks during the Fourth of July are a big fire hazard. In
2013, fireworks caused approximately 15,600 fires and 9,200
injuries in the United States. The safest way to handle fireworks
is not to handle them. Leave fireworks to the professionals,
and enjoy a public fireworks display at a park, ball field, or
other outdoor venue.
Summer also triggers fire danger from outdoor cooking.
Use portable grills and other outdoor cooking devices in an open
area and never below an overhanging roof or in an unventilated
space. Do not use portable grills on apartment decks.
Be careful of any flame or heat source outdoors, including
matches, cigarette butts, and sparks. If you see smoke
outdoors that suggests a grass or brush fire, notify the fire
department immediately.
September–November
The fall months bring cool—even cold—weather to many parts
of the country. This change in weather marks the return of
heater-related hazards. Autumn is the time to clean and repair
all heating appliances and to ready your home for winter.


FIRE SAFETY 21
.Preventing Fires
October brings Halloween, another holiday demanding
careful attention to fire danger. Two main fire hazards are
associated with this time of the year. The first involves lit
candles in jack-o’-lanterns. Use a flashlight instead. The other
hazard is trick-or-treat costumes. Select those that are designated
as flame-resistant or flame-retardant.
Home Safety Inspection
Together with the other members of your family, use this
checklist to check the safety of your house. Not every
question will apply to your home. For each question that is
answered with yes, score a point. When you are done, total
your score. Where you have answered no, attempt to
eliminate the hazards or change the actions. After a few days
of making adjustments, review the list to see how much your
score has improved.
Before burning
autumn leaves,
check with the
fire department
about local
burn laws.
FIRE SAFETY CHECKLIST
Matches Yes No
Are matches kept where young children cannot reach them? ■ ■■ ■
Are strike-anywhere matches kept in a plastic container? ■ ■■ ■
Are matches kept away from heat sources like stoves ■ ■■ ■
and heaters?
Are matches and smoking materials put out and cold ■ ■■ ■
before being discarded?
Do smokers use safety ashtrays? ■ ■■ ■
Is “no smoking in bed” a house rule? ■ ■■ ■
Does a responsible person watch the children when ■ ■■ ■
parents go out, even for a little while?
Score _______
Smoke Detectors Yes No
Are the smoke detectors in your home installed properly? ■ ■■ ■
Are smoke detectors located in all sleeping areas of ■ ■■ ■
your home and on every level?
Are smoke detectors tested at least once a month? ■ ■■ ■


22 FIRE SAFETY
Preventing Fires.
When the smoke detector sounds, does everyone know to ■ ■■ ■
get out of the house immediately?
If a smoke detector fails to operate when tested, is it ■ ■■ ■
fixed immediately?
Do you change the batteries in your smoke alarms at least ■ ■■ ■
once a year, on a birthday or holiday, or when you set your
clocks forward in the spring or back in the fall? (Note that the
battery cannot be replaced in a detector powered by a
10-year lithium or "long-life" battery.)
Are your smoke detectors less than 10 years old? ■ ■■ ■
Score _______
Electrical Hazards Yes No
Are only qualified electricians allowed to install or extend ■ ■■ ■
wiring in your home?
When you buy electrical equipment—extension cords, ■ ■■ ■
appliances, televisions, and all other devices—do you
always make sure it has been tested at an approved
facility like Underwriters Laboratories?
Are there enough electrical outlets in each room to avoid the ■ ■■ ■
need for multiple attachment plugs and long extension cords?
Are there special circuits for heavy-duty appliances like ■ ■■ ■
stoves, air conditioners, and clothes dryers?
On the household-lighting circuit, are the proper fuses or ■ ■■ ■
circuit-breakers used?
Are all extension cords in the open—not run under rugs, ■ ■■ ■
over hooks, or through partitions or door openings?
Score _______
Storage and Flammable Liquids Yes No
Are your basement, closets, balcony, and attic kept free of ■ ■■ ■
rubbish, oily rags, flammable liquids, and large stacks of
paper, and is necessary storage kept in an orderly fashion?
After oily polishing rags are used, are they destroyed or ■ ■■ ■
placed in covered metal cans in a metal cabinet in the garage?


FIRE SAFETY 23
.Preventing Fires
If you store paint, varnish, or other flammable liquids, are the ■ ■■ ■
containers metal, tightly closed, and kept in a metal cabinet
in the garage?
If you keep gasoline for use in a power mower or outboard ■ ■■ ■
motor, is it stored in an approved metal can with a self-closing
cap on the openings?
If you burn coal, are ashes put in metal containers, clear of ■ ■■ ■
wood floors or partitions?
Has everyone in the family been warned never to use gasoline, ■ ■■ ■
benzene, or other flammable liquids to clean clothes,
furnishings, or floors?
If your garage is attached to the house or in the basement, ■ ■■ ■
is it separated from the living area by cutoff walls with a
tight-fitting door?
Score _______
Heating and Cooking Yes No
If you use oil heat, is the equipment listed by ■ ■■ ■
Underwriters Laboratories?
If you use gas heat, is the equipment listed by Underwriters ■ ■■ ■
Laboratories or the American Gas Association Laboratories?
If your heating system is oil or coal, do you have it inspected ■ ■■ ■
and serviced before each season begins?
If your heating system is gas, is it regularly checked ■ ■■ ■
and serviced?
Are all chimneys, gas and smoke pipes, and other flue ■ ■■ ■
connections inspected each fall and cleaned and repaired
as necessary?
Are walls, ceilings, and partitions near heating and cooking ■ ■■ ■
equipment either adequately separated from the sources
of heat or protected by noncombustible materials?
Are wood floors under space heaters or coal stoves protected ■ ■■ ■
by insulation or ventilated air space?
Is the inside basement door at the head of the stairs tightly ■ ■■ ■
fitted and kept closed at night?


24 FIRE SAFETY
Preventing Fires.
Is the kitchen stove, including the oven and broiler, kept ■ ■■ ■
clean of grease?
Is the kitchen exhaust fan kept clean of grease? ■ ■■ ■
Are curtains arranged so they do not blow over stoves ■ ■■ ■
and heaters?
Are oil and gas heaters always turned off before everyone ■ ■■ ■
goes to bed?
Do all portable and space heaters sit level and out of the way ■ ■■ ■
of traffic?
Are oil and gas heaters, which use up oxygen as they burn, ■ ■■ ■
properly vented? Do you always keep a door or window
slightly open in any room where such a heater is being used?
Are the fuel tanks of oil heaters refilled only by adults ■ ■■ ■
outdoors and in daylight?
Are the gas connections for space heaters or other gas ■ ■■ ■
appliances made of metal?
Has everyone in the family been warned never to use ■ ■■ ■
kerosene or other flammable liquids to start a fire in the
fireplace or furnace?
Is every indoor fireplace equipped with a sturdy metal ■ ■■ ■
fire screen?
Are the shutoff valves for gas appliances located on the ■ ■■ ■
rigid metal gas pipeline where they can be reached in case
of trouble without touching the appliance?
Have all electric, oil, or gas heaters been tested and listed by ■ ■■ ■
a recognized testing laboratory like Underwriters Laboratories?
Score _______
Yard Hazards Yes No
Do you keep your yard cleared of leaves, debris, and ■ ■■ ■
flammable rubbish?
In areas where burning trash is permitted, are trash and ■ ■■ ■
refuse burned only in suitable outdoor incinerators and on
sufficiently calm days?


FIRE SAFETY 25
.Preventing Fires
Is an adult always present when trash or leaves are being ■ ■■ ■
burned outdoors?
Are charcoal grills used only outdoors and lit without the use ■ ■■ ■
of liquid fuels?
Score _______
Holiday Hazards Yes No
Do you have a safe Fourth of July celebration by not ■ ■■ ■
using fireworks?
When buying gift toys, do you insist on those that can’t cause ■ ■■ ■
fire, shock, or explosion?
Is the Christmas tree kept outside until you are ready to set ■ ■■ ■
it up?
Is the tree kept in water and thrown out when the needles ■ ■■ ■
begin to fall?
Is there a switch away from the tree for turning the lights ■ ■■ ■
on and off?
Are tree lights shut off whenever you go out or to bed? ■ ■■ ■
Is all decorative lighting checked for frayed and loose sockets? ■ ■■ ■
Are all decorating materials nonflammable? ■ ■■ ■
Are candles placed so they cannot reach flammable materials? ■ ■■ ■
Are gift wrappings gathered up and disposed of promptly ■ ■■ ■
after presents are opened?
Score _______
A Prepared Family Yes No
Does every family member know the proper procedure for ■ ■■ ■
reporting a fire in your community, including 911 or other
emergency telephone number, and the location of the
neighborhood fire-alarm box?
Does every family member know how to call the fire department? ■ ■■ ■
Are babysitters instructed carefully on what to do in case of fire? ■ ■■ ■
Did the entire family take part in completing this checklist? ■ ■■ ■
Score _______


26 FIRE SAFETY
Preventing Fires.
Home Fire-Escape Planning
Preparation is important to escaping a fire. In the case of an
actual fire, you will not have much time to stop and think, so
your actions for escape should be automatic, well-practiced,
and routine.
Develop a plan to get everyone out of the house before you
call the fire department. Because all family members need to
know what to do in a fire, all should be involved in escape plan-
ning. The three steps in escape planning are planning, practice,
and evaluation.
Planning
To begin planning, sketch a floor plan of your house or apart-
ment. Include all of the doors and windows, as well as what is
under the outside windows. Label each room. Now you are
ready to decide on the primary and secondary exits. Primary
exits are those that you would normally use, like doors and hall-
ways. Using a pen or pencil, draw a solid line from each room
to the nearest outside door. The line should follow the hallways
and routes that are the most direct to the exit. When these
lines have been drawn, you have marked the primary exits.
Now you need to decide on the secondary exits. Go back
to the starting point for each of the lines. Now draw a line
to the nearest opening that goes directly to the outside. You
probably will have to use some windows, but that is fine.
These are the secondary exits. Of course, you now face some
difficult problems.
The actions taken
during the first
few minutes
after a fire is
discovered can
be critical in
determining
whether the
people involved
will be survivors
or victims.
MAIN ROUTE ALTERNATE ROUTE
(WINDOWS OPEN ONTO PORCH ROOF)
BEDROOM 1
BEDROOM 3
HALLWAY AND
DOWNSTAIRS
BATHROOM
BEDROOM 2
UPSTAIRSDOWNSTAIRS
DINING ROOM KITCHEN
TO CELLAR EXIT
LIVING ROOM
FRONT PORCH


FIRE SAFETY 27
.Preventing Fires
If your house is all one floor at ground level, going out of
a window might not be difficult, although sometimes windows
are placed high in a wall and can be hard to reach from the
inside. However, if you have rooms on a second or third floor,
or if you live in an apartment building and are on an upper
level, going out a window can be a problem. Also, things out-
side of the window, such as flower boxes, roof overhangs, and
bushes can require special planning.
Because you cannot be sure that the primary exits will
always be available in a fire, you must be able to use secondary
routes. This could mean that you will have to plan to use an
escape ladder from an upper-story window, or you might be
able to climb out onto a roof and then down to the ground, or
perhaps you will have to take shelter from the fire in the room
and wait for firefighters to rescue you.
Some people will not be able to use a window exit safely,
including elderly people, infants and small children, people
with physical disabilities, and those above the third floor. If
the primary exits are unavailable, and the person cannot use
a secondary exit, that person should then take shelter.
After charting all of your exit routes, you must decide on
a meeting place. This should be near the road but not in it.
Pick something to serve as a landmark, like a tree. Call the fire
department if you have access to a phone or cell phone.
Escape ladders
stored beneath
upper-story
windows provide
a secondary exit
from bedrooms.
If it is necessary for you to take shelter in a room, remember to
• Close doors between you and the fire.
• Plug up air vents and cracks around the door to keep out smoke.
• Open the window for fresh air.
• Call the fire department if you have access to a phone.
• Signal from the window with something big, like a bedsheet.
• Calmly breathe the air close to the floor (heat and smoke rise) or
from the open window.


28 FIRE SAFETY
Preventing Fires.
When you have finished outlining the primary and
secondary exits, the meeting spot, and the calling place,
your plan is nearly complete. The only thing left to decide
is when you are going to practice the plan.
Practice
To be effective, practices should be held regularly. For most
homes, once every two or three months should be enough
practice after you have tested the plan. Here’s a sample of one
family’s practice plan. Note that there are dates, times, and
problems listed for each practice. All the family members
know when the drill will take place so that they can review
their actions.
Practice means having a fire drill. For the first part of the
drill, have everyone go to his or her bedroom and pretend to
be asleep. Then have someone set off the smoke alarm or yell,
“Fire!” These are the signals for everyone to get moving. Get
down on your hands and knees and crawl as if there were
smoke or a fire.


FIRE SAFETY 29
.Preventing Fires
Another member of the family should time the drill from
when the alarm sounds until everyone has arrived at the
meeting spot. For the first fire drill, everyone should use the
primary exits. After recording the time, go back into the house
for the second part of the drill—using the secondary exits.
Again, after that evacuation of your house or apartment, record
the time. Your family probably will take a little longer to get
out of your home because the exit routes are so different and
can be a bit more difficult to use.
Evaluation
After running the drill using primary and secondary exits, you
are ready to evaluate your plan. Check with everyone after the
second part of the drill to see if they encountered any problems
using the secondary exits. If some part of your escape plan
did not work well, implement and test other methods until the
escape plan runs without problems. When everything seems to
be working well, you have completed all three steps: planning,
practice, and evaluation.
Now, pencil in drill dates on the family calendar and
continue to practice on schedule. With regular practice, the
actions that can help to save your family in a fire will become
automatic. Continue to record the drill times on the chart to
help uncover any problems that might have developed. Keep
your plan flexible and be creative in solving the problems
encountered in the drills.
Smoke and heat
rise, so stay close
to the floor in the
event of a fire.
Fire-Drill Practice Plan
ESCAPE
TIME DATE TIME PROBLEM
3 MIN. JUNE 5 10 PM Sleeping-Smoke
detector alarms.
All go out first exit.
5 MIN. JUNE 30 10AM Everyone in bedrooms.
Smoke detector alarms.
All use window to exit.
_____ JULY 10 7PM Fire in the kitchen.
Use nearest exit.
_____ AUG 4 10PM Sitter holds drill.


30 FIRE SAFETY
Preventing Fires.
If you live in an apartment, learn the
fire-escape plan for your building. Do not
block exits that other people may need
to use, like stairway exits and fire exits.
Do not use the elevators. Consider getting
a collapsible fire-escape ladder to use from
the second floor. Do not put too many things
on your balcony and thereby cause a fire
hazard and fire-escape blockage.
Away from home, you must also have an
escape plan. When staying with a friend or relative
or in a hotel, answer the following questions: Is there a
fire alarm system? Are there smoke detectors or sprinklers?
Where are the exits? Is there a window exit? Remember,
elevators must not be used as exits during a fire.
Smoke Detectors
The smoke detector or smoke alarm is the
single most important piece of fire survival
equipment in your home. Most fatal residential
fires occur at night when people are asleep.
Fires give off deadly gases, such as carbon
monoxide, that can put people into a deep
sleep or weaken their judgment. Smoke
detectors are designed to alert you in the
earliest stages of a fire, giving you and your
family time to escape.
Smoke detectors are activated by smoke
particles that are produced when a fire burns.
Some of these particles are too small to see
with the human eye, but a smoke detector
can sense them. That explains why a smoke
detector placed in the kitchen might go off
when someone is cooking, even though there
is no visible smoke.
As an additional safety feature,
many homeowners now install
carbon monoxide detectors.
These are available at most
home improvement retailers.
Dual-sensor
smoke detector


FIRE SAFETY 31
.Preventing Fires
INSTALLING SMOKE DETECTORS
At least one smoke detector should be
installed on every level of the home,
including one in the basement. Modern
building codes require that a smoke
detector be put outside every bedroom.
The smoke detector should be
mounted on the ceiling or high on the
wall. Avoid putting the detector into
dead air spaces; you want natural
airflow to go past the detector. Do
not mount a detector in a high corner
where two walls and the ceiling meet.
Also, avoid mounting a smoke detector
near a central air-conditioning/heating
register, which could push smoke away
from the detector.
Automatic Fire Signaling Systems
Automatic fire signaling systems are used by many hospitals,
nursing homes, and other high-hazard occupancies. This fire-detection
equipment automatically signals the fire department of an emergency.
In fire-dispatch headquarters,
a panel will light up and
sound, indicating trouble
at a particular location.
In a central-station system,
rather than the fire department
being notified directly when a
detection device goes off, a
signal sounds in the office of
an independent agency, which
normally is staffed 24 hours a day. The firm’s personnel investigate
these alarms and notify the fire department if there is an emergency.
A local system is the type found in most schools. The signal is
heard only within the protected building. A local system is designed
for the warning of occupants only.


32 FIRE SAFETY
Preventing Fires.
TESTING AND MAINTENANCE
When the TV stops working, you know right away. How do
you know if the smoke detector is in working order? Smoke
detectors are made to be reliable, but some testing and
maintenance is required.
Smoke detectors are electrical appliances that can be wired
to the home’s electrical system, be plugged into a wall outlet,
or be battery-operated. Read and follow the manufacturer’s
instructions. To maintain your smoke detector:
• Test a smoke detector once a month. Most smoke detectors
have a test button that will activate the alarm when pressed.
• Vacuum the detector once a month to help keep dust from
interfering with operations.
• Change the batteries at least once a year—when you reset
your clocks in the spring or fall, or on important dates like
a holiday or birthday. Since the battery cannot be changed
in a detector powered by a 10-year lithium or "long-life"
battery, replace that type of unit according to the manufac-
turer's instructions.
• Track your smoke detector’s age and replace the entire unit
every 10 years.
Do not burn a
candle under a
smoke detector
to test it; doing so
might cause the
monitor to fail in
an emergency.
If you forget to change a smoke detector’s batteries, it will chirp
or beep as it loses power. Change the batteries immediately.


FIRE SAFETY 33
.Preventing Fires
Reporting a Fire
To report a fire in your home to the fire department, go to the
nearest neighbor or outside phone. If the fire is outside your
home, you can call from your home phone. Some communi-
ties and neighborhoods still use street fire-alarm boxes for
emergencies, but chances are you will be using a telephone
to report a fire or other emergency.
Learn the proper procedure for reporting a fire or
emergency in your community. You might live in an area
where you need only to dial 911 to reach emergency personnel.
Other areas have different emergency numbers. If you are not
sure what the emergency telephone number is, look inside the
front cover of your phone book. Learn your fire department’s
telephone number as well. As a last resort, you can call the
telephone operator. Do not wait until a fire or other emergency
occurs to learn the proper procedure to follow.
If you call the fire department directly, the dispatcher will
ask you for your name, the address of the fire or some other
description of its location, and additional pertinent information.
Stay on the line until the dispatcher tells you to hang up.
If you think there is a fire, call the fire department
immediately. Do not stop to investigate. A delay of even a
minute can make the difference between saving and losing
a home—or a life.
Because the
availability of
water can be
unpredictable
in rural and
remote areas,
fire departments
use water ponds
to store water in
such areas. These
large contraptions
look just like an
above-ground
pool—but they
aren’t made
for swimming.
If you live in an area where street fire-alarm boxes
are used, before an emergency occurs, learn the
location of these boxes and how they work. You
might want to visit the fire station nearest you and
ask the firefighters how the alarm boxes work. If
you report a fire or other emergency from a street
fire-alarm box, stay at the street box location until
the fire department arrives. A street fire-alarm box
only tells where the alarm has been activated—
not the location of the fire or emergency. You or
someone else should be at that fire-alarm box
location to direct firefighters to the site of the fire
or emergency.


34 FIRE SAFETY
Preventing Fires.
If you are in a public building, theater,
or restaurant when you discover a fire, do
not create confusion or panic by shouting.
Tell the management or another adult that
you think there is a fire. Pull a fire-alarm
box in the building if one is available and
then leave the building immediately.
In rural areas, forest fires and grass or
range fires should be reported immediately
to the fire department or the local forest
service ranger.
False Alarms
No discussion of reporting a fire alarm would be complete
without considering the irresponsible practice of deliberately
reporting a false alarm. Firefighters risk their lives driving
through traffic to respond to an alarm. If you report a false
alarm, you are disobeying part of your Scout Oath—to help
other people at all times. You also are breaking the law and
could be arrested.
Fire Extinguishers
Fire extinguishers have positive and negative aspects. On the
positive side, a fire extinguisher used properly can prevent a
small fire from getting out of control. On the negative side, a
fire extinguisher might give you false confidence or a feeling
that fire is not a danger because an extinguisher is available to
put it out. People often waste valuable time fighting a fire with
an extinguisher before sounding the alarm.
Fire extinguishers can be beneficial if they are controlled
by someone who knows how and when to use them. Know
where the fire extinguishers are located, and practice using them
correctly. The moment you face a fire, regardless of its size, is
not the time to learn how to use the extinguisher. Using a fire
Firefighters on a false-alarm call might be unable to
return quickly for an actual fire. Lives and property
elsewhere could be lost needlessly. Never turn in a
false alarm.
Whenever you
are in a public
place, note where
the exit signs are
located so that
you will be
prepared in case
of an emergency.


FIRE SAFETY 35
.Preventing Fires
extinguisher calls for quick, sensible judgment. A contained
fire, like one in a wastebasket or trash barrel, might easily
be put out with an extinguisher. A blazing sofa might not.
Do not waste valuable time using an extinguisher on a fire
that is simply too large to put out. Instead, sound the alarm
and get out.
Classes of Fire and Fire Extinguishers
There are four classes of fire, each named by a letter of the
alphabet. Extinguishers have been developed to work well on
one or more of them. An extinguisher should say on its side,
in words or pictures, the classes of fire that it can fight:
• Class A fires involve combustible materials like paper, wood,
fabrics, rubber, and plastics. These fires can be squelched
with water or insulated with tri-class (ABC) chemical or
foam extinguishers.
• Class B fires involve gasoline, oil, grease, tars, paints,
lacquers, or flammable gases. The oxygen that supports
this type of fire must be cut off by tri-class (ABC), regular
dry chemical, foam, or carbon dioxide extinguishers. Water
is dangerous, as it spreads this type of fire.
Water fire
extinguishers
are meant
for use
only on
class A fires.
A dry chemical
fire extinguisher
would be one
choice to
extinguish a
class B fire.
AOrdinary
Combustibles
Remember, a fire
extinguisher is
only a first-aid
appliance. If the
fire is serious
enough to require
a fire extinguisher,
it is serious
enough to sound
the alarm and
call the fire
department first.


36 FIRE SAFETY
Preventing Fires.
• Class C fires are electrical fires involving heated wiring,
cords, and appliances. These fires must be suppressed with
tri-class (ABC), dry chemical, or carbon dioxide extinguishers.
Never use water, which transmits electricity and could lead
to electric shock.
• Class D fires are a problem for industries
that use or transport combustible metals like
magnesium, sodium, potassium, uranium,
plutonium, calcium, lithium, and titanium.
They are extinguished by special powder
extinguishers that rob the fire of oxygen and dissipate heat.
Do not use a class D extinguisher on any other type of fire—
it can be dangerous.
Fortunately, manufacturers have found ways of combining
the compounds in extinguishers so that one extinguisher is
capable of handling more than one class of fire. The rating for
extinguishers includes a letter or letters indicating the class of
fire, and a number indicating the extinguishing capability of
the extinguishers.
A 20BC rating on an extinguisher means that it should be
used only on flammable-liquid (class B) or electrical (class C)
fires. The 20 means that this type of extinguisher can extin-
guish a fire twice as large as can an extinguisher rated 10BC.
A class-B fire extinguisher is effective on a grease
fire, but your first response should be to smother
it with a lid. That way, you will avoid any risk of
scattering the fire.
A carbon dioxide
extinguisher
would be a
good choice for
a class C fire.
Electrical
Equipment
C
An alternative
to using an
extinguisher on
an electrical fire
is to unplug the
cord or appliance,
if this can be done
safely. Water can
then be used to
extinguish the fire.
Class K
extinguishers
smother
cooking fires.
K


FIRE SAFETY 37
.Preventing Fires
Using Fire Extinguishers
A small fire is discovered in a wastebasket. An extinguisher
rated for class A fires is nearby. What do you do? First, sound
the alarm. Tell residents that there is a fire so that they can
safely leave. It is easier to escape a small fire than a fire that
has grown out of control.
Next, call the fire department. If you think you will feel
ridiculous if they arrive after you have put out the fire, just
think how you would feel if you did not call and then failed to
extinguish the fire.
Lastly, grab the extinguisher and make sure that you are
between the fire and an exit. If the fire can’t be controlled, you
need a quick way out. Following the PASS system, extinguish
the fire. If you have practiced using an extinguisher, it will not
feel unfamiliar.
While you wait for the fire department to arrive, keep
an eye on the fire in case it restarts. Be prepared to use the
extinguisher again if this happens.
Extinguishers should be mounted at shoulder level
near a doorway. Extinguishers can lose pressure—
and their effectiveness in an emergency—so they
must be checked periodically. All extinguishers have
a maintenance schedule attached to them; check
this schedule and adhere to it. Perform a monthly
visual check of the extinguisher’s gauge to ensure
the tank is full and the pressure is normal. At the
same time, ensure that the extinguisher can be
easily removed from the bracket and has no visible
damage. If you find anything out of the ordinary,
have the extinguisher professionally serviced.


38 FIRE SAFETY
Preventing Fires.
Extinguishing Systems
Public buildings, manufacturing plants, and other industrial
facilities can be protected with many different types of fire-
extinguishing systems. A common system is the hood extin-
guishing system found in many restaurant cooking areas.
Systems may use any of several extinguishing agents, including
water, foam, carbon dioxide, halogen, or dry chemicals.
One system that is increasing in use is the residential
sprinkler system, in which a sprinkler system automatically
puts water on a fire through sprinkler heads. The water is fed
to the sprinklers through pipes, usually suspended from the
ceiling. Until recently, sprinkler systems were found almost
exclusively in businesses and industry. Sprinkler companies
are now producing systems designed for home use.
The National Fire Protection Association recommends the word PASS
as a way to remember how to properly use an extinguisher.
P Pull the pin or release the lock latch. Extinguishers are not all the
same; practice with yours to ensure you can engage it.
A Aim the extinguisher nozzle, hose, or horn.
S Squeeze or press the handle.
S Sweep from side to side at the base of the fire.
P
S
A
S


FIRE SAFETY 39
.Preventing Fires
If You Smell Smoke
If you are in a building and smell
smoke, do not stop to gather your
belongings. Alert friends and family
members so everyone can evacuate
the premises. Feel a door with the
back of your hand. If the door is
warm, do not go out that way—the
hot smoke and/or flames on the
other side of the door can harm
you. Stay low to the ground as you
are leaving to avoid inhaling smoke. You might have to crawl.
Meet family members at the agreed-upon meeting place. Call
911 from a safe place or a call box.
If You Smell Natural Gas
Natural gas is extremely combustible. It can ignite and explode
merely from the spark of a light bulb being turned on or off.
In its pure form, natural gas is odorless and colorless. It is
treated with a distinctive smell—a little like rotten eggs—so
that a leak can be detected more easily. A gas leak needs to be
treated seriously.
If you smell a faint gas
odor, first check if gas appli-
ances (such as the burners on
a gas stove) are turned off.
Then, open doors and win-
dows to let in fresh air and
allow gas to escape. When the
gas smell diminishes, have an
adult check whether the pilot
lights of appliances (water
heater, furnace, oven) are lit. If you cannot determine the
source of the leak, call a professional.
If the gas smell is strong, do not do anything that could
cause the gas in the air to ignite, including lighting a cigarette,
making a telephone call, turning a light on or off, or even
using a flashlight. Extinguish any candles or other flames. Get
yourself and your family out of the house quickly and call the
gas company to report the emergency.
If you smell smoke
in a public place,
do not yell “fire.”
Quickly locate a
manager or other
adult and tell that
person you smell
smoke. Then leave
the building.





FIRE SAFETY 41
.Handling Fire Safely
Handling Fire Safely
A tiny match can spark a forest fire that destroys hundreds of
acres of Earth’s beauty. People who handle fire should always
keep safety at the forefront, and the best way to do that is to
follow some basic safety techniques.
Matches
Matches are a convenient tool—we use them routinely to light
the fireplace, birthday candles, campfires, and many other
necessary fires. If they are used improperly, though, people
can get hurt and property can be destroyed. Knowing the
correct way to light and handle matches is an essential skill.
Children are
curious and
do not understand
the dangers
of matches and
lighters. Always
keep matches
and lighters out
of their reach.
Here is the proper procedure for
lighting a match:
• Remove one match from its container
and close the container. Note:
Strike-anywhere matches are danger-
ous and must be used under adult supervision.
• Hold the match firmly, away from your head,
and identify what you want to light.
• Make sure no one is in front of you, then strike
the match by drawing it quickly across the grainy
striking surface. Try to strike the match with
a motion going away from your body, not
toward you.
• Light the object, and then extinguish the match.
• Dispose of the match in an ashtray, or hold it until
it is cold.


42 FIRE SAFETY
Handling Fire Safely.
Charcoal Fires
Any open flame must be handled with care. A Scout might
have frequent contact with the flame from a charcoal cooking
fire. A number of safety precautions must be followed to avoid
having an unfriendly fire.
The widespread use of charcoal lighter fluids requires us
to use these fluids with the greatest degree of safety. Before
using a charcoal lighter fluid, read all directions thoroughly.
Make certain that you are using an approved fluid for outdoor
cooking—not kerosene, gasoline, or some other dangerous
flammable liquid.
Heap the charcoal into a pyramid and apply the recom-
mended amount of fluid. Then close the cover of the fluid
can and set it down away from the charcoal. Next, light the
match and apply it to the coals. Be careful to extend your arm
fully and to keep your body as far away from the charcoal as
possible. Never lean over the charcoal during lighting.
Whenever you are trying to ignite charcoal, make sure that
all children are well away from the area. Use charcoal only on
level ground and only in a stable cooker that will not tip over.
People who live in apartments, townhouses, or two-story
homes must avoid using charcoal beneath a balcony or overhang.
The flames from the burning charcoal can sometimes reach high
enough to endanger the building construction above them.
Charcoal is not meant for use inside the home. Many
people make the dangerous error of using charcoal grills
for cooking or heating in enclosed areas such as garages,
basements, porches, cabins, tents, or automobiles.
People have been overcome by carbon monoxide after
taking a burning grill into an enclosed area during rainy or
cool weather. Even putting the grill into a fireplace is dangerous.
Only homes that have a special indoor barbecue pit with a
vent to carry away carbon monoxide fumes are safe.
Campers have been suffocated while trying to heat cabins
and tents with charcoal briquettes. It is not true that charcoal
is safe when all surfaces of the briquette have become coated
with gray ash. As long as the fuel is giving off heat, it is burning
and dangerous in any unventilated area.
Never store a charcoal grill next to the house. A number
of recorded fires have been started spontaneously by charcoal
that reignited long after the fire had been extinguished. Store
charcoal in a dry place.
Whenever you
are around an
open flame,
wear tight-fitting
clothes to reduce
the chances of
their catching fire.


FIRE SAFETY 43
.Handling Fire Safely
Pan Fires
Cooking fires are fairly common. They
do not, however, need to become major
fires or result in serious burns. The
procedure for putting out a grease
pan fire is simple, but it must be
followed closely.
It is a good idea to have the necessary fire-
fighting equipment (such as a class K extinguisher)
handy before you begin to work. In this case, the
equipment is a lid that will cover the entire pan. If the pan
you are using does not have a lid, use a cookie sheet or another,
larger pan. If the grease ignites, turn the heat off and slide the
lid over the pan, covering it completely. Use a pot holder or
oven mitt to lessen the danger of burning your hand. Also, tilt the
bottom of the cover away from you for protection from
the flames.
After waiting at least five minutes for the pan and grease
to cool, you can carefully slide the cover off. Do not stand over
the pan.
You can make an excellent charcoal fire
starter from a big metal can, like a large
coffee can. Before removing the bottom,
take a beverage can opener and punch a
row of triangular holes around the base of
the can, about an inch apart. Remove both
the top and bottom of the can. You will have
a cylindrical chimney open at both ends.
To use the fire starter, place this
chimney in the center of the charcoal grill
and put two or three handfuls of crumpled
and twisted paper in the bottom. Use
waxed paper or milk cartons if possible. Pile charcoal briquettes on top
of the paper until the can is filled. Light the paper through one of the
triangular holes at the base, and the chimney will send hot flames
roaring up through the briquettes. When you notice gray patches
appearing on the topmost charcoal, use pliers or tongs (never your
fingers) to lift the hot can straight upward. The burning charcoal will
spread out in an even mound, ready for cooking.


44 FIRE SAFETY
Handling Fire Safely.
While most pan fires are small, the heat from the flames
can ignite cabinets or walls around the stove. After smothering
the fire in the pan, feel the cabinet and walls for heat. If they
feel warm or if they appear to have darkened in color, call the
fire department immediately.
Heaters
Heater-related fires are the leading cause of residential fires
in the United States. If your family uses auxiliary heaters, you
should know the recommended clearance around them and
how to fuel them properly.
Kerosene Heaters
Use only an Underwriters Laboratories–listed heater that has
a tip-over shutoff mechanism. Most kerosene heater manu-
facturers recommend using 1K kerosene fuel, which produces
lower levels of toxic gases. Never use even a small amount of
gasoline in a kerosene heater. Fuel the appliances outdoors,
away from the house, on a level surface. Avoid overfilling and
spilling. Store the kerosene in an approved metal container.
Never fill a hot appliance; allow it to cool for a few minutes
before refueling. Use the heater only in a well-ventilated room
or area. Before you use this type of heater, check local fire
codes or insurance companies’ standards to be sure that your
kerosene heater is approved for use.
Wood-Burning Stoves
Have the stove checked by an expert before you use it. Read
and follow the manufacturer’s instructions on what type and
amount of fuel to burn. Start the fire using paper and kindling;
never use a flammable or combustible liquid of any kind in a
wood stove and never use green wood. Artificial logs made of
sawdust and wax, which are supposed to be burned one at a
time, should not be put into a wood-burning stove. The stove’s
heat can melt the wax in the log instead of burning it, and this
hot wax can leak out or flare up.
When adding wood to the stove, be sure to wear flame-
resistant clothes and an oven mitt. Open the stove door slowly
and carefully. Keep an extinguisher or a bucket of sand or
water nearby.


FIRE SAFETY 45
.Handling Fire Safely
Coal-Burning Stoves
Do not overload a coal stove. Ignite the coal with paper and
wood first. A coal stove can easily overheat, so adjust
the draft to control the rate of burning. Because coal stoves
produce high levels of carbon monoxide, use them only in
well-ventilated areas. These stoves generally do not require
the frequent addition of fuel that wood stoves do.
Fireplaces
Fireplaces also can be easily overfueled. Burn only one or two
wood logs at a time. Carefully follow all of the manufacturer’s
directions for using artificial logs; they should be burned
one at a time and not split apart or broken. Do not use a
combustible or flammable liquid on the fire—the result is
usually an explosive flash that can ignite a major fire.
Once a fire is started in the fireplace, close the screen or
door securely. Make sure the fireplace has a mechanism to
keep all embers safely within the firebox.
Flammable Liquids
All substances are made up of molecules in motion. They move
in different directions at various speeds. At higher temperatures,
they move with more energy and more speed. If the molecules
of a substance reach a high enough speed, they escape from
the surface of the substance into the air. The molecules that
remain in the air are called vapor.
Flammable liquids are different from other liquids because
less heat is required for them to vaporize. These vapors are
combustible under ordinary temperatures. Whenever a container
of flammable liquid is open, vapors are escaping and a fire
is possible.
When vapor escapes from a flammable liquid, it mixes with
air. This vapor-air mixture provides two of the three necessary
ingredients for fire: fuel and oxygen. All that is necessary for
combustion to occur is the right amount of heat.
Without proper ventilation, vapor levels can quickly build
up and become dangerous. Vapor is invisible. It can travel
from floor to floor in a house and to an ignition source that is
incorrectly considered a safe distance away. A dangerous con-
centration of vapor might be present without your knowledge.


46 FIRE SAFETY
Handling Fire Safely.
Proper Clothing for Working With Fire
Some materials burn more rapidly than others. Some materials
drip as they burn, creating severe burns. Here are some basic
facts to help you decide what to wear when you are building a
campfire, fueling a boat motor, or cooking at home.
The materials used to make up fabrics fall into two broad
categories: natural and synthetic. Natural materials include
cotton and wool. Silk is the most flammable of the natural
materials. Wool is the least flammable. Synthetic materials
do not come from plants or animals, but are developed in
laboratories and often are petroleum derivatives. Synthetic
materials include polyester (also known as microfiber and
synthetic fleece), acrylic, acetate, nylon, and rayon. Synthetic
fabrics are slower to ignite than natural ones, but once they
catch fire they melt and can cause serious burns. Some fabrics
are a combination of natural and synthetic materials. You may
have a T-shirt that is a blend of cotton and polyester fibers.
In general, avoid
working indoors
with flammable
liquids. If you
are cleaning
paintbrushes by
soaking them in
paint thinner or
turpentine, for
example, put
them outdoors.
Sometimes it is necessary to use flammable liquids
indoors, like certain cleaning products or adhesive
removers. However, gasoline should never be used
indoors. Gasoline vapor ignites more easily than
any other flammable liquid vapor and should be
used only as engine fuel.


FIRE SAFETY 47
.Handling Fire Safely
Synthetic and natural materials can be dipped or sprayed
with substances that will inhibit their ability to ignite or
continue burning. Some synthetic materials have this resistance
built in. Fiberglass materials and special fire-resistant fabrics
do not burn because their chemical makeup will not allow
ignition. These materials, however, can be expensive and are
not as adaptable as other fabrics.
Federal legislation regulates the flame resistance of
children’s sleepwear, mattresses, carpets, upholstery, and
some camping equipment. These standards are used in
burn tests conducted at various national laboratories.
Weight and weave also play a role in how a fabric burns.
Heavier fabrics, especially those with tight weaves, burn more
slowly than lightweight, open-weave fabrics. If you compare
denim jeans to a T-shirt, you will notice that the fabric used
in the jeans is heavier than what is used in the T-shirt. Both
are made of cotton, but the denim has a heavier weave. When
judging the weave’s tightness, consider how much light you
can see through the fabric. You probably can see some light
through a T-shirt but not through denim. Nappy fabric, like an
old, fluffy flannel shirt, will catch fire more readily than hard,
smooth fabrics like canvas.
Be aware of the cut of the clothing you choose when you
know you will be cooking, tending a fire, or working with
fuel. For instance, you do not want to unintentionally drag an
unbuttoned shirtsleeve across a flame or let your loose, long
pant cuffs become soaked with gasoline. You do not want an
oversized T-shirt to billow away from your body and touch a
hot charcoal grill.
Whenever you
are near fire or
flammable liquids,
wear clothing
that is styled in
a fire-safe way.
When determining the relative flammability of
fabrics, consider these factors:
• Weight—Heavier fabrics are less likely to burn.
• Weave—Dense fabrics are less likely to burn
than more open fabrics.
• Construction—The smoother the surface, the
less likely it is to burn.
• Style—Loose-fitting garments can ignite more
easily than tight-fitting ones.


48 FIRE SAFETY
Handling Fire Safely.
Fueling How-Tos
Gasoline-powered engines like those in lawn
mowers and edgers need their fuel replaced
from time to time, just like a campfire needs
more wood to keep burning. To keep yourself
safe and your equipment in good repair, follow
these general safety precautions when fueling.
• Fill the engine’s fuel tank outdoors, at least
6 feet from any building or structure.
• Position the engine firmly on level ground.
• From a standing position (do not kneel),
using a pour spout or funnel, slowly pour
gasoline (usually unleaded, unless the manu-
facturer’s instructions call for another type,
such as diesel) from an approved safety can
into the engine’s fuel tank, taking care not
to overfill or spill the gasoline. Should any
spills occur, thoroughly rinse the engine with
lots of water. Do not wipe up the spill with a
rag or cloth; wiping a spill simply produces
another fire hazard in the form of vapors
from a gasoline-soaked rag.
• Before starting the engine, replace the gasoline cap and
allow any areas of spillage to dry. Be sure the gas can is
secured several feet away from the engine when you start it.
• Keep children well away from the engine during fueling.
Burns
Burns are serious injuries that can have a dramatic effect on the
human body. Because burns can easily cover large areas and
penetrate the outer skin layers that protect us from infections,
their effect can be far-reaching.
When a burn occurs, it is important to control the amount
of damage as quickly as possible. Young children and elderly
people are affected more seriously by burns and should seek
medical help for any burn other than a minor, first-degree burn.
When using a
lawn mower, it
is best to begin
with a full tank
of gasoline.
If the engine runs out of gasoline
while being used, allow it to cool
before refueling. Some of the parts
could be hot enough to ignite any
spilled fuel.


FIRE SAFETY 49
.Handling Fire Safely
Scalds
Scalds from hot liquids or steam are the most common kind of
burns. Here are some ways to prevent scalds:
• Turn pan handles toward the back of the stove.
• For a shower or bath, first turn on cold water and then add
hot water.
• Help young children adjust the water temperature when
they are washing their hands.
• Set the water heater’s thermostat to 120 degrees.
• Keep hot liquids like soup and coffee away from children.
• Never use a wet oven mitt or towel to handle something
hot. The water can turn to steam and burn you. Steam is
hotter than boiling water.
The first step in controlling the damage done by a scald is to
remove the heat. When soup or hot coffee is spilled, it might
run off the skin, but it will soak into fabrics that will keep
burning the skin. Take them off and immediately apply cool
water to the burned areas to reduce the heat and lessen the
degree of burn.
Flame Burns
Flame burns from clothes that are on fire are the second most
common kind of burns. The quickest way to extinguish a fire
like this is to stop where you are, drop to the ground, and roll
out the fire. Roll over and back, covering your face with your
hands, until the flames are completely smothered.
After the fire is out, rinse the area with water for 10 to 15
minutes to help cool the skin and reduce the damage.
The same technique should be used if someone else’s
clothes catch fire: Stop, drop, roll, cover your face, and
cool. If necessary, tackle the person to get him or her to
the ground. A blanket thrown around the person will help
smother the flames.
After cooling the burn, examine the injuries. (If clothing
is sticking to the person’s body, do not try to peel it off.) If the
burn is small, cover it with a clean, dry cloth and seek medical
attention. If the burn covers a large area, such as an entire arm
or leg, or much of the chest or back, get the burn victim to
professional medical aid immediately.
The National
Fire Protection
Association reports
that when a
fire occurs in
a building with
sprinklers, fewer
people are burned
and less property
is damaged.





FIRE SAFETY 51
.Fire Safety Outdoors
Fire Safety Outdoors
Our forests are a national treasure to be enjoyed and protected.
Responsible camping practices and outdoor safety habits are
essential in preserving human and animal life, our environment,
and our natural resources.
Exercising extreme caution with campfires and brush fires
would reduce forest fires by about one-fifth. But an even simpler
precaution—careful use of matches and smoking materials—
would cut the loss by another 20 percent.
Wildland Fires
Every year in the United States, forest fires destroy thousands
of acres of forest and timberland. Careless camping results in
burns, fire injuries, and deaths. People must learn and practice
fire-safe habits while enjoying the great outdoors.
Types of Wildland Fires
Fires in the forest and field can be classified in many ways.
A grass fire usually involves a relatively small field of hay or
rye, and can become increasingly dangerous as it extends into
a wooded area or involves nearby houses, garages, and barns.
In the West, grass fires can cover hundreds of square acres.
Where the grass is high or where fire extends into a grain field,
fighting the blaze is a difficult and dangerous job.
Surface fires in the forest spread in the leaf litter and
underbrush. Less common, but more difficult to control, is the
ground fire, which burns deep below the surface in spongy leaf
litter and peat, eventually breaking to the surface.
Most dangerous and damaging of all is the crown fire,
which spreads quickly through the treetops. The period of
greatest danger is the spring or early fall when leaves are dry.


52 FIRE SAFETY
Fire Safety Outdoors.
Camping Safety
All the fire safety principles suggested by the home fire safety
checklist apply to your camping home-away-from-home as well,
particularly to a campsite with permanent buildings. Follow these
specific camp safety rules to keep yourself and fellow campers safe.
• Make sure there is some type of alarm that can be clearly
heard throughout camp. If a fire breaks out, all campers should
know in a matter of minutes. If organized fire protection is
nearby, everyone in camp should know how to call it.
• Remove all flammable rubbish and leaves from around
buildings and tents.
• Hang towels to dry away from stoves and heaters.
• Collect fireplace and stove ashes in covered metal containers
to cool, then dispose of them properly.
• Make a nightly check of the camp before turning in to see
that all fires and lights are out or suitably protected.
The Cost of Fire
Death and personal injury are the overriding
concerns of wildland fires. Wildland fires are also
significant because they can damage buildings,
timber crops, wildlife and their habitat, and soil.
All of these losses are costly to humans.
The cost of putting out the fire, no matter how
small, is significant. In most cases, the local fire
department will extinguish it. In a department with
paid firefighters, it costs money to send a crew and
equipment to a fire. In a volunteer fire department,
the costs include equipment as well as the lost
work time of the volunteer firefighters.
Another firefighting cost is the damage caused
by a serious fire that is unattended because fire
units are extinguishing a woods fire. If a fire
destroys a business, the chances are less than half
that the business will reopen in the same location.
Thus, the fire results in lost jobs, reduced tax
revenues to the community, and increased social
service expenses. The direct and indirect costs of
woods fires affect us all.


FIRE SAFETY 53
.Fire Safety Outdoors
Campfires
During periods of forest-fire danger, it is sometimes necessary
to get a permit before making a fire in national forests and
similar areas. Observe these rules carefully.
Campfires should be built only in safe places, on sand
or other mineral soil or rocks, and never next to trees. All
flammable materials should be cleared away at least 10 feet
around an outdoor fire, and the fire should never be left
unattended. When an outdoor fire is put out, stay with it
until the ashes are cool enough to handle with bare hands.
A campfire can become a danger unless it is kept small.
A large fire with limbs and wood piled high will light up the
entire circle, but sparks can be carried a considerable distance
by a light wind or gust.
Select a campfire spot with regard for wind and the
surrounding area into which sparks will blow. Carefully clear
the nearby ground of dead leaves, pine needles, and leaf mold
down to the mineral soil and rake or sweep a 10-foot area around
the base of the fire. Good, solid earth affords the only safe base.
Avoid spongy, porous earth or peaty soil. Fire and heat can
penetrate into the ground and travel under the surface, along
fuses like roots, to crop up some distance away, causing
sleeper fires.


54 FIRE SAFETY
Fire Safety Outdoors.
During the life of a campfire, at least one of the group’s older
members should be appointed camp fire warden, with responsi-
bility to see that the fire never gets out of control. This should be
a continuous watch with adequate relief. The warden should have
two or three pails of water placed near the fire, not to be used for
any purpose other than fire control. To extinguish fires started by
sparks, always have the pails filled.
Camp Stoves and Lanterns
For generations, an open fire provided light at night and a
means for most camp cooking. While it is still important to
know how to kindle a blaze, many Scouts now prefer to carry
lanterns and cook over lightweight stoves, practices that help
protect the land and provide an added convenience.
Using a camp stove allows the flexibility of preparing meals
quickly and neatly whether you are camping high above the
tree line, in the deep snows of winter, or at the edge of an arid
sandstone canyon. While a stove is a wonderful tool, it must
be handled intelligently and kept in proper working condition.
Follow these guidelines when using a camp stove:
• Use camp stoves only outdoors and their fuels only with adult
supervision. Practice using them before your outing, carefully
reading and following the manufacturer’s directions.
• Place stoves and charcoal grills on a level, secure surface, in
ventilated areas only.
• Do not overload the stovetop with heavy pots or large frying
pans. Keep pan lids handy to smother a grease fire if necessary.
• Keep fuel in well-marked, approved containers that are
stored in a ventilated, locked box at least 20 feet from all
buildings and tents. Store and refill fuel containers away
from any flames.
• Never fuel a stove inside a cabin or tent; always do it outdoors.
• Allow a hot stove to cool before changing or refilling
cylinders. Take home empty containers for proper disposal.
Two basic types of lanterns are used in camping. Battery-
operated, portable electrical lanterns are reliable and safe for
both indoor and outdoor use. Fuel-burning lanterns use the
same types of fuels as camp stoves, but instead of having an
open flame, they contain a mantel. When ignited, the material
glows and gives off a bright light.
Gallon-size cans
fixed with wire
handles and filled
with water should
be at every tent.


FIRE SAFETY 55
.Fire Safety Outdoors
TYPES OF FUEL
Butane and propane are clean, highly combustible, pressurized
gases stored in metal cylinders. Stoves using butane or propane
are light, compact, and uncomplicated. Simply attach a cylinder,
turn the regulator knob, and light the burner. You will have
several hours of quiet, steady heat.
Because it has a high flash point (the temperature at
which the gas bursts into flame), kerosene is among the safest
and most readily available of stove fuels. A kerosene stove
must be preheated by squeezing a dab of special flammable
paste onto the base of the burner and touching a lighted match
to it before igniting the burner itself. An air pump regulates the
fuel tank pressure, and thus the height of the flame. Kerosene
stoves can be a bit bulky, but they are reliable in any season.
White gas is highly refined, extremely flammable, and
potentially explosive. Use it with the utmost caution. Some
white-gas stoves have air pumps to provide the pressure
necessary for ignition and an even flame, while others must
be preheated. Follow the instructions for your stove exactly.
A variety of stoves use charcoal, canned flammable jelly,
burnable pellets, or some other petroleum-based fuel. The stove
you use should be designed for the job you expect it to do.
CARRYING FUEL
The amount of fuel you will need depends on how much you
plan to use your stove or lantern. You probably will need to
take along more fuel than the stove or lantern can hold.
Butane and propane cylinders are ready to pack just as they
are, but if you use kerosene or white gas, carry it only in a
container made especially for that purpose. Buy a high-quality
metal fuel bottle with a secure lid. Get one that is a different
color than your water bottles to avoid confusion, and wrap
several strips of tape around fuel bottles to help you correctly
identify them in the dark.
Prevent gas fumes from spoiling your food by storing fuel
bottles and cylinders in plastic bags, separate from food.
Remember that when a fuel is under pressure, its burning
characteristics change. This usually means that the fuel is more
dangerous and should be handled with extreme care.


56 FIRE SAFETY
Fire Safety Outdoors.
Managing a Fire
Build each fire just large enough for your needs. This
will minimize the amount of wood you will burn and
can make it easier to erase signs of a fire once you
are done. Take responsibility for every campfire by
keeping an eye on it at all times.
Extinguish every fire when you no longer need
it or if you won’t be around to watch it. Splash
water on the embers, then stir the damp ashes with
a stick and splash them again. Repeat this process
until the fire is cold out—cold enough so that when
you hold your hand just above the ashes, you do
not feel any heat.
Sometimes you will build your fire in a perma-
nent fire site. Clean such sites by picking out any bits
of paper, foil, and unburned food. Pack them home
with the rest of your trash. If you have made a new
fire site, get rid of all evidence that it was ever there.
Scatter any rocks, turning sides that have been
blackened by soot toward the ground. Spread cold
ashes over a wide area and toss away any unused
firewood. Replace ground cover. When you’re done,
the site should look just as it did when you found it.
Too often, a careless person discards a match in dry
leaves or grass and causes a fire. To avoid starting a
fire of this type, make sure matches are thoroughly
extinguished before they are discarded. Shake or
blow out a match to extinguish it. Before discarding
the match, ensure that it is cool by rolling the tip of
the match between your fingers.


FIRE SAFETY 57
.Fire Safety Outdoors
Breaking Camp
When cleaning up a campsite, similar precautions must be
taken with burning brush. Brush fires, like all campfires,
should be constantly attended. If the fire gets out of control,
it should be fought by adult leaders. Pails of water and
implements like brooms, spades, and bundles of green
boughs are useful in putting out a running brush or grass
fire. In any event, burn small piles at a time, feeding new
material gradually.
Matches and Fire Starters
Take along wooden matches for
lighting your stove. Store them
in a match safe or small
plastic container with a tight
lid. Some matches are
commercially water-
proofed; you can further
protect regular matches
by dipping them in melted
paraffin. To be safe, keep some
matches in your pocket and some with
your fire starters.
Chances are you will not build an open fire in
the backwoods, but in an emergency, if you must
start a fire to get dry or to signal for help, you
might need a fire starter. You can make them at
home by tying a short length of rolled newspaper
with string and dipping it in melted wax, or you
can save candle stubs. Commercial fire starters
come in tablet and paste forms. Keep all fire start-
ers with matches in a sturdy plastic bag, and save
them for use in an emergency.
When the time
comes to break
camp, a fire
should be care-
fully put out and
not left to burn out
by itself.


58 FIRE SAFETY
Careers in Fire Safety.
Careers in Fire Safety
Firefighters are people-oriented. They want to help others in
need. This characteristic is the motivation behind volunteer fire
departments and is one of the reasons why many firefighters
are active in community affairs.
Your Fire Department
The fire department has many roles. It fights and investigates
fires and provides emergency medical services. It is the primary
source of aid in an emergency like a building collapse or
lost person, and natural disasters like tornadoes, floods,
and snowstorms. Fire department employees also might moni-
tor downed power lines so
that people will not touch
them. The fire department
provides fire inspection
and code enforcement to
make sure buildings and
operations are in compli-
ance with state and local
fire codes and ordinances.
It also provides fire safety
education for the community.


FIRE SAFETY 59
.Careers in Fire Safety
Roughly 90 percent of the communities in the United States
are served by volunteer fire departments. However, career
fire departments provide protection to a greater number of
people. Generally, volunteer departments are found in rural
areas; career departments are more common in urban areas.
Firefighters must be in excellent physical condition
because fire-suppression activities demand that the firefighters
work at maximum pace for long periods of time in extremely
difficult conditions. Firefighters must leap into action at the
sound of the alarm without the luxury of doing warm-up
exercises. While firefighters are always subjected to heat in
the fire area, in winter they also face bitter cold.
Inspections and Prefire Planning
Firefighters inspect buildings for fire hazards. These inspections
also allow the firefighter to study the building and to determine
how a fire in that building should be fought. This is called
prefire planning.
Education
By working with teachers, nurses, and others who have contact
with many people, firefighters spread the message of fire
safety. Some fire departments establish public education
divisions to provide this service.
Public fire educators design programs for preschools, elemen-
tary schools, junior and senior high schools, and businesses and
industries. Public fire educators develop brochures and posters
and even produce films that teach people how to prevent and
survive fires.
Fire educators sponsor fire safety demonstrations in
shopping malls and other public places, often during National
Fire Prevention Week each year during the week of October 9.
Often, a fire department’s public education unit uses
community volunteers to assist with lifesaving education
programs. Interested Scouts should check with their local fire
department to see how they can help.
Code Enforcement
Specialized units of the fire department also provide fire safety
code enforcement and interpretation services. These units
monitor the design and construction of buildings to make sure
they incorporate fire safety features.


60 FIRE SAFETY
Careers in Fire Safety.
Types of Fire Trucks
One specialized fire truck is the rescue truck, which contains
gas masks and inhalators, life nets, and medical equipment.
It also carries equipment that firefighters use to rescue people
from collapsed and caved-in buildings. Hazardous materials
trucks contain special chemicals firefighters use on chemical
spills. The people who work on these trucks have special
training, clothing, and monitoring devices for dealing with
hazardous materials. Field communications trucks contain
sophisticated electronic equipment to help firefighters delegate
tasks in emergency operations.
Fire Department Survey
To gather additional important information about fire and fire
safety, contact your local fire department or fire company.
Ask to interview the officer on duty or the chief. Use the
following questions when gathering information. Feel free
to ask additional questions.
• Are the firefighters in this department career, volunteer, or
a combination?
• How many people are in this department?
• How many people are at the station during a shift?
• How many fire alarms does the department answer in a year?
• What is the most frequent cause of residential fires in the
department’s territory?
• Who conducts the community’s building inspections?
• Who does the fire investigations?
• Who teaches fire safety?
• What kind of training must a firefighter have?
• How old must a person be to become a firefighter?
• What types of emergency services does the fire
department provide?
• How has firefighting changed recently?
• What are some favorite pieces of firefighting equipment?
• How can the community help the fire department
accomplish its goals?


FIRE SAFETY 61
.Careers in Fire Safety
Types of Fire Trucks There are three main
types of fire trucks and
many kinds of specialty
trucks. The main types
are pumper, ladder, and
tank trucks.
Pumper trucks are
sent out on the first alarm.
They carry hoses, water,
and pumps to deliver
water to the fire site. The
pumper truck’s equipment
can help firefighters start
cooling the fire right away,
while other firefighters are
attaching hoses to nearby
fire hydrants. Some rural-
area pumper trucks also
have equipment to suction
water from local ponds
and rivers.
Tank trucks have a
much bigger supply of
water than pumper trucks.
They are needed especially
when fire hydrants are
not available.
Ladder trucks carry
long ladders and other
equipment to help firefight-
ers get up high to spray
water, break windows, and
cut holes in the roof of the
structure to let out smoke
and heat.
Pumper truck
Tank truck
Ladder truck





FIRE SAFETY 63
.Fire Safety Resources
Scouting Literature
Camping, Cooking, Emergency
Preparedness, First Aid, and Safety
merit badge pamphlets
Books
Bell, Karen Magnuson. Fire in Their
Eyes: Wildfires and the People Who
Fight Them. Harcourt, 1999.
Camenson, Blythe. Firefighting (VGM’s
Career Portraits). McGraw-Hill/
Contemporary Books, 1995.
Corso, Joe. Engine 24: Fire Stories.
Black Horse Publishing, 2013.
Gorrell, Gena Kinton. Catching Fire:
The Story of Firefighting. Tundra
Books, 1999.
Halberstam, David. Firehouse.
Hyperion, 2003.
Landau, Elaine. Fires. Franklin
Watts, 2000.
McCourt, D.E. Notes From the
Firehouse: A Collection of Stories
about Life as a Firefighter.
CreateSpace Independent Publishing
Platform, 2011.
National Commission on Fire
Prevention and Control. America
Burning. Lulu.com, 2014.
Patent, Dorothy Hinshaw. Fire: Friend
or Foe. Clarion Books, 1998.
Preston, Timothy. A Homeowner’s
Survival Guide to Fire Safety.
Liberty, 1991.
Shapiro, Larry. Fighting Fire: Trucks,
Tools, and Tactics. Motorbooks, 2008.
Yoder, Curt, and Karen Yoder. The
Heart Behind the Hero. Stoney
Creek Press, 2000.
Fire Safety Resources
With your parent’s permission,
visit Scouting America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org,
for a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


64 FIRE SAFETY
Fire Safety Resources.
Organizations, Government
Agencies, and Websites
National Association of State
Fire Marshals
Telephone: 202-737-1226
www.firemarshals.org
National Fire Protection Association
Telephone: 617-770-3000
www.nfpa.org
Safe Kids Worldwide
Telephone: 202-662-0600
www.safekids.org
U.S. Consumer Product
Safety Commission
Toll-free telephone: 800-638-2772
www.cpsc.gov
U.S. Fire Administration
Telephone: 301-447-1000
www.usfa.fema.gov
Acknowledgments
Scouting America is grateful to Roy
Marshall, director of the Residential Fire
Safety Institute, for providing his exper-
tise during the development of this edi-
tion of the Fire Safety merit badge pam-
phlet. Thanks also to Walter Smittle III,
West Virginia state fire marshal, retired,
for his contribution.
Scouting America is grateful to
the men and women serving on the
National Merit Badge Subcommittee for
the improvements made in updating
this pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration Credits
Dave Powell, USDA Forest Service,
Bugwood.org, courtesy—page 50
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of
or are protected by Scouting America.
John McDearmon—all illustrations on
pages 8, 26, 38, 43, 46, and 56
Randy Piland—pages 14, 32,
40 (Scouts), and 61 (all)