DR AFTING
STEM-Based


DR AFTING
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Drafting or check
Scoutbook for the latest requirements.
35885
ISBN 978-0-8395-3262-0
©2024 Scouting America/Boy Scouts of America
2024 Printing


DRAFTING 3


4 DRAFTING


DRAFTING 5





DRAFTING 7
Contents
Drafting a Better World . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Tools of the Trade . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
Sketching, Scale Drawings, and Lettering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
Views and Plans in Drafting. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
The Symbols of Drafting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
Careers in Drafting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
Drafting Resources. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62





.Drafting a Better World
Drafting a Better World
What does a 100-story skyscraper have in common with your
handheld video game? How is a space station like the
storage shed in your backyard? In what way do the dazzling
neon lights of New York City resemble the desk lamp you
use when doing your homework? In each case, from the
most massive superprojects to the tiniest electronic gizmo,
a design had to be made before the object could be built.
Creating the drawings that guide the hands of builders,
engineers, electricians, scientists, and craftspeople is the task
of the drafting professional. He or she draws, or
“drafts,” the design on paper or the computer
screen. The drafter’s work is used for plan-
ning and building machines, computers,
cars, homes, skyscrapers, roads, video
games—virtually everything that must
be made to precise specifications.
Our modern world thrives on new ideas—inventing
new products and processes, laying the infrastructure
to house and transport an ever-growing population,
expanding the reach of digital technology. But before
the first board can be nailed for a new house, the first
circuit fabricated for a new mobile phone, or the first
bucket of concrete poured for a new roadway, a draw-
ing must be made to show exactly how to get the
project done.
Using universally
accepted symbols,
a drafter’s plans
can be read by
any engineer or
trades worker,
no matter the
country or
language of origin.


10 DRAFTING
Drafting a Better World.
These days, much drafting work is done on computer, but
the basic concepts and principles of the skill have remained
the same for centuries. You can learn basic drafting in your own
home, with or without the help of a computer, using
inexpensive tools, supplies, and software. As you begin drafting,
you will learn the symbols, lines, and drawing forms and
techniques that will enable you to turn a rough sketch into
a professional drawing. You will see how to present all of the
information a craftsperson will need to build the project. You
will learn the importance of showing precise, accurate details
in a clean, simple format.
By the time you earn the Drafting merit badge, you will
be able to draw plans for projects like a birdhouse, a bookcase,
or a backyard storage shed. You might even draw rough plans
for your family’s dream house, complete with game room and
swimming pool. More importantly, you will be grounded in
an age-old profession that remains a vital part of many modern
technical careers. You may also want to explore other profes-
sions that use drafting, such as architecture, engineering,
graphic design, and art.


DRAFTING 11
.Drafting a Better World





DRAFTING 13
.Tools of the Trade
Tools of the Trade
A straight edge (ruler), a pencil, a flat and smooth surface, and
some paper are all you need to get started in drafting. As you
advance, though, you will want to try out some of the many
other basic tools that drafting professionals use.
A drafting table has a top that can be angled upward for
easier drawing. It may also have a lip at the bottom edge for
holding pencils and other drafting tools.
To easily draw horizontal lines, the draftsperson can
place a T-square on the drafting table. The short end of the
“T” rests against the side of the table, while the long part
extends across the table. The T-square can be moved up and
down along the table for drawing straight horizontal lines
anywhere on the paper.
To draw vertical (right-angle) lines, or other straight
lines that are not horizontal, rest a triangle on the T-square.
Triangles, including adjustable triangles, are available for
making lines at different angles. A protractor helps you
draw lines of still more angles.
For drawing circles, curves, and arcs, drafters use a
compass, an adjustable drawing device with two hinged
arms, and a French curve, a piece of plastic with traceable,
complex curves cut into it. Other basic drafting tools include
drafting pencils with leads of different weights, technical
pens, and specialized papers and erasers, as well as plastic
templates cut with different shapes for easily drawing the sym-
bols used in drafting.
For many years, the system of T-squares and triangles was drafting’s
main tool kit. Then came the drafting machine, which attaches to the
drafting table and makes drafting easier and quicker. This tool has a
built-in protractor for drawing lines of many angles, replacing the
T-square and triangle system.
In manual
drafting, the
traditional drafting
paper is known
as vellum. Almost
transparent,
vellum is used to
create blueprints
from the original
drawings. It is
available in a wide
variety of sizes.


14 DRAFTING
Tools of the Trade.
Using Computers in Drafting
The most powerful drafting tool of all is the computer, running
special software for computer-aided drafting (CAD). Drafting by
computer has many advantages.
Efficiency. Computers make it easy to do tasks that once were
difficult and time-consuming. Lettering, for example, takes lots
of time and skill to do neatly by hand. On a computer, it is as
easy as typing on a keyboard.
Accuracy. With computers, accuracy is easier to achieve—
for example, computers allow the drafter to quickly draw
multiple lines to the exact same length. Manual drawing
may be accurate enough for many designs, but many others,
such as tiny electronic circuits, demand much greater accuracy
than can be achieved on paper. Corrections can be made quickly
and easily, without having to erase pencil marks. Also, changing
one dimension can automatically alter related dimensions
accordingly, saving hours of tedious work.
Easy repetition. Computers make it easy to draw the same
shape over and over. Imagine drawing a bicycle chain. Each of
the many chain links is identical, but without CAD, each link
would have to be drawn by hand. With CAD, the designer can
draw just one link and use the computer to repeat the pattern
for the entire chain.
Since computers entered the drafting industry in the 1970s, their
use has grown dramatically.
Computers can
depict lines and
features using
units of millionths
of an inch or
even smaller.


DRAFTING 15
.Tools of the Trade
Practicality. Computers take up less space than the drafting
boards needed for manual drafting. This allows engineering
offices, for example, to be filled with normal-size desks and
work spaces, instead of needing a large room filled with big
drafting tables.
Standard appearance. With CAD, all designers in the same
company can produce drawings with the same style of lettering
and drawing. This allows all jobs to have a common feel to
them instead of reflecting a mix of styles depending on which
designer worked on the project. Thus, the company’s work
looks more professional.
Easy copying. Specialized printers and
papers are not needed with CAD. You can
simply print out a design as you would any
other document created on a computer.
Easy sharing. CAD designs are saved as digital
files that can easily be shared over the internet.
Designers can save various designs in a library that can be
used as a resource for later projects. They simply call up the
file of an old design and use it as the basis of a new design
without having to start from scratch. Designers sometimes need
to share information while a work is in progress. Different
designers may be working on various parts of a larger design—
say, a car—at the same time. With CAD, they can share their
work as they proceed, via email or a computer network.


16 DRAFTING
Tools of the Trade.
CAD does
not eliminate
the need to learn
the principles of drafting
nor the skills of drafting by
hand. Not all professional drafters
have the use of a CAD program, and
computers are not always portable enough
to take everywhere a design drawing is needed.
Also, some types of design are still done better by hand, so
learning manual drafting is a must.
Keep in mind that
CAD systems—
like the older
T-squares and
triangles—are
merely tools to
help you be a
better drafter.
CAD programs can make use of various computer
accessories, such as a graphics tablet, a stylus or
light pen for drawing on the tablet
or monitor, and a special kind of
souped-up computer mouse
that has a magnifying glass
with crosshairs for precise
tracing. A design made
using CAD can be saved
to a file or printed on a
hard copy, although
some projects still use
specialized plotters.


DRAFTING 17
.Tools of the Trade
Beyond Computer-Aided Drafting
Computers can go far beyond what is possible with paper
drawings. Objects can be “modeled” in three dimensions on
the computer screen, rotated and turned as though you were
holding the object in your hand. This is something no manual
draftsperson could ever do with pencil and paper.
Using a powerful modeling program takes us beyond
computer-aided drafting into computer-aided design, which,
confusingly, is commonly known as CAD, the same letters
as for computer-aided drafting. The two disciplines are
sometimes combined as computer-aided drafting and design
(CADD). In CADD, the designer (an automotive engineer,
for example) can assemble several object models on the com-
puter screen, seeing how well the object fits and interacts as
part of a larger assembly.
Some powerful design programs can assign physical
properties to the computer model. Then the computer program
can analyze the strength of that object and how much it will
weigh when built. This kind of analysis is part of computer-
aided engineering (CAE).
After an object has been drawn,
designed, and engineered, it might
also move on to the next step—
computer-aided manufacturing
(CAM). The computer-created
model of an object—say, a car
part—is transferred directly to
computer-controlled machines
that can produce the object. In
other words, a physical copy of
the part can be made without
ever having been shown on paper.
Engineers use CAE to find out if a part will break,
vibrate too much, or perform poorly when exposed to
heat. All of this vital information can be learned before
the object is ever actually made.
CADD is an enormous benefit for designing everyday
objects, too, such as a tape measure.


18 DRAFTING
Tools of the Trade.
Using CAD to Build Better Cars
David Oakley is a CAD designer for Ford Motor
Company in Detroit, Michigan. He uses an advanced
CAD software program called CATIA, which allows
him to design objects on the computer screen in
three dimensions.
David designs some of the thousands of parts that
go into making vehicles. He might work on the brakes,
the suspension, or the fuel system. Sometimes he must
change a design because some other part on the vehi-
cle is altered. “The car or truck is in constant flux until
the prototype is produced,” he says.


DRAFTING 19
.Tools of the Trade
Once, he had designed a fuel tank for a truck
that fit perfectly, only to be told that he must shave
2 inches off the width to fit a change in the floor assem-
bly. “We made it work,” he says. Adapting to change is
part of the designer’s duty.
David’s greatest satisfaction in his work comes
when he finds a way to make a part that is lighter,
stronger, and more economical to build. For example,
he redesigned the plastic air deflector shield that fits
under the front bumper of the Ford Focus passenger
car. His new design shaved 6 pounds off the weight of
the part and more than $7 off the cost to produce it.
When you consider that hundreds of thousands of
cars will be built with the new part, David’s design will
save the company more than $5.3 million—and it will
save car owners money by letting them go farther on a
tank of gas because of the car’s lighter weight. It’s easy
to see the value of a good CAD designer.
David says opportunities are good for young people
entering the field with the latest technical skills: “This
work is great for people who are creative, like to draw,
and have a good feel for mechanics or electronics.”





DRAFTING 21
.Sketching, Scale Drawings, and Lettering
Sketching, Scale
Drawings, and Lettering
Drafters must be skilled at sketching, making scale drawings,
and neatly lettering their finished drawings.
Sketching
Most drawings begin with sketches. A sketch is simply a rough
draft, little more than an outline of an object showing its main
features but not much detail. Sketches help the drafter visualize
what the more finished drawing will look like. Sketching also
helps the drafter decide which drawing technique would be
best to show an object’s features.
Sketching helps
the drafter plan
the drawing’s
format, where to
place the views,
and how much
room is needed
for notes and
other important
information. It
is important to
develop sketching
skills whether the
finished drawing
is created with
instruments or
with a CAD
computer program.


22 DRAFTING
Sketching, Scale Drawings, and Lettering.
The two illustrations show the contrast between sketch and
finished drawing. Both drawings are of an architectural floor
plan. Floor plans are drawn as though seen by a bird—that is,
from above—with the roof and ceiling of the building removed.
The first illustration was drawn freehand and shows walls,
doors, windows, electrical outlets, fixtures, etc. The room
was measured and the sketch dimensioned (that is, the room’s
measurements are shown on the sketch). For the finished
drawing, the sketch was redrawn to scale using drafting
instruments, and neatly lettered.
A freehand sketch
The sketch redrawn to scale using drafting instruments, and
neatly lettered


DRAFTING 23
.Sketching, Scale Drawings, and Lettering
When sketching freehand, it is easiest to use grid paper,
which has lines to help judge proportion and alignment.
Drafters use pencils with varying degrees of
hardness and different types of points,
depending on what part of the sketch
they are working on, such as when
outlining an object or shading the
object. Buy a few different types
of pencils and experiment with
them on your own drawings.
Industry-standard symbols are used for this type of
drawing. (See “The Symbols of Drafting” later in this
pamphlet.) Becoming familiar with these symbols will
help you to make sketches quickly and ensure that all
the important features of the sketch are transferred to
the final drawing.
Get started by sketching simple
objects around the house—a
book lying on a table, for
instance, or the table itself. Grid
paper will help keep the lines
straight. If you find sketching unfa-
miliar and difficult, don’t worry. Later
sections in this pamphlet on scale draw-
ings and the different “views” used in drafting
will give some structure to your efforts.


24 DRAFTING
Sketching, Scale Drawings, and Lettering.
Making Scale Drawings
The drawings we make of an object are rarely the actual
size of the object. Usually, drawings are smaller, and for
good reason. How awkward it would be if the drawing of a
car were as big as the car itself! With other objects, however,
such as electronic circuits, the drawing will be many times
larger than the actual object.
Even though a drawing is far different in size than the
object it represents, it must still be extremely accurate. That
is where the concept of “scale” applies. Simply put, scale is
the relationship or proportion between two sets of dimensions.
For example, in an architect’s drawing of a house, the scale
might be “1⁄4 inch equals 1 foot.” That means that every quarter
inch of distance on the drawing represents 12 inches of the
actual house. The wall of a room intended to be 12 feet long
would be shown 3 inches long in the drawing.
Drawing to scale means fitting your drawing to the size of
the paper without changing the proportions of the object, area,
or building you are drawing. You can choose whatever scale
you want; just be sure to label the drawing accordingly. Choose
a scale that will make the drawing as large as possible without
crowding it on the paper.
A drawing that
accurately reflects
the dimensions
of a project at
a reduced or
enlarged size
is called a
scale drawing.
SERVICE MODULE,
RESEARCH, DOCKING & STORAGE MODULE


DRAFTING 25
.Sketching, Scale Drawings, and Lettering
Dimensioning
When a drawing is made to scale, the craftsperson or engineer
who is working with the plans can determine the real-life
dimension of any object in the drawing by referring to the
scale—simply measuring the line in the drawing and then
applying the proportion of the scale. Keep in mind that parts
of the drawing might be small and hard to measure, or perhaps
the paper might shrink or expand with heat or cold and
moisture, which would throw off the measurement. For
those reasons, drafters add numbers to drawings to indicate
the object’s actual dimensions. Dimensioning typically includes:
• The overall dimensions of the project—the length, width,
and (if required by your drawing) depth of the entire project
• The location dimensions—positioning a window or door,
for instance, within the drawing
• The size dimensions—indicating, for example, how big the
window or door should be
A special ruler used to measure or draw a scale drawing is called an
architect’s scale. This ruler divides dimensions for you, simplifying the
process of measuring or drawing objects that are larger than the paper
or smaller than you want them shown. By comparison, an engineer’s
scale is more detailed and shows fractions up to sixtieths of an inch.
TRIANGULAR ARCHITECT’S SCALE
ONE INCH
DIVIDED INTO
EIGHT PARTS
ONE FOOT AT
1⁄8” SCALE
ENLARGEMENT
OF 1⁄8” SCALE


26 DRAFTING
Sketching, Scale Drawings, and Lettering.
Dimensions should be lettered neatly for easy reading
and positioned so they can be read from the bottom of the
sheet. Including more dimensions than are needed for
the purpose of the drawing could make the drawing look
cluttered or confusing, dimensioning should be so complete
that the person reading the drawing does not need to use
mathematics to understand sizes.
Like the tools of the drafting trade discussed
earlier, the methods of reproducing finished
drawings have been revolutionized by computer
technology. Copy machines and computer print-
ers have taken over, largely replacing some
older ways of duplicating designs.
A blueprint is a copy of a drawing made on
vellum. By laying the vellum on light-sensitized
blueprint paper and passing a high-intensity
light through the drawing onto the blueprint, a
special coating on the blueprint paper turns
blue. The lines on the drawing prevent light
from passing through to the paper; in this way,
they remain white. The coating on the paper is
then washed off and the paper is dried; the
result is white lines on a blue background. This
process is no longer used in the industry.
Until recent years, the size limitations and
cost of standard photocopiers made this dupli-
cation process impractical. Now, however, con-
tinuous, roll-fed copy paper can be used to
reproduce any size of drawing. Drawings can
be duplicated even on new vellum. This allows
the user to enlarge or reduce the drawing on
the copy.
CAD plotters are a special kind of computer
printer using pens, often colored pens. A pen
plotter draws original or duplicate drawings out-
Use the dimension
and extension
lines discussed in
the “Symbols of
Drafting” chapter.
The dimensions of
angles are indi-
cated by an arc
inside the angle.


DRAFTING 27
.Sketching, Scale Drawings, and Lettering
putted from a CAD computer program. Usually,
only the original drawing is made with the plotter;
other copy methods are used to reproduce the
original.
Laser or ink-jet printers are common forms of
computer printers often used to print CAD
designs. Laser printers are more precise than ink-
jet but more expensive. Both types of printers can
print in color.
The use of
computers and
printers has
greatly reduced
the need for
blueprinting
or diazo
reproductions
and for special
papers such
as vellum.


28 DRAFTING
Sketching, Scale Drawings, and Lettering.
Lettering
In all types of drafting, it is important to write clearly and
neatly. After all, the purpose of a drawing is to communicate
an idea. The ability to write clearly is a critical factor in
achieving that goal.
Because of this, drafters devote a lot of practice and
effort to lettering. In drafting, Gothic and Roman letters are
used because they are easy to read and draw. Engineering
professionals use only single-stroke Gothic letters, either
vertical or inclined. Architectural draftspeople use a more
stylized variation of single-stroke Roman letters, usually
inclined. Either style of lettering can be extended or
compressed to fit a certain length of line.
Mechanical and electrical lettering
Architectural lettering


DRAFTING 29
.Sketching, Scale Drawings, and Lettering
Lettering is just as important to master as other
drawing techniques. Often, more information is contained
in the notes than in the drawing itself. Illegible printing
can cause the craftsperson to overlook critical information.
Requirement 6 for this merit badge is to letter
a formatted page. Start by drawing guidelines about
¼ inch high (like the lines on loose-leaf notebook
paper). Keep the text evenly spaced as you letter;
if you step back from the page, you should not
see any gaps or crowded letters.
Lettering templates can help with rapid
lettering, but it is important to master freehand
lettering first, even if you eventually do most of
your lettering by computer. In CAD, lettering is as
easy as typing on a keyboard. The different styles
of lettering available in CAD are called fonts. Roman
and Gothic letters are just two of the hundreds of
different fonts available for the draftsperson to use.
Before lettering,
draw light
guidelines on
the paper; erase
the guidelines
after lettering
is complete.
Using guidelines
helps ensure
that lettering will
be straight and
evenly spaced
between the lines.


30 DRAFTING
Sketching, Scale Drawings, and Lettering.
How an Architect Uses Drafting
Charles Linn is a licensed architect, a member of the American Institute
of Architects’ College of Fellows, and deputy editor of Architectural
Record magazine. Here he answers questions about architectural drafting.
Q: How important are basic drafting skills in architecture?
A: Good drafting skills are crucial to the success of architects, because if
you don’t know how to draft, you won’t be able to communicate your
ideas. We use drawings to tell our clients what their building will look
like, and we use them to tell the builders what they will build. Drafting
is also important because we use drawings to help us predict whether
our ideas will work before we actually start making a building. A really
complicated building might have a thousand sheets of drawings.
Q: How have you used drafting and drawing techniques in your
own career?
A: Like most architects, I use drafting for several purposes. One of them
is to make what are called construction drawings. These are technical
diagrams that tell the people who are going to build a building how
big it is, what materials it will be made out of, and such things as
where the wiring, heating, and plumbing will go.
Getty Center, Los Angeles, California; Richard Meier, architect


Drafting is also often used as the basis for making renderings.
Renderings are like pieces of art. They can be either simple sketches or
complicated, almost like paintings. The intent of a rendering is to help
the viewer understand how the building will appear when it is finished.
Renderings generally do not have enough technical detail to allow a
person to build from them.
Q: Are manual drafting skills still useful in the age of computer-aided
drafting and design? How about lettering?
A: Sure, manual drafting skills are still quite useful at times. A person
needs only a T-square, triangle, a scale, pencil, and some paper in order
to start making drawings. That setup is much less expensive than a
computer, software, and a printer, and it can be used almost anywhere.
In the hands of a skilled draftsperson, there might be some situations
where these tools will be faster than the computer.
Architectural lettering is quite useful because it is so legible. Many
people have come up to me over the years and said, “Your handwrit-
ing is so straight and easy to read. You must be an architect!” Of
course, that makes me very proud.
Q: How long did it take you to master lettering without the use
of templates?
A: A few weeks. The main thing is that I had to practice a lot, and I used
light guidelines to keep things straight. When lettering, I always use
a small triangle to make the vertical strokes of letters such as I, L, K,
and so on.
Q: What are the most satisfying aspects of learning drafting skills?
A: The first is the satisfaction of making a beautiful drawing in itself.
The second is the thrill you get the first time you see a building that
was built from your drawings.
Q: What advice would you have for someone earning the Drafting
merit badge?
A: Be patient, and don’t get discouraged if your drawings don’t turn out
to be perfect at first.
DRAFTING 31
.Sketching, Scale Drawings, and Lettering


32 DRAFTING
Sketching, Scale Drawings, and Lettering.


DRAFTING 33
.Views and Plans in Drafting
Views and Plans
in Drafting
The views and plans created in drafting help architects,
builders, engineers, and others to bring a project to completion.
Different Views
Draftspeople create drawings with different types of views
depending on the purpose of the drawing. Each type of view
is based on a straightforward method that you can follow to
make drawing an object easier. Let’s look at each of the major
types of views, as well as some more specialized ones.
Orthographic Projection
One of the most common and easily understood styles of
drawing is the orthographic projection. The word orthographic
means, literally, “straight writing” or “straight drawing.”
As it is used here,
“projection”
means a way
of showing a
three-dimensional
object on a flat
plane—that is, on
a piece of paper.
These images depict a typical orthographic projection of
an object, with straight-on front, side, and top views.


34 DRAFTING
Views and Plans in Drafting.
The orthographic projection offers “straight on” views of
an object—for example, the front view, side view, and top view.
In each case, you see only the height and width of the object,
but not the depth. If you set a book on a table and crouch to
look at the book straight-on with your eye at tabletop height,
you will see a rectangle with a certain height and width.
Consider this the front view.
Walk around the table and again put your eye at tabletop
height. Now you are seeing the side view of the book. Stand up
and look straight down on the book. This is the top view. You
have just created an orthographic projection of the book. That
is, you have viewed various planes of the book from different
sides, with each side having a relationship to the other sides.
The illustration here shows a properly formatted drawing
of a river raft. This third-angle projection shows the craftsper-
son all the information necessary to build the raft. The top, front,
and side views are all drawn in natural relationship to each other.
The side view shows where the flotation barrels are to be
attached to the cross-tie poles and how they are to be lashed
with the rope. Note that the raft’s deck poles, which run left
and right in this view, are attached to the cross-tie poles at
specific locations. This view shows where and how the deck
poles are first lashed to the cross-tie poles.
Orthographic projection: river raft


DRAFTING 35
.Views and Plans in Drafting
The front view shows only the front of the first two barrels.
The two rear barrels are behind the front barrels but are unseen
from this view.
Now look at the top view. You will see the width and
length of the raft, each of which you saw in the front and side
views, respectively. This time, however, you see them both at
the same time. The length and width dimensions are not shown
in the top view because they are already shown in the other
two views.
If you look “through” the deck in the top view, you will
see hidden (dotted) lines. These represent the four flotation
barrels located underneath the deck. (Unlike pictorial styles,
which are discussed later in this section, orthographic drawings
show hidden features.)
Remember that each view gives the craftsperson only
two-dimensional information. You can see that dimen-
sional information in the front view could not possibly
have been given to the craftsperson in the side view.
Make an Orthographic Drawing
To make an orthographic drawing, start with the front
view. Draw it true to the shape of the object, scaled to
fit the paper. Then draw the top view by projecting
lines from the front view. This ensures that the top
view exactly lines up with the front view. This allows
the reader to easily see the features in both views.
Lastly, draw the side view. Again, project lines from
the front view to make the side line up with the front.
To complete the drawing, add important notes and
a bill of materials (a list of materials, and the quantity
of each, used to build the object). The entire drawing
should be centrally located on the paper, with no lines
extending beyond its border. Fill in the title block sec-
tions, including the drawing scale. The drawing is now
ready, and the building of the object (in this case, a raft)
can begin.
It is unacceptable
to dimension the
same object of
length more than
one time in any
single drawing.


36 DRAFTING
Views and Plans in Drafting.
Isometric Drawing
While an orthographic drawing shows different views arranged
on the same page, an isometric drawing combines several views
into one picture. The resulting image appears to have three
dimensions (height, width, and depth), not just two. The iso-
metric style looks similar to how the object would look in real
life—but with an important difference.
If you were to draw an object in three
dimensions as it looks to you, it would
have perspective. The parts farther from
your eye would look smaller and closer
together than those closer to your eye. To
better understand this, imagine standing in
the middle of a railroad track. The two rails
seem far apart at your feet but much closer
together in the distance—when, in fact, the
rails are parallel, the same distance apart,
all the way.
A drawing made with this perspective
would look realistic, but making scale
enlargements or reductions from it would
be difficult. A three-dimensional isometric
drawing, on the other hand, would show
an equal distance between the rails near
and far. This type of drawing can be reduced
or enlarged, through simple scale measurements, to the size
required, without distorting the proportions.
In a perspective drawing, the far-off
parts look smaller and closer together
than the nearby parts.
HORIZON VANISHING POINT


DRAFTING 37
.Views and Plans in Drafting
An isometric drawing is built on a
skeleton of three lines called isometric
axes. The lines form three equal angles
of 120 degrees each.
Let’s start by drawing an isometric cube,
line by line as shown in the illustration.
Do you see the isometric skeleton? Notice
that all edges of the cube that are supposed
to be the same length are actually drawn that way. You can
see that all lines that would be vertical in an orthographic
drawing are also vertical in isometric drawings. However,
lines that would be horizontal in an orthographic drawing
are tilted upward 30 degrees from horizontal.
B C
120°
120° 120°
An isometric drawing
is built on a “skeleton”
of three lines: the
isometric axes.
CB
Drawing an isometric cube
If you want to enlarge or reduce this drawing, you can
apply your draftsperson’s scale to lines A, B, and C
and convert them to the scale you want in your larger
or smaller drawing. You will then have a new skeleton
to build on. Try this, and you will understand the
isometric principle.
A
The term isometric,
which means
“equal measures,”
comes from the
three equal,
120-degree angles.
A
1 2 3
4 5


38 DRAFTING
Views and Plans in Drafting.
Now look at the other isometric drawings illustrated here.
Notice the isometric skeleton in each of them. See how it defines
the three dimensions? Study these drawings and practice draw-
ing them a few times before you try to draw an actual object.
It takes practice to figure out which edges should be based on
the isometric axes. Notice that a framework is drawn before the
shapes are defined.
Isometric drawings


DRAFTING 39
.Views and Plans in Drafting
How to Make an Isometric Drawing
of a Camera
Begin with orthographic views of a camera: top view, front view,
and side view. (See the orthographic projection of a camera at the
beginning of this chapter.) Then create an isometric series, adding
an increasing number of details to each of four isometric drawings.
Use lightweight lines in steps 1, 2, and 3.
Step 1—Set up angles and draw in major features.
Step 2—Locate and sketch in the detailed features.
Step 3—Draw in the “depth” of the detail features.
Step 4—Darken object lines; add detail.
ORTHOGRAPHIC VIEWS
“DEPTH” OF FEATURES
The concept of the orthographic view
is simple, as these illustrations show.
TOP
FRONT SIDE


40 DRAFTING
Views and Plans in Drafting.
ISOMETRIC CIRCLES
To draw isometric circles, the four-center approximation method
is most often used (see the illustration). Enclose the circle in
a true square, then make an isometric drawing of the square.
Mark off the points of tangency (where the circle and the true
square intersect) on the isometric square.
tangent A
tangent A 30º
ISOMETRIC SQUARETRUE SQUARE
pivot
point a
pivot
point b
arc 2
radius 2
radius 4
arc 3
radius 3
arc 4
pivot
point c
pivot
point d
tangent A
arc 1 radius 1
pivot
point a
pivot
point b
arc 2
radius 2
radius 4
arc 3
radius 3
arc 4
pivot
point c
pivot
point d
tangent A
arc 1 radius 1


DRAFTING 41
.Views and Plans in Drafting
At these points, draw
perpendicular lines to the sides
of the isometric square, using
a 60-degree triangle. The four
intersections of the perpendicu-
lar lines (a, b, c, and d) will be
the center from which four arcs
can be drawn with a compass
to complete the isometric circle.
The point where radius
1 meets radius 4 (tangent A)
will be tangent to the isometric
square. The radii will blend
naturally, creating a smooth arc.
pivot
point a
pivot
point b
arc 2
radius 2
radius 4
arc 3
radius 3
arc 4
pivot
point c
pivot
point d
tangent A
arc 1 radius 1
pivot
point a
pivot
point b
arc 2
radius 2
radius 4
arc 3
radius 3
arc 4
pivot
point c
pivot
point d
tangent A
arc 1 radius 1
TRUE SQUARE ISOMETRIC SQUARE


42 DRAFTING
Views and Plans in Drafting.
Perspective Drawing
Perspective drawing shows an object as it looks to the eye. In
the example of railroad tracks mentioned earlier, a perspective
drawing would show the two parallel rails coming together on
the horizon, at what is called a vanishing point, just as the
rails would in real life. Perspective drawings are often used in
architectural drafting to give customers an idea of how a house
or building will look before it is built. This kind of drawing
makes it easier to visualize the finished structure than a simple
floor plan could.
Perspective drawings are not just used in architecture,
though. They can be helpful when drawing any sort of large
object—say, a car or a complicated piece of machinery.
Most perspective drawings are drawn with a one-point
or two-point perspective. The numbers refer to the number
of vanishing points on the horizon.
In the case of the one-point perspective, you draw the face
of the object (say, a rectangular block) at its actual scale, just
as you would in an orthographic projection. Then you draw
guidelines from the corners of the block that meet at the same
single point on the horizon. When you draw the sides along
these guidelines, this creates a “shrinking” of the sides of the
block as they recede from the front face toward the horizon.
That shrinking is what makes the drawing look realistic.
Laying out and blocking in a one-point perspective. Although perspective drawings
are the easiest type of drawings for people to understand, they are often the most
difficult to draw.


DRAFTING 43
.Views and Plans in Drafting
More commonly used than a one-point perspective is the
two-point perspective. Instead of starting with a straight-on view
of the face of the block, this drawing starts with a corner view.
From a straight vertical line representing the corner, the lines
for the front and one side of the block are drawn out to two
vanishing points on the horizon (see the illustration). This
looks even more realistic than the one-point perspective.
Less commonly used are
drawings with a three-point
perspective, in which none of
the lines are parallel. This
perspective is often used when
drawing skyscrapers, adding
a third vanishing point on the
horizon below the building.
The effect of this is to make
the building seem narrower near
the ground, as though you were
looking down toward street level
from a point halfway up the side
of a nearby building.
Example of a two-point perspective
A three-point perspective adds
realism when drawing objects
such as tall structures.
HORIZON
VANISHING
POINT
VANISHING
POINT


44 DRAFTING
Views and Plans in Drafting.
Pictorial Drawings
Architects create a type of pictorial drawings called renderings,
which look like fine paintings of houses or buildings, complete
with trees and other landscaping features. Renderings are often
shown along with floor plans to give an idea of how a house
looks from the outside as well as how big each room is.
The term pictorial drawings refers to various styles of
drawing that show how an object might look in real life,
that is, with three dimensions. Isometric drawings are
pictorial. So are perspective drawings.
If you draw lines from the “horizontal” lines of the house
pictured, they meet at the vanishing points.
Floor plan


DRAFTING 45
.Views and Plans in Drafting
Good examples of assembly drawings are found in the instructions for putting
together a model car.
More Views
Still more types of drawings are commonly
used, all of which have the same basic
purpose: to communicate how an object
should be put together.
Sectional Views. Sometimes an object,
such as a car engine, has complicated
internal features or a complex shape that
does not allow the designer to show
everything with just an outside view.
In these cases, the designer might decide
to draw a sectional view. It shows how the
object would look if it were cut in half (or
in smaller pieces). Sometimes a sectional
drawing is referred to as a “cutaway view.”
Assembly Drawings. A drawing that
shows how two or more parts of a product
fit together is an assembly drawing. There
are various types, showing different levels
of detail. These range from layout drawings,
showing the general design of the object,
to working assembly drawings with exact
specifications for manufacture. Often, one
object will require several sheets of drawings. The first sheet is
an assembly drawing showing the overall project, followed by
several sheets of “subassembly drawings” showing how the
A sectional drawing or “cutaway
view” shows objects inside a
larger object.


46 DRAFTING
Views and Plans in Drafting.
component parts are put together. In the case of multiple sheets,
the drafter will state in the title block how many sheets are
included in the drawing set.
Exploded Views. Another type of assembly drawing is the
exploded view. It shows the various parts of a project pulled
apart from one another but still in the same relative positions
that they have when assembled. This helps you see how the
individual parts look, while getting a good idea of how they
fit together. This type of view is also common in instructions
for model car kits.
Drawings sometimes contain a combination of
styles rather than one style or view. An orthographic
drawing, showing dimensions, might be combined
with an isometric view of the object, which is easier
to visualize. Likewise, a floor plan of a home design
might be accompanied by a pictorial drawing,
complete with landscaping, showing the finished
project in the best possible light.
An exploded view shows the individual parts separated from one
another but still in their correct relative positions.


DRAFTING 47
.Views and Plans in Drafting
Different Plans
Here are some of the common types of plans that drafters create.
Floor Plans
The most basic and essential type of architectural plan is the
floor plan. Imagine that you could look down at your home
from above, with the roof and ceilings removed. This is the
view that is reproduced in the floor plan. The floor plan shows
each room, wall, door, and window in the house, as well as
staircases, patios, decks, and other structures. In multistory
houses, each floor has a separate plan.
Electrical Plans
An electrical plan starts with a copy of the floor plan, adding
the appropriate symbols (discussed in the next chapter) to
show where electrical services should be placed. All light
fixtures, wall outlets, switches, cable TV outlets, ethernet
connections, fiber-optic connections, and telephone connections
are added to the floor plan using symbols.
You can draw
a floor plan of
your own home
using only a tape
measure, a pencil,
and grid paper.
Electrical plan


48 DRAFTING
Views and Plans in Drafting.
Landscape Plans
The landscape plan shows the design of an entire property, not
just the structure that sits on the property. This plan shows the
landscaper where to place flower beds, shrubs, and trees. It is
also useful in showing walkways, driveways, and the structure’s
relationship to other nearby buildings.
Elevation Views
Another type of architectural drawing is the elevation view, a
type of orthographic drawing that shows details about a structure
that do not appear on the floor plan. Generally, an elevation view
is drawn for each side of the house. It shows the perspective of
someone standing at ground level (rather than a bird’s-eye view).
Trees and shrubs
add beauty and
can have other
benefits. Shade
trees, for example,
can help cool a
house in a warm
climate, while a
row of trees or
thick bushes can
help insulate a
house in a cold
or windy climate.
Elevation views are also sometimes drawn for interior (inside) walls,
to show the layout of such features as built-in fireplaces, bookcases,
and entertainment centers in a living room, or cabinetry and windows
in a bathroom.
A landscape plan shows the location of trees, shrubs, flower
beds, lawns, and walkways.
Items like the depth of the foundation, type of roof, and height
from the ground are all shown in elevation drawings.


DRAFTING 49
.Views and Plans in Drafting
Electronics Drawings
Drawing plans of electronic devices and systems is increasingly
important as computers and computer circuits find their way
into more and more parts of our lives. These days, everything
from an automobile engine to a greeting card can have a
computer chip in it. Special symbols are used in electronics
drawings, using standards set by industry groups such as the
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
Different Formats
To clearly present the various views and plans, drafters use
different types of formats. Although formats differ in style
and content, all share a few things in common. They convey
important information about the drawing on the sheet. This
information commonly includes the drawing’s name or number
(or other means of identification), the date it was drawn, the
designer’s name, and the drawing scale. Other important infor-
mation that is often included is the material used, company
name or logo, approvals, and sheet number (for drawings that
require more than one sheet).
On these pages are several sample formats used for different
types of projects. Note the information contained in the title
blocks in each example. Also notice that each format has a
border and title block. No drawing is finished until the title
block is added.
S1
R2
100K
R1
100K
R4
4.7K
R3
10K
Q1
IC1 741
7
4
2
3
PB +
-
+
-
+
-
9V
LDR
In this sense,
the word “format”
simply means a
particular way of
arranging and
labeling standard
elements in a
drawing. Every
company, or
designer, uses its
own favorite type
of format.
Electronics drawings include schematic diagrams (such as
this one), block diagrams, logic diagrams, and wiring diagrams.
Each has its own purpose and level of detail. For more about
diagrams, see the Electronics and Radio merit badge pamphlets.


50 DRAFTING
Views and Plans in Drafting.
For the Drafting merit badge, you will format two sheets of drawing paper
with proper borders and title blocks. You will use one formatted sheet
for your manual drawing project, and one sheet for your lettering project.
No special type of paper is required, however, you may want to tape
two 8½-by-11-inch sheets of paper together to make a more generous
11-by-17-inch drawing surface. If you have a little money to spend, you
can find drafting tools and papers at most stores selling office, school,
or art supplies. Standard sizes for professional quality papers are usually
17 by 24 inches or 24 by 36 inches.
This format is used for
architectural drawings of
buildings, floor plans, etc.
This format is used for
drawing objects, such as
machines or woodwork.
This format is used for
making electrical drawings,
such as electronic circuits.


DRAFTING 51
.Views and Plans in Drafting
Computer-Aided
Drafting Software
For requirements 3 and 4, you will draw
with the help of computer software. Ask your
counselor’s advice about software
programs, where to find a program that
fits your needs, and how to use it. Look at
several options. For requirement 5 you are
to discuss not only the software you use,
but also other programs that are available.
CAD (or CADD) Software Online
Many software programs are available on the
internet as “freeware” that will let you try
computer-aided drafting or design. Search for
the term “free CAD software.”
One program available at this writing is Sketchup, a free
download (with paid tiers of usage) at sketchup.com that is
widely used by students of architecture and design. The
program will not allow you to do a professional drawing but
does help you understand perspective and other drafting and
design concepts. One fun exercise to do with the program is to
create a 3-D model of your own house or apartment building.
Be sure to use the tutorials that accompany the program.
You may get to
try advanced or
professional
design software
when you visit
a place of
business to meet
requirement 7(a).
Before downloading or installing any freeware or other
software from the internet, first get your parent or
guardian’s (and the computer owner’s) permission.
This format is used for lettering, for notes, or for drawing
small parts. Use this format when you need to provide
written information, such as how CAD has been used in the
drawing. Use lettering rules when writing in this format.





DRAFTING 53
.The Symbols of Drafting
The Symbols of Drafting
Every industry has its own symbols that help its professionals.
Electrical engineers have symbols for resistors and transistors;
these are seldom used by architects. Architects use special
symbols of their own—for doors, windows, and walls—for which
mechanical engineers have little use. Mechanical engineers, in
turn, have symbols for welding, drilling, and machine sections
that are not often used in other professions.
Regardless of the exact symbols used, the purpose
of them is the same: to allow you, the draftsperson,
to properly communicate ideas to the professionals,
who will be making objects from the drawings.


54 DRAFTING
The Symbols of Drafting.
Lines and Symbols
Whether you are preparing architectural, mechanical, or
electrical drawings, you must observe certain line conventions
(the customary or agreed-upon way of doing things) used in
all industries. A few of commonly used lines in drafting are
shown here.
1. Thin line. For less important edges or edges beyond the
section plane (for example, electrical outlets, windows,
appliances, etc.).
2. Medium line. For primary edges (edges that are not
directly visible).
3. Thick line. For object, or perimeter, edges (outside,
visible edges).
4. Dash-dot line. Medium-weight line for the center line,
boundary line, or other important line not actually in
the object.
5. Extension line. Thin line not connected to the object;
used to show the limits of a dimension.
6. Dimension line. Thin line with
arrow points touching the extension
line and with a break in the
middle for the dimension numeral
(in a mechanical drawing), or
7. Dimension line. Thin line with
dimension numerals on top of
the line. This type of dimension
line is more commonly used.
8. Section line. Similar to dash-dot
line, but with two short dashes
instead of a dot. Used when a
section of an object is being drawn.
Arrows indicate the view through
which the section of an object
was drawn.
9. Breakline. Used where the section
view, or plan, is discontinued.
2'6"
6
1
2
4
7
8
2'6"
3
5
9


DRAFTING 55
.The Symbols of Drafting
Architectural Symbols
1. Light. Ceiling- or wall-mounted.
2. Duplex outlet. Wall plug, 110 volts.
3. Switch. Wall-mounted, 110 volts.
4. Special-purpose outlet. Specify on the drawing which
type the outlet represents (phone, alarm system, junction
box, etc.).
5. Floor drain.
6. Ceiling-mounted fluorescent light. Specify the
number of light tubes and their length (for example,
four 48-inch tubes).
7. Double-hung window. Usually, the size is marked
on the window’s exterior.
8. Door, exterior.
Specify size.
9. Door, interior.
Specify size.
10. Dimension. Standard
architectural dimension
line. Note that diagonal
hatch marks are used
in the same way arrow-
heads are used in
mechanical drafting.
12' 3"
2 4
6
8
10
1 3
5
7
9


56 DRAFTING
The Symbols of Drafting.
Mechanical Symbols
1. Radius arrow. The letter R is used
to designate radius. The radius of a
circle is half the diameter; it is the
distance from the center of a circle
to the outside. The top number,
above the line, expresses the radius
in decimal inches; the bottom
number, shown in square brackets,
is the dimension in millimeters.
2. Diameter. The ø symbol indicates
diameter. The letters DIA may also
be used.
3. Section, plastic. Indicates plastic
section lines for plastic parts cut to
show section views.
4. Section, steel. Indicates steel
section lines for steel parts cut
to show section views.
5. Weld. Indicates where standard
fillet welds (welds with a triangular
cross section) are to be made on
metal parts.
6. Leader arrow. The type of arrow-
head used in mechanical drawings.
7. Phantom line. Used to indicate
the exterior of a part when less
than the entire part is shown.
(If only the front half of a car
is drawn in detail, for example,
phantom lines would be used to
show the outline of the back of
the car.)
R.50
[13]
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Ø1.OO
[25.4]


DRAFTING 57
.The Symbols of Drafting
Electronics Symbols
1. Earth ground. Indicates where
a circuit is to be connected to
the ground.
2. Chassis ground. Indicates where
a circuit is to be connected to
the chassis, or frame, of the
electronic equipment.
3. Capacitor.
4. Capacitor (polarized).
5. Fuse.
6. Resistor (fixed value).
7. Resistor (variable resistance).
8. Transistor.
9. Switch (opened, or “off”).
10. Diode (semiconductor type).
11. Loudspeaker.
12. Transformer.
2
3
65
10
9
11
8
12
7
These electronics symbols are only a few of those commonly used in electronics
drafting and are sufficient for drafting a complete circuit. Your counselor can help
you with specialized electronics symbols.
1
4





DRAFTING 59
.Careers in Drafting
Careers in Drafting
As the technology of drafting has evolved, so have career
opportunities in drafting. Drafters of the past spent several
years in training, mostly on the job. They learned the trade
from more experienced coworkers, and, in time, were experi-
enced enough to teach newer employees themselves.
This system of on-the-job learning has mostly given
way to college training in drafting and drawing. Today,
many employers require a four-year degree before they
will consider a person as a designer.
Here are some of the titles and career opportunities found
in drafting today:
Drafters
Drafters create technical drawings for industry, science, and
engineering. Drafting skills are needed to support the many
industries that require plans and drawings of steel, plastic,
glass, wood, and electronics processes. Because drafting is
closely tied to the fields in which it is used, there are many
specialized drafting positions in which knowledge and training
in the broader field are essential.
Aeronautical drafters draw plans used to build aircraft.
Architectural drafters draw plans for constructing houses,
buildings, and other structures. These drafters may further spe-
cialize in a type of structure, such as homes or shopping malls.
Civil drafters draw plans used in big engineering projects,
such as highways, dams, bridges, and sewage systems.
Depending on the position, designers of today may
need to be knowledgeable about engineering and
architecture, since they could be working closely
with people in those fields and using many of the
same tools.


60 DRAFTING
Careers in Drafting.
Electrical drafters draw wiring diagrams used to build
electrical equipment and wiring in homes, buildings, and
other structures.
Electronics drafters also draw wiring diagrams, but in
addition they draw circuit boards and other schematics used
in making electronic devices and components, such as personal
music players and cell phones.
Mechanical drafters draw plans showing how to
assemble machines.
Related Careers
With modern drafters relying heavily on computer-aided drafting
and design software, nowadays they are sometimes called CADD
operators. Other positions also use drafting skills.
Engineering technicians help design, develop, test, and
create various projects, products, or processes. They may assist
engineers and scientists in a multitude of ways.
Graphic designers lay out
books, magazines, and other print
publications, as well as digital media.
Graphic designers may be called digital
technicians, since so much of their
work deals with the technology of
digital communications, involving not
just drawings but also video, audio,
and animation.
Illustrators create drawings,
pictures, graphs, tables, and other
kinds of images for publications
and electronic media, sometimes
in specialized fields of science,
medicine, or engineering.
Cartographers create maps for
business, industry, and government,
both digitally and on paper.


DRAFTING 61
.Careers in Drafting
Training for a Drafting Career
If you want to pursue a career in drafting, start by taking any
specialized drafting course that may be offered in your high
school. Take as many shop courses as you can to get experience
in reading blueprints and plans and to learn about the craftsper-
son’s use of tools in creating the objects shown in the plans.
Take drawing courses that may be offered by your school’s
art department.
After high school, you will continue your specialized
training in drafting. Many drafting, engineering technician,
graphic arts, and computer courses are offered by trade schools
and community colleges. You will need to get trained in using
particular CAD software programs. This training can come
during coursework at college, on the job, or through private
firms. Some forms of technical training taught in the armed
forces can also be used in civilian drafting positions.
The more education you have, the more competitive
you will be in the job market. Many employers require
four-year degrees in design or related fields. Growth in
the number of drafting positions available is expected
to slow as more and more drafting work becomes com-
puterized. However, the outlook is still good overall for
drafters with a good education and a solid background
in CADD, in addition to the traditional drafting skills.
Drafters need
math skills.
Take as many
science and math
courses as
possible, including
geometry, algebra,
trigonometry,
and physics.


62 DRAFTING
Drafting Resources.
Drafting Resources
Scouting Literature
Architecture, Art, Computers,
Engineering, Graphic Arts, Inventing,
Landscape Architecture, Model Design
and Building, Surveying, and Welding
merit badge pamphlets
Books
American Institute of Architects.
Architectural Graphic Standards.
Wiley & Sons, 2007.
French, Thomas E. Mechanical Drawing:
Board and CAD Techniques. McGraw-
Hill, 2002.
Giesecke, Frederick. Technical Drawing.
Prentice Hall, 2011.
Liebing, Ralph W. Architectural Working
Drawings. Wiley, 1999.
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


DRAFTING 63
.Drafting Resources
Meadows, James D. Geometric
Dimensioning and Tolerancing:
Applications and Techniques for Use
in Design, Manufacturing, and
Inspection. CRC Press, 1995.
Oberg, Erik. Machinery’s Handbook,
29th ed. Industrial Press, 2012.
Petroski, Henry. Invention by Design:
How Engineers Get From Thought
to Thing. Harvard University
Press, 1998.
Wakita, Osamu A. The Professional
Practice of Architectural Working
Drawings. Wiley, 2011.
Wallach, Paul R. Fundamentals
of Modern Drafting. Cengage
Learning, 2014.
Organizations and Websites
American Design
Drafting Association
731-627-0802
adda.org
American Institute of Architects
800-AIA-3837
aia.org
American Institute of
Chemical Engineers
800-242-4363
aiche.org
American Society of
Architectural Illustrators
207-966-2062
asai.org
American Society of Civil Engineers
800-548-2723
asce.org
National Society of
Professional Engineers
703-684-2800
nspe.org
Society of Automotive Engineers
724-776-4841
sae.org
Society of Manufacturing Engineers
800-733-4763
sme.org
Society of Women Engineers
312-596-5223
swe.org
U.S. Department of Labor
Bureau of Labor Statistics
Occupational Outlook
Handbook: “Drafters”
bls.gov/ooh/architecture-and-
engineering/drafters.htm
Acknowledgments
Scouting America gives special
thanks to avid Scouter David Oakley,
Lincoln Park, Michigan, for his support,
subject expertise, and patience with
this revision of the Drafting merit
badge pamphlet. Mr. Oakley remained
a constant and invaluable resource
throughout this lengthy project.
We greatly appreciate Ford Motor
Company for allowing us to have a
photo shoot at its facility in Dearborn,
Michigan. Thanks also to Adam Wendl
and David Wendl of Troop 1052,
Dearborn, for their assistance with
photography. We appreciate Jim
Hamblin, brake engineer, Ford Motor
Company, for his assistance with the
isometric section. Thanks to Roland
Kuhleman, instructor, architecture/
engineering graphics and computer


64 DRAFTING
Drafting Resources.
applications, Haltom (Texas) High
School, Birdville Independent School
District, for his input and subject
expertise.
Scouting America is grateful to the
men and women serving on the
National Merit Badge Subcommittee for
the improvements made in updating
this pamphlet.
Photos and Illustration Credits
Richard B. Ferrier, FAIA, courtesy—
page 30
Getty Images—page 11 (center)
NASA, courtesy—page 24
Nikon Inc., courtesy—page 33 (front
view, side view, top view)
Revell Inc., used with permission—
pages 32 and 45 (model car images)
Wikipedia.org, courtesy—page 16
(computer)
Wikipedia.org/Craig Spurrier,
courtesy—page 16 (styluses)
Wikimedia.org/Peter Welleman,
courtesy—page 45 (cutaway view)
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of
or are protected by Scouting America.
John McDearmon—illustrations on
pages 17, 22 (freehand sketch,
redrawn sketch), 25, 28 (mechanical
and electrical lettering, architectural
lettering), 34, 36, 37 (isometric axes,
isometric cube), 38 (isometric
drawings), 39 (orthographic views,
depth), 40 (true square, isometric
square, step 1, step 2), 41 (step 3,
step 4, true square, isometric square),
42, 43 (two-point perspective,
three-point perspective), 44 (floor
plan, vanishing points), 45
(assembly drawings), 46 (exploded
view), 47, 48 (landscape plan,
elevation drawing), 49, 50 (format 1,
format 2, format 3), 51, 54, 55, 56,
and 57
Randy Piland—pages 11 (Scout with
computer, Scout with part, measuring
part), 20, and 61