MOTORBOATING

STEM-Based

BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES

MOTORBOATING

“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”

Requirements
1. Do the following:
a. Discuss with your counselor the following hazards you
might encounter while motorboating: flammable fuel;
carbon monoxide; propellers; collisions; falls overboard;
capsize; running aground. Explain what you should do to
anticipate, prevent, mitigate and respond to these
hazards.
b. Explain first aid for injuries or illnesses that could occur
while motorboating, including hypothermia, heat reactions, dehydration, motion sickness, bugbites, and blisters.
c. Identify the conditions that must exist before performing
CPR on a person, and explain how such conditions are
recognized. Demonstrate proper technique for performing
CPR using a training device approved by your counselor.
2. Do the following:
a. Before doing requirement 5, successfully complete the
BSA swimmer test.
b. Name the different types of personal flotation devices
(PFDs), and explain when each type should be used.
Show how to choose and properly fit a PFD.
3. Do the following:
a. Explain inboard, outboard, and inboard/outboard
motors, and the uses and advantages of each.
b. Explain the safety procedures and precautions involving
handling fuel and engine servicing, and equipment storage and placement.
c. Explain how to winterize a boat motor and tell why this
procedure is necessary.
d. Explain the safety procedures and precautions involving
swimmers and skiers in the water, passenger positions
underway, and boat wakes.
35920
ISBN 978-0-8395-3345-0
©2021 Boy Scouts of America
2021 Printing

4. Show you know safety guidelines for motorboating by doing
the following:
a. Review how each item of the BSA Safety Afloat policy
applies, including checking the weather prior to and during
time on the water, confirming all required equipment is
present and functional, and following a float plan.
b. Explain the rules or laws that apply to recreational
boating in your area or state. Have a permit to operate a
motorboat, if required by the laws of your state. Discuss
how you would find information regarding the boating
laws in different states.
c. Discuss how hazards of weather and heavy water conditions can affect safety and performance in motorboating.
d. Discuss with your counselor the nautical rules of the road and
describe the national and your state’s aids to navigation.
e. Explain and show the correct use of equipment required
by both state and federal regulations to be carried
aboard a motorboat.
f. Explain federal and state rules for a ventilation system,
and tell why these rules are required.
g. Explain the use of lights (sight signals) and sound signals
on motorboats.
h. Discuss the common types of anchors used in motorboating and under what conditions each would be preferred.
Explain proper anchoring techniques.
5. With your counselor or other adults on board, demonstrate
proper boat-handling procedures and skills by doing
the following:
a. Board and assist others in boarding. Confirm that all passengers on board are wearing properly fitted life jackets.
b. Fuel the boat and complete a safety check.
c. If equiped, attach a kill switch and safely start the motor.
Get underway from dockside or from a beach launch.
d. Run a course for at least a mile, showing procedures for
overtaking and passing slower craft, yielding right-of-way,
passing oncoming traffic, making turns, reversing
direction, and using navigation aids.
e. Stop and secure the boat in position on the open water
using anchors. Raise and stow the anchor and
get underway.
f. Land or dock the boat, disembark, and assist others in
doing the same.
g. Moor, dock, or beach the boat and secure all gear.
MOTORBOATING    3

Motorboating Resources
Scouting Literature
Canoeing, First Aid, Fire Safety, Fishing,
Fly-Fishing, Kayaking, Lifesaving,
Pioneering, Rowing, Scuba Diving,
Small-Boat Sailing, Swimming,
Waterskiing, Weather, and Whitewater
merit badge pamphlets; Scouts BSA
Handbook for Boys, Scouts BSA
Handbook for Girls, and Fieldbook
With your parent’s permission, visit
the Boy Scouts of America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org,
for a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.

Books
Aarons, Richard N. Small-Boat
Seamanship Manual. International
Marine/Ragged Mountain
Press, 2006.
American Red Cross. American Red Cross
First Aid: Responding to Emergencies.
Staywell, 2007.
Armstrong, Bob. Getting Started in
Powerboating, 3rd ed. International
Marine/Ragged Mountain Press, 2005.

MOTORBOATING

Browne, Steven D. Nautical Rules of
the Road: The International and
Inland Rules, 4th ed. Cornell
Maritime Press, 2006.
Eaton, Jonathan. Chapman Piloting &
Seamanship, 68th ed. Hearst, 2017.
Larkin, Frank J. Basic Coastal
Navigation: An Introduction to
Piloting, 2nd ed. Sheridan
House, 1998.
Low, Charles T. Boat Docking:
Close Quarters Maneuvering for
Small Craft. Harvey Island
Enterprises, 1997.
Siminoff, Roger H. Boating 101: Essential
Lessons for Boaters. International
Marine/Ragged Mountain
Press, 1999.
Stagner, Eugene. Understanding the
Outboard Motor, 3rd ed. Prentice
Hall, 2002.
Thompson, Luke. Essential Boating for
Teens. Children’s Press, 2000.
U.S. Sailing Association. Start
Powerboating Right! 3rd ed. United
States Sailing Association, 2013.

DVDs
The following DVDs are available
from Bennett Marine Video (website:
https://bennettmarine.com):
Back to the Basics of Boating
Back to the Basics: Improve Your Boating
Skills and Knowledge
Back to the Basics: What to Do When
Things Go Wrong
Boating Basics for First-Time Boaters
The Encyclopedia of Boating Tips
On-the-Water Boating Tips
100 Boating Mistakes and How to
Avoid Them
Top 60 Tips: Boat Handling

Organizations and Websites
North American Safe Boating
Campaign
Website:
www.safeboatingcampaign.com

Acknowledgments
This edition of the Motorboating merit
badge pamphlet was written by
K. Gregory Tucker, Readyville, Tennessee.
The Boy Scouts of America thanks
this devoted Scouter, who is a Silver
Buffalo Award recipient and past BSA
Health and Safety Committee chair.
As a volunteer, Mr. Tucker has written
or contributed to a number of merit
badge pamphlets on aquatics and
health-related topics.
The BSA also expresses its appreciation to Michael Moore of Performance
Marine Inc., Nashville, Tennessee, for
providing the boats and other equipment
used in preparation of this pamphlet.
The Boy Scouts of America is
grateful to the men and women
serving on the National Merit Badge
Subcommittee for the improvements
made in updating this pamphlet.

U.S. Coast Guard Auxiliary
Website: www.cgaux.org
U.S. Coast Guard Boating Safety
Resource Center
Website: www.uscgboating.org
U.S. Sailing Association
1 Roger Williams University Way
Bristol, RI 02809
Website: www.ussailing.org

MOTORBOATING    5

