AVIATION
STEM-Based


AVIATION
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


35862
ISBN 978-0-8395-3293-4
©2024 Boy Scouts of America
2024 Printing
Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Aviation or check
Scoutbook for the latest requirements.


AVIATION 3


4 AVIATION


Contents
Introduction to Aviation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
How Airplanes Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
All About Instrumentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
Communication. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
Air Navigation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
Entering the Cockpit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
Taking Flight . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
Aviation Facilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .69
Flying Without Leaving the Ground . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
Careers in Aviation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91
Aviation Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 94
AVIATION 5


6 AVIATION


Introduction to Aviation
Flying! For most of history, people have dreamed of flying,
imagining how it would feel to soar through the sky like an
eagle or hover in midair like a hummingbird, to float on
unseen currents, free of Earth’s constant tug, able to travel
great distances and to rise above any obstacle.
Today, through aviation, we can not only join the birds but
also fly farther, faster, and higher than they ever could. Today,
aircraft routinely fly across the country, around the world, and
even beyond Earth’s atmosphere.
But our ability to fly is relatively new. It has been only
in the last 100 years or so that people have mastered flight.
Aviation’s progress since then has been nearly as breathtaking
as a ride in the latest Air Force jet.
.Introduction to Aviation
AVIATION 7


8 AVIATION
The History of Flight
The first successful manned flight took place on November 21,
1783, in Paris, France—and it did not involve an airplane. That
day, brothers Joseph and Etienne Montgolfier sent two men up
in a hot-air balloon they had made out of cotton and paper.
The men stayed aloft for 25 minutes and traveled about 5 miles.
From lighter-than-air balloons, early aviators progressed to the
original heavier-than-air flying machines—gliders or sailplanes. In
1853, English engineer Sir George Cayley built the world’s first real
glider, which carried his terrified coachman across a small valley.
Later in the century, German engineer Otto Lilienthal built a series
of gliders in which he made regular, controlled flights.
Inspired by Lilienthal’s gliders, two bicycle mechanics
from Ohio, Orville and Wilbur Wright, began studying aviation
and experimenting with their own aircraft. On December 17,
1903, they ushered in the aviation age when Orville took off
from a sand dune near Kitty Hawk, North Carolina, traveled
120 feet in 12 seconds, and landed safely. Those 12 seconds
changed history.
Charles Lindbergh and the Spirit of St. Louis
Introduction to Aviation.


Aviation grew quickly in the decades after the Wright
brothers’ historic flight. In 1910, Glenn Curtiss made headlines
for flying 150 miles from Albany, New York, to Governors
Island, New York. In 1927, Charles Lindbergh made the first
solo flight across the Atlantic Ocean. In 1938, Howard Hughes
and his crew flew around the world in just under four days.
And in 1969, Eagle Scout Neil Armstrong stepped onto the sur-
face of the moon. Many people who watched Armstrong on
television that day had heard about Lindbergh’s flight on the
radio and read about the Wright brothers in the newspaper.
Types of Aircraft
The term aircraft is broad, covering nearly everything that
enables people to fly through the air. Some aircraft (balloons,
blimps) are lighter than air; others, like airplanes and helicop-
ters, are heavier than air. (Missiles, rockets, and vehicles like
the space shuttle are called spacecraft since they are designed
to fly outside Earth’s atmosphere.)
Here are some of the kinds of aircraft in use today. Each of
these aircraft has been designed to do a particular job. You are
probably already familiar with many of them.
• Commercial airliners
• Cargo airplanes (including those used by express
delivery services)
• Military bombers, fighters, supply transports, and
surveillance aircraft
• Military and civilian helicopters and gyroplanes
U.S. Navy biplane, 1934
AVIATION 9
.Introduction to Aviation


10 AVIATION
• Personal-use and training airplanes of various types
• Airplanes owned by corporations to transport personnel
• Balloons for sport or for exploring the atmosphere
• Sailplanes, amphibious aircraft, and seaplanes
• Blimps used for advertising in the sky and as television
camera platforms
• Aerobatic airplanes for recreation, training, and competition
• Crop sprayers
• Fire-fighting “smoke jumper” transports
• Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAV) or drones
Aircraft at Work
Even if you have never boarded an airplane, your life is affected
by aircraft every day. Cargo planes carry many of the packages
you receive in the mail. Helicopters make possible the traffic
reports that identify trouble spots for commuters. Blimps pro-
vide bird’s-eye views of sporting events. Military jets protect
the skies above your home.
Other uses of aircraft may surprise you. Helicopters
can be used to dry out the field before a baseball or football
game. Hovering a few feet off the field, their giant rotors dry
the surface with their powerful downwash of air. Construction
companies use helicopters to “top off” tall buildings by lifting
a structure’s final pieces into place. Large transport planes
serve as aerial pumper trucks, fighting forest fires.
Introduction to Aviation.


AVIATION 11
Transportation. Most uses of aircraft are more familiar, such
as the transportation of passengers. Aircraft make it possible for
businesspeople to attend meetings in faraway cities and return
home in time for dinner. They allow families to take vacations on
the other side of the country without spending endless days in a
car. Airplanes also allow people to conduct business internation-
ally and visit other countries without taking long rides on a ship.
Geologists, surveyors, and forest rangers use helicopters
and small airplanes to reach remote places. In some large cities,
helicopters make regular flights from the congested business
district to the airport, greatly reducing travel time. In rural
areas, small airplanes sometimes serve as taxis in areas not
served by major airlines and airports.
Mail and Packages. Small airplanes have been used to carry
mail since aviation’s earliest days; the U.S. government started
airmail service in 1918. Even today, winged carriers of mail and
supplies may be the only regular face-to-face contact some peo-
ple in remote areas have with the outside world.
Alaska has more
airplanes per
person than any
other state; much
of the state is
easily accessible
only by air.
The airplane is a key element in today’s high-demand business
world, where moving packages in as little time as possible is
extremely important.
.Introduction to Aviation


12 AVIATION
The Military. Aircraft are among the U.S. military’s most
important tools, and air power continues to play a decisive role
in conflicts around the globe. But aircraft do more than drop
bombs on sites far behind enemy lines. They also carry out
surveillance, serve as flying ambulances, and transport troops
and equipment. The C-17 Globemaster III can carry 170,900
pounds of cargo and fly 2,800 nautical miles without refueling.
Firefighting and Public Safety. The USDA Forest Service
spots forest fires from airplanes as well as from lookout towers.
And once a fire is spotted, aircraft swing into action. Helicopters
bring firefighters and equipment to remote areas and can extract
them quickly when the need arises. Airplanes drop water or
flame-retardant agents (which once included borate salts) on
fires from above.
Helicopters are the unsung heroes of many rescues at sea
and in rugged mountain regions. In the emergency medical
field, paramedics use helicopters as air ambulances to quickly
transport severely injured people from accident sites to hospitals.
One nautical
mile is equal to
6,076 feet.
Helicopters have become indispensable in fighting wildfires, dropping water on hot
spots to assist crews.
Introduction to Aviation.


AVIATION 13
Law Enforcement. The airplane’s speed and maneuverability
are valuable to many law enforcement agencies. Federal and
state law enforcement agencies like the U.S. Department of
Homeland Security, narcotics inspectors, and game wardens
all use aircraft for patrol work, transporting officers, and
chasing suspects.
Agriculture. Crop-spraying airplanes have been a common
sight in the rural sky for many years. Today, helicopters are
often used to spray crops because the “wash” from their rotors
tends to distribute the spray more widely, even blowing it up
to the underside of the crop’s leaves.
Airplanes haul perishable items to market and help
ranchers patrol fences, herd cattle, and bring feed to animals
in distant pastures. Some farmers hire aviation companies for
these services, but so much of the work is done by farmers
themselves that they have formed an organization called the
International Flying Farmers.
Aerial Photography. Aerial photography has been important
for mapmakers and newspeople since the first intrepid camera-
person leaned over the side of one of the early flying machines
with a box camera. Now, much filming is done from helicopters
because they can furnish a stationary platform in the sky for
the camera operator.
.Introduction to Aviation


How Airplanes Work
When people first dreamed of flying, they looked to the birds
as models. Greek mythology includes the story of Daedelus
and Icarus, who made wings out of wax and feathers to escape
from the island of Crete. (Unfortunately, the story says, Icarus
flew too close to the sun, which melted his wings.) Even as
late as the 19th century, inventors were still trying to imitate
birds with elaborate flying machines that never quite got off
the ground.
Sir George Cayley had a better idea. His glider had fixed
wings and a moveable tailplane. What it did not have was an
engine—nobody had yet figured out how to make one that was
light and powerful enough for aviation. Nonetheless, his ideas
led more or less directly to the 1903
Wright Flyer, to the fighter planes
of World War II, and to the
massive airliners of today.
To understand how
an airplane works, you
need to learn about sev-
eral different concepts:
the forces that affect an
airplane, what airfoils
are and how they work,
the control surfaces a
pilot can use, and the
types of engines that
give an airplane power.
In 1488, Leonardo da Vinci came up with a
plan for an “ornithopter,” a winged flying
machine like an oversized bird, though he
never actually built one.
How Airplanes Work.
14 AVIATION


AVIATION 15
Forces That
Affect Airplanes
Gravity makes anything that has
weight—even a feather—fall to
Earth. So how can we get a 400-ton
airplane like a Boeing 747 into the air
and keep it there? By matching two natural
forces with two forces that are made by humans.
The natural forces are gravity and drag. Toss a
ball into the air, and you will see gravity in action. Thanks
to this downward-acting force, the ball quickly falls to the
ground. Drag, on the other hand, is a backward-acting force.
It is the resistance you feel when you pedal a bicycle into a
strong headwind or put your hand out the window of a moving
vehicle. Airplane designers offset these natural forces with two
forces of their own: thrust and lift. These forces work together
to pull an airplane forward and to keep it off the ground.
Lift is an upward-acting force; it is created by the way
airplane wings are designed. Rather than slip easily past the
wings, air pushes them upward. Thrust is the force that pushes
or pulls the airplane forward, depending on engine placement.
It is produced by the plane’s powered propeller or jet engine.
Airfoils
Look at a wing from the
side of an airplane, and you
will notice two things. First,
the bottom surface of the
wing is more or less flat,
while the upper surface
curves upward. Second,
the wing is attached at a
slight angle instead of
being level with the
ground. Together, these
two characteristics pro-
duce lift. They also make
the wing an airfoil, which
is a shaped structure that
provides lift when air is
forced across its surface.
Although aviation
includes all
sorts of manned
aircraft, we
will mostly focus
on airplanes in
this pamphlet.
Basic lift action
LIFT
POSITIVE-PRESSURE AREAL
O
W
-
P
R
E
S
S
UR
E
AREA
Cross section of
an airfoil
TRAILING EDGELEADING EDGE
LINE PARALLEL TO LONGITUDINAL AXIS
ANGLE OF
INCIDENCE
CHORD LINE
Four forces of flight
DRAGTHRUST
GRAVITY
(WEIGHT)
LIFT
.How Airplanes Work


In the 18th century, a Swiss scientist named Daniel
Bernoulli discovered something about how all fluids (liquid or
gas) work that is vital to flying a heavier-than-air machine. He
found that a fluid’s pressure decreases at points where its speed
increases. For example, if you direct a stream of air into a pipe
that is smaller in diameter in some places than in others, the
pressure will be lowest and the speed fastest in the most con-
fined section of the pipe.
As an airfoil moves through the atmosphere, air must go
faster to get over the curved top than to go under the flatter
bottom. According to Bernoulli’s principle, therefore, the air
pressure is lower above the wing than under it; that creates lift.
The angle at which the wing is attached also creates lift.
You have probably heard of Isaac Newton’s third law of motion—
for every action there is an equal and opposite reaction. When
air hits the bottom of the wing, it is diverted down toward the
ground. The reaction to that action is that the wing is pushed
up toward the sky.
You can see Bernoulli’s principle in action at your
kitchen sink. Hold a teaspoon upside down and direct a
stream of water at the back side of the bowl. You might
expect the water to push the spoon down forcefully, but
it actually hugs the bowl’s contours, reducing the pres-
sure on the bowl. Flip the spoon over, and you will get
a completely different effect.
If you have ever
stuck your hand
out the window
of a moving car,
you have created
a simple airfoil.
Angle your palm
upward and the
wind lifts your
hand. Flatten your
hand out and the
lift decreases.
Just think: If your
hands were big
enough (and your
arms strong
enough), you could
make your car fly.
The wings are not
the only airfoils on
an airplane—so are
propeller blades. They
work by creating greater
air pressure on one side
of their surfaces than on
the other. As the blades
cut through the air, they
pull or push the plane
along because the pres-
sure behind them is
greater than the pres-
sure in front.
16 AVIATION
How Airplanes Work.


AVIATION 17
Airfoils in Action
The angle at which a wing is attached
is called the angle of incidence. As
we have discussed, that angle creates
lift, but it also produces greater drag,
as you can see in the accompanying
illustrations.
While flying the plane, the pilot
moves the entire aircraft and changes
the angle at which the wings meet
the air to maneuver the plane upward
or downward. This angle is called the
angle of attack. The greater this
angle—up to a certain point—the
more lift and drag there will be.
When the angle of attack reaches
about 16 to 20 degrees, the air cannot
flow smoothly over the wing’s upper
surface. This extreme angle makes the
air churn behind the wing as it tries to
follow the surface. There is a sudden
increase in pressure on the upper wing
surface. This immediately reduces lift
and increases drag, and the wing is said
to “stall.” When this occurs, the plane
can no longer produce enough lift to
support the weight of the aircraft. The
plane can go out of control until the
pilot reduces the angle of attack.
Lift and drag are also affected by
several other factors such as the size
of the wing, the shape of the airfoil,
the speed of the airplane, and the
density of the air itself. Let’s examine
the density of the air.
4°
8°
10°
14°
16°
20°
How airfoils work
1
2
3
4
5
6
.How Airplanes Work


18 AVIATION
Altitude effects
SEA LEVEL
ELEVATION
5,000 FEET
Temperature effects
COLD
WINTER DAY
HOT
SUMMER DAY
Effects of altitude, temperature, and humidity
DRY AIR
MOIST AIR
COLD, DRY
DAY AT SEA
LEVEL
HOT, HUMID
DAY AT
5,000 FEET
Humidity effects
How Airplanes Work.How Airplanes Work.


AVIATION 19
Air: The Pilot’s Element
Air has weight and substance, so it tends to resist anything
passing through it. We have seen how an airfoil lifts a plane by
changing the air pressure (or weight) around it. But the air is
constantly changing. Sometimes it is quite dense and heavy;
at other times (and always at high altitudes) it is thin and light.
Pilots must understand how and why the air changes so that
they know what to expect.
How Air Density Affects Aircraft Performance
Three things affect the density of the air: altitude, temperature,
and humidity. As the illustration shows, these factors can drasti-
cally change how an airplane functions, including how long
a run it must take before getting aloft.
Our atmosphere extends hundreds of miles out from Earth.
The farther from Earth you go, the less atmospheric pressure
there is. At sea level, the atmosphere exerts about 20 tons of
pressure on your body. (Fortunately, your body exerts an equal
force on the atmosphere, keeping you from being crushed.)
When your altitude reaches 18,000 feet, atmospheric pressure
drops by half.
The second factor that affects air density is temperature.
When air is heated, it expands and thus has less density. That
means a pilot needs a longer runway to take off on a hot day
than on a cool day.
The final factor is humidity—the amount of water vapor
in the air. You might think that humid air would be more dense
than dry air, but the reverse is actually true. Water vapor weighs
less than perfectly dry air, so the air is denser on dry days than
when the humidity is high.
To sum up the effects of temperature and humidity, we
can say that a pilot will have to make a much longer run to
take off on a warm, humid day than on a cool, dry day because
the air will be less dense. If the airport is high above sea level,
the takeoff will be harder still because the density of the air
is lower.
These three factors—altitude, temperature, and humidity—
are interrelated. Changes in temperature will change the humid-
ity, and changes in altitude will affect both. Changes in pressure
and temperature are largely responsible for the weather condi-
tions—winds, storms, snow, and ice—that a pilot encounters
on the ground and aloft.
An airplane
that requires
1,000 feet of
runway to take
off at a sea-level
airport will need
almost 2,000 feet
at Denver
International
Airport, which
is a mile above
sea level.
.How Airplanes Work


20 AVIATION
Building an Airfoil
When airplane designers create wings, they must
consider two key factors:
1. The lift and drag acting on a wing are related to the
size of the wing. That is, if two wings have the same
shape but one is twice as large as the other, the big-
ger one will have twice the lift and twice the drag.
2. As the upper curve, or camber, of a wing is increased
(up to a certain point), the lift produced by the wing
increases. This is because the air must travel farther
and faster around a large curve, thus reducing air
pressure above the wing.
In many modern jet aircraft, the wings are rather short
and stubby, and they may be quite thin. The speed of
these jets is so great that a small airfoil can provide suf-
ficient lift. Also, the small wings reduce drag. The space
shuttle had delta wings, which are triangular and sweep
back at a sharp angle from the fuselage. Some military
airplanes also use this type of wing.
How Airplanes Work.


AVIATION 21
THROTTLE
(PROPELLER)
CONTROL WHEEL
(AILERONS AND
ELEVATORS)
RUDDER PEDALS
(RUDDER)
Control Surfaces
Earlier we saw how a pilot can maneuver the entire airplane
to change the angle of attack and increase or decrease lift. By
manipulating the plane’s control surfaces, the pilot can do
even more, including turning, climbing, and descending.
Control surfaces are sections of five airfoils—the right and
left wings, the two smaller areas on the tail called the horizontal
stabilizer, and the vertical stabilizer. When the pilot moves these
surfaces, the flow of air changes, affecting the plane’s altitude and
direction. The control surfaces on the wings are called ailerons,
the control surfaces on the horizontal stabilizer
are called elevators, and the control
surface on the vertical stabilizer
is called the rudder.
Control surfaces
AILERON
AILERON
RUDDER
ELEVATOR
The pilot can control the
propeller and control surfaces
by using the control wheel,
throttle, and rudder pedals.
ELEVATOR
.How Airplanes Work


22 AVIATION
LOWERING THE ELEVATOR
FORCES THE TAIL UP, AND
THE NOSE DROPS.
The Control Wheel
The control wheel (also called the stick or yoke) can be moved
in all directions. As it is moved, it changes the positions of the
ailerons and elevators. When the wheel is rotated to the right,
the left aileron goes down and the right one goes up. The plane
rolls to the right, because these movements of the ailerons
change the curvature of the wings’ surfaces. Just the opposite
happens when the pilot rotates the wheel to the left.
THE ACTION OF THE AILERONS MOVES THE
PLANE ON ITS LONGITUDINAL AXIS.
When the
airplane’s wings
are not level, it is
in a bank. Banking
is how the pilot
turns the airplane.
THE ACTION OF THE ELEVATORS MOVES
THE PLANE ON ITS LATERAL AXIS.
NORMAL LIFT LOWERING THE AILERON
INCREASES LIFT AND
RAISES THE WING.
RAISING THE AILERON
DECREASES LIFT AND
LOWERS THE WING.
RAISING THE ELEVATOR FORCES
THE TAIL DOWN,
AND THE NOSE RISES.
NORMAL LIFT
How Airplanes Work.


AVIATION 23
If the pilot pushes the control wheel forward, the elevators
move downward and the aircraft assumes a nose-down attitude.
If the pilot pulls back on the wheel, the elevators turn upward,
creating a nose-up attitude.
The rudder helps keep the plane flying straight by
controlling what is called yaw, or side-to-side
motion of the plane’s nose. Rudder pedals in
the cockpit connect to the rudder. If the pilot
presses the right rudder pedal, the
nose moves to the right. Pressing
the left rudder pedal causes the
nose to move to the left.
The throttle, which adjusts
the engine’s power, is an impor-
tant factor in maneuvering. For
example, you would not climb
just by pulling back on the wheel
to lower the plane’s tail and raise
the nose. Doing so would rapidly
increase drag and cause the wing to
lose considerable lift. What you would
actually do is pull back on the wheel and, at the
same time, advance the throttle to increase thrust
and maintain airspeed. This would keep lift high
and help the plane climb.
Requirement 1d asks you to show how pilots use these
control surfaces to maneuver a plane. You can demon-
strate this by actually working a plane’s controls on the
ground if one is available to you. If it is not, you may
demonstrate by using a model plane or by showing the
positions with hand motions.
RUDDER
MOVING THE RUDDER
TO THE LEFT FORCES
THE TAIL TO THE RIGHT.
NEUTRAL MOVING THE RUDDER
TO THE RIGHT FORCES
THE TAIL TO THE LEFT.
.How Airplanes Work


24 AVIATION
Maneuvering the Plane
Now, let’s look at how pilots use a plane’s control surfaces to
handle several basic maneuvers.
Takeoff (given an airplane with a tricycle landing gear).
The elevators are neutral, ailerons level, and rudder centered.
Use the rudder to keep the airplane centered down the runway.
When flying speed is reached, ease back on the wheel to lift the
nose. (The term pilots use is rotate.)
Straight climb. Control what is called the pitch attitude (the
relationship between the nose position and a level attitude) with
the elevator. On a typical airplane, the nose will be just above
the horizon.
Level turn. Turns are made by the ailerons, elevators, and rudder
working together. During a level turn, you must pull back some
on the control wheel to maintain the airplane’s altitude. To make
a level turn to the left, turn the wheel to the left and press the
left rudder pedal. The left aileron goes up, the right one goes
down, and the rudder goes to the left. This forces the plane into
a coordinated banking left turn in level flight.
Takeoff
When maneuvering
a plane, the pilot
applies and
releases pressure
using the
controls, and the
plane responds
accordingly.
How Airplanes Work.


AVIATION 25
Climbing turn. To climb, ease back on the wheel. So, to make
a climbing turn, combine this movement with those of turning.
For a climbing left turn, ease the control wheel back and to
the left and press the left rudder pedal, and increase power to
prevent the airplane from slowing down. At that point, the left
aileron will be up (helping to lower the wing), the right aileron
down (helping to raise the wing), the rudder to the left, and the
elevators up. Neutralize the ailerons and rudder when you
reach the desired angle of bank.
A Cirrus SR22 high-performance single-engine light aircraft on approach for landing.
.How Airplanes Work


26 AVIATION
Descending turn. The position of the control surfaces for a
descending turn is the same as for any other turn, except that
you move the wheel forward slightly to lower the nose below
the horizon and reduce the power.
Straight descent. To descend on a straight course, make all
control surfaces level except for the elevator. These are down
slightly, which means the plane’s tail is up and the nose
is down.
Landing. As the plane nears the ground, reduce power and
ease back on the control wheel to slow the airplane. When the
wheels are just above the ground, move the control wheel back,
further decreasing the speed. The plane lands on the two
main wheels.
Landing
The Science of Flight
Also located on the airplane’s wings are flaps, slats,
and spoilers. Manipulating these devices allows the
pilot to increase or decrease the lift and drag by
changing the shape of the wing. They are employed
during takeoff and landing to help stabilize the aircraft’s
speed and direction.
How Airplanes Work.


AVIATION 27
Sources of Power
Without an engine, an airplane would be nothing but a
glider. In fact, many aviation pioneers—including the Wright
brothers—mastered glider flight before they began
experimenting with engines. The goal was to build an engine
with the right power-to-weight ratio. In other words, the engine
had to be both powerful enough and light enough to make
flight possible. Unable to find an engine light enough, the
Wright brothers used a piston engine they built themselves.
The Wright brothers used a piston engine they built
themselves. The piston engine, which works much like the
engine in your family’s car, remained the primary source of
airplane power for four decades. Soon after World War II,
however, jet engines arrived, and within a few years they were
powering most airliners and military aircraft. Recent
advancements in high-technology batteries and electric motors
OPENCLOSED
OPEN CLOSED
INTAKE STROKE
CLOSEDCLOSED
CLOSED CLOSED
How a piston engine develops power
A
C
B
D EXHAUST STROKEPOWER STROKE
COMPRESSION STROKE
Most aircraft are
powered by piston
or turbine engines.
They are called
internal-combustion
engines because
they produce their
power by capturing
the energy of
expanding gases
from combustible
fuels. They develop
power in 4 steps:
1. Intake – Intake of
a fuel/air mixture
2. Compression –
Compression of the
fuel/air mixture
3. Combustion –
Ignition of the fuel/
air mixture resulting
in rapid expansion
of gases
4. Exhaust – The
release of the
expanding gases
.How Airplanes Work


28 AVIATION
have resulted in the development of electrically powered
aircraft. But there is still a place for the piston engine in
aviation, particularly in small airplanes.
The Piston Engine
In a piston engine (or reciprocating internal-combustion
engine), a piston compresses a mixture of gasoline and air.
When an electric spark ignites this compressed mixture, the
resulting gases expand very rapidly and force the piston to
move away from the end of the cylinder in which it is enclosed.
This motion is transferred to a connecting rod, which then
transmits a rotary motion to a crankshaft. The rotating
crankshaft turns the propeller and also forces the piston back to
the top of the cylinder.
An exhaust valve at the top or head of the cylinder opens
to let out the burned gases. It then closes, and another valve—
the intake valve—opens to let in a fresh mixture of air and
gasoline. These valves are operated by a system of gears and
cams so that they open and close at the correct time.
Each complete movement of a piston in one direction is a
stroke. The whole series of actions between the admission of
fuel and air (intake) and of the burned gases (exhaust) is called a
cycle. The main aircraft engines use a four-stroke cycle, so called
because there are four strokes of the piston in each cycle.
The crankshaft makes two complete revolutions for
each four-stroke cycle.
Each cylinder in an engine fires once for
every two revolutions of the crankshaft. The
power strokes in the various
cylinders are timed to keep the crankshaft
turning smoothly. The propeller converts
the power of the engine into the thrust that
pulls an airplane rapidly through the air.
Jet Propulsion
A simple experiment with a balloon demon-
strates how jet engines work. Blow up the
balloon and pinch the neck to keep in the air.
Then, let the balloon go and watch it shoot
across the room. The air inside the balloon is push-
ing in all directions to get out, but it can escape only
through the open neck. The air at the opposite end of the
Most light
airplanes have
four- or six-
cylinder engines.
This illustration shows how large the
engine of a commercial airplane can be.
How Airplanes Work.


AVIATION 29
balloon can’t escape quickly, and its push against the front is
what makes the balloon shoot forward. When all the air has
escaped through the neck, there is no more jet propulsion, and
the balloon falls in a rubbery heap.
The scientific principle behind this jet action is Newton’s
third law of motion, which was discussed earlier in this chapter.
In our experiment with the balloon, the force of the air rushing
from the neck creates an opposite, equal force that pushes the
balloon forward. Of course, in a real jet or rocket engine, the
thrust has to continue for a lot longer if our plane or rocket is
to fly more than a few feet, but the principle is the same.
Jet Engines
Jet engines and rockets both operate on Newton’s law, creating
a thrust that pushes the craft through the air or into outer space.
The difference between them is that jet engines require air, while
rockets do not; rockets carry their own oxygen.
In jets, a stream of air and burning gases flows through
the engine and is ejected at a speed much greater than when it
entered. Most jet engines use rotating compressors and turbines
to compress the gases and operate the moving parts. When the
gases are compressed by scooping air from the atmosphere
without compressors or turbines, the engine is called a ramjet.
There are five kinds of jet engines: turbojet, turbofan,
turboprop, ramjet, and scramjet.
Turbojet. In a turbojet engine, the air comes in through an
inlet (intake) and is compressed by the rotating blades of a
compressor (compression). Fuel is added to the compressed air
in the combustion chamber and ignited (combustion). The
burning fuel and air creates tremendous temperatures and
expands rapidly.
The expanding gases travel through a rotating turbine
and out the tail, creating a giant thrust. The turbine turns
the compressor, which is usually mounted on the same shaft.
The turbine does not contribute to the engine’s thrust.
TURBOJET
.How Airplanes Work


30 AVIATION
Turbofan. Turbofan engines are similar to turbojets except that
they have larger rotating blades enclosed in a metal cowling. And
in the turbofan, a separate portion of the compressor provides an
air stream that bypasses the combustion chamber. The turbofan
engine has greater thrust for its weight than the turbojet.
Turboprop. This is a variation of the turbojet. Some of the
shaft power of the turbojet engine is used to turn a propeller,
just like those on piston-driven aircraft. Turboprops get most of
their thrust from the propellers, but they also are propelled by
the exhaust gases. This added thrust is especially important at
high altitudes and high speeds.
Ramjet. The ramjet engine is the simplest power plant ever
devised. The compressor and turbine are eliminated altogether,
and it has no moving parts. The air inlet on a ramjet is designed
so that the plane’s forward speed alone compresses the air. It
goes into a combustion chamber where it is mixed with fuel.
The expanding gases go directly out the tail, creating a
tremendous thrust.
The turboprop engine is particularly useful in commercial aviation because
the propeller gives a large thrust for takeoff. It can also be reversed easily
and quickly after landing to slow the aircraft without using as much braking.
Ramjets cannot power aircraft by themselves. Usually, a rocket or other
device sends the ramjet on its way. Ramjets can operate from slightly over
Mach 1 (the speed of sound, about 761 mph at sea level) to Mach 4 or 5.
TURBOFAN
How Airplanes Work.


AVIATION 31
Scramjet. Scramjet stands for “supersonic combustion ramjet.”
This engine operates by introducing a mixture of fuel and air to
fly at supersonic speeds (in excess of Mach 5). By capturing air
into specially designed engine inlets, then compressing the air
and combining it with the fuel in a supersonic combustor, the
scramjet is able to achieve supersonic speeds. Today, there are
many test vehicles demonstrating hypersonic flight—at speeds
higher than Mach 5—using the scramjet engine.
Rockets
Rockets were used as
fireworks and weapons
of war by the Chinese at
least a thousand years
ago, but modern develop-
ment of rockets did not
begin until the first half
of the 20th century.
The rocket engine
is used in space flights
because it carries its own
oxygen, but rockets can
also be used in the atmo-
sphere. In fact, the first
plane to fly faster than
the speed of sound—
the X-1—was rocket-
powered. Today, rockets
are important mainly as
propulsion for spacecraft
reaching into space.
If you want to learn
more about rockets and
humankind’s future in
outer space, consider
earning the Space Explo-
ration merit badge.
.How Airplanes Work





All About
Instrumentation
The first aviators flew by the seat of their pants, relying on
their senses to tell them how high they were and whether they
were climbing or descending. This style of flying was pretty
easy because early airplanes had open cockpits and flew both
low and slow. However, as planes got faster and pilots started
flying at night, they found they could not always trust their
senses. So airplane builders began adding instruments to indi-
cate the plane’s altitude, its heading, and whether it was climb-
ing or descending, turning or flying straight, in level flight
or banking.
Modern airplanes have instruments and radios to tell the
pilot everything about the aircraft’s position and condition.
With them, the pilot hardly has to look out the windshield to
fly the plane. That is not to say that pilots do not look outside,
however. In clear skies, they rely on both their instruments and
their eyes to determine the plane’s position. When flying in
clouds, however, they must rely solely on instruments.
.All About Instrumentation


34 AVIATION
The seven flight instruments mentioned in requirement
2e—the attitude indicator, heading indicator, altimeter, airspeed
indicator, turn and bank indicator, vertical speed indicator, and
compass—tell the pilot about the plane’s altitude, speed, direc-
tion, attitude, and rate of climb or descent. The navigation/com-
munication radios (navcoms), discussed more in the next chap-
ter, permit the pilot to guide the aircraft directly and safely to
its destination in both clear and cloudy conditions. The last
three instruments—tachometer, oil pressure gauge, and oil tem-
perature gauge—tell a pilot how the engine is operating.
Let’s look at the flight instruments first.
Attitude Indicator
The attitude indicator or “artificial horizon”
lets the pilot get an immediate picture of
the airplane’s attitude, which is its position
relative to Earth’s horizon.
Attached to a gyroscope is a face with a
contrasting horizon line on it. This line rep-
resents Earth’s actual horizon. This repre-
sentation of the horizon moves to show the
plane’s position with respect to the real hori-
zon. The attitude indicator shows both bank
(roll) attitude, which is the relationship
between the wings and the horizon, and
pitch attitude, which is the relationship
between the nose and the horizon.
Heading Indicator
The heading indicator can take different
forms but is basically a gyroscope that
shows the plane’s heading. The simplest
heading indicators have to be set to match
the magnetic compass.
All About Instrumentation.


AVIATION 35
Altimeter
The altimeter tells the pilot how high the aircraft is flying. To
steer clear of mountains, buildings, and such obstructions as
television towers, the pilot must know the altitude at all times.
Charts and air traffic rules indicate the minimum heights pilots
must maintain. There are also specific altitudes to fly based on
the direction of flight, which reduces the risk of collisions when
pilots are flying by visual flight rules in good weather. During
times of reduced visibility, pilots are assigned altitudes by air
traffic control.
The altimeter is simply a barometer
that measures the air pressure and con-
verts that measurement into altitude.
Altitude references are generally above
sea level, so the pilot has to know the
height above sea level of the terrain or
obstructions to be sure the plane is at a
safe altitude. The altimeter has a knob
for adjusting the instrument to take into
account changes in barometric pressure
at different points of the flight as reported
by air traffic control.
As discussed
earlier, atmospheric
pressure gets
lower as altitude
increases.
One reason for having a heading indicator in addition to
a magnetic compass is that the compass does not read
accurately when not in straight and level flight, whereas
the gyroscope maintains an accurate and steady reading.
.All About Instrumentation


36 AVIATION
Airspeed Indicator
The airspeed indicator is the airplane
equivalent of a car’s speedometer, telling
the pilot how fast the plane is traveling
through the air. Like the altimeter, the
airspeed indicator works by measuring
air pressure, but the airspeed indicator
measures the plane’s impact on the air
(ram air pressure). In other words, the
airspeed indicator registers the velocity
of air molecules striking a sensor as the
airplane moves through the air. This is
translated into speed in knots, or nautical
miles per hour, the standard unit of
velocity used in aviation.
Compass
As a Scout, you are familiar with the mag-
netic compass and probably have used one
many times. The compass used in aircraft
is not much different, although flight poses
special problems in reading a compass.
You may know that the magnetic pole is
not at the North Pole, or the exact top of
Earth. Instead, it is around 800 miles
away, which leads to variations in deter-
mining true headings. Second, Earth is not
uniformly magnetized; in some areas, the
compass may vary many degrees from mag-
netic north. Finally, the metal and electrical
equipment within an aircraft can throw off
the compass. This variation is known as
magnetic deviation. A pilot must consider
variation and deviation, as well as wind,
when determining what compass reading
will get the airplane to its destination.
All About Instrumentation.


AVIATION 37
Turn and Bank Indicator
The turn and bank indicator is two instruments
in one. It tells the pilot when the plane is
turning and how well the turn is being
executed—whether there is too much or
too little bank for the rate of turn. The
pilot may also check for balance and
coordination in straight and level flight.
The turn needle always deflects in the
direction of the turn and indicates the rate
at which the aircraft is turning about its
vertical (yaw) axis.
Most modern airplanes have a variation of
this instrument called a turn coordinator. It looks a
little like an attitude indicator but gives information
only about turn, not about pitch attitude. The ball part of the
turn indicator is simply an agate or steel ball that moves freely
inside a curved, sealed glass tube filled with liquid. The lowest
point of the glass tube is in the middle of the instrument. In
straight and level flight, gravity keeps the ball there, centered
between two lines.
In a turn, if the aircraft is neither slipping nor skidding,
the ball will be kept centered by centrifugal force. If the aircraft
were in a slip (the tail sagging into the turn), the ball would fall
to the low side of the instrument. In a skid (the tail swinging
wide outside the turn), the ball would be to the high side.
Vertical Speed Indicator
In addition to knowing the airspeed, the
pilot must know how rapidly the aircraft
is climbing or descending. The vertical
speed indicator, or VSI, registers how fast
the barometric pressure is changing and
converts this information to a speed mea-
sured in hundreds of feet per minute. This
instrument is important because it is diffi-
cult to judge rates of climb or descent
using only our human senses.
In addition to the flight instruments,
the tachometer, the oil pressure gauge,
and the temperature gauges also tell the
pilot how the plane’s engine is performing.
.All About Instrumentation


38 AVIATION
Tachometer
You may have seen a tachometer on the
dashboard of a car. Its purpose is to tell
the driver exactly how fast the engine is
running. In an airplane with a piston
engine and a fixed-pitch propeller, the
tachometer has two main purposes: to
show whether the propeller is turning at
the recommended speed for a particular
maneuver and to indicate whether the
engine is operating normally. For example,
the airplane’s designer might have deter-
mined that the best cruise power setting
for the engine is 2,300 revolutions per
minute (rpm), so the pilot would set the
throttle accordingly while cruising.
The designer would also have recom-
mended certain rpm settings for climbing
and descending.
Oil Pressure Gauge
An airplane’s oil pressure gauge does the
same thing as the oil pressure gauge in a
car. It shows the pilot the pressure of
the oil in the engine, which reveals a
great deal about the health of the engine.
Dropping oil pressure is a sure sign of
engine trouble.
The tachometer also tells the pilot something about
the engine’s condition. Suppose a pilot is preparing for
flight and finds that, with the throttle open all the way,
the tachometer reads only 1,800 rpm when it should
read 2,400. That is a good indication something is
wrong with the engine.
OIL PRESSURE
All About Instrumentation.


Temperature Gauges
The temperature gauges are another indicator
of the engine’s health. They measure the
temperature of oil and the cylinder heads
and show whether the engine is running
well, too warm, or too cold. The instru-
ments are generally marked with a green
area and a red line. If the needle is “in
the green,” that is good. If it passes the
red line, there is a problem because that
line marks the maximum allowable
operating temperature.
TEMPERATURE
AVIATION 39
.All About Instrumentation





Communication
Virtually all airplanes are equipped with radios, so a pilot is
never out of range of advice and help. Good radio communica-
tion is vital to safe flying. The Federal Aviation Administration
maintains control towers at airports and flight service stations
throughout the country to provide dependable communications
for pilots. These communications can take the form of clear-
ances to take off, to land, or to fly under instrument flight
rules (where air traffic controllers keep all aircraft separate).
Pilots can also get the latest weather information while
aloft. To do this efficiently, a standard method of communicat-
ing has evolved. For example, if you were in the control tower
at Redbird Airport, you might hear this exchange.
Pilot: Redbird tower, this is Cessna three-niner-two-one-bravo, 10 miles
west, inbound for landing. Over.
Tower: Cessna three-niner-two-one-bravo, Redbird tower. Report a left
base, runway three-six. Wind three-four-zero degrees at one-five.
Altimeter two-niner-niner-five.
Pilot: Left base, runway three-six. Cessna three-niner-two-one-bravo.
Here is what that exchange would look like in plain English.
Pilot: Redbird tower, this is Cessna 3921B. I’m 10 miles west of the air-
port and am coming in for a landing.
Tower: Cessna 3921B, this is Redbird tower. Approach from the left
base section of the designated initial approach area and land on run-
way 36. The wind is coming from 340 degrees at 15 knots. The baro-
metric pressure is 29.95 inches of mercury.
Pilot: OK. I’ll do what you instructed and land on runway 36.
.Communication
AVIATION 41


When you compare these two versions, you will notice that
the first version is about half as long as the second. It also
includes some unfamiliar words and pronunciations.
Pilots use shorthand phrases that both they and the tower
understand. They also use the International Civil Aviation
Organization’s phonetic alphabet, which is shown in the chart on
the next page. This alphabet helps reduce misunderstandings,
because difficult words can be spelled out with it or pronounced
in a special way that is easy to understand.
Numbers are straightforward, but there are some special
pronunciations. For example, nine is pronounced “ny-ner”
because it is easily confused with five. Also, altitudes above
10,000 feet are referred to by their digits (such as “one-three
thousand” for 13,000). However, when at or above 18,000 feet,
altitudes become flight levels. For example, 22,000 feet is flight
level 220 (pronounced “two-two-zero”).
At or above flight level 180, all airplanes must fly under
positive (mandatory) air traffic control and are sepa-
rated vertically by at least 1,000 feet.
42 AVIATION
Communication.


AVIATION 43
Common Aviation Terms
There are a few words and phrases that are not part of the phonetic
alphabet that also help in radio communication. Here are some of the
common ones and what they mean.
Acknowledge—Let me know that you have received and understood
this message.
Affirmative—Yes.
Negative—No.
Correction—An error has been made in this transmission. The correct
version is . . .
Over—My transmission is ended, and I expect a response from you.
Out—This conversation is ended, and I don’t expect a response.
Roger—I have received all of your last transmission.
Read back—Repeat all of this message back to me exactly as received
after I have said, “Over.”
Aviation jargon might seem strange at first, but few words are actually
used. English is the official language of aviation the world over, and it has
been said that pilots who speak other languages have to learn only about
100 English words to operate in any air traffic control system.
ICAO Phonetic Alphabet
A Alpha
B Bravo
C Charlie
D Delta
E Echo
F Foxtrot
G Golf
H Hotel
I India
J Juliet
K Kilo (Key-loh)
L Lima (Lee-mah)
M Mike
N November
O Oscar
P Papa
Q Quebec
(Keh-beck)
R Romeo
S Sierra
T Tango
U Uniform
V Victor
W Whiskey
X X-ray
Y Yankee
Z Zulu
.Communication


Air Navigation
Air navigation is simply the way a pilot gets an airplane from
where it is to its destination with a minimum of difficulty.
Using charts, instruments, and preparation, the pilot is able to
map a course to know at all times where the plane is, what
direction it should go, and how long the trip will take.
There are four standard methods of navigation.
• Pilotage—by reference to charts and visible landmarks
• Dead (deduced) reckoning—by figuring direction and
distance from a known position
• Radio navigation—by use of ground-based radio aids
• Satellite navigation—by use of the global positioning
system (GPS)
Aeronautical Charts
A chart is what most people would call a map. Aeronautical
charts are available in digital or print. There are four types of
charts of greatest interest to private pilots.
Terminal area chart. The scale is 4
statute miles per inch. (A statute
mile is 5,280 feet.)
Sectional aeronautical charts.
Scale is 8 statute miles per inch.
(This chart also includes scales for
nautical miles and kilometers.)
World aeronautical chart. Scale is
16 statute miles per inch.
Aeronautical planning chart. Scale
is 80 statute miles per inch.
Air Navigation.
44 AVIATION


AVIATION 45
Sectional Charts
The sectional aeronautical charts are most widely used by private
pilots. There are 37 such charts for the 48 contiguous states;
additional sectionals cover Alaska and Hawaii. For requirement 2c,
you must obtain a chart and learn how to read it.
Reading an aeronautical chart is almost like reading a
detailed highway map. In fact, they look like road maps, except
that aeronautical charts have special symbols to show such
things as airports, radio navigation aids, latitude and longitude,
and magnetic variation. Each chart includes a detailed explana-
tion of the symbols used; your counselor can also help you
understand what you see.
You should be able to find the sectional aeronautical chart for your
area at your local airport. You can also obtain copies by contacting
chart distributors such as Sporty’s. See the resources section at the
end of this pamphlet.
.Air Navigation


46 AVIATION
Measuring Direction
Before you can plot a course, you should review some basic
facts of geography. As you know, the equator is an imaginary
line running around the middle of Earth exactly halfway
between the North and South Poles;
its value is zero degrees. Other
imaginary east-west lines that
circle Earth are called lines
of latitude, or parallels.
This country’s 48 contig-
uous states lie roughly
between 25 degrees and
49 degrees north latitude
(that is, north of
the equator).
The map here shows part of the St. Louis sectional aeronautical chart. We will use
this part of the chart in explaining how a pilot would map a course for a short flight
between two cities in Indiana.
IND
CFJ
PARALLEL
MERIDIAN
Air Navigation.


AVIATION 47
You can locate any point on Earth by reference to its
latitude and longitude. For example, Washington, D.C.,
lies at approximately 39 degrees north latitude,
77 degrees west longitude.
Lines of longitude, or meridians, are imaginary lines that
run from the North Pole to the South Pole at right angles to
the equator. The meridian passing through Greenwich, England,
is called the prime meridian and has a value of zero degrees.
Other meridians have values in degrees of longitude east and
west up to 180 degrees. North America lies between about
67 and 125 degrees west longitude.
Approximate measures are not very helpful, however,
when you consider that the distance between each degree of
latitude is roughly 69 miles. So each degree is subdivided into
60 minutes, which lets us pinpoint a location further. On charts,
degrees are shown by this symbol (°) and minutes by this (').
On the part of the sectional aeronautical chart shown
on the facing page, Indianapolis International Airport is at
39 degrees 43 minutes north latitude, 86 degrees 17 minutes
west longitude. You can’t see the latitude in the illustration,
however, because it does not include the edge of the chart
where the latitude appears.
The True Course
Let’s suppose that we are at Indianapolis International Airport
(IND on the chart), and we want to fly directly to Crawfordsville
Airport (CFJ), which is 33 nautical miles to the northwest. IND,
as we said, is at 39 degrees 43 minutes north latitude, 86 degrees
17 minutes west longitude, while CFJ is at 39 degrees 58 min-
utes north latitude and 86 degrees 55 minutes west longitude.
To determine the direction to Crawfordsville Airport, we
draw a line on the chart from IND to CFJ. At a meridian line
near the first third of our flight, we measure the angle between
our course and the meridian, using a plotter. This angle is
298 degrees, and we call it the true course because it measures
a direction with reference to true north. True course for our
return trip would be 118 degrees, or the reciprocal of 298 degrees
(298 degrees minus 180 degrees).
.Air Navigation


48 AVIATION
Magnetic Variation
You might think that all we have to do is take off from
Indianapolis International and steer a course of 298 degrees
to Crawfordsville Airport. But it is not quite that easy, because
we have other factors to consider.
The first is magnetic variation. As we discussed in the
chapter on instruments (and as you may have learned from
work on the Orienteering merit badge), compass needles point
to magnetic north, not to the geographical North Pole, which
is about 800 miles away. In the United States, true north and
magnetic north coincide on a line running roughly through
Wisconsin, Illinois, Kentucky, Tennessee, and Alabama. This is
called the agonic line (see the chart of the United States show-
ing magnetic variation across the country). Unless you are on
the agonic line, you must compensate for the difference between
true and magnetic north, which can be more than 20 degrees.
Because Earth is not uniformly magnetized, in some places,
a compass needle will vary many degrees from magnetic north
because of variation in Earth’s magnetism. The U.S. Coast and
Geodetic Survey has carefully measured this variation at all
parts of the country. On aeronautical charts, the amount and
direction of variation is shown by broken red lines called
isogonic lines.
OR
CA
NV
ID
WY
MT
WA
UT CO
NM
AZ
AK
HI
SD
ND MN
WI
MI
IL IN OH
KY
TN
MS AL
FL
GA
SC
NC
VA
WV
PA
NY
ME
NH
VT
MA
RI
CT
NJ
DE
MD
IA
MO
AR
LA
NE
KS
OK
TX
Map of magnetic variation of the United States
Air Navigation.


AVIATION 49
Near Indianapolis, the magnetic variation is approximately
2 degrees west, which means we need to add 2 degrees to our
course. If the variation were to the east—as it would be in most
of Illinois—we would subtract that value. (An easy way to
remember whether to add or subtract is the rhyme “East is
least, west is best.”)
So, allowing for magnetic variation, our course from IND
to CFJ would be 300 degrees. On the return trip, we would add
2 degrees to our true course of 118 degrees for a magnetic
course of 120 degrees.
Compass Deviation
Magnetic variation is just one factor we must consider.
The airplane’s compass is surrounded by thousands of
pounds of metal and electrical parts, which can deflect the
compass from a normal reading, something called deviation.
The deviation is different for each airplane and even varies for
the same airplane on different headings.
Compass deviation card
.Air Navigation


Remember, the magnetic course from Indianapolis
International (IND) to Crawfordsville Airport (CFJ) is 300
degrees. Our deviation card tells us that for a magnetic course
of 300 degrees, we should steer a course of 301 degrees. In
other words the compass deviation in our airplane at this
course is 1 degree higher than the magnetic course.
We can now proceed to steer at 301 degrees, confident
that we will soon see the Crawfordsville Airport. And we
would—provided that there was no wind.
Wind Drift
For requirement 2e, you learned that your airspeed indicator
shows how fast you are passing through the air, not over the
ground. If you are flying into a 25-knot headwind, you are
actually traveling over the ground at 25 knots less than your
airspeed. On the other hand, if you have a 25-knot tailwind,
you are traveling over the ground 25 knots faster than
your airspeed.
However, if the air mass is moving across your path, then
your plane will drift with the wind. As a pilot, you must know
how to correct your course for this drift, which you do by using
your own speed and the speed and direction of the wind to
make a wind triangle. When the course is corrected for wind,
it is called a heading. That is what you fly on the compass to
reach your destination.
Now let’s draw a wind triangle using our calculations for
a planned flight from IND to CFJ.
Technicians can calculate closely just how much
the deviation will be for any airplane. In every aircraft,
you will find a deviation card mounted near the com-
pass that tells us how to correct the magnetic course
for deviation.
Air Navigation.


AVIATION 51
MAKING A
WIND TRIANGLE
Suppose a preflight
weather briefing reports
that a 15-knot wind is
blowing steadily from 340 degrees.
Remember, if the wind is coming from
340 degrees, it is going toward 160 degrees
(the reciprocal).
Step 1—On a clean sheet of paper, make a north-
south (N-S) dotted line. Place a dot halfway down
that line and identify it as IND. We have already
determined that CFJ is 33 nautical miles (nm) from
IND and that our true course is 298 degrees.
Step 2—Using a protractor, measure our 33 nm true course of
298 degrees based on our N-S line (A-B). Place a dot 33 units
from the N-S line and identify it as CFJ.
Step 3—With the protractor centered on the dot representing
IND, draw a line at 160 degrees clockwise from north, indicat-
ing the effects of the wind from 340 degrees to 160 degrees.
Since it is a 15-knot wind, show its velocity by making that line
15 units long on our ruler; place an arrowhead (>) at the end
of that line and identify it as C.
Step 4—The plane’s cruising speed is 100 knots, so measure
100 units on the ruler to represent the airspeed, making a dot
on the ruler at that point. Place the ruler so that the end is on
the arrowhead and the 100-mile dot on the ruler crosses the
true course line (label that point P). Draw the line and label it
for our 100-knot airspeed. At the end of an hour, our position
should be at point P.
HEADING AND AIRSPEEDCOURSE AND GROUND SPEED
AIRSPEED 100 KNOTS
CRAWFORDSVILLE
(CFJ)
NOT TO SCALE
INDIANAPOLIS
INT’L AIRPORT
(IND)
WIND
DIRECTION
AND
VELOCITY
15 KNOTS
B
P
N
A
C
D
S
.Air Navigation


52 AVIATION
Step 5—We can find our ground speed by measuring the num-
ber of units on the ruler from Indianapolis International Airport
to point P, which is 88 knots.
Step 6—What we really want to know, however, is what our
heading should be to offset wind drift on a flight from IND to
CFJ. We can find that from our wind triangle by placing the
reference line of the protractor along the north-south line with
its center point at the intersection of the airspeed line (D). We
find that the airspeed line extends out at 304 degrees, our true
heading. To calculate the compass heading, which is what we
will actually fly, we must also consider the effects of magnetic
variation and compass deviation.
Step 7—After we obtain this true heading, we can apply the
corrections for magnetic variation and for compass deviation to
obtain a compass heading, as we discussed earlier. This will
enable us to fly directly to CFJ. We have already found that
magnetic variation in the Indianapolis area is 2 degrees west,
so we add 2 degrees to our true heading and find a magnetic
heading of 306 degrees.
Step 8—The deviation card near our compass tells us to add
1 degree to a magnetic reading of 300 degrees, so we add
that to our magnetic heading and get 301 degrees. That is our
compass heading from IND. It should take us directly over CFJ.
Because weather
constantly
changes, we
must check our
calculations
during the flight
by radio or
reference points
on the ground
to determine if the
wind has changed
in its direction
and/or speed.
Air Navigation.


AVIATION 53
The Wheel Deal
Drawing a wind triangle is a pretty accurate way to figure out your
heading, but it can be awkward. Not surprisingly, pilots have tools to
make the job easier.
One of these tools is the E6B flight computer. Sometimes called a
“whiz wheel,” the E6B has been around for generations. One side is a
circular slide rule marked for performing flight calculations. The other
side—the “wind” side—has a transparent sheet of plastic over a grid. In
effect, you draw your wind
triangle on the clear plastic
of the computer instead of
on a piece of paper. Grid
lines and other markings
let you simply read off
angles and speeds without
having to measure them
with a protractor and ruler.
Learning to use an E6B
takes practice but is a mark
of a knowledgeable aviator.
Electronic tablets and flight
computers similar to
handheld calculators are
available and work well, but
the well-prepared pilot
knows how to use the old
E6B, too. This instrument is
vital to a pilot’s knowledge
because it gives a mental
image of the relationships
of performance and winds.
“Electronic Flight Bags” (above) are increasingly
replacing the E6B (below) and paper charts. They
include moving maps driven by GPS. They are
typically applications loaded on tablet computers.
.Air Navigation


54 AVIATION
Radio Navigation: VOR Highways
The Federal Aviation Administration oversees radio aids to
navigation through its Federal Airways System. The primary
ground-based navigational aid is called very high frequency,
omnidirectional radio range (“VHF omni range” or “VOR”).
From VOR stations throughout the coun-
try, VHF radio signals are transmitted in
all directions, or omnidirectional. Any air-
craft equipped with a VOR receiver can
receive these signals if it is within range.
Depending on the VOR station’s power
and the aircraft’s altitude, range can be
more than 100 miles. Information on dis-
tance may also be available if both the
ground station and aircraft are equipped
with distance measuring equipment.
Assume that you are a pilot and
want to use VOR as a simple navigation
guide. Look at the aeronautical chart cov-
ering your destination, find the location
and radio frequency of a nearby VOR
station, and tune to that station. Be sure you have the correct
station—listen to the identification, which will be sent either
in Morse code or by voice.
Turn the omni bearing selector (a knob at the edge of the
VOR receiver’s face) until the vertical needle centers at the bot-
tom of the round dial. Glance at the “to/from” indicator; be
sure the bearing is “to” the VOR. Now, just fly a course that
keeps the vertical needle centered. If it moves right, fly right
to correct your course. If it moves left, fly left. Keep the needle
centered and you will fly directly over the VOR station. At that
point, the “to/from” indicator will flicker for a few seconds and
then change to a “from” reading. To continue past the station
in the same direction, keep the needle centered on “from.”
When using VOR, remember that the needle indication
shows your relationship to an imaginary line on the ground.
When a correction is needed, try about a 15-degree correction
toward the deflection of the needle. Then, when the needle
returns to the center, subtract 10 degrees of that correction and
maintain that heading to see if it will keep the needle centered.
With VOR, the
pilot need not
be concerned
with magnetic
variation, compass
deviation, or wind
drift. Keep the
needle centered;
radio does the rest.
Air Navigation.


GPS: Steering by Satellite
You may have used a global positioning system, or GPS,
receiver on a Scout hike. GPS uses a series of geostationary
satellites orbiting at an altitude of about 11,000 nautical miles
to precisely indicate your position in terms of latitude
and longitude.
GPS is the primary means of navigation. It offers similar
guidance to VOR/DME but can also accurately determine
altitude. Unlike VOR/DME navigation, GPS has the capability to
fly direct tracks between points on a map, which reduces
mileage and time to reach a chosen destination. For this reason
GPS has become the primary means of satellite (space-based)
navigation for aviation. Because the GPS receiver knows your
present position and your past position, it gives a very accurate
ground speed readout as well as a readout of your track over
the ground. Instrument approach procedures also use GPS to
guide the aircraft to a safe landing when ceiling and visibility
are low. Eventually, GPS will replace ground-based navigation
systems including the instrument landing system (ILS).
AVIATION 55
.Air Navigation





Entering the Cockpit
Now that you understand how airplanes work, you may be
eager to get in the cockpit and start flying. Of course, not just
anyone is allowed to fly an airplane; you must earn a pilot’s
license first, just as you must earn a driver’s license before you
can drive a car. The good news is that earning a pilot’s certifi-
cate is not as hard as you might think.
The U.S. government’s Code of Federal Regulations (Title
14) details six levels of pilot certificates, ranging from student
pilot to air transport pilot (the certificate held by airline captains).
To help you complete requirement 1e, we will briefly examine
three of the certificates—recreational pilot, private pilot, and
sport pilot—along with the instrument pilot rating.
.Entering the Cockpit
AVIATION 57


58 AVIATION
The recreational
pilot certificate
has some important
restrictions. Most
importantly, the
pilot can fly only
during daylight
hours and in
airspace where
he or she does not
need to communi-
cate with air
traffic control.
Recreational Pilot Certificate
Of all the certificates and ratings, the recreational pilot certificate
is the easiest to obtain. It requires 30 hours of flight instruction
(three hours of which must be solo flight time). The main privi-
leges afforded the recreational pilot are that the pilot may carry
one passenger (in a single-engine land-based airplane with up to
four seats and 180 horsepower) and may share expenses with
that passenger. The recreational pilot may fly in good visibility
at altitudes of up to 10,000 feet above sea level or up to 2,000
feet above ground level, whichever is greater, and may travel as
far as 50 nautical miles from the home airport. The recreational
pilot may earn additional privileges.
Sport Pilot Certificate
The FAA created the sport pilot’s license in 2004 to help lower
the barriers of entry-level aviation by making flying more
affordable and accessible to more people. If you are an enthusi-
ast of light-sport aircraft (LSA), consider a sport pilot certificate
if you want to fly one. To fly an LSA under a sport pilot
certificate, you must be at least age 17, have either a valid U.S.
driver’s license or an FAA medical certificate, and you will first
need to get a student pilot certificate. Like the recreational pilot
certificate, this certificate will allow the pilot to carry only one
passenger at up to 10,000 feet above sea level. The sport pilot
may share expenses with the passenger, and only daytime
flights are allowed. The sport pilot does not qualify for addi-
tional ratings, such as the instrument rating available to the
private pilot. Specific qualifications and additional restrictions
apply; contact the Federal Aviation Administration (see the
resources section for more information).
Entering the Cockpit.


AVIATION 59
All of these
certificates require
an individual to
write the English
language, pass
written and oral
examinations, and
be in good health.
(Keeping yourself
physically strong
and mentally
awake can come
in handy here.)
Lastly, you must
be at least
16 years old to
fly solo and at
least 17 to carry
passengers.
Private Pilot Certificate
At one time considered to be the primary pilot’s license, the
private pilot certificate is still greatly desired. Its requirements
are more demanding than those for the sport or recreational
pilot certificate, and its privileges are greater. This certificate
requires a minimum of 40 hours of flight instruction (of which
10 hours must be solo), including cross-country experience
(trips of more than 50 nautical miles), night flight, instrument
flight, and radio communications. A private pilot certificate
permits the pilot to carry more than one passenger, to fly higher
than 10,000 feet above sea level, to go farther than 50 nautical
miles, to fly at night and into airspace controlled by air traffic
control, and to share expenses with passengers.
Instrument Rating
With additional instruction, private pilots can add ratings to a
certificate—upgrades that allow privileges like flying
multiengine aircraft or seaplanes. One rating many private
pilots work to earn as quickly as possible is the instrument
rating, which allows them to fly at times when instrument
flight rules (IFR) are in effect. Without the instrument rating, a
pilot can fly only when visibility is good and visual flight rules
(VFR) are in effect. Of course, it is sometimes necessary to fly
when clouds obscure the sky. The instrument rating permits a
pilot to fly under these conditions.
.Entering the Cockpit





Taking Flight
You have learned the basic principles of flight and something
about how to fly an airplane. You also know a little about what
it takes to become a pilot. Perhaps you have never actually flown.
Now is a good time to try if that is possible. Learning by doing is
the Scouting way, and you cannot experience the thrills of flight
while sitting on the ground.
You may be lucky enough to fly with your parent on a busi-
ness trip or perhaps take a flying vacation with your family. Or,
you may be able to take an orientation flight at an airport near
your home—with your parent’s permission, of course. If you are
able to take an actual flight in an airliner or a small airplane, be
sure to note the date, time, place, and how long the flight lasted—
much as pilots log every flight they make. Be sure to make notes
of your experience so you can tell your counselor about it.
AVIATION 61
.Taking Flight
AVIATION 61


62 AVIATION
Filing a Flight Plan
If you are a pilot, preparing for a trip is more complicated than
just buying a ticket. You must plan every detail of the flight,
from what time you will leave to how much fuel the journey
will take.
Pilots flying under instrument flight rules (IFR) are
required by law to file an aviation flight plan—and can be fined
up to $1,000 if they do not. But it is a smart idea to file a flight
plan even when visual flight rules (VFR) are in force.
Preparing to Fly
A lot of preflight planning goes into every flight. The pilot must
learn about the weather and the expected wind at the proposed
cruising altitude. The pilot first determines whether everything
is OK for the flight, and then conducts a preflight inspection of
the airplane to make sure it is airworthy.
Follow along on a typical preflight inspection of a popular
four-seat airplane. The pilot first visually checks the aircraft for
general condition during a walk-around inspection. In cold
weather, the pilot does this by removing even the smallest
accumulations of frost, ice, or snow from the wings, tail, and
control surfaces. The pilot then makes sure that the control
surfaces contain no internal accumulations of ice or debris.
If it is a night flight, the pilot checks the operation of all lights
and makes sure a working flashlight (with extra batteries) is
on board.
Taking Flight.


CIVIL AIRCRAFT PILOTS, FAR 91 requires you file an IFR flight plan to operate under instrument flight rules in controlled airspace. Failure to file could result
in a civil penalty not to exceed $1,000 for each violation (Section 901 of the Federal Aviation Act of 1958, as amended). Filing of a VFR flight plan is
recommended as a good operating practice. See also Part 99 for requirements concerning DVFR flight plans.
CLOSE VFR FLIGHT PLAN WITH ___________________________ FSS ON ARRIVAL
FLIGHT PLAN
1. Type
VFR
IFR
DVFR
2. Aircraft
Identification
3. Aircraft Type /
Special Equipment
4. True
Airspeed
KTS
5. Departure
Point
6. Departure Time (Z)
Proposed Actual
7. Cruising
Altitude
8. Route of Flight
9. Destination
(name of airport and city)
10. Estimated Time En Route
Hours Minutes
11. Remarks
12. Fuel On Board
Hours Minutes
13. Alternate
Airport(s)
14. Pilot´s Name, Address, and Telephone Number and Home Base 15. Number
Aboard
17. Destination Contact/Telephone (Optional)
16. Color of Aircraft


64 AVIATION
Here is a typical preflight checklist.
1. Cabin
a. Remove the control wheel lock.
b. Make sure the ignition switch is in the OFF position.
c. Turn on the master switch and check fuel quantity
indicators, then turn off the master switch.
d. Check the fuel selector valve handle on both tanks.
e. Check baggage door for security.
5
3
2
7
1
46
Warning: When turning on the master
switch, do not allow anyone to stand
within the arc of the propeller, since a
loose or broken wire or other malfunc-
tion could cause the propeller to rotate.
Taking Flight.


AVIATION 65
2. Exterior, starting at the tail of the airplane
a. Remove the rudder gust lock, if installed.
b. Disconnect the tail tie-down.
c. Check control surfaces for freedom of movement
and security.
3. Right wing (trailing edge)
a. Check the aileron for freedom of movement and security.
4. Right wing (leading edge)
a. Disconnect the wing tie-down.
b. Check the main wheel tire for proper inflation.
c. Visually check the fuel quantity and that the fuel filler
cap is secure.
d. Before the first flight of the day and after each refueling,
drain all fuel strainers, including the fuel line quick-drain
valve. Drain at least a cupful of fuel (using a sampler
cup), checking for water, sediment, and proper fuel
grade. If contaminated, take further samples until clear,
then gently rock the wings to move any additional
contaminants to the sampling points. Take repeated
samplings from all drain points until all contamination
has been removed.
5. Nose
a. Check the oil level. Do not operate a plane with the oil
level below the recommended level. For extended flights,
fill the oil to the maximum level.
b. Check the propeller and spinner for nicks and security.
c. Check the landing lights for condition and cleanliness.
d. Check the carburetor air filter for restrictions by dust or
other foreign matter.
e. Check the nose wheel strut and tire for proper inflation.
6. Left wing (leading edge)
a. Disconnect the tie-down rope.
b. Inspect the flight instrument static source opening on the
side of the fuselage for stoppage (left side only).
.Taking Flight


66 AVIATION
c. Check the main wheel tire for proper inflation.
d. Visually check the fuel quantity and that the fuel filler
cap is secure.
e. Inspect the fuel strainer; repeat as with right wing.
f. Remove the pitot tube cover, if installed, and check the
tube opening for stoppage. (The pitot tube measures air
pressure and works with the airspeed indicator.)
g. Check the fuel tank vent opening for stoppage.
h. Check the stall warning for stoppage.
7. Left wing (trailing edge)
a. Check the aileron for freedom of movement and security.
After the pilot completes a preflight check and boards the air-
plane, the checking continues. There is a checklist for every
phase of flight, and the pilot uses this list to make sure every-
thing is properly set before moving on to the next flying task.
Taking Flight.Taking Flight.


AVIATION 67
Safety on the Ground
and in the Air
If you are going to take a flight:
• Obey all instructions of the pilot
and crew.
• Fasten your seat belt securely
for takeoffs and landings and
when instructed to do so. It is a
good idea to keep your seat
belt fastened whenever the air-
plane is moving—in the air or
on the ground.
If you are walking around aircraft
or hangars:
• Keep well away from propellers
and helicopter tail rotors, even
if they are not turning.
• Keep away from jet intakes
and exhausts.
• Heed all warning signs.
As an airport visitor:
• Keep off the flying field.
• Stay out of operations rooms
and the control tower unless
you are being conducted by
a guide.
• Remember that we live in an era of heightened
security concerns. At major airport or radar facilities,
expect to pass through security checkpoints.
• Never walk on an active tarmac; the noise may
distract you from another danger you can’t see.
.Taking Flight





Aviation Facilities
Every year, roughly 87,000 airplanes
take off and land in the United States.
At any given moment, about 5,000
planes are in the air. Yet, the number
of aviation accidents (and near misses)
is so small that every plane crash is a
major news event.
How are so many aircraft able to
operate so frequently yet remain safe
and worry free? The answer lies in the
air traffic control system, which guar-
antees trouble-free skies. This system
includes airports and other facilities
that may be unfamiliar to you.
One of the earliest methods of navigation assistance for
pilots was the lighting of fires at night. The first air traffic con-
trol used maps, chalkboards, and mental calculations to keep
planes separated in the air. We have come a long way since
then in providing accurate and reliable assistance for private,
commercial, and military pilots.
In the 1920s, the first attempts to control the airspace
above the United States were made in establishing air-
mail routes. The organizations created back then were
predecessors to the Federal Aviation Administration,
which controls the skies today.
Requirements 4a and 4b encourage you to visit an air-
port and one of several types of FAA facilities. Before
you go, it might be wise to learn a little about each.
.Aviation Facilities
AVIATION 69


70 AVIATION
The Airport
Visiting an airport should be fairly easy, because there is
probably one not many miles from your home. Perhaps it is
just a large, open, grassy field with a barnlike hangar for stor-
ing a few airplanes, or perhaps it is a giant complex near the
center of a major city. In either case, a visit will give you a
taste of aviation.
If possible, visit an airport that has an air traffic control
tower. If you can visit the tower, you will be able to see the
airways system at work as controllers guide traffic on the
aerial highways.
Civil (commercial) airports are
generally built by cities, often with
aid from state and federal govern-
ments, to serve civilian aviation
and sometimes military traffic as
well. They are usually close to the
city or town they serve. Their loca-
tion may depend in part on where
builders can find a reasonably level
tract of land that is large enough to
permit operations free of obstruc-
tions and prevailing smoke, fog,
or strong winds.
Aviation Facilities.


AVIATION 71
Airport Runways
At a large airport (and some small ones), the runways have hard
surfaces of concrete or asphalt. Open areas are grass-covered to
prevent erosion and to control dust. While light airplanes some-
times use the turf area for landings and takeoffs, airliners and
other large planes need paved runways and taxi strips.
Airport runways are designed, whenever possible, to allow
takeoffs and landings into the prevailing wind. All runways
are numbered according to the compass heading indicated
when lined up on the centerline of that runway, but in a sort of
shorthand. So, for instance, a runway pointing toward 30 degrees
would be runway 3.
Airports are assigned identifiers consisting of three
letters, numbers, or a combination of both. Although
these identifiers sometimes seem random, they are
usually drawn from the airport’s name or city. Here are
a few examples: Los Angeles International Airport is
LAX, Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport is
ATL, and John F. Kennedy International Airport is JFK.
.Aviation Facilities


72 AVIATION
If you landed on the same runway going in the opposite
direction, the compass heading would be 210 degrees (the
reciprocal of 30 degrees). Again, you would drop the last zero,
referring to runway 21 instead of runway 210.
The runway in use (active) is determined by the wind
direction; it is better to fly into the wind to reduce takeoff
and landing roll. Some of the biggest airports have two or
more parallel runways that can be used simultaneously. An
airport with two runway 36s would designate them runway
36L (for left) and runway 36R (for right).
Other Airport Facilities
In addition to runways and a control tower, every large com-
mercial airport has an administration building with passenger
waiting rooms, restrooms, ticket counters, baggage areas,
and offices for dispatchers, airline officials, and the airport
management. The administration and airline terminal buildings
may include restaurants, newsstands, rest and eating quarters
for air crews or transient (visiting) private pilots, and other
services. There will probably be taxi stands, bus stops, and rental
car companies, allowing travelers to get from the airport to
other destinations.
At large airports, each airline may have its own terminal
facilities and a hangar or two for its airplanes. Fuel trucks and
line crews are available. If the airport is served by an airline,
there will be complete firefighting and rescue equipment. Other
buildings will house equipment for maintaining the field.
Runway numbers
are pronounced
one numeral at a
time, so runway 21
is pronounced
“two-one,” not
“twenty-one.”
Runway 30 is
pronounced
“three-zero,”
not “thirty.”
Aviation Facilities.


AVIATION 73
The Control Tower
As its name suggests, a control tower is an elevated structure
from which airport controllers operate. The people in the con-
trol tower have four primary responsibilities. They must
• Ensure aircraft are a safe
distance apart and in the
proper sequence when
flying through the airport
traffic area or in the
traffic pattern.
• Manage arrivals and
departures.
• Control ground move-
ments of aircraft and
ground vehicles.
• Provide clearances and
local weather and airport
information to pilots.
Terminal Radar Control Facility (TRACON)
More commonly known as “Approach Control” or “Departure
Control,” terminal radar control facilities (TRACON) are
associated with an airport or group of airports that lie within
high-traffic airspace. TRACON controllers provide separation
services for aircraft transitioning from an air route traffic control
center (ARTCC) and an airport within their airspace or for
aircraft operating between airports within their airspace. The
actual TRACON facility might not be located in the control
tower or even on the airport site.
When you visit a terminal radar control facility, expect
to enter a darkened room lit only by the glow of radar
screens. Controllers skillfully observe and maneuver
the “blips” that appear on their screens; each blip repre-
sents an aircraft. If you have ever played a computer or
video game, you have some idea of the intense nature
of this responsibility. Of course, there is absolutely no
room for error.
.Aviation Facilities


74 AVIATION
Air Route Traffic Control Center
Away from the airspace of a control tower, a pilot may receive
assistance from an air route traffic control center, more commonly
referred to as the “center.” A controller’s duties are chiefly oriented
toward aircraft flying by instruments (instrument flight rules, or
IFR) but, as the workload permits, a controller also assists those
flying visually.
In addition to keeping aircraft a safe distance from one
another, controllers monitor aircraft progress over all routes,
advise pilots concerning hazardous weather, and sequence traf-
fic into destination airports. Looking much like the approach/
departure facility, air route traffic control centers may be respon-
sible for much larger areas, some extending hundreds of miles
from their building.
Flight Service Station
Providing weather and information services for all pilots is
the primary responsibility of the flight service station. The FSS
will also:
• Accept and close flight plans.
• Conduct preflight weather briefings.
• Communicate with VFR pilots en route.
• Help pilots in distress.
• Provide weather information.
• Monitor air navigation radio aids.
• Publicize notices to airmen, which update
pilots on changes to aeronautical facilities,
services, or procedures or notify them
of hazards.
• Work with search-and-rescue groups in
locating missing aircraft.
Aviation Facilities.


AVIATION 75
Flight Standards District Office
The Flight Standards District Office (FSDO, pronounced “fiz-doh”)
is a field office of the FAA serving the aviation industry and
general public on matters relating to certifying and operating
airline and general aviation aircraft. Each office serves an
assigned geographical area and oversees operations for safety,
certification of flight crews and aircraft, accident prevention,
investigation, and enforcement.
Arranging a Visit
Most of the facilities mentioned welcome visitors, and you can find their
phone numbers in your phone book. Look up the airport’s name or look
for FAA facilities under “United States Government, Department of
Transportation.” Be sure to call ahead to make an appointment; don’t
expect to drop by unannounced. Airports, and especially control towers,
are busy places, and the working personnel will not be able to drop every-
thing to give you a guided tour without advance notice and permission.
Remember that you are a guest in a most important part of the air
traffic control system. The people there are responsible for the lives and
safety of thousands of individuals and billions of dollars in property.
.Aviation Facilities





Flying Without Leaving
the Ground
Nothing quite equals the thrill of flying, but you can still enjoy
aviation without leaving the ground. Computer simulators and
model airplanes offer fun, inexpensive alternatives to taking an
actual flight.
Flight Simulators
You may already have access to a flight simulator program for
a personal computer. The equipment most likely includes a joy-
stick or yoke control and may even have rudder pedals. If you
choose option 2d, you will need to plot a course over an area
contained in the program menu and obtain an aeronautical
sectional chart for that region.
.Flying Without Leaving the Ground
AVIATION 77


78 AVIATION
From the airplanes available in the menu, choose one
that you want to fly. This exercise should not be viewed as
entertainment, competition, or combat. The purpose of this
requirement is to let you experience some sense of what it is
like to pilot an airplane from takeoff to landing, to fly a heading
that you calculated during the preflight stage, and to monitor
your progress as you pass ground and radio checkpoints.
Model Airplanes
A great way to learn about air-
planes and the principles of fly-
ing is to build model planes.
Model airplanes are not toys.
They hold an important place
in the history of flight and were
actually the first heavier-than-
air machines to fly. Engineers
still use models today as they
develop new airplane designs
and test them in wind tunnels.
You will find model building
fun, and you will learn much
about the science of flight.
There are two basic kinds
of model airplanes—nonflying
display models and flying mod-
els. Display models are miniature copies of full-size airplanes,
precise in scale and exact in detail. You can buy plastic kits
for these models at hobby and toy stores. Some beginner’s kits
include all the materials necessary, including glue, paint, and
decals of the plane’s markings. You will just need to furnish
a sharp knife and a paintbrush.
Select a departure point and a destination point that
will allow for a flight of no more than an hour. Arrange
to be uninterrupted during your time at the controls,
and be aware of what you are thinking and feeling as
you perform the flight. When you complete the flight,
write down your experiences and share your observa-
tions with your merit badge counselor.
Flying Without Leaving the Ground.


AVIATION 79
Model Aircraft That Fly
Some flying models are rather simple, and others can be quite
complex. The diversity of model aircraft can range from gliders
to radio-controlled airplanes, turbine-powered jets, helicopters,
and drones. The simplest kind of flying model is a glider.
However, if you choose to make a flying model for requirement
3a, it must be a powered rise-off-ground model—it must have a
landing gear and be able to start from the ground or floor and
fly. The power source might be liquid fuel or a battery pack.
You may use a kit or design your own.
Flying models may be constructed from balsa wood or
composites, such as fiberglass or carbon fiber. Many models are
finished using modern iron-on plastic film coverings that shrink
to fit with the application of heat from a heat gun. Some of the
more realistic models are finished using traditional materials
such as silkspan tissue or lightweight cloth and painted with a
lightweight coating called dope.
Experienced model-makers usually use internal combustion
engines to power their airplanes. Often they will build gas-
powered models that they can control from the ground by
working the plane’s control surfaces, either by means of a
control line or by radio control.
Three general categories of powered flying models are
available. These are free-flight, line-controlled, and radio-
controlled model airplanes.
.Flying Without Leaving the Ground


80 AVIATION
Free-Flight Models. As the term suggests, free-flight models
are designed to be released with the engine running and to
coast on oversized wings when the engine stops. Resembling
sailplanes or gliders, these may stay aloft for an hour or more.
Control-Line Models. Also known as U-control models,
control-line models are flown by two wires attached through
one wing of the aircraft. These wires work the elevators on the
horizontal stabilizer, controlling the altitude of the flight. The
operator rotates inside a small circle, maneuvering the airplane
up, down, or in loops.
Radio-Controlled Models. Many advanced model airplane
builders install radios in their airplanes so the planes can be
controlled in flight from the ground. A tiny receiver is built into
the model, and signals are sent to it from a transmitter. These
signals are used to guide the model’s control surfaces, allowing
the pilot to make the model dive and climb, turn, and cruise.
Radio-controlled drones have the capability of carrying
electronic sensors and cameras and have quickly found a place
in the commercial aviation market. Drones are used for aerial
photography, agriculture surveys and monitoring, and as video
platforms for emergency-response teams.
Model Power
There are three basic types of power plants for flying models:
rubber-powered, fuel-powered engines, and battery-powered
electric motors.
Engines for fuel-powered model planes are internal
combustion engines that burn either an alcohol/oil mixture or
gasoline. Most of them are two-cycle engines that draw fuel
into the combustion chamber, fire, and expel exhaust by the
In many kits,
modern “heat-
shrink” plastics
have replaced the
traditional tissue
and dope covering
the airframe.
Check with a
hobby shop or
model club to help
you in selecting
the type of kit you
will build and fly.
Flying Without Leaving the Ground.


AVIATION 81
up-and-down movement of the piston in the cylinder. The
simplest type is called the glow-plug engine. It is fired by a
glowing filament heated by a battery. Once the engine starts,
the heat of combustion keeps the glow plug hot. This engine
uses a mixture of methanol, nitromethane, and oil as fuel.
The other common type of model engine is a simple diesel
engine that burns an ether mixture and is fired on compression
alone. The average flight time for a gasoline-powered engine is
10 to 15 minutes; although larger fuel tanks provide longer
operation.
The battery-powered electric motors have an advantage;
they can be switched on or off, thus providing maximum power
instantaneously. Their disadvantages are a comparable lack of
speed and shorter flight time.
Keep these tips in mind when building
your model airplane.
• Be careful when using sharp tools
such as razor blades and knives.
• Avoid inhaling fumes from airplane cement and
airplane dope.
• Keep all materials and tools away from small children.
Before tackling requirement 3a, practice-build several of
the simpler rubber-powered airplanes. Become familiar
with common construction problems. Then, building a
model with an engine will be less complicated.
Be sure you
follow the safety
precautions
provided by the
manufacturer
for the fuel—or
battery—operated
model you build.
.Flying Without Leaving the Ground


82 AVIATION
Flying Models in Competition
After you have built and flown several models, you may want
to compete with other model flyers. In many communities,
model clubs, hobby shops, civic organizations, and other groups
sponsor meets. Some flying meets are held indoors in gymnasi-
ums, armories, or other large halls.
There are events for gas- and rubber-powered free-flight
models, gliders of various types, free-flight rocket-powered
models, control-line models, and radio-controlled models of
various kinds. These often involve “combat,” during which
the flyers’ line-controlled, gas-engine models try to cut with
their propellers streamers trailing from other models. Models
are sometimes judged for workmanship as well as for flight.
National rules for model contests are established by
the Academy of Model Aeronautics. This nonprofit
organization’s mission is to promote development of
model aviation as a recognized sport and worthwhile
recreation activity. See the resources section at the
end of this pamphlet for contact information.
Flying Without Leaving the Ground.


AVIATION 83
The Model FPG-9
An easy way to learn about how planes work is to build a
model FPG-9. This simple design was devised by Jack Reynolds,
a volunteer with the National Model Aviation Museum. The
glider is made using a standard-size foam plate.
In requirement 3b,
you are asked to
build an FPG-9
and compete with
other Scouts in
tests of precision
flight and landing.
Flying Models Safely
Flying model aircraft requires a high level of skill and responsibility.
The planes can weigh up to 100 pounds and reach speeds faster than
200 mph. Therefore, safety must never be compromised.
One commonsense rule of safety when flying model planes: Stay
out of their way. Even a light, balsa-wood model powered by a rubber
band might injure you if it hit you.
The Academy of Model Aeronautics publishes the National Model
Aircraft Safety Code for use by AMA members and at AMA-sanctioned
events, but it applies just as well to any model aircraft enthusiast. You can
request a copy of the code (AMA document 105) by contacting the AMA
or visiting the AMA website.
Materials Needed
n FPG-9 pattern
n 87⁄8 -inch foam
plate
n Scissors
n Clear tape
n Ink pen
n Penny
.Flying Without Leaving the Ground


84 AVIATION
SCISSOR SLITS (A)
SCISSOR SLITS (B)
WIDTH OF SLOT IS
DETERMINED BY
THICKNESS OF
FOAM PLATE.
FPG-9 Pattern by Jack Reynolds
SLOT 2
SLOT 1
This FPG-9 pattern
must be enlarged 150
percent to be full size.
You can also print out
the pattern from the
AMA’s education web-
site at http://www.
buildandfly.com.
Flying Without Leaving the Ground.


AVIATION 85
Making an FPG-9
Follow these steps to make your FPG-9.
Step 1—Photocopy the pattern provided (it will have to be
enlarged 150 percent) and cut it out with scissors. Don’t cut
along the dotted line, just along the bold lines.
Step 2—Place the paper pattern in the center of the foam plate,
making sure that the tail of the pattern stays on the plate’s flat
bottom, inside the curved portion. Don’t worry if the tab at the
top of the pattern is on the curved portion. The wingtips should
spill over the curved edge of the plate.
SCISSOR SLITS (A)
SCISSOR SLITS (B)
2
.Flying Without Leaving the Ground


86 AVIATION
Step 3—Trace around the pattern with the ink pen. Mark the
scissor slots A and B.
Step 4—Cut out the foam template by following the pen lines
you just drew.
Step 5—Cut along the dotted line to separate the tail from the
wings. For ease, make all of your cuts from the outside of the
plate toward the center of the plate. Don’t try to turn the scis-
sors to make sharp corners. Cut the two slots only as wide as
the thickness of the foam plate; otherwise the pieces will not
fit together snugly.
3
5
SCISSOR
SLITS (A)
Flying Without Leaving the Ground.


AVIATION 87
Step 6—To attach the tail to the wing, slide slot 1 into slot 2.
Making sure the tail is perpendicular to the wings, use two
small pieces of tape (about 2 inches long) to secure the
bottom of the tail to the bottom of the wing.
Step 7—Glue the penny near the front of the plane where indi-
cated on the pattern. Fold the square tab back over the penny;
tape it down to secure the coin.
The FPG-9 uses
“elevons” to
control both pitch
and roll. In a
conventional
airplane, elevators
control pitch
and ailerons
control roll.
6
7
.Flying Without Leaving the Ground


88 AVIATION
Step 8—Bend the elevons (the flaps on the back edges of
the wings) upward. This will provide for a flatter glide path.
Step 9—Your FPG-9 is ready to fly. Gently toss the plane
directly in front of you. Once it flies reasonably straight and
glides well, try throwing it hard with the nose of the glider
pointed 30 degrees above the horizon. The glider should make
a big loop and have enough speed to glide 20 to 25 feet after
completing the loop.
8
9
Flying Without Leaving the Ground.


AVIATION 89
Testing Your FPG-9
Now that you have built your FPG-9, you can test the effect
of various modifications. See what happens when one elevon
is up and the other is down. Make both elevons neutral (even
with the wing) and move the rudder (the flap on the tail) to
the left. What happens? Figure out how to make the glider fly
to the right.
Once you are an FPG-9 ace, challenge other members of
your troop or patrol to make their own gliders. Then, have a
competition to test your gliders. To judge precision flight, hang
a plastic hoop about 20 feet from the starting line and try to fly
your gliders through it. To judge precision landing, lay the hoop
on the ground and try to land your gliders within its circle. Give
each participant a set number of tries and number of points per
successful try, then total each person’s score.
.Flying Without Leaving the Ground





Careers in Aviation
Aviation offers a nearly unlimited variety of career opportuni-
ties—many of which do not directly involve airplanes. Experts
in the field estimate that for every person who flies an aircraft,
there are 600 others who fill aviation-related positions.
Following are just a few aviation-related careers:
• Pilots and flight engineers
• UAV (Unmanned Aerial
Vehicle)/drone pilot
• Flight attendants
• Airline nonflying careers
• Aircraft manufacturing
• Maintenance/avionics
• Airport careers
• Government careers
Nearly all workers in the
aerospace industry must be
highly skilled. Those involved
in the manufacture, flying, and maintenance of aircraft and
spacecraft are especially well-trained. The quality of study and
work that might give you just a passing grade will not be good
enough for a position in aviation.
As you consider whether you want to enter the aviation
field, ask yourself about your skills and interests. Are
you mechanically or scientifically minded? Do you work
well with your hands? Do you work well with people?
If you have the necessary abilities, there may be an
opportunity for you in aviation—provided you are
willing to work hard to learn.
.Careers in Aviation
AVIATION 91


92 AVIATION
If you are serious about a career in aviation, you should
begin planning for it when you enter high school because you
may need a background in such fields as mathematics and
physics. For many positions, college degrees are necessary,
again usually with emphasis on math and science. Depending
on the career you want to pursue, you may choose a college
that offers a specialized aviation program. In addition, many
commercial pilots earn their wings as members of the U.S.
armed forces. Your guidance counselor can help you learn more
about how to prepare for an aviation career.
The FAA website has several publications about careers in
aviation. These can be found online (with your parent’s permis-
sion) at www.faa.gov/education/careers. The U.S. Department
of Transportation also provides information online about avia-
tion careers. To access the reports, visit www.rita.dot.gov/bts or
download the PDF at http://ntl.bts.gov/lib/000/900/932/sky.pdf.
For more information on aviation-related university studies,
contact the University Aviation Association.
This chart shows school subjects that must be mastered
for some of the many careers in aviation.
For more
information about
the resources
mentioned in this
section, see the
resources section
at the end of
this pamphlet.
Careers in Aviation.


AVIATION 93
AVIATION CAREER
Aerial Photographer • • • • • • • • • •
Aeronautical Engineer • • • • • • • • • • •
Aircraft Manufacturer • • • • • •
Aircraft Mechanic • • • • • • • • • • •
Aircraft Navigator • • • • • • • • •
Aircraft Sales • • • • • •
Airframe Mechanic • • • • • • • • • • • • •
Airline Accountant • • • • • • •
Airline Maintenance Inspector • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •
Airline Pilot • • • • • • • • • • • •
Airline Reservations • • • • • • •
Airline Scheduler/Dispatcher • • • • • • • • •
Air Traffic Controller • • • • • • • • •
Airport Management • • • • • • •
Avionics Technician • • • • • • • • •
Chemical Engineer • • • • • • • • •
Corporate Aviation Manager • • • • • • • • • •
Corporate Pilot • • • • • • • • • • •
Customer Service Rep. • • • • • • •
Design Draftsman • • • • • • •
Electronics Engineer • • • • • • • • • • •
Fixed Base Operator • • • • • • • • • •
Flight Attendant • • • • • • • •
Flight Engineer • • • • • • • • • • • •
Flight Surgeon • • • • • • • • • •
Flight Test Mechanic • • • • • • • • • •
Line Service Specialist • • • • • • • •
Mechanical Engineer • • • • • • • • • • •
Metallurgist • • • • • • • • •
Meteorologist • • • • • • • • • •
Military Pilot • • • • • • • • • • • •
Physicist • • • • • • • • • •
Public Relations • • • • • • • • •
EDUCATION
Chemistry
Physics
Bookkeeping
Business Machines
Biology
English/Technical Writing
Mathematics
Speech
Mechanics
Sheet Metal
Machine Shop
Welding
Electronics
Electricity
Mechanical Drawing
Composite Materials
Journalism
Psychology
Keyboarding
Computers
Photography
Nutrition
Meteorology
Geography
.Careers in Aviation


Aviation Resources
Scouting Literature
Auto Mechanics, Electronics, Engineering,
Model Design and Building, Orienteering,
and Space Exploration merit
badge pamphlets
Books
Bell, Dana. In the Cockpit: Inside 50
History-Making Aircraft. Harper
Design, 2007.
———. Smithsonian Atlas of World
Aviation. Smithsonian, 2008.
Echaore-McDavid, Susan. Career
Opportunities in Aviation and the
Aerospace Industry: A Guide to
80 Careers in Aviation and the
Aerospace Industry. Checkmark
Books, 2004.
Eichenberger, Jerry A. Your Pilot’s
License, 8th ed. McGraw Hill, 2011.
Grant, R.G. Flight: The Complete
History. DK Publishing, 2007.
Nahum, Andrew. Flight: DK Eyewitness
Book. DK Children, 2011.
Whiteman, Phillip. Aircraft: The
Definitive Visual History. DK
Adult, 2013.
Periodicals
Flying
Telephone: 407-628-4802
www.flyingmag.com
Model Airplane News
Air Age Media
Toll-free telephone: 800-827-0323
www.modelairplanenews.com
Plane & Pilot
Werner Publishing Corp.
Telephone: 310-820-1500
www.planeandpilotmag.com
Organizations and Websites
Academy of Model Aeronautics
5161 East Memorial Drive
Muncie, IN 47302
Toll-free telephone: 800-435-9262
www.modelaircraft.org
Aircraft Owners and Pilots
Association
421 Aviation Way
Frederick, MD 21701
Toll-free telephone: 800-872-2672
www.aopa.org
With your parent’s permission, visit
the Boy Scouts of America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org,
for a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.
Aviation Resources.
94 AVIATION


AVIATION 95
The Aviation History
Online Museum
www.aviation-history.com
Federal Aviation Administration
800 Independence Ave. SW
Washington, DC 20591
Toll-free telephone: 866-835-5322
www.faa.gov
National Aeronautics
and Space Administration
Suite 1M32
Washington, DC 20546-0001
Telephone: 202-358-0001
www.nasa.gov
National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration
1401 Constitution Ave., NW, Room 5128
Washington, DC 20230
Telephone: 202-482-6090
www.noaa.gov
Sporty’s Pilot Shop
Toll-free telephone: 800-776-7897
www.sportys.com
DVDs
Be a Sport Pilot: Learn to Fly a Fixed-
Wing Light-Sport Aircraft. DVD,
75 min.
Sporty’s Learn to Fly Course. DVD,
23 hours.
Sporty’s Introduction to Flying—A Non-
Pilot’s Guide. DVD, 56 min.
Sporty’s So You Want to Fly Helicopters.
DVD, 2 hours.
Start Flying! Understand What’s
Involved With Learning to Fly and
Earning a Pilot’s License. DVD,
34 min.
Acknowledgments
The Boy Scouts of America gives
special thanks to Jonathan Friedman for
his expert review and leadership of this
merit badge. Thanks also to Sporty’s
Pilot Shop for making this revision of
the Aviation merit badge pamphlet
possible. In particular, thanks to Mark
Wiesenhahn for his assistance.
Thanks to Robert Lamb Jr. and to
Ed Mitchell and his colleagues in
Phantom Works at Boeing Aircraft
Company for their assistance with
past updates to this pamphlet.
The BSA is grateful to Rear Adm. J.
Dan McCarthy, U.S. Pacific Fleet, U.S.
Navy, for facilitating the use of U.S.
Navy photographs in the production
of this book.
Thanks also to staff members
at the Academy of Model Aeronautics
for their time and expertise in reviewing
the text, and for providing some of the
photos used in this pamphlet.
The Boy Scouts of America is grate-
ful to the men and women serving on
the National Merit Badge Subcommittee
for the improvements made in updating
this pamphlet.
.Aviation Resources


Photo and Illustration Credits
Academy of Model Aeronautics,
courtesy—pages 79 and 82
Academy of Model Aeronautics/
Jack Reynolds, courtesy—page 84
Library of Congress, Manuscript
Division, Washington, D.C.,
courtesy—page 7
NASA, courtesy—page 42
National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, courtesy—
pages 9 and 46 (map)
©Pratt & Whitney, courtesy—page 30
©U.S. Air Force, courtesy—page 8
U.S. Department of Agriculture/Tim
McCabe, courtesy—page 13
U.S. Department of Agriculture/Bob
Nichols, courtesy—page 12
Wikipedia.org, courtesy—page 50
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of
or are protected by the Boy Scouts
of America.
Toby Everett—page 11
Daniel Giles—page 71
John McDearmon—14 (ornithopter illus-
tration), 15 (forces of flight, airfoils),
17 (airfoil angles), 18 (chart),
21 (control surfaces, cockpit), 22
(ailerons, elevators), 23 (rudder),
27 (piston engine), 28 (engine size
illustration), 51 (wind triangle),
and 64 (checklist areas)
Brian Payne—pages 70 (Frontier termi-
nal), and 72
Randy Piland—pages 68 and 73
Subscribe today at go.scoutlife.org/subscribe
Use promo code SLMBP15 to get a special
print + digital bundle offer priced just for Scouts!
Aviation Resources.