FLY-FISHING


FLY-FISHING
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Fly-Fishing or check Scoutbook
for the latest requirements.
35900
ISBN 978-0-8395-3283-5
©2025 Scouting America
2025 Printing


FLY-FISHING 3





Contents
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
The Basic Equipment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Learning to Cast . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
All About Flies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
Where to Fish . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
Hooking, Playing, and Releasing Fish . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
Cleaning, Filleting, and Cooking Fish . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
Fishing Safety . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
Fish Conservation and Ethics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
Glossary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93
Fly-Fishing Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 96
Earning the Scouting America Complete Angler
Award could help you expand your fishing
knowledge and experiences. To become eligible for
the award, start by earning these three merit badges:
Fishing, Fly-Fishing, and Fish and Wildlife Management.
Then complete one or more of the following projects:
• Teach a Fishing or Fly-Fishing merit badge skill to your unit as part
of a program activity.
• Help instruct Cub Scouts on fishing skills or fishery management as
part of a Cub Scout meeting or outing.
• Participate in a local fishing derby or tournament, either a Scouting
or community event.
• Complete a conservation project that will benefit a local fishery.
With the Complete Angler Award, you can become a mentor for
younger Scouts, sharing your knowledge and helping others to enjoy
a positive fishing experience. For more information, visit
scouting.org/outdoor-programs/fishing





FLY-FISHING 7
.Introduction
Introduction
Fly-fishing is a specialized form of fishing that emerged cen-
turies ago, as far back as 1653, when Sir Izaak Walton wrote
The Compleat Angler, and perhaps to the time of the Roman
empire. Long before there was spin fishing or bait casting,
there was fly-fishing. Because it combines skill and artistry
and because it is so rich with tradition, fly-fishing is a passion
for millions of people. The beauty of the water, the solitude,
and the skills that the sport requires have made fly-fishing
very important in the lives of many notable people, includ-
ing former President Jimmy Carter, who wrote books about
fly-fishing after he left office. Another avid fly fisher was Lord
Baden-Powell, a former general in the British Army, who
wanted to use his military fame to help youth become better
adults and eventually started the worldwide movement that we
know today as Scouting.
In a biography of Baden-Powell, we find the following
description by a fellow angler:
“I should say B-P was as good an angler as he was at most
things. He preferred river fishing for sea trout or salmon, and
liked to be on his own, particularly on any river requiring more
than the usual care and courage. I think his chief joy in fishing
was that it took him away from the ordinary business of life
more effectively than anything else, particularly when the for-
malities too often connected with sport were bypassed. He was
always entranced with the beauty of river life, especially in the
autumn, with its gorgeous colouring.
“Even the Boy Scouts had to give place to science and
philosophy when the day’s work was finished on the river.
I don’t think he was ever so supremely happy as he was
when wading deep and waiting for that electrical thrill of
taking a fish.”
Some experts
believe fly-fishing
may date back to
the time of the
Roman empire.


8 FLY-FISHING
Introduction.
In his book, Scouting for Boys,
Baden-Powell included a small
chapter titled “Fishes and Fishing.”
His advice in this passage is
still sound:
“Every Scout ought to be able
to fish in order to get food for
himself. A tenderfoot (beginner)
who starved on the bank of a river
full of fish would look very silly,
yet it might happen to one who
had never learned to catch fish.
“Fishing brings out a lot of
the points in Scouting, especially
if you fish with the fly. To be
successful you must know about
the habits and the ways of the
fish, what kind of haunt he
frequents, in what kind of
weather he feeds and at what time
of the day, and so on. Without knowing these, you can fish
away until you are blue in the face and never catch one.
“A fish generally has his own particular haunt (position)
in the stream, and once you discover a fish at home you can
go and creep near and watch what he does.
“And you have to have infinite patience. Your line gets
caught up in bushes and reeds, or in your clothes—or when
it can’t find any other body it ties up in a knot around itself.
Well, it’s no use getting angry with it. There are only two
things to do—the first is to grin, and the second is to set to
work very leisurely to undo it. Then you will have loads of
disappointments in losing fish through the line breaking, or
other mishaps. But remember they happen to everybody who
begins fishing, and it is the troubles that in the end make it
so very enjoyable when you get them.
“When you catch your fish do as I do—only keep those
you specially want for food or specimens, put back the others
the moment you have landed them. The prick of the hook in
their leathery mouth does not hurt them for long, and they
swim off quite happily to enjoy life in their water again.”


FLY-FISHING 9
.Introduction
Baden-Powell was both entirely sensible and far ahead
of his time in this advice. Today, all fishermen practice a
conservation ethic. Fly fishermen pioneered the idea of catch
and release fishing and generally put most of the fish they
catch back in the stream to live—and perhaps be caught
again—another day.
In Baden-Powell’s time, fly fishermen were out to catch
either trout or salmon. Today, fly fishermen go after all kinds
of fish in all kinds of environments, including salt water.
Fly-fishing is demanding and requires practice, skill, and
knowledge. But it is also a form of recreation through which
an angler finds himself in beautiful surroundings, observing
the natural world and becoming a participant in it. Learning
to be an expert fly angler pays off in a lifetime of the deepest
kinds of satisfaction and enjoyment.
Fly fisherman, circa 1884





FLY-FISHING 11
.The Basic Equipment
The Basic Equipment
Early fly fishers practiced their craft with rudimentary
and basic equipment—a line tied to the tip of a long, thin rod.
As their expertise developed, their fishing equipment did, too.
They devised a system of guides, tied in a row, so that loose
line could be released at the cast, allowing the fly to sail out
much farther. Later, a reel was devised, fastened to the lower,
butt end of the rod, as a place to store the extra line.
Today’s fly rods are limber and light, weighing only a few
ounces, and they provide the maximum amount of leeway to a
fighting fish. The lines are tapered, as are the leaders, to add to
the unfurling effect of the cast.
A Balanced Outfit
When the rod, reel, and line are correctly
matched to handle a given-weight
fly line, they are considered to be in
balance. When balanced, they allow the
angler to accurately present flies within
the equipment’s normal casting range.
Modern tackle manufacturers continually
test and upgrade their rods, reels, and
lines to create better balance for line
control and easier casting.
Fly-fishing requires a match
between the rod and line, with the
reel mainly functioning as line storage,
although its weight can determine
how easily casts can be made. Fly rods
usually are marked with numbers
indicating which line works best on
a particular model.


12 FLY-FISHING
The Basic Equipment.
The Rod
The basic piece of fly-fishing equipment is the rod. A fly rod
is long—usually 8 to 10 feet—and limber enough to flex when
casting a line or playing a fish. Most modern fly rods are made
from a material called graphite, although a few manufacturers
and some artisans still make rods from the traditional bamboo.
Bamboo rods tend to be expensive and do not perform any
better than those made of fiberglass or graphite.
Fly rods are tapered with a cork grip and a reel seat at the
thick end. Near the grip is a small wire loop, called a hook-
keeper, that holds the hook of a fly safely when it is not in use.
Spaced along the length of the rod are several guides,
designed to run the line to the rod tip. The first guide, usually
made from some abrasion-resistant material, is called the strip-
ping guide. Above this guide, there will be snake guides,
which are normally simple wire loops. The last guide, at the
tip of the rod, is called the tip top.
For convenience while traveling, most rods are designed
to be broken down into at least two—and sometimes as many
as 10—sections. The joints where the rod comes together are
called ferrules.
Tenkara rods are typically made of several tapered,
thin-walled graphite sections that telescope out to form the
rod. On a modern Tenkara rod, the line is attached to a
flexible, braided cord on the end of the rod, called a lillian.
At the other end of the line is attached a thin, clear section
of monofilament or fluorocarbon called a tippet. The fly is
attached to the far end of the tippet. There are no rod guides
nor reel. Tenkara-style fishing doesn’t even require a modern
telescoping rod. A simple bamboo fishing pole, rigged with the
right line, tippet, and fly will work.
Selecting a Rod and Line
A fly rod is a long lever that flexes. As it flexes more deeply,
it delivers longer casts. Every fly rod is designed to be matched
to a line of specific weight. Lines of lighter weight are matched
to rods that flex more easily. These rods cast smaller and lighter
flies more delicately. Heavier, stiffer rods, matched with the cor-
rect line, cast larger, more wind-resistant flies a longer distance.
Anglers use these, in general, to deliver tiny artificial lures (flies)
to where they believe a fish may be lurking. The rod and the
line must match because the weight of the line is what causes
the rod to flex and turn the line over in a smooth, efficient cast.


FLY-FISHING 13
.The Basic Equipment
END CAP
REEL SEAT
ROD GRIP
HOOK KEEPER
ROD BUTT
FERRULE
GUIDES
ROD TIP
LEADER TO
TIPPET KNOT
FLY
TIP TOPLEADER TO LINE
KNOT
LEADER
LINE
Manufacturers label each rod according to the
size of the line it is designed to cast. This information—
along with the rod’s length and weight in ounces—will
appear on the rod, usually just above the grip.
Rod Length
Fly rods can be as short as 6 feet and as long as 15 feet or
more. Many anglers use one-handed rods between 7 1
⁄2 and
9 1
⁄2 feet in length. Shorter rods are desirable on close brushy
streams. Longer rods enable the angler to make higher back
casts and to keep the line and the fly above obstructions such
as grass and brush. Rods longer than 10 feet are generally
used by anglers who employ a specialized two-handed casting
technique, called spey casting, that is popular on some salmon
and steelhead rivers.
Rod/Line Uses and Sizes
ROD/LINE REEL
WEIGHT SIZE USES; FLY SIZES
1–2 Small Catching trout and
panfish; #26–#18
3–6 Small, medium Catching trout, bass, and
panfish; #26–#1/0
7–8 Medium, large Catching trout, steel-
head, bonefish, redfish,
Atlantic salmon, and
bass; #20–#1/0
9–11 Large Catching steelhead,
Atlantic salmon, Pacific
salmon, bluefish, small
tarpon, dorado, and
stripers; #6–#2/0
12–15 Large Catching tarpon, billfish,
and tuna; #2/0–#8/0
FLY REEL


14 FLY-FISHING
The Basic Equipment.
Lines
Most fly lines are 80 or 90 feet long. Lines vary by weight,
and must be matched to the rod. They come in different styles
(called tapers) and colors and are designed either to float on
the surface of the water or to sink to different depths at different
rates. Intermediate lines, for example, sink very slowly and can
be fished just below the surface. Heavily weighted lines sink
quite rapidly and are designed to get down deep very quickly.
Most fly-fishing is done with floating lines, which are the easi-
est to cast and control. But there are times and conditions when
fish lie deeply in the water and are not feeding at or near the sur-
face. A sinking line is then useful to get the fly down to them.
Fly lines come in different colors. Sinking lines usually
come in drab, darker colors so that the fish cannot spot them.
Floating lines can be very brightly colored, even fluorescent.
Many anglers prefer these lines for their high visibility. In low
light conditions, a darker line can be hard to see on the water.
A visible fly line can be the best means of keeping track of the
location of small flies on the water.
Fly lines are constructed of a soft, strong core with a
tough, enamel-like coating. Avoid situations that might cause
nicks or small cuts in the fly line, taking special care not to
step on the line. Heat and sunlight are the greatest threats to
a fly line, so do not store a reel with a line on it in a hot place
or leave it in a car trunk for long periods of time. A properly
maintained fly line should last several years.
Tapers
Fly lines of all weights are designed in different tapers, which
describe the shape of the line. The narrow point of the line
allows for delicate presentations. A line that is of the same
diameter throughout its length is called “level.” Level line is
inexpensive but is not recommended for casting.
A line that has its widest diameter at the midpoint is
called a double taper. This is a popular line for some kinds of
fishing, especially those requiring shorter casts.
If your fly line becomes dirty, it will not function well. Be
careful when using insect repellents; some will damage
the coating of the line. Clean your line with mild soap and
water. Rinse and thoroughly dry before storing in a cool,
dry location. Some manufacturers endorse cleaning and
lubricating fly lines with a specifically designed product.


FLY-FISHING 15
.The Basic Equipment
Decoding a Fly Line
When you buy a fly line, the information about that line is marked
on the packaging in a kind of code. For instance, you might see the
following: WF5F. The first two letters of the code tell you the taper of
the line. In this case, it is a weight-forward taper. Other designations
include DT (double taper) and L
(level). The number that follows the
taper designation is the weight of
the line. In this case, the line is a
number 5.
The letters that follow the
number indicating the weight of
the line tell you whether the line
floats or sinks. In this case, the
F indicates that this is a floating
line. Other designations could be
S (sinking), F/S (sink tip), I (inter-
mediate), HD (high density or
fast sinking).
A weight-forward taper line has several sections, includ-
ing a narrow tip, a forward taper, a level belly, a rear taper,
and a narrow running line. The front part of the line up to the
running section is normally about 30 feet long and the running
line is about 60 feet long to make a 90-foot line. Each of these
sections may be tailored by the manufacturers to fine-tune the
performance of the line for different fishing conditions. The
heavy forward part of the line is designed to pull or “shoot” the
lighter line following it.
Level Line (L)
Weight Forward (WF)
Double Taper (DT)
90’ 80’ 60’ 40’ 20’


16 FLY-FISHING
The Basic Equipment.
Fly Reels
A fly reel stores line and puts tension on the line when a
fish makes a long run and pulls line off the reel. When catch-
ing smaller fish, such as panfish, small bass and small trout,
line storage is the reel’s chief function. A bluegill weighing less
than half a pound, is unlikely to take off on a long run and
strip yards of line from the reel. As the fish get larger, however,
the reel must have a mechanism to handle the runs of a large
fish.
The mechanism for providing resistance when a fish
is taking line is called a drag. The drag system on a simple
reel, like the one used for panfish, may be a simple ratchet
and pawl. Some anglers call this a clicker. Some reels, espe-
cially those that are more expensive, have stronger and more
complex drag systems that allow a smoother release of line
from the spool. Both drag systems are adjustable by means
of a knob on the outside of the reel that allows the angler to
increase or decrease tension.


FLY-FISHING 17
.The Basic Equipment
When selecting a reel, choose one that is the right size for
the kind of fishing you plan to do. It should have the capacity to
hold the selected line and some backing (the line that goes on the
reel before the fly line). Manufacturers will indicate a reel’s line
capacity somewhere on the packaging. For instance, the manufac-
turer might state a reel is designed for a WF5F line with 100 yards
of backing. This means you could use a little heavier line with
a little less backing or a lighter line with more backing. Also, if
you plan to fish in salt water, make sure that the reel you choose
is designed for this kind of use. It should be made of corrosion-
resistant material such as anodized aluminum for the frame and
stainless steel for the inner workings. If your reel is not corrosion
resistant, be sure to wash it and the line in fresh water to clean
away the salt. Thoroughly dry the line and reel before storing.
Next, decide which hand you will use to reel in line. Some
anglers prefer to cast and reel with the same hand—which
means they have to switch rod hands when they are playing
a fish or retrieving loose line—while others cast with one
hand and reel with the other. Most modern reels can
be easily changed from one side to the other by hand
or with simple tools, although some might require
more elaborate work that will have to be done at the
factory or by an expert. Another consideration when
buying a reel is whether you plan to use more than
one type or size of fly line. If so, you will want a reel
for which you can easily fit extra spools.
Backing
Backing is the line that goes on the reel before the fly
line. It is generally made of polyester fiber of a fine diameter.
It costs less than coated fly line. In the case of larger reels for
bigger fish, there may be as much as 300 yards of backing.
There are two reasons for using backing. The first is that
some big fish will run much farther than the length of the fly
line. Fly fishermen love to talk about how a fish “took me into
the backing.” A big tarpon, in salt water, might run out 200
yards of backing before the pressure from the reel’s drag and
the rod’s deep bend stop him. The second reason for backing is
that the reel arbor is generally of fairly small diameter and fly
line tends to hold a coiled shape when it comes off the reel. The
closer to the arbor, the tighter the coils and the harder they are
to pull out of the line. With backing on a reel, the fly line comes
off in wider coils that are easier to manage.


18 FLY-FISHING
The Basic Equipment.
Leaders
The leader is a transparent plastic line tied between the end of
the fly line and the fly. It is often tapered to a very fine point
to which the fly is tied. Leaders are supple, so they do not
hinder the natural action of a fly. They are transparent so that
they are hard for a fish to see. Usually they are 6 to 12 feet
in length. In general, clearer water demands longer leaders.
Smaller flies call for finer leaders.
Tippets
The tippet is the most delicate link between the angler and the
fly. Choose a tippet fine enough to allow the fly to move natu-
rally and strong enough to hold a fish. Tippets can be as small
as .003 inches in diameter, as fine as a human hair. The break-
ing point of such a tippet is just over a pound. Tippets are
measured by diameter. A heavy tippet is a 0X. Very fine is 8X.
For a given diameter, tippet strength varies among
manufacturers. It also varies depending on material. There are
two types of common tippet material, nylon monofilament
and fluorocarbon. Each has its advantages, depending on the
situation. Nylon floats or sinks very slowly, stretches to absorb
shock and is relatively inexpensive. It also absorbs water and
weakens over time. Fluorocarbon is slightly less visible in
water, stronger for a given diameter when wet, more resistant
You can make
your own tapered
leader by tying
lengths of
monofilament of
different diameters
together. Also,
manufacturers
have developed
knotless leaders
that are tapered
throughout their
length by an
extrusion process.
Avoiding Leader Problems
Leader problems result in a lot of lost fish. And more
fish are never even hooked because of the wrong
leader, one that made it impossible to cast properly
or did not allow the fly to behave as intended.
Leaders become damaged while fishing. They
pick up nicks from rocks or branches. Sometimes they
become knotted when the angler makes a poor cast
and throws what is called a tailing loop. These wind
knots can decrease the breaking strength of a leader
by as much as 50 percent. Leaders should be inspect-
ed for such knots and damage. If you find a knot, take
it out of the leader. If the leader looks frayed, replace
the damaged section of the leader and tie on new tip-
pet material or replace the entire leader.


FLY-FISHING 19
.The Basic Equipment
to temperature extremes, UV radiation and abrasion, higher in
density, and stiffer. It is also more expensive than monofilament.
Both materials take a long time to decompose — nylon about 530
years and fluorocarbon about 4,000. A new material, bioabsorbable
polymer monofilament, decomposes in about five years.
Tippet material, size and length are important. With a
proper cast the leader should efficiently transmit the flow of
energy all the way to the tippet, which will straighten out and
allow the fly to fall gently on the water. A tippet that is too limp
or fine for the fly will collapse at the end of the cast instead of
unfurling. A tippet that is not fine enough will cause the fly to
land heavily and behave unnaturally.
A leader that is too short will cause the fly line to land too
close to fish, possibly alarming it. In clear water with skittish
fish, a longer, finer tippet may be needed. A leader that is too
long may be difficult to control, especially under windy condi-
tions. A leader of 7½ to 9 feet is about average, but it can be
lengthened or shortened as conditions require. When fishing with
a fly that sinks, the length of the leader will affect how deep the
fly may be fished.
A tippet can be
added to a leader with
a surgeon’s knot or a
loop-to-loop connection.
With a proper cast this
leader would efficiently
transmit the flow of
energy all the way down
to the tippet, which
would straighten out
and allow the fly to fall
gently on the water.
Approx. breaking
Tippet Tippet strength for Orvis Balances with
size diameter Super Strong nylon these fly sizes
8X .003" 1.75 lbs. 22, 24, 26, 28
7X .004" 2.5 lbs. 18, 20, 22, 24
6X .005" 3.5 lbs. 16, 18, 20, 22
5X .006" 4.75 lbs. 14, 16, 18
4X .007" 6 lbs. 12, 14, 16
3X .008" 8.5 lbs. 6, 8, 10
2X .009" 11.5 lbs. 4, 6, 8
1X .010" 13.5 lbs. 2, 4, 6
0X .011" 15.5 lbs. 1/0, 2, 4


20 FLY-FISHING
The Basic Equipment.
Knots and Knot-Tying
Fly fishermen depend on knots and must know how to tie
several different knots properly. A poorly tied knot will result
in lost fish and great frustration for the angler. Well-tied knots
ensure that all the elements of a properly matched fly-fishing
outfit work smoothly together. Learn the essential fly-fishing
knots and practice tying them. Some tips:
• Small-diameter monofilament is hard to work with. While
learning and practicing, use something that has a larger
diameter and is relatively stiff. If you can find an old
discarded fly line, cut it into short sections to practice.
• Knots must be neat. If a wrap crosses another it can cut
through itself when fighting a fish causing the knot to fail and
the fish to escape.
• Test each knot after you have finished tying the fly on by
giving it a good tug. Better for it to fail now rather than when
fighting a trophy fish.
• When tying knots in monofilament, tighten gently and firmly.
• Lubricate knots with water before tightening. But do not put
leader material that has been in a stream into your mouth.
Just a few drops of stream water can carry harmful parasites.
• Clip knots closely and neatly, and check them often.


FLY-FISHING 21
.The Basic Equipment
Nail Knot (or Tube Knot)
Use the nail knot to tie the backing to the fly line or to attach a leader to a
line. Better than a nail is a short piece of narrow tubing like a plastic coffee
stirrer into which the line can be inserted.
Step 1—Hold the nail along the fly line and
backing between your thumb and forefinger.
Step 2—Lay a loop of line along the nail and,
with the free end, wind the monofilament
around the nail, loop, and leader about six
times. Feed the tag end of the monofilament
through the loops so it sticks out the back of
the knot.
Step 3—Hold the “coils” carefully between
your thumb and forefinger. Remove the nail,
and tighten the knot carefully, allowing the
turns of the leader to settle closely together.
Step 4—Lubricate the knot and then pull
both the tag end and the main part of the backing or leader butt. Test the knot
and then trim excess backing or leader as well as fly line. For left-handed per-
sons, reverse the hands that you use.
3
4
2
FIVE TO SEVEN WRAPS
PULL
PULL
TRIM
Improved Clinch Knot
The improved clinch knot can be used to connect the
fly to the leader. It works well for tying small flies.
Step 1—Run the end of the line through the eye,
double the line back, and make five to seven wraps
around the line, leaving a loop.
Step 2—Run the end of the line through the loop
where the line joins the eye and then pass the line
through the large loop.
Step 3—Partially close the knot and moisten it a little
with water before securing it tightly against the eye.
Step 4—To make an unimproved clinch knot, pull the tag
end and standing line tight after completing the first step.
1
2
3
4


22 FLY-FISHING
The Basic Equipment.
Putting It All Together
All of the previously discussed elements of a properly
balanced fly-fishing outfit must be assembled properly. Begin
by attaching the reel to the seat on the rod. Make sure the
handle is on the side of the hand you intend to reel. When
reeling in the line, it should come into the bottom of the reel,
and the drag should be engaged if the line is pulled out. The
inner workings of the reel may need to be adjusted to use
the handle on the preferred side. Now, run the point of the
backing through the stripping guide of the rod and attach the
backing to the reel spool using an arbor knot.
FLY ROD
BACKING
FLY REEL
STRIPPER GUIDE
NAIL KNOT
DACRON
BACKING
TIPPET
MATERIAL
FLY LINE
SURGEON’S KNOT OR LOOP-TO-LOOP
CONNECTION
TIPPET
NAIL KNOT OR LOOP-TO-LOOP
CONNECTION
LEADER TIP
FLY
LEADER
BUTT
LEADER
BUTTFLY LINE TIP
FLY LINE BUTTARBOR KNOT
IMPROVED CLINCH KNOT
TACKLE ASSEMBLY
Assemble the gear systematically for trouble-free performance.
TO FLY LINE
TAG END
LOOP
AROUND
SPOOL
ARBOR ARBOR KNOT
Attach the backing to the reel spool with an arbor knot. Pass
the line through the stripper guide before tying the knot. After
snugging the arbor knot tight, the line must then flow from
the bottom of the spool back toward the stripper guide.


FLY-FISHING 23
.The Basic Equipment
Now, keeping the backing under tension, slowly wind
it uniformly onto the reel. Reeling too fast without keeping
tension in the line will cause the loops to work over each
other, creating fouling (knots) that could mean the loss of a
big fish when it takes you into the backing.
At the other end of the backing tie the backing to the fly
line using the nail knot (tube knot) and finish the knot with a
flexible adhesive such as Pliobond®. First make sure you still
have enough room on the reel for the entire fly line with a
little left over.
To connect the leader to the fly line, use a nail knot or a
loop-to-loop connection. If your fly line includes a permanent
loop in the end you can tie a surgeon’s loop on the butt end
of the leader and then form a loop-to-loop connection. This is
good to use if you plan to change leaders periodically.
To connect the leader to the line, use a nail or needle knot
or a loop-to-loop connection. You are now ready to string the
line through all the guides of the rod and to begin casting.
If the fly line
doesn’t come with
a loop, attach a
section of heavy
monofilament to
the line with a nail
(tube) knot. Tie a
double surgeon’s
loop in the other
end, then change
leaders using a
loop-to-loop
connection.
Anglers use loop-to-loop connections
like the double surgeon’s loop to attach
a tippet to a leader or a leader to a
fly line. The illustration above shows
how to connect two lines with double
surgeon loops.
LOOP-TO-LOOP CONNECTION USING
DOUBLE SURGEON’S LOOPS
The double surgeon’s loop works well
for joining two sections of line. 1.
Overlap several inches of the ends of
the lines to be joined and form a loop.
2. Make an overhand knot, keeping the
loop open. 3. Run the lines through the
loop again, forming a loose double over-
hand knot. 4. Draw the knot up until it’s
snug, then lubricate with water, draw it
tight and trim the tag end.
DOUBLE SURGEON’S LOOP


24 FLY-FISHING
The Basic Equipment.
Other Equipment
In addition to a balanced outfit—rod, reel, line, and leader—
and some flies, you may require other equipment. You may
also want to acquire some slightly less essential—but still
useful—equipment such as waders or boots, a fishing vest,
and various accessories.
Waders and Boots
Waders or boots are nice to have when wading. Waders come
in a variety of materials and styles. Chest-high waders are the
most versatile, especially for deep water, but waist-high and
hip waders are more comfortable when the weather is hot.
Make sure your waders fit comfortably, do not pinch, and
allow a full range of motion.
Keep a patch kit handy and know how to use it. Felt soled
boots are good to use on slippery rocks, but invasive species
that have appeared in some streams may prohibit their use.
Rubber soled boots or studded boots are two alternatives. Be
mindful that rubber soled boots may be slippery on some sur-
faces. Studded boots can damage the surfaces of docks, floors
and boats, and are noisier under water than other sole types.


FLY-FISHING 25
.The Basic Equipment
Vest
Fly fishermen need pockets where they can put fly boxes, tools,
spare tippet spools, and other things. The answer is a vest with
many large and small pockets. Some of the big pockets should
have zippers. Use these to store those things you absolutely
do not want to fall out into the water. Some pockets can be
fastened with hook-and-loop fasteners for easy access. A very
large pocket on the back of the vest is handy for storing rain
gear and a lunch. Slippery rocks,
underwater
obstructions, and
strong currents
all can make
wading conditions
challenging.
So can soft mud
or lakes with
quicksand-like
bottoms. A safe
angler carries a
wading stick to
probe the bottom
before taking the
next step.
Organize your vest so that you can find
exactly what you need, when you need it.
Also, keep one pocket for trash.


26 FLY-FISHING
The Basic Equipment.
Accessories
Experienced fly fishermen have learned that a few well-chosen
accessories can make a difference in their enjoyment of the
fishing trip. Consider taking some of these items along.
Sunglasses. Polarized, glare-cutting glasses are great for
helping spot fish in the water, for protecting your eyes from
the sun, and from flying fishhooks.
Hat. For added protection from the sun, a baseball cap works
OK, but a brimmed hat will also protect your ears and neck.
A hat can also deflect a flying hook.
Fly boxes. These come in many styles. Several smaller boxes
might be a better idea than a single large one. Put different
styles of flies in different boxes.
Sunglasses and a
hat will not only
provide protection
from the sun,
but also serve
as an extra
defense against
a flying fishhook.


Forceps. This little tool is invaluable
for releasing fish or crimping down the
barb on a hook.
Clippers. Standard fingernail clippers
or some variation are excellent for
trimming knotted leader material.
Hook sharpener. A small file is a
great tool for touching up the point
of a dull hook.
Line dressing and fly line cleaner. Commercial products
for keeping flies, lines, and leaders clean can come in handy.
Duct tape. This multipurpose tape can be kept on hand for
small repairs.
Bandanna. Worn around the neck,
this accessory has several uses, including
cleaning eyeglasses.
Small flashlight. This will help light
the path for evenings when you stay
on the water until dark.
Rain jacket. Some varieties of this
garment can be folded small enough
to fit inside a tackle box or fishing vest
until it is needed in an unexpected rain.
.The Basic Equipment





FLY-FISHING 29
.Learning to Cast
Learning to Cast
Fly-casting is a skill that depends not on strength, but on proper
technique and timing. This means that it can be learned but
that it requires practice. Almost nobody can simply pick up a
fly rod—even a properly balanced outfit—and begin casting
properly, accurately, and for distance. On the other hand,
almost anyone who is willing to study the proper technique,
listen to instruction, and practice can quickly become an
accomplished fly caster. The key is to discover that there is a
proper technique and that, through practice, it can be learned
and mastered.
Learn to cast before you learn to fish. It is best to
practice on water—preferably a pond where you do not
have to contend with currents. Even if there are fish
in the pond, do not try to catch them with a fly. Tie a
small piece of colorful yarn to the end of your leader to
imitate a fly. If a pond is not available, a yard or mowed field
will do just fine. Be careful of obstructions, though, especially
overhead power lines.
When you are learning to fly cast, it helps to learn from
someone who knows how to cast. Members of local fishing
clubs may offer casting and fly-tying classes. Fishing clubs and
organizations also hold clinics at Scout jamborees and camps,
some of them free. In addition, commercial clinics and schools
can help you to learn proper technique from certified instructors.
Perhaps you know an experienced fly angler in your troop
who can serve as your coach. Another option is to study videos
and books to help you with your casting technique. You can
learn this way, although it is harder than if you had personal
instruction and it might take longer. But you can learn by
practicing and by following some basic rules.
Fly Fishers International is a nonprofit organization with
a threefold mission of conservation, restoration, and
instruction. See the resources section at the end of this
pamphlet for the FFI’s contact information.


30 FLY-FISHING
Learning to Cast.
Roll Casting
If there are obstructions behind you, if you have a lot of
slack line on the water, or if you want to make a quick, soft
presentation that doesn’t alarm the fish, the roll cast is a
useful technique.
Start with the rod tip low to the water, your elbow bent,
and a few feet of line out of the rod tip in the water. Pull out
15 to 20 more feet of line from the reel and let it lie next to
you. Holding the line in your line hand, gently stroke the rod
back and forth, releasing line out through the rod guides. You
will end up with loose coils of line on the water in front of the
rod tip. To start the cast, face the target squarely, but with your
right foot back a little.
Moving slowly, raise the rod and your arm until your hand
is slightly above eye level. Keep your wrist straight and your
arm in line with your shoulder and hand. Point the rod straight
up, with the line hanging in front of you (Position A, above).
Cock your hand to the right so the tip is outside your body.
This moves the hanging fly line to the side so it won’t collide
with the rest of the line during the cast.
Keeping the rod in position, rock back on your back foot and
let the line swing behind your shoulder and come to rest (B).
Choose a target to the left of the line in the water, rock
forward, and follow through by stroking the rod forward and
downward. As you stroke the rod, accelerate forward to an
abrupt and complete stop, pushing forward with your thumb
(C and D). Follow through by pointing the rod down, in line
with where you want the fly to go (E). The line should roll out
straight on the surface, with the leader and fly straightened out
ahead of it (F).
Watch your
back cast. You
don't want to
snag overhanging
wires, trees,
shrubs—or
people!
A
B C D
E
F


FLY-FISHING 31
.Learning to Cast
Casting at a Glance
These are the essential points to remember as you practice casting.
• Pick up the line cleanly with a crisp forearm movement that takes
the rod tip from 9 o’clock to 1 o’clock. Remember to abruptly stop
the rod tip at the 1 o’clock position.
• Pause at the top of the back cast to let the line unroll and straighten
out behind you. Turn your head and watch to make sure this is hap-
pening. If you bring the rod tip forward before the line straightens
out, you will hear a crack, like the sound of a whip, and the line will
pile up on the forward cast. If you wait too long, the line—and fly—
will fall onto the ground or water behind you.
• Bring the rod forward from the 1 o’clock position to the 12 o’clock
position with a smooth but powerful forearm motion. This is the
forward loading move, and you should feel the weight of the line
behind you.
• Smoothly accelerate the rod to a hard stop at about 10:30. As the
line unfurls and falls to the water, follow it with the rod down to 9
o’clock or lower so that it is pointed at the fly.
• Keep the wrist fairly stiff and use the forearm in an up-and-down
motion to move the rod.
• Do not overpower the rod. Let it do the work.
• Keep the slack out of the line with the hand you are not using for
casting. Extend the arm that holds the line as you make the back
cast with the other arm. This will draw the
slack out and enable you to keep a tight
line and loop.
Practice this technique for 15
minutes a day. Concentrate on
making a tight, clean loop with
the line and getting it to lie out
straight in front of you when you
have finished a cast. Do not go
for distance until you are able to
accurately cast about 30 feet of line.


32 FLY-FISHING
Learning to Cast.
Overhead Casting
Begin with the grip. Make sure your thumb is on top of the
rod’s cork grip and that you have a firm hold. Now, strip out
20 to 30 feet of line from the reel. You might want to make
a mark 30 feet from the line tip, using a waterproof marker.
Since most lines are designed to properly load the rod when
30 feet of line are just outside the tip top, this reference mark
will help you pull out the right amount of line for optimal
casting. With that length of line in front of you, more or less in
a straight line, start with the rod tip down near the ground or
the surface of the water.
On an imaginary clock, with the rod tip in the fishing posi-
tion near the water, bring the rod up slowly to the 9 o’clock
position to remove any remaining slack, and then lift the rod by
raising your forearm with a motion that is crisp but not sudden
or violent. Smoothly accelerate the rod through the vertical, or
12 o’clock, position and then stop it abruptly. The rod should
stop at the 1 o’clock position. This loads the rod like a spring
and then vigorously launches the fly line up and behind you.
The line will soar up and behind you in a loop that will
quickly straighten out. When the line has almost straightened
out and is roughly parallel with the ground, smoothly acceler-
ate the rod forward, pushing with your thumb, and stopping
abruptly at the 10:30 position. As the line flies out in front of
you and unrolls, follow it down until the rod is once again in
the fishing position.
The back cast is the foundation of the forward cast and
should be directly opposite the target. With a strong back cast
and good timing, it is easy to launch your fly to the target
so the line is fully straight in front of you. Both the
back cast and the forward cast should be
smooth and strong.
A large plastic
hoop (such as
a hula hoop)
makes an
excellent target
for practicing
casting.
The proper grip is important. For most fly rods,
keep your thumb on top of the grip to help you
apply force to the stroke and direct the rod tip
accurately and in plane. An alternative grip,
where the index finger is on top of the grip, is
sometimes used with light conventional fly rods
and especially with Tenkara fly rods.


FLY-FISHING 33
.Learning to Cast
Tenkara Casting
Tenkara casting is not very different from conventional fly cast-
ing. It works best with a shorter and slower casting stroke and
requires little force. The basic cast is a simple overhand “back
to 12 o’clock, short pause, and then forward to 10 o’clock”
motion. Grasp the rod handle with your thumb or index finger
on top of the handle. Hold the rod in a relaxed manner that
still allows for positive control of the rod.
Start with rod and line held in front of you at roughly 10
o’clock, with the line hanging free. Draw the tip up and back-
ward by flexing your forearm and wrist. Keep your elbow in
place, held comfortably near your side.
Stop abruptly when the rod tip reaches 12 o’clock. Pause
briefly to allow the rod to load (bend) with the line’s weight.
Depending on the rod and line, you might feel the weight shift
as the rod loads. Stroke the rod tip forward in a smooth motion.
Keep that elbow in place!
Check the cast abruptly at 10 o’clock. Do NOT drop the rod
tip as you would with a conventional fly rod. You want to keep
the line out of the water. Only the tippet and fly will be on or in
the water.
• Stay relaxed and keep your motions smooth and consistent
• Use the minimum amount of energy you need to throw the
line and present the fly. Too much force will spoil the cast.
• As in conventional fly casting, the back-cast is the most
important part of the cast. You want the line to unfurl up
and back before being cast forward.
• Stop the forward cast high to allow the fly and tippet to land
first and enjoy the biggest advantage of Tenkara: keeping the
line off the water for drag-free presentations.
• Roll casting can also be done with a Tenkara rod. Just stop
the rod at the 10 o’clock position as with the basic cast.
Casting in windy conditions can cause a fly to behave
unpredictably. When the wind makes casting difficult, try moving
a few yards to the left or right. Doing so will sometimes help by
shifting your body and fly away from the wind's direct path. It
may also keep you from getting hit by your own fly.
Experiment and
practice your
casting to
gain control
and confidence.


34 FLY-FISHING
Learning to Cast.
Going for Distance
As your technique improves, you can work with more line.
Distance in fly-casting is achieved by shooting the line on
the forward cast. A proper power stroke will have put enough
momentum to the line that it can pull more line through the
guides if you have first stripped it from the reel. Hold a couple
of coils of slack line in the hand you are not using to cast—this is
your line hand—and release these coils when you have finished
the power stroke—at 10:30—and feel the loop straightening out
in front of you. The slack line will be pulled through the guides.
False Casting
If you have made the forward cast and, instead of softly
lowering the rod tip and letting the line and fly settle on the
water, you execute another back cast with the fly still in the air,
you are false casting. False casting allows the angler to change
directions from cast to cast without disturbing the surface of the
water and to add more length to the cast. It is also a good way
to dry a fly that has soaked up too much water. Practice false
casting 30 feet of line. Much more than this is unwieldy.
Practice Your Casting Technique
• Learn to feel the tug of the line when it straightens out
behind you on the back cast. This is the signal to start the
forward cast.
• Learn to use the weight and speed of the line to make
the fly rod work for you.
• Work on accuracy. The line and fly will travel
in the direction in which your thumb ends up.
• Exaggerate the up-and-down motion of your
forearm when you are learning to cast. Don’t
be afraid to look behind you to see the action
of the line and leader.
• Remember that the roll cast has a vertical
stopping point of 1 o’clock. The roll cast is
essentially half a cast. It uses the same grip
and the same vertical stopping point as the full
back cast. As such, you may wish to perfect your
roll cast technique before progressing to the full,
traditional back cast.


FLY-FISHING 35
.All About Flies
All About Flies
Fly-fishing is done with artificial imitations of
natural foods (insects, minnows, and so forth).
The angler presents a hook that has been
dressed with feathers, fur, and other materials
—both synthetic and natural—in an attempt to
trick a fish into striking. These artificial lures
are called flies, even when they imitate fish,
crabs, or, in some cases, nothing in particular.
Each fly is tied according to a pattern, and
fly tiers are constantly developing new patterns
that vary in presentation—each with the hope
of hooking choice fish.
Types of Flies
Although many of the lures fly fishers use
to catch fish are designed to duplicate the
immature and adult stages of aquatic insects
such as mayflies, dragonflies, and midges,
many other types of fish food are represented
by flies, including baitfish, leeches, worms,
and crustaceans. The term fly is only generic;
it does not necessarily refer to flying insects.
Today’s fly tiers can create flies that mimic
aquatic insects in all their life stages,
nymph, hatching forms, mature, and even
“spent” insects. Many fly tiers familiarize
themselves with entomology, the study
of insects, to improve their fly-tying skills.


All About Flies.
The following charts list the types of
patterns that have been designed to
imitate live baits for certain fish.
Dry Flies
Traditional trout flies that float
are called dry flies. They are
designed to imitate the adult
forms of mayflies, caddis flies,
and other insects that trout and
other fish feed on. Anglers use
dry flies to catch fish that are
feeding on surface-hatching
insects. The dry flies are tied in
patterns to look like the specific
species of insect. This is called
matching the hatch, and it
is one of the most important
principles in fishing. If you see
fish feeding on a specific insect
then you should use a fly that
closely imitates this food source.
In addition to shape, color and
movement, the size of the fly is
also important when matching
the hatch. Good casting with
the wrong fly can result in a lot
of refusals by fish and a lot of
frustration for the angler.
Dry Flies and Terrestrials
Use these flies to catch trout, bass and
panfish on the water’s surface.
PATTERNS MATCHES
Adams Adult mayflies,
caddis flies, midges
Black Gnat Adult black mayflies,
Parachute caddis flies, gnats
Elk-Hair Caddis Adult caddis flies
(color to match naturals
Fur Ant Color to match naturals
Foam Beetle Color to match naturals


.All About Flies
Nymphs and Wet Flies
While most anglers consider dry
fly-fishing to be the most
exciting form of fishing—because
the strike of the fish can
be anticipated—fish do the bulk
of their feeding beneath the
surface, where mayflies and other
aquatic insects spend most
of their lives, from egg to adult
form. Flies that are fished beneath
the surface are called wet flies.
They often imitate aquatic insects
in the nymph or pupae stage
that are struggling to reach the
surface. Also fished beneath
the surface are flies that imitate
baitfish or crayfish; they are called
streamers.
Nymphs and Wet Flies
Use these flies to catch trout, bass and
panfish below the water’s surface.
PATTERNS MATCHES
Gold Ribbed Mayfly nymphs
Hare’s Ear
Bead Head Caddis and
Pheasant Tail mayfly nymphs
Simple Stone Stonefly nymphs
(color to match naturals)
Zug Bug Caddis pupae
Woolly Worm Caddis and mayfly nymphs


38 FLY-FISHING
All About Flies.
Streamers
Use these flies to catch larger freshwater and
saltwater fish below the water’s surface.
PATTERNS MATCHES
Clouser Deep Minnow Baitfish
Muddler Minnow Baitfish
Synthetic Streamer Baitfish
Olive Bucktail Baitfish
Woolly Bugger Baitfish, leeches
Streamers
As fish get larger they need
bigger prey to get the energy
they need to thrive. Unlike dry
flies, nymphs, and traditional wet
flies—which imitate small aquatic
and terrestrial insects—streamers
are designed to simulate larger
baitfish, leeches, and other
swimming critters. They are used
in both fresh and salt water, and
are tied from a variety of natural
and synthetic materials. Bucktails
are traditionally those baitfish
imitations with hair wings, while
streamers were traditionally
those with feather wings. Since
wings of mixed materials are now
common, including synthetics,
“streamers” is used to describe
the entire range of such flies.
Both freshwater and saltwater
streamers can be tied to imitate
very small to very large prey.
Flies for large apex predators like
saltwater barracuda or freshwater
muskellunge can be over 12
inches long!
Among the most intricate
and beautiful flies are those
designed to catch Atlantic
salmon. The recipe for some
salmon flies requires the use of
more than two dozen different
materials. At the other extreme,
some flies are tied to look like
salmon eggs and are nothing
more than some synthetic floss or
yarn tied in a clump around the
hook shank.


FLY-FISHING 39
.All About Flies
Bass Bugs and Poppers
PATTERNS MATCHES
Lefty’s Popper Frogs, small baitfish,
large insects
Cork Slider Frogs, small baitfish,
large insects
Deer Hair Diver Frogs
Bass Bugs and Poppers
A popular fly in bass fishing
is the popping bug. This fly
consists of a cork, foam, or hair
body that is attached to a hook
and dressed with some feathers,
fur, synthetic hair and perhaps
some pieces of pliable rubber.
They imitate a large insect or
frog. Anglers use the fly line
and rod tip to impart some
action to these bass bugs and
make a popping noise on the
surface of the water. Such action
can arouse the curiosity of a
fish and get it to strike.
Size, color, and
shape are three of
the most important
characteristics of
any fly.


40 FLY-FISHING
All About Flies.
Tying Flies
Flies are sold commercially in stores, through mail order, and
online. Many anglers, however, tie their own flies. This pro-
vides a satisfying hobby, although it might require developing
some skills. Most serious anglers have tried fly tying and are
familiar with the basics, even if they buy their flies from a
commercial source. Some anglers even carry a portable fly-
tying kit with them when they go fishing so they can match
whatever the fish are eating.
Fly-Tying Tools
For a very basic fly tying kit all you need is a vise, bobbin,
and scissors. Other useful tools include bodkin, hackle
pliers, half-hitch tool, and bobbin threader. A
number of other special tools are available for the
more advanced tier.
Vises are available in a range of designs
and should have a simple, sturdy and adjustable
action that will firmly hold a variety of hooks.
Most tiers prefer an action that includes a lever
that is pressed down to grip the hook in the jaws.
Better and more expensive vises have hardened
jaws to withstand many years of use and some
vises even allow rotation of the partially dressed
fly, giving the fly tier better access to add the
next material.
The bobbin holds a spool of thread, which
is used to attach materials to a hook. The bobbin
is adjustable so you can control the amount of
tension on the thread. It also allows you to pause
your tying, while the weight of the bobbin and
thread spool keep tension on the thread wraps,
while you prepare the next piece of material for
your fly. Many beginning fly tiers start with 3/0
or 6/0 black or other subdued color that can easily be used
for tying many different patterns. Other thread sizes and colors
can be added later as needed to tie more refined patterns.
In the following sections we will discuss basic fly-tying tools, hooks,
materials, and skills. These will be used to tie the fly patterns that follow
as well as many more you might want to tie.
A simple kit like this makes fly
tying easy. Everything fits into
the box for storage.


FLY-FISHING 41
.All About Flies
A quality pair of scissors is a must-have tool. It should
have razor-sharp blades with fine points that allow you to work
closely around the hook. Many tiers use two pairs—one for
cutting tough materials such as feather stalks, hair and tinsel,
and a finer pair for delicate tasks such as trimming hackle fibers.
Bodkins, sometimes called dubbing needles, are used to
tease out dubbing, divide wing slips, free trapped hackle fibers,
and precisely apply small drops of head cement. You can make
your own from a small cork and a large needle. Keep it clean
with a small piece of steel wool.
There are many hackle pliers available in different sizes.
The best are simple and include a small piece of rubber on one
of the jaws to firmly grip the hackle without breaking it. You
can always use your fingers, but there are times when a hackle
plier makes tying easier and more precise.
Some bodkins come with half hitch tool—basically a hole
in one end—that can be used to tie half hitches on the head of
your fly to finish it off. You can also use a small coffee stirrer
straw for flies without bead heads, or a larger straw if a bead
head is used. An inexpensive pen has a number of parts that
can be used as well.
A bobbin threader is a specialty tool that helps you
slip thread through the narrow tube in the bobbin. You can
also use a dental floss loop, available at most drug stores.
Sometimes you can just slip the tip of the thread into the
bobbin tube and carefully feed it through.
Fly Hooks
It is best to use barbless hooks or to crush down the barb on
barbed hooks. A small pair of flat-jawed needle-nose pliers can
do the trick. Hooks are usually made from high-
strength steel wire. A wide range of hook types
and sizes are available for fly tying, many of them
developed for specific types of flies. Almost all
hooks have a number of common features, which
are important to know. The dimensions of some
hook parts are used to establish the key proportions of a fly,
such as the tail, body and wing. Hooks may be extra-long or
extra-short, they may be formed of extra strong or extra light
wire, and they may have an eye that is bent up bent down, or
straight. Most fly recipes will tell you what hooks are best to
use.


42 FLY-FISHING
All About Flies.
The hook length is often used to measure fly wings and
tails. It is measured from the back of the bend to the back of
the eye. The eye is not usually included in this measurement,
but is often used to set the size of the fly head.
The shank is also used as a reference. The marabou tail on
a Woolly Bugger streamer, for example, is supposed to be the
same length as the shank. It is important to note that the shank
does not always end opposite the point, as shown in the figure,
but is often close.
The gap (or gape) is another hook feature that is used
to measure materials. The tail on a Woolly Worm wet fly, for
example, should be no longer than the gap. The hackle fibers
on some dry flies should be 1½ to 2 times the gap. Another
common hook feature is the barb. We recommend that you
use barbless hooks or flatten the barb with smooth-jawed pliers
before you tie your fly.
It is important to note that hooks dimensions vary slightly
from one manufacturer to another. The differences are usually
small, but experienced tiers often develop a preference for one
hook over another for specific fly patterns.
Fly-Tying Materials
A fly is made by using thread to secure natural and synthetic
materials on a hook. The thread we use to secure materials on
a hook may be made from a num-
ber of materials including nylon,
rayon, silk, gel spun polyethylene,
polyester and even Kevlar. Threads
are usually specified by a num-
ber corresponding to its diameter
(where 8/0 is very fine and 3/0 is
thicker and stronger) or its weight
(where 70 denier is lighter and
weaker than 210 denier). Denier is
the weight in grams of 9,000 meters
of thread. The actual strength of the
thread will vary significantly depending on material and manu-
facturer. Most fly recipes specify what thread works best, but
you can usually substitute with whatever you have.
Metal beads, dumbbell eyes or lead-substitute
wire can be used to add weight to a fly such as a nymph or
streamer. A bead can be slipped on the hook before tying in


FLY-FISHING 43
.All About Flies
other materials and provides both weight and flash. Dumbbell
eyes are tied in behind the hook eye to add weight, cause the fly
to swim in a specific way, and serve as the eyes of the imitation.
Lead-substitute wire can be wrapped around the hook shank
and positioned to give a fly a special action in the water. Copper,
brass and other wire is sometimes used to add strength to a fly and
to serve as a rib. The segmented body of a nymph, for example, is
highlighted by the addition of a rib.
Yarn and chenille are used to form fly bodies. They are made
of both natural and synthetic materials, and come in a wide variety
of colors, sizes and styles.
Feathers are used to create tails, wings, legs, bodies, ribs and
other fly parts. They include hackles, body feathers, tail fibers,
herl, marabou, and many others. Some are stiff, good for dry flies
that float on the surface, and some are soft, good for underwater
flies that are more effective when their materials wave in the water.
Patterns
Fly patterns are basic designs tied to match a live insect or bait
when fished under certain conditions. Patterns call for standard
hooks and materials, but experienced fly tiers can modify an
existing design to match the color, size, or shape of the “real” fish
food that exists in the area. For example, if trout on a
particular stream seem to be feeding on a certain color and
size of mayfly, the angler can modify a basic pattern to tie a
fly that specifically matches the real mayflies in size and color.
Learning to tie a few of the basic patterns will allow a begin-
ning fly tier to imitate the characteristics of a fly enough to make an
informed judgment about which type of fly will catch the biggest
fish. Fly tying takes practice, but the enjoyment of trial and error can
be half the fun; catching fish on flies you have tied is the other half.
Four simple and effective flies are included here to help you
learn the basics of fly tying—Bead Head Woolly Worm (wet fly),
Bead Head Pheasant Tail (nymph), Elk Hair Caddis (dry fly)
and Clouser Minnow (streamer). Each one uses different materi-
als and requires some different skills and techniques to master.
These patterns can be adapted and used in both fresh and salt
waters for a wide variety of fish. Once these have been tied and
the basic skills and techniques learned, you can tie hundreds of
effective flies to match what fish may be eating.


44 FLY-FISHING
All About Flies.
TYING THE WOOLLY WORM WET FLY
Step 1—Crush the hook barb.
Slide a metal bead over the point
and up the hook so the small hole
is against the eye. Grip the hook
firmly in the vise by the lower
part of the bend so the shank is
level and the barb and point are
exposed. If desired, wrap lead-free
wire around the front of the hook shank, leaving some bare
shank behind the eye. For a heavy fly that goes deep, wrap
the wire behind a metal bead, then push it forward to seat the
bead.
Step 2—Lay in the thread on
the hook behind the eye, bead,
or wire. Make a few wraps back
over itself toward the hook bend,
creating a “jam knot” to lock the
thread in place. If wire is used,
build a tapered thread dam behind
the wire, then cover the wire in
crisscross wraps and wrap back to the end of the shank to a
spot between the hook point and barb. This spot is often called
the “origin,” and it is where the materials for this fly will be
tied in. Cut the excess thread.
Step 3—Cut a piece of floss, yarn, or soft fur for the tail. Using
the critical pinch technique, tie in a sparse amount of material
on top of the hook just behind the wire or bead (if present).
Otherwise, start a short distance behind the hook eye. Wrap the
Woolly Worm Wet Fly Recipe
■■ Hook: wet fly or 2XL nymph/streamer hook, size #12 to #8
■■ Thread: 3/0 or 6/0 to match the body color
■■ Weight: (optional) lead-free wire and/or bead
■■ Tail: floss, yarn or soft fur to match or complement the body
■■ Body: chenille or yarn (black, brown, olive, yellow, etc.) or peacock herl
■■ Hackle: soft hen body feather (grizzly or to match or complement the body)


FLY-FISHING 45
.All About Flies
thread down the hook, trapping the tail material on
top of the hook until you reach the origin. If using
floss or yarn, you can trim the end of the tail to even
it up. The tail should stick out beyond the origin so
it’s about as long as the width of the hook gap or even
with the back of the bend.
Step 4—Hold a hackle feather by its tip and gently
stroke the fibers toward the butt so they stick out from
the stem. A good feather will feel smooth and slightly
waxy. If it feels dry or brittle it might break, so pick a
better feather. Using the critical pinch technique, tie
the tip in with a few firm thread wraps at the origin.
Most of the feather should lie over or beside the tail,
shiny (convex) side up. Trim the excess tip.
Step 5—Cut a piece of body material. Using the
critical pinch technique tie in behind the wire or bead,
if used, or a short distance behind the hook eye, then
wrap the thread down the hook, trapping the body
material on top of the hook until you reach the origin.
Advance the thread forward to just behind the bead, if
used, or a short distance behind the hook eye.
Step 6—Wind the body material forward in touching
turns to the tying thread, tie off with several thread
wraps, and trim the excess material. It’s best to end
up with the material sticking up so you can cut it
close without cutting the thread. If you accidentally do
this, start the thread again, cut the excess thread, and
continue.
Step 7—Wrap the hackle forward in about 5 open
turns, evenly spacing each wrap, to the front of the
fly. This is called “palmering.” Tie off with some firm
thread wraps, trim excess hackle, add a few half hitches
to finish, and cut the thread. If you’re not using a bead,
you can form a neatly tapered thread head and then
add a few firm half hitches to secure the wraps.


46 FLY-FISHING
All About Flies.
TYING THE BEAD HEAD PHEASANT TAIL NYMPH
Step 1—Crush the barb and slide a bead on the hook with the
small hole next to the hook eye. Grip the hook firmly in the vise
by the lower part of the bend so the shank is level and the barb
and point are exposed.
Step 2—(optional) Wrap 3-4 turns of lead-free wire on the hook
shank and slide them up into the back of the bead to seat it.
Step 3—Start the thread behind the wire, lock the wire in place
with a dam of thread and then open crisscrossed thread wraps
over the wire. If no wire is used, form a loose ball of thread (20-
30 wraps) and push it under the bead to seat it.
Step 4—Cover the shank with thread.
Step 5—Tie the wire rib on top of the hook from behind the
wire or bead to the bend.
Step 6—Tie in 5-6 pheasant tail fibers with the tips to the rear
for a short tail, no longer than the width of the hook gap. Keep
your wraps together, not spread out.
Step 7—Lift the pheasant tail fiber butts and run the thread up
to the bead.
Step 8—Wrap the pheasant tail fibers up to the bead to form
the body and tie off. Trim the fiber butts.
Bead Head Pheasant Tail Nymph Recipe
■■ Hook: #14 to #10 nymph (straight or curved)
■■ Thread: 3/0 or 6/0, rusty brown or black
■■ Head: 7/64", 1/8" or 5/32" copper, brass, or black bead to fit the hook
■■ Weight: lead-free wire, same diameter as hook wire (optional)
■■ Tail/Body/Legs: pheasant tail fibers
■■ Rib: fine copper or brass wire
■■ Thorax: peacock herl (optional)


FLY-FISHING 47
.All About Flies
Step 9—Counter-wrap the copper or brass wire up to the bead
to form a rib, tie off firmly, then wiggle or twist it to break it—
do not cut with scissors.
Step 10—Tie in 2-3 peacock herls behind the bead and wrap to
form a thorax about the diameter of the bead.
Step 11—(optional) Tie in 4-6 pheasant tail fiber tips below
and behind the bead to form legs. The tips should just reach the
hook point. Trim the butts short.
Step 12—Add several half hitches to secure and trim excess
thread.
Many anglers consider fly tying to be
an art in itself, apart from the actual
use of their flies on the water.
They use many specialized
tools and materials for this
craft. You might wish to look
at a commercial sporting-
goods catalog just to mar-
vel at the huge selection
of flies and fly-tying mate-
rials. In earning the Fly-
Fishing merit badge, you
will need to learn only the
basics of fly tying. Consult the
resources included at the end
of this pamphlet to learn more
about the art of fly tying.
Elk Hair Caddis Dry Fly Recipe
■■ Hook: #16 to #10 dry fly
■■ Thread: 3/0 or 6/0, color to match the body
■■ Rib: extra-fine copper wire
■■ Body: polypropylene yarn or peacock herl
■■ Hackle: brown rooster neck, sized to the hook
■■ Wing: bleached elk or deer hair


48 FLY-FISHING
All About Flies.
TYING THE ELK HAIR CADDIS DRY FLY
Step 1—Crush the barb. Grip the hook firmly in the vise by the
lower part of the bend so the shank is level and the barb and
point are exposed.
Step 2—Attach the thread about two eye lengths back from
the eye and wrap a thread base on the shank back to the bend.
Make sure to keep the section of shank right behind the eye free
of all materials until it’s time to tie in the wing.
Step 3—Spiral-wrap the thread back to the front, making a
ridged foundation.
Step 4—Tie in a length of extra-fine copper wire and wrap the
thread over it to the bend and back to the front. Keep the wire
along the side or top of the shank.
Step 5—Tie in a piece of polypropylene yarn or peacock herl,
wrap the thread down the shank and back to trap the body
material, then wrap the material in close turns to the front to
form a thin body. Tie off and clip the excess.
Step 6—Select a brown rooster hackle feather with a barb
length about 1½ times the hook gap. Prepare the feather by
stripping off any fuzzy material at the base, then firmly tie it in
by its butt at the front of the body with the concave side facing
the body. Don’t cut off the butt end yet.
Step 7—Grasp the tip of the feather and palmer it back to the
bend with 6–7 evenly spaced turns.
Step 8—At the bend, wrap the wire rib firmly over the tip of
the hackle one turn and then carefully palmer the wire forward
to the front of the body. Wiggle the wire as you wrap to avoid
trapping hackle fibers.
Step 9—Tie off the wire firmly and then wiggle or twist it to
break it—do not cut with scissors. Cut off the hackle butt and


FLY-FISHING 49
.All About Flies
tip as well. Form a narrow thread base between the body and
the eye. End with the thread hanging just in front of the body—
about two eye widths behind the eye.
Step 10—Cut, clean and stack a medium-size clump of elk or
deer hair. Measure the hair so it reaches from the rear of the
hook eye to the hook bend.
Step 11—Cut the hair to this length and, using the critical
pinch technique, place it on top of the hook with the butt ends
at the back edge of the eye.
Step 12—Make 4-5 firm turns of thread to compress and secure
the hair.
Step 13—Tie off under the hair wing, just behind the eye, then
add several half hitches and trim the excess thread. A small
plastic tube, like a coffee stirrer, makes this easy. Check the
wing from the front and adjust it if it’s slightly off center.
Streamer Construction
Streamers come in a wide range of sizes and are tied with a
variety of materials. The recipe may include deer hair, bucktail,
rabbit fur strips, hackles, and synthetic materials. Adding eyes
to the larger patterns can often make them more effective.
This traditional fly, known as the Clouser Minnow, is easy
to tie. You can incorporate variations by using different colors of
bucktail. The Clouser Minnow can be used to catch any species
of fish. Practice tying this fly to learn the basics of fly tying.


50 FLY-FISHING
All About Flies.
TYING THE CLOUSER MINNOW STREAMER
Step 1—Crush the barb and set the hook in the vise with the
shank level and the barb and point exposed.
Step 2—Start the thread behind the eye, then spiral wrap to
just opposite the hook point and back to about 2-3 eye-widths
from the eye, forming a ridged foundation.
Step 3—Tie in the dumbbell or bead chain eyes
with figure-eight thread wraps. Tighten the wraps by
frapping—firmly passing the thread over the hook
shank and under the eyes several times.
Step 4—Cut, clean and stack a small clump of
white bucktail. Select hair from near the tip of the
tail where the hair is less hollow to minimize flaring
when you tie it down.
Step 5—Cut the hair to about 2½ hook lengths (at an angle)
and then tie it in with firm thread wraps between the hook eye
and the dumbbell eyes. If the hair twists a bit due to thread
torque, straighten it before proceeding.
Step 6—Bring the thread under the barbell eyes, hold the hair
down over the eyes, and tie in with soft spiral wraps up to a
point opposite the hook point and back to in front of the barbell
eyes. The thread should be hanging midway between the
barbell eyes and the hook eye.
Step 7—Flip the hook over in the vise so the point is on top.
This is the way the fly will swim in the water.
Step 8—Fold one or two pieces of Krystal Flash over the
hanging thread and then bring the thread up and over the hook,
Clouser Minnow Streamer Recipe
■■ Hook: Mustad® 3366 (freshwater), Mustad® 34007 (saltwater), or equivalent,
#10 to #2
■■ Thread: 3/0 or 6/0 thread, color to match belly or wing
■■ Eyes: brass or nickel dumbbell eyes (larger hooks or deep water) or bead
chain (smaller hooks or shallow water)
■■ Belly: white bucktail
■■ Flash: Pearl Krystal Flash or equivalent
■■ Wing: chartreuse, natural brown or gray bucktail


FLY-FISHING 51
.All About Flies
Fly Selection Tips
Some tips for choosing and tying flies include
the following:
• The same types of mayflies hatch year
after year and at roughly the same
time of year on most trout streams.
Therefore, the same fly patterns
work on these streams, year after
year, in the right season. Know
what flies generally work and
make sure you have some in
your box.
• If the pattern you are using
doesn’t work but you think you
have matched what is hatching,
try going up or down one fly size.
• If nothing is hatching but you see
trout rising, try a very small fly—
especially if the fish are rising softly.
They could be taking very small flies—
midges—in the surface film or nymphs
just below the surface.
• If nothing is rising but you want to prospect with
a dry fly, try one of the reliable attractor patterns
like a Royal Wulff or a Humpy. These patterns
seem to imitate a broad cross-section of insects
and they have caught a lot of fish.
• If a bass bug isn’t getting any strikes and you
have been giving it some action, try letting it rest
motionless. Sometimes fish will take it when it
hasn’t been moved at all.
• Check the hook on the fly often. Remove any debris.
The point of the hook should be sharp enough to
scratch the top of your thumbnail. The barb will
sometimes break off during casting (for example,
if it hits a rock).
• If the fly is of a lighter color than the naturals you
see, darken it with a permanent marker.


52 FLY-FISHING
All About Flies.
trapping the flash on top of the hook. Make several thread wraps to tie down the
flash and then evenly distribute the fibers on each side of the bend.
Step 9—Prepare a clump of chartreuse, brown or gray bucktail, about the same size
as the first.
Step 10—Cut the hair at an angle to the same length as the previous clump,
place it on the hook with the butt ends about one hook eye width behind the eye,
and tie down using the critical pinch technique. If the hair flares too much, place
several soft wraps just in front of the dumbbell eyes to bring the hair down.
Step 11—Form a neat, tapered thread head and add several half hitches for
durability.
Step 12—Trim the flash so it sticks out just a little bit beyond the bucktail.
Fishing Dry Flies
When you fish a dry fly, you cast either to a fish you have seen feeding—“a rising
fish”—or to a location, or lie, where you think a fish will be holding and waiting
for food to pass above. The fly should drift without “dragging” over the head of the
fish and look natural to it. If you
are fishing in water with current,
cast far enough upstream to give
the fly a chance to float down
over the lie, where you have seen
the fish or think it is holding.
When fishing dry flies in
moving water, an angler must
contend with drag. This occurs
when the line moves down cur-
rent ahead of the fly and pulls
it along. This will create a wake
and look entirely unnatural to a
fish. Anglers traditionally have
cast upstream with dry flies to
avoid drag.
When anglers must cast
across current, they can throw
an upstream “bend” into the line
with a reach cast or mend. After
completing the power stroke, the
angler reaches upstream with the
arm and rod tip. This sends the
belly of the fly line up current.


FLY-FISHING 53
.All About Flies
Many additional sources of information are
available to you to take your fly-fishing skills
to the next level. Inspired by Scouts like you,
angler Robert J. Sousa wrote Learn to Fly
Fish in 24 Hours.
An angler also can put slack into the line by waving the rod tip back and forth
at the end of the power stroke, throwing S-curves into the line before it lands on
the water. Another option is to use a parachute cast, in which the angler stops
the rod abruptly at the end of the power stroke. This puts slack loops into the line
before it lands on the water. Raise the rod tip to set the hook with dry flies. If you
miss, you can deliver the fly right back to the same spot on the next cast.
Fishing Sinking Flies
When fishing sinking flies in moving water, the anglers control the line by keeping
the casts relatively short. They cast upstream and follow the drift of the fly with the
tip of the rod, raising the rod as the fly swings downstream to keep slack out of
the line. Watch carefully where the leader is tied to the fly line. When it stops—or
when you see a flash in the water beyond this point—tighten up with the line
hand and lift with the rod hand to set the hook. If you do not strike quickly, the
fish may spit out the fly. Some anglers use a small piece of bright yarn or cork on
the line as a strike indicator. When the indicator stops moving or dips under the
surface, the angler strikes.
Streamers and saltwater flies are tied to look like minnows or bait fish. These
flies are fished deeply in a lake or stream when fish are not at the surface. They
should be moved through the water by short, quick strips of line with the line hand.
You also can impart movement to a streamer by moving the rod tip slightly. When
fishing nymphs and streamers, use the line hand to set the hook. Even if the fish
misses, you will not drag the fly very far away from its view, and the fish may still
wish to pursue it.





FLY-FISHING 55
.Where to Fish
Where to Fish
To survive in a lake or stream, fish need unpolluted water,
a source of food, and shelter that will protect them from
predators. Often fish will find food and protection at edges.
An edge is where two things come together, where something
ends and something else begins. If you are fishing a pond,
there is an obvious edge where the shallow shore water meets
deeper water. This is where you will find fish. When you study
water, trying to decide where the likely spots might be, look
for edges.
You also may find fish where a gravel bar or sandbar drops
off into deeper water. A stump or a fallen log creates an edge
effect, and so does a weed bed. In moving water, fish lie where
one line of current meets another or where the current breaks
up around a rock, creating slack water or an eddy. Trout that
are feeding on floating insects, like hatching mayflies, will take
a position where the current brings the food down to them.
Look for these feeding lanes. In salt water, a feeding place might
not be visible. It could be a tide that is carrying bait, a deep
hole, or an eddy near a rock.
Sometimes, you will be able to see the fish. This is
especially likely in salt water when fish are cruising in
shallow areas, looking for food. But you also can spot
fish by the rise, or action a fish makes as it comes to the
surface to feed. You can spot trout in shallow, moving water
by the shadow they leave on a sand or gravel bottom or
by the flash when they move to take a nymph or some
other kind of food.


56 FLY-FISHING
Where to Fish.
To spot fish in the water, you need a pair of polarized
sunglasses to cut the glare. Do not stare at one place for a
long time; rather, keep your eyes moving. Don’t expect to see
the fish in full profile. Look for a shadow, a part of the fish,
a slight movement, or a flash. Once you have spotted one of
these signs, you will be able to pick out the entire fish. Some
saltwater species, like bonefish and redfish, feed in water so
shallow that their fins and tails sometimes show above the sur-
face. Casting to a feeding tailing fish is one of the great thrills
of saltwater fly-fishing.
Schooling fish, especially in salt water, can be located
from a distance by the presence of birds that are feeding on
the same baitfish the game fish are eating. Anglers who fish
for bluefish, striped bass, and false albacore look for flocks
of birds just above the surface of the water, diving into the
schools of baitfish. Fish can be spooked easily, so you may be
more successful by casting around the edge of a school rather
than directly into it. Fish also gather around moving water like
inlets or tidal guts. Often predatory fish will try to ambush
their prey in the areas of turbulent water.
Kinds of Fish
The types of fish that can be caught by fly-fishing are almost as
numerous as the fish themselves. While this sport is often equated
with trout, salmon, and other brook- and river-swimming fish,
almost any species of fish can be caught with a fly.
Remember, if you
can see the fish,
they can likely see
you, so move
slowly and wear
clothing in colors
that match your
surroundings.


FLY-FISHING 57
.Where to Fish
Freshwater Fish
Lakes, ponds, rivers, and streams are home to many hard-
fighting and tasty species.
Largemouth Bass. No fish was more aptly named than the
largemouth bass. Its jaw extends well back past its eye, and
when it opens its mouth to swallow something, it seldom miss-
es. Because it often strikes explosively on the surface,
the largemouth is one of the most prized and
highly sought game fish in North America.
In the South, largemouth grow to 20
pounds or more. In the North, 10 pounds
is a record-breaker. Largemouth are struc-
ture fish, meaning they hang around brush,
fallen trees, weed beds, and ledges, usually in
fairly shallow water. Where they are heavily fished, they
become cagey, and the angler must be careful, quiet, and skill-
ful to be successful.
In areas where fishing pressure is heavy, many anglers
release the bass they catch, perhaps keeping one or two small
ones for supper. Small bass are excellent eating; big bass are
not as good.
Smallmouth Bass. Smallmouth bass have been described as
“pound for pound, the gamest fish that swims.” Some anglers
will argue for other species, but there is no question
that this snub-nosed, jut-jawed warrior of the
cold water is a foe to test the tackle of any
angler.
Smallmouth bass were once confined
to the Mississippi River and Great Lakes
drainages, but they have been stocked in
all of the northern states, much of Canada,
and parts of the southern United States. Fly-
fishing techniques work well on smallmouth. They are
especially fun to catch with deer-hair bugs and popping bugs
fished on the surface, but smallmouth are caught more readily
The easiest way to distinguish smallmouth from largemouth is by the
upper jaw. In the smallmouth bass, the jaw comes back to a point just
to the eye. In the largemouth, the upper jaw ends behind the eye. Also,
smallmouth are yellow or tan with brown markings. The largemouth is
greenish-gray with black markings. Both fish are known as black bass.


58 FLY-FISHING
Where to Fish.
on streamers like clouser minnows, woolly buggers and muddler
minnows, as well as crayfish imitations.
Panfish
This year, a million American young people will be intro-
duced to the sport of fishing. Most of them will catch a spe-
cies of panfish. Aptly named, the species that are lumped
together in this category are some of the tastiest in the frying
pan. They also are fun to catch, and some are ferocious bat-
tlers for their size.
Rock Bass and Bluegill. The rock bass, of the sunfish family,
is brassy colored with rows of black scales. A stubby fighter
growing to 2 pounds, it will strike almost any kind of live bait
or artificial lure. It likes to hang out around old bridge piers,
docks, boulders, and weed beds. Except in the late
fall when it goes deep, the rock bass is a
shallow-water feeder that likes to take
minnows and bugs near the surface.
The bluegill, like many of the
sunfish, has
a shiny, dark blue patch on the edge
of
the gill cover. Like its sunfish cousins,
it is brightly colored. The bluegill has
purplish sides with black bands and
a bright yellow or orange throat. It has a small mouth, and
anglers use small hooks to catch it. Bluegill are found just
about all over the United States. They are tough fighters and
are superb eating. They are often taken on small popping bugs
with rubber legs.
Crappie. Crappie are white and black fish that may grow to
4 pounds, although a 2-pounder is considered a trophy in most
areas. It will take flies, especially woolly buggers, without
hesitation. The crappie has a paperlike mouth and must be
carefully handled so that the hook does not pull loose. It is
excellent eating.
BLUEGILL


FLY-FISHING 59
.Where to Fish
Stream Trout
For sheer beauty, the members of the trout family are hard
to beat. They are sleek, colorful, and built for speed through
the water.
Brook Trout. A dark green back with yellowish
tracks, spotted sides with bright red spots,
red fins, and a white underside mark
this all-American warrior. Brook trout
are found in tiny beaver brooks as
well as the great rivers of the North.
In lakes they reach 7 to 8 pounds, but
the average brookie is under a pound.
Brook trout can be caught on dry or wet flies.
Rainbow Trout. Aptly named for the bright pink streak down
its silvery side and its bluish-green back, the rainbow trout is
not only a handsome fish but also one of the
most spectacular leapers among freshwa-
ter species. There are many varieties
of rainbow trout, some growing to
more than 20 pounds. The migra-
tory steelhead, a fish that spawns
in streams but spends most of its
life in salt water or the Great Lakes, is
a cousin.
Brown Trout. This European import has taken hold in
many of the warmer streams that will not support native
American species. It is stubbier than most trout, yellowish-tan
with brown and red spots, shy, and is the wariest of the trout.
Planted in the Great Lakes, it grows to more than 20 pounds.


60 FLY-FISHING
Where to Fish.
Saltwater Fish
Fly fishermen fish for many species of saltwater fish. Because
saltwater fish are usually much larger than their freshwater
cousins, anglers casting for them require specially designed rods
and lines. Some of the species can be taken on a regular fly
rod, but extra care must be taken to clean, rinse, and lubricate
the equipment to reduce the corrosive effects of seawater.
Shallow-Water Species. Spotted sea trout and drum are
abundant and easily caught where they swarm in coastal bays
and lagoons and at river mouths. They will hit streamer flies,
and in some cases, skipping bugs work rapidly along the
surface. Spotted sea trout and drum are good eating.
Redfish live along the Gulf Coast and southern Atlantic.
They can be found cruising and feeding in shallow water
where they will take a fly after a careful presentation. Redfish
are terrific fighters and excellent table fish.
Flats Fish
Three species of fish that live in the shallow, subtropical waters of Florida
are among the finest fly-fishing trophies. These are the tarpon, bonefish,
and permit.
Tarpon are the largest of the three and can reach weights of more
than 150 pounds. They are spectacular jumpers and are sometimes called
“silver kings.”
Bonefish seldom grow to more than 10 pounds. They feed in very
shallow, clear water, which makes them exceedingly wary, and when
they take a fly, the angler will experience the thrill of one of the longest,
fastest first runs in all of fishing.
The permit is found on some of the same flats where anglers look
for tarpon and bonefish. It is rare, wary, and very hard to catch. Many
expert anglers have never caught a permit and would consider their first
the fish of a lifetime.
TARPON


FLY-FISHING 61
.Where to Fish
Striped Bass
The striped bass is a native of the Atlantic. On the East
Coast, it can be found from Chesapeake Bay to Maine.
It has been widely transplanted in both freshwater and
in the Pacific, especially around San Francisco Bay.
In the shallow-water flats of Long Island and around
Cape Cod, fly rodders spot cruising and feeding fish
and take them on flies. They are excellent fighters and,
after many years of scarce stocks, are now plentiful
enough that one may occasionally be kept for eating.
School Fish
Bluefish are among the most aggressive of all salt-
water fish. They have razor-sharp teeth, so use a short
piece of wire leader when fishing them or any other
fish known to have sharp teeth. Anglers take bluefish
on flies that imitate small minnows. Bluefish usually
are found schooling and are located by the birds that
flock over to eat the baitfish they chase to the surface.
False albacore are tunalike fish that also school on the
surface. Many anglers will claim that false albacore are
strong fish that fight harder than anything in the ocean.





FLY-FISHING 63
.Hooking, Playing, and Releasing Fish
Hooking, Playing,
and Releasing Fish
Hooking a Fish
To set the hook quickly, the fly angler often uses the line hand
and not the rod. This is especially true for flies fished underwater.
When a fish takes the fly, the fish will spit it out upon discovering
it is not real food. The rod flexes and is difficult to control. An
angler trying to set the hook by raising the rod tip will often pull
the hook out of the fish’s mouth. On very big fish such as tarpon,
a long pull with the line hand followed by a sharp raising of the
rod hand usually will set the hook.
Many fly fishermen use either barbless hooks or, if the hook
they are using does have a barb, flatten the barb with pliers.
Barbs tend to damage a fish’s mouth more than necessary
and may make releasing the fish difficult. Barbless hooks make
releasing a fish easier and cause less trauma if they become
lodged in an angler’s skin.
If using a barbless hook,
be sure to keep a tight
line when playing a fish,
as it will sure help you
to land the fish.


64 FLY-FISHING
Hooking, Playing, and Releasing Fish.
Playing a Fish
Play the fish aggressively but not to exhaustion. Try to turn its
head and make it fight against the full flex of the rod, not just
a slight bend at the tip. Do not play a fish too long—it will
become exhausted and might not recover if you release it, or it
might be too weak to escape from predators.
Releasing a Fish
Releasing fish is an important conservation measure. Catch
and release is a concept that fishers pioneered and hold dear.
One of the great anglers, the late Lee Wulff, was fond of saying
that a fish is too valuable to be caught only once.
Catch and release is the law on many popular trout
streams and for some species of saltwater fish. Be
sure you know the law on which fish must be released
and follow it completely.


FLY-FISHING 65
.Hooking, Playing, and Releasing Fish
When releasing a fish, try not to remove it from the water.
Use needle-nosed pliers or forceps to remove the hook. If
the hook is deeply imbedded in a fish’s mouth, do not try to
remove it. Simply cut the leader as close to the hook as possi-
ble. Trying to remove a deeply imbedded hook can cause more
harm to the fish than cutting the leader close to the hook and
allowing the hook to deteriorate over time.
If you do remove the fish from the water,
handle it gently, with wet hands or a finely
meshed landing net so as not to disturb
the protective slime that covers its body.
If taking a picture of the catch, have a
friend ready with a camera to reduce
the time the fish is out of the water.
Support the weight of the fish while
you hold it horizontally (never ver-
tically), and return the fish to the
water as quickly as possible.
Before releasing, revive a
tired fish by facing it upstream in a
natural position. Let it swim away on
its own.
It is a good idea to
wet your hands
before handling a
fish—even when
using a net.





FLY-FISHING 67
.Cleaning, Filleting, and Cooking Fish
Cleaning, Filleting, and
Cooking Fish
There are as many recipes for cooking a freshly caught fish
as there are anglers. Proper cleaning and preparation of a fish
before cooking will help ensure success with whatever cooking
method you choose.
Cleaning Fish
Follow the Leave No Trace Seven Principles and the Outdoor
Code and local regulations for proper disposal of all fish
entrails, skeletons, and other remains. In many areas, you
should treat this waste as you would human waste.
Step 1—Cover the area with brown paper or newspaper.
Keep a plastic bag handy for any waste. Make sure you
have a sharp knife.
Step 2—Rinse the fish under clean, cool water.
Step 3—Skin the fish, or remove the scales using a scale
remover, spoon, or knife. (Hold the fish by the tail and run
the dull edge of your knife from tail to head until the fish feels
slick.) If you skin the fish,
it won’t need to be scaled.
To skin the fish, cut down
the backside and loosen
the skin around the fins.
Remove the skin with
pliers; pull the skin down
from head to tail and cut
it off at the tail.


68 FLY-FISHING
Cleaning, Filleting, and Cooking Fish.
Step 4—Starting at the anal opening near the tail, cut through
the belly to the gills.
Step 5—Open the belly and remove the entrails and gills from
the fish. (Don’t burst the stomach.) Scrape out the kidney line
(it’s reddish-brown) along the backbone.
Step 6—If you want, remove the head by breaking the
backbone against the edge of the cutting board or a table.
Detach the head by cutting through the fleshy area.
Step 7—Remove the tail and pull off the dorsal fin (along the
top of the fish) with a quick tug.
Step 8—Rinse the fish well under cool running water.
Filleting Fish
Keep in mind that not all fish should be filleted. Trout, for
instance, need only be cleaned. However, removing the meat
of some fish from the bones and skin makes it easier to cook
and to eat. Here is one way to do it.
Step 1—Lay the fish on its side and make a cut just behind
the gills down to the backbone, but not through it.
1


FLY-FISHING 69
.Cleaning, Filleting, and Cooking Fish
4
Step 2—Start at the cut made in step 1 and run the point of
the knife alongside the backbone, down to where it starts to
click along the tops of the ribs. Cut alongside the ribs, working
back toward the tail until the entire side of the fish is free from
the ribs and backbone, but leave it attached to the tail.
Step 3—Lay the side flat and hook a forefinger under the skin
near the tail. Run the knife into the meat next to the skin and
hold the blade against the inside of the
skin at an angle of about 45 degrees.
Holding the blade steady, gently lift the
forefinger holding the skin and pull. The
skin will slide out, leaving a boneless,
skinless fillet.
Step 4—Repeat on the other
side of the fish, and you will
have two fillets.
2 3


70 FLY-FISHING
Cleaning, Filleting, and Cooking Fish.
Cooking Fish
There are many ways to cook fish. One of the easiest and tastiest
is to simply sauté the entire fish—or the fillets if the fish is
larger—in some butter in a hot skillet. Keep the heat low
enough that you do not burn the butter. Turn the fish after it
has cooked for five minutes on a side. Serve with lemon.


FLY-FISHING 71
.Cleaning, Filleting, and Cooking Fish
Try this tasty, no-nonsense recipe next time you
bag a fish on the fly. Serves four.
Oak’s Grilled Fish in Foil*
1 lb. fish fillets
1
⁄4 teaspoon pepper
2 tablespoons margarine or butter
1
⁄2 teaspoon garlic powder
1
⁄4 cup lemon juice
Pinch of paprika
1 tablespoon chopped parsley
1 medium onion, thinly sliced
1 teaspoon dried dill weed
Heavy-duty aluminum foil
1 teaspoon salt
Margarine or butter to grease the foil
Grease four large squares of foil with margarine.
Place equal amounts of fish on each square. In a small
saucepan, melt 2 tablespoons of margarine. Add the
lemon juice, parsley, dill weed, salt, pepper, and garlic
powder. Pour equal amounts of the mixture over
the fish. Sprinkle with the paprika, and top with
the onion slices. Wrap the foil securely around
the fish, but leave some room for the fish to
expand. Grill 5 to 7 minutes on each side or
until the fish flakes with a fork. Enjoy!
*This recipe provided courtesy of David Oakley.





FLY-FISHING 73
.Fishing Safety
Fishing Safety
Fly-fishing is not a dangerous sport, but you should always
be prepared for emergencies and know how to handle them.
Be prepared to treat minor injuries by bringing along a small
first-aid kid complete with bandages, antiseptic wipes, insect
repellent, and sunscreen. Also be prepared to manage risk so
that your outing will be safe and fun.
As in any outdoor activity, you must take precautions to
prevent heat reactions and dehydration. Wear sunscreen with
a sun protection factor (SPF) of at least 15 (reapply it often),
drink plenty of water, and limit your physical activity in the
heat of the day.
When fly-fishing, you should always wear eye protection
and a broad-brimmed hat. A good pair of polarized glasses will
protect your eyes and also help you spot fish.
When wading, be careful not to get in too far or too deep,
and avoid strong currents. If you should lose your balance and fall,
simply tread water or float as you are carried downstream. Wait
until you have reached relatively quiet water, then swim to shore.
If you have an open wound, do not wade without wearing waders.
Always be aware
of the path of your
fishing rod and line
when you cast so
that the hook and
line don’t catch
on anything—
especially
another angler!


74 FLY-FISHING
Fishing Safety.
Removing a Fishhook in the Skin
A fishhook embedded in the skin is a frequent outdoor injury. Using
a barbless hook allows for easy hook removal, but if you are using a
barbed hook, follow these procedures.
Do not try to remove a fishhook from the face or from an eye or an
earlobe. Cut the fishing line and, if possible, let a doctor remove the hook
from the flesh. If that isn’t possible, you might have to do the job yourself.
First, wash your hands with soap and warm water. Wear nonlatex
disposable gloves and protective eyewear to avoid contact with blood.
Step 1—Wrap a 3-foot length of fishing line around the
bend of the hook, and securely wrap the ends around
your index or middle finger.
Step 2—Keep the affected body part flat and stable,
then firmly push down on the shank to free the barb
from the injured tissue. The shank should be parallel
to the injured tissue.
Step 3—Keep bystanders well away from the area.
While maintaining pressure on the shank, give the line
a quick, sharp jerk. Be careful to avoid getting snagged
by the outcoming hook.
Step 4—Wash and bandage the injury, and keep the
wound clean. Apply triple antibiotic ointment if there
are no known allergies or sensitivities to the medica-
tion. See a doctor as soon as possible, because the
risk of infection is high with this type of injury.
If the hook has lodged so that the barb is visible
above the skin, try this method:
Step 1—Cut off the barbed end with wire cutters
or pliers.
Step 2—Back the shank of the hook out through the
entry wound.
Because the risk of infection is high with any type of
puncture wound, be sure to see a doctor as soon
as possible.
2a
2b
3
1
2


FLY-FISHING 75
.Fishing Safety
Treating Minor Injuries
Even a gentle sport like fly-fishing can come with its perils. A
good angler will be well-versed in first-aid for cuts, scratches,
puncture wounds, and insect bites and stings.
Cuts and scratches are wounds—openings in the skin
and tissues that can allow germs to enter the body and cause
infection. Wash minor scratches and cuts with soap and water.
Apply antiseptic to help prevent infection. Keep the wound
clean with an adhesive bandage. On camping trips, clean and
rebandage small wounds daily.
Larger cuts should be treated with direct pressure to stop
bleeding, then cleaned as well as possible to limit infection.
Cover an open wound with a sterile gauze pad or clean cloth
that has been folded to make a pad. Hold the pad in position
with tape, a cravat bandage, or other binder. Remember, any-
one suffering a serious wound should be treated for shock and
seen by a physician.
Puncture wounds can be caused by pins, splinters, nails,
and fishhooks. All can be dangerous, because they allow
germs into a wound that is hard to clean. To treat a puncture
wound, encourage the wound to bleed to help flush out dirt
or other particles that might have been forced inside. Use
tweezers sterilized over a flame or in boiling water to pull out
splinters, bits of glass, or other objects you can see. Wash the
area with soap and water, apply a sterile bandage, and get the
victim to a doctor.
The bites or stings of insects, spiders, chiggers, and ticks
can be painful. Some can cause infection. Applying calamine
lotion to insect bites may bring relief, but the most important
thing to remember is to try not to scratch. Applying an ice
pack can help reduce swelling.
For a bee or wasp sting, scrape away the stinger with the
edge of a knife blade. Don’t try to squeeze it out; doing so will
force more venom into the skin from the sac attached to the
stinger. Ice also will help ease the swelling of stings.
Never try to
remove a fishhook
that is lodged
in the face or
near an eye,
artery, or other
sensitive area.
Many spider bites can be dangerous. Victims of
spider bites should be treated by a doctor as soon
as possible.


76 FLY-FISHING
Fishing Safety.
If a tick has attached itself, grasp it with tweezers close to
the skin and gently pull until it comes loose. Don’t squeeze,
twist, or jerk the tick, as doing so could leave its mouthparts
in the skin. Wash the wound with soap and water and apply
antiseptic. After dealing with a tick, thoroughly wash your
hands and any affected area to help
prevent Lyme disease, a bacterial
infection that is spread through
contact with infected ticks. If
redness develops in the bite
area, see a doctor.
Treating Heat Reactions
When the body’s cooling system gets overworked, heat
exhaustion can occur. Symptoms can include pale, clammy
skin; nausea and fatigue; dizziness and fainting; and head-
ache, muscle cramps, and weakness. Treat heat exhaustion
by having the victim lie in a cool, shady place with the feet
raised. Remove excess clothing. Cool the victim with wet
cloths applied to the body. Let an alert victim sip a little water.
Recovery should be rapid, but if symptoms persist, call for
medical help immediately.
Heatstroke is a reaction to heat that is more serious than
heat exhaustion. It occurs when the body’s cooling system shuts
down completely. The victim’s temperature often soars to a life-
threatening level. Symptoms include very hot skin; red skin that
is either dry or damp with sweat; rapid and quick pulse; noisy
breathing; confusion and irritability; unconsciousness. In cases
of heatstroke, call for medical help immediately. While waiting
for medical help, cool the victim as soon as possible. Move the
victim to a cool, shady spot and cool the person any way you
can, using any of the following techniques:
• Remove outer clothing and sponge the person with cool water.
• Cover the victim with wet towels, wet clothing, or whatever
else is available.
• Fan the person.
• Place the person in a cool stream or in front of a car
air conditioner.
Keep the victim lying down and comfortable with head and
shoulders slightly raised. Monitor the person’s temperature
until help arrives.


FLY-FISHING 77
.Fishing Safety
Trip Itinerary
Always tell your parents or guardian where you
are going and when you expect to return. If fish-
ing a remote area, leave your trip plan with a resort
owner or dock operator. If nothing else, write your
trip plan on a piece of paper and stick it up under the
windshield wiper of the car. If you run into trouble,
trained searchers will know where to look.
Sunburn
Sunburn is a common injury among people who
enjoy being outdoors. Most sunburns are first-
degree burns, but prolonged exposure to the sun
can cause blistering—a second-degree burn.
If you or one of your companions gets
sunburned, prevent further injury by
getting out of the sun and into the
shade. If no shade is available,
have the person put on a
brimmed hat, pants, and a
long-sleeved shirt that will
afford protection from
the sun. Treat painful
sunburn with damp
cloths. Remedies con-
taining aloe vera also
might provide relief.
Sunburn is easy
to prevent by wear-
ing protective clothing
and applying plenty of
sunscreen with an SPF rating
of at least 15. Reapply if you are
sweating and after you have been
in water.


78 FLY-FISHING
Fishing Safety.
Treating Dehydration
Dehydration is caused by lack of water in the body. Your body
must have water for digestion, respiration, brain activity, and
regulation of body temperature. The first signs of dehydration
are dark-colored urine, thirst, dry lips, and a slightly dry mouth.
Signs of moderate dehydration include a very dry mouth,
sunken eyes, and pale skin. As dehydration progresses, other
signs can include fatigue, headache, body aches, a rapid but
weak pulse, rapid and short breathing, cold hands and feet,
and confusion. Left unchecked, severe dehydration can lead to
shock and death.
If you are mildly dehydrated, drink plenty of water to help
rehydrate your body. You should see a physician if you are
moderately dehydrated. However, severe dehydration requires
hospitalization because you must be pumped with intravenous
fluids right away.
Prevent dehydration by drinking enough water to keep
your urine clear; don’t wait until you are thirsty. If you feel
overheated, stay in the shade whenever possible. Don’t
overlook prevention in cold-weather conditions, too. Cold,
wet conditions can mask dehydration symptoms to dangerous
levels. So, in cold or hot weather conditions, it’s important
to stay well-hydrated.
Never drink
water that has
not been treated.
Treat it on the
trail or carry fresh
water from home.


FLY-FISHING 79
.Fishing Safety
Treating Hypothermia
Hypothermia is the lowered internal body temperature that occurs
when the body loses heat faster than it can produce it. Water or
air temperature lower than 70 degrees poses hypothermia risks.
Moving water and wind substantially increase the loss of body
heat. Any combination of cool weather and damp clothing, wind,
exhaustion, or hunger can bring hypothermia on. In fact, most
cases occur when the air temperature is well above freezing.
The best way to deal with hypothermia is to prevent it in
the first place. Dress appropriately for the weather; always carry
rain gear to keep yourself and your clothing dry. Wearing a U.S.
Coast Guard–approved personal flotation device (PFD) if there
is any risk of being in cold water or being stranded in water
far from shore; the PFD also can serve as insulation against the
cold. Wear a hat, eat plenty of energy foods, and do not push
yourself to a dangerous point of fatigue.
Wading
This can be treacherous, particularly in the spring
when water is high or late in the fall when water is
cold. It’s best to start wading in shallow water before
venturing farther out so that you can better gauge
water current and depth. It will also help if you wade
diagonally rather than face the current straight on.
Rock-bottom streams often are slippery.
Experienced fishermen take small steps and wade
slowly, moving one foot ahead and feeling the
bottom while supporting the body weight on the
other foot. Steel cleats or felt boot soles sometimes
help, as will walking around slippery rocks rather
than over them whenever possible.
Felt boot soles are generally to be avoided
in fresh water as they may harbor organisms
hitchhiking from one water body to another. The
spread of certain diseases, algae, snails and other
noxious organisms occurs when anglers do not
sterilize their boot as they fish from one place to
another. A wading staff is very useful for feeling out
the bottom and providing stability as you wade.
See the Swimming
and First Aid merit
badge pamphlets
for more detailed
information on
treating heat-
and cold-related
illnesses.


80 FLY-FISHING
Fishing Safety.
Lightning
During lightning storms, avoid the summits of mountains, crests
of ridges, slopes above timberline, and large meadows. If you
see a storm approaching, quickly descend to a lower elevation,
away from the direction of the approaching storm. Instruct
Scouts to squat down and keep their heads low. Avoid isolated
trees and trees much taller than adjacent trees; and water, metal
objects, and other substances that will conduct electricity over
long distances.
If the threat of lightning strikes is great, group members
should spread out at least 100 feet apart and squat with
feet close together. Remove backpacks with either external
or internal metal frames. In tents, stay away from metal poles.


FLY-FISHING 81
.Fishing Safety
Look Out for Lightning
Many fly fishermen use graphite rods—which conduct
electricity—and stand in water in open areas, so light-
ning is a particular danger. At the first indication of an
approaching thunderstorm, get out of the water and
retreat quickly to a safe location.
Anticipate, Help
Prevent, Mitigate
Prevention goes hand in hand with mitigation,
which means “to lessen in force or intensity”
and “to make less severe.” By taking precau-
tions to manage risk and first aid, you can
be prepared to anticipate, help prevent,
mitigate, and respond to just about any
fly-fishing hazard.





FLY-FISHING 83
.Fish Conservation and Ethics
Practice good
stream etiquette.
Do not crowd
other anglers.
Make sure you
have permission
before you cross
private land.
Fish Conservation
and Ethics
Fly anglers are dedicated conservationists, concerned with keep-
ing the waters where they fish clean and encouraging actions
that improve the quality of fishing. They try to have as little
impact as possible on the banks of the streams where they fish
and were the first to make catch and release popular. However,
some waters have a surplus of certain species. In these situ-
ations, harvest of some types and sizes can improve fishing.
Harvesting such fish is called selective harvest. For other situ-
ations where the quantity of fish does not match the demand
by anglers, catch and release produces the best fishing. In the
southeast and some northern areas, cold-water fish like trout are
stocked with the goal that they will be caught by anglers before
the water warming. Any uncaught fish will likely die in the heat
of summer if they cannot find an aerated spring or other cold
water source. Fishery biologists and managers take this fact into
account when they make their spring stocking prescriptions for
a given body of water. Contact a local or state fisheries biologist
to discuss the waters you fish. Find out what species and sizes
of those species are best to harvest from the waters you fish. See
more in the box on page 89.
Several organizations help spread the conservation ethic
by working on stream restoration, restocking, and other proj-
ects. Consider joining Trout Unlimited, the International Game
Fish Association, or the Fly Fishers International and learn
what you can do to promote and preserve the sport.
Fly-fishing is a more than a leisure activity; it is a heritage.
When you step into a clear, cold stream where mayflies are
hatching and you study the water for the rise of fish, you will
feel a thrill that has been experienced by thousands of anglers
before you. Enjoy the experience to its fullest—the water, the
fish, and the plant, bird, and animal life. As you enjoy the expe-
rience, make a promise to do what you can do to pass it along.


84 FLY-FISHING
Fish Conservation and Ethics.
Outdoor CodeAs an American, I will do my best to—
BE CLEAN IN MY OUTDOOR MANNERS.
I will treat the outdoors as a heritage.
I will take care of it for myself and others.
I will keep my trash and
garbage out of lakes, streams,
fields, woods, and roadways.
BE CAREFUL WITH FIRE.
I will prevent wildfire. I will build my fires only when
and where they are permitted and appropriate. When I have
finished using a fire, I will make sure it is cold out.
I will leave a clean fire ring or remove all evidence of my fire.
BE CONSIDERATE IN THE OUTDOORS.
I will treat public and private property with respect.
I will use low-impact methods of hiking and camping.
BE CONSERVATION-MINDED.
I will learn how to practice good conservation of soil,
waters, forests, minerals, grasslands, wildlife,
and energy. I will urge others
to do the same.


FLY-FISHING 85
.Fish Conservation and Ethics
Leave No Trace Seven Principles
and the Outdoor Code
Sooner or later, an angler discovers that it is not enough to
enjoy the sport of fishing and the tasty fish dinners that go with
it. All anglers find that they have a responsibility to their sport
and to the environment in which the fish live.
Entire rivers and lakes have been emptied of game fish
because of human-caused pollution. However, many rivers and
lakes have been reclaimed once fishing enthusiasts banded
together and demanded it. Scouts have been active in cleaning
up trash from rivers and in helping state fishery managers with
the rehabilitation of streams for game fish species.
To ensure a healthy future for ourselves and our envi-
ronment, we must do more than simply pick up litter. We
must learn how to maintain the integrity and character of the
outdoors. Leave No Trace is a set of guidelines as well as an
awareness and an attitude that helps us to do just that. These
guidelines apply to fishing just as well as they do to hiking,
camping, or any other outdoor activity.
Plan Ahead and Prepare. Proper planning and preparation for
a fishing trip help you to have a safe and enjoyable experience
while minimizing damage to natural and cultural resources.
Anglers who plan ahead can avoid unexpected situations and
minimize their impact by complying with area game and fish
laws, such as size and catch limits, tackle and bait regulations,
and seasonal restrictions. Failure to know and obey these laws
can lead to an arrest and a stiff fine. If you need more infor-
mation, ask a local game warden. Be sure to obtain a fishing
license if necessary and any other needed permits or permission.
Obtain information concerning geography, water levels,
and weather where you plan to fish so that you are not caught
off guard by a storm or difficult terrain. Always leave a trip
plan with a responsible adult or two so they will know where
you are going and when you plan to return.
Allow ample time to travel to and from your desired fish-
ing spot, whether on the water or the shore. Take along the
proper equipment and tackle for the type of fishing you plan to
do. It also is helpful to schedule your outing to avoid times of
high use. Following these steps will ensure a safe, comfortable,
and fun fishing trip.
Using a float tube
or waders is a
good way to mini-
mize your impact.
These devices
leave little or no
lasting impact and
allow you better
access to the fish.


86 FLY-FISHING
Fish Conservation and Ethics.
Travel and Camp on Durable Surfaces. Whether you fish
for a few hours, an entire day, or plan to camp and fish, it is
important to minimize your impact on the land. In high-use
areas, concentrate your activity where vegetation is already
absent. Use wading gear to reduce stream and lakeside impact.
Use existing trails and select designated or existing fishing
areas. In more remote, less-traveled areas, avoid creating new
trails that cause erosion, and avoid places where impacts are
just beginning to show.
If camping overnight, always camp at least 200 feet from
shorelines. Keep campsites small by arranging tents in close
proximity. If you are camping and cooking that day’s catch,
disperse tents and cooking activities—and move camp daily to
avoid creating permanent-looking campsites. Always choose the
most durable surfaces available: rock, gravel, sand, compacted
soil, dry grasses, or snow.
It is especially important to avoid impacting stream banks
and lakesides. The area that is immediately adjacent to a
stream or river is called the riparian zone. These zones supply
food, cover, and water for a diverse number of animals, both
in and out of the water. They also serve as migration routes
and forest connectors between habitats for a variety of wildlife,
especially birds. In addition, riparian zones generally contain
more diversity and are more productive in plant growth and
animal species than land farther away from the water.
Dispose of Waste Properly (Pack It In, Pack It Out). This
simple yet effective saying helps motivate outdoor visitors to
take their trash home with them. Inspect your fishing spot, boat,
or campsite for trash or spilled foods. Pack out all trash, leftover
food or bait, and litter. Use designated fish cleaning areas, or
check with the local game and fish officials if you will be fishing
in a more remote area.
Responsibly dispose of used or broken fishing line by
packing it out with the rest of the trash. Many tackle shops
offer recycling bins specifically for used fishing line. Anglers
should make every effort to retrieve broken line and snagged
hooks. If a hook is snagged and the leader breaks, the respon-
sible thing to do is go after that hook and line. Do not leave
it there to decompose. Monofilament line can last for decades
under certain conditions and can potentially harm birds and
other wildlife.
Learn the Leave
No Trace Seven
Principle and the
Outdoor Code for
your specific
activity or
destination. Check
with local land
managers to be
sure you are
using the proper
techniques.


FLY-FISHING 87
.Fish Conservation and Ethics
You must properly dispose of any wastewater or bodily
waste while in the backcountry. If cooking in the backcountry,
strain food particles from your dishwater and disperse the water
at least 200 feet from any springs, streams, or lakes. Use bio-
degradable soap 200 feet or more from any water source. Dig
catholes to properly dispose of human waste and to prevent the
spread of disease and exposure to others. The catholes should
be 6 to 8 inches deep in humus soil and at least 200 feet from
water, trails, and campsites.
Disposal of Fish Entrails
If you decide to keep what you catch, you must
dispose of the entrails properly. Tradition held that
you would throw the entrails back into the water or
scatter them in a large area so animals could eat
them. If everyone disposed of a catch in this manner,
the outdoors would quickly become unattractive to
humans. In addition, attracting wildlife to areas
where people camp is not a good idea.
Accepted practice today is to dispose of all fish
entrails in solid waste facilities. In the backcountry,
treat the entrails as you would human waste by bury-
ing them in a cathole at least 200 feet from any water
source. This disposal method is especially important
when you fish trout streams.
In certain states there is a growing threat to trout
called whirling disease. This disease attacks the trout’s
central nervous system. Spread through spores inside
infected fish, whirling disease is potentially deadly,
especially to younger trout. When the infected fish die
or the entrails are thrown into the water, the spores
are transferred to a new host and the cycle starts all
over again.
If fishing in an area that might be affected with
whirling disease, be sure to wash and completely dry
all tackle, waders, float tubes, and boats. It is always
a good idea to check with local land managers for the
best ways to dispose of fish entrails.
Practice catch-
and-release
fishing to help
ensure quality
fishing for future
anglers. The
statement “Limit
your kill; don’t kill
your limit” should
be part of every
Leave No Trace
fishing experience.


88 FLY-FISHING
Fish Conservation and Ethics.
Leave What You Find. Allow others a sense of discovery, and
preserve the past. Leave rocks, plants, animals, archaeological
artifacts, and other objects as you find them. Examine but do
not touch cultural or historical structures and artifacts that you
may stumble across. It may be illegal to remove artifacts.
Good fishing spots are found, not made. Avoid altering a
site, digging trenches, or building structures. Never hammer nails
into trees, hack at trees with hatchets or saws, or damage bark
and roots by tying horses to trees for extended periods. Replace
surface rocks or twigs that you cleared from your fishing spot
or campsite. On high-impact sites, clean the area and dismantle
inappropriate user-built facilities such as log seats or tables and
multiple fire rings.
To avoid spreading invasive species and disease, do not
transport fish or live bait from one body of water to another or
from one location to another. Be sure to always clean your gear
and clothing after a fishing trip so you don't spread invasive
species that might have caught a ride home.
Minimize Campfire Impacts. If you plan to cook what you
catch while on your fishing trip, you must consider the poten-
tial for resource damage. A low-impact alternative to campfire
cooking is a lightweight camp stove. Stoves are fast, eliminate
the need for firewood, and make cleanup after meals easier.
If you build a fire, keep it small. Whenever possible, use
an existing fire ring and dead and downed wood that can be
broken easily by hand. Burn all wood to ash and remove all
unburned trash and food from the fire ring. Be certain all wood
and campfire debris are cold-out. Choose not to have a fire in
areas where wood is scarce.
Respect Wildlife. Help keep wildlife wild. Be respectful of any
catch-and-release areas, and return unharmed to the water any
fish that exceed the designated limit. Use appropriate tackle;
lead sinkers, for example, are harmful to fish and other wild-
life. Nontoxic alternatives to lead sinkers, some of which have
other advantages over lead, include rock, ceramics, iron, steel,
and bismuth. These materials are becoming readily available
and should be used as an alternative whenever possible.
Observe wildlife from afar to avoid disturbing them; you
are too close if an animal alters its normal activities. Never
feed wildlife. Store food securely, and keep garbage and food
scraps away from animals so they will not acquire bad habits.


FLY-FISHING 89
.Fish Conservation and Ethics
If you plan on keeping a fish you caught, dispatch it right
away. Do not allow a caught fish to languish on a stringer
while you continue to fish. The quickest and most humane
way to dispatch a fish is with a sharp blow to the area right
behind its head.
Be Considerate of Other Visitors. Thoughtful anglers respect
other visitors and protect the quality of their experience. The
following are a few tenets of outdoor ethics.
• Travel in small groups no larger than that prescribed by the
land managers.
• Let nature’s sounds prevail. Keep the noise down and
leave radios, music players, and pets at home (fish can be
spooked by such interruptions).
• Select fishing spots and campsites away from other groups
to help preserve their solitude (and your chances of catching
fish). The ethical angler will do this even if it means walking
a bit further down the stream or lakeside.
Selective Harvest
Catch and release has a big place in the world of
fishing. Harvest does, too. Many of the waters in the
U.S. are very productive and produce a surplus of
fish each year. This is especially true in the southeast,
where there is a long growing season and plenty of
water relative to the number of anglers. Fishing is
better when anglers harvest at reasonable levels.
Catch and release is important, but selective
harvest can be a better ethic where fish are harvested
in such a way that fishing improves. For example,
ponds in the south can reach their carrying capacity
in a year. For the average fish to gain weight, another
fish has to die or be harvested. A managed pond
(without feeding) can produce up to 30 pounds of
bass and 125 pounds of bream each year.
By harvesting smaller bass, larger bass have
more food and will continue to grow. Without harvest,
the fish die before reaching their full potential.


90 FLY-FISHING
Fish Conservation and Ethics.
• Always travel quietly to avoid disturbing other visitors.
If fishing from a watercraft, take care not to disturb other
anglers’ efforts on the water.
• Make sure the colors of your clothing and gear blend with
the environment.
• Respect private property and leave gates (open or closed)
as found.
The Leave No Trace Seven Principles and the Outdoor Code might
seem unimportant until you consider the combined effects of
millions of outdoor visitors. With a 750 percent increase in the
use of designated wilderness areas over the last 30 years, leaving
no trace is everyone’s responsibility. Tailor your outdoor activities
to the environment where the outing will occur. Whether
outdoors for sport or leisure, you are nature’s guest; remember to
act accordingly while there.
Angling Regulations
With millions of anglers fishing the nation’s waterways, it is
necessary for the taking of fish to be regulated so that there
are enough to go around. State conservation departments seek
laws that will balance fish production with the harvest. Trained
conservation officers patrol the waterways to see that the laws
are followed.
Limits. Each state puts a limit on the number of game fish
of each species that may be taken by an angler at one time.
Limits vary in direct proportion to the availability of the fish.
More scarce species have a much lower limit. Muskellunge,
for instance, in many states are limited to one a day. Panfish,
which are prolific and numerous, have much higher limits or
no limits at all.


FLY-FISHING 91
.Fish Conservation and Ethics
Methods. With the change from gathering fish only
for food to the concept of fishing for sport, rules of
sportsmanship have been woven into regulations.
In most states, game fish must be taken on hook
and line and cannot be speared or netted
except with a landing net. In some areas,
trout may be taken only on artificial flies or
on barbless hooks. Where salmon and steel-
head trout migrate up streams to spawn,
only single hooks may be used on lures to
prevent unscrupulous anglers from trying
to snag fish with treble hooks. In many
areas, only one lure or bait may be used
on one line, and only one line is allowed for
each angler.
Seasons. To protect fish while spawning,
seasons are set so that game fish can lay their eggs
without interference. For species such as bass, pike,
and walleye, the seasons open after spawning ends in the
spring. For lake trout, brook trout, and other fall-spawning
species, the seasons may close in late autumn, just before
spawning starts.
Failure to know and obey the fish and game laws can lead
to an arrest and a fine. True sportsmen never consider breaking
the rules. Many states have a TIP (Turn In Poachers) hotline
telephone number that can be called to report violations. People
who break the fish and game laws are thieves, stealing from
other outdoors enthusiasts and demonstrating a disregard for
the environment.





FLY-FISHING 93
.Glossary
Glossary
anadromous. A fish that lives most of its life in saltwater but
needs to swim up freshwater rivers to spawn.
backing. The line attached to the reel before the fly line.
balance. The state in which the rod, reel, and line are correctly
matched to handle a given-weight lure or bait. Balance allows
an angler to deliver the lure or bait with accuracy within any
desired distance.
catch and release. A fishing technique in which fish are
caught and immediately released back into the water.
clicker. The mechanism on a fly reel that supplies resistance
to the turning of the spool and prevents overruns. It is called
clicker because of the clicking sound it makes when engaged.
drag. The effect created when a fly line drags a floating fly
along the surface of the water. Also, the resistance provided in
the line by the reel when a fish is taking the line.
dress. To create a fly using items such as feathers, fur, and
other materials that imitate how “real” fish food looks in nature.
dry flies. Traditional trout flies that float. They imitate adult
forms of mayflies, caddis flies, and other insects that trout and
other fish feed on.
eddy. In moving water, the edges where one line of current
meets another or where the current breaks up around a rock,
creating slack water.
edge. An area where two dissimilar elements of a
stream or lake meet, allowing fish and fish food
to gather.
ferrules. Joints where a fly-fishing rod fit together.
flies. Artificial lures with little weight designed
to be cast with fly-fishing equipment. Typically,
flies are made from feathers, fibers, and fur and bound
to the hook with thread, but many materials have been
incorporated to dress a fly.
FLY


94 FLY-FISHING
Glossary.
graphite. A strong substance with flexible fibers that are
often used to manufacture fishing rods.
guides. A series of metal loops positioned along the fly rod
to hold the line and distribute stress evenly along the rod.
leader. Transparent, tapered plastic line between the fly
line and the fly.
lie. An area where fish tend to wait for food to float by.
line hand. The hand you are not using to cast.
matching the hatch. The practice of using a fly that
mimics the size, shape, and behavior
of the prey a fish is currently feeding on.
monofilament. Synthetic, nylon, or other plastic line
used in the manufacture of leader material.
nymphs. Sinking flies that simulate the underwater, immature
stage of many aquatic insects. Aquatic insects live most of their
lives in this stage.
parachute cast. A casting technique in which the angler stops
the rod abruptly at the end of the power stroke, putting slack
loops into the line before it lands on the water.
pattern. A recognized recipe or model for a tied fly made of
synthetic and natural materials and imitating natural fish food.
popping bug. A popular fly consisting of a cork, closed-
cell foam or hair body dressed on a hook to imitate a frog,
wounded baitfish, or large insect. Anglers impart action to
create a popping noise on the water’s surface that can arouse
the curiosity of a fish and get it to strike.
reach cast or mend. A technique used to place line upstream
when an angler must cast across current.
recipe. The list of materials necessary to assemble a fly.
roll cast. A technique used to avoid heavy
brush or other obstacles behind the angler
or if there is a lot of slack line on the
water in front of the angler.
GUIDE
A
B C D
E
F
ROLL CAST


FLY-FISHING 95
.Glossary
selective harvest. When an angler harvests certain sizes of
certain species to improve the fishing in a watershed.
shooting the line. A casting technique in which extra line is
held in the line hand and is released and pulled by the cast
line to gain additional distance.
spey casting. Two-handed method of casting used with very
long rods, usually on salmon rivers. This technique is popular
in Europe and gaining popularity in the United States.
streamers. Artificial flies tied to imitate baitfish or crayfish.
strike indicator. Generally a bright piece of yarn or material
tied to the line or leader to help anglers identify when a fish has
taken the bait.
stripping guide. The first guide up from the reel of a fly rod,
usually made from abrasion-resistant material.
tailing fish. A fish that feeds in water so shallow that its fins
and tail sometimes show above the surface.
tailing loop. Term that describes what happens to the line in
a poor cast. It can be caused by a number of casting mistakes
that result in the fly hitting the rod or putting knots in the
leader. Most tailing loops are caused by overpowering the rod.
tapers. Describes the shape of fly line and leader.
Tenkara. A traditional and simple Japanese fly fishing method
that uses only a rod, line, tippet and fly.
tippet. The delicate piece of leader that
attaches the fly to the leader.
tip top. The guide at the
very tip of the rod.
weight-forward
taper. A type of fly
line that has the
most weight in the front portion of the line.
wet flies. Flies that often simulate the pre-emerging or
emerging stage of aquatic insects. Some traditional wet flies
have wings, while soft hackle wet flies usually do not.
wind knot. An undesirable overhand knot in the fly leader
caused either by a gust of wind that forces the leader to roll
over on itself or by a bad cast.
TIP TOP


96 FLY-FISHING
Fly-Fishing Resources.
Scouting Resources
Conservation Handbook; Fieldbook;
Deck of First Aid; Emergency First
Aid pocket guide; Be Prepared First
Aid Book; Freshwater Fishes pocket
guide; Scouts BSA Handbook for Boys
and Scouts BSA Handbook for Girls;
Camping, Cooking, Fish and Wildlife
Management, and Fishing merit
badge pamphlets
Books
Alley, Robert H. 40 Best Trout Flies.
Frank Amato Publications, 1997.
Best, A.K. A.K. Best’s Fly Box. Lyon’s
Press, 2006.
Chouinard, Yvon; Mathews, Craig; and
Mazzo, Mauro. Simple Fly Fishing:
Techniques for Tenkara and Rod &
Reel. Patagonia, Inc., 2014.
Genova, Phil. First Cast: Teaching Kids
to Fly-Fish. Stackpole Books, 1998.
Hughes, Dave. Essential Trout Flies,
2nd ed. Stackpole Books, 2017.
Leiser, Eric. The Complete Book of
Fly Tying, 2nd ed. Skyhorse
Publishing, 2008.
Lord, Macaulay. The L.L. Bean
Fly-Casting Handbook.
Lyons Press, 2000.
Lyle, Morgan. Simple Flies: 52 Easy-
to-Tie Patterns that Catch Fish.
Stackpole Books, 2015.
McKim, John F. Fly Tying: Adventures
in Fur, Feathers, and Fun. Mountain
Press Publishing Company, 1998.
McNally, Tom, and Tom Beecham. The
Complete Book of Fly Fishing, 2nd
ed. McGraw-Hill Professional
Publishing, 1997.
Morris, Skip. Fly Tying Made Clear
and Simple. Frank Amato
Publications, 1992.
Rosenbauer, Tom. The Orvis Fly-Fishing
Guide. revised ed. Lyons Press, 2017.
Rutter, Michael. Fly Fishing Made Easy:
A Manual for Beginners With Tips
for the Experienced. Globe Pequot
Press, 2006.
Shook, Michael D., and Mel Krieger.
The Complete Idiot’s Guide to Fly
Fishing, 2nd ed. Alpha Books, 2005.
Sousa, Robert J. Learn to Fly-Fish in
24 Hours. McGraw-Hill, 2006.
Fly-Fishing Resources
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


FLY-FISHING 97
.Fly-Fishing Resources
Sousa, Robert J. The 24 Greatest Flies
You Don’t Leave Home Without (An
Indispensable Guide). Husking Bee
Books, 2010.
Talleur, Dick. Modern Fly-Tying Materials.
Lyons Press, 1995.
Whitlock, Dave. The L.L. Bean
Fly-Fishing Handbook, 2nd ed.
Lyons Press, 2006.
Wulff, Joan. Joan Wulff’s Fly Casting
Techniques. Lyons Press, 2016.
Zacoi, Thomas Neil. Flies, Ties & Lies.
Thomas Neil Zacoi, 2003.
DVDs
LaFontaine, Gary, and Dick Sharon.
Successful Fly Fishing Strategies, 100
minutes. Miracle Productions, 2002.
Wulff, Joan. Joan Wulff’s Dynamics of
Fly Casting. From Solid Basics to
Advanced Techniques, 90 minutes.
Miracle Productions, 2001.
Young, David, and Cheryl Young.
Fly Fishing: The Lifetime Sport,
240 minutes. Honeybear Press, 2005.
Periodicals
American Fly Fishing magazine
americanflyfishing.com
Fly Fishing & Fly Tying magazine
flyfishing-and-flytying.co.uk
Fly Fisherman magazine online
flyfisherman.com


98 FLY-FISHING
Fly-Fishing Resources.
Organizations and Websites
American Fisheries Society
Telephone: 301-897-8616
fisheries.org
The American Museum of Fly Fishing
4070 Main St.
Manchester, VT 05254
Telephone: 802-362-3300
amff.org
Catskill Fly Fishing Center & Museum
1031 Old Route 17
Livingston Manor, NY 12758
Telephone: 845-439-4810
cffcm.com
Fly Fishers International
Telephone: 406-222-9369
flyfishersinternational.org
International Game Fish Association
Telephone: 954-927-2628
igfa.org
Leave No Trace Center for
Outdoor Ethics
Toll-free telephone: 800-332-4100
lnt.org
Trout Unlimited
Toll-free telephone: 800-834-2419
tu.org
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
Toll-free telephone: 800-344-9453
fws.gov
Acknowledgments
Scouting America is grateful to
fishery scientist, author, and fly fishing
enthusiast Robert J. Sousa. PhD, retired,
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. Thanks
also to Ben Jelsema (Chairman, Scouting
America Fishing Task Force), and Jeff
Wilson, Doug Precourt, Howard Kern
(Leave No Trace Master) and Mike
McConnell, retired USFWS, for their
contributions. A special thanks to
Peter Adams (Vice Chairman, Scouting
America Fishing Task Force) for this
updated version along with Doug Darr
(Alabama DNR). We thank Ted Rogowski
for his assistance and for graciously
allowing us to use photographs from
his personal collection. We are grateful
also to Joan Wulff for her help with
fly rod illustrations. We appreciate Ben
Jelsema, Virgil Pearce, Dan Roberts, Bob
Sousa and especially Pete Adams for
allowing us to use many of the photos
on these pages/ We appreciate the time,
expertise, and invaluable input given
by Howard Evans, Ph.D., Lee Mullin,
and Charles Allen of Bass Pro Shops
Outdoor World in Grapevine, Texas.
Scouting America would like to
thank the Fly Fishers International,
Bozeman, Mont.; Fly Fisherman
The Fly Fishers International,
International Game Fish
Association, and Trout Unlimited
have each signed a memorandum
of mutual support with Scouting
America that emphasizes an
ongoing relationship to promote
mutually beneficial programs such
as the Fly-Fishing merit badge.


FLY-FISHING 99
.Fly-Fishing Resources
magazine; J. Austin Forbes Ltd., East
Hartland, Ct.; the International Game
Fish Association, Fort Lauderdale, Fla.;
and the website flyshop.com for their
assistance. Portions of this merit badge
pamphlet were adapted from Fly
Fisherman magazine’s “Fly-Fishing
Tactics,” with permission.
Scouting America is grateful to
the men and women serving on the
National Merit Badge Subcommittee for
the improvements made in updating this
pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration Credits
Scott Bauer/USDA Agricultural Research
Service, Bugwood.org—page 76 (both)
Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation
Commission (artist: Diane Rome
Peebles)—page 60
International Game and Fish Association
(artist: Duane Raver)—cover (striped
bass); pages 57–59 (all illustrations)
and 61
Ben Jelsema, courtesy—pages 47 (group
demonstration) and 67
Virgil Pearce, courtesy—pages 6, 52,
and 54
Dan Roberts, courtesy—pages 16,
26 (fly box), 40 (Scout watching
demonstration), 62, 70 (all), and 72
Ted Rogowski, courtesy—page 4
Robert J. Sousa, courtesy—pages 53
and 56
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of
or are protected by Scouting America.
John R. Fulton Jr.—page 19
John McDearmon—all illustrations
on pages 13, 19 (loop-to-lop knot),
20–23 (all), 30, 31, 32, 74, and 94
Brian Payne—pages 68–69 (all) and 73
Randy Piland—page 66
Scott Stenjem—page 51


Find more merit
badge ideas in
Subscribe today at go.scoutlife.org/subscribe
Use promo code SLMBP15 to get a special
print + digital bundle offer.
Special Scout Rate!