WATER
SPORTS


WATER SPORTS
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


35963
ISBN 978-0-8395-3348-1
©2025 Scouting America/Boy Scouts of America
2025 Printing
Note to the Counselor
Counselors are responsible for following the requirements,
procedures, and techniques presented in this pamphlet and
for ensuring that each Scout earning the merit badge is able
to demonstrate knowledge and skills at a level consistent with
the requirements. In addition, it is the merit badge counselor’s
responsibility to ensure that all applicable Scouting America
safety policies, including Safe Swim Defense and all the points of
Safety Afloat, are followed during training, practice, and review.
Like many other outdoor activities, water sports have
risks. Those risks can be minimized by following the Water
Sports Safety Code and safety guidelines for boat drivers
found in this pamphlet. To ensure the safety of all involved,
the merit badge counselor must ensure:
• All participants wear a properly fitted life jacket
at all times.
• The equipment is safe, functions well, fits the
participants, and is being used properly.
• The skis and wakeboard are in good shape, free from
sharp or protruding edges.
• There is competent and responsible instruction.
• The towboat operator is efficient and careful,
driving solely for the benefit, satisfaction, and safety
of the skiers.
• The boat and skier stay away from docks and other
objects, and away from swimmers, boaters, and people
who are fishing.
• The designated observer is responsible
and conscientious.
Before setting out, the merit badge counselor should
review the Safety Afloat guidelines with the participants.
Be sure all involved are familiar with and follow these
FPO


WATER SPORTS 3
guidelines while afloat. Used together, the Water Sports Safety
Code and the Safety Afloat guidelines will help ensure the
safety and well-being of those Scouts under your supervision.
Counselors for the Water Sports merit badge must be
registered members of Scouting America, have current training
in Safe Swim Defense and Safety Afloat, and be approved
by the local council Advancement Committee. Councils with
an Aquatics Committee should utilize that committee to
coordinate with the Advancement Committee for approval of
qualified counselors.
All counselors should have formal training in the
knowledge and skills indicated by the requirements,
experience in teaching such skills to youth, and experience in
identifying and managing risks associated with the activities
involved. For the Water Sports merit badge, appropriate
credentials include current or previous certification by an
organization that meets the voluntary National On-Water
Standards for powerboating or the National Association
of State Boating Law Administrators (NASBLA) boating
education standards for powerboating. Organizations that can
provide this certification include the Boat Owners Association
of the United States (BoatU.S.), the National Safe Boating
Council, the United States Coast Guard Auxiliary, the United
States Power Squadrons, or the powerboating component
of the United States Sailing Association (U.S. Sailing). The
council Advancement Committee may approve counselors
with similar experience and training in knowledge, skill,
safety, and instruction.


Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Water-Sports or check Scoutbook
for the latest requirements.
4 WATER SPORTS


Contents
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Safety and First Aid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Water Sports Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
Basic Skills for Water Sports . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
Building Your Skills . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
Water Sports Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
WATER SPORTS 5





.Introduction
Introduction
Water sports are a fun and exhilarating way to enjoy being out-
doors while developing strength, coordination, and fitness. By
using your experience with water sports and practicing good
judgment, you will develop skills that will serve you well for a
lifetime and have extreme fun while you do.
A Brief History of Water Sports
Water sports have come a long way since 1922, when Ralph
Samuelson made the first attempts to glide across water using
wooden slats from a barrel. It was an ingenious effort, but the
slats worked poorly. Samuelson tried using snow skis next, but
the results were still disappointing. Finally he decided to create
the skis himself, shaping wooden boards and attaching them to
his feet with leather straps.
This method was much
more successful, and
interest in Samuelson’s
invention caught on
quickly. Exhibitions of
the new sport were soon
being held in both the
United States and Europe.
The first official
waterskiing
organization—
then called
the American
Water Ski
Association—was
founded in 1939.


8 WATER SPORTS
Introduction.
Wakeboarding—which has been described as snowboard-
ing on water—is a much more recent development in water
sports. The first wakeboard designs were created in 1985 by
two surfers, Jimmy Redmon of Texas and Tony Finn of
California. These wakeboarding innovators fashioned small
surfboards that could be towed behind a boat. They called this
invention a “skurfboard.”
But their designs had one drawback: Like surfboards,
skurfboards were buoyant, and many waterskiing tricks
depend on being able to make a deepwater start. Only the
strongest and most experienced skiers were able to accomplish
a deepwater start.
Herb O’Brien resolved that problem in 1990. This wake-
boarding visionary created a neutral-buoyancy board. Shortly
afterward, Jimmy Redmon added a further refinement by
designing a twin-tipped version. This twin-tipped model,
by now called a “wakeboard,” has since become the standard
for the sport.
Wakeboarding guru Jimmy Redmon founded the sport’s
first official organization, the World Wakeboard
Association, in 1989.
Modern wakeboards are designed for neutral buoyancy—they
will stay in position when held under water, making deepwater
starts easier.








WATER SPORTS 11
.Safety and First Aid
Safety and First Aid
Following the guidelines in this chapter will help you enjoy the
thrill of water sports while staying safe and accident-free.
The Scouting America Swimmer Test
The Scouting America swimmer test evaluates the skills needed
for the minimum level of swimming ability required for safe
deep-water swimming, a safety factor necessary for waterskiing
and wakeboarding.
Entry
First, the swimmer must be able to make an abrupt entry
into deep water and begin swimming without any aids.
Walking in from shallow water, easing in from the edge
or down a ladder, pushing off from the side or bottom,
or gaining forward momentum by diving do not satisfy
this requirement.
Taking the Test
Jump feetfirst into water over your head in depth. Level
off and swim 75 yards in a strong manner using one or
more of the following strokes: sidestroke, breaststroke,
trudgen, or crawl. Then swim 25 yards using an easy
resting backstroke. The 100 yards must be completed in
one swim without stops and must include at least one
sharp turn. After completing the swim, rest by floating.
This qualification test should be renewed annually.


12 WATER SPORTS
Safety and First Aid.
Distance and Stamina
After entering the water and beginning to swim, the swimmer
must demonstrate an ability to cover distance by swimming
75 yards with a strong, confident stroke. The 75 yards should
not be the outer limit of the swimmer’s ability or stamina.
Dog-paddling and strokes that are repeatedly interrupted and
restarted are not sufficient, and underwater swimming is not
acceptable. One stroke or a combination of strokes may be used
to complete the 75 yards. Any strong overarm stroke (including
the back crawl) is acceptable.
Resting
The swimmer must be able to do a restful, free-breathing back-
stroke that can be used to help avoid exhaustion while in the
water. After completing the distance requirement, the swimmer
must show, for 25 yards, that he or she can use the backstroke
for resting. The change of stroke must be accomplished in deep
water without any push-off or other assistance. Any variation
of the elementary backstroke is acceptable if it is restful. An
overarm back crawl may be acceptable if it clearly provides
an opportunity for the swimmer to rest and regain his or
her wind.
Sharp Turn
A sharp turn is included in the requirements to show the
swimmer can reverse direction in deep water without
assistance and without pushing off from the side or bottom.
Floating
The floating part of the swimmer test demonstrates the
swimmer’s ability to maintain himself or herself in the water
indefinitely, though he or she might be exhausted or otherwise
unable to swim. Treading water or swimming in place will
further tire the swimmer and is, therefore, unacceptable. The
duration of the float test is not significant, except that it must
be long enough to demonstrate that the swimmer is in fact
resting and could likely continue to do so for a prolonged
period. Survival floating, or drownproofing, may be sufficient
if it is clearly restful, but floating face-up is preferred.


WATER SPORTS 13
.Safety and First Aid
Safety Afloat
The Scouting America Safety Afloat guidelines were developed
to promote boating and boating safety and to set standards for
safe activity afloat. Be sure to keep these guidelines in mind
during all water sports activities.
1. Qualified Supervision
All water sports activities must be supervised by a mature
and conscientious adult, age 21 or older. That person must
understand and knowingly accept responsibility for the
well-being and safety of those in his or her care. Further, that
person must be experienced and qualified in the particular
watercraft skills and equipment involved in the activity and
be committed to compliance with the nine points of the
Scouting America Safety Afloat guidelines. Supervision for
towed activities must include both a skilled boat driver cur-
rently trained in Safety Afloat and a separate observer.
All supervisors must complete Scouting America Safety
Afloat and Safe Swim Defense training, and at least one must be
trained in CPR. It is strongly recommended that all units have
at least one adult or older youth member currently trained in
Scouting America Swimming and Water Rescue to assist in the
planning and conducting of all water sports activities.
2. Personal Health Review
A complete health history is required of all participants as
evidence of fitness for water sports activities. Forms for
minors must be signed by a parent or legal guardian.
Participants should be asked to relate any recent incidents
of illness or injury just prior to the activity. It is
particularly important that the supervisors know
about each participant’s medical conditions such
as diabetes, severe allergies, epilepsy, asthma,
or heart conditions so that they can take the
necessary precautions to make water sports
activities safe. In the event of any significant
health condition, the adult leader should
require that the participant be checked by
a doctor.
The complete text
of Safety Afloat
can be found
in the Scouting
America
publication Guide
to Safe Scouting,
or online at
scouting.org/
health-and-safety/
aquatics.


14 WATER SPORTS
Safety and First Aid.
3. Swimming Ability
All water-skiers and wakeboarders must have passed the
Scouting America swimmer test. Anyone not classified as a
swimmer may ride as a passenger in the boat when the opera-
tor is a skilled adult.
4. Life Jackets
Properly fitted U.S. Coast Guard–approved life jackets must be
worn by all persons engaged in boating activity. Type III life
jackets are recommended for general recreational use. All
participants in towed activity afloat (waterskiing, wakeboard-
ing, kneeboarding, tubing, etc.) must wear a life jacket marked
for waterskiing.
5. Buddy System
All participants in water sports activities must use the buddy
system. Every individual must have a buddy, and every craft
should have a buddy boat when on the water.
6. Skill Proficiency
All participants in a water sports activity must be trained and
experienced in watercraft handling skills, safety, and emergency
procedures. Anyone operating a powerboat must be able to meet
requirements for the Motorboating merit badge or equivalent.
7. Planning
Float Plan. A summary of the water sports activity should be
recorded in a float plan that documents exactly where the unit
will put in and pull out, and what course will be followed.
Review the plan beforehand with others who have made the
trip recently. Be sure to use accurate and current maps of the
waterways to be traveled, and estimate travel time generously
to allow for unexpected weather conditions and to avoid
traveling under time pressure.
Notification. Provide the float plan to parents or guardian of the
participants and to a member of the unit committee.
Appropriate authorities such as the Coast Guard, state police, or
park personnel also should be notified of the activity. Check in
with all those who should be notified when you return.
Local Rules. All water sports activities must comply with state
and local laws and regulations. Get written permission to use
or cross private property.


WATER SPORTS 15
.Safety and First Aid
Weather. Be familiar with the seasonal weather pattern for the
area. Check the weather forecast just before setting out, and
keep an alert eye on the weather. Bring all craft ashore if rough
weather appears to be developing. Wait at least 30 minutes
before resuming activities after the last incidence of thunder
or lightning.
Contingencies. When planning water sports activities, anticipate
possible emergencies and identify any other circumstances that
could force a change in plans. Be prepared with an emergency
plan before you set out.
8. Equipment
All equipment, including boats, rescue
equipment, and skis or wakeboards, must
be in good repair and must satisfy all state
and Coast Guard requirements. Carry spare
equipment and appropriate repair materials,
and be sure that rescue equipment is
available for immediate use.
9. Discipline
All participants should know, understand,
and respect the rules and procedures for
safe activity afloat. The rules should be
learned before beginning any water sport
activity and reviewed just before setting off.
Safety rules, plus common sense and good
judgment, keep the fun from being spoiled
by accidents or injury.
Rules and Regulations
Everyone involved in the activity—the boat
driver, safety observer, and water sports bud-
dies—needs to be familiar with rules for safety
on the water, including state laws and regula-
tions governing boating and water sports. Each
of the 50 states has its own rules, which can be
obtained online (with your parent’s permission),
or through a licensing center, a marine dealer,
or the appropriate government office.
Carry a Coast
Guard–approved
fire extinguisher
when required,
and know how to
use and maintain
it. See the Fire
Safety merit badge
pamphlet for
more information.


16 WATER SPORTS
Safety and First Aid.
Water Sports Safety Code
Make sure that your water sports activities stay fun by under-
standing and living up to the Water Sports Safety Code.
Always:
• Learn to water-ski or wakeboard by taking instructions
from a good instructor or a person with advanced ability
in the sport.
• Wear a life jacket when taking part in water sports.
• Look ahead and know where you are going at all times.
• Stay away from solid objects such as docks, boats,
and stumps.
• Be courteous and stay a reasonable distance from other
skiers, boats, and swimmers.
• Run parallel to shore and come in slowly when landing.
• Learn new maneuvers in a step-by-step progression.
• Have an extra person in the boat to watch the skier.
• Signal that you are all right after a fall by clasping your
hands over your head or waving to notify the driver
and observer.
• Hold up a ski while waiting in the water in a well-traveled
boating area.
• Check your equipment for dangerous, sharp, or protruding
objects (including wing nuts, loose runners, and slivers).
• Always use a stern platform or ladder when climbing into
the boat.
A life jacket is as much a part of your equipment as the
boat and the skis or board. Always make sure your life
jacket is in good condition. Before entering the water,
adjust your life jacket correctly for safety, comfort, and
freedom of movement.


WATER SPORTS 17
.Safety and First Aid
But:
• Never ski or wakeboard in shallow water or in an area where
you do not know the depth. Minimum safe depth is 5 feet or
your height, whichever is greater.
• Never put any part of your body through the towrope handle
or wrap the rope around any part of your body.
• Never yell “Hit it!” until the rope is tight and your board
or skis are in proper starting position.
• Never water-ski or wakeboard to the point of exhaustion.
• Never water-ski or wakeboard at night.
• Never water-ski or wakeboard directly ahead of another boat.
• Never water-ski double with different lengths of rope.
• Never attempt fast landing directly toward the shore.
• Never jump from the boat while it is moving.
• Never climb into the boat or approach the stern of the boat
while the motor is running.
Be particularly wary of shallow water. The water may look
deep enough, but if your skis or board hit bottom, your feet
will stop suddenly and the rest of you will continue forward
at high speed. These severe forward falls can cause injuries
ranging from painful sand burns to seriously broken bones.
Before taking
part in any water
sports, be sure
that both you
and the boat
driver have
become familiar
with the water
where you
plan to ski
or wakeboard.
Prevention goes hand in hand with mitigation, which
means “to lessen in force or intensity” and “to make
less severe.” By taking precautions to manage risk
and the possibility of injury, you can be prepared to
anticipate, help prevent, mitigate, and respond to just
about any incident that might happen while waterskiing
or wakeboarding.


18 WATER SPORTS
Safety and First Aid.
Skier Signals
Every ski boat should include a designated observer who
communicates the skier’s signals to the boat driver.
Skier in the Water. This signal makes the skier more visible
to nearby boats while waiting to be picked up.
Skier Safe. Skiers use this signal after a fall to indicate to
the boat that they are all right. If the skier does not make
this signal after a fall, the boat driver and the observer can
assume that emergency or rescue procedures are necessary.
Other Signals. At the start of a ride, instructions to the boat
can be given verbally. With the skier in starting position, the
observer tells the driver to idle the boat forward slowly. When
the line becomes taut and the skier is moving slowly forward
in a takeoff position, the skier lets the boat driver know to
accelerate by yelling “Hit it!” The driver then steadily increases
the boat speed until the skier is up.
The use of standard waterskiing signals has made a
great contribution to the safety of water sports. These
signals, originally developed by the American Water Ski
Association, have been written into law in many states.
For the “skier in the water” signal,
hold one ski upright above your head.
To make the “skier safe” signal, clasp
your hands high over your head so
that the observer can see you.


WATER SPORTS 19
.Safety and First Aid
The driver may use this signal to alert
the skier that the boat is about to turn.
If the skier wants the driver to turn, the
skier uses the same signal followed by
pointing in the direction he or she
wants the driver to go.
Once a skier is underway, the noise from the boat makes hearing instructions difficult.
The skier must learn to give directions by using the hand signals shown here.
FASTER
TURN RIGHT TURN LEFT
CUT MOTOR OR STOP
SLOWER BACK TO DOCK


20 WATER SPORTS
Safety and First Aid.
The Observer
The observer must communicate the skier’s signals to the boat
driver quickly and accurately. To do this, the observer must
watch the skier closely, tell the boat driver if the skier falls, and
keep the driver alert to other boat traffic and potential hazards.
The observer and skier should review signals before the
skier enters the water. Although signals are fairly standard, they
vary slightly in some regions. For example, some people indi-
cate turns by using the straight and bent-arm signals used in
bicycling. Agree on signals for skier in water, OK, stop, faster,
slower, right turn, left turn, cut motor, and back to dock, and
make sure the skier knows to quickly use the skier safe signal
after a fall.
The observer also is in charge of the towrope. The observer
coils the rope into the boat when the skier is ready to board the
boat and plays it out when necessary for deepwater starts. The
observer should be ready and able to enter the water quickly to
aid the skier when needed.
The observer serves as the eyes and the ears for the driver and skier. Note that “skier”
refers to both water-skiers and wakeboarders.
A designated observer must always be on the boat. However, the number
of additional passengers should be kept to a minimum because they can
be distracting to the driver. The extra weight can also lessen the boat’s
power and affect the skier’s ride.


WATER SPORTS 21
.Safety and First Aid
Safe Boat Operation
Driving a ski boat is fun, but it also demands a lot of
responsibility. In water sports, the boat driver must
remember that the safety of the water-skier or wakeboarder
is always the top priority.
Boat Driver’s Safety Guidelines
Here are some guidelines to help drivers maintain a safe and
enjoyable outing.
Always:
• Have an observer onboard to watch the water-skier while
you watch forward.
• Return quickly to protect a fallen skier, who is helpless in
the water against oncoming boat traffic. The skier is your
primary responsibility.
• Drive according to the skier’s ability, and avoid sharp turns.
• Put the motor in neutral when passing a fallen skier.
• Turn off the motor when picking up a skier.
• Use common sense and courtesy when driving for a skier.
• Take a skier into the boat using a ladder or lower rear deck,
helping the skier to avoid any contact with the motor
or rudder.
But:
• Never ride the gunwale or the back of the seat while driving
for skiing, and do not allow passengers to ride this way.
• Never increase speed when bringing in a skier.
• Never tow skiers in congested areas, particularly
swimming areas.
The Basics of Safe Boat Driving
• Keep the boat speed even.
• Take off smoothly.
• Steer a straight course.
• Round curves to make the skiing easier.


22 WATER SPORTS
Safety and First Aid.
A driver should never start the boat’s motor when anyone is in
the water near the boat’s stern. The motor’s propellers can cut
a person even when in neutral or at idling speeds.
In addition to providing a safe ride, the boat driver should
also try to find the best possible water conditions. When work-
ing with beginners, knowing how to find and maintain good
water conditions can be critical to the success of your skiers
and wakeboarders.
Finding the Best Water Conditions
Smooth water is usually found relatively close to shore. Rough
water caused by wind can be avoided by seeking the shore
protected from wind. To find that shore, you can drive into
the wind until you reach it. Remember to stay a safe distance
from the shoreline and to pull skiers only in water of sufficient
depth. Also be courteous to anglers and campers, and stay well
clear of swimming areas, docks, and other boaters. In most
states, you are required to stay 150 feet away from shore,
docks, other boats, and all objects or people in the water
unless moving at a wakeless speed. The distance of 150 feet
is equal to the length of two standard ski ropes.
Inexperienced boat operators often find themselves pulling
their skiers through their own boat wakes. Unnecessary boat
wakes can be minimized by noticing where your wakes, and those
of other boaters, are going. When you follow a path relatively
close to shore, one wake travels out toward the middle of the lake
while the other wake travels toward the shoreline to die out.
When you are ready to make a turn, you can avoid excess wakes
by reversing course and retracing the path you just followed. By
making a steady turn in a “dog bone” pattern, the wake
on the inside of the turn cancels itself out.
Retracing your path keeps you and your
skier out of your own boat wakes.
Be aware that on some crowded
lakes, the path you follow may be regu-
lated. You may be required to drive one
direction, in an oval or circular pattern,
around the lake. In this situation, on a round
Using a “dog bone” turn when reversing
direction helps reduce the effect of the
boat wake on the skier.
For more information on safely operating a ski boat,
see the Motorboating merit badge pamphlet.


WATER SPORTS 23
.Safety and First Aid
lake, wakes will be nearly impossible to avoid. Long, narrow
lakes usually afford the best conditions for skiing and wake-
boarding, even when somewhat crowded.
If your skier has fallen and given you the “skier OK” sig-
nal, you can minimize wakes by slowing to a wakeless speed
before turning. When you make a fast, wide turn back to your
skier, you send a large wake off into the lake, and you’ll likely
drag your skier over it before long.
Pulling Up a Skier
While taking slack out of the line, make certain that the
steering and the boat are aligned with the towrope so that
the skier or boarder is pulled up in a straight path. When
a skier or boarder requests to be pulled up, the boat driver
should respond only when there is clear water ahead for a
considerable distance.
Take a close look at the starting position of the skier or
boarder before hitting the throttle. (See the sections on proper
starting positions later in this pamphlet.) If the skier shouts “Hit
it!” but the rope is not tight or the skier has his or her arms
pulled in, straightened legs, or the skis or wakeboard in bad
position, stop to do some basic coaching. Coach beginners to
start with knees bent to the chest and arms out straight and
around the outside of the knees. Often the skis or wakeboard
will move into the correct starting position once the skier or
boarder bends his or her knees fully. Remind the participant to
stand up slowly and smoothly as the boat pulls him or her up.
A slow start gives the skier or boarder time to react and
adjust to the movement of the water. Keep the boat speed slow
until the skier or boarder starts to look stable and comfortable.
Then ease the throttle forward to gradually reach a better speed
for steering and controlling the skis or wakeboard.
Troubleshooting Falls
If the skier or boarder falls forward when trying to get up, he or
she might have started with the knees not sufficiently bent or
tried to stand up too quickly, sinking the tips of the skis or the
leading edge of the wakeboard. Coach the beginner to start in the
correct position and stand up more slowly. Standing up late is
not a problem; standing up before there is enough speed for the
water to support a skier’s or boarder’s weight will result in a fall.


24 WATER SPORTS
Safety and First Aid.
If the skier or boarder falls backward when trying to get
up, he or she might have pulled in on the rope. For some begin-
ners, pulling in with the arms is an almost uncontrollable
reflex. Pulling in on the rope causes the tow line to go slack
and the skis or wakeboard to slide out from under the skier or
boarder. Coach the beginner to keep arms out straight and
stand up slowly and smoothly, about two-thirds of the way,
keeping the knees bent and flexible once up.
To help a beginner learn to not pull in on the rope, pull
him or her up as slowly as possible and maintain a very slow
speed. Once the skier or boarder is up, slowly increase the
speed as the beginner shows more stability.
When the skier or boarder has managed to get up several
times and clearly has the feel of the process, you can begin to
make faster starts.
The exception to the rule of starting slowly is when the skier or boarder is
large or heavy, and the skis or wakeboard are not large enough to match
his or her weight. In this case, a hard pull might be the only path to suc-
cess. If the boat lacks power, you might need to drop off passengers and
carry only the observer.
Crossing the Wake
When beginners are ready to try crossing wakes, adjust the boat
speed accordingly. At slow speeds, the boat wakes will be larger
and more challenging. As boat speed increases, wakes will
begin to shrink and be easier to cross.
Although wakes get smaller as boat speed increases, always wait before
speeding up until the skier or boarder is comfortable with increasing the
speed. Never pull skiers or boarders faster than their comfort level (or
good judgment) allows.
Making a gradual turn toward the wake also will reduce
wake size. The wake on the inside of a turn will be smaller and
smoother. Beginners might benefit by making their first attempt
at wake crossings on an inside wake during a slow turn.
Experienced skiers and wakeboarders will appreciate
drivers who can hold a steady speed and follow a straight path.
Even a slow, gradual turn by the boat or minor variations in
speed can be serious distractions.


WATER SPORTS 25
.Safety and First Aid
Picking Up a Downed Skier
When the skier falls, it is important that the
driver knows quickly whether the skier is all
right. The observer is responsible for keeping the
driver informed.
If the skier fails to wave or give the clasped
hands overhead signal, the observer must let the
driver know right away. The driver must then return
to the downed skier as quickly as safety permits to give
any help needed.
If a skier indicates he or she is all right, the driver
should idle back to the skier, allowing time for the skier to put
his or her skis back on. The approach should be made with the
driver’s side of the boat closest to the skier, so that the driver
has the best possible view. When maneuvering a boat near
someone in the water, be aware that unlike automobiles, boats
steer from the back. The back end of the boat goes directly
where the drive (or rudder) is pointed. Never aim the back of
the boat at your skier while in gear and under power.
As the boat approaches the skier, the observer asks if the
skier wants to go again. If the answer is no, the driver kills the
engine and coasts abreast of the person, staying far enough away
that the boat does not glide or blow into the person. If boarding is
from the stern, caution the skier to avoid sharp edges on any
exposed drive mechanism. Turning an outdrive away from the
boarding ladder might help. If the skier wants to continue the
run, the driver pulls abreast of the skier at a safe distance of 10 to
Approaching a downed skier
Skier Down Flags
Some states require the towboat to display a
12-by-12-inch orange flag whenever a skier or
wakeboarder falls, or is down in the water, to
alert other boats to be aware that someone is in
the water. Because regulations differ from state
to state, each leader supervising a towing
activity must check and comply with local
requirements. The website of the National
Association of State Boating Law
Administrators, nasbla.org, contains links to the
appropriate regulatory agency in each state.


26 WATER SPORTS
Safety and First Aid.
AT SKIING SPEED, WAKE IS CREATED.
CUT THROTTLE, TURN WHEEL. WAKE BECOMES
A WAVE.
WAVE REACHES STERN AND PUSHES THE
BOAT AROUND.
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) is the important first response in
the event of a cardiac emergency. Such emergencies can result from
strenuous activity or drowning accidents where submersion has caused
respiratory and cardiac arrest. Persons trained in CPR should be included
in every water sports outing. The Scouts BSA handbook and the First Aid
merit badge pamphlet explain these skills and when they should be used.
12 feet. Then the driver turns sharply at idle speed to the side the
skier is on, putting the motor in neutral when passing the skier. If
the driver wants to pull the skier in the direction the boat was
going when the skier fell, the driver comes around in a half circle.
In many cases, an experienced driver will pick up a skier by
turning sharply to the side the skier is on (once safely abreast of
and past the skier) and then turning sharply in the opposite direc-
tion so that the boat is nearly on the same course as when it came
up on the skier. This S-course causes the stern of the boat to
swing in a broad arc, bringing the trailing line close to the skier.
On small or congested lakes, a driver can reduce the boat
turning area when retrieving a fallen skier by cutting the
throttle and turning the wheel just as the following wake hits
the stern. This stern wave pushes the boat around in a tight,
space-saving turn.
First Aid
Following the nine points of Safety Afloat will help prevent
many incidents in your water sports activities, but some minor
injuries could still occur. Take appropriate precautions and
become familiar with the steps to follow if health concerns arise
while you are out on the water.
Turning on the stern wave
S-course


WATER SPORTS 27
.Safety and First Aid
Hyperventilation is the result of overbreathing—either deliberately or
because of panic. The likely result is dizziness and fainting. Such a condi-
tion is unlikely in water sports if the participants are properly prepared for
each new skill level. If a skier shows signs of panic at any time, calmly
bring that person back into the boat or onto shore. Before resuming any
activity, determine and resolve the cause of the panic.
Cold-Water–Related Illnesses
There are two primary dangers from falling or jumping into
cold water. As quickly as the first minute, a person can experi-
ence cold-water shock. This can happen in water as warm as 69
to 77 degrees Fahrenheit. The second danger is hypothermia, a
gradual lowering of the body’s core temperature over minutes
to hours in water colder than 80 degrees. Wearing a properly
fitted wetsuit or dry suit can reduce, but not eliminate, the risk
of these hazards.
Cold-water shock occurs when a person falls or jumps into
very cold water, especially less than 60 degrees. The effects of
cold-water shock can lead to death in just a few minutes. The
colder the water, the more severe and the more rapid the effects
will be. The body’s response to cold water will be completely
out of the victim’s control.
The first response will be the reflex to take a deep, gasping
breath. Wearing a life jacket could save the victim’s life by
keeping the head above water when he or she instinctively tries
to inhale. Next, the victim will start taking many quick, short
breaths as if panting for air. This can make the victim light-
headed and dizzy, unable to hold his or her breath. The victim
likely will lose any sense of up and down.
During this time, the victim should concentrate on controlling
breathing and avoiding panic. The victim’s heart rate and blood
pressure will rise quickly. If the blood gets cold enough, the heart
could stop. All of these effects can occur in about 60 seconds.
The only treatment for cold-water shock is to get the victim
out of the water as soon as possible. He or she will likely need to
be treated for hypothermia. Take care when engaging in activities
in cold waters. The best prevention for cold-water shock and
related injuries is to plan appropriately for the weather and water
temperature. Stay out of the water if the risks seem significant.
Keep a blanket, towels, and warm, dry clothing in the boat
when possible.
As wakeboarders
or water-skiers
enter the water,
it is essential to
watch for
symptoms of cold-
water shock and
respond immedi-
ately by removing
the victim from the
water if these
symptoms occur.


28 WATER SPORTS
Safety and First Aid.
For all activity afloat on cold water or in cold weather, appropriate cloth-
ing should be worn for warmth, with the life jacket worn at all times. A
dry change of clothes should be available in case of a spill. Activity afloat
should include procedures and equipment for warming anyone showing
symptoms of chill.
If alone in cold water and more than a short distance from safety, you
can reduce heat loss by avoiding movement, using clothing and the life
jacket for insulation, keeping your head above water, and maintaining a
tuck position. This is called the heat escape lessening posture (HELP).
During cold-water immersion, it is important to concentrate on self-
rescue initially. If that isn’t possible, minimize your exposure to the water
by using the HELP position and waiting for help.
Hypothermia occurs when the body’s core temperature falls
below the normal range. Exposure to cold, or even cool, water
can lower your core temperature dangerously, especially when
combined with wind, exhaustion, or hunger. Early signals of
heat loss include shivering and bluish lips. Further cooling may
result in loss of muscle strength and coordination, and may
upset the ability to think clearly or do simple tasks. In severe
stages, shivering will stop and unconsciousness will follow.
At this stage, death is possible unless treatment is received.
Treatment for hypothermia involves carefully removing the
person from the water, removing wet clothing, and drying off.
Warm the person by wrapping him or her in blankets and
changing into dry clothing. Pay special attention to covering the
head, as most heat loss occurs from the head. Warm the per-
son’s trunk first, not the hands and feet. Warming arms and
legs first can cause shock. If using hot-water bottles or chemical
hot packs, wrap them in cloth; don’t apply them directly to the
skin. Place the heating sources on the chest, neck, and groin.
Avoid rough handling or jerking of the person, especially if
he or she is lethargic or unconscious. This may cause the heart
to develop life-threatening irregular rhythms. If the person is
conscious, give him or her a warm drink to sip. Avoid caffeine
and alcohol. Once the body temperature begins to rise, keep the
person dry and wrapped in a warm blanket. Cover the person’s
head and neck as well. Avoid rapid rewarming as it, too, can
induce fatal heart rhythms.


WATER SPORTS 29
.Safety and First Aid
Heat-Related Illnesses
The human body is 70 percent water, which is essential to
maintain our body temperature. Vital organs like the brain and
the kidneys will not function well without enough water. We
lose water mostly through breathing, sweating, digestion, and
urination. When we lose more water than we take in, we
become dehydrated. Signals of mild dehydration include fatigue,
increased thirst, dry lips, and dark yellow urine. Signals of
moderate to severe dehydration include severe thirst, dry mouth
with little saliva, dry skin, weakness, dizziness, confusion,
nausea, fainting, muscle cramps, loss of appetite, decreased
sweating (even with exertion), decreased urine production,
and less frequent and dark brown urine.
To treat mild dehydration, drink plenty of water to replace
fluids and minerals. Drink one to two quarts (or liters) of liquids
over two to four hours. See a physician for moderate or severe
dehydration. Severe dehydration requires emergency care; the
victim will need intravenous fluids. Rest for 24 hours and con-
tinue drinking fluids. Avoid tiring physical activity. Although
most people begin to feel better within a few hours, it takes about
36 hours to completely restore the fluids lost in dehydration.
Avoid dehydration by drinking plenty of fluids and
eating enough throughout the day to keep your body well-
balanced. If you become weary or develop a headache or
body aches, or if you become confused, rest in the shade
and sip water until the symptoms subside.
Heat exhaustion can be brought on by a combination of
dehydration and a warm environment. Heat exhaustion is not
uncommon during outdoor activities conducted in hot weather,
especially if participants are not fully acclimated to the condi-
tions. Signals of heat exhaustion include severe lack of energy,
general weakness, headache, nausea, faintness, and sweating;
cool, pale, moist skin; and a rapid pulse.
Get the person in the shade (or an air-conditioned vehicle or
building). Encourage him or her to drink fluids, such as cool
water or a sports drink. Apply cool, wet towels or cloths to the
skin, wet the person’s clothing with cool water, and fan the
person to help the cooling process. Raising the legs might help
prevent a feeling of faintness when the person stands. Usually
after two or three hours of rest and fluids, the victim will feel
better but should rest for the remainder of the day and be extra
careful about staying hydrated.
The importance
of drinking plenty
of fluids cannot be
overemphasized.
Do not wait until
you feel thirsty—
thirst is an
indication you are
already becoming
dehydrated.


30 WATER SPORTS
Safety and First Aid.
Because heat index values are calculated for shady
conditions with a light wind, exposure to direct sun-
light can increase heat index values by as much as
15 degrees. Strong winds, especially with very hot,
dry air, can also be extremely hazardous.
Heatstroke—much more serious than heat exhaustion—can
lead to death if not treated immediately. Left untreated, heat
exhaustion can develop into heatstroke. In heatstroke, the
body’s cooling system begins to fail and the person’s core tem-
perature rises to life-threatening levels (above 105 degrees).
Heatstroke develops from dehydration and overexertion in hot
weather, especially in high humidity. Signals of exercise-related
heatstroke can include any signals of heat exhaustion as well as
hot, sweaty, red skin; confusion or disorientation; a rapid pulse;
shallow breathing; vomiting; and seizures.
Heatstroke is an
extreme stage of
heat exhaustion,
caused by
overheating,
dehydration,
overexercising,
or a combination
of any of these.
First Aid for Shock
1. Eliminate the cause of shock by restoring breathing and heartbeat,
controlling bleeding, relieving severe pain, and treating wounds.
2. Make sure the airway stays open for breathing.
3. Have the injured person lie down. Raise the feet 10 to 12 inches to
move blood from the legs to the vital organs.
4. Keep the person warm by placing plenty of blankets under and over him
or her.
5. Call or send someone for emergency medical care.


WATER SPORTS 31
.Safety and First Aid
A body temperature of 105 degrees or greater is a life-threatening medical
condition and requires immediate medical treatment by health-care profes-
sionals. Heatstroke is a life-threatening condition; call for medical assistance
immediately. While waiting for medical personnel to arrive, work to lower
the victim’s temperature. Move the person to an air-conditioned or shady
area. Loosen tight clothing and further cool the victim by fanning and apply-
ing wet towels. If possible, immerse or spray the person with cold water. If
you have ice packs, wrap them in a thin barrier (such as a thin towel) and
place them under the armpits and against the neck and groin. If the person
is able to drink, give small amounts of cool water.
Sunburn is a familiar condition commonly
associated with water activities. Remember that
sunlight reflected from the water surface can
be as damaging as direct exposure. Cover up
and use a waterproof sunscreen with a sun
protection factor (SPF) of at least 15. Apply
every two hours, and limit your exposure time.
If your skin begins to redden, or if you feel
discomfort, get out of the sun or cover the area
with clothing that will block the sun’s rays.
Head, Neck, and Spinal Injuries
Head, neck, and spinal injuries can occur in
both waterskiing and wakeboarding. In both
activities, the most common head injuries are
minor cuts that usually result from contact
with a ski, wakeboard, or tow handle during
a fall. Mild concussions can occur as a result
of hard falls, but they are more common in
wakeboarding than in waterskiing.
The best way to prevent injuries in water sports is to learn new skills and
maneuvers progressively (step by step) at the lowest boat speed that can
be used for the skill. Always learn from a qualified coach and experienced
boat driver. In wakeboarding, concentrate on keeping your weight back,
away from your direction of travel. This can usually be accomplished by
leaning away from the boat, which helps you avoid catching the leading
edge of the board and falling face-first.
You can get a sunburn even on cloudy
days. The best prevention for sunburn is
to apply sunscreen with an SPF of at
least 15, and reapply as needed.


32 WATER SPORTS
Safety and First Aid.
The backbone (spinal column) is made up of small bones
called vertebrae that surround and protect the spinal cord. If a
vertebra is broken or dislocated, the spinal cord may be injured.
Fractures of the head, neck, and back are extremely dangerous,
because movement might further damage the spinal cord and
cause permanent paralysis or even death.
Whenever someone has fallen, been involved in an acci-
dent, or suffered a blow to the head, assume there is an injury
to the head, neck, or spine. Such injuries are often not easy to
detect. The victim may or may not be suffering from pain,
paralysis, cuts and bruises, or swelling. He or she might have
tingling or weakness in the fingers or toes. The injured area
might be deformed or abnormally shaped, or there might be no
symptoms at all. Someone with a head injury might be disori-
ented, irritable, confused, or combative—symptoms that can be
present right away or might develop over time. Always proceed
with great caution when you are aiding a person whom you
suspect has head, neck, or back injuries.
When you suspect an injury to the head, neck, or spine,
follow these steps.
Step 1—Stabilize the head and neck of the victim until it can
be determined whether the spinal column has been injured. A
first-aider or a bystander can hold the victim’s head and neck
steady. If the person is wearing a helmet, do not remove it
unless it is necessary to access the person’s airway.
Step 2—Provide urgent treatment if necessary.
Step 3—Do not move the person or let him or her move unless
threatened by immediate danger such as fire, potential avalanche,
or highway traffic.
Step 4—if the victim is having trouble breathing, gently adjust
the position of the head and neck just enough to maintain an
open airway. Do not put a pillow under the head.
Step 5—Treat for shock, but do not unnecessarily change the
victim’s position.
Whenever you suspect head, neck, or back injuries and the
victim must be moved (to open the airway, for example, or to
get the victim out of the path of danger), ask other Scouts or
bystanders to help so that the victim’s body can be turned or
lifted all at once without causing any twists or turns.


WATER SPORTS 33
.Safety and First Aid
Concussion
A concussion is a traumatic brain injury, usually caused by
a blow to the head, that alters the way the brain functions.
Proper healing requires lots of rest and time, but most people
who experience concussion recover fully.
The symptoms of concussion are usually temporary but
can include headache and problems with concentration, mem-
ory, judgment, and coordination. Other symptoms of the injury
include amnesia about the event, dizziness, ringing in the ears,
nausea, slurred speech, and fatigue. Some symptoms of concus-
sion might be immediate or might not be noticed until hours or
days after injury, including
• Problems with concentration and memory
• Irritability and other personality changes
• Sensitivity to light and noise
• Sleep disturbances
• Unusual senses of taste and smell
If you have any symptoms of concussion, do not continue wakeboarding,
waterskiing, or any other physical activity. Research has shown that a second
concussion on the same day, even if mild, can cause serious and possibly
permanent damage.
Anyone who has experienced a head injury and has any
symptoms mentioned above could benefit from seeing a doctor.
Seek immediate emergency care for anyone who shows such
symptoms as
• Repeated vomiting
• Loss of consciousness lasting longer than 30 seconds
• A headache that gets worse over time
• Changes in behavior, such as irritability
• Changes in physical coordination, such as stumbling
or clumsiness
• Confusion or disorientation, such as difficulty recognizing
people or places
• Slurred speech or other changes in speech


34 WATER SPORTS
Safety and First Aid.
Sprains and Strains
A sprain usually indicates that a ligament was overstretched
or possibly torn, such as when the joint is put in an unnatural
position and force is suddenly applied to the joint. For water-
skiers, sprains are more likely to affect the ankle, knee, and hip
joints. Wakeboarders might be more likely to experience sprains
of the neck, arm, and shoulder joints.
A strain can happen when muscles are made to work extra
hard or are overused. Muscles and tendons used strenuously or
repeatedly in waterskiing or wakeboarding can become strained.
Sprains and strains have three common symptoms: pain,
swelling, and spasms. The pain from a joint sprain is immedi-
ate. Muscle strains might not be painful until the day after
using a muscle over and over again. The muscle/tendon or liga-
ment will then begin to swell. Once pain and swelling occur,
the muscles surrounding the injured area often will begin to
contract and tighten (spasm).
The treatment of sprains and strains involves rest, immobi-
lization, cold therapy, and elevation, or RICE therapy.
R = Rest. Avoid any movements or activities that cause pain.
I = Immobilize. Stabilize the injured area in the position that
it was found or that is most comfortable. If the person must be
moved, a splint and/or sling might be needed.
C = Cold. Use a cold pack or crushed ice wrapped in a thin
towel to reduce pain and swelling. Apply to the injured area for
no more than 20 minutes to avoid ice burn or frostbite. Remove
the pack for 40 to 60 minutes before repeating.
E = Elevate. If possible, hold the injured area above the level of
the heart to reduce swelling.
Marine Stings and Scrapes
Wakeboarding or waterskiing in the ocean can be exhilarating
but may expose you to unique hazards such as jellyfish, sea
anemone larvae, or other underwater hazards like coral. Most
marine stings and scrapes can be treated with common first-aid
techniques. Clean the wound with fresh water, apply an anti-
septic and, if there is no risk of allergy, an antibiotic, and
cover with a clean bandage. If the victim experiences severe
bleeding or any of the following symptoms, seek emergency
medical treatment.


WATER SPORTS 35
.Safety and First Aid
• Difficulty breathing
• Unconsciousness
• Chest pain
• Swelling around the sting site
• Vomiting
• Spasms
• Shock
Other Minor Injuries
Most bruises—also called contu-
sions—are not serious and are easy
to recognize and treat. The black-
and-blue discoloration is caused by
blood leaking into damaged skin tis-
sue, usually caused by a blow from
a blunt object.
Covering the site of the bruise
with a cold compress or towel
for 30 minutes will help reduce
discoloration, pain, and swelling.
The flow of blood to the damaged
tissues can also be slowed by rest-
ing the injured area. Bruises to the
head or abdomen coupled with
sharp or persistent pain, or those
that include possible bone injury,
should be seen by a medical professional.
Lacerations, incisions, and abrasions—
commonly called cuts and scrapes—may result
from falls during water sports, or more likely
when climbing in and out of the boat or loading
gear on a rough dock. As in other situations, the
wound should be cleaned, disinfected, and cov-
ered. The boat first-aid kit should provide sup-
plies for minor wound treatment. For severe
bleeding injuries, control bleeding with direct
pressure or at pressure points until emergency
medical help is available.
A blister is a small pocket of fluid that
forms when the skin is irritated. In water sports,
blisters are most likely to occur on the hands
Treating a Jellyfish Sting
The sting of a jellyfish can be painful,
but immediate action can help lessen
the symptoms. Follow these guidelines
when someone has been stung.
• Do not rub the tentacles with your
hands, a towel, sand, or clothing.
• Pour very warm water (not hot enough
to burn the victim!) or salt water on the
area to help remove the stinging part of
the tentacle. Wearing a protective glove
or using a towel to cover your hand, pick
off the tentacles, being careful not to rub
or press them into the skin.
• Apply an ice pack to
the area to help
relieve the pain.
• Clean any open
sores, apply an anti-
septic, and cover with
a light bandage.
Clean and cover minor scrapes.


36 WATER SPORTS
Safety and First Aid.
from the towrope handle, and on the feet and ankles where the
ski bindings rub. Tenderness or sensitive areas called hot spots
may indicate the start of a blister. Be attentive for these and try
adjusting your grip on the handle, or loosening or repositioning
your bindings to avoid the sensitive areas.
If these efforts don’t help, be smart: Listen to your body and
quit for the day. If you have no choice but to continue the activity,
it might help to protect the area with gloves, socks, or booties.
Moleskin generally is not effective in wet conditions.
Common Hazards in Water Sports
Safe participation in wakeboarding and waterskiing includes being
aware of potential weather and water-related hazards. Always be
prepared for unexpected weather and water conditions.
Storms and Lightning
Depending on the area and the time of year, storms can be pre-
dicted with some accuracy. However, storms can develop at any
time and with a speed that surprises even the National Weather
Service. Once you notice an approaching storm, get off the
water as quickly as possible. If caught in a storm, travel as
quickly as possible to shore.
If you see lightning or hear thunder, keep a low profile in
the boat until you reach shore. During a thunderstorm, no place
in the outdoors is safe from lightning. The vast majority of
lightning injuries and deaths on boats occur on small boats
such as canoes, kayaks, or motorboats with no cabin.
If possible, get off and stay off the water before the storm
arrives. If caught in a sudden storm, stay away from open or
exposed shorelines. On shore, the safest place is a building
wired to proper electrical code. If no building is available, any
fully enclosed, metal-topped vehicle such as a hard-topped car,
minivan, bus, or truck can provide shelter.
If a blister
develops, try
to keep from
breaking it open.
Treat a broken
blister as you
would a minor
cut or abrasion.
Diabetics who
develop blisters
should seek
medical attention.


WATER SPORTS 37
.Safety and First Aid
In the outdoors, stay away from high ground and
tall geographical features such as trees. Remove your
life jacket, place it on the ground, and kneel on it.
Stay away from metal fences, telephone and power
lines, and towers. Stay away from isolated or tall
trees; seek large groups of trees about the same
height. Seek dry ditches, trenches, or the low ground.
Stay out of caves.
Do not huddle as a group. Spread out so you
are at least 20 feet—or even 100 feet—from the next
closest person. As a last resort when there is no safe shelter and
you are caught out in the open, you might be able to reduce the
risk of being struck by lightning by assuming a low, crouching
position with feet together, a bent-over position, kneeling or sit-
ting cross-legged, or sitting with your arms around your legs.
Put your hands over your ears to help minimize acoustic shock
from thunder. These positions will help reduce the chances of
being injured by lightning, but they are no substitute for getting
to safer terrain or a structure if it is immediately available.
Wind and Waves
Wind and the waves it creates have the potential to give you
a thrilling ride or to swamp your boat. Knowing about wind
and waves and their hazards is important for your safety and
can also improve your chances of finding the best water
conditions available.
Wind is created when air moves from a high-pressure area
to a low-pressure area. Usually absent in the early morning,
wind increases as the rising sun heats the ground and air
throughout the late morning and early afternoon. Winds often
reach maximum strength by midafternoon. By sundown, they
usually subside to an occasional breeze.
Waves result when wind collides with the water. A keen
eye will see the ripple effect on the water surface as a gentle
wind moves across it. As the wind increases, so will the size of
the waves until they become frothy whitecaps. Waves can
become so big that they create a hazard, particularly on large
lakes or the ocean, where the wind can interact with the water
over long distances. On lakes, calmer water can often be found
by traveling toward the upwind shoreline, especially if that
shore is protected from the wind by trees, hills, or cliffs. Always
anticipate wind as part of any boating activity.
All float plans
should include a
contingency plan
for thunderstorms.





.Water Sports Equipment
Water Sports Equipment
Water sports do not require a lot of equipment, but each item is
essential. At the top of the list, of course, is a life jacket. After
that, you will need a motorboat, a towrope, and water skis or
a wakeboard.
Life Jackets
A properly fitted life jacket should be worn during any activity
on open water, including waterskiing and wakeboarding. Before
you even fit a ski, first learn about the five types of U.S. Coast
Guard–approved life jackets and how to use them properly.
In general, Type III life jackets are worn for waterskiing
and wakeboarding.
Type I: Offshore Life Jacket. Designed to turn most unconscious
victims face-up in rough, open water. Type I life jackets have a
lot of flotation in the chest, shoulders, and upper back areas.
They are not designed for recreational boating but for passengers
on cruising vessels, such as ferries on large bodies of water.
Type II: Near-Shore Buoyant Vest. Designed to turn an uncon-
scious victim face-up in calmer, inland waters. Type II life jack-
ets are shaped like a horse collar and are not as bulky as Type I
life jackets. They come in four sizes ranging from infant to
adult and are generally inexpensive. Most of the flotation is
placed in the front and around the neck, making them uncom-
fortable for water sports but useful for most types of recre-
ational boating and instruction.
Type III: Flotation Aid. Designed to keep a conscious person
floating in a vertical position, but may not prevent an uncon-
scious person from floating face-down. Type III life jackets are
most often used for water sports such as waterskiing and wake-
boarding. They come in many styles, are comfortable to wear,
and have the same buoyancy as Type II life jackets. Most have
a zipper or buckle closure and adjustable side straps.
TYPE I
TYPE II
TYPE III


40 WATER SPORTS
Water Sports Equipment.
Type IV: Throwable Device. Designed to be tossed to a person
nearby in the water. Type IV throwables include ring buoys and
seat cushions with straps. They should never be used in place
of a life jacket.
Type V: Special Use. Designed to have internal buoyancy
and to inflate for additional flotation. These flotation aids have
special characteristics and limitations, and should not be used
without specific training.
Using a Life Jacket Properly
Most Type III ski vests are well-suited for water sports because
they are comfortable and do not restrict movement. All of
the water sports techniques discussed in this pamphlet must
be done while wearing a life jacket. Life belts or ski belts are
not acceptable.
Most Type III life jackets will be worn with the label on the
inside. The belt straps should be adjusted to fit snugly at or
just above the waist. The front of the life jacket must be firmly
secured at the top by a buckle, strap, or strong zipper.
All side straps, ties, or zippers should be secure.
Life Jacket Care and Maintenance
Proper care and storage of life jackets is essential. Allow life
jackets to drip dry, and store them in a well-ventilated place
away from direct sunlight. Sunlight causes the fabric to fade
and the flotation material to weaken. Never use a life jacket
as a kneeling pad or seat cushion, and never cut or alter it.
This includes gluing or sewing patches on the fabric that covers
the flotation material. Do not repair tears or holes in the mate-
rial. If the fabric is ripped or if buckles are missing, replace the
life jacket.
TYPE IV


WATER SPORTS 41
.Water Sports Equipment
Checking the Fit of a Life Jacket
On land, have a buddy stand behind you and firmly
pull up both shoulder straps. If the straps pull up to ear
level, the life jacket doesn’t fit snugly enough. Readjust
it or try a smaller size or different style.
In calm, shallow water, test the fit of a life jacket by
relaxing your body and tilting your head back. The life
jacket should keep your chin well above water. If it
doesn’t, readjust for a snugger fit or try a life jacket
with a higher buoyancy rating. Check the label to find
the rating.
Never set out on a watercraft unless you are wearing a
life jacket that fits well.


42 WATER SPORTS
Water Sports Equipment.
The Ski Boat
The ski boat must meet all Scouting America and state safety
requirements. It can have either an inboard or an outboard
motor, as long as it is able to reach speeds of 25 miles an hour
while pulling a skier. This is adequate power for all the skills
and maneuvers required for the Water Sports merit badge.
Never use a boat for waterskiing or wakeboarding unless it
has safe positive steering. The boat must be equipped with a
steering wheel. Check the cables frequently to be certain they
are in good condition. The boat should be equipped with a
clean and clear wide-angle rearview mirror.
If the ski boat does not have a stern platform just above
the water for skier use, then a ladder device must be available.
A ladder or platform is essential, because few skiers can climb
over the side of the boat after an exhausting ski run without
injuring themselves or requiring substantial assistance.
For more
information on the
Scouting America
safety
requirements for
boating, see the
Motorboating
merit badge
pamphlet and
the Guide to
Safe Scouting.
Never pull or
hang onto the
motor or any other
mechanical part
of the boat when
climbing out of
the water.
Positive steering refers to steering that matches the
direction of travel. For example, the steering wheel of
a car uses positive steering—when the wheel is turned
to the left, the car goes to the left. In contrast, when
the tiller in most sailboats is moved to the left, the boat
turns to the right.


WATER SPORTS 43
.Water Sports Equipment
Towropes
Polyethylene and polypropylene towropes are popular because
they float and are brightly colored for good visibility. Standard
towropes have a single handle and are 75 feet long. Before
each outing, check that the towrope is in good condition. If a
towrope is frayed, throw it away; do not try to mend it.
The towrope can be fastened to the boat in a number of
ways. A simple eyebolt can be used through the transom. Place
it as near the center as possible. Also, a harness equipped with
a swivel may be bolted to the outside of the transom and the
towrope attached to it. Do not attach the rope to cleats that are
not specifically intended for this purpose. A center post with a
ball and quick release is ideal and is usually included on boats
specifically designed for waterskiing.


44 WATER SPORTS
Water Sports Equipment.
Water Skis
As a beginning water-skier, you will be using basic skis,
called a combination pair. Choosing the correct size skis to
use depends mostly on the skier’s weight. Small, lightweight
skiers should not attempt to ski on oversized skis, and heavy
skiers should not use undersized skis.
Larger skis will
plane faster at
low speed than
narrower skis,
but their greater
buoyancy might
make them difficult
to handle in
starting positions.
Using skis designed for jumps, tricks, or slalom riding
is unnecessary until your skills are more advanced.
Freestyling can make learning the basic skills
more difficult.
Combination pair


WATER SPORTS 45
.Water Sports Equipment
Wakeboards
Wakeboards come in different lengths and widths, and have one
to three fins on the bottom that help stabilize the board and
increase maneuverability. Most wakeboards are twin-tipped,
which means that they slope upward at both ends.
Always double-
check the security
of the fins and
bindings before
using your
wakeboard.
Attach the fins
with the wider
end toward
the outside of
the board.
As with water skis, the
most important factor in
choosing a wakeboard
is the rider’s weight.


46 WATER SPORTS
Water Sports Equipment.
Choosing the Correct Size
Use these general guidelines when selecting skis or a wakeboard.
If your weight is on the borderline between two sizes, choose
the larger size.
Bindings
Bindings come in a wide variety of styles. Some are designed to
fit a range of sizes, while others offer a more specific fit. Most
wakeboards, for example, have bindings in specific sizes from
small to extra-large. Many of the current styles of bindings are
designed to stay on the foot during a fall.
The snugness of the fit is also adjusted in a variety of ways,
including laces, straps, or clamps. No matter what style of
fastener is used, correctly fitted bindings should feel comfort-
able and snug, like a tennis shoe that is firmly laced up.
Note that
standard sizes
for water skis
are measured
in inches; for
wakeboards,
in centimeters.
Many wakeboards are designed to stay on during a fall,
with good reason. If one foot came loose while the
other was still in its binding, there would be a greater
chance of injury to the skier.
If you weigh: Try skis that are:
Up to 150 pounds 66 to 67 inches long
150 to 200 pounds 68 inches long
More than 200 pounds 69 to 72 inches long
If you weigh: Try a wakeboard that is:
Up to 160 pounds 125 to 135 centimeters
(49 to 53 inches) long
160 to 180 pounds 135 to 140 centimeters
(53 to 55 inches) long
More than 180 pounds 140 centimeters
(55 inches) long or longer


WATER SPORTS 47
.Water Sports Equipment
Be sure that your heel is firmly in place and that the binding
supports your feet well. If the bindings are slightly too large for
your feet, try wearing a pair of heavy socks or liners to provide
friction and a snugger fit. However, do not try to make the
binding fit by wearing more than one pair of socks.
Water-ski bindings
Wakeboard bindings
Be sure to check the fit when both
your feet and the skis are wet.
Bindings that seem to fit well when
dry often will be too loose when wet.


48 WATER SPORTS
Water Sports Equipment.
Adjusting Wakeboard Bindings
With wakeboards, the angle of your
feet on the board can be adjusted
depending on your skill level. As
a beginner, you’ll want to follow
the steps below, fine-tuning the
adjustments to find a stance that
feels most comfortable to you.
Step 1—Adjust the distance
between the bindings to about
shoulder-width apart, with your
back foot slightly more toward the
rear of the board for better stability.
Step 2—Adjust the angle of the
back foot so that it is straight
across the board or turned out
slightly toward the back (at zero
to 9 degrees on the baseplate).
Tighten the binding lock.
Step 3—Adjust the angle of the front
foot so that it is slightly turned out
toward the front (9 to 27 degrees).
Try the board on for size before you
hit the water.
Regular or Goofy?
When riding a wakeboard, one foot is in front of the other. Having the left
foot forward is called “regular-footed,” and having the right foot
forward is called “goofy-footed,” but there is no right or wrong choice.
To find out whether you are regular-footed or goofy-footed, stand
with your feet shoulder-width apart and have a friend gently push you
from behind. The foot you naturally step forward with is probably the
one to have in front when you wakeboard.
1
2
3


WATER SPORTS 49
.Water Sports Equipment
Adjusting Water-Ski Bindings
Many skis come in specific sizes and
do not need to be adjusted. If you
have adjustable skis, most will be
adjusted in the following way:
Step 1—Slip your foot into the
bindings of one ski, pressing the
front of your foot snugly against
the front binding.
Step 2—Press the release button
on the back binding and slide the
binding forward until it is snug but
comfortable against your foot.
Step 3—Repeat these steps with the
bindings of the second ski.
To correctly
size and fit
your bindings,
seek assistance
from someone
knowledgeable
about the
equipment.
2
3





WATER SPORTS 51
.Basic Skills for Water Sports
Basic Skills for
Water Sports
You are almost ready to hit the water! First, get a feel for
standing up on skis or a wakeboard by practicing the basic
techniques on dry land. Then, be prepared to get wet. It may
take a few tries and several falls before you master the basic
skills in this section, but the effort will be well worth the
result. In no time, you will be hooked.
Beach Practice
Beach practice allows you to perform
the basic moves of standing up with-
out having to worry about falling.
By getting a feel for the proper
techniques on dry land, you will be
able to correct your form much more
easily once you are out on the water.
Step 1—With your skis or board
flat on the ground beneath you, sit
with your knees up against your chest
and arms straight out in front of you,
holding onto the towrope handle.
Your instructor should hold the line
and pull gradually but firmly to help
you stand.
Step 2—As the line begins to pull
you forward, use your legs to lift
up slowly. Keep your feet flat in
the bindings, your arms and back
straight, and your weight back
against the pull of the tow grip.
1
2


52 WATER SPORTS
Basic Skills for Water Sports.
Step 3—Lift up almost to standing position. Be sure that you
push yourself up with your legs, not pull yourself up with your
arms. Keep your knees bent slightly to provide better balance
and so that your legs act as shock absorbers when you are on
the water. Practice this several times while focusing on the legs
doing the work, so it will come naturally to you when you are
on the water.
Another essential point is to keep your arms straight when
standing up. The arms are the connection that transmits the
boat’s power to the skis or board—if the arms are bent, the
connection breaks and you will start to founder.
Once you are standing, a good way to check your position
is to drop the handle or have your instructor suddenly ease up
the line. If you start to topple backward, you are leaning back
too far. Find the proper position by letting go of the handle and
taking your stance with knees bent slightly and arms out
straight. Now you are balanced, and when the instructor places
the handle back in your hands, you will be in proper position.
Once these steps come easily, you are ready for the water.
33


WATER SPORTS 53
.Basic Skills for Water Sports
Entering the Water
The boat’s motor should always be turned off before a skier
enters or exits the water.
Some ski boats will have a platform at the back of the boat
so that skiers can enter the water more easily. If no platform is
available, the boat must have a ladder device. Skiers would
then use the ladder to lower themselves into the water. Once
skiers are safely in the water, a helper in the boat hands
equipment to them.
Putting On Your Skis or Board
Because the equipment floats, putting on skis or a wakeboard
might be the biggest challenge of the deepwater start. All too
often, new skiers find themselves flat out on the water with
their legs bobbing on the surface behind them.
Begin by practicing in neck-deep water so you can stand
on the bottom and rest between tries. In deep water, it may
help to take a deep breath of air and duck your head underwater.
This gives you better control and easier movement.
First get your
skis or board on,
then have the
boat bring the
tow line to you.
When entering the water from a boat equipped with a platform,
skiers can sit down and ease themselves into the water.


54 WATER SPORTS
Basic Skills for Water Sports.
To put on water skis, follow these steps.
Step 1—Push the first ski underwater as you bring your foot
up to it. Use both hands to open the bindings, pulling the
front tongue away from the heel. Let the second ski float on
the surface beside you.
Step 2—Slip your foot into the binding and secure it for a
snug fit.
Step 3—Follow the same steps with the second ski.
1
3
2


WATER SPORTS 55
.Basic Skills for Water Sports
To put on a wakeboard, follow these steps.
Step 1—Hold the board in front of you and use both hands to
open one of the bindings, pulling the front tongue away from
the heel.
Step 2—Slip your foot into the binding and secure it for a
snug fit.
Step 3—Follow the same steps with the other binding.
1
3
2


56 WATER SPORTS
Basic Skills for Water Sports.
Standing Up
After you have put on your board or skis and are waiting to
start, keep your balance in the water by bending your knees
into your chest and treading water with your hands and arms.
The rope should be trailed to you, with the boat idling
slowly past and the rope out behind it. As the line moves past
you, hold it loosely and let it slip through your hands. If you
are not facing the direction that the boat will be pulling you,
tighten your hold on the line and let the boat’s pull on the
rope swing you into position.
To bring the tips of the skis or edge of the board up,
tighten pressure on the rope and lean back against the pull
of the boat. When the handle comes to you, you should be
in starting position.
The boat should be taken out of gear momentarily while
you adjust your starting position. Keep your knees bent and
your arms to the outside of your knees.
Deepwater Starts on Water Skis. Standing up on water
skis starts with proper positioning. The skis should be about
shoulder-width apart, with at least 6 to 12 inches of ski above
the water. Keep your knees bent into your chest and close
together, and the skis parallel. Hold the rope handle with
your arms straight. When you are ready, shout out “Hit it!”
to let the boat driver know to accelerate.
Starting position
Holding the
towrope handle
close to your
chest or letting it
drop toward your
knees will throw
you off balance.
Remember to
drop the handle
if you fall.


WATER SPORTS 57
.Basic Skills for Water Sports
Stay in a sitting position, leaning
back slightly against the pull of the
boat. Keep your knees bent and
between your arms, and stay in a
crouch until the skis are planing on
top of the water. Then slowly stand
up, keeping your arms and back
straight and knees slightly bent. Look
up toward the boat, not down at the
water. Be sure to keep the skis about
shoulder-width apart.
Deepwater Starts on a Wakeboard.
Begin with the wakeboard out in front
of you and parallel to water’s surface.
Come up to a standing position as
described for skiers, then twist at the
hips to bring the front of the board
forward. Keep your knees bent and
arms straight, and hold the handle
down in front of the lead hip. When
you are in position and ready, shout
out “Hit it!” to let the driver know
to accelerate.
As the boat picks up speed, your
wakeboard will begin to plow against
the water. Bring your knees in close
to your chest and your hands just in
front of your knees.
Stay in the squatting position and
use your feet to keep the bottom of
the board planing against the water.
This helps bring the board up onto
the water surface, lifting you up
with it.
As the board begins to ride on the
surface of the water, stand up slowly,
keeping your knees bent slightly and
arms out straight in front of you. Turn
the board forward by twisting at the
hips, keeping the handle down, your
head up, and your lead hip pushed
close to the handle.
Starting position


58 WATER SPORTS
Basic Skills for Water Sports.
Alternate Method for Deepwater Wakeboard Starts. You
may prefer to start out with the wakeboard partially rotated up
toward the front foot. Begin with the wakeboard out in front of
you and parallel to the water’s surface, as before. Keep your
knees bent and hold the rope handle with your arms straight.
When you are in position and ready, shout out “Hit it!” to let
the driver know to accelerate.
As soon as the boat starts to pull, twist at the hips to turn
the front of the board up and toward the boat. Keeping your
knees bent, transfer more weight to your back foot as the boat
pulls you up.
Avoiding Common Errors
Most falls during deepwater starts are caused either by standing
up too soon or by pulling the towrope handle into the chest.
In both cases, you will lose your balance. By standing up too
soon, you will fall forward; by pulling the handle into your
chest, you will fall backward.
Another common error when waterskiing is keeping the
skis too close together, which will cause you to roll to one side.
“Planing” means that the skis or board are gliding across the top of the
water. “Resistance” happens when the skis or board are still somewhat
below the surface and pushing against the water, as at the beginning of
a deepwater start.
Alternate starting position
To keep the board
from wobbling, put
slightly more
weight on your
front foot than on
your back foot as
the boat begins
to pull you out of
the water.
In the alternate method, just as the boat starts to pull, twist your
hips to bring the front of the board up and forward before
coming up to the standing position.


WATER SPORTS 59
.Basic Skills for Water Sports
The following guidelines will help you to avoid or correct
common errors.
Take Your Time
As the boat starts to pull you out of the water, you can more
easily handle the resistance against the skis or wakeboard by
staying in a crouched position and taking your time before
trying to stand. Once the skis or the board begin to plane,
the resistance will be less and it will be easier to assume
a balanced position.
Basic Stance for Waterskiing
and Wakeboarding
• Shoulders back and head up
• Knees slightly bent
• Shoulders square to the boat
When waterskiing, also keep:
• Feet straight ahead, with the tips of
the skis pointed directly at the boat
• Towrope handle near the waist
• Weight centered between skis, with
the skis shoulder-width apart
When wakeboarding, also keep:
• Feet sideways to the boat, with the tip
of the board pointed directly at the boat
• The towrope handle near the lead hip
• Weight centered over your feet, with
slightly more weight on the back foot


60 WATER SPORTS
Basic Skills for Water Sports.
Use Your Legs
You must raise your body weight through leg power. If you pull
in on the handle in an attempt to stand up, the board or skis
will slide forward and you will probably fall backward. If you
find it difficult to stand up with leg power, you may be leaning
back too far.
Straighten Your Body
Another common error is leaning forward when
you are on top of the water. When you straighten
your legs, it may seem as if you have straightened
your whole body, when in fact you are still lean-
ing over from the waist. To avoid losing your
balance and falling forward, stay aware of your
stance and straighten your whole upper body,
keeping your knees slightly bent.
Keep Your Arms Out
Beginners frequently pull in their arms to maintain
balance or to take up imagined slack in the line.
Inexperienced skiers often think that the line is
slack when it is not.
The trouble with pulling in your arms is
that it pulls your body up to the handle with your elbows bent,
and when you straighten your arms again, the line actually
does slacken. Then, as the boat moves forward and the line
snaps taut, your balance is completely thrown off. Remember
to keep your arms out straight.
Bend Your Knees
You will stay better balanced by keeping your knees slightly
bent, so they can act as shock absorbers. When waterskiing,
it also helps to keep your weight evenly distributed over both
skis—especially when crossing the wake in rough water and
making turns.
Hold the towrope handle so that it is near your center
of gravity, about waist high. To compensate for a
momentary loss of balance, give the towrope a short
jerk rather than a long pull.
Keep your stance straight to
maintain better control.


WATER SPORTS 61
.Basic Skills for Water Sports
Falling
Falls are an inevitable part of learning water sports, and
learning to fall properly is a skill you can develop.
The first thing to do is make certain that you are actually
falling. Amazing recoveries are often made by simply hanging
on to the tow handle and regaining balance. If a fall can’t
be avoided, let go of the towrope, tuck your chin, and keep
your arms and legs close to your body. Avoid falling forward.
Instead, fall backward or to the side.
Stopping
When you have gained skill and find that you are sometimes
still standing at the end of a ride, it is time to learn how to
coast to a stop. The steps are simple.
Step 1—Let go of the towrope and slowly
crouch down.
Step 2—Spread your arms out to your sides for
extra balance as you begin to sink into the water.
Step 3—Give the “skier safe” signal as soon as
you are down, and then the “skier in the water”
signal if there is any other boat traffic.
Never ski directly toward shore when landing
or at any other time. If you misjudge and suddenly
hit bottom, you will be thrown into a bruising fall.
Ski parallel to the land. Never attempt to land
close to a dock, a float, or any other solid object.
Keep Trying
Don’t worry if it takes several tries before you stand up.
The average beginner tries five or six times before
succeeding. If you find that you are falling an unusual
number of times, fear of falling may be the real problem.
Remember that falls are a natural part of learning water
sports and that they are just part of the fun.
When you are in
the water after a
fall, clasp your
hands high over
your head to
signal that you
are OK.
If you want to slow yourself down while landing, squat and drag your
hands in the water.


62 WATER SPORTS
Basic Skills for Water Sports.
Moving From Side to Side
Before attempting to cross the wake, take plenty
of time to get comfortable with your balance
and the sensation of skimming along the surface.
Practice moving back and forth several times
on the smooth water between the wakes. Avoid
drifting too far to either side, because hitting the
wake broadside with the skis or board can easily
cause you to catch an edge and topple over.
Waterskiing
Remember that your skis will naturally head in the direction
the tips are pointing. To move from side to side, you will need
to “bank” the skis. So, if you want to go to the left side of the
wake, shift a little more weight to the left ski. This slight shift
in weight causes more resistance against the left side of the
skis, turning them to the left.
Wakeboarding
In wakeboarding, the side of the board that your toes point
toward is called toeside; the side the heels point toward is
heelside. To change direction, shift your weight to the side
that you want to move toward and lean slightly into the turn.
When moving toeside, lean slightly to the front; when moving
heelside, lean slightly backward.
Balancing will
become easier as you
develop a feel for moving
back and forth. Just like
when riding a bike, you
will feel less steady at
slower speeds. As you
become more confident,
you will wobble much
less. As in other sports,
the proper reflexes develop
with practice.
Moving toeside Moving heelside
Banking your skis will allow you to move to the
right or left.


WATER SPORTS 63
.Basic Skills for Water Sports
Crossing the Wake
Once you have the feel of moving from side to side, you are
ready to try crossing the wake. Wakeboarders might find it
easier to move toeside when riding regular-footed and heelside
when goofy-footed. Approach and cross the wake at an angle
with knees bent to help absorb the lift of the wake.
Remember to avoid hitting the wake broadside. Just as
boats avoid capsizing by pointing into rough waves, you will
avoid catching an edge if you cross the wake at an angle.
Maintain your momentum as you cut across the wake.
Once you are outside the wake, keep moving to a distance of
10 to 15 feet and turn the skis or board toward the boat wake,
again at an angle.
As you go back and forth and become accustomed to the
lift of the wake, you will be able to turn sharper and pull harder,
increasing your speed across the wake each time you try it.
Avoiding Obstacles
If you are going too fast or are too close to steer away from an obstacle,
release the towrope and crouch down. If you are still going too fast, you
can slow yourself rapidly by sitting back on your skis or board and drag-
ging your hands in the water. Be prepared to topple to one side if needed.
When crossing the wake, stay aware of your body position and
where you are holding the rope handle. Keep your knees bent,
the towrope taut, and your eyes on the horizon in the direction
you are moving.





WATER SPORTS 65
.Building Your Skills
Building Your Skills
Learning to cross the wake opens the door to a new level
of skill in water sports. Take each new skill step by step.
Remember that patience will still be required. As you apply
yourself and increase your abilities, water sports will become
even more enjoyable.
Waterskiing
Once you are comfortably crossing both sides of the wake,
you are ready to advance by learning to ride on one ski.
On One Ski
Learning to ski on a single ski does not require any special
equipment. Use your regular pair of skis, a regular 75-foot
towrope, and your regular life jacket. Later you can use a ski
with rear bindings if you want.
Begin by getting a feel for the stance while still on land.
Shift about 80 percent of your weight to one ski. Then lift the
other ski, bringing the knee up and toward your chest as you
lean back slightly. Bend your ankle to keep the ski tip up. Keep
your arms straight, and keep your skiing leg only slightly bent.
Using this stance on the water, try lifting one ski and then
the other. You will probably feel more stable on one leg than
the other and will want to drop the ski from the less stable leg.
Make your first attempt to ride on one ski in the smooth
water directly behind the boat and between the wakes. Shift
your weight to the ski you intend to use. Then gently lift your
heel out of the binding of the ski you are going to drop off. Let
that foot and the ski drift toward the back. Keep your heel up,
and the force of the water on the ski will pull the front binding
from your foot.
If you have
difficulty lifting
the skis, you
probably have
not transferred
enough weight to
the other foot.
You cannot lift a
foot you are
standing on.


66 WATER SPORTS
Building Your Skills.
Do not attempt to kick the ski off or
you will lose your balance. Keep the toes of
your free foot in the water as you gain sta-
bility, then slowly move your free foot into
position behind the heel binding of the
remaining ski. Place your toes on the ski
first, and gradually set your foot down.
When your free foot is in place, experi-
ment with shifting your weight back and
forth slightly to find the most stable skiing
position. Then keep your weight back, knees
slightly bent, and arms straight. To turn,
lean in the direction you want to go. The
harder you lean, the faster you will turn.
One-Ski Start
Many slalom skiers prefer to start with both
feet in the ski bindings. This technique
works well for relatively small, light, and
compact beginning slalom skiers.
Start with your knees bent tightly to
your chest, pulling the ski as close to you as
you can get it. After you shout “hit it,” stay
in the tuck position, and patiently wait for
the ski to start rising beneath you and level-
ing off. You will get more water in the face
than you did when starting on two skis, and
you will feel much more drag. Take a deep
breath before starting, and hold on tight.
Don’t push out on the ski with your
legs. Instead, stay tucked, be patient, and
let the boat pull you up. Concentrate on
keeping the tip of your ski above the water’s
surface by about 6 to 12 inches. If the ski
tip starts to drop, stay tucked, and wait to
stand up.
As the ski starts to rise underneath you and level off, stand
up smoothly and lean back away from the boat, keeping your
knees well bent and putting plenty of weight on your back foot.
Once you are up and steady, keep your shoulders back, your
head up, and your knees slightly bent. Steer by leaning in the
direction you want to go.
When lifting your ski, the tip of the
ski must leave the water first and
come back down to the water last to
prevent it from digging in and pitch-
ing you forward.
In the starting position, the rope
should be to the inside of your
ski—to the left if you ski goofy, and
to the right if you ski regular (left
foot forward).


WATER SPORTS 67
.Building Your Skills
Alternate Method for Starting on One Ski
Tall, large, or heavy beginners usually find success more
quickly by starting with the back foot out of the binding.
If you can start on one ski, you and your companions will
not have to chase after a loose ski every time you switch from
two skis to one. You can use one ski of a combination pair, or
use a slalom ski if one is available.
Sit on the heel of your ski with your knee bent well into
your chest. Your free leg should be stretched out behind you,
down into the water as far as possible. The free leg acts as a
rudder for steering and partly substitutes for stability that
ordinarily comes from a second ski. Do not be in a hurry to pull
up the free foot. Drag it deep in the water as long as
possible, and wait for the boat to pull you out of the water.
With only one ski to support your weight, waiting for
sufficient speed is essential. As you come out of the water, lean
backward slightly until you are in the normal single-ski position.
You can compensate for a tendency to fall toward the side
of the free leg by twisting your body slightly to that side. The
rope will then pull you away from the falling side. If necessary,
also ease up slightly in dragging your free leg.
To keep your ski headed in the right direction, watch the
ski tip throughout the start. Make sure the ski rope is to the left
if you are skiing right foot forward (goofy) or to the right if you
are skiing left foot forward (regular). Use your free leg as a rud-
der to keep the ski lined up with the path of the boat.
The correct boat speed for
switching from two skis to one
ski is the speed that allows the
skier to ski without undue
strain from a bogging ski.
Keep in mind that the speed
on one ski will normally be
slightly higher because of the
bogging ski.
If the ski tip raises
more than about a
foot above the
surface, you are
leaning back too
far and/or pushing
out on the ski,
fighting the boat
instead of letting it
pull you up.


68 WATER SPORTS
Building Your Skills.
Wakeboarding
When you are crossing the wake with confidence, you can step
up your wakeboarding skills by learning a simple jump called
the bunny hop, and by riding switchstance (or fakie), where
the back of the board is turned around to the front. Slowly but
surely, you will be hooked on this extreme sport.
Bunny Hop
Start the bunny hop by cutting to the outside of the wake in
either a heelside or toeside direction. As you cut across the
wake, be sure to keep the towrope taut by pulling on the rope
and pressing back on the board at the same time. This creates
the tension and force needed to help you gain speed. Adequate
momentum is the key to mastering the bunny hop.
Step 1—After cutting to the outside of the wake, ease up on
the rope and straighten out by centering your weight.
Step 2—If you are riding heelside, push the board into the
water with your heels and push away from the water with your
toes. If you are riding toeside, push into the water with your
toes and away from the water with your heels. This will pop
your board up and out of the water.
Step 3—Land with your knees slightly bent, eyes toward the
boat, and the towrope handle at your front hip.


WATER SPORTS 69
.Building Your Skills
Switchstance
The first step in the switchstance is to signal for the boat to
slow its speed so that the water will be a little softer under
the board.
Step 1—Keeping the handle near your back hip, move to the
top of the wake.
Step 2—Tip the forward edge
of the board up slightly so that
it will not catch, then pivot the board
until both feet are pointing forward
toward the boat.
Step 3—Continue pivoting the
board until it is 180 degrees
from the starting position, with
the foot that was in front now
at the back.
Step 4—Signal for the boat to
increase speed.
1
2
3


70 WATER SPORTS
Water Sports Resources.
Scouting Literature
Scouts BSA Handbook for Boys; Scouts
BSA Handbook for Girls; Fieldbook; Deck
of First Aid; Basic Illustrated Wilderness
First Aid; Emergency First Aid pocket
guide; Be Prepared First Aid Book;
Athletics, First Aid, Kayaking, Lifesaving,
Motorboating, Personal Fitness,
Small-Boat Sailing, Snow Sports, and
Swimming merit badge pamphlets
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful Scouting
materials and supplies.
Books
Endres, Hollie. Wakeboarding. Action
Sports HL Readers Series.
Riverstream Publishing, 2014.
Favret, Ben. Water Skiing and
Wakeboarding. Human Kinetics
Publishers, 2010.
Hayhurst, Chris. Wakeboarding!
Throw a Tantrum. Extreme Sports
Collection Series. Rosen Publishing
Group, 2000.
Kalman, Bobbie. Extreme Wakeboarding.
Crabtree Publishing Company, 2006.
Roughton, Kim. Wakeboarding Basics:
All About Wakeboarding.
CreateSpace Publishing, 2012.
Summers, Gail. Learn to Water Ski in
60 Minutes: Your Simple Step by
Step Guide. CreateSpace Publishing,
2015.
Whyte, Charles. Lake Wakeboarding:
Learn How to Wakeboard.
CreateSpace Publishing, 2016.
Boating Regulations
Boating regulations vary from state to state. To find out what your state
requires, get your parent or guardian’s permission to use the internet and
check the website for the U.S. Coast Guard’s Boating Safety Division. You
will find a reference guide to state boating laws at uscgboating.org/regula-
tions/state-boating-laws.php.
Water Sports Resources


WATER SPORTS 71
.Water Sports Resources
Organizations and Websites
International Waterski and
Wakeboard Federation
iwwf.sport
USA Water Ski & Wake Sports
Telephone: 863-324-4341
usawaterski.org
U.S. Coast Guard Boating
Safety Division
uscgboating.org
World Wakeboard Association
thewwa.com
Acknowledgments
Scouting America is grateful to the men
and women serving on the National
Merit Badge Subcommittee for the
improvements made in updating this
pamphlet.
For their assistance with this book’s
predecessor, the Waterskiing merit badge
pamphlet, thanks go out to devoted
Scouter Greg Tucker, Readyville,
Tennessee; Sue Smith, American Water
Ski Association; Betty Bonifay and the
Bonifay Ski School; and to MasterCraft
Boat Company and O’Brien International.
Photo and Illustration Credits
Dave Bell, courtesy—page 39 (type I)
MasterCraft Boat Company,
courtesy—cover (motorboat)
USA Water Ski, Lynn Novakofski,
courtesy—pages 6, 9, and
45 (wakeboarder)
wikipedia.org, courtesy—page 7
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of
or are protected by Scouting America.
Dan Bryant—cover (life jacket) and
page 39 (type III)
John McDearmon—all illustrations
on pages 19, 22, 25, 26, 54-56, 58,
and 66
Brian Payne—pages 39 (type II) and
40 (cushion)
Scouting America thanks USA Water Ski, Polk
City, Florida, for assisting in so many ways
with this edition of the Water Sports merit
badge pamphlet. In particular, we are grateful
to Natalie Angley, media relations coordinator,
who so graciously coordinated USA Water Ski’s involvement. Thanks also
to Lynn Novakofski, graphic designer, for assistance with photographs, and
to Lisa St. John, competition and events director, for her input and
expertise. USA Water Ski is the national governing body for organized
waterskiing in the United States.


72 WATER SPORTS
Water Sports Resources.
Scouting America gives special thanks to Jack Travers International
Tournament Skiing, Groveland, Florida, and the entire Travers family (Jack,
LeLani, Jonathan, and Christopher) for their assistance with photography.
They not only opened their top–notch Sunset Lakes facility to us but also
provided the equipment and knowledge to make the photo shoot there go
smoothly. Thanks also to Alex Paradis for his assistance.
Jonathan Travers