HORSEMANSHIP


HORSEMANSHIP
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


35909
ISBN 978-0-8395-3298-9
©2024 Boy Scouts of America
2024 Printing
Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Horsemanship or check
Scoutbook for the latest requirements.
FPO


HORSEMANSHIP 3





HORSEMANSHIP 5
Contents
What Is Horsemanship? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
The Horse . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Choosing a Horse . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
Tack . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
Grooming and Care . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
Health Matters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
Feeding Horses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
Ready to Ride . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
Riding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
Horsemanship and You . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
Horsemanship Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78
Note to Scouts and Counselors
All step-by-step instructions in this pamphlet should
be demonstrated by the counselor or an experienced
horseperson. This will make each task easier to
understand and safer for you and the horse.





HORSEMANSHIP 7
.What Is Horsemanship?
What Is Horsemanship?
The goal of a good horseman or horsewoman is to become
so sensitive to the entire horse, to the movements of its body
and to how the horse thinks, that the rider can sense trouble,
anticipate how the horse will react, and move to control that
reaction even before the horse is aware of its own feelings.
Good riders will do these things without thinking, without
even being able to explain what they did.
Will you be a rider or just a passenger? To be a good rider
you must know what a horse is. You must understand the horse,
and why it behaves as it does. You and your horse must become
almost as one. Only then can each of you completely enjoy the
advantages of the other.
The horse is a flesh-and-blood creature, but it’s also a
bundle of instincts. If you understand the instincts that cause
a horse to act in a certain way, you can use that knowledge to
become more skilled.
Part of the Herd
Though they possess individual personalities, horses have a
herd instinct. They do not like to be alone. Like other herd
animals—animals that are preyed upon—horses are alert,
timid, and insecure. Living in herds provides horses a sense
of security and safety from real and perceived predators.
Horses also develop relationships within a herd. Wild
herds have a leader, and the other horses are ranked behind
this lead horse in a pecking order. This prevents fighting over
food, water, and mates because a lower-ranked horse almost
always yields to a higher-ranked horse.
One of your goals
will be to soften
and improve your
handling and
riding skills so that
the experience
is calm and
comfortable for
you and the horse.
This will help you
and the horse
build mutual trust.
Fossils reveal that horses have been evolving for approximately
60 million years. The first horses were no bigger than dogs and had
multiple toes rather than hooves.


8 HORSEMANSHIP
What Is Horsemanship?.
The leader of a wild herd usually is an older mare that the
other horses respect. She leads the herd to food and safety and
even settles disputes, sometimes using discipline. If a stallion is
part of the herd, he protects the herd and leads it to food
and water while the lead mare still leads the herd in social
and day-to-day matters.
Domesticated horses also seek a leader. To
practice good horsemanship, you will need to
become the leader of your horse. The horse will
seek direction, reassurance, food, and safety from
you. If you do not become the leader, the horse
will try taking the role.
Instincts, Senses, and Behavior
One of the horse’s most important instincts is
defense. When startled or afraid, a horse’s strongest
impulse is to get away. Horses use their speed and
agility, bucking and kicking to defend themselves.
Horses also develop habits. Some habits, such
as those that you train the horse to do, are good
and help foster your relationship with the horse.
But some habits, such as biting, are bad. If you do
not prevent or correct poor habits, the horse will be
difficult to manage.
Horses have highly developed hearing, smell,
sight, taste, touch, and what many call a sixth sense,
which allows horses to recognize impending danger
and to detect the moods of people around them.
Humans and horses
have a long history. At
various times, horses
were a source of food
and clothing or were
viewed in mythical or
religious ways. People
eventually learned
that horses could be
domesticated and
ridden. The invention
of the wheel allowed
people to put horses
to work, hitching them
to wagons and chari-
ots for transportation,
hauling, sporting
events, and warfare.
Horse Terminology
• A stallion is a male horse older than 4 years that has not been
castrated (altered).
• A mare is a female horse older than 4 years.
• A filly is a female horse younger than 4 years, and a colt is a male
horse younger than 4 years.
• A gelding is a castrated male horse of any age. A gelding cannot be
used for breeding.
• A yearling is a horse older than 1 year but not yet 2 years old.
• A foal is a young, unweaned horse of either sex, and a weanling
is a newly weaned horse.


HORSEMANSHIP 9
.What Is Horsemanship?
Large, funnel-like ears aid a horse’s
hearing. The ears can rotate in any direction
to pick up sounds and vibrations. A horse’s
ear position also is a signal of its mood. For
instance, when its ears move back and forth,
it is alert and listening. The ears will usually
hang toward the side when a horse is relaxing
or dozing. When the ears are laid back, they
signal aggression or displeasure.
Horses use their sense of smell to identify
each other and other animals that could be
predators. A horse’s sexual behavior also is
affected by smell.
Because horses’ eyes are positioned on the
sides of the head, they can see almost all the
way around their bodies except immediately
in front of and behind them, where they have
blind spots. Horses also see well in the dark.
But their eyes do not focus like human eyes do;
a horse must raise and lower its head to see
objects clearly.
Horses can detect the same four basic
tastes as humans: salty, sweet, sour, and bitter.
Some people believe horses have a sweet tooth, just as people
do. You might notice that your horse likes to eat apples or
molasses, for example. Many commercial horse feeds have
added sweeteners to make the taste more appealing.
Touch is a way for horses to communicate with each other
and humans. By grooming each other with tongue and teeth,
horses keep clean and develop friendships. As you earn the
Horsemanship merit badge, you will learn how grooming your
horse will help you strengthen your relationship.
Horse Talk
Horses communicate through body language, vocalization, smell,
taste, and touch. A horse might show displeasure by pinning back its
ears, baring its teeth, biting, and turning to show its hind legs. Signs
of aggression or excitement include squealing, snorting, and grunting.
A horse might whinny or neigh if a meal is late or when separated
from its usual companions.
A horse’s ears point to where it is
directing its attention.


Parts of a horse (15 main parts in bold type)


HORSEMANSHIP 11
.The Horse
The Horse
You can learn a lot by reading about horses, but the best and
most fun way to learn is to actually care for and ride a horse.
Taking lessons can speed up your learning. But first, learn the
parts of a horse so that you can discuss them with confidence.
Markings and Coat Colors
A variety of natural markings and coat colors gives horses their
distinct looks.
Common face markings include the following:
• Star—a white mark on the forehead
• Stripe—a narrow white mark from the forehead to the nose
• White muzzle—a broad white mark that covers the muzzle
• White lips—a white mark covering just the lip area
White muzzle
White lips
Star
Stripe


12 HORSEMANSHIP
The Horse.
• Blaze—a broad white stripe that runs from the forehead
down the nose bridge, and covers the nostrils
• Interrupted stripe—a narrow, white mark from the forehead
to the nose
• Snip—a white mark between the nostrils
• Bald—a mark similar to a blaze but wider, touching or
encompassing the eyes and mouth
Leg markings include the following:
• Coronet—a white band around the coronet
• Pastern—white coloring from the hoof to the fetlock joint
• Sock —white coloring from the hoof to the top of the
fetlock joint
• Stocking—white coloring from the hoof up to or covering
the knee or hock
The most common colors of a horse are brown and black, but
nearly any color combination is possible. Many horse colors have
specific names, such as the following:
• Bay—a reddish coat with a black mane, tail, and points. The
word “points” refers to the black coloring on the lower parts
of the legs (exclusive of any white markings) and the mane
and tail on some reddish-brown horses.
• Chestnut—various shades of gold and reddish brown, from
pale to a rich red, with no points on the lower legs, mane,
or tail. The legs, mane, and tail are either the same color as
the body or lighter.
• Strawberry roan—a chestnut color mixed with white hairs
• Blue roan—black mixed with white hairs
• Palomino—a golden coat with a pale tail and mane
• Pinto—two coat colors of irregular patterns, usually white
and another color such as brown or black
Coronet Pastern Sock Stocking
Blaze
Interrupted
stripe
Snip
Bald


HORSEMANSHIP 13
.The Horse
Pinto
Palomino
Appaloosa
The great variations in a horse’s color boils down to genes. For
instance, a buckskin carries the cream gene, which “dilutes” its red/
brown coat, giving it a yellow, cream, or gold coat. The buckskin also
has black points on the mane, tail, and legs. Dun horses carry the dun
gene, which gives the coat any color variation of yellow or cream. A
dun always has a black dorsal stripe running down the middle of the
back and some variation of other markings. The Appaloosa is a breed
with distinctive dark patches over a white coat.
A characteristic buckskin
Dun with light-colored guard hairs
at the dock, alongside the trademark
black dorsal stripe.





HORSEMANSHIP 15
.Choosing a Horse
Choosing a Horse
Because horse breeds can be as varied as breeds of other
animals, such as dogs and cats, it is important to weigh the
characteristics of each breed before choosing a horse. You will
need to decide what factors are best for the purpose you have
in mind for the horse, whether riding for pleasure, working
cattle, showing, or competing. Decide on the breed, age, size,
and sex of the horse accordingly.
Owning a horse is expensive and time-consuming, so
first determine why you want one. Deciding whether you are
able to handle the responsibility and expense takes great
consideration. If you decide to buy a horse, have someone
experienced help you select one, and have a veterinarian
examine it. Buy from a knowledgeable and reputable horseman
or horsewoman.
Horse Breeds
A breed of horse is an equine group that has a set of character-
istics that distinguish it from other horses. These characteristics
are preserved through selective breeding over a period of time.
With purebred horses, the pedigree, or lineage, is recorded in
a stud book. A male horse used for
breeding is often called a stud. Stud
stables or farms provide purebred
male horses for breeding.
American Saddlebred
This breed, originally referred
to as the Kentucky Saddler, was
developed during the 19th century
in the southern United States. Its
ancestors include the Canadian Pacer,
Narragansett Pacer, Morgan, Arabian,
and Thoroughbred.
Equine describes
anything relating
to a horse or
horse family.
The American Saddlebred is an elegant and
comfortable riding horse.


16 HORSEMANSHIP
Choosing a Horse.
Because of its high-stepped gait, the breed is popular for
recreational riding and show competitions, faring especially
well in the five-gaited, three-gaited, fine harness, park, and
pleasure categories. It also is popular for farm work and rid-
ing over rough terrain. American Saddlebreds have strength,
stamina, and a pleasant temperament. They usually are bay- or
chestnut-colored, but they also can be gray, black, palomino,
and roan. These horses usually stand 15 to 16 hands tall.
Appaloosa
The Appaloosa is a distinctive and popular breed in the United
States. The breed was developed by the Nez Perce Indians in
the 18th century using stock the Spanish conquistadors brought
to the Americas, but it was nearly
wiped out in the late 1800s due to
indiscriminate breeding. In 1938,
Claude Thompson, a wheat farmer
from Moro, Oregon, wanted to
preserve the breed and established
the Appaloosa Horse Club. The
club has been largely responsible
for the breed’s rebound.
The Appaloosa has five
coat patterns: blanket, marble,
leopard, snowflake, and frost.
The American Appaloosa stands
from 14.2 to 15.2 hands, but
European types can grow larger.
Appaloosas are excellent to use
as pleasure horses and in parades,
jumping, reining, dressage, and
gymkhana games.
Gymkhana
includes
competitions in
which horse and
rider compete
against others
in timed events,
including barrel
racing, pole
bending, and
stake racing.
A horse is measured in hands. One hand equals
4 inches. The measurement starts from the top
of the horse’s withers. A pony is shorter than 57
inches, or 14.2 hands; miniatures are shorter than 34
inches, or 8.5 hands.
The Appaloosa has endurance, is athletic, and is
easy to train.


HORSEMANSHIP 17
.Choosing a Horse
Arabian
The Arabian is considered the oldest and
purest of all breeds. Developed in Arabia, the
breed’s purity has been carefully maintained
for thousands of years. Arabians have been
bred in the United States since Colonial times.
Its short head and dished (concave)
face make the Arabian unmistakable. The
nostrils and eyes are large, and the eyes are
widely spaced and positioned lower on the
face than in other breeds. The ears are small
and sometimes curve inward. Most Arabians
are under 15 hands, with the ideal height
between 14.2 and 15 hands. True Arabians
have solid color and can be chestnut, gray,
bay, or black. They often are seen in show
classes for English and Western pleasure,
trail, cutting, reining, jumping, and dressage.
Arabians dominate competitive endurance
riding events because of their stamina and
natural endurance.
Arabians bond well with humans
and are known for stamina, speed,
intelligence, and grace.
Draft Horses
A draft horse is a large horse
bred for pulling heavy loads.
Although machinery has largely
replaced the work horse, the draft
horse continues to hold a place of
importance and tradition in parts
of the country. Common breeds of
draft horses include the Belgian,
Percheron, and Clydesdale. Draft
horses weigh at least 1600 pounds
and stand at least 16 hands high. They have relatively deep, wide,
strongly muscled bodies with strong backs and quarters. Their legs are
short, and the leg bones are large and strong. Draft horses share the
common traits of strength, patience, and a docile temperament, making
them ideal for a multitude of purposes, including farming, show, and
other recreational uses.
Clydesdale


18 HORSEMANSHIP
Choosing a Horse.
Morgan
The Morgan was developed in the United States in the
late 18th and early 19th centuries from the offspring
of a horse named after its owner, Justin Morgan. The
Morgan is considered a general-purpose horse.
Morgans have small ears set above a broad fore-
head. They have large eyes, an arched neck, a broad
chest, a short back, and compact bodies. The coat
usually is reddish but can be brown or black. They
are usually between 14 and 15 hands tall. Morgans
excel in many disciplines, including driving, carriage,
park saddle, harness, hunter, dressage, cutting, com-
petitive trail, pleasure saddle, reining, classic pleasure,
and jumper.
Tennessee Walking Horse
The gait that made a day’s work in the saddle comfort-
able for Southern plantation owners continues to be
the best-known characteristic of the Tennessee walking
horse. Today, this docile horse is a favorite mount of
park rangers, mounted police, field trail enthusiasts,
hunters, endurance riders, competitive trail riders, and
show-ring performers. It is famous for the running
walk that produces the unusual gliding ride that is so
comfortable. The Tennessee walker can cover as much
as eight miles an hour at the walk instead of the four
or five typical of other mounts.
Thoroughbred
Thoroughbred ancestry dates to three 17th-century
sires—the Darley Arabian, the Godolphin Arabian,
and the Byerley Turk. In England, offspring from
these stallions were bred with stronger domestic
horses, resulting in a horse that could carry weight
with a sustained speed over longer distances.
Intelligent and courageous, thoroughbreds are a
popular choice in many disciplines, including hunting,
jumping and eventing, and horse trials. Thoroughbreds
usually are between 16 and 16.2 hands. The head is
fine-boned, and veins can be seen underneath its thin
skin. The alert eyes are big and the nostrils are large.
Thoroughbreds were brought
to the United States in the
18th century, and nearly all
were bred for racing. Others
were used as saddle horses
and polo mounts.
Morgans bond well with
humans of all ages. Their
traits include loyalty, tireless-
ness, reliability, and versatility.
The calm disposition and
comfortable ride of the
Tennessee walking horse
make it very desirable.


HORSEMANSHIP 19
.Choosing a Horse
Principal colors are black, brown, gray,
chestnut, and bay. Thoroughbreds often are
high-strung, nervous, and sensitive, and they
can be temperamental.
Quarter Horse
The quarter horse was the first breed
established and developed in the United
States. It was developed from Spanish and
Middle Eastern breeds that were crossed with
horses from England and Ireland in the early
17th century. This combination resulted in a
compact, heavily muscled horse that excelled
in short-distance racing.
The quarter horse often is used for ranch
work. Because of its ability to start, stop, and
turn quickly, it is perfect for working cattle. It
excels as a cutting horse, hunter, and pleasure
horse. The quarter horse stands between 15
and 16 hands, and the usual color is chestnut.
Paint
The paint is distinguished by its two-toned
coat and is descended from horses with
quarter-horse or thoroughbred bloodlines.
The coat colors are divided into two
categories: piebald, in which the markings
are black and white, and skewbald, in which
they are any color but black plus white. The
coat patterns are divided loosely into three
types. The tobiano displays more white than
dark coloring, with white legs and white
across the back but contrasting color on
the head. The overo displays more jagged
patterns, the white rarely crosses the back,
and there is more dark than white. Finally,
the tovero describes a combination of the above two patterns,
and the horse may also have blue eyes. Note that these distinc-
tions are very generalized, and there are crossovers. American
Indians liked the paint because its blotchy coat provided a
natural camouflage. Western cowboys liked it because it could
maintain a comfortable pace over long distances. Paints stand
between 14 and 16 hands and have a wide range of builds
and temperaments.
The quarter horse got its name from
English settlers in the United States
who raced them on quarter-mile
stretches.
Paints can come in a variety of
colors that generally fall into one
of three coat patterns—tobiano,
overo, or tovero.


20 HORSEMANSHIP
Choosing a Horse.
Conformation
Conformation refers to a horse’s build. It includes the horse’s
skeletal and muscular structures and all of the physical features
and proportions that are characteristic of its breed. A horse’s
conformation is a critical indication of its soundness and ability.
A well-proportioned horse will be well-balanced, which allows
it to move efficiently and makes it less prone to unsoundness
and strain. A well-balanced conformation will give the horse a
longer working life and help it maintain a better temperament.
As you choose your
horse, keep the following
things in mind.
First, look at the horse’s
general build. It should
be muscular and the
muscles should look evenly
built, giving the horse a
balanced shape.
Look for a well-shaped
head that is proportional
to the rest of the body. A
head that is too big or small
will upset the balance of the
horse’s overall appearance.
Likewise, the features of
the face—the ears, eyes,
and nostrils—should be
symmetrical and look pro-
portional to the size of the
head. The neck should be
muscular, proportional to
the rest of the body, and
slightly arched.
The arch in the back
should dip slightly, and the
withers should be promi-
nent, showing firm support
for the neck muscles. In a
mature horse, the croup will
be aligned with the with-
ers. If the arch in the back
Horse with normally curved back
Swaybacked horse


HORSEMANSHIP 21
.Choosing a Horse
dips too low, the horse is sway-
backed. A well-aligned back
and withers means a saddle
will fit better.
Straight legs are impor-
tant for long-term soundness.
Irregularities affect how the
horse moves (which might
affect its rideability) and may
lead to unsoundness. View a
horse from all sides to assess
the legs.
When viewing the forelegs
and hind legs from the front
and behind, the alignment of
each should follow a vertical
line dropped from the shoulder
blades and buttocks through
middle of the knees, hocks, and
fetlocks to the center of
the hooves.
From the side, the vertical
alignment of the forelegs passes
through the center of knee,
cannon bone, and fetlock, and
lands behind the heel. When
viewing the hind legs from
the side, a line dropped from
the point of the buttock to the
ground should touch the hock
and continue down the vertical
line formed by the rear of the
cannon bone and fetlock.
The illustrations here show
some conformation faults you
might see in a horse’s legs.
Bowlegged—
the hocks are
positioned too
far to the sides
Knock-kneed—
the legs are
curved inward
at the knees
Bench-kneed—
the cannon
bones are
turned outward
below the knee
Splay-footed—the
toes are turned
outward below
the fetlock
Sickle-
hocked—
excessively
angled and
weak hocks
Proper front and hind
leg alignment, front
and rear views
Proper front
leg alignment,
side view
Cow-hocked—
inwardly
turned hocks,
which can
make the toes
point outward


22 HORSEMANSHIP
Choosing a Horse.
Age Considerations
A well-cared-for horse can be saddle-mounted for at least
20 years. An older horse that is already trained makes a better
mount for a beginning rider than a young, untrained horse.
Sex, Disposition, and Soundness
Mares and geldings usually are the best choices for saddle
horses. Geldings usually are calmer and steadier than mares or
stallions. A mare might be more difficult to handle when she
is in heat, which occurs for several days about once a month
throughout the spring, summer, and fall.
Owning a Horse
If you keep a horse in a pasture,
the general rule is one horse per
acre. A horse kept in a barn or
stable will need bedding so that it
does not stand on a hard surface
constantly. Dust-free wood
shavings make a good, clean
bedding. Hemp also can be used.
Barn stalls that remain open to
the corral allow horses to shelter
when needed.
Beginning riders should
start with a mature,
trained horse. A begin-
ning rider should never
consider mounting an
untrained or unbroken
horse. Common sense
should be exercised
when deciding whether
or not to put a young
or novice rider on
a stallion.


HORSEMANSHIP 23
.Choosing a Horse
Stables and barns should be cleaned every day, sometimes
more often. Remove all horse waste and soiled bedding. Sweep
the floor, then add clean bedding.
You probably will need a way to transport your horse,
which means either buying or borrowing a horse trailer and
having a vehicle that can pull the trailer.
Before you buy a horse, be sure you have a place
to keep it. If you do not live on a farm or ranch,
you will need to board the horse. Boarding rates
will vary according to services provided. Also,
some communities do not allow large animals.
If you must hose
down the stable,
be sure it is
completely dry
before adding
clean bedding.


24 HORSEMANSHIP
Choosing a Horse.
Facing the same
direction as the
horse, the near
side of the horse
is on your left, and
the off side is on
your right.
Safety With Horses
Before you handle a horse, you should know a
few safety rules. Because horses can sense if you
are afraid, be confident yet careful around them.
Prevent accidents and injuries by following
these rules.
• Ground Safety
–Never startle a horse. Always speak reassuringly
whenever you approach.
–While working around a horse, stay close to the
front or sides so it will not be tempted to kick
you and, if it does kick, you will not be struck
with the full force of the kick.
–Never approach a horse directly from the rear
because a horse has a blind spot directly behind
it. You might startle it and cause it to kick, which
could result in a serious injury.
–Walk beside your horse, near the shoulder,
when leading it—never ahead or behind.


HORSEMANSHIP 25
.Choosing a Horse
–Do not wrap the lead strap, halter rope, or reins
around your hand, wrist, or body. Lead from the
left or near side, using your right hand to hold the
lead rope. Keep the excess rope in the left hand in
an S shape with your fingers to the outside.
–If the horse rears, release the hand nearest the
halter so that you stay on the ground.
–Never mount in a barn or near fences, trees, or
overhangs. A sidestepping horse could force you
into one of these objects.
• Riding Safety
–Never bind yourself to the horse or saddle.
–Keep the horse under control and maintain
a secure seat at all times. Horses are easily
frightened by strange noises and objects.
–When a horse is frightened and attempts to run,
turn it in a circle and tighten the circle until the
horse stops.
–Hold your mount to a walk when going downhill.
–Slow down and hold the horse’s head up when
riding over rough ground or in sand, mud, ice,
or snow, where there is a danger it might slip
and fall.
–Avoid paved roads because a horse, especially
one with shoes, can slip and fall. When you must
cross a paved surface, slow the horse to a walk,
or dismount and lead the horse across. Also
avoid riding on frozen or icy ground.
–Beginning riders should not jump a horse. If you
cannot avoid a jump, give your horse a loose
rein, grasp the saddle, and lean well forward
with your heels down.
–If lost on a trail, allow the horse to go its own
way. A horse knows where it is fed and, if given
a choice, will return to that place.
Never approach
a horse from the
rear or directly
in front. These
are blind spots
for the horse.





HORSEMANSHIP 27
.Tack
Tack
You will need several pieces of tack, or equipment, to ride
and care for a horse. The cost of equipment can be high.
To save money, you might buy used tack that has been
well-maintained. Whatever you buy, the tack must fit the
horse. Learning to properly use and take care of equipment
is important.
Saddles
The type of saddle you get will depend on your reason for
riding the horse. Distinctive styles of Western and English
saddles are available for dressage, show jumping, Western
pleasure, and saddle seat classes. You might choose an
English general-purpose saddle or a Western trail saddle
because both can be used for several activities.
Saddles are made of leather or a synthetic material.
Quality leather saddles are supple, strong, long-lasting, and
costly. Synthetic saddles usually are less expensive and lighter
and easier to handle, but they might not be as durable.
Tack includes
saddles, bridles,
harnesses, and
other equipment
you use for riding
or leading a horse.
Western saddle
CANTLE
HORN
FORK
POMMEL
JOCKEY
FENDER
LATIGO
STIRRUP
CINCH
SKIRT
BACK HOUSING
CONCHOS
FLANK CINCH
DEE
RINGS
CINCH RING


28 HORSEMANSHIP
Tack.
English and Western saddles have distinct differences.
The Western saddle was designed for driving cattle and is
also called a stock saddle. It has a higher cantle (the raised
back part), a higher pommel (the raised front part), and
longer stirrup leathers than the English saddle. The Western
saddle also has a saddle horn.
The heavier and larger Western saddle might give a beginner
more security, but it is harder to handle than an English saddle,
which is lighter and flatter and requires that the rider develop
a more secure seat, which can lead to better horsemanship.
On an English saddle, the rider sits closer to the horse, which
allows the rider to more easily use posture and leg movement
to communicate to the horse.
An ill-fitting or
poorly adjusted
saddle will
make the horse’s
back sore.
Consider the size and shape of the horse when
fitting a saddle. Have an experienced horseman or
horsewoman check the fit of the tack on the horse
to make sure the saddle does not slip, rock from
side to side, or pinch the horse’s withers.
English saddle
FLAP (RAISED)
POMMEL
SKIRT
KNEE
ROLL
STIRRUP
LEATHER
GIRTH
FLAP
POINT
POCKET
BUCKLE
GUARD
GIRTH
STRAPS
STIRRUP
(OR IRON)
STIRRUP LOOP
PANEL
CANTLE
SEAT


HORSEMANSHIP 29
.Tack
The structural support of the saddle is called the tree, and
it is the most important part of the saddle. It can be made of
wood or a hard synthetic material and is covered with leather
or synthetic material. The girth or cinch is a strap of leather,
cotton, wool, or synthetic material and is used to secure the
saddle to the horse. Flaps, skirts, and fenders protect the horse’s
sides and the rider’s legs.
Halters
A halter is a strap or rope used to lead animals by their heads
or to secure them to a fence or post. Halters come in a wide
variety of materials, but nylon, leather, and rope are the most
common. Page 56 shows a halter.
Bridles
The rider uses the bridle and reins to tell the horse where
to go, stop, or turn. Pulling or guiding the reins pulls on the
bit, which applies pressure to the horse’s tongue.
Bridle types include the single, double, and hackamore (a
bridle that does not have a bit). However, only experienced rid-
ers should use the double and hackamore bridles. Parts of the
bridle can include the headstall, browband, throatlatch, nose-
band, cheek piece, bit, and reins.
When positioning the bridle, it is recommended that
two fingers fit under the browband and the noseband. The
browband should allow the headstall to rest comfortably
Single rein Double rein
CROWNPIECE,
OR HEADSTALL
BROWBAND
CHEEKPIECE
THROATLATCH
NOSEBAND
SNAFFLE BITREINS
HEADSTALL
SNAFFLE
REIN
CURB
BIT
CURB REIN


30 HORSEMANSHIP
Tack.
behind the ears, just below the base of
the ears. The other parts of the bridle
can be adjusted to fit.
The bit is connected to the bridle
on each side of the horse’s mouth, and
a connecting metal bar rests inside
the horse’s mouth, placed in a gap
between its teeth. Hundreds of bit
designs are available, but one of the
most common is the eggbutt snaffle
bit. The half-cheek smooth snaffle bit
is another popular choice.
These single-jointed snaffle bits
should be fitted with about ¼ inch
clearance between the corners of the
A Properly Fitted
Bridle
The bit should be placed in the
toothless gap between the front
and back teeth. A correctly adjusted
bit should cause only one or two
wrinkles in the corner of the horse’s
mouth. However, this might not be
appropriate with horses that have
an unusually long or short mouth.
A bit that suspends too low will
bang against the front teeth.
A bit that is pulled too high
will press against the molars.
Snaffles Double
Bridle
Bit (Pair)
EGGBUTT
SMOOTH
BRADOON
HALF-CHEEK
SMOOTH
CURB
Western
Curb Bit
ROLLER SHANK
SHANK HOBBLE
CHIN STRAP


HORSEMANSHIP 31
.Tack
horse's mouth and the bit ring. Double-jointed bits are fitted
more closely to the width of the horse’s mouth.
When choosing a bit, it’s important to get an experienced
horseman or horsewoman to help you ensure a proper fit so the
bit doesn’t irritate or hurt the horse’s mouth, teeth, or tongue.
Saddle Pads and Blankets
The saddle pad, or numnah, adds comfort when the horse is
wearing a saddle.
Clothing
When you ride, wear clothes
that are comfortable and will not
impede riding. That can include
jeans or jodhpurs (breeches that
are worn in English riding).
Gloves should fit well and not be
loose. Western boots, long rid-
ing boots, or jodhpur boots with
heels are recommended. You
should not wear flexible, light
shoes, sneakers, or heavy
hiking boots.
Safety Stirrups and
Helmets
Horse riding can be danger-
ous, so take precautions to ride
safely. First, make sure you have
proper-fitting tack to help avoid
causing the horse to become irri-
tated and hard to control.
A proper riding helmet is
very important. Only helmets
approved for equestrian activities
should be used. Helmets designed
for other sports will not give you
the necessary level of protection.


32 HORSEMANSHIP
Tack.
Concussion
A concussion is a brain injury, caused by a blow to the head
or by a sudden change in motion of the head, in which the
brain bounces back and forth inside the skull. A person does
not need to be knocked out to have a concussion. Someone
with a suspected concussion should be assessed promptly by a
medical professional.
Care of Equipment
Your safety and the horse’s comfort depend on tack that is
clean and in good condition. To take care of tack properly, you
will need these items:
When participating
in Scouting-related
horsemanship activ-
ities that call for
you to work directly
with or around a
horse, you should
wear an equestrian
helmet approved
by the American
Society for Testing
and Materials
(ASTM).
Consider using safety stir-
rups to ensure that your
foot does not get trapped
in the stirrup if you fall.
Be sure the stirrups fit
your footwear. Use stir-
rups that are 1
⁄2 to 3
⁄4 inch wider
than the footwear.
• Saddle soap
• Sponges, for washing and
soaping
• Soft cloth
• Leather conditioner such
as neat’s-foot oil
• Metal polish
• Clean towels
• A knife
• A stiff toothbrush
• A saddle rack to hold
the saddle
• A bridle rack


HORSEMANSHIP 33
.Tack
To thoroughly clean the saddle, remove the
girth and stirrup leathers and, on English saddles,
remove the stirrup irons. Using a damp sponge,
wipe off dirt or any mud on the saddle and parts
you have removed. Do not forget the underside of
the saddle.
Use a soft cloth to help dry the tack. After
the tack dries, rub a sponge with wet saddle soap
and sponge the soap into the saddle using a cir-
cular motion. The sponge should be only slightly
damp so that the soap does not lather. Re-soap
the sponge often. Soap all leather parts, including
underneath the flaps. Clean the Western saddle
stirrups, which often are covered in rawhide. Wipe
off excess soap with a damp cloth. You can oil the
leather parts on occasion, but use oil sparingly.
If you have a fabric girth, it can be scrubbed
with a mild detergent. Rinse off the soap thor-
oughly and prevent rust by immediately drying and
polishing the metal billet buckles or cinch ring.
Do not put polish on the mouthpiece or wash
it with soap. Wash the mouthpiece occasionally
with warm water. Keep saddle blankets and pads
clean, dry, and well-aired.
Clean the tack after each ride, especially the leather
parts. If you cannot do a complete cleaning, at
least clean under the saddle and wipe the reins
clean using a damp sponge.
Store tack properly, such as in a well-ventilated
storage shed—not in places such as a car trunk or
dusty barn. Hang up the bridle, and put the saddle
on a saddle rack or saddle horse.





HORSEMANSHIP 35
.Grooming and Care
Aside from being
a necessary
task, grooming
allows you to
communicate
and build a closer
relationship with
your horse. Talk
kindly and softly
to your horse
while grooming.
Grooming and Care
Proper grooming of your horse is important. Dirty coats can
lead to fungus and other skin problems. Grooming gives you
a chance to look for parasites and wounds. Plus, grooming will
give you a sleek, good-looking horse.
Outdoor horses do not need to be bathed as often as sta-
bled horses because outdoor horses need to build up more natu-
ral body grease for protection against the weather. Also, outdoor
horses will roll in the grass or dirt to help stimulate their skin.
The most important grooming equipment are the metal
curry comb, block brush, body brush, and hoof pick.
If the horse has caked and dried mud or dirt on it, use the
dandy brush to remove the dirt by working in the direction
of hair growth. Wash off wet mud, or wait until it dries to
brush it off.
BODY
BRUSH
FINISHING
BRUSH
DANDY BRUSH
RUBBER
GROOMING GLOVE
FARRIER’S HOOF KNIFE
MANE AND TAIL
COMBS
GROOMING
SHEARS SPONGES
METAL CURRY OR SHEDDING COMB
MILD,
UNSCENTED
SHAMPOO
BLOCK
BRUSH
HOOF PICK AND
BRUSH COMBO
SHEDDING COMB
RUBBER
GROOMERS


36 HORSEMANSHIP
Grooming and Care.
Next, with the body brush in one hand, work from the front
of the horse toward the rear. Work the brush in the direction in
which the hair grows. Here are some other grooming tips.
• Take care not to bang the hard edges of the body brush
against bony areas.
• Keep the hand that is not brushing in contact with the horse.
Doing so helps to quiet the horse. It will also warn you of
any dangerous movement the horse may make.
Before grooming, tie the horse in a
safe place inside a stable or outside,
using a quick-release knot like the
one shown here. This knot enables
you to release the horse quickly in
case of emergency. Be sure the tie
is level with, or slightly higher than,
the horse’s withers. Do not tie a horse to a smooth pole. The rope
could slip down, and the horse could trip or get tangled.
Step 1—Tie the running end of the horse's lead rope to a strong
fence rail or post ring.
Step 2—Create a loop by bringing the running end over and around
the standing end (the part of the rope attached to the horse's halter).
Step 3—Make another loop with the running end, and push this loop
through the one you made in step 2.
Step 4—Pull the end of this loop to tighten the knot.
To undo the knot in case of an emergency, pull the end of the rope.
Remember, horses
have blind spots
directly in front of
and behind them.


HORSEMANSHIP 37
.Grooming and Care
• Use a soft brush or the body brush to gently brush over the
eyes and ears.
• After every few strokes, clean your brush with the
metal currycomb.
• Keep a routine of the areas brushed, starting with the near,
or left, side so that you do not miss an area. Brush firmly,
but do not be too rough.
• Use the body brush on the mane, forelock, and tail. Brush
gently, working through a few hairs at a time to avoid
breaking the hairs. Use your fingers to untangle any knots
while holding the hair in the other hand. After brushing,
you can smooth down the mane and tail using a damp
brush to help keep the hair in place.
• Pull long, unwanted hairs from the mane rather than cut
the mane.
• Brush the forelegs, paying special attention to the joint areas
and the area behind the pasterns. Do not use a currycomb
below the horse’s knees.
• With a damp sponge, clean the dirt and discharges from the
nose, lips, and eyes. With a different sponge, clean the rear,
the tail, and, if you have a gelding, the sheath. Wash the
sponges thoroughly after using them.
• A final polish is next. Use a dampened soft cloth to smooth
down the whole horse.
Normally, you
should not comb
or brush the tail
on a regular basis.
Doing so can
break the hair or
pull it out. Over
time, this would
result in a sparse,
thin tail.
Some horses might be ticklish between the hind
legs and on the belly. You might need to use your
hand to brush these areas.


38 HORSEMANSHIP
Grooming and Care.
Hoof Care
A horse’s usefulness depends greatly on the
condition of its hooves, which need daily
inspection and attention to stay healthy.
For example, rocks and other objects can
lodge in the hooves and cause bruising.
In addition, long-term exposure to bacteria
can lead to infections.
Hooves grow continuously. Starting when
a horse is about 6 weeks old, the hooves
should be leveled with a rasp (file) by a horse-
shoer (farrier) to prevent the bones from grow-
ing crooked. Lifting, inspecting, and cleaning
the hooves daily will prepare the horse for the
possible next step of shoeing.
Use the hoof pick to carefully clean the
bottom of each hoof from heel to toe.
Clean with the point working away
from you.
Rasping and shoeing should be done
only by a farrier.


HORSEMANSHIP 39
.Grooming and Care
Most horses are first shod at about age 2. Shoes help prevent
excessive hoof wear under rocky conditions. Horses with shoes
need a hoof trim and reshoeing about every six to eight weeks.
Horses with conformation faults can be helped by proper
shoeing. A horse that has flat soles or weak hoof walls probably
will need shoes. Shoes can protect the hooves from objects,
such as stones. Horses that are ridden in the winter, when the
footing can be slippery, will need the added traction that shoes
provide. Special cleats also can be used to enhance footing
under certain conditions.
It is best to keep horses out of wet, muddy areas because
these conditions can promote fungal infections. Besides thrush
and founder, which are discussed later in this pamphlet, other
problems with hooves include corns, bruised soles, abscesses,
cracks, splitting, and navicular disease.
A hoof pick probably will be the most important
item in your grooming kit. Always clean the hooves
before and after riding.
FROG
HEEL
CENTRAL GROOVE
OF FROG
WALL
BAR OF WALLSOLEWHITE LINE
COLLATERAL GROOVE
Horse's hoof
BULBS
BAR


40 HORSEMANSHIP
Grooming and Care.
Steps for Picking Hooves
Here are the steps to help you care for the hooves. Ask your
counselor to demonstrate this process.
Step 1—Put a halter on the horse and tie it to a secure fence,
rail, or post attachment with a quick-release knot. Make sure
the horse is standing square with its weight evenly distributed.
Step 2—Stand beside the horse’s left foreleg, facing toward
the tail. Run your left hand down the leg so the horse is aware
that you are going to do something. Many horses will lift the
foot when the hand reaches the pastern (just below the fetlock
joint and above the hoof).
Step 3—If the horse does not lift its foot, apply gentle pressure
with your thumb and forefinger to either side of the fetlock, or
firmly pinch the pastern with your thumb and index finger.
Step 4—If your horse still does not pick up its foot, lean
against the horse slightly, pushing its weight to the other
foreleg while trying steps 2 and 3 again.
A shod horse’s hooves should be picked daily. This
will give you a chance to check for infections,
foreign objects, loose shoes, and other problems.
A professional shoer at work


HORSEMANSHIP 41
.Grooming and Care
Step 5—Once the horse lifts the leg,
hold it in your left hand. Hold the hoof
pick in your right hand, and begin
cleaning from heel to toe to remove
debris. Pay particular attention to
cleaning the cleft between the sole and
the frog. Check for dampness and any
dark, foul-smelling fluid oozing from
the frog or sole. The frog should be
firm, with no discharge. If you find
problems, have a veterinarian examine
the horse.
Step 6—Check the shoes for loose
or missing nails. Make sure nails
are crimped down so they do not
pull out.
Step 7—Repeat steps 1 through 6 with
the remaining three hooves, working in
order from the near hind foot, the far
(right) forefoot, and the right hind foot.
To pick up a horse’s hind foot, stand
beside the horse’s flank. Facing the
horse’s tail, run your hand nearest
the leg down the back of the cannon
bone to the fetlock, and apply gentle
pressure with your thumb and
forefinger to either side of the
ankle as you did on the front leg.
When the horse picks up its foot,
pull the leg up and back toward
the tail and rest the inside of the
horse’s lower leg (the cannon bone)
on your thigh. Lock your arm over
the hock so that the horse cannot kick.
Step 8—Use a paintbrush to apply
a hoof dressing, especially if the hooves
are dry and brittle. Work from the inside of
the hoof to the outside.
5
8





HORSEMANSHIP 43
.Health Matters
Health Matters
A healthy horse has bright eyes, and the membranes under the
eyelids and nostril are an even, pink color. A healthy coat lies
flat and has a glossy sheen in the warm summer months, but in
cold weather horses will grow heavy fur to keep warm. The skin
should be clean and loose. The limbs should not have swelling.
An unhealthy horse could have many of the following signs:
If your horse displays any unhealthy conditions, consult
a veterinarian.
A horse’s normal temperature is between 100
and 101.5 degrees. The normal pulse rate is 32 to
44 beats per minute. A horse at rest will have
respiration of eight to 15 breaths a minute. The
temperature is taken using a rectal thermometer.
The pulse can be taken by feeling the inner surface
of the lower jaw, below the cheek and behind the
eye. Count the pulse for 20 seconds on a stopwatch,
then multiply by three.
• Red, yellow, white, or
purple membranes under
the eyes or in the nostrils
• A tight, blotchy coat
• Puffiness in the limbs
• Loss of appetite
• A cough, runny nose, or
watery eyes
• Abnormal
bowel movements
• Strong-smelling manure
• Thick and dark urine
• A protruding bone structure
• High temperature
• Uneasiness or restlessness
• Sweating while at rest


44 HORSEMANSHIP
Health Matters.
Regular Checkups
Besides having your horse examined by a veterinarian when
it is ill or lame, your horse also needs regular checkups. For
example, a horse needs vaccinations to prevent serious diseases
such as tetanus and equine flu. All horses should be dewormed
on a regular basis. A horse’s teeth should be checked once a
year. Older horses might need more frequent teeth checkups.
Dangerous Plants
If your horse grazes in pastures and fields, you will need to be
aware of the poisonous plants in your area. Check with a vet-
erinarian or horse expert to learn more.
Keep a calendar
and mark each
time that your
horse has been
shod, vaccinated,
and dewormed,
and when its
hooves have
been trimmed
and its teeth
rasped (floated). Make sure that horses on pasture have adequate
hay and/or grass so that they will not resort to eating
poisonous plants. Some of the more common poison-
ous plants include:
1. Ragwort, which also can be found in hay
2. Acorns, when eaten in large quantities
3. Buttercups
4. Nightshade
5. Hemlock
6. Bracken fern
7. Yew trees are extremely toxic, and all parts of the
tree, whether dead or living, are poisonous.
8. Red maple
9. Cherry (and related) trees, especially wilted leaves
from fallen branches
10. Black walnut trees are very toxic, and shavings
from these trees can cause laminitis when used
as bedding material.
1
2
3
4
5


HORSEMANSHIP 45
.Health Matters
A first-aid kit prepared specially for
your horse (with a veterinarian’s advice,
if necessary) will ensure that you have the right
materials available in case of an emergency. Store
the first-aid items in a sealable plastic container and
keep the container where you can reach it easily,
such as in the tack room.
First-aid kits for horses should include most of the
following items:
• Disinfectant
(rubbing alcohol)
• Antiseptic ointment
• Antibiotic ointment
• Swabs
• Sterile gauze
sponges or pads
(a variety of sizes)
• 3-inch gauze roll
• Adhesive tape
(2-inch rolls)
• Safety pins
• Instant ice pack
• Scissors
• Tweezers or forceps to
remove thorns
or splinters
• Fly repellent
• Equine thermometer
• Petroleum jelly
• Epsom salts,
for soaking
abscessed feet
First Aid
You will need a first-aid kit to tend to minor scratches
and wounds. Any serious injuries must be
treated by a veterinarian. If your horse
is wounded, take the following steps
while waiting for the veterinarian:
• Calm the horse by talking in a
soothing voice and stroking,
patting, and rubbing the horse
gently, quietly, and slowly.
• Slow the bleeding if necessary
by providing pressure, then
clean and disinfect the wound.
• Do not attempt to treat eye,
joint, or deep abdominal wounds.


46 HORSEMANSHIP
Health Matters.
To slow or stop the bleeding, place a pressure pad on the
wound and apply a bandage over that. You might have to
hold it in position. Hosing a fresh wound will delay clotting;
however, a quick light hosing to eliminate dirt or foreign
objects might be necessary. You also can clean the wound by
gently swabbing it or flushing it with a mild disinfectant.
Ailments
Keeping your horse and stable clean will help prevent many
of the ailments that can afflict a horse. Keep feed boxes and
bedding clean, as well. Make sure your horse has access to
clean, fresh water at all times.
The following common horse-related ailments require
immediate examination by a veterinarian.
Colic is pain in the abdomen. Colic can be mild or serious
enough to cause death. Some of the causes include moldy feeds,
internal parasites, overfeeding on grain when the horse is tired,
letting a horse gorge on feed while it is still hot after a workout,
or riding a horse immediately after a full feeding.
A horse with colic is in great pain. The horse will be
agitated, constantly moving, sweating, and trying to roll.
Rolling can be dangerous because it could cause a twisted
intestine, which requires emergency surgery. Halter an
afflicted horse to keep it from rolling. Walk the horse until
the veterinarian arrives.
Founder, or laminitis, is an inflammation of the sensitive
tissue in a horse’s hoof that usually causes lameness. It is one
of the most serious hoof diseases. A gap forms between the
hoof and the sole, pushing the coffin joint out of position. This
condition causes severe pain when the horse puts weight on
the affected foot.
One common cause is letting a horse eat in lush grasses.
Horses are not able to cope with large amounts of lush spring
grass or feed mixes that are high in sugars (carbohydrates).
Parasites such as roundworms, stomach worms, blood-
worms, or bots (botfly larvae) can infect a horse. An infected
horse might suffer from poor growth, anemia, a dull coat,
listlessness, and digestive problems. Strongyloides (types of
parasite worms) can damage abdominal arteries. Roundworms
can cause problems for young horses and yearlings. Colts and
fillies often suffer from pinworms, which cause severe itching
around the tail.


HORSEMANSHIP 47
.Health Matters
In addition to giving an afflicted horse deworming drugs,
regularly clean and remove manure from stables or indoor
areas where the horse is kept. Do not dispose of the manure
in pastures or near water or feed. Have a veterinarian screen
the horse’s manure for parasites a couple of times a year.
Respiratory problems and coughing also are common
horse ailments. An afflicted horse will cough and/or wheeze
because of irritation in the airway. This could be caused or
aggravated by dusty, moldy feed; fungal spores in hay; or
being ridden in cold air.
Strangles, or equine distemper, is a fairly common,
contagious disease that stems from an infection caused by
Streptococcus equi bacteria. Young horses between 6 months
and 5 years of age and very old horses are most susceptible
to the disease.
Symptoms can be swollen lymph nodes in the head
and neck regions, nasal discharge, lack of appetite, and high
fever. Isolate any horses showing these symptoms in a clean,
well-ventilated stall.
EPM, or equine protozoal myeloencephalitis, is a debili-
tating neurological disorder caused by a parasite that enters
the horse through infected drinking water or food and settles
in the spinal cord. Symptoms include lameness, weakness,
loss of motor control, loss of appetite, muscle atrophy (loss
of muscle), and paralysis. Tests cannot prove conclusively if a
horse has EPM.
Most experts believe that the source of the parasite is
opossum droppings. To help prevent the disease, protect water
and feed from opossums, conduct proper grooming routines,
and minimize stress to the horse.
Equine infectious anemia, also called swamp fever,
is transmitted by biting flies and mosquitoes. The ailment
attacks a horse’s immune system, and there is no vaccine.
Symptoms include high fever, loss of appetite, labored
breathing, pounding heartbeat, bleeding in the mouth, and leg
swelling. Because this is a viral disease, no drugs can effectively
treat it. Infected horses usually die within 30 days.
Moon blindness, or periodic ophthalmia, is the most
common cause of blindness in horses. Not much is known
about the condition, which causes an inflammation of the
blood vessels in the eye. It usually affects only one eye and


48 HORSEMANSHIP
Health Matters.
often recurs. Thoroughbreds 2 to 3 years old are the most com-
monly affected, but horses of any age can become afflicted.
Symptoms include redness, increased tearing, half-closed,
and painful-looking eyes, as well as swelling and tenderness of
the eye or eyes.
Monday morning disease, or azoturia—also known as
“tying up”—is most often noticed when a horse has worked
hard during the week while on full feed but gets sick when
put to work on Monday (or any day) after a period of idleness
during which the horse continued to receive full feed. Though
eating too much while idle is the cause, azoturia is regarded as a
more complex issue, involving type of diet, vitamin deficiencies,
and other factors.
When being worked or exercised again after the idleness,
the loins and quarters stiffen and cramps result. Other symptoms
might include a high temperature, sweating, and stiffening of
the legs.
Common unsoundness is linked to a horse’s conformation
and includes anything that inhibits or interferes with the horse’s
strong, natural instincts or that affects the intended use of a horse.
Lameness is the impaired movement of the legs. A horse
generally is considered lame when pain causes it to alter the
usual weight distribution on one or more legs. Lameness can
be caused from:
• Inherited conformation faults
• Bruised soles
• Cracked or badly trimmed hooves
• Tendon, ligament, or joint problems
• A sore back
• Founder
• Improper riding (also called “rider-induced lameness”)
Some people
believe the
recurrence of
moon blindness
coincides with
the phases of
the moon, thus
the name.


Subscribe today at go.scoutlife.org/subscribe
Use promo code SLMBP15 to get a special
print + digital bundle offer priced just for Scouts!
Get ideas
for your next
merit badge
adventure in
every issue
of Scout Life
magazine.





HORSEMANSHIP 51
.Feeding Horses
Feeding Horses
Although horses are built to forage, it is not always practical
to put a horse out to pasture. So, you will have to feed your
horse. When feeding, there are a few rules to follow.
• Provide an amount of feed appropriate to the horse’s activ-
ity level. Too much feed can cause digestive and circulatory
problems. Too little feed can lead to a loss of energy, and it
could harm the horse’s overall condition.
• Do not feed a horse that is tired or overheated. Let a horse
cool off sufficiently after exercise or work before allowing
it to eat.
• Water is critical for a horse’s health. It helps produce saliva
and other fluids, regulates body temperature, carries nutrients
through the body, and is important for digestion. A horse
can drink from 4 to 15 or more gallons of water each day,
depending on the weather, amount of work, and its age
and size.
Horses have small stomachs and do best when fed a little at a
time and often. After feeding, allow an hour for the horse to
digest the food before exercising or working it.
To determine a correct proportion between hay and grain
in your area, consult a veterinarian, horse nutritionist, or horse
breeder. It is generally suggested that a horse doing light work
(one to three hours daily) be fed 11/4 to 11/2 pounds of hay
and 1/2 to 3/4 pound of grain per 100 pounds of weight. It is
best to feed most of the hay (approximately two-thirds) at
night, and the rest in two feedings during the day.
Horses working or exercising under saddle for five to
eight hours a day need about 11/4 pounds of hay and 11/4
or 11/3 pounds of grain per 100 pounds of weight. It is best
to divide the food into four feedings over a 24-hour period.
If your horse
is stabled, give
it clean water
before feeding.


52 HORSEMANSHIP
Feeding Horses.
Feeding Tips
• Clean feed boxes regularly to keep them free of
moldy feed.
• Use only clean, bright, sweet-smelling hay.
• Avoid hand-feeding, which can lead to nipping
and charging.
• Remember that mares with nursing foals need
more protein than other mares, and young horses
usually need more protein than older horses.
• Do not store more than a two-week supply of
processed grain, and keep feed covered to avoid
contamination with rodent feces.
Types of feed include commercial grain mix, bran, barley, hay, oats,
corn, apples, carrots, supplemental minerals and vitamins, and salt lick.
Get a veterinarian’s or nutritionist’s advice before adding supplements.


HORSEMANSHIP 53
.Feeding Horses
Horses need sodium. Free-choice salt can be provided
by securing to the stall wall a white salt block that they can
access as needed.
Horses left to pasture spend much of their time
grazing on grass. They often have to eat a lot of
grass to gain enough nutrients. If the pasture grass
is poor in nutrients and vitamins, concentrated feed
mix can help provide a more balanced diet.





HORSEMANSHIP 55
.Ready to Ride
Ready to Ride
Learning how to handle a horse is just as much a part of rid-
ing as being in the saddle. A good horseman or horsewoman
needs to learn how to catch, lead, turn, back, saddle, and
bridle a horse.
Catching a Horse
When you first try to catch a horse, have a more experienced
person help you. Walk slowly toward the horse at an angle
while talking gently to let the horse know you are there.
Do not chase the horse if it runs. Continue walking slowly
toward the horse without looking directly at it, keeping your
halter or lead rope draped over your left arm. If the horse does
not let you get close, try standing still. It might get curious and
come to you. Approach from the left because that is where you
buckle the halter.
Haltering
Before approaching a horse, unbuckle the halter and attach
the rope to it. Lead ropes are about 5 feet long and 3/4 inch
in diameter with a spring or trigger clip on one end, which
attaches to the halter. Ask your counselor to demonstrate
haltering.
Never enter
a field of
horses alone.
Consider renting a good lesson horse by the hour
to learn how to ride and perform other merit
badge requirements.
Never approach a horse from behind or unannounced.


56 HORSEMANSHIP
Ready to Ride.
Step 1—Approach the horse from its
left shoulder. Talk to the horse gently
and reassuringly.
Step 2—Rub the horse's shoulder, then
place the lead rope around the horse's
neck. Hold the rope with one hand if
needed to restrain the horse.
Step 3—Gently slip the lower part of the
halter around the horse's nose and pull the
halter up with the halter straps.
Step 4—Position the halter strap over the
horse's head, just behind the ears, then
fasten the buckle.
To remove the halter, unbuckle and slide
the halter off the head. Store it with the
tack.
A correctly adjusted halter should
fit snugly, with the noseband 2
inches below the bony point of
the horse’s cheek. If the noseband
is too low, it could damage fragile
nasal bones and tissues. If the
halter is too loose, it will slide
around and could come off.
You should be able to fit two
fingers between the horse and
the noseband.
2"


HORSEMANSHIP 57
.Ready to Ride
Leading
Once the horse is haltered, stand on its near (left) side. Take
the lead rope in your right hand, right beneath the jaw. Hold
the slack folded in your left hand with your fingers around the
outside of the rope.
Position yourself at the horse’s shoulder and face forward.
Now you can guide the horse forward using the lead rope. With
your right arm near or against the horse’s shoulder, you can feel
its actions and anticipate its moves. Look where you are going
(not at the horse) and keep a decent pace, but do not rush the
horse. If the horse tries to get ahead of you, tug lightly a couple
of times on the lead rope to slow it down. If the horse tries to
charge ahead, circle the horse around you, using your elbow in
its neck if necessary.
Walk calmly but decisively. When you change directions,
always turn to the right. A trained horse might need only a
touch
on the neck to move to the right. Otherwise, you might have to
straighten your right
arm and push the horse’s head or neck. Always maintain your
position at the horse’s shoulder. Slow your pace when you
want the horse to slow down, and gently pull on the lead rope.
Before entering a narrow opening such as a doorway,
stop the horse. If necessary, increase the tension on the lead to
increase your control. Walk through the door in
front of the horse. If the horse starts to rush through and you
cannot hold it back, do not try to pass it. Stand still. Turn to
face the horse’s shoulder, even if you have to let the horse
loose. To avoid this situation, be sure you have trained long
enough so that you can control the horse before trying to lead
it through a door or gate.


58 HORSEMANSHIP
Ready to Ride.
Tying
When you tie a horse, use a strong lead rope; do not use reins.
Make sure to tie the horse in a safe place away from other
horses, barbed wire, machinery, movable equipment, and
other such objects. Use a quick-release knot so that it can
be undone with one tug of the free end in case of emergency.
The tying point should be as high as the horse’s head and
above the height of its withers. If the tie is low or slips down
a pole, the horse could get tangled in the rope. Also, do not
use a long rope; the horse could step on it, trip, or get tangled.
Mind the saying, “Eye high and arm long,” when tying a horse.
Saddling
Whether saddling a horse with a Western or an English saddle,
you will follow certain procedures. You might need help
controlling the horse the first few times you attempt saddling.
Halter the horse and tie it using a quick-release knot.
Then brush the horse to remove any caked dirt, remembering
its belly and brisket area. Talk to the horse reassuringly.
Step 1—Shake out the
saddle blanket or pad.
(Because horses are easily
frightened, do not do this
with the horse nearby.)
Inspect it carefully, removing
any objects that might cause
discomfort, such as burrs.
Step 2—Approaching the
horse from the near side,
place the blanket or pad
well up on the withers and
then drag it back a few
inches to smooth down
the hairs.
English saddles
do not come with
girths, stirrup
leathers, or stirrup
irons. These are
sold separately.
Western saddles,
on the other
hand, always
include stirrups
and usually
cinches, too.
To prevent rope burns and pinches, wear gloves when
working with your horse.
2


HORSEMANSHIP 59
.Ready to Ride
Step 3—Balance the blanket or pad evenly on the horse.
Make sure there are no wrinkles.
Step 4—Before placing a saddle on the horse’s back, lay all of
the dangling pieces such as the stirrups, cinch, and latigo over
the top of the saddle to prevent them from banging on the horse’s
side and startling it. On an English saddle, run the stirrup irons
up the stirrup leathers, or cross them securely over the top of the
saddle. On the Western saddle, lay the cinches, the right stirrup,
saddle strings, and other rigging over the seat.
Step 5—Grasp the saddle pommel with your left hand and the
cantle or saddle skirts with the right hand, and lift the saddle
slowly and high enough so that the flaps do not brush against
the horse. Place the saddle gently near the horse's withers. If the
saddle is too heavy, ask someone to help
you place the saddle.
Step 6—Slide the saddle backward
until it sits just behind the withers
Be careful to properly place the saddle
on the horse’s back, because if it is
too far back over the soft part of the
horse’s back, it can cause kidney
problems or back pain. If it is too far
forward, it will restrict the horse’s
shoulder movement.
Step 7—Reach under the pommel and
lift the edge of the blanket slightly to give
the horse some working space over the withers. An inch of blan-
ket or pad should extend in front of the saddle.
Step 8—Slide both the pad and saddle into position, and make
sure the saddle is level. Lift the pad well into the gullet of the
saddle. If the saddle pad has any tabs or straps to secure it to
the saddle, attach them. Go to the right-hand side of the horse
and secure the saddle pad on that side also. Then gently drop
the girth or cinches, making sure they are not twisted. Pull out
any saddle strings from under the saddle. On a Western saddle,
gently put down the right stirrup. On an English saddle, leave
the stirrup irons up until you are ready to mount.
Be sure to line
up the cinch
slightly behind
the front legs.
5


60 HORSEMANSHIP
Ready to Ride.
Step 9—Return to the near side
to cinch the horse. Do not fas-
ten the girth too tightly at first
because the horse will breathe
in and puff out its chest when
you first put on the saddle. After
a couple of minutes, when the
horse breathes out, you can
tighten the girth more securely.
The girth should fit snugly
under the chest or “barrel,”
behind the horse’s elbows. You
should be able to just slide your hand between the girth and
the horse’s skin.
If the horse’s skin wrinkles under the girth, move the left
foot forward with your toe. Or, pick up the left front foot firmly
and pull it forward to get rid of the wrinkles. Some saddles will
have a buckle guard fitted to the girth. Pull the buckle guard
over the girth buckles to prevent rubbing.
Latigo Knot
On a Western saddle, the cinch is often secured with a buckle.
However, some saddles require the use of a latigo knot.
Step 1—Loosely loop the latigo, or cinch strap, through the cinch ring
and Dee ring twice.
Step 2—Pull the latigo out to the side, cross it over the looped latigo,
put it up under the Dee ring and then out through the Dee ring.
Step 3—Place the latigo under the crossed-over section and pull it down.
Step 4—Pull up on the cinch and pull down on the end of the latigo
to take up the slack and tighten the cinch.
9
1 2 3 4


HORSEMANSHIP 61
.Ready to Ride
Bridling
Bridle a horse after saddling. Although Western and English
bridles differ somewhat, the procedure for bridling is basically
the same. Bridling is easier to learn if your counselor or an
experienced horseperson demonstrates how to bridle safely.
Step 1—Gently talk to the horse while you approach from
its left.
Step 2—Untie the halter rope, then gently remove the halter
and place it around the horse's neck. This way, the horse
To make sure the Western saddle fits, have an
experienced rider mount the horse. With the
horse mounted, three fingers should fit between
the arch of the pommel and the horse’s withers.
To make sure that the saddle tree is the correct
width, put three fingers with a flat hand sideways
between the saddle and the top of the horse’s
shoulder. If your hand fits too loosely, the saddle
tree is too narrow. If you have to squeeze your
fingers, the tree is too wide.
With an English saddle, have someone sit in
the saddle with his or her feet in the stirrups.
Again, slide your fingers under the pommel.
Three fingers should fit comfortably between the
horse’s withers and the arch below the pommel.
The saddle should not inhibit the horse’s shoulder
movement. Then stand behind the horse and
look under the saddle. You should see some light
between the horse and the saddle when the
horse’s head is down.
After you have checked that the girth or cinch is secure, adjust
the stirrups before riding. Your counselor or an experienced
horseperson can show you how to adjust the stirrups to fit you.


62 HORSEMANSHIP
Ready to Ride.
remains tied while you work. Keep the
reins over your left arm to keep them
out from underfoot. Unbuckle the
throatlatch and noseband, then put the
reins over the horse’s head and neck.
Step 3—Hold the bridle with the bit
in your left hand and the top of the
bridle in your right hand. Guide the
bit into the horse’s mouth while gen-
tly pulling up on the bridle with your
right hand. You might need to gently
press the horse’s gum or teeth at the
gap between the teeth to get the horse
to open its mouth.
Step 4—Continue to gently pull the bit
over the horse’s tongue by lifting the
bridle with your right hand and guiding
the bit with your left hand. Never force
the bit between the horse’s teeth or
gums. If you hurt the horse’s gums, the
horse might resist the next time you try
inserting the bit.
Step 5—Use both hands to position the
headpiece. Slide it over the horse’s ears,
one piece at a time, over the left ear
first. Be careful not to pull on the ears.
Step 6—Pull the horse’s forelock over
the browband, and then check from
the front to make sure the bit, nose-
band, and browband are level and not
twisted. Check again to make sure the
bit is over the tongue.
4
5


HORSEMANSHIP 63
.Ready to Ride
Step 7—Fasten the noseband,
if your bridle has one, so that
it fits snugly and inside the
cheekpieces. You should be able
to slip four fingers in the space
between the throatlash and the
horse’s jaw. You should be able
to place one finger between
the noseband and the horse’s
nose, and two fingers under
the browband.
Step 8—When putting on the
bridle, keep your head clear
to avoid being hit if the horse
throws back its head. Before
you fasten the buckles, check
to see that the bit fits the
horse’s mouth. If there are two
or three wrinkles at the corners
of the horse’s mouth, the bit
is too high.
After the horse is saddled and
bridled, lead the horse by holding
the reins under the bit with your
right hand. Hold the other end of
the reins in your left hand so that you are leading the horse with
both hands. The horse should move just by urging it with the
weight of the reins. Do not tug.
7





HORSEMANSHIP 65
.Riding
Riding
Riding is basically a matter of balance and control. You will
learn balance with practice, and control will come as you
learn the proper riding techniques. Learning to ride correctly
requires time and patience.
A good rider keeps arms and hands quiet, moving them
only back, forth, or sideways—never up and down. Do not
jerk the reins, and do not pull or tug very long or you could
hurt the horse’s tender mouth.
Develop a soft, relaxed, give-and-take grip on the reins
to help maintain easy contact with the horse’s mouth. When
first learning to ride, let your hands follow the bobbing of the
horse’s head by keeping your shoulders and elbows loose so
they can “open” and “close” with the horse’s movements.
Western Horsemanship
Western riding as it is practiced today developed on cattle
ranches in the Western United States and Mexico.
As Western horse shows grew more popular, the style
became standardized. Western-style riding includes trail, show
classes (such as pleasure and reining), and competitions that
include rodeo, cutting, barrel racing, and pole bending.
When learning
Western and/or
English riding,
you will use aids
such as your
voice, legs, hands,
weight, and
reins to control
your horse.
Even though a horse’s mouth is tender, it will
resist your pull on the reins. Because a horse can
pull harder than you can, it can develop a hard
mouth—one that becomes insensitive—if you pull
too hard or too long on the reins.


66 HORSEMANSHIP
Riding.
The obvious difference between Western and English riding
is that in most Western show events, the reins are held in one
hand only—the left hand. However, in classes for junior horses,
rules allow for two hands with certain bits and bridles. Also,
Western riders generally do not use their legs to maintain a gait.
Judges look for slack in the reins, which makes it important to
learn how to control your horse without tugging on the reins.
Western riders should sit tall in the saddle with head up,
back straight, shoulders level and square, and feet deep in the
stirrups with heels below the toes and knees slightly flexed.
Ride relaxed, but alert.
Mounting
Step 1—Recheck that the girth/cinch is
adequately tightened.
Step 2—Speak gently to the horse as you stand
facing it on the left side, even with the saddle.
Grasp the reins evenly in your left hand, keeping
them short enough to stop the horse if it tries to
move. Place your left hand firmly on the horse’s
neck, just in front of the withers.
Step 3—Steady the stirrup with your right hand.
Raise your left foot into the stirrup and brace your
knee against the horse.
Step 4—With the foot well into the
stirrup, take hold of the saddle horn
with your right hand and spring
straight up with your right foot
until you are standing with your
right foot even with the left. Lean
forward just enough to keep your
balance. Your left hand can rest on
the horse’s neck.
Step 5—Swing your right leg over
the saddle, being careful not to kick
the horse. Ease lightly into the saddle.
Step 6—Place your right foot in
the right stirrup. If the horse tries
to move, hold it in check with the
reins using your left hand. Hold the
reins in your left hand just in front of the saddle horn. Rest the
right hand on your thigh.
2
3


HORSEMANSHIP 67
.Riding
Dismounting
Step 1—Place your left hand, holding the reins, on the horse’s
neck and grasp the saddle horn with your right hand. Lean
slightly forward and shift your weight to the left stirrup.
Step 2—Swing your right leg backward over the saddle, again
being careful not to hit the horse.
Step 3—Continue to step down, place your right foot on the
ground, and remove your left foot from the stirrup.
Practice so that you can mount and dismount in a smooth,
easy movement.
The Gaits
Horses have four natural gaits—walk, trot, canter, and gallop—
plus some specialized ones.
The walk is the slowest gait. The horse alternates between
having three and two feet on the ground. The walk does not
require much physical effort from the rider.
The trot is a safe and efficient working gait for a horse.
Horses in good condition can maintain a working trot for hours.
However, the trot can be difficult for the rider who is jostled
upwards out of the saddle and meets the horse with some force
on the way down.
The canter or lope is a rhythmical gait that is typically
faster than a trot but slower than a gallop. Once you have the
feel, the canter or lope is a very relaxing gait—you simply follow
the motion of your horse.
The gallop, or run, is the fastest pace for a horse, with
all feet off the ground together in each stride. It should only be
done for short periods of time.
If you are short
or have a tall
horse, you may
have to lean into
the saddle,
remove your left
foot from the
stirrup, and slide
down on your
right hip to avoid
falling or getting
your left foot
caught in
the stirrup.
Beginning English
riders must learn
to post while
the horse trots.
Posting is
an up-down
movement that
makes the trot
more comfortable.
Learning to Canter
Working with a horse and learning how to canter or
lope takes time, patience, and lots of practice with
a knowledgeable instructor. If you are interested in
advancing your horsemanship skills and want to
learn how to lope or canter, get your parent’s permis-
sion first. Then find an experienced instructor who
can safely teach you how.


68 HORSEMANSHIP
Riding.
Reining
In Western riding, horses are taught to turn by the weight of
the rein against the neck. To turn left, move your rein hand
to the left so that the right rein falls against the horse’s neck.
To go right, move your rein hand to the right.
English Horsemanship
The basics of riding are the same whether the style is Western
or English. However, the styles have different traditions, equip-
ment, and purposes. Also, English riding techniques involve
coordinating the legs, reins, and balance to control the horse.
The rider might not feel as secure in an English saddle as in
the wider Western saddle, which has a saddle horn and a raised
cantle and pommel.
Events in which English riders can participate include
dressage, hunter or jumper, and eventing or combined training.
English riding clothes include breeches, which usually are
made of stretch material and worn with riding boots; a sweater
or thick shirt in cold weather; jodhpur boots, which are worn
with jodhpurs (pants made from two-way stretch materials
that are longer than breeches); a hacking jacket; a tie or stock
for hunting or hacking; a shirt with collar for showing; string
or wool gloves; and a protective cap. English riders also carry
a jumping, cross-country, or keeper whip to guide the horse
using a slight tap; it is never used to discipline or hurt a horse.
Dressage
In dressage (pronounced dress-AHGE), horse and
rider must perform a series of designated movements
in an arena before judges. The goal is precision and
harmony in movements. The hunter jumper course
is an obstacle course over fences that the horse
and rider must complete as faultlessly as possible.
Eventing, or combined training, is a three-day triathlon
for the horse-and-rider team. It combines the skills of
dressage, cross-country, and jumping.


HORSEMANSHIP 69
.Riding
Holding the Reins
With a single-rein bridle (see 1), to hold the reins with both hands,
each rein should come into your hand under the little finger and pass
between the thumb and forefinger, continuing on over the thumb.
To use one hand (correctly, the left hand; see 2), the near-side rein
should pass under the little finger and out through the thumb and
forefinger. The offside rein should pass through the hand in the oppo-
site direction, and on top of the near-side rein (in through the thumb
and forefinger and out under the little finger).
With a double-rein bridle (see 3), to hold the reins with both hands,
take the snaffle rein in your hands as described above for the single-rein
bridle, leaving the bight of the curb rein on the horse’s withers. Keep the
snaffle rein in your hands, open up the forefinger and second finger on
each hand and with them pick up the curb rein at about the same length
as you are holding the snaffle rein. The curb rein should be just a little
looser than the snaffle rein.
To pull the curb rein and loosen the snaffle rein, bend your hands
down at the wrists toward the horse’s withers, rolling the backs of the
hands toward each other if necessary to maintain tension.
To hold double reins in one hand (see 4), the snaffle rein is held
the same as for a single-rein bridle; the near-side curb rein should
pass between the second and third finger and the off-side curb
between the forefinger and second finger, crossing inside, the off side
over the near side.
OFF
REIN
1
OFF
REIN
NEAR
REIN 2
OFF
SNAFFLE REIN
4
NEAR
CURB
REIN
NEAR SNAFFLE REIN
OFF
CURB
REIN
OFF SNAFFLE REIN
OFF
CURB REIN
NEAR
SNAFFLE
REIN
3
NEAR
CURB
REIN


70 HORSEMANSHIP
Riding.
Mounting
Step 1—Recheck that the girth is adequately tightened.
Step 2—Hold the left rein in the left hand. With the right
hand, pull the right rein to take up the slack on the off side.
Step 3—With the left rein in the left hand, bring the hand up
until it meets the right rein on the horse’s neck just in front of
the withers. Take both reins in the left hand. The leftover reins
should drop neatly alongside the shoulder of the horse, where
they will not catch in the stirrup.
Step 4—Open the fingers of the left
hand enough to grasp a handful of the
horse’s mane to help pull you up. Do
not pull on the reins when you mount;
this will hurt the horse’s mouth.
Step 5—Take the stirrup in your
right hand and turn it toward you.
Place the ball of your left foot in the
stirrup, keeping your heel down.
Step 6—Grasp the cantle with your
right hand. In a springlike movement
from your right leg, push yourself up
and stand straight with the right foot
even with the left and your weight
balanced over the horse’s back. Be
sure not to jab the horse with your toe.
Step 7—As you stand in the left stir-
rup, your weight should be on your
arms and left leg. Lean on your left
arm and move your right hand from
the cantle to the right-hand side of
the pommel. At the same time, swing
your right leg over the horse’s back,
taking care not to kick the horse.
Step 8—Place your right foot in the
right stirrup, settle gently into the
saddle, and take the reins in both
hands.
5
6


HORSEMANSHIP 71
.Riding
Dismounting
Step 1—Gather the reins in your left hand on the horse’s neck.
Step 2—Place your right hand on the pommel, then take your
right foot from the stirrup and pass your right leg over the
horse’s back without touching it.
Step 3—Shift your right hand to the cantle.
Step 4—Keeping your weight on your hands, take your left
foot from the stirrup and drop lightly to the ground, sliding
down the horse’s side.
Position and Reining
Keep your head up and eyes ahead. Your back should be straight,
but not stiff. Keep your arms and hands flexible, and your elbows
bent. The reins should be held evenly in each hand in front of the
horse’s withers and about 2 inches apart.
Sit in the deep part of the saddle, not on the cantle.
There should be enough space behind you for the width of
your hand. Place the ball of each foot on the inside of the
stirrup iron so that your feet are turned out slightly and your
heels hang below your toes. Use your calves to apply pressure
to signal the horse. Keep your elbows close to your sides.
Both hands hold the reins in English riding, and horses
are trained to respond to direct pressure on the mouth. When
using two reins (one pair), let them pass between the last
two fingers of each hand, up from beneath your hands, and
out between the thumb and first finger. Your thumbs should
hold the reins in place. The loop that is formed falls over your
hands, down to the horse’s right shoulder.
Turning
When riding, always look in the direction you want to go. This
includes turning. The slight change in your weight in the saddle
helps the horse understand your requests. To turn left, move
both hands slightly sideways to put pressure on the right side
of the horse’s neck. Move the hands in the opposite direction
to turn right. While walking the horse, practice turning in both
directions, then circle the horse to the right and to the left.


72 HORSEMANSHIP
Riding.
Stopping
Learn how to stop your horse without jerk-
ing back or pulling too hard on the reins.
This action can hurt your horse’s mouth,
and it will cause the horse to begin resist-
ing you.
To stop while English riding, sit down
firmly in the saddle, and set your hands
while not yielding to the horse’s head
motion. Be firm on the reins, but gentle.
Posting the Trot
Once you have learned how to walk, turn,
stop, and back your horse, you are ready to
go to the trot. In English riding, you should
learn to post. This in an up-down, up-down
movement that makes the trot more com-
fortable for both you
and the horse.
Shorten the reins, bend slightly for-
ward, and use your legs or heels to urge
your horse from a walk into a trot. For a
moment just sit there, letting your knees
and ankles absorb the shocks and jolts.
To post, use your thigh muscles to hold yourself in the air
while the horse’s hooves strike the ground, thus avoiding the
jolt. Then let yourself down until the horse’s leg action pushes
you up again. Allow yourself to be “thrown” out of the saddle
with each thrust of a hind leg, and to land back in the saddle at
the instant of the next thrust. Repeat the motion in rhythm with
the horse’s movement.
Don’t stand up in the stirrups or heave yourself out of the
saddle. Let the horse do most of the work by giving the push
while you help by holding yourself up momentarily with your
leg muscles.
It will take practice. Most people find posting the most
difficult part of English riding. The trick is to balance from
your heels and knees. If your heels are well down and your
weight forward, posting is simply a matter of rolling onto your
knees and rising up and slightly forward about an inch out of
the saddle.
It is best to break
a horse into the
canter from
a walk.


HORSEMANSHIP 73
.Riding
You can throw your mount off balance if you post on the
wrong diagonal. Remember, post on the outside diagonal—the
leg next to the rail in an enclosed area.
To change diagonals, as you would in a figure eight at the
intersection of the two circles, don’t rise on the count. Instead,
skip one beat and rise on the following count. You will then be
on the opposite diagonal.
Backing While Mounted
Backing while mounted is helpful when you need to back up
a few steps to get out of a tight spot on the trail. Walk your
horse forward, gently but firmly restricting the motion so that
your horse lifts its leg forward then drops it back because it
cannot go forward without straining the rein. The horse should
only back one, two, or three steps. Keep your horse quiet,
calm, and straight while backing.
Correcting Poor Habits
To prevent a horse from developing poor habits, correct them as
quickly as possible.
Do not let the horse head for the barn, stable, or its “home”
every time it is nearby. Practice riding the horse in front of the stable
or barn without letting it stop there. When you are ready to dismount,
ride away from the barn, stop, dismount, and lead the horse back to
the stable or barn.
When a horse attempts to bite, push it away and say “No!’’ in
a firm voice. Praise the horse when it does not try to bite. If a horse
bites, you need to find out why. It could be that the horse expects a
treat. Restrict or quit giving treats if this is the reason. A horse might
bite during grooming or cinching if you are careless or too rough.
If a horse ever attacks with its teeth, do not attempt to deal with
it. Seek the advice of a horse expert.
Don’t come down with a thump. You should post
at the same speed as the horse trots and change
speeds as the horse goes faster or slower.


74 HORSEMANSHIP
Riding.
Backing Up Straight
As you teach your horse to move backward with a halter,
remember that horses dislike moving backward. Your horse’s
first reaction might be to raise its head and plant its hind feet.
However, there is an effective way to teach your horse to back up.
Step 1—Stand on the left side of the horse, near the
withers, with the lead rope in your right hand. Use the rope to
bump the horse’s forefeet back while using your left hand to
keep the horse’s nose straight. You might need someone else to
help. Just move the horse back a step at a time while saying
“back.” It might help to have the horse facing a wall so
that it can’t go forward.
Step 2—If the horse won’t move, push the horse at the
chest, where the muscles join. Apply pressure until the
horse steps back. Then release and repeat.
As the horse learns to move back, touch it lightly on
the chest less and less often until it backs with just the
pressure from the halter rope or when you say “back.”
Unsaddling
After your ride, make sure the horse has cooled off and
relaxed before taking it to the stable or barn. When you
have stopped the horse, pat it on the neck. Now dismount
to the left, and lift the reins over the horse’s head.
After dismounting an English saddle, run the stirrups
up the leathers, making sure they do not flop. Unbuckle
the girth on the near (left) side of the horse and lay it over
the seat.
On a Western saddle, lay the “left” stirrup over the
saddle or hook the stirrup on the horn. Unbuckle or untie
the latigo knot and completely release the cinch. Take the
cinch (latigo) strap and wrap it on the front D-ring a couple
of times to ensure that it doesn’t drag on the ground. Move
to the off (right) side of your horse and tie the cinch using
the saddle strings or the cinch tab.
Place one hand on the pommel and the other hand
on the cantle. Lift the saddle off the horse’s back and set
the saddle on the ground or store it in the tack room. Ask
someone to help you if you have problems removing and
carrying the saddle. Make sure the saddle pad does not fall on
Never back a
horse by pulling
or jerking on
the mouth!
1
2


HORSEMANSHIP 75
.Riding
the ground. It is usually best to prop it against a wall with the
pommel down.
Before taking off the bridle, strap a halter around the
horse’s neck so that you can maintain control. Undo the nose-
band and the throatlatch from the bridle, and lift the headpiece
and reins together over the ears. The horse will drop the bit
when you do this.
Next, fasten the halter and tie the horse while you put
your tack away.
There are two ways to carry a saddle. One way is to place
it on your right arm with the pommel in the crook of your
elbow and the cantle end in your left hand. The second is
to put the headpiece of the bridle and the reins on your left
shoulder. This will leave your hands free to carry the saddle.
Lastly, groom your horse and clean the tack.
Stable Safety
In case of an emergency, it’s important to keep certain items
handy in the stable. Spotlights, flashlights, fire extinguishers,
and ropes with easily loosened knots or snap fasteners all are
items that may be necessary in an emergency.
Fire Prevention Tips
• Stable horses in a building separate from machinery, fuel,
lubricants, paint, and fertilizers.
• Store feed and bedding in a building separate from where
horses are stabled.
• Keep matches and flammable materials outside the stable area.
• Pile manure away from the stable because manure builds heat.
• Buy or store only well-cured hay and bedding. Damp
grass is a hazard because it builds heat and might ignite
by spontaneous combustion.
• Do not allow smoking in the stable area.
As you remove
the bridle, do
not pull the bit
from the horse’s
mouth—you might
hurt the horse. Let
the bit fall out as
you remove the
bridle.
Keep a halter with
a lead rope on
each stall door.
In case of an
emergency, you
won’t have to
look for one for
each horse.





HORSEMANSHIP 77
.Horsemanship and You
Horsemanship and You
By now you know what it takes to be a kind and responsible
horseman or horsewoman. Just remember to practice your
riding and handling skills slowly and methodically. As you do,
you will notice that you become more comfortable and many
of the skills will become second nature. If you are consistent
with your handling and riding skills, you will be able to work
with any kind of horse.
It is important to be respectful of horses’ nature.
Remember that they do not think like people do, but if you
communicate with them in ways they understand, they make
wonderful companions and riding partners. One of the most
rewarding things about horsemanship is the deep and lasting
trust you can have with your horse.
You might discover that you enjoy horsemanship enough
to own your own horse or to compete in rodeos or jumping
events. Whether you use your horsemanship skills for pleasure
rides or competition, horsemanship is more than just riding a
horse; it is a practice of respect for horses and your relationship
with them.


78 HORSEMANSHIP
Horsemanship Resources.
Horsemanship Resources
Scouting Literature
Fieldbook; Animal Science, Mammal
Study, and Veterinary Medicine merit
badge pamphlets
Books
Bennett-Talbot, Betty, and Steve
Bennett. Games on Horseback. Storey
Books, 1999.
Haas, Jessie. Safe Horse, Safe Rider.
Storey Books, 1994.
Harris, Susan. The United States Pony
Club Manual of Horsemanship:
Basics for Beginners. Howell Book
House, 2012.
Hartley-Edwards, Elwyn. The
Encyclopedia of the Horse. DK, 2008.
Hayes, D.V.M., M.S., Karen. Hands-On
Horse Care. Trafalgar Square
Press, 1997.
Henderson, Carolyn. The New Book of
Saddlery and Tack. Sterling, 2002.
Hill, Cherry. Horse Handling and
Grooming. Storey Books, 1997.
Ramey, D.V.M., David, and Stephen
Duren, Ph.D. Concise Guide to
Nutrition in the Horse. Howell Book
House, 1998.
Rodenas, Paul. The Random House
Book of Horses and Horsemanship.
Random House, 1991.
Vogel, Colin. The Complete Horse Care
Manual. DK, 2011.
Magazines
Horse Illustrated
www.horseillustrated.com
Horse & Rider
www.horseandrider.com
Practical Horseman
www.practicalhorsemanmag.com
With your parent’s permission, visit
the Boy Scouts of America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org,
for a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


HORSEMANSHIP 79
.Horsemanship Resources
Organizations and Websites
National Reining Horse Association
Telephone: 405-946-7400
www.nrha.com
Pony of the Americas Club
Telephone: 317-788-0107
www.poac.org
United States Dressage Federation
Telephone: 859-971-2277
www.usdf.org
United States Equestrian
Team Foundation
Telephone: 908-234-1251
www.uset.org
United States Eventing Association
Telephone: 703-779-0440
www.useventing.com
The United States Pony Clubs
Telephone: 859-254-7669
www.ponyclub.org
Acknowledgments
The Boy Scouts of America gratefully
acknowledges the Horse Trail Guide
Committee of the Greater St. Louis Area
Council for its assistance with revising the
Horsemanship merit badge pamphlet.
We gratefully express our thanks
to Mary Peatman for her help with
this publication. Thanks also to John
Fitzpatrick for his assistance.
Thanks to Susan A. Herking of
the Certified Horsemanship Association
and Instructional Services Inc.,
and Phil Peterson, director, Miracle
Ranch, Poulsbo, Washington; Dr.
Dale Linebaugh, director, Miracle
Mountain Ranch Missions, Spring Creek,
Pennsylvania; and to Don Matschull,
Plano, Texas, for their expertise and
assistance. We gratefully express our
thanks to Terrance Brown, FAIA. who has
35 years experience trail riding, working
with horses, and serving as a merit badge
counselor in New Mexico.
The Boy Scouts of America
is grateful to the men and women
serving on the National Merit Badge
Subcommittee for the improvements
made in updating this pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration Credits
American Morgan Horse Association,
courtesy—page 18 (Morgan)
American Quarter Horse Journal,
courtesy—page 19 (quarter horse)
Chris Evans, River to River CWMA,
Bugwood.org, courtesy—page 44
(bracken fern and yew tree)
John Fitzpatrick and Mary Peatman,
courtesy—pages 30 (all), 31 (saddle
bag), 62 (both), 63, and 76
Mary Ellen Harte, Bugwood.org,
courtesy—page 44 (ragwort)
Im Your Gold Huckleberry, Tennessee
Walking Horse Stallion, owned
by Mary Bittner of Deer Creek
Walkers, Quitman, Texas,
courtesy—page 13 (palomino)
Steven Katovich, USDA Forest Service,
Bugwood.org, courtesy—
page 44 (acorns)
Ohio State Weed Lab Archive, Ohio
State University, Bugwood.org,
courtesy—page 44 (hemlock)
U.S. Department of Agriculture/
Bob Nichols, courtesy—page 3
U.S. Department of Agriculture/
Bill Tarpenning, courtesy—
page 13 (Appaloosa)


80 HORSEMANSHIP
Horsemanship Resources.
Wikipedia.org/Appaloosas, courtesy—
page 16
Wikipedia.org/Arsdelicata, courtesy—
page 13 (dun)
Wikipedia.org/Dan Dee Shots, cour-
tesy—page 18 (Tennessee walker)
Wikipedia.org/Ealdgyth, courtesy—
page 17 (Arabian)
Wikipedia.org/Paula Jantunen,
courtesy—page 13 (buckskin)
Wikipedia.org/Belinda Hankins Miller,
courtesy—page 38 (farrier)
Wikipedia.org/Kersti Nebelsiek,
courtesy—page 19 (paint)
Wikipedia.org/USDA/Bill Tarpenning,
courtesy—page 17 (Clydesdale)
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of
or are protected by the Boy Scouts
of America.
Daniel Giles—cover (grooming tools,
helmet); pages 6, 22, 26, 31 (boy),
32–33 (all), 35–36 (all), 38 (hoof
pick), 41–42 (all), 45, 52, 54, 56
(both), 61–63 (all), 70 (both), 72, 74,
and 76
John McDearmon—all illustrations
on the cover and on pages 10–12,
20–21, 27–29, 36, 38–39, 56, 60, and
69–70
Brian Payne—cover (bridle); page 34