CYCLING


CYCLING
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Cycling or check Scoutbook for the
latest requirements.
35881
ISBN 978-0-8395-3226-1
©2025 Scouting America/Boy Scouts of America
2025 Printing FPO


CYCLING 3


4 CYCLING


CYCLING 5
Contents
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Types, Parts, and Fit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Maintenance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
Riding Skills . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
Touring . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
Mountain Biking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
Cycling and First Aid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 82
Improving as a Cyclist . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86
Appendix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 88
Cycling Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 94





CYCLING 7
.Introduction
Introduction
A messenger weaves his way through a traffic jam in midtown
Manhattan. A lawyer commutes to her office in Topeka, Kansas.
A Scout zips down the street to hang out with a friend. All these
people are united by the bicycle, an amazing invention that has
been around for more than a century and is likely here to stay.
The bike is the most efficient human-powered vehicle
ever invented. With the energy it takes to walk a few miles per
hour, you can ride four or five times that fast. With a little more
energy, you can travel 50, 75, or even 100 miles in a single day.
How far and how fast you ride is really up to you. As long as
you understand how to keep yourself safe and keep your bike
in good condition, your bike can launch you on a lifetime of
adventure on roads and trails in your neighborhood—and all
over the world.
In these pages, you will
learn the basics of bicycle
types, repairs, maintenance,
equipment, riding skills, safety,
and touring and mountain
biking—information you
will need to fulfill the merit
badge requirements.
So what are you wait-
ing for? Grab your bike, put
on your helmet, and let the
adventure begin.





CYCLING 9
.Types, Parts, and Fit
Types, Parts, and Fit
The basics of bicycle design haven’t changed much since the first
chain-driven models appeared around 1885. Most bikes today
include the same main parts as those early models: a diamond
frame, two wheels, a chain that connects the pedals to the rear
wheel, handlebars that let the rider turn the front wheel, and a
seat (also called a saddle).
However, the comparisons end there. Modern bikes use all
sorts of innovations such as front and rear derailleurs, index
shifting, and carbon-fiber components that make them lighter,
faster, and easier to use. Modern bikes also come in a variety
of styles, each designed for a different purpose.
In choosing a bike, ask yourself: 1) what kind of riding will
I be doing? and 2) where will I be riding? Prices also vary widely.
As price increases, so does the overall quality of workmanship,
materials, and components.
The three primary types of bikes you will see are road bikes,
mountain bikes, and hybrid bikes.
Road Bikes
Road bikes are built for riding quickly and efficiently on
paved surfaces. They often have dropped handlebars that allow
for a variety of riding positions while providing less wind resis-
tance. They will generally have narrower tires to reduce rolling
resistance and front and rear derailleurs that can produce from
3 to 30 different gear combinations, with shifters integrated into
the handlebar brake levers. Road bikes have narrower saddles
for more efficient pedaling over long periods. The family of road
bikes includes touring bikes for riding long distances with pan-
The diagrams in the appendix will help you identify the bike parts
described (and set in bold) in this section.


10 CYCLING
Types, Parts, and Fit.
niers (packs) and gravel bikes, which excel at riding on both
paved and unpaved roads and paths.
Mountain Bikes
Mountain bikes (MTBs) are ideal for riding on unpaved terrain.
They have a more heads-up riding position, larger, lower-pressure
tires for better traction, and a wide range of gears. MTBs have
sturdy, compact frames and flat handlebars for quick handling.
Most MTBs have front suspension forks to absorb bumps, and
many now have rear suspensions for even more comfort and
control. Most modern MTBs have efficient disc brakes, and some
even have hydraulic disc brakes.
Hybrid Bikes
If you are going to be riding in the city or on multi-use trails,
hybrid bikes, also called fitness bikes, are a blend of road and
mountain bikes. They typically have a more upright riding
position than a road bike
and narrower tires than
a mountain bike. These
bikes are generally more
comfortable than road bikes
but aren’t as efficient, and,
while they can be ridden
on unpaved surfaces, they
aren’t as capable of handling
off-road conditions as a
mountain bike. Hybrid
bikes are a good choice for
commuting.The features that make MTBs ideal for
rugged ground also make them less
suitable for longer trips on paved roads.
Road bikes are designed to
reduce rolling resistance and
wind resistance.
See the chapter
on mountain
biking for more
information
about these
versatile bikes.


CYCLING 11
.Types, Parts, and Fit
Other Bikes
Other types of bicycles include:
• Comfort and cruiser bikes; with
heavier frames and wider tires,
they are suited for short trips on
flat terrain.
• BMX bikes are made for racing
on bicycle motocross courses
and trick riding. Their small
wheels and lack of gears make
them inefficient for road and trail
riding.
• Tandem bikes carry two riders,
and are therefore, suitable for
recreation or for some adaptive
uses.
• Recumbent bikes place the rider in a
reclined position with the legs extending
ahead rather than down to pedal.
• Folding bikes can be folded up and carried
onto a bus or train.
• E-bikes with batteries and electric motors
to assist the rider in pedaling are gaining
in popularity. Road bikes, mountain bikes
and hybrid bikes can all now be found as
e-bikes. Because they can allow a bike rider
to go at speeds faster than they can control,
e-bikes are generally not appropriate for
beginning riders. E-bikes are not appropriate
for the requirements of this merit badge.
BMX bikes, made for jumping and stunt riding,
are small-wheeled and highly maneuverable.
A recumbent bicycle or tricycle may
be easier for a physically challenged
person to power. Some are adapted
so that they can be pedaled with the
hands rather than the feet.
A tandem bicycle pay give
a visually impaired person
the ability to ride. Both
riders must work in a
coordinated way to steer
and power the bike safely.


12 CYCLING
Types, Parts, and Fit.
Parts
Being familiar with and knowledgeable about how your bike is
equipped makes maintaining it more manageable.
Brakes
Most bicycles have either coaster brakes or hand brake levers
that control rim brakes or disc brakes. Coaster brakes are
housed in the hub of the rear wheel, and are applied by
pedaling backward. While the hub protects them from the
weather, coaster brakes have several disadvantages. They take
longer to apply than hand brakes, they affect only the rear
wheel, and you must have the pedals in position for pedaling
backward to apply them.
Side-pull
hand
brakes
Center-pull
hand brakes
Cantilever
hand brakes
Linear-pull
brakes
Disc brakes


CYCLING 13
.Types, Parts, and Fit
When hand-brake
levers are fully
squeezed, there
should be at
least an inch
of clearance
between the
levers and
handlebars. If not,
the brakes need to
be tightened.
Levers mounted on the handlebars control rim brakes and
disc brakes. Stopping force is created by friction. In a rim brake,
that friction is from the brake pads pushing on the sides, or
“rims,” of the wheel; for a disc brake, the friction comes from
pistons in a brake caliper pushing brake pads against a disc
rotor attached to the wheel, like in a car. The brakes work
through either a flexible cable pulling the brake pads against
the wheel rim or disc rotor, or, for hydraulic disc brakes, a fluid
that pushes pistons into the brake pads and against the rotor.
Hand-operated brakes provide for more stopping power
and control than coaster brakes. However, hand-operated brakes
may need more frequent adjustment. Cables need to be checked
and occasionally replaced to prevent snapping; brake pads wear
down and need to be replaced.
Gearing
Gearing lets you adjust the bike’s efficiency—the effort required
to move the gears—based on speed and terrain. When you shift
to a low gear as you are climbing a hill, the wheels won’t move
as far on each pedal stroke, but you also won’t have to work as
hard. When you shift to a high gear when you are moving quick-
ly, each pedal stroke will move the wheel a greater distance.
There are three main types of gearing: fixed gearing,
multispeed internal gearing, and derailleur gearing.
FIXED GEARING
More bikes now have disc brakes. Disc brakes are
popular because they are more dependable in wet or
muddy conditions, provide better braking modulation,
and give the rider more control on slippery surfaces.
Moisture and dirt on wheel rims can greatly affect rim
brakes. Hydraulic disc brakes are low-maintenance
because the brake system is sealed and there are no
cables to fray or stretch. You can learn more about
bicycle brakes on-line or by visiting a bike shop.
Fixed gearing


14 CYCLING
Types, Parts, and Fit.
Multispeed
internal gearing
operates in the
hub of the rear
wheel or the
bottom bracket
and is connected
by a cable to a
control lever on
the handlebar.
A fixed-gear bike has only one gear, which may be high, low, or
in between. In this gearing system, the pedals always move with
the wheel. Fixed gearing is mostly found on utility bikes and
track bikes, although some elite riders actually prefer “fixies,”
as they are called, to multispeed bikes.
MULTISPEED INTERNAL GEARING
Bikes with multispeed internal gearing usually have three or five
speeds. The lowest-numbered gear is for pedaling uphill or against
strong winds. The highest-numbered gear is for traveling at a
higher speed downhill or with a tailwind. This system’s benefits
include weather resistance and easier cleaning and maintenance.
DERAILLEUR GEARING
A derailleur moves the chain (literally derails it) from a sprocket
or chainring of one size to a sprocket or chainring of another size,
changing the bike’s gearing. The chain passes through a guide, or
cage, that moves it to the various sprockets or chainrings as need-
ed. This cage is connected by a flexible cable to a control mecha-
nism near the rider’s hands. Some bikes have a derailleur on just
the rear wheel, while other bikes have front and rear derailleurs.
Determine the number of possible gear combinations by mul-
tiplying the number of sprockets (cogs) on the rear cluster by the
number of chainrings at the pedals. For example, a bike with seven
rear cogs and three chainrings (front sprockets) has 21 gear combi-
nations. Gearing available today ranges from five to 30 speeds.
Devices that control the derailleur come in a variety of
styles. They can be:


CYCLING 15
.Types, Parts, and Fit
• Ergonomic shifters that work in
conjunction with brake levers
• Levers mounted on the down tube
• Levers mounted on dropped handlebars
• Thumb-shifters mounted on straight bars
• Twist-grip shifters that work through
the handlebar grips
Shifters can work in two modes: indexed or fric-
tion. A “click stop” in the indexed system precisely
controls the shifting of the derailleur. Each click of
the shifter moves the derailleur one position. The
friction-style shifter has an infinite range of move-
ment. To shift gears, you move the lever until the
gears change, then adjust the lever to fine-tune the
mechanism so that the gears produce as little noise
as possible. Front-derailleur shifters may be either
friction or indexed, especially in integrated brand-
brake systems.
Wheels and Tires
Wheels can be described several ways:
• Diameter is measured in either millimeters or
inches. Note that even though the two dimen-
sions might be roughly the same size, they are
not usually interchangeable.
• The number of spokes varies according to the
bike’s use and rider. In general, a wheel will
have more and thicker spokes if it is designed
for rougher conditions or heavier loads. For
example, a road bike may have 28, 32, or 36
spokes per wheel, while a tandem bicycle may
have 48 spokes for the same size wheel.
• Bike wheels generally are made from one of three
materials: steel, anodized aluminum, or carbon.
Steel wheels are found on less costly bikes, are
slightly heavier than aluminum, and don’t work
as well in wet conditions as aluminum with
hand-operated brakes do. Carbon wheels, suited
for both paved surfaces and mountain terrain, are
found most often on high-end racing bikes.
Front
derailleur
Rear derailleur


16 CYCLING
Types, Parts, and Fit.
• Rim construction can vary, but virtually all
rim-and-tire combinations on bikes (other
than ultrahigh performance bikes) have
“clincher” rims.
Like wheels, tires are sized in inches or
millimeters. To find the size of a tire, look on
the label of the tire or on its sidewall. The first
number is the wheel diameter; the second is
the width of the tire.
Tubes are the rubber bladders that hold air
and expand inside the tire. They come sized to
fit a range of tires, which in turn must match the
size of the rims. A 27 × 1 to 1¼ tube would fit
a 27-inch tire measuring 1 to 1¼ inches; a 700 ×
25 to 32 tube would fit a 700-millimeter tire
measuring 25 to 32 millimeters.
Many bikes, particularly mountain bikes,
use “tubeless” tires and wheels, where a liquid
sealant is used inside the tire rather than an
inner tube. The sealant plugs minor punctures
to prevent air escaping, and, because there is
no inner tube, pinch punctures are eliminated and the tire can be
operated at lower pressures. Both the tire and the wheel must be
designed to work tubeless. You will also need to add or replace
sealant periodically after it has dissipated or dried out.
In a clincher tire, the inflated
tube presses the wire-embedded
edge, or bead, of the tire
casing outward, holding it
secure against the wheel.
Three types of hubs and axles are used for wheels. Some bikes have solid axles
with hex nuts on their ends to keep them tight on the forks or dropouts. Quick-
release hubs have a hollow axle through which a rod passes, permitting the rapid
installation and removal of a wheel. Many bikes now use thru axles where a large
bolt passes through the hub and screws into one side of the fork or dropout; the
bolt is loosened or tightened with an attached lever or with a hex wrench.


CYCLING 17
.Types, Parts, and Fit
Two types of air valves, the Schrader and the Presta, are
used in tubes. Schrader valves are the same as those used in car
tires. You push in a pin to release the air, while a spring shuts
the valve to retain air pressure. Presta valves have a
narrow, all-metal tip with a locknut on the end that can be
partially unscrewed. The valve floats freely once the locknut
is unscrewed; air pressure inside the tube pushes out on the
valve to retain the air. Once the Presta tube is brought to
operating pressure, the locknut is screwed tight.
Road bikes have narrower tires (left), which usually require higher
inflation pressure than the wider tires (right) on mountain bikes.
The Presta valve tube, bottom, is most often used on narrow rims because it requires
a smaller valve opening, which is the rim’s weakest point.


18 CYCLING
Types, Parts, and Fit.
Fit
Fitting a bike means adjusting it to fit your body’s dimensions.
The easiest parts to adjust are the saddle and the handlebars;
in extreme cases, you may need to replace parts such as the
stem or crank arms. When a bike fits you just right, you should
enjoy maximum efficiency and minimal discomfort.
Sizing
Choosing the correctly sized frame will help you ride with greater
efficiency, control and comfort. Different types of bikes are sized
differently. Road bikes come in both standard (S, M, L) and
numerical sizes. Mountain bikes come in standard sizes (S, M,
L). Bike manufacturers usually have recommendations as to the
correct size based on your height and inseam length. Because
frame size is one aspect of the bike that cannot be adjusted,
work with your local bike shop to select the right frame.
Fitting the Saddle
The most important adjustment is setting the saddle height.
When the saddle is too low, you put too much stress on your
knees. When the saddle is too high, you lose leverage and can’t
use the cranks efficiently. The saddle should be positioned so
Check the fit by straddling the top tube and lifting the handlebars
until the top tube reaches your crotch. On a road bike with a hori-
zontal top tube, there should be 1 inch of clearance; for a road bike
with a sloping top tube, look for 2 or more inches of clearance. For
a mountain bike, there should be 2 to 4 inches of clearance.


CYCLING 19
.Types, Parts, and Fit
that your knee is slightly bent when you are seated and have the
ball of your foot on the pedal in the 6 o’clock position.
To test the saddle’s height, put on your helmet, mount the
bike close to a wall, and lean one shoulder against the wall.
Place the ball of your foot directly over the axle of the pedal,
then pedal backward and check your motion. As you spin the
crank, your leg should almost—but not completely—straighten
out and your hips shouldn’t rock. After adjusting the seat
height, make sure the saddle is level, not tilted up or down.
Fitting the Handlebars
As a general rule, the top of the handlebars should be about an
inch below the height of the saddle, so your weight is balanced
between the saddle and the handlebars. (This guideline does
not apply to bicycles like utility-style bikes for which a more
upright position is usually preferred.) Your body proportions,
Some saddles can be adjusted forward or backward. If your
saddle has this feature, do the following: Put the right pedal in
the 3 o’clock position and center the ball of your right foot on the
pedal axle. Hang a weighted string next to the bottom of your
right kneecap. The string should pass through the center of the
pedal axle. If the string is behind the axle, move the saddle for-
ward. If it is in front, move the saddle backward. Next, make sure
the saddle is level and not tilted up or down.


20 CYCLING
Types, Parts, and Fit.
flexibility, and riding style will help you determine the most
comfortable, efficient handlebar placement. Your local bike
shop can help you fine-tune this adjustment.
You may be able to make small adjustments to the height
of your handlebars. If your bike has a quill-type (threaded)
handlebar stem, loosen the stem expander bolt at the top of the
On a road bike, the handlebar ends should be tilted up or
down so they are parallel to the ground. If the handlebars are
in the correct position, your back should be at a 45-degree
angle when you are riding. (This angle is a suggested guide-
line; your personal preference may vary.) If not, you may have
to change to a different size handlebar stem or adjust the
height of the bars.
These are the basic, beginning adjustments to your
bike. As you ride more miles, you may find that
minor adjustments will lead to large gains in comfort
and efficiency.


CYCLING 21
.Types, Parts, and Fit
For a proper mountain bike fit, bend your arms slightly to help absorb
shock. Due to height and handlebar design, you may need to adjust your
handlebar placement to accommodate your riding style and for comfort.
stem to raise or lower the stem, making sure you do not extend the stem beyond
the marked limit. For a threadless headset, you might be able to place spacers
under the stem if the steerer tube is long enough or replace the stem with one that
raises or lowers the handlebars. Consult your local bike shop for advice.
As you ride more miles, you might find that minor adjustments will sometimes
lead to large gains in comfort and efficiency.


There might be times when repairs are easier with the bike
upside down. Avoid scuffing or damaging the handlebars,
shifters, grips, or head unit. Be careful to not to damage
hydraulic disk brakes or other sensitive components.


CYCLING 23
.Maintenance
Maintenance
The bicycle is a very simple machine. As long as you take care of
it, it will give you many miles of riding pleasure. The information
in this chapter will help you get started. As you read, keep in mind
requirements 2, 3, and 5, as well as the Bicycle Safety Checklist in
the appendix.
How much maintenance should you do? That depends on
you. If you are mechanically inclined and have a good set of
tools, you can service most parts of your bike. If you do not have
a clear idea of what you are doing, you should leave everything
but routine maintenance to an experienced mechanic.
Unless you are skilled in bike maintenance and repair,
have a bike mechanic inspect and service your bike once a
year. This can include cleaning and replacing bearings (bottom
bracket, headset, and wheel bearings), replacing worn cables
and housings, replacing brake pads, replacing the chain if worn
beyond limits, checking the suspension (for mountain bikes),
and replacing tires. If you ride long distances or in adverse
conditions, your bike might need servicing more often. There are
on-line resources with detailed instructions and videos on how to
perform many bike repairs.
Just as important as annual servicing is preventive
maintenance. Before every ride, remember your ABCs:
• A: Check the air pressure in your tires and inspect the tires
for cracks and cuts from glass. Remove anything stuck in the
tires. Debris, thorns, or other objects may eventually pierce
the tube if they haven’t already.
• B: Make sure your brakes are working properly. The pads
should be in adjustment and not too worn, the cables should
be taut and not frayed at the ends, and any quick-release
mechanisms or thru axles should be fastened correctly.
• C: Make sure the chain is clean and well-lubricated.
If you have ridden in the rain, clean and lubricate the
chain immediately.
You can find
helpful bike
maintenance
books at your
local library,
bookstore, online,
or at a bike shop.


24 CYCLING
Maintenance.
Tools
Most bikes have metric-sized nuts and bolts, and it is important
to use the correct tools to remove and tighten them. Except in
an emergency, do not use adjustable tools to turn nuts and bolts,
because these tools tend to strip or round the corners of the
fasteners. Instead, use the correct size of box, open-end, or Allen
wrench. Special wrenches called cone wrenches work well when
open-end wrenches are too thick.
34
5
7
8
9
10
6
1
2
SCREWDRIVERS
Standard (slotted),1
⁄8 inch and 3
⁄4 inch
Phillips, small and medium heads; used
on derailleur-adjustment screws and
accessory-mounting screws
WRENCHES
Box or open-end wrenches, 8 to 17
millimeters (1-millimeter increments);
used for various nuts and bolts
• 6-inch and 12-inch adjustable wrenches;
used for adjusting brake toe-in and
headset-bearing work
Allen wrenches, standard
4 to 8 millimeters
PLIERS/CUTTERS
Vise grip–type pliers, locking 6-inch;
used for grabbing bolts rounded by
adjustable wrenches
Cable and housing cutters; used to cut
cables and cable housings
MALLET—1-pound wooden or rubber
mallet; used for loosening handlebar
expander bolt (usually found on
older bikes)
FLOOR PUMP—high-pressure (150 psi)
pump with built-in air gauge; used for
underinflated tires; should work with
Presta and Schrader valves
TIRE TOOLS—set of plastic tire levers;
used to remove clincher tires
CHAIN TOOL—metal tool that removes
pins from chains; used to break and
rejoin chains
2
3
10
7
8
9
1
4
5
6


CYCLING 25
.Maintenance
Except for the floor pump, tire tools, and chain tool, which
can be purchased at bike shops, the tools pictured usually can be
found around the house or purchased at a local hardware store.
Many bike shops sell tool kits that include the most commonly
used tools.
Cleaning and Lubricating
You should spend some time each week inspecting, cleaning,
and lubricating your bicycle. If you ride fairly often, check the
condition of your bike more frequently. By finding potential
trouble spots early, you can avoid breakdowns on the road.
The parts of the bike that are not lubricated can be cleaned
with a soft brush, a rag, and a mild detergent solution. These
parts include the spokes, wheel rims, and tires. After washing,
rinse and dry everything well.
All painted parts of the bicycle can benefit from an appli-
cation of car wax, which makes cleaning easier the next time.
Take great care that the wax doesn’t get into the drivetrain or
on braking surfaces. The film of oil and dirt should be removed
from the rims of the wheels or brake discs so that the brakes
will work smoothly and effectively. After washing the wheels
with soap and water, wipe the rims with a clean, dry rag.
Never wash
your bike with
high-pressure
water (like in a
drive-through car
wash) because
water will be
forced into
bearings,
causing rust.
A good time to inspect the drive train and the rest of the bike for worn or broken
parts is right after it has been cleaned.


26 CYCLING
Maintenance.
Cleaning the drive train of the bike (chain, chain rings,
cassette, and derailleurs) may be a little messier and is best done
outside. A bike-specific degreaser or grease-cutting dishwashing
liquid works well to clean the drive train; avoid automotive
degreasers, which generally are too harsh. Begin by cleaning the
rear cassette with a brush; an old toothbrush can work. Then
clean the front chain rings. To clean the chain, a chain scrubber
with degreaser will remove the grit trapped in the chain’s rollers.
If you do not have a chain scrubber, an old toothbrush can work
here too. After cleaning the drive train components, wipe them
dry and inspect them for wear. Worn chains, chain rings, and
cassettes can cause poor shifting.
Inspect the frame for bulges or cracks in the metal or paint,
especially at the joints. Look at the wheels for cracks in the rim,
broken spokes and spoke holes, and irregularities. Scan the whole
drivetrain for worn, bent, or cracked parts. Make sure that every
bolt and screw on the bike is tight, taking care not to overtighten
or strip screws or parts, and check the tires for anything unusual.
Damaged tires must be replaced immediately.
Drive train of mountain bike
Be careful not to let lubricant drip in brake pads, rims, or disc rotors.
If it does get on any brake parts, it is nearly impossible to remove and
may require replacing brake pads and cleaning rims or disc rotors
with alcohol.


CYCLING 27
.Maintenance
Lubricating
Like any machine, your bike needs proper lubrication to work
best. The lubricant you use depends on the part you are
lubricating. A good rule: “Less is best.” Always wipe away excess
lubricant, and prevent lubricant from getting on other parts, such
as holding a cloth behind the part when using spray lubricant.
Chain Lube: The part you will lubricate most often is the
chain. Always start with a clean chain. Applying new lube on top
of old leaves the grit and dirt in the old lube that will grind down
your drive train. There are two common types of chain lube: “wet”
lube, which is designed for wet conditions and does not wash off
easily; and “dry” lube, which is designed for dry conditions and
does not attract as much dirt and grit. Apply chain lube weekly or
after riding in wet conditions.
Grease: A quality bicycle grease is used on closed
components, such as headset bearings, wheel bearings, and
bottom bracket bearings. You should regrease those components
at least annually; bikes with sealed cartridge bearings may
not require as frequent lubrication or may not be able to be
re-greased at all.
Light Oils: Lighter oils containing PTFE are best for
lubricating pivot points on derailleurs, jockey wheels, brake levers,
and rim brake calipers. Take care when lubricating brake calipers
not to get lubricant on brake pads, wheel rims, or disk rotors.
Besides lubricants, there are a few other products you may
use on your bike.
• Thread lock is an adhesive applied to the threads
of screws, nuts and bolts to prevent loosening and
corrosion. Generally, use “blue” medium-strength thread
lock on bikes. Thread lock must be applied to a clean
surface. Thread lock may be used on handlebar stem
bolts, brake caliper bolts, chain ring bolts, dropout
hangers, or any place where vibration could cause a
fastener to work loose.
• Anti-seize compound is a lubricant that reduces friction
in threaded and press-fit connections for easy assembly
and disassembly as with bottom brackets, pedal
threads, pressed headset cups, seat posts, and quill
stems. It is used where two metals come into contact,
to prevent them from reacting and becoming stuck.
• Carbon-fiber paste is used on carbon-fiber seat posts,
handlebars and stems to reduce slippage without having
to use too much torque on clamps and bolts.


28 CYCLING
Maintenance.
If your bike has a quill (threaded) stem, clean the stem
regularly, applying a thin coat of grease. Headset bearings need
to be properly lubricated for the steerer fork to turn freely. For
threadless headsets with cartridge bearings, you may not be able
to lubricate the bearings, but they should be replaced when they
start to bind or stick. Some headsets allow for the bearings to be
re-greased, but pitted and corroded bearings should be replaced.
These may be jobs best left to your local bike shop. Seat posts
should be cleaned to prevent them from becoming corroded and
wedded to the seat tube. For alloy seat posts in an alloy frame, a
thin coat of grease should be applied. For carbon posts and frames,
use a carbon fiber paste to prevent the seat post from slipping.
Brakes
Brakes are the most important components on a bicycle because
they stop a bicycle in motion or help control its speed on a
descent. They should function at maximum
efficiency all the time. Coaster brakes should be
adjusted and serviced only by a bicycle repair
specialist, but you can adjust hand brakes with a
little effort.
For the remaining adjustments, be sure
your wheels are true, or laterally aligned. To
check, spin the wheel. If it has a noticeable
side-to-side wobble or up-and-down “hop,” it’s
not true. Bike shops are well-equipped to true
wheels.
Brake Pads
If your bike has caliper brakes, center-pull
brakes, or linear-pull (“V”) brakes, you will
need to check the brake pads that push against
the wheel rim for wear. If there is less than ¼
inch of rubber outside the brake pad base, or
if the pads are glazed and hard, replace both
brake pads on that assembly. To make sure
you get the correct replacements, take the old
pads to a bike shop as examples. Worn brake
pads can be shaped with a file or sandpaper
to remove any “shelves” formed by the pads
riding below the wheel rim. The file also will
remove any glazing from the surfaces of pads.
Keeping hand
brakes in good
working order
and maintaining
air pressure in
your tires are
the maintenance
tasks you will
perform most
frequently.
Front linear pull brake
Front hydraulic disc brake


CYCLING 29
.Maintenance
Loosen the anchor bolt or quick
release (shown here). On side-pull
brakes, this bolt is on the arm. On
center-pull brakes, this bolt is on
the bridge-wire hook. The main
brake cable is now free to move,
and you can adjust the brake
pads so that they are aligned with
the side of the rim when moved
against the rim.
The brake blocks
should not ride
above the rim on
the tire, nor should
they extend below
the side of the rim.
The front edge of the brake
pad should be “toed in” so it
contacts the rim slightly before
the rear edge. Gently bend the flat
surfaces of side-pull brake arms,
or adjust the washers on center-
pull brakes. Once the brakes are
aligned with the rim, have a friend
hold the brake pads (or use a tool
or a piece of string), then tighten
their bolts to secure them. You
also do this to fix squeaky brakes.
Adjusting Caliper-Rim Brakes


30 CYCLING
Maintenance.
Adjusting Linear-Pull Brakes
5. Use the barrel adjuster to fine tune cable tension. If the brakes are not
centered, adjust the screws on the brake arms using a screwdriver or hex
wrench until the brake pads are an equal distance from the rim, then If not
already there, place an end cap on the cable and tuck the cable end down
along the brake arm.
Adjust brake pads by loosening the mounting nut and aligning the pad
with the rim of the wheel. Pull the brake arm toward the rim to hold the
pad in position when retightening the mounting nut. Add a little toe-in so
that front of the pad contacts the rim first.
2. If the brake lever moves more than
halfway toward the handlebar,
add tension to the brake cable. If
pads engage immediately when
you pull the lever, the cable is too
tight. Back out the barrel adjuster
at the brake lever to allow for later
adjustment.
2
1. Align the brake pads and
loosen the mounting bolt.
1
4. There should be an equal
space between the rim and
pads on each side.
4
3. Loosen the cable pinch bolt.
Pull the cable to move the
brake arms together until the
pads are almost touching the
rim. Tighten the pinch bolt.
3


CYCLING 31
.Maintenance
Disc Brake Pads
If your bike has disc brakes, replace the pads
when they wear down to 3 millimeters thick
or less. Inspect your disc brake pads at least
monthly and check the disc rotor to make sure
it is not warped or bent. Hydraulic brakes require
much less maintenance than rim brakes and are self-centering as
the brake pads wear down. For mechanical brakes, you may need to
adjust the tension of the brake cable as well as adjust the centering
of the brake pads in the caliper. Check the manufacturer’s
instructions for your brakes to see how to do these tasks. If
your disc brake pads have become contaminated, clean the pads
with isopropyl alcohol, which can also be used to clean the rotors.
You can also lightly sand the surface of the pads. Do not use any
solvent other than isopropyl alcohol to clean pads. Disc brake
pads and pin
Barrel adjuster on cable disc brake
Barrel adjusters on
brake and shift levers


32 CYCLING
Maintenance.
Brake Cables
If your brake cables are too tight, your bike might lurch when
you try to stop. If they are too loose, you might not be able to
brake effectively.
Inspect the brake cables and housings. If a cable housing
has any kinks or crimps, replace it. The brake cable also should
be replaced if there are signs of wear, loose strands, or rust on
the outside. If you have any doubt about your brake cables and
housings, replace them. Your brakes are critical to your safety.
Before performing any cable adjustments, make sure the
cable-adjusting barrel, or barrel adjuster, is screwed all the way
in, less one turn. If your bike has quick-release devices, make
sure they are in the closed/down position.
1. To adjust your brake cable, loosen the main anchor bolt. Squeeze the brake lever;
unscrew the barrel adjuster. This frees the cable for loosening or tightening to
decrease or increase cable tension.
2. After pulling the main brake cable taut through the anchor bolt, screw in the bar-
rel adjuster and tighten the bolt. If you need to use pliers, do so carefully to avoid
causing the cable to fray. Check the tension and readjust if necessary.
Adjusting Brake Cables
1 2


CYCLING 33
.Maintenance
3. After the brakes are centered, check the whole brake system by squeezing the
lever several times to see that the parts work promptly, nothing slips, and
everything returns to a natural position when the levers are released.
Tires
Improperly inflated tires probably cause greater maintenance
expense than any other part. Underinflated tires result in pre-
ventable cuts and damage to tires, tubes, and rims. Overinflated
tires result in poor handling, an uncomfortable ride, and
increased wear
Use only a frame pump or floor pump (or a CO2 cartridge)
to inflate your tires. Service station air pumps can blow out tires.
Check your tires frequently for breaks, cracks, and worn
treads. Replace tires that are suspect in any way.
Cantilever and linear-pull brakes used on mountain bikes are mounted
differently from side-pull and center-pull hand brakes. However, the
same kinds of adjustments are necessary: rim clearance, pad alignment,
and toe-in.
3


34 CYCLING
Maintenance.
Fixing a Flat
Removing a flat tire from the wheel completely makes it easier
to find the cause of the flat and to put everything back together
without damaging the tube. Do not rush, and don’t skip any
steps. By being patient and following the procedure, you will
be less likely to have recurring flats.
Step 1—First, check to see if the
reason for the flat is the valve.
The core in a Schrader stem can
be tightened with a special cap or
valve core wrench, but tubes with
Presta stems must be replaced.
Step 2—If the flat is on the rear
wheel, turn the crank by hand
and shift to the smallest cog on
both the rear sprockets and the
chainring. Deflate the tire com-
pletely, release the brakes if pos-
sible, and remove the wheel from
the bike.
Keep tires inflated within the
range recommended by the
manufacturer. This range is
stamped on the side of each
tire.
1
2


CYCLING 35
.Maintenance
Step 3—Slip a tire lever between the rim
and the tire on the side of the wheel facing
you. Slide the tool around the rim until the
tire is loose on that side.
Then, starting at a
point opposite the
valve stem and
leaving the tube
inside the casing,
remove the tire
completely. Lay
the tire on top of
the wheel exactly
the way it was
before you removed it.
Pull the tube from the tire,
maintaining the relative positions of the
casing and tube.
Step 4—Inflate the problem tube
with enough air that you can find
any holes by feeling or hearing the
air escape. Dunking the tube in
water may help detect holes that are
otherwise difficult to locate. Check
the corresponding section of the tire
for a sharp object that might have
caused the flat. Be absolutely sure the
object is gone before you continue.
Step 5—Replace with a new tube
and/or tire, if necessary, or follow
the procedures below to fix the flat.
a. Using a “boot.” If the hole in
the tire casing is bigger than the
head of a straight pin, you should
repair the tire to prevent the tube
from squeezing through the hole
and bursting. A boot can be made
from duct tape, a scrap of denim,
a quarter-sized piece of a plastic
milk jug, a tire patch, or even a
folded dollar bill. Place the boot
over the hole inside the tire before
installing the tube.
3
5
4


36 CYCLING
Maintenance.
b. Patching a tube. Deflate the tube completely and dry it, if
necessary. Clean an area around the hole that is just a little
bigger than the patch you will use, then apply the patch,
making sure it adheres tightly to the tube. This patch should
suffice until you can get home and replace the tube.
The easiest patches to use are self-adhesive and don’t
require glue. If the patches in your repair kit require glue,
carefully follow these instructions: Roughen the tube surface
with sandpaper or the metal roughener included in patch
kits. Apply one thin coat of glue. While waiting for it to dry,
raise the protective backing at one corner of a patch so that
the backing will be easy to remove when you are ready for
it. Apply a second coat of glue and let it dry until the glue
loses its shine.
Peel the backing off the patch, being careful not to let anything
touch its clean surface, and center it over the hole. The patch
should stick immediately; hold it down if it does not, and
make sure the edges of the patch are well sealed.
Step 6—To make remounting the
tire easier, use talcum powder to
coat the inside of the tire, the bead
of the casing, and the tube.
Next, inflate the repaired or
replacement tube with enough air
to give it a soft shape, and insert
the tube into the tire so that the
valve stem is aligned with the label
on the tire. Working with the tire
and tube as a unit, insert the valve
stem into the hole in the wheel,
and work one end of the tire onto
the wheel. The powder should allow you to do this using only
your hands. If you must use a tool to flip the tire onto the rim,
be very careful not to cut the tube.
Adjust the tube so that it is not pinched between the casing
and the rim and so that the valve stem is perpendicular to the
rim. Starting at a point opposite the valve stem, mount the other
side of the tire onto the wheel. (It may help to release a small
amount of air from the tube.) Check again to make sure the tube
is inside the tire.
6
When changing
or patching tubes,
most riders do
not completely
remove the tire.
Instead, removing
only one side is
recommended.


CYCLING 37
.Maintenance
Carry your spare
tube, along with
a tablespoon of
talcum powder,
in doubled
resealable bags.
This way, the tube
will already be
coated, and the
leftover powder
can be used on
the tire.
Now inflate the tire to about 30 psi and check to see that
the tire is concentric (centered) on the wheel: The “witness
line” molded onto the tire should be an equal distance from the
rim all the way around. Make adjustments using your hands.
Pump the tire to the recommended pressure shown on the side-
wall. With the help of the powder, the tire should align itself
straight on the wheel. Install the wheel on the bike and recon-
nect the brakes if necessary.
Wet-Weather Maintenance
Generally, you will have to perform more frequent maintenance
on your bike when you ride in wet or rainy conditions. If your
bike has chromed-steel rims, you can benefit from switching to
specially coated aluminum rims. Hand brakes work much better
with aluminum rims. The drivetrain will need to be cleaned and
lubricated after every ride through cold, wet weather. Brake pads
wear down faster when there is water and grit on the rims of
the wheels. Bearings can get contaminated and dirty sooner.
Some parts of your bike—such as the drivetrain—can become
inoperative if they get coated with water and freeze. These
parts, especially, require preventive lubrication.
The best place to patch a tube is at home. The best way to fix a flat
along the road is to use the spare tube you have carried for just that
purpose, but you should always carry a patch kit in the event you get
two flats on a ride.





CYCLING 39
.Equipment
Equipment
Many accessories are available to make cycling safer and more
fun, comfortable, and secure. The accessories you choose will
depend on where and how you ride. Some of the essential and
more popular equipment is described here.
Helmets
About 75 percent of deaths and permanent
disabilities resulting from cycling accidents involve
brain injuries. A helmet is the most important piece
of equipment a cyclist can own and use. In fact,
the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration
says bicycle helmets can reduce head injuries by
85 percent. So, even if your state doesn’t require
helmet use, you should always wear a properly
fitted helmet when riding your bike Make sure
your helmet meets standards for bike helmets set
by the Consumer Product Safety Commission.
To protect your head, a helmet must:
1. Gradually slow the momentum of the skull
and act as a shock absorber. A good helmet
will have a lining of rigid, crushable foam at
least half an inch thick. This lining reduces the
severity of damage to the brain when it bangs
against the skull as the head hits a hard surface.
2. Prevent sharp items from reaching your head.
To do this, a helmet should have a rigid shell
covering the foam layer. The shell distributes the
impact of a sharp or hard object over a larger
surface, reducing the chance of penetration.
Helmets with fabric covers do not provide the protection of
shell-covered helmets. Shell-covered helmets can slide along
the road surface in an accident, while fabric-covered versions
tend to grab on the surface and could twist the rider’s neck.
Helmet technology aims to reduce
rotational force, which correlates to
how much the brain moves inside the
skull during an impact. The two most
common are Multidirectional Impact
Protection System (MIPS) and WaveCel.
A MIPS helmet has an inner liner that
absorbs rotational forces while the
foam outer layer absorbs impacts.


40 CYCLING
Equipment.
Select a shell-covered helmet that closely matches the size
of your head and is comfortable. Most helmets come with a
selection of replaceable pads of various thicknesses that you
can use to fit the helmet to your head.
The helmet should have four fully adjustable ear straps.
Wear your helmet so that it covers your forehead to just above
the eyebrows. Adjust the straps so that the helmet stays in this
position on your head. The chin strap should be easy to fasten
and unfasten.
To increase visibility, select a helmet color that is bright
and reflective. You can apply reflective tape or stickers to the
helmet to help other vehicle operators see you. Also, a light-
colored helmet will help keep you cool in the hot sun, as
will one with large vents.
Even if it shows no damage, a helmet must be replaced if it
has been worn in an accident, because the foam protecting the
head will have been crushed. The helmet should also be replaced
when any of its parts show wear, or if it has been used for more
than three years. In terms of your safety, a helmet is a very
inexpensive precaution.
Gloves
Gloves serve several purposes. They cushion the shocks trans-
mitted through the handlebars from the wheel, and they reduce
damage to your hands if you fall. Most gloves have padded
palms for cushioning. Warm-weather gloves are fingerless, but
their temperature range can be increased by wearing a wool
or synthetic liner under them. Cold-weather gloves cover the
whole hand.
Shoes
You can pedal in any comfortable shoes. However, shoes intended
for cycling have special features. Usually lightweight, they have
very stiff soles to protect your feet and reduce fatigue. Most cycling
shoes have cleats to lock onto clipless pedals. Shoes designed for
road biking typically have little or no tread, while mountain-biking
shoes have the sort of tread you would find on hiking boots. This
tread comes in handy when you have to walk your bike over
obstacles or on a muddy trail.
Too far back
Too far forward
Correctly
positioned
The rule to
remember is:
If you are on a
bicycle—even
straddling it
without moving—
your helmet
should be properly
fastened on
your head.


CYCLING 41
.Equipment
Eye Protection
Because your eyes are so exposed on rides, they can be stressed
and damaged if they are not protected from the effects of sun,
wind, and flying particles or insects. It’s a good idea to wear
high-quality, polarized sunglasses when you ride. When you
don’t need sun protection, clear or amber riding glasses or
goggles are useful.
What To Carry on a Ride
Identification
Every rider should carry some form of identification when cycling.
In case of an accident, authorities can use this information to
reach the people who should be notified of your situation.
ID information can be neatly recorded on a label inside
your helmet or on dog tags or bracelets. Whatever the form,
the information should be carried where it can be found easily
by someone trying to help. Keep it on you, not on your bike,
which can get separated from you after an accident.
If you wear ordinary shoes when cycling, tuck your
shoelaces inside your shoes. Otherwise, the laces could
get tangled in the chain or the chainrings, causing you
to crash.
You should carry the following information whenever
you are riding:
• Full name
• Home address
• Home telephone number (including area code)
• Date of birth
• Names and phone numbers of people to
contact in an emergency
• Special medical information emer-
gency personnel should know,
including any medications
you are taking


42 CYCLING
Equipment.
Registration
Traffic regulations vary by state and locality, but all states consider
bicycles the same as other vehicles. Bicyclists are granted the same
rights and have the same responsibilities as operators of motor
vehicles—an awesome set of obligations.
Check with your local police department or bike shop to find
out the bicycle regulations in your community.
Money
You should carry emergency money on every ride to buy food
or drinks when necessary. On many trips you will want to
bring spending money, but it is always nice to know that your
emergency cash is in reserve.
Roadside and Repair Kit
Be prepared for roadside
emergencies by carrying
a kit containing the items
shown here.
TIRE PATCH KIT
TOOL BAG
SPARE BATTERIES
AND CONTAINER
BIKE TOOLS
EMERGENCY
CASH
SPARE TUBES
BANDAGES
IDENTIFICATION
TAGS


CYCLING 43
.Equipment
Clothing
You can ride in just about any clothing that is comfortable and
doesn’t restrict your range of motion. However, many garments
have been designed specifically for cycling.
Jerseys. A cyclist’s jersey is a tight-fitting, short- or long-sleeved
shirt made of fabric that wicks away moisture. Jerseys are long
enough to cover your waist in the normal riding posi-
tion and usually have pockets sewn onto the
back where you can carry food or other small
items while cycling. Bright-colored jerseys
help other drivers see you easily. Some jerseys
have reflective material sewn into the fabric.
Shorts. Cycling shorts protect your skin
where it comes in contact with the saddle.
These shorts are made from a stretchable
synthetic material and have legs long enough
to extend below the edge of the seat. A special
material is sewn into the crotch of the shorts to
provide padding and wick away moisture. Cycling
shorts come in many colors, but black is the most popular
because it does not show stains from dirty hands, chains,
saddles, or tires. Shorts, add a sentence at the end: Most cycling
shorts are designed to be worn without underwear, which can
bunch up and cause discomfort.
Jackets. Like jerseys, cycling jackets have long tails and usu-
ally have back pockets. They typically have a breathable back
panel to let excess heat escape; some feature armpit zippers and
removable sleeves.
Weather-Appropriate Gear
With the right gear, cycling can be enjoyed year-round. In hot
weather, it is important to wear clothing that allows the flow
of air to cool your body. Riding in wet or cold weather requires
more specialized gear.
For maximum
safety, always
wear reflective
clothing.


Equipment.
RAINWEAR AND LAYERS
Rain clothing, such as high-tech, breathable-fabric rain jackets or
simple nylon windbreakers, should shed the rain and allow air to
flow around your body, keeping it at a comfortable temperature.
Rainwear should be a bright color such as yellow or lime green
and have retroreflective strips to help other drivers see you despite
poor visibility.
Your body controls its temperature by perspiring, so trying
to stay dry in clothing that cannot breathe will cause your body
to overheat and can lead to hyperthermia. Riding unprotected
from the rain can cause your body to cool too much and create
a serious condition known as hypothermia. (See the chapter on
riding skills for more information on this topic.)
You can maintain a comfortable body temperature over
a wide range of cool to cold conditions by dressing in layers.
Experienced riders will often put on warmer clothing—long-
sleeved jerseys or cycling tights—when the temperatures start
to fall into the high 50s. To stay warm on cool or cold days,
use multiple thin layers of material that wick moisture away
from the body and keep you warm even if you get wet. Wool
and polypropylene are two such materials. Thin, closed-cell,
neoprene-rubber foam is often found in gloves, shoe covers,
and face masks.
All clothing works better when you can prevent wind from
penetrating it and carrying off the body heat you are trying to
conserve. Windproof yourself by wearing a nylon shell, windproof
warm-up pants, and wind-resistant gloves and shoe covers.
Do not rely on
cotton clothing to
keep you warm
while cycling.
Cotton absorbs
and retains
moisture, actually
making you colder
as you ride.


CYCLING 45
.Equipment
PROTECTION FOR THE BODY’S EXTREMITIES
Because your legs are doing most of the work, they will stay the
warmest and need the least protection from the cold. Your hands,
feet, and ears will be the coldest because they can’t generate or
maintain heat well. Headbands or ear covers, full-fingered gloves,
and shoe covers or booties (overshoes) help protect these parts of
your body.
To warm up, your body needs to transfer heat from warm
areas to cool ones by circulating blood. The clothing you
wear—especially gloves and socks—should be loose enough to
allow good circulation but tight enough to insulate against the
cold. Gloves and socks that are too tight can actually make your
hands and feet colder.
Your eyes and lungs need protection from the cold, too.
Clear or amber-tinted goggles or close-fitting ski-style sunglasses
protect your eyes from cold and wind. When temperatures drop
below 25 degrees Fahrenheit, wear a mask, balaclava, or even
an inexpensive carpenter’s dust mask over your mouth and nose
to prevent the cold, dry air you are breathing from damaging
your lungs.
Special Gear for Mountain Biking
If you ride on challenging mountain trails, you might want to
consider wearing gear that protects your body more than ordinary
cycling gear does. Some mountain bikers prefer to wear BMX
helmets, for example, which cover the ears and jaw and have
smaller vents. Others wear sleeves or pads on their elbows and
knees and even upper-body “armor” that looks like something
a knight might wear.
While such gear protects your body, it also decreases comfort
and increases weight. Whatever gear you are wearing, you can still
get seriously hurt if you ride beyond your capabilities or don’t use
common sense.
Bicycle Equipment
Racks
Racks are metal or plastic frames attached to the bicycle to help
transport objects. They allow you to secure all kinds of gear
to the bicycle while keeping the gear away from the working
parts of the bike and off your back, where it could interfere
with your balance.


46 CYCLING
Equipment.
Among the racks available are ones that are mounted on the
handlebars, over the front wheel or on the front fork, or over the
rear wheel. Note that the higher a rack is installed on a bicycle,
the less weight it should carry. One frame in particular, the
low-rider rack, allows the cyclist to carry a bag on either side
of the front wheel, keeping the weight low on the bike and
the bike in balance.
Bags
The best way to carry gear while cycling is in bags specifically
designed for bikes. Most are constructed to hold gear securely
and can be mounted on a rack. Most bicycle bags have hardware
that firmly attaches them to the frames, but bags containing small
items or bulky things can also be secured to frames with bungee
cords and straps. Many bags have lightweight internal frames that
give them shape and keep the bags from sagging into moving parts
of the bicycle, interfering with its safe operation. Quick-release fas-
teners let you remove the bags with ease.
Handlebar bags are great for holding items you need quick
access to, like cameras and cellphones, but such bags should
carry as little weight as possible because they are so high on the
bike. Seat bags that attach behind and below the saddle are the
best place to carry repair gear (see photo). Rack trunks or rear
duffel bags are rectangular-shaped bags that attach to a bike’s
rear rack. These are useful for carrying supplies for day trips.
Panniers are the bags that hang vertically on front or rear racks
on either side of the wheels. These are used to carry more gear
The safest and easiest
way for a cyclist to
carry extra equipment
is to let the bike haul it.


CYCLING 47
.Equipment
for multiday rides and tours. Frame bags are thin, triangular
bags that fasten between the top tube and seat tube of the
bicycle; they can substitute for a seat bag.
Water Bottles and Cages
You can conveniently carry plastic bottles of fluids
on the bicycle in water bottle cages that hold 20-
to 25-ounce bottles of liquid. The cages are usually
clamped to the seat tube or down tube or attached with
screws to special threaded sections of the frame. Backpack-style
hydration packs are popular for mountain biking and can hold as
much as 100 ounces of liquid.
Locking Devices
All riders should have some means of
preventing bicycle theft. A padlock on
a coiled cable is one of the simplest
solutions. Locks specifically designed
for bicycles are also available. The cable
should be long enough to pass through
both the front and rear wheels. Always
secure your bike to a sturdy parking rack or
some other immovable
object like a tree, pole, or lamppost in
a way that doesn’t interfere with other
people’s movements around your bike. If
you ride by yourself, you will need your
own locking equipment. Group riders often
can share locking devices.
Pumps
A pump is a necessity when you have a flat tire. The long pumps
available for road use are mounted directly under the bike’s top
tube. Minipumps and tire inflators are stored on the bike in their
own or carried in a seat bag.
Before you need to use the pump on a ride, be sure it can
inflate the tires of your bike and that the inflation head is
compatible with the type of valve used on your tires.


48 CYCLING
Equipment.
Lights and Reflectors
Common sense tells us not to ride at night. If you must ride
in the dark, you need lights and reflectors for people to see
you—and for you to see the roadway. Even if you are cycling
in an area with streetlights, you still need lights to ride in the
dark. Lights and reflectors should be aimed in at the ground
some distance in front of you to be most effective. Remember to
carry spare lightbulbs and batteries in your gear bag.
All cyclists in all states are required to use a white front light
on their bicycles from sunset to sunrise. Some states may also
require a red rear taillight or a red rear reflector, or white or amber
side reflectors. Check your state laws for requirements for lights
and reflectors. A bike shop can help you select these components.
For cycling in low light or darkness, you can select from four
main types of lights:
1. Small battery-powered lights work well for riding in areas
with streetlights and can be used with rechargeable batteries,
keeping operating costs low.
2. Generator systems emit enough brightness even on dark
roads, and they go dark when you stop riding.
3. High-powered battery lights work well in all conditions but
have heavy battery packs, cost more, and need more frequent
recharging than other types of lights.
In addition to
using lights and
reflectors, you
should also apply
reflective tape
wherever
practical on the
bicycle, your
clothing, and your
helmet. This helps
other vehicle
operators see
you in low-light
conditions,
especially at
dawn and dusk.


CYCLING 49
.Equipment
4. High-intensity/high-efficiency front lights with rear strobe
lights can be fastened with Velcro to helmets or clothing.
Mirrors
The cyclist’s rearview mirror alerts the rider to vehicles
approaching from behind.
Remember, however, that using a mirror is no substitute
for scanning by turning your head and making visual contact
with everything around you.
Cycle Computers
Cycle computers, also known as cyclometers or cyclocomputers,
are handlebar-mounted devices that track your speed (current,
average, and maximum), distance traveled (per trip and cumula-
tive), riding time, and current time. Some models measure cadence
(pedal speed), altitude, elevation gain, and heart rate; high-end
models work like the GPS units found in some cars.
Mirrors can be mounted several ways on the handlebars. Several
styles of small mirrors attach to glasses or helmets. Although small,
these mirrors provide a wide field of view.
Some cycle
computers now have
GPS and maps.





CYCLING 51
.Riding Skills
When the pedal
is around the
10 o’clock
position as shown
in the photo below,
you are ready to
start pedaling.
Remember, the
forward motion of
the bicycle will
provide the
momentum needed
to keep the bike
(and you) in the
upright position.
Riding Skills
You may have learned how to ride a bike when you were a little
kid, but you can still learn to ride more safely and efficiently.
Mounting and Dismounting
To mount the bicycle, engage the brakes to prevent the bike from
rolling. Swing either leg up and over the bike and straddle the
top tube. Now put one of your feet on the pedal. Use your foot to
turn the crank backward until it reaches the 10 o’clock position.
Release the brakes and push down on the pedal. As your
body moves up and the bike moves forward, the saddle will
move under you. When the opposite pedal reaches the 12 o’clock
position, make a second pedal stroke.
To dismount, place the left pedal straight down and stand
on it like a step. As the bike is about to come to a stop, lean a
little to the right and put your right foot on the ground. As soon
as you can, position the left pedal to the 10 o’clock position in
preparation for starting again. That way, you are ready for a
quick start with minimal effort.
Braking
To brake efficiently, you must keep your
brakes in good operating condition. About
80 percent of the stopping force of a bicy-
cle comes from applying the brakes to
the front wheel (except on a bike with
coaster brakes, which are stopped by
pressure on the rear wheel only). When
a bicycle is stopping, the rider’s body
weight and the weight of the bicycle
shift forward to the front wheel, reducing
the weight over the rear wheel. To com-
pensate, extend your arms and move your
weight back on the bike, even off the rear of
the saddle if necessary.


52 CYCLING
Riding Skills.
If you apply the front brake too forcefully, you could go over
the handlebars. If you use the rear brake too forcefully, it will skid
and wear out your rear tire. The trick is to use both brakes togeth-
er in the most efficient combination.
Apply both brake levers at the same time. If the rear wheel
starts to skid, ease up slightly on the front brake. Slide your
body as far back as possible on the saddle. If you follow this
technique, your stops will be safe and efficient.
Shifting Gears
When you ride, you should try to maintain a consistent cadence
(the number of times per minute the cranks rotate). Shifting
gears lets you do this.
When climbing hills or riding into a headwind, you change to
progressively lower gears to reduce your effort. Going downhill or
riding with a tailwind, you change to higher gears to increase your
leg effort and maintain your pedaling speed. The more tired you
get, the more you should shift to lower gears. When you think you
need to shift to a lower gear, do so as soon as possible. This keeps
your cadence consistent and preserves your momentum.
How to Shift Gears
If your bike is equipped with derailleurs, you can shift only while
pedaling forward. The forward motion shifts the chain to differ-
ent cogs or rings with the derailleur. Just as you move the shifter,
slightly reduce the pressure on the pedal until the next gear is fully
engaged. This allows for easier shifting with no hard changes that
can damage drivetrain parts. For safety, don’t shift the front and
rear derailleurs at the same time.
If your bike has three chainrings in the front, you will do
most of your riding with the chain on the middle ring. This
means that you usually have to shift only the rear derailleur to
find a comfortable gear. Keep pedaling and use the shifter on
the right side of the handlebar or down tube to move the chain.
For bikes with a hub gear, shifting can be done at any
time, whether the bike is in motion or stationary.
As you become a more experienced rider, you will learn
to shift by feel, reducing the need to look away from the road
or the trail as you adjust your gears. The cyclists’ adage, “shift
early, shift often” is also important, as it serves as a reminder
that shifting before your terrain changes is more efficient for
you and less stressful on your bike’s drivetrain.
When approaching
a hill, shift the
front derailleur to
a smaller ring (in
which it is easier
to pedal) and shift
the rear derailleur
to a larger gear.
For downhill,
shift the front
derailleur to a
larger ring and the
rear derailleur to a
smaller gear. Avoid
cross-chaining;
that is, selecting
a large ring in the
front and a large
gear in the back or
a small ring in the
front and small
gear in the back.


CYCLING 53
.Riding Skills
Rules for Riding
Cyclists are subject to the same laws as the drivers of motor
vehicles, and they are safest when treated just like motorists. That
means you need to follow the same rules of the road as motorists
do—and use a few special techniques that apply only to cyclists.
Scanning and Signaling
Learn how to observe traffic and make your intentions
clear to other drivers by scanning and signaling. Scanning
means being aware of traffic around you, including behind you.
In one sense, scanning is simply looking over your shoulder.
While scanning lets you know what other road users are doing,
signaling tells other road users what you intend to do. Practice
scanning so you can keep the bike moving in a straight line
Mirrors are good
for keeping track
of vehicle traffic
behind you, but the
only way you can
keep tabs on traf-
fic beside you is
to look. Do not rely
upon your hearing;
cars can be very
quiet in motion,
as can bikes.
League of American Bicyclists
(LAB) Rules for the Road
• Follow the Law: You have the same rights and
responsibilities as drivers. Obey traffic signals and
stop signs. Ride with traffic; use the rightmost
lane headed in the direction you are going.
• Be Predictable: Make your intentions clear. Ride in
a straight line and don’t swerve between parked
cars. Signal turns, and check behind you well
before turning or changing lanes.
• Be Conspicuous: Ride where people can see you
and wear bright clothing. Use a front white light,
red rear light and reflectors. Make eye contact
with others. Don’t ride on sidewalks.
• Think Ahead: Anticipate what drivers, pedestrians,
and others on bikes will do. Watch for turning
vehicles and ride outside the door zone of parked
cars. Look out for debris, potholes, and other road
hazards. Cross railroad tracks at right angles.
• Ride Ready: Check your tires are sufficiently inflat-
ed, brakes are working, chain runs smoothly, and
quick release levers are closed. Carry tools and
supplies appropriate for your ride. Wear a helmet.


54 CYCLING
Riding Skills.
when you are looking behind you. One way to keep
from swerving is to take one hand off the handlebar
and place it along your side or even on the back of
your saddle as you scan. With practice, looking over
your shoulder will become easy.
Communicating your intentions not only makes
you safer, it is also required by law. Always signal to
let others know when you are turning, changing lanes,
or stopping. Before changing lanes, scan behind you.
Signaling is usually done 100 feet before your turn
and held for 2-3 seconds. Signal in advance of the turn in order
to prepare other drivers and so both your hands can be on the
handlebar during the turn for maximum control.
To let others know that you are going to turn left, fully
extend your left arm out to the side. To signal a right turn, fully
extend your right arm out to the side or bend your left arm up
at a right angle with your hand flat. Signal that you are slowing
down or stopping by extending your left arm out at a downward
angle.
When changing lanes, yield to traffic that is already in the
lane you are trying to enter. Scan to make certain there is a suffi-
cient gap in traffic. Moving to the left side of your travel lane can
also indicate to other drivers you are planning to change lanes.
Where to Ride
The first rule of the road is: Ride on the right side of the road, with
the flow of all other vehicular traffic. One of the most frequent
causes of car-and-bike accidents is cyclists riding on the left, pedes-
trian style, facing the flow
of traffic. Riding on the right
lets you approach drivers on
side streets and pedestrians
on sidewalks from the direc-
tion they expect, the one from
which traffic normally comes.
When you ride on the right
side of the road, drivers also
have more time to react to
you and just have to slow
down to avoid or pass you.
You should not ride on
sidewalks. Not only do you
interfere with pedestrians on
Right-turn signal
Stop or slow down
Left-turn signal
When cyclists turn their head
to scan, they often turn the
handlebars in the same direction.
Practice scanning in an empty
parking lot to develop the skill of
riding straight without swerving
as you turn your head to look.


CYCLING 55
.Riding Skills
sidewalks, but you also actually put yourself at more risk
than when you are on the road because drivers at inter-
sections and driveways are less likely to see you. (This
restriction does not apply to established bike paths.)
The standard vehicle code for all road users
states, “All persons have an equal right to use the
highways for purposes of travel by proper means,
and with due regard for the corresponding rights of
others.” The second rule of the road, then, is: Slower
traffic keeps to the right, and faster traffic passes on the
left. A cyclist should ride to the right as far as is safe—
which does not mean you should ride at the very edge of
the road. In fact, you should typically ride about 3 feet away
from the pavement’s edge, as well as from parked cars, hedges,
and other obstructions. If you ride any closer to the edge, you may
encounter road debris, crumbling pavement, or a car door that
suddenly opens in your path.
If cars to the rear are trying to pass you, you can move to
the edge of the road while they do so. This allows them to pass
you without moving too far into the other lane.
Many country roads and city streets are so narrow that
cars can’t pass you without moving partway into the next lane.
When cars are approaching you from both directions, and on
blind curves where there might be oncoming traffic, take the
middle of the lane to
discourage drivers from
unsafe passing. Look and
signal before you move.
Do not forget that
you have the same right
to use the road as a
motorist. Make motor-
ists slow down for you
if safety warrants it. Be
courteous and give a
“slow” signal to tell the
driver behind you that it
is unsafe for him or her
to pass. When motorists
approach from the rear,
they are required to slow
down and follow if they
If your lane is
clear, you may
move toward
the center of
the road to
avoid debris,
sand, gravel, or
other hazards.
On roadways that have two narrow lanes in each direction, ride in
the middle of the right lane. Drivers need to get the idea that they
must move into the passing lane if they want to pass you.


56 CYCLING
Riding Skills.
In narrow-lane
conditions, riding
all the way to the
right invites a car
to try passing you
in the same lane,
possibly forcing
you off the road.
Do not weave among parked cars. You become invisible to drivers and will have to
swerve back into traffic when you reach the next parked car.
If the roadway has a usable paved
shoulder or an extra-wide right lane,
you may ride in a line that is consistent
from the left side of the right lane and
about 3 feet to the right of where the
cars are traveling. This lets motorists
see you and helps prevent you being
cut off by a driver turning right, as in
this illustration.


CYCLING 57
.Riding Skills
cannot safely pass. However, you should not delay faster drivers
unnecessarily.
If you are going the same speed as other vehicles, pull into
line with them. If you must pass slower vehicles, look back for
a safe interval in traffic and signal before moving left into the
passing lane. (Do not pass on the right; drivers expect faster
vehicles to pass on the left.) Make sure you are visible to the
driver at this point. Don’t ride too close to the vehicle you are
passing. After you pass, return to the right lane as soon as
is convenient.
If the vehicle you are passing speeds up while you are beside
it, wait until you have fallen behind, look back to the right for
traffic and merge back to the right when it is safe to do so.
Handling Intersections
An intersection is any point, including a driveway, where the
paths of two vehicles can cross. There are ways to get through
an intersection as easily and safely as possible.
First, always move to the lane position that will allow you to
ride through most efficiently. To turn right, get to the right side;
to go straight, stay near the middle; to turn left, move just to the
right of the center of the roadway or into the left-turn lane.
The cyclist’s turning-lane rules are as follows:
• Select the rightmost lane that goes to your destination
(the left, middle, or right lane).
• Ride on the side nearest your destination if one lane goes in
two directions, such as left and straight-through center lanes.
Right Turns. From the right side of the right lane, look both ways
for traffic, signal, and go around the corner. At an intersection with
a stop sign or where right turns at a red light are allowed, you
must stop and yield the right-of-way to traffic already in the inter-
section. You also must yield to pedestrians in the crosswalks. A
right-turn signal is necessary to let drivers know your intentions.
Left Turns. Left turns are the most complex traffic maneuvers a
cyclist can make. In areas where traffic is light enough to permit
it, execute left turns from the center of the roadway, meaning
the lane from which no cars on your left will go straight ahead.
Turning left from this position puts all the traffic you might have
to deal with in front of you. It allows through traffic to pass on
your right, and it doesn’t require you to look back when turning.
Particularly when making left turns, be aware that a vehicle may


58 CYCLING
Riding Skills.
sometimes be hidden in the “traffic shadow” of a larger vehicle.
Allow sufficient time after a truck or van passes to make sure
there are no other vehicles before beginning your turn.
If the traffic at an intersection is too heavy for you to ride
through safely, it’s OK to make the left turn as a pedestrian. Ride
to the far right corner of the intersection, come to a complete
stop, dismount from your bike, and look for traffic in all four
directions. Now, wait like a pedestrian until traffic clears, then
walk your bicycle safely across the street.
On one-way streets with two or more lanes, you may ride
on either side of the road. The easiest way to make a left turn
from a one-way street onto another one-way street is to ride
around the corner on the left, then change lanes to the right as
soon as you are certain the roadway is clear and operators of
vehicles behind you are aware of your intentions.
Going Straight. When going through an intersection, make
sure traffic turning right passes you on your right. Ride to the
left side of dual-destination lanes (lanes from which vehicles
can go straight or turn right) and stay completely out of right-
turn-only lanes.
The simplest-looking yet most difficult intersection to ride
through is one on a small, two-lane street, where the traffic in the
right lane can go left, straight, or right. To discourage drivers from
passing you on the left and then turning right, ride a little farther
into the lane as you approach the intersection.
Never pass the
last in a series
of cars stopped
and waiting at
an intersection.
You do not
know which way
the car will go,
or whether it
is hiding a
pedestrian or
other hazard.
You may need to cross more than one lane to get in position for
a turn or move. Ideally, a gap will extend across more than one
lane and you can move across multiple lanes to your destination.
If that is not possible, you may need to change lanes one at a
time, following the same scan-and-signal routine for each change.


CYCLING 59
.Riding Skills
Handling Hazards
Motor Vehicles in General
Getting hit from behind on a bicycle happens infrequently and
usually occurs when a driver loses control of a vehicle. Because
you can do little to recognize or prevent this situation, heads-
up riding is the only survival strategy you can use. You can do
something about drivers underestimating your speed and cutting
you off as they overtake you. While you look ahead, keep track
of the passing vehicle out of the corner of your eye. If the car
merges too soon, slow down to give it space, or, if necessary,
take a safe route off the road to avoid it, especially if it is a long
vehicle like a bus, a tractor-trailer rig, or a truck pulling a trailer.
When a string of cars is coming toward you on a rural road,
watch for one of the trailing cars to pull out and pass the lead
vehicle. Give it space if necessary. A head-on collision could
occur if there’s not enough room for the passing car to get back
into its lane before it reaches you. Since this type of accident
occurs partly because the motorist cannot see the cyclist ahead,
it is a good idea to wear a conspicuous helmet and bright
clothing to increase your visibility.
Emergency Vehicles
Emergency vehicles always have the right of way. Bicyclists
should take this rule one step further. As soon as
you hear the siren or see the lights of emergency
vehicles, pull off the roadway as quickly and safe-
ly as you can. Drivers of vehicles are trained
to look for the emergency vehicles and
clear the way for them. During
this process, their ability to deal
with a bicycle on the road is
reduced. The best thing to do is
get off the road and wait until
the emergency vehicle passes.
Weather
Motor-vehicle drivers—and cyclists—can have a hard time seeing
in poor weather conditions. Therefore, ride where you can easily
be seen, and do everything else you can to increase your visibility.
Remember that rainwear may make it uncomfortable to turn your
head to scan, while glasses will become rain-spotted and steamy.
The general rule
in the presence
of police cruisers,
fire department
equipment, or
ambulances is
“Sirens or lights,
drive right.”


60 CYCLING
Riding Skills.
Everything gets slippery when wet. The roadway loses some
traction just by having water on it—especially if it hasn’t rained
in a while. Anything made of metal (such as manhole covers,
gratings, and steel bridges), painted or wooden surfaces, road
markings, and areas on the road where vehicles drip oil become
very slippery. Be especially careful of painted striping and
markings on the road. Not only is your ability to brake reduced,
your ability to accelerate or pedal may also be affected. The rear
wheel may spin out from under you if you try to pedal hard, so
take it a little easier with the pedals. In wet and cold conditions,
watch out for shaded areas on the roadway, where water trends
to freeze.
Don’t ride far away from civilization when a storm is
approaching. At the first sign of lightning, find shelter and
wait for the storm to pass. If you are riding in cool or cold
conditions, plan to take breaks and end your ride at a place
where you can get warm and change into dry clothing.
Staying in wet clothes could lead to hypothermia.
Other Hazards
Other hazards include sharp edges or bumps in the road, diver-
sions, slippery conditions, immovable objects,
and moving obstructions. A hazard can fall into more than one
category. For example, a wet diagonal
railroad crossing could have a sharp edge, a
parallel diversion, and a slippery surface. Always cross rail-
road tracks perpendicular to the rails.
Sharp edges or bumps in the road can cause
flats, fold a wheel, or throw you from the bike. The
front wheel is more vulnerable to edges because
of the weight transfer that occurs when the bike
is slowed for any reason. If you cannot dodge
this hazard, try to get the bike to “climb” over it.
(Never “climb” curbs.) Cross these hazards at their
most level or lowest point. Slowing down gives the
wheels more time to climb over without compressing
Because hand
brakes do not
work as well in
the rain, squeeze
the brakes lightly
and regularly
to help keep the
rims dry so that
you can stop
quickly when
necessary.
Allow extra room
for stopping.
Although motorists demand much of your attention when you are
riding, you should also keep an eye on—and cooperate with—other
cyclists. We’ll discuss this topic in the chapter on touring.


CYCLING 61
.Riding Skills
the tire and deforming the rim. (See the “Mountain Biking” chap-
ter for more details.)
On a bicycle, you have a limited amount of traction, which
is divided between accelerating or decelerating and steering.
Slippery conditions reduce traction, so straighten up and steer
straight, delaying your braking until better traction is available.
Cross slippery surfaces at right angles, if possible.
Immovable objects such as concrete barriers are intended
to control motor traffic. The only way to handle these hazards,
which can cause serious injury to cyclists, is to watch for them
and steer clear.
Steer your bike carefully to keep moving objects—toys,
balls, etc.—and animals and children from getting under your
front wheel. If you see a ball, watch out for a child, too. Most
animals will get out of your way, but a loose dog may chase
you. If this occurs, steer clear of the dog and keep both hands
on the handlebars for control. Get the dog behind you, and try
to frighten it off by shouting aggressively until you get past.
Shifting to a lower gear and sprinting also is effective. If a dog
starts to attack you, get off the bicycle and keep it between you
and the dog.
A diversion is any
hazard that causes the
front wheel to move
sideways or out from
under the rider (right).
Cross this type of
hazard at a right angle
(left). If this is not
possible and you
cannot stop, make the
front wheel “climb”
over the hazard. The
rear wheel may move
sideways as a result,
but you can get the bike back under you and in control by steering with
the front wheel. This works especially well on uneven road edges.
Almost all immov-
able road hazards
appear in front
of you. Avoid
them by being
observant and
anticipating
problems. If you
cannot avoid a
hazard but can
stop safely, get
off the bike and
walk around
the hazard.


62 CYCLING
Riding Skills.
Emergency Maneuvers
The emergency maneuvers described here can be used to
handle hazards that occur too quickly for you to use any other
measures. Practice these techniques in a safe environment like
an empty parking lot or a school playground. These skills don’t
feel natural at first; they should be learned and practiced until
they come easily so that if you must use them, you will
be prepared to do so.
The Rock Dodge
Just before you reach a rock or other obstacle, steer the
handlebars left without leaning over first. Just as the front
wheel goes around the rock, quickly turn the handlebars right
to correct your balance and straighten out. This technique
works because your body doesn’t have a chance to follow the
bike’s weaving and you haven’t strayed very far from the line
you were originally following.
To practice this technique, place a sponge in the path of
your bike and practice missing it. This “practice rock” won’t
hurt you if you hit it. Start slowly, then increase your speed
until you can dodge the “rock” at normal speeds.
The quick stop is nothing more than a maximum-effort stop
without skidding either wheel. You get a gain in braking
efficiency when you shift your hips back on the saddle, or
even slide off the saddle and place your stomach on the seat.
This transfers more of your body weight to the rear wheel
and increases its traction.
The Quick Stop


CYCLING 63
.Riding Skills
The Instant Turn
Picture this: You are approaching an
intersection when the car on your left
suddenly begins to turn right. You need
to turn right, quickly.
You know that to turn on a bicycle,
you lean and then steer the handlebars.
How do you get the bike into a quick
lean so you can turn in a hurry?
The instant turn is like the rock
dodge, except that you do not straighten
up at once but let the bike stay in the
deeper turn. Steer the bike out from under you to the left for an instant.
You will momentarily steer toward the car you want to avoid. Now the
bike is leaning right and turning. Raise the leg on the inside of the turn and
point your knee outward. This will help you deepen the turn. Then, once
you are around the corner, bring yourself back up to a vertical position.
Practice the instant turn using a sponge. Start cautiously and increase your
speed as you learn.
A variation on the instant turn
can help if you are going around
a downhill curve too fast. Instead
of doing what feels right—braking
and steering straight—do not brake.
Momentarily straighten the handle-
bars. This should put you into a
deeper lean on the bike and let you
get around the curve. If you skid out,
you will land on your side and skid to
a stop. If you are in danger of going
over a cliff or hitting a wall, it may be
wise to skid on purpose by hitting the
brakes after leaning into the turn.





CYCLING 65
.Touring
Touring
Planning the Trip
Touring simply means taking a long bike ride while being more
or less self-sufficient. Many bike clubs offer organized tours
complete with rest stops, food, and support vehicles. However,
you can plan your own tours as well.
Participating in an Organized Tour
Tours offered by bike clubs or other organizations are a great
way to take long rides. Some rides raise money for charity;
others are strictly for fun.
Organized tours typically offer support and gear (SAG) stops
where you can refill water bottles and get a snack, roving SAG
vehicles that can help with breakdowns, entertainment, souvenir
T-shirts, and more. Some offer a variety of route options, up to
a century route (100 miles). Even on a long route, you will be
riding with hundreds of other riders, so you won’t have to worry
about getting lost, bored, or stranded. Local bike shops can tell
you about upcoming rides in your area.
Planning a Trip
If you want to plan your own long ride, you should consider
these factors:
• Purpose
• Route
• Distance
• Terrain
• Suitability of roadways
• Traffic conditions
• Weather
• Points of interest
• Starting location and time
• Solo or group ride
• Experience, skill, and
condition of riders
• Pace and cadence
• Rest stops
• Eating and drinking


66 CYCLING
Touring.
The Route: Maps and Cue Sheets
Maps. When we travel by car, we look for the quickest route,
which usually means following interstate highways or other
multilane roads. Cyclists, however, seek out little-traveled
secondary roads. The twists and turns on these back roads
discourage automobile traffic and provide cyclists with
diversion and scenic splendor.
Since back roads don’t always appear on ordinary road
maps, you will need to rely on maps from other sources.
Topographic maps, obtained by writing to the U.S. Geological
Survey in Washington, D.C., are among the best. Digital files of
topographic maps are also available for download (with your
parent or guardian’s permission) on the USGS website at
usgs.gov. Similar maps are available from your state’s
department of conservation or department of public works.
County engineer offices stock up-to-date maps of all county
roads. Many veteran cyclists consider these the most helpful
and readily available. You also can get maps from local bicycle
clubs, chambers of commerce, tourism agencies, and nature or
conservation groups. Local bookstores and outdoor stores are
another good source of county maps, atlases, and gazetteers
useful for planning rides.
In mapping out your ride, try to plan a return route that’s
easier than the outgoing route, since you are likely to be less
energetic on the return trip. Biking into the prevailing wind
going out might give you a tailwind coming back. Hills also
seem easier early in the route.
Cue Sheets. Because it’s not practical to carry large maps
or atlases on a bike, cyclists usually carry cue sheets instead.
A cue sheet tells how to follow a planned route. Four kinds
of information make useful cues:
• Mileage—the cumulative distance to the nearest tenth of a
mile and/or the distance to the next cue
• Signals—traffic-control devices, for example:
—TL (traffic light)
—SS (stop sign)
—Y (yield sign)
• Directions/Actions—which way to go:
—L/BL (left/bear left)
—R/BR (right/bear right)
You can avoid
getting lost by
learning to use a
map. The Scouts
BSA handbook
explains how
to orient a map,
locate yourself
on it, read the
map’s symbols,
and translate the
scale so you
know how to
gauge map
distances on
the ground.


CYCLING 67
.Touring
—X/CR (cross)
—S (straight)
—TRO (to remain on)
—RL or R/L (right, then immediate left [jog right])
—LR or L/R (left, then immediate right [jog left])
• Description—name of the roadway and other useful information
For planning purposes, estimate mileage and indicate signals to the
best of your knowledge; mapping websites can be helpful. On the
ride, modify the cue sheet with actual signals and mileage from
a cycle computer, if available. If you are the leader of a group
of cyclists, you should ride the route ahead of time to make the
cue sheet as accurate as possible. This advance ride will also let
you change the route to handle unexpected difficulties such as
roadway construction or closed roads or bridges.
Solo or Group Riding
You can ride alone or with a group of other cyclists. Individual
riders have more freedom in selecting the distance, pace, time,
and route for a ride. However, solo riders must be self-sufficient
and have the knowledge, skills, and equipment to take care of
themselves on rides. Riding solo also requires extra effort to be
visible to other vehicular traffic; brightly colored, conspicuous
clothing helps.
Riding with friends makes the miles fly by because it is
simply more fun. In a group, you can gain the confidence to
go farther. Because individuals want to finish a ride with their
friends, they tend to complete the whole ride and not quit early.
Group members don’t have to be so self-sufficient because the
resources of all riders—both equipment and experience—can be
pooled. Plus each person can take a turn at the front blocking
the wind, allowing the others to draft behind the lead rider.
Group riding has disadvantages, too. The individual riders
must follow the same route and maintain the same pace as every-
one else. To an extent, you are responsible for everyone else’s
safety. All the riders must strive to keep a “safety cocoon” of
space—3 feet on level ground and even more on downhill runs—
around their bikes.
Websites like MapMyRide (mapmyride.com) let you
create accurate cue sheets on a computer.
Riders should
know that biking
with a buddy is
best, and that
solo riders should
always tell
someone their
route, schedule,
and destination
before departing.


68 CYCLING
Touring.
Distance Signal Action Description
0.0 L Locust Street
0.2 SS R Sixteenth Street
3.0 TL L Bridge Street (becomes Third Street)
2.1 TL X Lowther Street
2.5 TL L Humel Avenue
4.1 TL L Eighteenth Street (becomes
Creek Road)
5.7 BL Lisburn Road (becomes Spangler’s
Mill Road)
6.7 Caution: metal deck bridge
7.6 L Limekin Road
8.4 L Green Lane Drive
10.3 SS R Cedar Cliff Drive
11.5 TL R Simpson Ferry Road
11.9 L Elkwood Street
12.0 SS L Locust Street
12.0 L Home
Sample Cue Sheet
Legend: SS = Stop Sign; L = Left; R = Right; TL = Traffic Light; X = Cross;
BL = Bear Left; BR = Bear Right


CYCLING 69
.Touring
When you are on the same road for a long distance, include a cue that indicates a
landmark (for example, a crossroads), which will help confirm that you are on the
correct route and reduces the chances of taking wrong turns.
N
START/STOP
1.0 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0 0.25 0.50 1.0 MILE
1000 0 1000 3000 6000 FEET
1.0 0.5 0 1.0 KILOMETER


70 CYCLING
Touring.
Safe group riding requires a lot of communication among
riders. The standard hand signals (right turn, left turn, stop) tell
riders about changes in direction or speed. Pointing at road
hazards is one way to warn others about them. Many verbal
signals also are commonly used for warning others of situations.
Other safety rules for group riding include:
• Never pass another rider on the right side (your left).
• Never ride two abreast on a winding (curving) or
hilly road.
• Never “drop” (leave behind) slower riders off the
back of the group.
Verbal Signals for Warning Others
“On your left!”—I am about to
pass you on your left side.
“Stopping (Slowing)!”—I am
stopping or slowing down.
“Right (left) turn!”—We are
making a turn to the right (left).
“Coming on!” or “Coming off!”—
I’m entering (or leaving) the
roadway or trail.
“Gravel!”—There is loose
material ahead on the roadway.
“Glass!”—There is glass ahead
on the roadway.
“Rumbles!”—There are rumble
strips (textured strips) on the
shoulder of the road.
“Tracks up!”—There are railroad
tracks ahead.
“Grate!”—There is a storm grate
ahead. (Storm-drain grates can
catch wheels and cause falls.)
“Car left (or right)!”—A car is
approaching from the left
(or the right).
“Car back!”—A vehicle is
approaching from the rear. Form
a single line as quickly and safely
as possible.
“Car up!”—A car is approaching
from the front.
“On your wheel!”—I am directly
behind you.
“Roadkill!”—There is a dead
animal ahead in the roadway.
“Thank you!”—OK/I heard you.


CYCLING 71
.Touring
Cadence and Pace
You will have more fun on a bike trip if you
understand the importance of moderation
and common sense in setting the pace.
Experience has shown that the best
cadence (pedal speed) for riding long
distances is 75 to 95 revolutions per
minute (rpm). This cadence may feel
strange and uncomfortable to you in the
beginning; however, practice riding at
this cadence and you will find that you
can go longer distances with ease. Pedaling
at a low cadence will increase your fatigue.
Experienced cyclists frequently pedal at cadence
levels between 95 and 105 rpm or higher.
Automobiles measure their speed in miles per hour.
Cyclists frequently do the same. If you have a cycle computer, it
is tempting to begin your ride at a faster pace than advised—you
are fresh, you have lots of energy, and it feels good. However,
remember how many miles you expect to travel that day or on
that trip. Determine a pace that is comfortable for you—perhaps
10 to 12 miles per hour—and maintain that average for the entire
trip. Remember, you will climb hills at a slower pace and go
downhill at a faster one. Realize also that riding into the wind,
even on flat land, can be at least as difficult as pedaling up a
long, steep hill. (Strong winds blowing across the road could
throw an unsuspecting cyclist off balance.)
The best part of cycling is the opportunity to see the world
around you. When you are in an automobile, the scenery rushes
by. Traveling by bike lets you experience things you might other-
wise not notice. So set a realistic pace, take rest stops when you
feel like it, and enjoy the scenery and your riding companions.
Other Considerations
Staying Comfortable
To ease muscle aches from being in the same position on your
bike for several hours, vary your riding position. Move your
hands to different places on the handlebars. Remember to keep
your elbows flexed. Stiff, rigid elbows will cause fatigue in your
hands, shoulders, and back.
A monitor on a
cycle computer
can tell you things
like your pace,
distance you have
ridden, and when
you have reached
the desired rpm.


72 CYCLING
Touring.
Stops
There are lots of reasons to stop
on a ride: to eat and drink; to take
pictures or view points of interest;
to allow stacked-up motorists to pass
on narrow roads; to fix mechanical
problems like flat tires; to rest; and to
let slower riders rejoin the group. In
this last situation, do not resume the
ride as soon as the slower riders catch
up. The cyclists who just rejoined
the group should determine when to
resume the ride.
The best place to stop is where
all riders can get a safe distance off
the roadway and where you are
visible to motorists for a long distance.
Do not stop in places that interfere
with the movement of other vehicles
or pedestrians. It is more enjoyable to
start down a hill after a rest, so try not
to stop at the bottom or in the middle
of a hill. Again, do not remain on the
roadway while stopped.
Nutrition
Food provides the energy necessary for cycling. From the
foods you eat, your body gets the nutrients it needs, including
carbohydrates, fats, and protein. Carbohydrates are the primary
energy source for recreational cycling. Fats, also an energy
source, are more important in endurance sporting events
(such as track-and-field events or marathon running).
Proteins maintain and repair cells throughout the body.
Carbohydrates come in simple and complex forms. Simple
carbs, also called sugars, are found in fruits and vegetables. They
provide quick energy and are not stored by the body to maintain
energy. Complex carbs, also called starches, are found in pasta,
breads, and cereals. They provide the long-term energy you need
for a long bicycle ride. Eating a dinner of pasta the day before a
big ride and a breakfast of cereal and a bagel or an English muffin
the day of the ride will provide a good energy foundation.
Stretch while riding. Every 30 minutes, stand
on the pedals, arch your back, and stretch
your legs. To prevent upper-body stiffness, do
slow neck rolls and shoulder shrugs. When
you are out riding, practice stretching so
that you will be able to do so effectively on
longer rides.
Try not to stop
for more than
10 minutes at a
time during your
ride. Longer rest
stops can make
you stiff and zap
your motivation.


CYCLING 73
.Touring
Oils, fats, and sweets are not considered a food group. Try
to limit your intake of fats and sweets, which are high in calories
and difficult for the body to digest.
Proteins are important to the body’s maintenance and repair
of cells. You should eat foods containing proteins—such as meats,
cheese, nuts, and peanut butter—in moderate amounts to keep a
nutritional balance in your body.
Fig bars, granola bars, and dried fruits (raisins, apricots,
pineapple, etc.) are excellent natural sources of the carbohydrates
that will keep you going during your ride. They are also a good
substitute for satisfying your sweet tooth. Plan to refuel every
20 minutes or at least every 10 miles.
Water
You will perspire more heavily than usual while cycling, but
you may not notice since the wind quickly dries your sweat.
Dehydration is a serious condition that you should work to
prevent. The day before your ride, drink more water
than usual to “superhydrate” your body in prepara-
tion for the exertion of the ride. Plan to drink one
bottle (about 20 ounces) of water per hour or
every 10 to 12 miles of your ride. If the weather
is exceptionally hot and humid, increase the
amount and frequency of your drinking.
You may want to take along sports drinks,
some of which contain carbs, vitamins, and other
nutrients to keep you going. However, many of
these drinks contain a lot of sugar and sodium, so
read the labels and choose carefully. Avoid soft drinks,
which have lots of sugar and no nutrients.
For an enjoyable ride, eat and drink at a slow, steady pace.
Your route should include rest stops at regular intervals. If you
plan when and what you will eat, your body will enjoy the ride
as much as the rest of you will.
The basic rule of refueling while cycling is: Eat before
you are hungry and drink before you are thirsty.
If you find yourself feeling light-headed and ill on a very hot day, you may
be experiencing the early signals of dehydration. Get off your bike and get
help to rehydrate before continuing your ride.
Bananas are a
cyclist’s mainstay.
They provide
carbs as well as
other vitamins
and nutrients that
the body uses in
large amounts
while cycling.





CYCLING 75
.Mountain Biking
Mountain Biking
Just as cycling on the road requires you to master certain skills and
maneuvers, so, too, does trail riding. To get started on the right path to
mountain biking, start by choosing the right bike for you.
The Right Bike for the Right Use
There are three basic types of mountain bikes.
Rigid mountain bikes have no front or rear suspension (shock
absorbers). These bikes are great for riders with beginner to
intermediate abilities because the lack of cushioning makes you
feel every bump on the trail, encouraging you to take the smoothest
line of approach. Rigid mountain bikes are also usually reasonably
priced and easier to maintain than other types.
Hardtail mountain bikes have shock-absorbing suspension
for the front wheel but no suspension for the back wheel. Front
shocks allow the steering wheel to stay planted on the ground while
riding over small bumps and improve overall handling and control.
Hardtail bikes are designed for all abilities, tend to cost more than
rigid bikes, and require good mechanical ability to service. Hardtails
are best suited for intermediate to rough trail conditions.
Full-suspension mountain bikes use shock-absorbing suspen-
sion technology for the front and rear wheels. Shocks on both wheels
improve handling and control at higher speeds by helping to smooth
out rough terrain. Full-suspension bikes are designed for riders with
intermediate to advanced abilities. They are more costly than rigid
and hard-tail mountain bikes and are usually the heaviest of the three
types. Full-suspension bikes require the most maintenance to keep all
their moving parts working correctly.
Because there are many types of mountain bike frames and
accessories, it is important to work with a knowledgeable bike
shop to find the combination that is right for you. The best way
to tell if a new bike, frame, or accessory is right for you is to try it
where you like to ride, the way you like to ride.


76 CYCLING
Mountain Biking.
Sharing the Path
Perhaps the most important thing you can learn about
riding on a public mixed-use path is proper trail courtesy.
Respect other trail users, such as walkers, joggers, people on
horseback, and in-line skaters. Yield to slower users, and let
others know you are approaching. And consider this: when
a speeding cyclist hits someone or something, the bicycle
rider is usually the more seriously injured party. On the trail,
everyone should yield to horses; bicycles should yield to
horses and pedestrians; and downhill bicycles should yield to
bikes going uphill.
Sometimes cyclists like to venture beyond the easy trails
that also are used by walkers or casual cyclists. The narrow
mountain trails that crisscross the wilderness are called single-
track. Riding singletrack involves more skill and training than
riding flat, wide, mixed-use paths. Some of the most important
skills for singletrack riding are navigating rough terrain, climb-
ing, and descending steep hills.
Preserving the Path
Like many recreational activities, mountain biking can damage
the environment if riders are careless. To minimize your impact,
follow these guidelines:
• Ride only on established, open trails. Check park maps or
trail signposts.
• Do not ride on wet trails.
• Do not ride on wet trails. Ride dirt, not mud. If your tires
leave a track, it is too wet to ride.
• Preserve switchbacks by slowing down on corners. Never
take shortcuts on switchbacks.
• Preserve water bars by riding directly over them or dismount-
ing and walking across. Never ride around them.
Basic Skills: Neutral and Ready Positions
Mountain biking requires riders to quickly shift their weight to
traverse tight turns, steep descents, and other obstacles found on
trails. The neutral position is the default position the mountain
biker uses. It consists of being relaxed and tall, knees slightly
bent, elbows slightly bent, and one finger on each brake lever.


CYCLING 77
.Mountain Biking
Rules of the Trail
The Rules of the Trail for the International Mountain Biking Association
(IMBA) were developed to promote responsible and courteous conduct
on shared-use trails.
1. Ride on Open Trails Only. Respect trail and road closures—ask a land
manager for clarification if you are uncertain about the status of a trail.
Do not trespass on private land. Obtain permits or other authorization as
may be required. Be aware that bicycles are not permitted in areas pro-
tected as state or federal wilderness.
2. Leave No Trace. Be sensitive to the dirt beneath you. Wet and muddy
trails are more vulnerable to damage than dry ones. When the trail is
soft, consider other riding options. This also means staying on existing
trails and not creating new ones. Don’t cut switchbacks. Be sure to pack
out at least as much as you pack in.
3. Control Your Bicycle. Inattention for even a moment could put your-
self and others at risk. Obey all bicycle speed regulations and recommen-
dations, and ride within your limits.
4. Yield to Others. Do your utmost to let your fellow trail users know
you’re coming—a friendly greeting or bell ring are good methods. Try to
anticipate other trail users as you ride around corners. Bicyclists should
yield to all other trail users, unless the trail is clearly labeled for bike-only
travel. Bicyclists traveling downhill should yield to ones headed uphill,
unless the trail is clearly labeled for one-way or downhill-only traffic.
Strive to make each pass a safe and courteous one.
5. Never Scare Animals. Animals are easily startled by an unan-
nounced approach, a sudden movement or a loud noise. Give animals
enough room and time to adjust to you. When passing horses, use spe-
cial care and follow directions from the horseback riders (ask if uncer-
tain). Running cattle and disturbing wildlife are serious offenses.
6. Plan Ahead. Know your equipment, your ability and the area in which
you are riding and prepare accordingly. Strive to be self-sufficient: keep
your equipment in good repair and carry necessary supplies for changes in
weather or other conditions. Wear a helmet and appropriate safety gear.
The ready position is the position to get in when a technical
challenge is coming up. It consists of being off the saddle, level
pedals (3 and 9 o’clock positions), bent knees, bent elbows, one
finger on each brake lever, torso down, and head up. From this
position you are ready to move your body weight to navigate the
technical obstacles coming up.


78 CYCLING
Mountain Biking.
Cornering on Trails
Using side-to-side bike/body separation, you can control your
bike through many tight turns on trails. Practice this skill on
a relatively flat space with some markers (cones, half tennis
balls, or rocks and sticks) and mark out a 90-degree turn and a
180-degree turn. Practice riding through the turns several times,
increasing your speed, off the saddle and with level pedals. Push
your bike into the turn, keep your head up and look at your exit
point, one finger on each brake lever.
Climbing
On steep climbs a rider may choose one of three positions:
seated, crouched, or standing. In the seated position, the rider’s
shoulders move forward and the rider may move forward on the
saddle. As the terrain becomes steeper, a rider may need to move
into a crouched position similar to a ready position. This position
provides more power, bike/body separation, and better traction
control. A standing position provides the most power and can be
used when traction is good to rest from other positions and for
acceleration. Practice each of the three climbing positions in a
relatively flat space keeping one finger on each brake lever.
Crossing Obstacles
Mountain trails offer a variety of obstacles—from branches to
boulders. Not all obstacles are safe to cross on a bike, especially
if you are just getting started. Do not feel bad about dismounting
and walking your bike around or over an obstacle.
If you come upon an obstacle about 6 to 10 inches high,
you can try to cross it using this technique:
Step 1—As you approach the obstacle, stand up on your
pedals with your weight shifted back a bit, keeping your knees
and elbows relaxed. Make sure you are in a relatively easy gear.
Step 2—When your front wheel gets close to the obstacle, pull
up sharply on the handlebars to let the front wheel climb onto
the obstacle. Do not use your brakes. Lean back a little, but not
so far that you tip over backward.
Step 3—Once your front wheel is on the obstacle, push forward
on the handlebars and move your hips forward. If you have
clipless pedals, lift with your feet. These actions plus your
momentum should pull the back wheel up onto the obstacle.
Step 4—Continue pushing with your arms until you are over
the obstacle. Keep your body and knees compressed.


CYCLING 79
.Mountain Biking
Four Tips to Improve Steep Climbs
Having the right strengths and skills for climbing a steep hill separates
the advanced mountain biker from the beginner. Any hill can be a
challenge depending upon your experience, your bike, how tired you
are, and the kind of surface you are riding. Steep hills expose the limits
of your equipment, technique, and fitness level.
You can work on your technique more easily when climbing
because you are moving more slowly. Maintaining your balance
becomes very important at slower speeds since the wheels are no
longer creating the gyroscopic effect to help keep you upright.
1. Shift Weight Forward. When entering a climb, shift your weight
forward just a bit. This helps improve control and keeps the front wheel
on the ground, but leaning too far forward reduces rear wheel traction,
which can cause you to spin out. Shifting to one of the lowest gears
prior to starting the climb makes the effort easier on you and your bike.
2. Lower Your Center of Gravity. When climbing a steep hill, move
forward onto the tip of the saddle, bend your elbows down, and lean
toward the handlebars. Relax your upper body and keep a firm grip
on the handlebars. This will lower your center of gravity, stabilize your
balance, and improve traction to the rear wheel, making climbing much
easier. Do not stand up on the pedals during steep climbs. Standing
will shift your weight too far forward and you will lose rear wheel
traction. Staying seated is the best position for steep climbs.
3. Pull Down and Back. Drop your wrists and bend your elbows. Pull
down and back against the handlebars. Timing the pull of your hand
against the push of the pedal stroke helps improve traction.
4. Stay Smooth. Do not rock your upper body from side to side; keep
your hips steady on the seat. Leaning to one side reduces traction. Do
not waste your energy. Keep your breathing steady.
Other Skills
That is just the tip of the mountain when it comes to single-
track. Other types of off-road cycling may intrigue you, too,
such as free riding, cross-country cycling, and downhill racing,
as well as wheelies and other special maneuvers that make
every mountain biking experience unique.
The best way to find out more about any form of off-road
riding is to find experienced groups in your area. To learn more
about any of these off-road sports, visit the websites for the cycling
organizations listed in the resources section of this pamphlet.


80 CYCLING
Mountain Biking.
Four Tips for Steep Descents
One of the great joys of mountain biking is the exhilaration of riding
downhill, particularly a steep hill. Singletrack skills must be practiced
many times before they become second nature.
Never ride down a steep hill or trail without knowing if the trail is
open to bikes and whether other trail users such as hikers, horseback
riders, hunters, or all-terrain vehicles are allowed to use the same
trail. Never ride on trails closed to mountain bikes, no matter how
tempting that might be.
Steep slopes (20 percent grade or more) will erode and change
when exposed to rain, wind, and trail users. Bicycling professionals
would not think of riding a new section of downhill singletrack
without first inspecting the trail. Never be afraid to walk down a hill
that is inappropriate for you because of unusual weather, the wrong
equipment, or the need for more practice. Always have a place to
make an emergency stop on a new hill.
1. Be Ready at the Start of the Hill. Put your bike in the highest gear
of your chainrings and in the middle gear of your rear sprockets. Keep
your cranks horizontal to minimize contact between the pedals and rocks
or logs. When the terrain permits, pedal to increase downhill speed if
desired, returning quickly to the parallel-to-the-ground position.
A tough hill calls for secure handholds on the handlebars with
just a finger holding the brake levers. Remember that bent elbows
and relaxed arm and leg muscles act as shock absorbers, reducing
wear and tear on the body.
2. Start Slowly. The steeper the descent, the slower you should start
your ride. Once you have started downhill in earnest, you may find it
It’s difficult for novice mountain bikers to know how to choose trails
that are right for their skill level. You don’t want to pick ones that are
too tricky or dangerous; that will just leave you feeling frustrated,
defeated—and possibly injured. Instead, select trails that offer just the
right amount of challenge, excitement, and adventure. That will allow
you to enjoy your newfound hobby and build your level of skill. Ask
your counselor for advice.


CYCLING 81
.Mountain Biking
very difficult to slow down. Using too much braking power on steep
descents, especially on loose rocks, gravel, or dirt, can cause loss of trac-
tion, so balancing speed with control is the key to a safe downhill ride.
Avoid grooves caused by water runoff or previous riders. If you
find yourself in a groove, try not to brake suddenly; that won’t help
you slow down but will only make the groove worse. Weave from side
to side until you find firmer ground.
The faster you are riding, the farther you should look to anticipate
avoiding or riding over tree limbs, rocks, and other obstacles. Part of the
art of downhill riding is picking the best “line,” or most enjoyable ride.
3. Keep Your Weight Back on the Bike. Slide back on the bicycle.
Sometimes you may end up with your arms fully extended and your
rear over the back wheel, just as in the emergency stop on the road
described in the chapter on riding skills. Do not move your weight
back that far, however, unless you are on a steep hill, and do not
move too fast even then, or you will lose control over the front wheel.
4. Avoid Skids. Do not brake too hard with the rear brake or you will
lock the rear wheel, causing it to slide along the surface and damage
the trail. If your rear wheel starts to skid, let up on the rear brake.
Under extreme conditions, even the front wheel may skid. The
same trick for stopping the rear wheel from skidding works here,
too—just let go of the front brake a bit. The front brake is doing most
of the stopping, however, so be prepared to reapply the front brake
almost immediately. If you still skid, turn in the direction of the skid
so that you do not fall.


82 CYCLING
Cycling and
First Aid
While cyclists can prepare for their rides by
keeping their bodies and bikes fit and by planning
their routes, first-aid situations will sometimes arise.
All riders should be prepared to take action.
Hypothermia
Hypothermia occurs when a person’s body is losing more heat
than it can generate. Exposure to the cold and dehydration are
contributing factors. Wind, rain, hunger, and exhaustion can
further compound the danger. Temperatures do not need to be
below freezing. A cyclist caught out in a cold, windy rainsquall
without proper raingear can be at great risk.
A hypothermia victim may experience numbness, fatigue,
irritability, slurred speech, uncontrollable shivering, poor
judgment or decision-making, and loss of consciousness.
After calling for help, use any or all of the following methods
to help rewarm the remove the person to shelter and replace
wet clothing with dry, warm items. If the victim is conscious,
have him or her swallow warm water, soup, or juice.
Frostbite
Frostbite occurs when skin is exposed to temperatures cold
enough that ice crystals begin to form in the tissues. The ears,
nose, fingers, or feet might feel painful or numb, though the
person may not notice any such sensation.
To treat frostbite, remove wet clothing and wrap the injured
area in a dry blanket. Get the victim under the care of a physician
as soon as possible. Do not massage the area or rub it with snow.
Rewarm the area only if there is no chance of refreezing.
Monitor a
hypothermia
victim closely for
any change in
condition. Do
not rewarm the
person too quickly
(for instance, by
immersing the
person in warm
water); doing so
can be dangerous
to the heart.


CYCLING 83
.Cycling and First Aid
Dehydration
When we lose more water than we take in, we become dehy-
drated. Symptoms of mild dehydration include increased thirst,
dry lips, and dark yellow urine. Symptoms of moderate to severe
dehydration include severe thirst, dry mouth with little saliva,
dry skin, weakness, dizziness, confusion, nausea, cramping, loss
of appetite, decreased sweating (even with exertion), decreased
urine production, and dark brown urine.
For mild dehydration, have the victim drink a quart or two
of water or a sports drink over two to four hours. The person
should rest for 24 hours and continue drinking fluids. See a
physician for moderate to severe dehydration, which requires
emergency care; the victim will need intravenous fluids.
Heat Exhaustion
Heat exhaustion happens when the body becomes overheated.
Symptoms include a severe lack of energy, general weakness,
headache, nausea, faintness, heavy sweating, pale and clammy
skin, and muscle cramps.
To treat heat exhaustion, get the person into a shady, cool
spot. Encourage the person to drink small amounts of fluids, such
as cool water or a sports drink. Apply water to the skin and cloth-
ing and fan the person. Raising the legs may help prevent a feeling
of faintness.
Heatstroke
In heatstroke, the body’s cooling system fails and the person’s core
temperature rises to life-threatening levels (above 105 degrees). If
you suspect someone is suffering from heatstroke, seek immedi-
ate medical assistance. Work quickly to lower the victim’s tem-
perature. Move the person to a shady, cool area. Loosen tight
clothing, fan the victim, and apply wet towels.
Dehydration increases the danger of frostbite, so be
just as diligent about drinking fluids in cold weather
as you are when the weather is hot. Drink before you
feel thirsty; thirst is an indication you are already
becoming dehydrated.


84 CYCLING
Cycling and First Aid.
Cuts and Scratches
Wash cuts, scratches, and scrapes with soap and water. Allow
to air dry. Apply antiseptic to help prevent infection. Keep the
wound clean with an adhesive bandage. Clean and rebandage
small wounds daily. Cover larger wounds with a sterile gauze
pad or a clean cloth folded into a pad. Hold the pad in position
with tape or a bandage.
Concussion
A concussion is a brain injury, caused by a blow to the head
or by a sudden change in motion of the head, in which the
brain bounces rapidly back and forth inside the skull. A
person does not need to be knocked out to have a concussion.
Some symptoms are disorientation, slurred speech, nausea,
sensitivity to light or noise, and sleepiness. Someone with a
suspected concussion should be assessed promptly by a medical
professional.
Blisters
Blisters are pockets of fluid that form when the skin is irritated
by friction. A hot spot—the tender area as a blister starts to
form—is a signal to stop and take preventive action. To help
prevent foot blisters, wear shoes or boots that fit, change socks
if they become sweaty or wet, and pay attention to how your
feet feel. To help prevent blisters on the hands, wear gloves for
protection and pay attention to how your hands feel.
Bites and Stings
Ticks. To avoid tick bites, wear long pants and long sleeves
whenever you are in tick-infested woodlands and fields. Ticks
bury their heads beneath the skin of their victims. To remove a
tick, with gloved hands, grasp it with tweezers close to the skin
and gently pull until it comes loose. Wash the wound with soap
Sunburn can cause lasting skin damage and the potential for skin cancer.
Cover up to prevent sunburn, and use plenty of sunscreen with a sun protec-
tion factor (SPF) of at least 15. Reapply frequently, even on cloudy days. To
ease the pain of a mild sunburn, apply cool, wet cloths to the affected area.
A soothing lotion containing chamomile or aloe vera may provide relief.


.Cycling and First Aid
and water and apply antiseptic. Thoroughly wash your hands
after handling a tick.
Bee, wasp, or hornet stings. If you are stung by a bee, wasp,
or hornet but are not allergic to their stings, remove the stinger
by scraping it out with a knife blade. Do not try to squeeze
the stinger out. Use a cold pack to help reduce pain and
swelling.
Snakebites. The nonvenomous snakebite causes minor puncture
wounds and can be treated as such. Scrub the bite with soap
and water, apply an antiseptic, and cover with a sterile bandage.
However, the bite of a venomous snakebite requires special care.
Summon medical help immediately. Wash the wound if
possible, and remove any restrictive clothing or jewelry in case
of swelling. Have the victim lie down with the bitten part below
the rest of the body. Watch for and treat any signs of shock.
Poisonous Plants
The oily sap from the leaves, stem, and roots of poison ivy,
poison oak, and poison sumac irritates the skin of most people.
Once the sap gets on skin, it can spread to other parts of the
body and cause a rash with redness, blisters, swelling, itch-
ing, burning, fever, and headache. Immediately stop to wash
the exposed area well with soap and water. Wipe with rubbing
alcohol and apply calamine or other soothing skin treatment.
CYCLING 85
For people who are allergic to bee or wasp venom
or fire ant stings, a life-threatening reaction called
anaphylactic shock (anaphylaxis) can occur. Symptoms
can include a swelling of throat tissues or tongue that
makes breathing difficult or even impossible. Scouts
who have allergies that could cause anaphylactic shock
should share that information with their unit leaders and let them know
where anaphylaxis medications are kept so that they can be made
available at a moment’s notice.


86 CYCLING
Improving as a Cyclist.
Improving as a Cyclist
The Cycling Journal
A cycling journal is essential to improving your riding. Keeping
a journal will enable you to gauge your progress, help you to
recognize why on certain days riding felt exceptionally good,
and let you build on the unique experiences you have. It also
will give you material for the reports you need to write to fulfill
requirement 7 of the Cycling merit badge.
Mileage and Experience
Keep a steady record of the mileage you complete each time you
go for a ride. You may find that 10 miles is long for a beginning
ride. Start your journal, however, with the first ride you take,
regardless of the length. Then, ride five miles one day and five
miles another day in the same week. You need not
take a trip to accomplish this. Do you know the
length of your street? Ride up and down
your street continuously until you have
completed five miles. The next week,
repeat the process, except this time,
ride seven miles at a time.
In your journal, record also
what you eat and drink every
day, especially what you eat
and drink while riding. As your
mileage per ride increases,
you will find that certain foods
and drinks will fuel you more
comfortably for a long ride. Your
journal will help you clarify what
you enjoyed about each ride and
help you isolate things that you would
like to do differently on your next ride.


CYCLING 87
.Improving as a Cyclist
Sample Journal Entry
Date:________________ Hours slept:________________
Nutrition: (Record what you ate for each meal and snacks.)
Breakfast: __________________________________________
___________________________________________________
Lunch:____________________________________________
____________________________________________________
Dinner: ___________________________________________
____________________________________________________
Snacks: ____________________________________________
__________________________________________________
Distance ridden today: __________________________________
Route and type of terrain:________________________________
________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________
Weather: _________________________________________________
Remarks: _______________________________________________
______________________________________________________
______________________________________________________
______________________________________________________
______________________________________________________
______________________________________________________
______________________________________________________
Use your journal as notes for the reports you write for requirement 7.


88 CYCLING
Appendix.
Appendix
Bicycle Safety Checklist
Use this list, or another provided by your counselor, to be sure
your bike is ready for inspection—and the road or trail.
■■ Frame (1)—Clean and not bent out of shape. No cracks at
frame joints (2).
■■ Front fork (3)—Clean and not bent out of shape. No
cracks at fork joints (4).
■■ Headset bearing (5)—Well lubricated; turns freely with no
binding. No perceptible play in the assembly.
■■ Bottom-bracket bearing (6)—Turns freely with no more
than barely perceptible play in the bearing.
■■ Crank arms (7)—Clean and not bent out of shape.
Tightened securely on the crankset axle (8).
■■ Chainrings (9)—Clean, not worn, and not bent out of
shape. Chainring bolts (10) tightened securely to hold
chainrings to crank arms.
■■ Pedals (11)—Tightly screwed into crank arm. Flat bearings
well-lubricated; turn freely with no perceptible play in
the bearing. (12) or clipless pedals functional.
■■ Wheels (13)—Run true and round. Centered in fork or
frame/dropouts. Wheel securely attached by either nuts,
quick releases, or thru axles. (14).
■■ Wheel bearings (15) in hubs—Well lubricated and properly
adjusted to move freely with no more than barely
perceptible play.
■■ Spokes (16)—None broken or bent. Tightened to a
uniform tension.
■■ Tires—Good tread (17). Valves (18) completely airtight.
Properly inflated to recommended pressure.
■■ Rims (19)—Clean of oil and grime. Free of dents or kinks.
■■ Chain (20)—Proper tension, allowing 1
⁄2 inch of play. No stiff
links. Clean, lubricated, and wiped of excess lubrication.
■■ Gearing (21)—Clean and oiled. Three-speed gears adjusted
to eliminate all slipping. Front (22a) and rear (22b)
derailleurs adjusted for proper shifting with shifters (22c).


CYCLING 89
.Appendix
■■ Brakes (23)
— Coaster: even braking. Operate within a 20-degree
back-pedaling motion.
— Hand: even braking. All nuts, screws and bolts tight.
Front and rear brakes work without binding. Minimum
of 3/16 inch of rub on rim brake pads (24) or 3 mil-
limeters of thickness on disc brake pads. Brake pads
properly aligned with rims or discs and contact with
a minimum movement of brake levers (25). No squeal
when brakes are used.
■■ Cables (26)—No frayed ends. No broken strands. All taut.
■■ Handlebars (27)—Tightened securely. Grips (28) not worn;
fit snugly. Adjusted to comfort of rider. Ends (29) plugged.
■■ Saddle (30)—Height, tilt, and fore/aft position adjusted
to rider. All adjustments securely tightened. Seatpost (31)
not extended beyond maximum mark on post.
■■ Rear red reflectors/lights (32)—Visible for 300 feet.
Lights/blinkers functional with generator or batteries.
■■ Bike registration—If required by local law, must be
displayed on frame.
■■ Lights (optional)—Front light visible for 500 feet.
Generator or battery in good operating condition.
■■ Bell or horn (optional)—In good operating condition.
All accessories well-tightened and securely fastened.
No broken frames or fasteners.


(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(13)
(14)
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
(19) (20)
(21)
(22a)
(22c)
(22b)
(23) (24)
(25)
(26)
(27) (29)
(30)
(31)
(32)
(32)
Road bike
(18)
(28)


(1)
(2)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9) (10)(11)
(13)
(14)
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
(18)
(19) (20)
(21)
(22a)
(22c)
(22b)
(23)
(24)
(25)
(26)
(27)
(28)
(29)
(30)
(31)
(32)(32)
Mountain bike


92 CYCLING
Appendix.
Scouting America Bike Safety Guidelines
The Scouting America Bike Safety Guidelines are designed to make bicycle riding
safer and more enjoyable for you and others. Review these guidelines with your
merit badge counselor.
Scouting America SAFE Checklist. As with all Scouting activities, these principles
should be applied in your cycling event.
Wear a properly fitted helmet. Protect your brain; save your life! Bicycle helmets
can reduce head injuries by 85 percent, according to the NHTSA.
Adjust your bicycle to fit. Make sure you can stand over the top tube of your bicycle.
Assure bicycle readiness. Make sure all parts are secure and working well. Assure
that tires are fully inflated and brakes are working properly.
See and be seen. Wear clothing that makes you more visible, such as bright neon
or fluorescent colors. Wear reflective clothing or tape. Avoid riding at night.
Watch for and avoid road hazards. Stay alert at all times. Be on the lookout for haz-
ards, such as potholes, broken glass, gravel, puddles, leaves, animals, or anything that
could cause you to crash. If you are riding with friends and you are in the lead, call out
and point to the hazard to alert the riders behind you.
Follow the rules of the road. Check and obey all local traffic laws. Always ride
on the right side of the road in the same direction as other vehicles. Go with the
flow—not against it! Yield to traffic and watch for parked cars.
Scouting America SAFE Checklist
Scouts and their parents or guardians expect all Scouting America activities to be
conducted safely. To ensure the safety of participants, Scouting America expects
leaders to use the four points of SAFE when delivering the Scouting program:
1. Supervision. Youth are supervised by qualified and trustworthy adults who
set the example for safety.
• Accepting responsibility for the well-being and safety of youth under their care.
• Ensuring that adults are adequately trained, experienced, and skilled to lead
the activity, including the ability to prevent and respond to likely problems
and potential emergencies.
• Knowing and delivering the program of Scouting America with integrity.
• Using qualified instructors, guides, or safety personnel as needed to provide
additional guidance.
• Maintaining engagement with participants during activities to ensure
compliance with established rules and procedures.
For more information on bicycle safety, visit the National Highway
Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) website at nhtsa.dot.gov


CYCLING 93
.Appendix
2. Assessment. Activities are assessed for risks during planning. Leaders have
reviewed applicable program guidance or standards and have verified the
activity is not prohibited. Risk avoidance or mitigation is incorporated into the
activity.
• Predetermining what guidance and standards are typically applied to the
activity, including those specific to the Scouting America program.
• Planning for safe travel to and from the activity site.
• Validating the activity is age appropriate for the Scouting America program level.
• Determining whether the unit has sufficient training, resources, and
experience to meet the identified standards, and if not, modifying the activity
accordingly.
• Developing contingency plans for changes in weather and environment
and arranging for communication with participants, parents or guardians, and
emergency services.
3. Fitness and Skill. Annual Health and Medical Records are reviewed, and
leaders have confirmed that prerequisite fitness and skill levels exist for
participants to take part safely.
• Confirming the activity is right for the age, maturity, and physical abilities of
participants.
• Considering as risk factors temporary or chronic health conditions of
participants.
• Validating minimum skill requirements identified during planning and
ensuring participants stay within the limits of their abilities.
• Providing training to participants with limited skills and assessing their skills
before they attempt more advanced skills.
4. Equipment and Environment. Safe and appropriately sized equipment,
courses, camps, campsites, trails, or playing fields are used properly. Leaders
periodically check gear use and the environment for changing conditions that
could affect safety.
• Confirming participants’ clothing is appropriate for expected temperatures,
sun exposure, weather events, and terrain.
• Providing equipment that is appropriately sized for participants, is in good
repair, and is used properly.
• Ensuring personal and group safety equipment is available, properly fitted,
and used consistently and in accordance with training.
• Reviewing the activity area for suitability during planning and immediately
before use, and monitoring the area during the activity through supervision.
• Adjusting the activity for changing conditions or ending it if safety cannot be
maintained.
Full details of the SAFE checklist at scouting.org/health-and-safety/safe


94 CYCLING
Cycling Resources.
Cycling Resources
Scouting Literature
Fieldbook; Deck of First Aid; Emergency
First Aid pocket guide; First Aid merit
badge pamphlet
Books
Bohlinger, Tim. Mountain Biking: A
Beginner's Essential Guide to Getting
Started in the Sport of Mountain
Biking. CreateSpace Independent
Publishing Platform, 2015.
Bortman, Tori. The Bicycling Big Book
of Cycling for Beginners: Everything
a New Cyclist Needs to Know to Gear
Up and Start Riding. Rodale, 2014.
Clark, Nancy, and Jenny Hegmann.
The Cyclist’s Food Guide, 2nd ed.
Sports Nutrition Publishers, 2011.
Forester, John. Effective Cycling, 7th ed.
MIT Press, 2012.
Forth, Clive. The Mountain Biking
Pocket Guide. Falcon Guides, 2012.
Friel, Joe. The Cyclist’s Training Bible,
5th ed. VeloPress, 2018.
Friel, Joe. The Mountain Biker’s
Training Bible. VeloPress, 2000.
Glowacz, Dave. Urban Bikers’ Tricks and
Tips, 3rd ed. Wordspace Press, 2016.
Hewitt, Ben. Bicycling Magazine’s
New Cyclist Handbook, revised ed.
Rodale, 2005.
Hewitt, Ben. Bicycling Magazine’s
Nutrition for Peak Performance: Eat
and Drink for Maximum Energy on
the Road and Off, revised ed.
Rodale, 2000.
Jones, Calvin, Big Blue Book of Bicycle
Repair (4th ed., 2019)
League of American Bicyclists, Smart
Cycling Manual (2019)
Lopes, Brian, and Lee McCormack.
Mastering Mountain Bike Skills, 2nd
ed. Human Kinetics Publishers, 2017
McCormack, Lee. Teaching Mountain
Bike Skills, 2nd ed. Race Line
Publishing, 2011
Sidwells, Chris, Bicycle Repair Manual.
DK, (2021)
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


CYCLING 95
.Cycling Resources
Sumner, Jason. Bicycling Complete Book
of Road Cycling Skills: Your Guide to
Riding Faster, Stronger, Longer, and
Safer, 2nd ed. Rodale, 2016.
Zinn, Lennard. Zinn & the Art of
Mountain Bike Maintenance, 5th ed.
VeloPress, 2010.
———. Zinn & the Art of Road Bike
Maintenance, 5th ed. VeloPress, 2016.
Magazines
Bicycling
400 S. 10th St.
Emmaus, PA 18098
bicycling.com
Ride BMX
2052 Corte Del Nogal, Suite 100
Carlsbad, CA 92011
bmx.transworld.net
Mountain Bike
mountainbike.com
Organizations and Websites
Adaptive Adventures
Resources to adapt equipment and activ-
ities for individuals with special needs
adaptiveadventures.org
Bikepacking.com
bikepacking.com
Adventure Cycling Association
Toll-free telephone: 800-755-2453
adventurecycling.org
International Mountain
Bicycling Association
Toll-free telephone: 888-442-4622
imba.com
International Special Olympics
Resources related to cycling for
individuals with special needs
specialolympics.org
League of American Bicyclists
bikeleague.org
National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration
nhtsa.dot.gov
National Interscholastic Cycling
Association (NICA)
nationalmtb.org
Park Tool (bike repair videos)
parktool.com
REI
rei.com/learn/c/cycling
USA Cycling
210 USA Cycling Point, Suite 100
Colorado Springs, CO 80919
Telephone: 719-434-4200
usacycling.org
Acknowledgments
Scouting America is grateful to Andrew
Rosch, communications coordinator at
Trek Bicycle Corporation, for his technical
expertise and support of this edition
of the Cycling merit badge pamphlet.
Thanks to Trek for its continued support
of this merit badge and pamphlet.
The Trek Bicycle Store in Madison,
Wisconsin, provided many of the
bicycles, helmets, and other equipment
photographed for this pamphlet.
We appreciate the help of Scouting
America’s Four Lakes Council, Madison,
Wisconsin, for its help with photography
arrangements. Thanks to Richardson Bike
Mart and Jim Hoyt, Richardson, Texas,
for assistance with photography, as well.
Scouting America is thankful to
Eagle Scout Peter Reigelman, a cycling
enthusiast, for his assistance. We
appreciate support from Philmont Scout
Ranch, as well.


96 CYCLING
Cycling Resources.
Scouting America is grateful to
the men and women serving on the
National Merit Badge Subcommittee for
the improvements made in updating this
pamphlet.
We appreciate the input from the
Wheels and Boards subcommittee of
the National Outdoor Program and
Properties Committee. Thanks also to
Martine Nehrig and Peter Asden, All Star
Bike Shops, Cary, North Carolina, for
assistance with photography.
Photo and Illustration Credits
Wikipedia.org, courtesy—page 45
(combination lock)
Wikipedia.org/Ralf Roletschek, courtesy—
page 45 (U-lock)
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property
of or are protected by Scouting America.
Tom Copeland—page 8
Nate Luke Photography—page 5
John McDearmon—all illustrations on
pages 12–16, 20, 26, 29, 32-33, 40,
52, 54–58, and 61
Brian Payne—pages 11, 37, 81, and 89
Randy Piland—page 96