COMMUNICATION
STEM-Based


COMMUNICATION
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


35876
ISBN 978-0-8395-3258-3
©2025 Scouting America
2025 Printing
Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Communication or check
Scoutbook for the latest requirements.
FPO


COMMUNICATION 3


4 COMMUNICATION


COMMUNICATION 5
Contents
Communication: A Key to Opening Doors. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Good Listener, Good Leader . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
The Five-Minute Speech . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
Teaching Skills and Using Teaching Aids. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
Active Communication and the Digital Revolution . . . . . . . . 41
Planning a Program . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
Careers in Communication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
Resources in Communication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77





COMMUNICATION 7
.Communication: A Key to Opening Doors
Communication: A Key
to Opening Doors
Communication is important to your life. Being able to
communicate effectively is key to achieving success. It is
the way you get people to understand your values, interests,
talents, abilities, needs, and wants. It is how you show your
knowledge about things.
Good communication means more than just expressing
yourself. It also involves listening carefully to others, knowing
when to speak up,
and knowing when
to keep your thoughts
to yourself. If you can
communicate well,
you will be better at
just about everything
you do, from Scouting
to schoolwork and
being a good friend.
As you grow older, your ability to communicate grows with
you. When you were an infant, you used crying to communicate
simple messages such as “I’m hungry!” or “My diaper needs
changing!” At about 6 weeks of age, you learned to communi-
cate by smiling. This was how you said: “I’m happy” or “I’m
comfortable with you.” At around 6 months, you started talking.
A mixture of sounds and words tumbled out of your mouth.
Every day, you got a little better at it. By the time you started
school, you had advanced from “Da-da!” to “Can you come over
to play?”
When you are old enough to get a job, good
communication skills will make you a valued and
productive worker.


8 COMMUNICATION
Communication: A Key to Opening Doors.
Today, you are able to communicate complex thoughts about
things like sports, math, and movie plots. You may have learned
a special group of words related to a favorite hobby or sport. You
may have even learned to communicate in a second language.
Different Forms of Communication
As you work on your Communication merit badge, you may
wonder, “What is communication?” Simply put, communication
is the act of sharing information with others. Most forms of
communication are symbolic. A symbol is something that means
or stands for something else. For example, the American flag is
a symbol of America.
Language
Language is the most common way that we use symbols to
communicate. Most languages use an alphabet to symbolize
(stand for) sounds in the spoken language. We combine
these “letters” to form words. Some words symbolize things
you can hold or touch. “Apple,” for example, stands for a
fruit. Other words, such as “love,” “intelligence,” and “free-
dom,” stand for things you cannot hold or touch.
We combine words to form sentences. Sentences state facts,
opinions, questions, or commands, such as, “The apple looks
very red” and “Is it a Macintosh or Fuji?”
Here are some
other common
symbols. What
do they mean?
The answers are
upside down.
1. Peace
2. Canada
3. No smoking
4. Men’s room
Women’s room
1
2
3
4


COMMUNICATION 9
.Communication: A Key to Opening Doors
Speaking Without Words
Not all communication uses words. There are many
ways we communicate nonverbally, or “without words.”
Nonverbal communication can still use symbols,
however. For example, if a Scout is on a trail and sees
a sign with a drawing of a bicycle with a bold red line
drawn over it, the Scout knows that no bicycles are
allowed on the trail, even though there are no words
on the sign.
Some types of communication use words and
nonverbal symbols. The eight-sided red sign printed
with the word STOP in white letters tells drivers to stop
their car. You would probably know the sign’s meaning
even if the word was not there. That is because the color red,
which signifies danger, and the eight-sided shape (called an
octagon) are used on no other road sign in the United States.
In this case, three different symbols—a word, a color, and a
shape—all help communicate the same important meaning.
Talking With Your Body
Another nonverbal way to communicate is through “body
language.” Body language is communication through body
movements or gestures. It can be as simple as a smile, frown,
or nod of the head.
Shaking hands when you meet someone is a nonverbal way
to communicate goodwill. For people in the military, a salute—
raising the right hand, held flat, to the forehead over the right
eyebrow—shows respect. Legend has it that the practice had its
origin in the Middle Ages, when knights raised the visors of their
helmets to greet each other.
Body language, like spoken languages, can have
different meanings in different countries. This could
lead to misunderstandings. In some countries, nodding the
head up and down means “no,” while it means “yes” in the
United States. The peace sign gesture (holding up the middle
and index fingers in a “V”) may be polite in this country but
considered rude or insulting in other cultures.


10 COMMUNICATION
Communication: A Key to Opening Doors.
Body language can even communicate whole
sentences. For example, many people who are
deaf, and their friends and families, use
a special language called American Sign
Language, or ASL. This language uses
hand movements and “finger spelling” to
communicate thoughts.
People may sometimes “speak” body
language without knowing it. If you grew up
in the United States, you might lower your eyes
and look at the floor when you are feeling shy.
You might raise an eyebrow to show doubt
or confusion. Squinting your eyes can signal
anger. In other cultures, these movements may
have different meanings.
Other Ways of Communicating
Without Words
Words and body language are not the only ways
to communicate. Dressing nicely to go to a place
of worship tells others, “I respect this religious
tradition.” Sitting in the front of the classroom,
rather than in the back, says, “I want to learn
and do well in this class.”
Mass Communication and
Digital Technologies
Communication that is meant for a large audience
is sometimes called mass communication. This used to
mean communicating through radio, TV, newspapers,
magazines, films, and theater. Today, many people com-
municate using digital (computer-related) technologies.
The way you wear your hair can communicate, too. In the 1960s, many
young men wore their hair long as a way to protest “the establishment,”
a term that meant “the usual way of doing things.” However, by the
1970s long hair on boys and young men was common and had lost its
special meaning.
American Sign Language, or
ASL, helps people communicate
whole sentences with hand
movements and finger spelling
rather than by voice.


COMMUNICATION 11
.Communication: A Key to Opening Doors
Some of these are mass communication tools. Others help
individuals or small groups communicate.
Digital tools include websites, social networking sites,
blogs, instant messaging, and text messaging using cellular
phones and other handheld devices. We will look more closely
at digital communication in a later chapter.
Why Study Communication?
If we learn to communicate naturally, why do we study
communication? The answer is that we all can improve our
communication skills if we practice them. That means learning
to be a better listener and a more confident public speaker.
Earning this merit badge will make you more aware of
communication in your life. You will learn how to interact
better with others and improve your communication skills.
You can use these skills when you need to inform, persuade,
or get the attention of people.
According to the National Communication Association,
“Communication is a learned skill. Most people are
born with the physical ability to talk, but we learnvover
time to speak well and communicate effectively.”
In other words, we do not communicate naturally. We
learn how to communicate from others—by watching
them, listening to them, and doing what we see others
do. We learn from our parents or guardians and
teachers how to communicate better.


12 COMMUNICATION
Communication: A Key to Opening Doors.
Keeping a Communication Log
By observing how you communicate and how much time you
spend communicating, you can learn about your own strengths
and weaknesses as a communicator. Requirement 1(a) asks you
to keep a detailed communication log for one day. Doing so will
help you see your communication style more clearly. You will
know how much time you spend online, or watch TV, listen to
the radio, and read. You will learn how much time you spend
on the phone and in face-to-face interactions, and how often
you use email, text messaging, instant messaging, or write
letters to friends and relatives.


COMMUNICATION 13
lllI
\lllI
\lll
lllI I
\
lllI I
\
lllI II
\
lllI
\
lllI\
Sample Communication Log
Date: Monday, 3/18
Ways to Communicate
Interacting
Face-to-Face
Listening to
Speaker
Talking on
Telephone
Writing Notes/
Letters
Email/Texting/
Instant Messaging
TV/Print Media/
Radio Online
Time 6 to 7 a.m. lll ll
7 to 8 a.m. lllI l
8 to 9 a.m. l ll llI
9 to 10 a.m. l llI llII
10 to 11 a.m. l l l
11 a.m. to noon l l llI
Noon to 1 p.m. lIII ll
1 to 2 p.m. lIII l lI l
2 to 3 p.m. llI l l ll lIII lIII
3 to 4 p.m. l llI lI
4 to 5 p.m. l l lI lI
5 to 6 p.m. lIII ll lI
6 to 7 p.m. llI lI lI lII
7 to 8 p.m. l l
8 to 9 p.m. lI l lII lII l
9 to 10 p.m. llI llI l
10 to 11 p.m. l
11 p.m. to midnight
lllI IIII
\
lllI III
\
lllI II
\
lllI
\ lIlllI
\
lllI
\
lllI
\
lIlllI
\
lllI
\
lllI
\





COMMUNICATION 15
.Good Listener, Good Leader
Good Listener,
Good Leader
Have you ever met someone new and then promptly forgotten the
person’s name? This can be very embarrassing. Listening is one
of the most important skills you can learn. Scientists say that we
learn 85 percent of what we know by listening. However, listening
is more than just hearing. Listening is receiving. When you focus
on the speaker and what is being said, you learn more, remember
more, and retain the information longer.


16 COMMUNICATION
Good Listener, Good Leader.
Practice listening to the speaker with respect. If you work
hard not to interrupt even when you really want to make a
point, the speaker will respect you more. Being a good listener
is important in building and keeping friendships. If you take the
time to listen to your friends when they need you, they probably
will do the same for you.
There are many different reasons for listening. When you
listen to your teacher in school or to your Scoutmaster at a troop
meeting, you are listening to
gain information. You may
have listened to someone who
is trying to persuade you about
something. Perhaps you have
listened to sounds in nature or
music that helped you relax.
Some people fall asleep faster
when they are in a tent near a
babbling brook. For others, it
helps to hear the big-city back-
ground sounds of taxis honking
and sirens wailing.
Notice how active
listening includes
repeating what
you have heard.
Active listening
helps the speaker
and the listener
understand, and
perhaps resolve,
a problem or
conflict. We will
discuss active
listening in the
next section.
How to Remember Names
People like it when you call them by name. This shows
respect. It often makes people glad they have met you.
Here is a neat trick to help you remember a person’s
name. Let’s say you meet a man named Bob Brown.
First, say his name aloud. “It’s nice to meet you, Bob
Brown.” Repeat his name to yourself a couple of times.
Next, “hang” the name in a mental picture. To do that,
look at Bob and picture him in a scene based on his
name. For example, imagine that he is in a rowboat
with the letters “BOB” on the side. The rowboat is
bobbing up and down in a sea of chocolate (brown)
milk. The next time you see Bob Brown, this picture
will come to mind, and you will remember his name.


COMMUNICATION 17
.Good Listener, Good Leader
Tips for Better Listening
Pay attention. It is natural for your mind to wander when someone is
talking to you. Often, we think about what we are going to say next, rather
than listening to what the speaker is saying. However, a good listener
ignores that impulse.
Be responsive. A good listener lets the speaker know that the message
is getting across. Instead of being distracted, look directly and often at the
speaker’s eyes, nod your head, and make short responses like, “Yes, I get
it,” or “That’s interesting.”
Restate what you heard. Another great listening skill is to state what
you think the speaker just said, using your own words. Ask questions
if necessary. This helps you make sure you understood what was said.
“We’ll meet at 3 o’clock at the snack bar in the bowling alley, right?
Or did you say at the snack bar next door to the bowling alley?”
Keep a Listening Journal
Requirement 1(b) asks you to keep a journal of your listening
experiences to make you more aware of this key skill. Make a
note of when you listen to gain information and when someone
is trying to persuade you about something. Identify when you
listen to appreciate or enjoy something, and when you listen to
understand someone’s feelings.
Remembering the Important Things
We cannot remember everything; we must decide what is
important to remember. Some scientists have discovered
that just after we hear something, we will remember less
than half of it. By the next day, we might recall only up to
a third of the message.
Earlier, we explained how to create a mental picture to
help you recall someone’s name. Another great memory tool
is to write down what you need to remember. As soon as you
can after you hear something, or even while you are listening,
write down the things you need to remember. If you have a
smartphone, iPad, or tablet computer with note or voice memo
applications, you can use those to record what you want to
remember. Be sure to look at your notes or listen to your memo
later. If necessary, rewrite your remarks more clearly and add
details to help you understand your notes.


18 COMMUNICATION
Good Listener, Good Leader.
Leading Small-Group Discussions
Leading a small-group discussion is exciting. As a Scout,
you may have a chance to lead a discussion in your patrol
or troop. As a student, you may get to lead a discussion for
a school project or sports team. Here are some other kinds
of group discussions:
• Work groups (people working together on a task)
• Focus groups (people brought together to discuss a product
or service)
• Brainstorming groups (people who gather to come up with
new ideas about how to do something)
Requirement 1(c) asks you to lead a small-
group discussion. Before the discussion begins, give
the group clear guidelines about the topic and the
format of the discussion. You might start by
saying, “Today we are going to brainstorm
ideas for Eagle Scout projects. I want each
person to share new ideas and make
suggestions for our current projects.
We will sit in a circle, and each of us
will have three minutes to share our own
thoughts. After each speaker finishes,
the group will have three minutes to ask
questions. Then, the person at the speaker’s
right will have a turn to speak.”
As group leader, you cannot join the
conversation. Avoid talking too much. Instead,
stay a little bit apart to watch, listen, and guide.
During the discussion:
• Keep the group members focused on discussing the correct
topic. Don’t let the group get distracted.
• Make each person feel that it is OK to talk about their own
experiences or ideas.
While you lead the discussion, remember that your task is to be part
referee, part coach, and part observer. Do not take sides. Remind
participants to make all comments to the group leader or to the whole
group. Prevent conversations between individuals, or redirect them to
the group.


COMMUNICATION 19
.Good Listener, Good Leader
• Give shy people a chance to talk; encourage them with a
smile and a kind word.
• Prevent any one person from taking over the conversation.
Do this respectfully.
• Make sure the group gives each person a chance to speak
and be heard without interruption.
• If necessary, help group members to compromise.
• Watch the time to make sure the group completes the
discussion or task.
As each person speaks, observe how the person
communicates and how others respond. Look for nonverbal
communication. Notice how a smile, shrug, or raised brow
can reveal a person’s feelings or thoughts. When each
speaker finishes, thank them for participating. When the
time is nearly up, close by summarizing the main points
and the group’s conclusions.
Text Message or
Formal Letter?
During the Civil War—before there were
computers, telephones, or even motorized
mail delivery—letters often took months
to arrive. Union and Confederate soldiers
wrote detailed and expressive letters and
used beautiful penmanship. Their friends
and relatives cherished these handwritten
words. Many of those letters, which became
family keepsakes and were passed down
through generations, survive today.
Requirement 1(d) asks you to list as many
methods of communication as you can, and
identify to your counselor when each method should
(and should not) be used. Today, we use many forms of
communication: text messages, social media, telephones,
emails, faxes, regular mail, and express mail delivery around
the globe by plane. There is no one right way to communi-
cate. However, you can pick the best way to send a message,
depending on who will get it and why you are sending it. Here
are some simple guidelines to help you choose the right way
to communicate.
Letters written
by Union and
Confederate
soldiers show
that the average
foot soldier had,
for the most part,
a fairly impressive
command of the
English language.


20 COMMUNICATION
Good Listener, Good Leader.
Formal Letters
We use formal letters to communicate for school or business
purposes, or to write recommendations. When you apply for an
internship, a camp, or a job, you may have to write a formal letter
asking admission or permission to attend or to state your interest.
If you are chosen for an award or honored for your talents, write
a formal letter thanking the organization. Letters to the editor of
a newspaper or magazine, even those sent by email, also require
a formal tone.
Penmanship: A Disappearing Art
In the past, people wrote letters by hand. Now we are more likely to send
an email or a text message. Few people today have neat handwriting
that is also beautiful. Practice your handwriting so that anyone can read it.
Using a computer, choose a font that you would like your handwriting
to look like. Make sure your practice sheet includes all the letters in the
alphabet and has lots of space between lines. Print out the page and
practice writing the letters below each line.
Being able to write
a formal letter in
the proper format
says a lot about
your maturity and
professionalism.


COMMUNICATION 21
.Good Listener, Good Leader
In a formal letter,
“Enc.” is short
for “enclosure.”
Formal letters are always typed, spell-checked, and then
proofread (to catch mistakes the computer missed). Begin with
today’s date in the top, left-hand corner, followed by the recipi-
ent’s name, formal title, street address, city, state, and zip code.
Add the recipient’s email address if you are sending the letter
electronically. The formal greeting with a colon at the end
(for example, “Dear Ms. Brown:” or “Dear Dr. Smith:”) is next.
The body of the letter follows. End with a formal closing,
such as “Sincerely,” or “Best regards.” Follow with your full name
typed below it; leave enough space above for your signature. Add
your own address information, phone number, and email address.
If you are enclosing something with the letter, such as an appli-
cation or resume, put a note at the bottom of the letter like this:
“Enc: resume” or “Enc: application and $75 fee.”
Faxes
A fax (short for “facsimile”) is a copy of a document that is
transmitted over telephone lines or the internet. The recipient
can view it as a printout or as an image on a computer screen.
Sending a fax is not as personal as making a phone call, but
it lets you instantly send detailed or printed information,
such as a map or a newspaper clipping. It is particularly
helpful for business offices.
The main drawback of faxes is that not everyone has a
fax machine or a computer that can send and receive faxes.
In addition, faxing can be expensive if you have to send or
receive messages at an office supply store or copy shop, and
when the recipient has a long-distance number.
Text Messaging
Sometimes called “texting,” this form of communication
involves sending short messages, usually by cellphone. Texting
is good for quick communication, especially when phone calls
might be disruptive or impractical. It is also useful for leaving a
message when a person can’t take your call. Remember that
your cellphone provider may charge a fee for texting.
Social Media
Social media are forms of electronic communication through
which users create online communities to share information,
ideas, personal messages, and other content (such as videos).


22 COMMUNICATION
Good Listener, Good Leader.
Email
Email, short for “electronic mail,” has changed how many of us
communicate. Email messages travel electronically. They can be
just about any length and can have attachments such as photo-
graphs, videos, or documents. An
email usually reaches its destination
almost instantly. You can send email
just about anywhere in the world and
store emails as long as you want. You
may also forward emails to others.
Email is so easy to use that
many people write a note quickly
and click “send” without reviewing
their message. You should always
review an email before sending it.
Make sure that it is easy to under-
stand, contains good spelling and grammar, and is respectful.
Even in an email, misspelled words, poor grammar, or unclear
sentences can make you look rude or not very smart—or both.
Phone Calls
Phone calls are great for hearing the other person’s voice, casual
chatting, making quick plans, or finishing some business for
your Scout troop. Also, some people communicate better by
talking than by writing. Phone calls do have drawbacks: People
are not always available to take your calls, it is hard to exchange
detailed information over the phone, and visual images or infor-
mation that needs to be stored cannot be shared.
In the digital age, it is possible to literally talk online by
using a Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP) that transmits sound
as data over the internet. You can also make online video calls
by using a webcam that feeds images in real time to a desktop
computer, laptop, tablet computer, or smartphone.
If you need to
leave someone
a voice mail
message, speak
slowly and clearly.
Keep your
message brief
and to the point.
Email works well for most written communication.
You may sometimes need to send a formal letter, such
as when the person you are writing to does not have
a computer, or when you are writing about something
very personal or serious.


COMMUNICATION 23
.Good Listener, Good Leader
Perhaps someone has been very generous or kind to you, inviting you to
stay for a weeklong visit or come along on a family trip. In this case, it is
even more important to send a thank-you note within a week. You should
also think about sending a small gift along with the note. This is particu-
larly important if you had home-cooked meals, went sightseeing, or did
something else out of the ordinary, such as if you were driven to events or
appointments. You do not have to spend a lot of money. Inexpensive food
gifts are a good idea.
When making a phone call, have a pen and paper handy
to write down details if necessary. When calling a friend and
someone else answers, it is polite to say, “Hello, this is [your
name here]. May I speak to…?” If you are calling someone
whom you do not know well, introduce yourself using your
full name; clearly state why you are calling.
Thank-You Notes
If you receive a gift, whether it is in person, such as at your
birthday party, or through the mail from faraway friends or
relatives, you should write a thank-you note that specifically
mentions the gift you received. Write it by hand and send it in
the mail. This takes more effort than a phone call or an email,
and it shows more respect. Mail your note no more than one
week after you receive the gift. Waiting two weeks or longer
is not polite. Adults and elders, in particular, will remember
receiving a thank-you note from you and will be impressed
with your good manners.


24 COMMUNICATION
Good Listener, Good Leader.
Creative Ways to
Describe Yourself
Requirement 2(a) calls for
you to find a creative way
to describe yourself.
Choose a method that
you feel comfortable
using. It should suit your
personality and allow
you to express yourself
completely. Here are a
few ideas.
Make a Collage
Collages are fun to
make, and you can
use a variety of
visual items to
describe your life.
Postcards, clip art, stickers, pho-
tos, cutouts from magazines, typed text, markers,
paint, decorative items, leaves and other things from nature,
and small plastic toys are just a few things you can use to make
an eye-catching 3-D collage.
Create a Slide Show
If you like working with photography and computers, you can
create a narrated slide show on your computer. Some slide show
software programs let you add your own videos. Instead of using
random shots, carefully select the photos and videos to tell a
particular story about yourself. Write a script to follow when
you record your narration.
Write a Story
If you enjoy writing, you may write a short story about one
special event in your life or an autobiography that tells the
major events in your life. The best way to start either project
is to create an outline. It should pinpoint the event or events
you plan to describe. This will give you a road map to follow.
Using an outline makes it much easier to stick to your
main idea.
It is a good idea
to keep a light
touch when
describing
yourself. Be
humble. Do not
be afraid to poke
a little fun at
yourself. This also
is a good way to
introduce yourself
when you are
asked to speak
in public.


COMMUNICATION 25
.Good Listener, Good Leader
Other Ideas
If you are artistic, you might want to create
a series of drawings showing yourself and
some people and events important in your
life. Similarly, if you are musical or theatrical,
you may choose to write a song or a short
skit to fulfill this requirement.
Make a Good Sales Pitch
Requirement 2(b) asks you to make a sales
pitch for a concept, product, or service. A
sales pitch is a persuasive speech in which
you try to get someone to buy your product
or service. Here is one way to organize a
sales pitch that works. It contains four parts.
1. Get the audience’s attention. Tell a
story about how your product or service
changed your life or the life of someone
like the people in your audience.
2. Connect to the audience’s needs. Your audience does
not necessarily care about your product. What people care
about is their own needs. Research your audience—are they
Scouts? Adults? Apartment renters? Home owners? Know
enough about your audience beforehand so that you can
tailor your presentation to fit their needs. You would not
try to sell apartment renters a lawnmower service. However,
you might successfully sell a dog-walking service to them.
3. Offer a solution. Be specific about how your product or
service will fulfill a need of the audience. Explain how
their lives will improve if they use your service or product.
Describe the problems that might arise if they do not.
4. Close the deal. Before you end your speech, ask your
listeners to act. Make it clear how they can buy your
product or sign up for your service right away.





COMMUNICATION 27
.The Five-Minute Speech
The Five-Minute Speech
A short speech consists of an introduction, the main body, and a
closing. Your goal for requirement 3 is to introduce yourself and
hook your listeners, deliver information so that the audience
understands it, and end in a memorable way. The trick is to know
what you are going to say and to organize it well.
Your speech will be better if you choose a topic that you are
personally familiar with and know about. A good way to start a
speech is to tell a short anecdote, or little story, which audiences
love to hear. Telling a personal story allows the audience to feel
comfortable with you and helps you relax before you start your
main presentation.
When you have finished a simple outline, write the main
points and some additional minor points on numbered index
cards. Do not write out your speech or try to memorize it word
for word. That will result in a stiff-sounding presentation. You
want your speech to flow naturally, as it would in conversation.


28 COMMUNICATION
The Five-Minute Speech .
Sample Outline
Let’s say you decide to give a five-minute speech to your Scout patrol
about Dutch oven cooking for campouts. To prepare, create a brief
outline of the main points to cover. It might look like this.
I. Introduction
Begin with a true story about the first time you cooked over a
campfire. “The beef was burned and covered with ash. It was
a disaster! I knew I had to improve my skills. That is when I decided
to learn about Dutch oven cooking.”
II. Body
A. How to select a Dutch oven and why you need to season it before
using it. This involves oiling it and baking it at a high temperature
in an oven.
B. Tips for cooking with Dutch ovens.
C. How to clean and properly
store a Dutch oven so it
will last a lifetime.
D. One-pot wonders:
Handouts of four
recipes for a Dutch-oven
meal that will make your
entire patrol a bunch of
happy campers.
III. Conclusion
Nothing tastes better than a hearty meal at the end of a long
day of hiking, cycling, or canoeing. Preparing and eating great
home-cooked meals outdoors with your patrol is part of what
makes the adventures of Scouting so memorable. So don’t
forget the wonders of one-pot cooking with a Dutch oven.
Practice your speech. Do it in front of a mirror, in the
shower, while riding your bike, almost anywhere. You will find
that the words flow much more naturally after you have gone
over the speech a few times.


COMMUNICATION 29
.The Five-Minute Speech
Dealing With Stage Fright
Many people get nervous at the thought of speaking in
public. That is natural. Here are some tips for staying
calm so that you can enjoy giving your speech.
• Know your subject. Give your talk about a topic
that you are genuinely interested in and know
something about.
• Organize your thoughts. Instead of writing out
your entire speech, write only the main points.
• Practice, practice, practice. Rehearse your speech
alone or in front of others at least three times.
Doing so will help you feel more at ease when
you are presenting your speech.
• Be yourself. Do not try to copy a television host
or politician. Speak as if you were talking to a
good friend.
• Act confident. Even if you feel nervous, do not tell
the audience. Smile and look individual audience
members in the eye. Speak with a full voice. Do not
rush through your words. Soon you will start to feel
as confident as you act.
• Get experience. Seek out opportunities to speak in
public instead of trying to avoid them. The more
you do it, the more comfortable you will get.
Ask your family or a few friends to listen to your speech
and give you ideas for improvement. As you speak, remember to
look at your audience and smile. Keep your notes handy in case
you need to refer to them. Finally, to make sure you are main-
taining eye contact, standing in a confident posture, and looking
relaxed, ask someone to record your speech as a movie using a
smartphone. When you play it back, you can observe yourself
and make appropriate adjustments.


30 COMMUNICATION
The Five-Minute Speech .
Tips for Interviewing and Introducing a Guest Speaker
Let’s say you have a neighbor who is a police
detective. To fulfill requirement 4, you would like to
interview her and prepare an introduction to deliver
to your counselor, as though she were to be a guest
speaker at your next troop meeting. You also need to
show your counselor how you will invite your
neighbor to speak at the meeting. Here is how you
could approach the task.
Call your neighbor on the telephone. Have a
small notebook and pen or a laptop or computer with
you when you make the call. If you have a wireless
headset for a cellphone, you can listen hands-free
while typing your notes. Tell the neighbor that you
are a member of Scouts BSA and ask her politely if you could
interview her as part of your Communication merit badge
requirements. Explain that the requirements include interviewing
and preparing to introduce a guest speaker.
If she agrees to help you, ask if this is a good time to talk.
If she says yes, ask her about her background, and take notes.
(If it is not a good time, ask when you might call again.)
Here are some questions that will help you prepare an
introduction. Do not be afraid to ask the person politely to slow
down or repeat a statement if you were not able to write down
the information fast enough.
• What is your full name and professional title?
• How long have you been in your current position?
• What are your duties?
• What position did you have before this one?
• What do you like best about your career?
• What is the most difficult challenge you face in your position?
• Did you go to college or receive special training?
• What activities or interests do you enjoy when you are
not working?
• Is there anything else you would like to tell me about yourself?
Based on the person’s answers, write a short introduction
of the speaker. Stick to the most important and interesting facts.
You do not have to tell everything you learned. Write a few key
points on index cards that you can use as reminders. Keep your
introduction short. Practice it several times.


COMMUNICATION 31
.The Five-Minute Speech
When you and your buddy meet with your counselor to
show how you would introduce the speaker, bring your index
cards. The cards will help you remember details that you would
like to include. Stand up, go to the front of the room, face the
“audience,” smile at your counselor confidently, and address the
“audience.” (Your counselor knows you, so keep this informal.)
Then give a brief introduction of the speaker and sit down.
Here is an example.
Thanks for coming today. Our special guest speaker is
Detective Kate Moore, a 10-year veteran with the Minneapolis
Police Department. Detective Moore has solved many puzzling
crimes in our area. She has a bachelor’s degree in law enforce-
ment from Iowa State University. When she is not working,
she teaches karate and coaches Little League Baseball.
Detective Moore has graciously agreed to speak to us today
about her position and other career opportunities in law
enforcement. Please welcome Detective Kate Moore.
”
“


32 COMMUNICATION
The Five-Minute Speech .
Conducting a More In-Depth Interview
You might have a chance to interview someone about an
important subject. This could happen because you have a
class assignment or are writing an article for your school
newspaper. An in-depth interview is a good way to
conduct research.
Watch broadcast journalists interview people
on TV. Notice how they show that they are paying
attention to the person they are interviewing. See
how they phrase questions to get good responses.
Here are some pointers.
• Decide what information you need and whom to interview
to get it.
• Research the topic of the interview. Learn as much as possible
about it before you start asking questions.
• Take notes on a notepad, on a laptop, or on a computer tablet. If
you want to record the conversation using your smartphone or
other recording device, ask for permission first. Even if you do
record the interview, take notes. Recorders do not always work.
• If you want to record the interview, practice in advance
with the equipment you plan to use. Make sure the batteries
are charged or new, or that the interview site has a place to
plug in your equipment. How close to the recorder should
the speaker be to make a good recording?
• Prepare your questions in advance.
• Use a closed-ended question to get a specific answer.
For example, “How many weeks did you work on your
Eagle service project?” will get a more precise answer
than, “How hard was it to do your Eagle service project?”
Open-ended questions are a good way to get informa-
tion from someone without seeming pushy. This kind of
question gives the person flexibility in answering. For
example, you might ask, “How is your business doing
financially?” rather than, “Are you losing money?”
Other examples of open-ended questions are, “What
is the best thing about winning the marathon?” and
“How has being an Eagle Scout helped you in life?”


COMMUNICATION 33
.The Five-Minute Speech
• If you contact the person by phone, ask if this is a good time
to talk. If it is not a good time, ask when you should call
back. Start by asking the person to spell his or her name
and tell you his or her title. Speak clearly and slowly so the
person can understand your questions.
• If you do not understand a response, ask the same question in
another way. You could also state the response in your own
words and ask if you got it right. Use follow-up questions to
dig more deeply into a topic.
• Save your hardest questions for last. By then, your subject
should be more comfortable with you and more willing to
answer difficult questions.
• If you run out of time and you still have more questions,
ask the person for permission to call back.
• Read your notes (and replay your recording, if you made one)
as soon as you can after the interview. While the conversation
is still fresh in your mind, rewrite or type your notes for
easier reading.
Reporting an Event Objectively
With your counselor’s and your parent or guardian’s approval,
attend a public meeting for requirement 5. You can find a list of
public meetings in the local newspaper or on a local website.
Take a notebook and a couple of pens or pencils or your laptop
or computer tablet to the meeting.
Remember to
get your parent
or guardian’s
permission to do
a web search.
Your task is not to write down everything every person
says. Wait until you hear someone give an opinion
about an issue or debate a main point of the meeting.
Then start writing. Everyone has a unique way of
taking quick notes. You probably do this in class or in
emails and text messages. For instance, you might
use “EZ” for the word “easy,” or a downward arrow for
the word “down.” “Without” may become “w/o,” and
“department” can become “dept.” Develop your own
shorthand style.


34 COMMUNICATION
The Five-Minute Speech .
To be best prepared, find out if
the group has a website. If so, look
online for the meeting agenda (the list of topics to be covered),
and print a copy to review before the meeting. Otherwise, pick
up an agenda when you arrive. Sit near the front so you can
hear the speakers, but be ready to turn around and face people
in the audience who may stand up to speak.
During the meeting, think of yourself as a witness or
observer. Try not to judge what people are saying or form an
opinion about the topic of the discussion. Don’t be swayed
toward one side or the other. Just listen attentively and quietly
and record what individuals say about the topic.
As soon as you can after you get home, when the meeting is
still fresh on your mind and you can easily remember what people
said, write a report of the meeting. Reread the agenda to help you
recall what happened. Make the report as unbiased and factual as
possible. Focus on topics that were debated or discussed.
Here is a sample taken from a report.
Note that some things were restated in
the writer’s own words. The statements
from the citizen were put inside quotation
marks to show that those were the
speaker’s actual words.
Dave Marcus, a
longtime resident of
Petersburg, argued that
replacing the city park
with a parking garage
would mean that part of
our town’s history would
be lost forever. He called
the proposal to demolish
the park “shortsighted and
a terrible travesty,” particu-
larly for children, who would
lose their playground, and
for senior citizens, who would
miss sitting on park benches
with friends.


COMMUNICATION 35
.The Five-Minute Speech
For example, imagine that you attended a city council
meeting. The city council discussed six proposals, but only
one of them—whether to turn a city park into a much-needed
parking garage—became a topic of debate. Give a short summary
of each proposal, but focus on the parking garage issue, which
caused a discussion.
Report what people on all sides of the issue said and what,
if any, action the council took. Stick to the facts and record a
variety of viewpoints. Do not state your own opinion in the
report. Did the council make a decision, or did it agree to post-
pone making a decision? Did the parties compromise on one or
more issues? Did anyone agree to take further action? Be sure to
report the outcome.
Be sure to record the council’s actions on each agenda item,
even if some items were boring. You can keep those sections
of your report short. For example, if the city council voted to
approve funds to fix eight potholes on Hightower Road, that is
all you need to say on the topic. Keep your report to one or
two pages, and summarize the main issues and points of view
covered at the meeting.
Avoid including
details of
everything you
saw and heard.





COMMUNICATION 37
.Teaching Skills and Using Teaching Aids
Teaching Skills and
Using Teaching Aids
For requirement 6, you will develop a plan to teach a skill or
inform someone about a subject. Start by making an outline.
Use a process similar to the one you used to prepare your short
speech. As you form the outline, think about how you could
break down the subject into step-by-step instructions. Pick a
subject or skill that is (1) something you know well, and
(2) something that a friend, relative, or troop member might
like to learn. Also, decide whom you will teach. For example,
if you know a lot about knots, you could choose to teach a
friend how to tie a few basic knots.
First, choose four basic knots that are useful in different
situations. Think about how you learned to tie each one. For
each knot, write an outline that lists the steps for how to tie
the knot. List the best uses for each one.
Next, find pictures of how to tie each knot. Look in the
Scouts BSA handbooks, other Scouting resources, library
books, and search the internet (with your parent or guardian’s
permission). You might want to enlarge these diagrams on a
photocopier or computer printer to make them easier for a
beginner to follow. Get two pieces of rope that are long enough
for knot tying—one for yourself and one for the friend you will
teach. Use the ropes and the pictures as teaching aids to help
your friend learn how to tie the knots.
Before the teaching session, practice how you will
show your friend this skill. Since this is a hands-on
skill, consider whether it would be better if the two
of you sat side-by-side or across from
each other. Which way will make the
instruction go more smoothly?
How you teach the
skill will depend
on whom you
plan to teach.
For example, how
would you teach
a Cub Scout?
How would your
plan change if
you were teaching
a boater or
rock climber?


38 COMMUNICATION
Teaching Skills and Using Teaching Aids.
HOW TO TIE A CARRICK BEND
The carrick bend comes in handy for tying together
two thick ropes, especially if there will be a heavy strain
on the rope. The knot will tighten under strain, but it
won’t slip and it is usually easy to untie. This knot also
works well with wet or slippery ropes.
Step 1—Start the carrick bend by making an over-
hand loop at the end of one rope.
Step 2—Bring the end of the other rope under the
overhand loop. Then complete the knot, weaving over
and under as you go.
Step 3—The carrick bend looks symmetrical (even)
when it is first tied and still loose. When you pull it
tight, it looks very different.
Demonstrate each step slowly. If your friend gets confused
or frustrated, slow down or start over. If something is hard for
the person to master, you might have to rethink the way you
are teaching or choose an easier knot. Take a short break if the
frustration level gets too high.
Be cheerful and encouraging when you teach. People learn
skills best if they can make mistakes without worrying that you
will laugh at them or get mad. Be a positive role model. You
can often make someone feel better by saying, “I had the same
problem when I first started tying this knot. Try this…” Ask
whether your friend has any questions, and be sure you answer
them thoroughly before moving on.
Before you and your buddy see your counselor to demonstrate
the skill you have successfully taught, review the topic with your
friend one last time. After the demonstration is over, meet with
your counselor to discuss how well you were able to pass on your
knowledge or skill to your friend.
Praise your
friend’s efforts
honestly and
often. This is
called positive
reinforcement,
and it is a great
teaching and
learning tool.
2
3
1


COMMUNICATION 39
.Teaching Skills and Using Teaching Aids
Teaching Aids
The knot diagrams are examples of teaching aids. Another example
is the memory trick described earlier for remembering a person’s
name. Another kind of memory trick is to use a word or phrase
called a mnemonic (pronounced nu-mon-ik) device. By using the
first letter of each word in a phrase, you can remember something
important. For example, if you want to remember the names of
the Great Lakes, just think of the word “homes”: Huron,
Ontario, Michigan, Erie, and Superior.
Teaching aids can be pictures, maps, a chalkboard,
props, memory tricks, or anything else that works.
Aids do not have to be fancy or expensive. Anything
that you can think of that will help you teach a subject,
make the experience more hands-on and fun, or help
the person understand what you are saying, will help
that person learn more quickly.





COMMUNICATION 41
.Active Communication and the Digital Revolution
Active Communication
and the Digital Revolution
As you decide how to fulfill requirement 7, try something
different and challenging.
Letters to the Editor
Many Scouts write to the editor (or the
mascot, Scout the MailEagle) of the
national Scouting publication, Scout Life,
if they choose requirement 7(a). Many
letters are sometimes answered in the
magazine by the editorial director, who
writes as Scout.
In their letters, readers of Scout
Life might tell Scout the MailEagle how
much they liked a particular story in the
magazine. At other times, they write to correct
a mistake they saw in print or to tell the Scout Life
editors about interesting trips or campouts their
troop has planned that year.
All letters to the editor of any publication are carefully
read. Editors want to know what readers like and dislike
about their publication. They are constantly trying to
serve their readers better with what is published.
Even if you are sending a letter to the editor by email,
always keep your letter formal and include your name
and return address. For privacy reasons, your address
will not appear in the publication. However, editors need
to be able to make sure you are who you say you are.


Active Communication and the Digital Revolution.
March 15, 2024
Ms. Vivian Jefferson
Editor-in-chief, Teens Today magazine
1401 Riverside Drive
Little Elm, MI 48888
Dear Ms. Jefferson:
I really enjoyed the article called “Used Hot Wheels” by Chris Peterson
in the February 2013 issue. It was about what to look for when shop-
ping for a used car. I just got my driver’s license, and I’ve been saving
intensely for a car for about two years now. My parents and I have
been looking for a good used one. I’ve taken an auto maintenance class
at school and know a little bit about cars, but Mr. Peterson’s article had
some choice tips about what to check out before buying.
My parents and I don’t exactly agree on what kind of car is best for
me. I got them to read “Used Hot Wheels,” too, and now we are closer
to finding a car we’ll all like. At least the article got us talking about
what’s really important to me and to them.
Thanks for running the article. It’s amazing how reading it has helped
me get along better with my parents. It’s like we try to understand the
other side—not just on the car issue, but on a lot of other stuff, too.
Sincerely,
Ronny Metzger
2020 Little Elm Drive
Salem, OR 97777
Before you write a letter to a newspaper or magazine, read
the publication. Look at its masthead, the short section that
lists the staff by names and positions. It usually has other key
information, such as the newspaper’s or magazine’s address.
(See the Scout Life masthead at left). The masthead often is
printed on the editorial page of a newspaper or near the front
or the back pages of a magazine. If the masthead does not list
the editor by name, address your letter “Dear Managing Editor.”
Unless you are writing to Scout the MailEagle at Scout Life,
your approach should be formal. Write the person’s full name,
title, the name of the publication (in italics or underlined), and
its address in the top left-hand corner of your letter. Begin the
body of your letter with “Dear Mr. (last name)” or “Dear Ms.
(last name),” followed by a colon (:).
S C
I don’t
ixth
as a
se of
p to him
love
cout
cool!
art
p
aking
g
not
s as
I’m
’t make
pests
the
to
uts,STEPHEN GILPIN
scoutlife.orgwww.scouting.orgGOGREEN Tell us how you helped
the environment and win!
CLICK HERE
Send your comments,
questions and anything else to
Aerie on the Prairie, Scout Life, S306, P.O. Box
152079, Irving, TX 75015-2079. Or head to
scoutlife.org. Please include your complete
name and address. If you don’t want your name
to appear, we’ll use a pen name. Due to the
huge volume of mail, we can answer only the
letters appearing here.
From the publisher of Boys’ Life
since 1911, Scout Life is the official
youth publication of Scouting America.
From the publisher of
Boys’ Life since 1911
EDITORIAL DIRECTOR
Michael Goldman
MANAGING EDITOR
Paula Murphey
DESIGN DIRECTOR
Eric Ottinger
SENIOR EDITOR
Aaron Derr
ASSOCIATE EDITORS
Michael Freeman
Sheniece Chappell
SENIOR DIGITAL EDITOR
Bryan Wursten
SENIOR DIGITAL PRODUCER
Gina Circelli Mulcahy
COPY EDITOR
Zack McLain
EDITORIAL ASSISTANT
Adryn Shackelford
FIELD EDITORS
Jenny Everett DiBenedetto,
Steve Mazzucchi, Brian Payne,
Bryan Wendell
ASSOCIATE DESIGN DIRECTOR
Kevin Hurley
PHOTO EDITOR
Edna J. Lemons
PRODUCTION MANAGER
Stacy Hall Lee
IMAGING ARTIST
Marcie Rodriguez
MAILEAGLE
Scout
THE BOSS
The Boss
FOR ADVERTISING
INFORMATION:
877-929-5433
advertising@scouting.org
NATIONAL SALES DIRECTOR
Nicole Cosme
ADVERTISING SALES SPECIALIST
Lindsay Hauck
CLIENT SERVICES SPECIALIST
Bria Cavitt
FOR SUBSCRIPTION INFORMATION
AND CUSTOMER SERVICE:
866-584-6589
scoutlife.org/contact-us
CUSTOMER SERVICE
Jennifer Ingram (Supervisor),
Andrea Gonzales,
Kermit Thomas, Sarah Yang
HONORARY CHAIR,
SCOUTING AMERICA
PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES
Donald Trump
NATIONAL CHAIR,
SCOUTING AMERICA
Brad Tilden
CHIEF SCOUT EXECUTIVE
PRESIDENT & CEO
Roger Krone
NATIONAL COMMISSIONER
Scott Sorrels
MAGAZINES ADVISORY CHAIR
David Talbot
1/31/25 3:46 PM1/31/25 3:46 PM


COMMUNICATION 43
.Active Communication and the Digital Revolution
In your first sentence, state why you are writing this letter to
the editor. Here are some examples of good opening sentences:
• “I am writing to say how much I enjoyed Dan McLain’s story
on high-adventure Scout camps.”
• “Drew Norton’s piece on rappelling was highly informative.
However, the third paragraph contained an error that could
lead to an unsafe climbing situation.”
Back up your first statement with more detail or an
explanation. If you are expressing an opinion, do so respect-
fully. Don’t be mean or aggressive. Back up your opinion with
personal experience and/or facts you have learned about the
subject. You may want to suggest a way to solve a problem
or issue that is different from what the publication proposed.
If you do this, explain your solution clearly.
Make your letter only a few sentences long or, at the most,
several paragraphs. End the letter with “Sincerely” or “Best
regards,” then skip four lines and type your name, address, city,
state, and zip code. Spell-check your letter on your computer
before sending it. Print it out and read it carefully again. Make
sure that you wrote in complete sentences, that you stated your
idea or opinion clearly, and that your letter is error-free.
If possible, have a parent, guardian, teacher, or older friend
read your letter, too. Ask this person to point out any mistakes
or things that are still unclear. Do not feel offended by their
remarks. Once you have fixed any mistakes, sign your name in
the space you left before your typed name and address.
Most newspapers and magazines have websites where
they allow readers to comment on specific articles.
The comments usually appear with the reader’s name
or screen name. If you decide to post a comment
this way, you must first get your parent or guardian’s
and counselor’s permission. While this might be a
much more informal way to express your opinion
than a traditional letter to the editor, you should still
be respectful of others. Some individuals challenge
comments left by other readers. This can quickly lead to
a “flame war” in which parties trade insulting remarks.
Flame wars are a waste of time. Do not get involved in
one.


44 COMMUNICATION
Active Communication and the Digital Revolution.
Digital Communication
Technology is rapidly changing how we communicate and
the speed of that communication. The word “digital” refers to
two numbers, or digits—0 and 1—that are the basic units all
computers use to process information. Digital communication
is communication that uses some kind of computer technology.
As of 2019, there were 7.6 billion people in the world. Of
those, an estimated 4 billion, or 52 percent, were using the inter-
net. From 2000 to 2019, use of the internet increased almost ten
times worldwide. Much of this growth involved high-speed inter-
net, which makes it easy to transfer video, audio, text, and photo
files. Add in the growing use of cellphones and other handheld
electronic devices, and you can safely say we are experiencing
a digital communication revolution.
Personal Digital Communication
Today you can send an email from your
computer to another computer just
about any place in the world, as long
as it is connected to the internet. Your
message will arrive almost instantly.
Using a smartphone, you can download
maps of a city you are visiting and find
out about good places to eat. People
keep in touch with their friends minute
to minute using text messaging.
Global positioning system (GPS)
devices let us share our exact location
with friends or family who may want
to track our movements. These units
can also help us reach a destination,
whether in a car or out hiking. People bank and shop online, pick
out the features of their next car, map the route to the amusement
park, and even socialize with friends online.
You should still
learn how to use a
map and compass
for backcountry
travel. You can’t
always rely on
your GPS unit,
especially if it
runs on batteries.


COMMUNICATION 45
.Active Communication and the Digital Revolution
Social networking sites have attracted millions of users.
Many people post information about themselves on these sites,
including text, photos, favorite music, and videos. Their online
“friends” can view the entry and post messages of their own.
There are dangers with social networking sites, so discuss
this thoroughly with your parent or guardian. Get their per-
mission before using such a site. See the cautions later in this
section for more information. Consider that anything you post
online—whether it is a photo or personal information—can stay
online just about forever.
Texting
Texting is a popular form of digital communication. To text, you
type a message using the keypad on a cellphone or other hand-
held electronic device. The message is then sent over the
airwaves, often via cellular phone networks. Because typing
messages on a small device can be difficult, texters often use
abbreviations. So “Oh my gosh, are you serious?” becomes
“OMG, R U serious?”
Be aware that service providers often charge a flat rate
or per-character fee for text messaging. Such charges can
quickly make a phone bill go sky-high. Before you send any
text messages, you should have your parent or guardian’s
permission. Be sure you understand the guidelines your parent
or guardian has set for you regarding text messaging.
The Fastest Fingers
Texting is so common now that many people have
become quite skillful at typing messages. One
mobile phone manufacturer started an annual texting
competition in 2007. At the LG Mobile World Cup,
teams representing 13 different countries competed
for $130,000 in prize money. Bae Yeong-ho, 17, from
South Korea, won first prize by texting an average of
7.25 characters per second.
Items you post
online are easy to
copy, forward, and
change. Once you
post something,
you may not be
able to control
what happens
to it. The item can
stay online long
after you remove
it from your site
or page.


46 COMMUNICATION
Active Communication and the Digital Revolution.
Public Relations in the Digital Age
A public relations firm handles the important communication
tasks of individuals and companies. The PR firm will communi-
cate with government agencies, the media, and the general
public on behalf of its client. These companies also work in
marketing, finding creative ways to promote a client’s products
to the buying public.
An example of a PR campaign in the digital age was a
web-based contest called “Knock It Out!” It was conducted
by a PR firm to promote an electric grill. The goal was to show
how the grill could be used in cooking healthy to “knock out
the fat.”
The campaign took the form of webisodes, or video episodes
on the web, that showed four people competing to lose weight
through exercise and healthy eating. It encouraged members
of the public to upload helpful videos of their own as well as
cheer on contestants. Viewers could then vote on which tips
from the public were most useful. This campaign showed how
marketing and public relations use nontraditional media and
digital technology to get potential customers involved in the
use of a product.


COMMUNICATION 47
.Active Communication and the Digital Revolution
Mass Communication
The digital revolution is also changing mass communication—
communication that reaches large groups of people. Newspapers,
magazines, and TV and radio (broadcast) stations have all been
drastically affected by the internet. Most people in small towns used
to have a very limited choice of news sources. The local newspaper
and broadcast stations were their main choices. Besides the local
news, those sources reported regional and national news from news
services or from major broadcast networks.
All that has changed. People can now get news from more
than just the traditional sources. They can read newspapers and
magazines from around the world on their computers, laptops,
tablets, smartphones, and e-readers. They can listen to or watch
downloaded audio and video podcasts or watch live broadcasts
streamed in real time.
TV is different, too. Cable and satellite technology bring
dozens of channels into many homes. Most of these channels are
national, not local. Local newspapers and radio and TV stations,
which sell ads to make money, have suffered. The “business
model”—the way a company makes money—is rapidly
changing for publishers and broadcasters.
User-Generated Content
The internet now makes it possible
for ordinary individuals to reach large
audiences. A printing press or broadcast
tower is no longer necessary. Anyone
with a computer and an internet
connection can publish information
that people worldwide can read. That
has put the “power of the press” into
everyone’s hands, including yours. Two
ways to exercise this personal publishing
power are by creating a webpage and
writing a blog.
Online mass communication is often called “user-generated content.”
This is because the same people who are using the media are now also
generating (creating and providing) online text, photos, and videos.
Today people can
watch streamed
media from
all over the
globe on the
big screen—
on an internet-
connected TV.


48 COMMUNICATION
Active Communication and the Digital Revolution.
Build Your Own Webpage
If you choose requirement 7(b), you will need to create a web-
page for your Scout troop, school, or other organization. In
addition to websites for companies, schools, Scouts BSA troops,
and other groups and organizations, there are many personal
websites on the internet generated by people all over the world. If
you are interested in joining this global community of “netizens,”
here is what you will need to do.
Choose Your Content
First, decide what you want to say to the world. You could tell
people about your hobbies, show off your collections, or just
talk about your daily life. This may be more interesting than
you think, especially to people from faraway places and other
cultures. Your webpage can teach others how to do things,
introduce them to new interests, or just share information that
might interest them.
Find a Web Server
To make your home page available to others, it must be hosted
on a web server. Your troop, place of worship, or school may
agree to host your webpage for free, for a limited time. If so,
be sure to follow the rules set by the host and the webmaster.
If your family has an account with an internet service provider
—often a telephone or cable TV company—your parent or
guardian can check whether that subscription comes with free
space on a web server. You may be able to post your page there.
You cannot post
your website
or blog to the
internet unless
you have both
your parent or
guardian’s and
your merit badge
counselor’s
permission to
do so.
It is important to remember that once you post your
webpage, it becomes public. It is more like a poster
displayed in a football stadium than a private letter to
a friend. Others can take that information, change it,
and pass it on. Be careful when choosing the informa-
tion you post. You would not give complete strangers
personal information such as your address or telephone
number, or broadcast such information for everyone
to have. Do not provide any information that could be
used to harm you or your family. Always have your
parent or guardian’s and counselor’s permission before
posting anything on the internet.


COMMUNICATION 49
.Active Communication and the Digital Revolution
Building Your Webpage
In the early days of the web (which was invented around 1990),
you needed to know a special language called hypertext markup
language, or HTML, to create a webpage. You used HTML to
create a source document that held all the text as well as pointers
to pictures and animations on the page.
Few people today bother to create HTML code themselves.
Instead, they use a web-page editing program to do the job. Some
websites will even allow you to create a webpage without using
any special software or having any technical knowledge. Again,
have your parent or guardian check if your family’s internet ser-
vice provider offers this service.
These sites present the steps for creating your page in a
simple “wizard,” an easy, step-by-step process for performing the
task. These programs will typically allow you to create a website
using ready-made templates (forms). Your Scout buddies also
can contribute to the site by adding their email addresses in the
proper field. You may choose whether to make the site public or
private. A public site is viewable by anyone; a private one can be
viewed only by the people you select or invite.
Start Your Own Blog
The word “blog” is formed from the words web and log. Here,
“log” means a record of events or thoughts. A blog is a special
kind of webpage. The owner usually updates it regularly—
weekly, daily, or even many times a day. Some blogs are nothing
more than an online diary in which the blogger posts entries
about what is going on in his or her life. Many other blogs focus
on a particular topic—say, new electronic gadgets, a hobby, a
sports team, travel, or any of a million other special interests.
Many newspaper reporters have established blogs on
their newspaper’s websites to provide more information about
their “beat” (their subject area) than what appears in print.
The simplest format for a blog is a series of posts made by
If you want to add video to your website or blog, the easiest way to do
this is by uploading the video to a video sharing site. Embed that video
into your own website or blog. Everything you need to build your own
webpage or blog is available on the internet. See the resources section at
the end of this pamphlet for more information. Just be sure you have your
parent or guardian’s and counselor’s permission before you begin.
Another new
form of mass
communication
is the news
aggregator. A
news aggregator
is a single site that
brings together
(aggregates) and
displays dozens
of links to
columnists
and news reports
from other
publications.


50 COMMUNICATION
Active Communication and the Digital Revolution.
the blogger, with the newest at the top. The website often will
have space for the blog’s readers to post comments of their own.
Fancier blogs may have news stories, links to other websites,
photographs, and video.
Many blogs are read by a small audience with common
interests. Others have millions of viewers. Blogging has become
so popular that many big companies have started blogs on
their websites. Blogging has become an important form of
mass communication. Today, some people even make their
living as bloggers.
Decorate Your Webpage or Blog
You will want to decorate your webpage or blog with a few
graphics. You can use a piece of equipment called a scanner to
input drawings and photographs for your webpage. You can also
use drawing or painting software to create artwork directly on
the computer. You may find free graphics on the internet, such
as clip art. Before using art from the internet, you will need
your parent or guardian’s permission. Also make sure that it is
OK with the copyright holder (the person or company that owns
the image). You can’t just take a picture from someone else’s
website to use on your own. That is stealing.
Get Permission
Before you begin work on Requirement 7(b), be sure you have
your parent or guardian’s permission to visit any website
mentioned in this text or the resources section. Never
download anything or purchase anything online, unless you
have your parent or guardian’s permission to do so. Also, if
you choose requirement 7(b), remember that while you do not
have to post your page or blog on the internet, if you decide to
post it, you will first need to share it with your parent or
guardian and your counselor, and you must have their
approval to do so.


COMMUNICATION 51
.Active Communication and the Digital Revolution
Stay Safe Online
Computers allow access
to a vast amount of knowl-
edge. You might already
be using the internet for
schoolwork, hobbies, or
simply for enjoyment. By
logging onto the internet,
you can contact sources
of information around the
world. You can download
material about any sub-
ject. You can also use it to
develop online friendships
with Scouts anywhere on
the globe.
For all of its benefits,
though, the internet can
also present hazards.
Most people using the
internet are friendly and
honest. However, there are some who use the internet to take advantage
of others. There are also websites with content that is not good for young
people. Use the following guidelines to protect your privacy and gain the
most good from your time online.
1. Follow your family’s rules for going online. Respect limits on how long
and how often you are allowed to be online and what sites you can visit.
Avoid sites that are off limits. Just like in real life, there are places to
avoid on the internet.
2. Do not respond to inappropriate messages or websites. If you stumble
across information or images that you don’t understand or that make you
feel uncomfortable, it is OK to talk about it with your parent or guardian.
3. Protect your privacy. Do not share information such as your address,
telephone number, school name, or parent or guardian’s work address or
telephone number, and never send any photos via the internet unless you
have permission.


52 COMMUNICATION
Active Communication and the Digital Revolution.
4. Never agree to meet anyone who has contacted you online unless
your parent or guardian goes with you.
5. Do not open emails or files you receive from people you don’t know
or trust. If you get something suspicious, trash it just as you would
any other junk mail.
6. Never share your internet passwords with anyone (even if they
sound official) other than your parent or guardian or other respon-
sible adults in your family.
7. Do not shop online without getting your parent or guardian’s
permission first.
8. Do not believe everything you see or read online. Along with lots
of great information, the internet has lots of junk. Learn to separate
the useful from the worthless. Talk with your counselor or other
experienced web user about ways to tell the difference.
Another hazard of the internet is called the cyberbully. A cyberbully
uses electronic communications such as the internet to harass,
threaten, and harm others. They use tactics like dissing (spreading
damaging gossip about a person), harassment (repeatedly sending
hateful messages), and impersonation (pretending to be someone
else and posting damaging information to harm another’s reputation).
If you feel you are the victim of cyberbullying, do not try to get
back at the bully. Ask the cyberbully to stop. Do not make your mes-
sage aggressive or emotional. Let the bully know that you will take
other steps if the abuse does not stop. If that does not help, tell your
parent or guardian right away.
Cyberbullies can’t be seen when they are online. This gives them
a false sense of security. What they don’t know is that they can be
found out, caught, and even punished.
The best way to protect yourself is to be a good online citizen.
Do not post information that could be used against you or others.
Avoid sites that tolerate and encourage bullying. Be kind online.
You can learn more about internet safety by viewing the Digital
Safety video that is required for Scout rank. Together with NetSmartz.
org, Scouting America created this video to help educate Scouts about
being safer online, cyberbullying, and internet scams, and to promote
community awareness of internet safety issues. Find the video at
scouting.org/training/youth-protection/scouts-bsa


COMMUNICATION 53
.Active Communication and the Digital RevolutionThe National Eagle Scout Association
Membership is restricted to those who have been granted
the Eagle Scout Award by the Boy Scouts of America.
J
oin
NESA
Soaring to greater heights
in the 21st century
www.NESA.org
How to Create a Tri-Fold Brochure
If you choose requirement 7(c), you do not need internet
access. You just need a computer with word processing
software and a printer. If you do not have a computer and
printer at home, you might be able to use equipment at
school or a public library.
A brochure is a simple and effective way to com-
municate a message visually. You do not have to be a
graphic designer to develop a tri-fold brochure, which
is made up of the front and back of one sheet of paper.
It is folded so that it has three panels. Here are some
tips you can use to create a simple one yourself, using
word processing software.
Determine the Message and Content
First determine your brochure’s message and audience. Decide
what you want to communicate, to whom, and why. Create an
outline, and organize the information with headings and
subheadings for easier reading. Include only what will be
helpful to readers.
Choose the Layout
Decide how you want the information to look on your brochure.
For a barrel fold (or roll fold), the top fold overlaps the first one.
For a Z-fold (or accordion fold), the paper is folded in alternating
directions. This format is good to present information in
sequence. Fold a piece of scrap paper the way you want the
brochure to look. Then number the panels on each side to
make sure the information for each panel is in the right place.
Set Up the Page
For more space to set up columns, choose the
landscape or horizontal setting for your paper
orientation. This format will also allow you to
fold the brochure the correct way once it is
printed. Set the top, bottom, left, and right
margins. A practical choice is 0.5” all the way
around. Some printers, such as inkjet printers,
have size limits, so do not make the margins
too narrow.


54 COMMUNICATION
Active Communication and the Digital Revolution.
Refer to your
folded and
numbered
scrap paper
if necessary.
Set Up Columns
A tri-fold brochure has three columns.
You will need to space your text equally
on either side of the folds between each
column. To do this, make the gutters
(the space between the columns) twice
as wide as the margins. For instance,
if the margins are 0.5”, make each gutter
1.0” wide.
Add a Page Break
To create the second, or back, side of
your brochure, insert a page break at
the end of the third column.
Add and Format Text
To format your text, you will choose
the font style, size, and other elements.
You may format the text as you type it,
or you may want to format the text
after it has all been entered. As you
add text, think about where you want
it to go on the finished brochure. For
instance, you may actually need to
enter the cover text on the last panel.
Keep formatting simple. If you use too many fonts and
font sizes, your brochure will look busy. Designers
choose fonts for a reason: to communicate. Avoid fonts
that are so fancy or small that they are hard to read.
People—especially busy people—will pass over some-
thing that is hard to read.


COMMUNICATION 55
.Active Communication and the Digital Revolution
Even though it may be free, be sure you have the copy-
right holder’s permission to use the clip art on your
brochure. The website will have information about the
proper way to use the clip art it makes available.
Use photos, clip
art, and other
visual effects
in moderation.
You want the
art to improve
your brochure,
not clutter it.
Add Pictures
You will want to use at least one photo or other visual image in
your brochure. If you are creating a product brochure, you may
want to include a picture of the product. It can be a digital photo
from your camera, smartphone, another external drive, or your
computer’s hard drive. You may find a useful clip art image that
came with your computer’s software. If you don’t have an image
that works, you can search (with your parent or guardian’s
permission) various free clip art sites on the internet.


56 COMMUNICATION


COMMUNICATION 57
.Planning a Program
Planning a Program
Planning and serving as master of ceremonies at a troop court
of honor, campfire program, or interfaith service (requirement 8)
is one of the most important and challenging undertakings you
will face in earning the Communication merit badge. You will be
in charge of making sure committees complete their work on
time. You will also need to handle many organizational details
in order to present a successful program.
Planning a Campfire Program
Planning a campfire program is much easier if you use the
standard campfire program planning form. The form,
reproduced later in this section, comes from the Troop
Program Resources website at programresources.org.
As the master-of-the-campfire, or MC, you must put songs,
stunts, and stories in a good sequence for the program. First,
be sure that every feature of your campfire program upholds
the highest traditions and ideals of Scouting. Next, think about
timing, variety, smoothness, and showmanship.
You must plan the opening, closing, and headliner or
main event. You also must designate the song leader and
cheerleader. Help them develop a plan that details the
songs and yells they will lead and their order on the
program. Here are some additional details you will need
to discuss during the campfire planning session with
your troop and unit leader.
• Who will set up the campfire area?
• Who will build the campfire?
• Who will put the campfire out after the program?
• Which troop members will clean up afterward?
Complete the Campfire Program Planner and
Campfire Program in pencil, because you probably
will make changes later. List all participants in the
A full-size
Campfire Program
Planner form is
available on the
Troop Program
Resources
website. Ask
for your parent
or guardian’s
permission before
visiting the site.


58 COMMUNICATION
Planning a Program.
program. Then note the name, description, and type of each
song, stunt, or story in the program. Before the campfire begins,
the MC fills in the campfire program sheet and gives copies of
the program to all participants. The MC then opens the campfire
program with a greeting and introduces the song leader, cheer-
leader, and the various acts, songs, and yells.
When the glowing embers of your campfire begin to fade,
close the program with a note of quiet inspiration, and refer to
the value of Scouting in daily life. This can be done in many
ways. For example, you could ask all to stand, bow their heads,
and recite the Scout benediction together: “Now may the great
Scoutmaster of all Scouts be with us until we meet again.”
Then have the Scouts leave the area quietly.
Another way to end the program is to have a troop member
stand some distance from the fire and play “Taps” on the bugle.
Then have the Scout repeat this quite softly. These are not the
only choices; use your imagination.
Planning a Court of Honor
Courts of honor require even more careful planning than camp-
fire programs. A court of honor is convened when members of
Scouts BSA achieve Tenderfoot, Second Class, First Class, Star,
Life, and Eagle Scout ranks. Write out your plan, assign roles,
and then have key members rehearse their parts.
Use the checklist provided near the end of this section
as a guide to help you through the court of honor planning
process. Develop your own ideas. Get feedback from other
troop members and parents or guardians on how to make the
ceremony even more memorable. Remember to complete your
checklist in pencil so you can make changes easily.
Have a written program for the Scouts and the adults who
will be presenting the awards. Rehearse, if possible, in the place
where you will be serving as master of ceremonies. If scripts are
needed, be sure to give a copy to participants well in advance.
As you plan the ceremony, keep the following tips in mind.
Lighting
Lighting is important to all ceremonies. Use it to help create
a sense of drama and excitement. For instance, you can also use
a spotlight to recognize recipients during the court of honor. By
following the script, you will be able to prepare in advance for
the lighting techniques you want to use during the ceremony.
Lighting is
important to all
ceremonies. Have
the performers
stand behind the
campfire so that
the fire lights up
the participants.


COMMUNICATION 59
.Planning a Program
At a minimum,
use spotlighting
whenever a Scout
is recognized
before an audience.
A simple flashlight
can serve as
a spotlight.
Consider the following basic procedures as you
develop your plan.
1. The Scouts enter carrying the troop and
patrol flags.
2. The court of honor members enter.
3. The color guard enters carrying the
colors. The Scouts and audience
members stand at attention.
4. The parents, guardians and audience
members join the Scouts in reciting the
Pledge of Allegiance.
5. An appointed person presents an appropriate
opening ceremony.
6. The court chair (or master of ceremonies)
convenes the court of honor.
7. The court chair calls on members of the
court to present the awards.
8. Participants present special program
features—Scout demonstrations, a brief
address, or singing.
9. The color guard retires the colors.
10. The court of honor may close with the
troop’s regular closing ceremony.
If you have access to the ceremony site earlier in the
planning process, take the time to learn how to operate the
lighting controls. Find out what lighting resources are available.
Depending on the facility’s lighting, you may have access to
stage lights, spotlights, or colored lighting. Arrive early the day
of the ceremony to inspect the lighting controls and be sure you
know how to switch the lights off and on. Practice the timing for
using the lighting controls so that the program goes smoothly.


60 COMMUNICATION
Planning a Program.
Decorations
The right decorations can transform a bare room into a
special place for any court of honor. Crepe paper, neckerchiefs,
Scouting posters, Scout skill displays, merit badge displays,
and knot boards are a few examples.
Audiovisuals
Scouting America has many videos and slide programs that are
appropriate for use during a court of honor ceremony. Ask your
Scoutmaster about these. Enhancing the court of honor with
good sound equipment and carefully selected music will give
the ceremony a polished touch.
Props
Props add special flair to any ceremony. Use your imagination.
You may want to make an advancement board that displays the
progress of each Scout in the troop or patrol. At the court of
honor, some troops present a handsome plaque to Eagle Scouts.
An engraved nameplate on the plaque
shows their name, troop number, and
date of the ceremony. Here are more
ideas for props.
• A candle log—A log drilled with
holes, used as a candleholder.
• An artificial campfire—Made with
a flashlight, logs, and sheets of red,
yellow, and orange cellophane.
• A badge holder—A surface such
as a felt-covered tray, used to display
advancement badges, pins, and cards.
Many Scouts and Scouters have created webpages
with tons of imaginative, dramatic ideas for court
of honor ceremonies. With your parent or guard-
ian’s permission, search the internet. Type “Courts of
Honor, Scouting” into a good search engine, and you
will find many excellent resources.


COMMUNICATION 61
.Planning a Program
• Flags—Flags from your troop, place of worship, and state,
as well as the U.S. flag, are appropriate in ceremonies.
Be certain to display and carry flags correctly.
• A troop scrapbook—The troop historian, who helps maintain
the troop scrapbook, can assist you with this.
Planning an Interfaith Service
Worshipping with fellow Scouts and Scouters is a fine way
to live the 12th point of the Scout Law—“A Scout is reverent”
—and the part of the Scout Oath that addresses duty to God.
At Scouting activities where it is not practical to carry out
multiple religious services, it would make sense to have a
single interfaith religious service.
“Truth in
advertising”
is extremely
important here.
If a service is
advertised as
interfaith, then it
really needs to
be so.
Consider that some religions have specific require-
ments based on their own beliefs that would not be
fulfilled through an interfaith service. Carefully choose
elements such as scripture, prayers, hymns, and all
other parts of the worship. Be considerate of everyone
present; be respectful of all religions.


62 COMMUNICATION
Planning a Program.
The name of the service should be clear: Interfaith Service
(the preferred term) and Outdoor Worship Service are a couple
of practical examples. Be sure everyone understands that the
service is for all religious faiths and that everyone is invited.
Choose songs, readings, and other content carefully so that
everyone will feel comfortable during the service.
Here are some basic guidelines for conducting interfaith
religious services.
• The word God generally is accepted by most faith groups and
is the term used in all phases of Scouting. This term means
the creator or divine spirit; it is not intended to be a limiting
term. Many other names can be used to represent God.
• Use God rather than specific names (such as Jesus, Buddha,
Allah, or Holy Spirit) that are related to specific religions. Also
avoid male nouns and pronouns (such as Father, Heavenly
Father, or his), which may be disrespectful in some religions.
• Pick a theme for the service that fits with the specific week-
end or time of year. This helps focus the prayers, songs, and
message in a meaningful way and ties the religious service
into the weekend event.
Avoid isolating the service
so it feels like a separate
activity. Possible themes
include God’s Creation,
Thanksgiving, the Great
Outdoors/Forest/Ocean,
Doing One’s Best, and
On the Trail of the Eagle.
• Keep songs generic; do
not call them “hymns.”
The words should address
God rather than Jesus,
Buddha, and so on. This
can be challenging, since
the list of worship songs
that are both usable and
familiar is fairly short.
If there is a good
chance that
people of the
Jewish faith will
be present, and
you are using
printed materials,
it would be
considerate to
use the term G-d
instead, as many
Jews do not write
the name of God.


COMMUNICATION 63
.Planning a Program
• Choose quotations and readings wisely and that fit the theme
or message of the service.
• The length of time required for a good religious service varies.
Consider the time of day, age of the participants, and other
elements. However, don’t short-change this experience by
wedging it into a 15-minute spot—for instance, between a
major activity and dinner. Make the interfaith service a
meaningful part of each Scouting weekend.
• When a speaker delivers a message, avoid use of the religion-
specific words sermon or homily. Be sure that the speaker
understands that this is an interfaith experience. Choose
a topic that relates to all who will
attend. Any message presented
should steer clear of specific
religious beliefs—for instance,
biblical themes.
• Pick a comfortable location for the
interfaith service that fits with the
theme of the service and enhances
the religious experience. Try to
avoid the display of religious
symbols such as the cross, although
this may be hard to do if you
are using a chapel with affixed
symbols. In any case, try to be
sure that all appropriate religious
symbols are represented.
• Keep a working file of Scouting
interfaith services that you attend.
Make notes about what worked
well and share this with those
who may be asked to plan future
interfaith services. You can find
additional ideas for interfaith
services by searching the internet
(with your parent or guardian’s
permission). Use the search terms
Scout interfaith services or Scout’s
Own Service (the former name
used for interfaith services).
Scouting America’s Troop Program Resources
website (programresources.org) contains
a wealth of information about planning
ceremonies and courts of honor. Use the
planning guides on the following pages to
help you get started.


64 COMMUNICATION
Planning a Program.
7 130176 33696
#33696A
THE CAMPFIRE PROGRAM PLANNER
How to use this sheet: Be sure that every feature of this campfire program upholds Scouting’s highest traditions.
1. In a campfire planning meeting, fill in the top of the Campfire Program sheet (over).
2. On the Campfire Program Planner (below), list all units and individuals who will participate in the program.
3. Write down the name, description, and type of song, stunt, or story they have planned.
4. The MC organizes songs, stunts, and stories in a good sequence considering timing, variety, smoothness, and
showmanship.
5. The master-of-the-campfire makes out the Campfire Program sheet (over).
6. Copies of the program are given to all participants.
Campfire Program Planner
Group or
Individual Description Type Spot
Opening
Closing
Headliner Main event
Song leader
Cheerleader
Cheer Planner Spot
Song Planner Spot
33696A • 2001 Boy Scouts of America


COMMUNICATION 65
.Planning a Program
CAMPFIRE PROGRAM
Place _____________________________
Date ______________________________
Time ______________________________
Camp director’s approval: __________
___________________________________
Campers notified ________________
Campfire planning meeting _______
MC _____________________________
Song leader _____________________
Cheermaster ____________________
Area set up by ___________________
_________________________________
Campfire built by ________________
Fire put out by ___________________
Cleanup by ______________________
Spot Title of Stunt, Song, or Story By _____________________ Time
1 Opening—and firelighting
2 Greeting—introduction MC
3 Sing— Yell—
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22 Closing


66 COMMUNICATION
Planning a Program.


COMMUNICATION 67
.Planning a Program


68 COMMUNICATION
Planning a Program.
SAMPLE INTERFAITH PRAYERS
AND BENEDICTIONS
1. For health, strength, and daily food,
we give You thanks, O Lord.
2. For this and all Your mercies, Lord,
make us truly grateful.
3. For food, health, friendship, we give
You thanks, O Lord.
4. For food, for raiment, for life, for
opportunity, for friendship and
fellowship, we thank You, O Lord.
(Philmont grace)
5. Come, O Lord, be our guest, and
bless what You have bestowed on us.
6. Gracious Giver of all good, we thank
You for food and rest. Grant all we
say or do pleases You.
7. Lord, bless our Scouting leaders
who spend so much time and
energy to help us grow up well.
Guide them in their work; give them
patience and wisdom, and reward
them in this life and the next. Amen.
8. As our campfire fades, we thank You
for the joys and blessings of this
day. We lift our minds and hearts to
You in gratitude for life, happiness,
and the Scouting movement. Lord,
protect our camp this night; may
we rise refreshed and ready to
serve You. Amen.
9. May the Great Scoutmaster of
all Scouts be with us until we
meet again.
SAMPLE INTERFAITH
WORSHIP SERVICE
Call to Worship
Psalm 100
Make a joyful noise to the Lord,
all the lands!
Serve the Lord with gladness!
Come into his presence
with singing!
Know that the Lord is God!
It is he who made us, and
we are his!
We are his people and the sheep
of his pasture.
Enter into his gates with thanksgiving,
and his courts with praise!
Give thanks to him; bless his name!
For the Lord is good; his steadfast love
endures forever, and his faithfulness to
all generations.
Invocation
O Lord, our Heavenly Father, we lift our
hearts to thee at the beginning of this
new day. We come to this time and
place of worship with thy beauty all
about us; in the sky, in the trees, in the
earth, and in all thy creation. We praise
thee, and come to worship thee. Blessed
art thou, O Lord our God, who gives us
each new day. Amen.
Ideas for Interfaith Services*
If the group consists of mixed
beliefs, or if the beliefs of the
group are unknown, then prayers
should be of an interfaith
content. However, if everyone
in the group is of like belief,
then it is entirely appropriate
to offer belief-specific prayer.
*Source: Troop Program Resources website
(programresources.org)


COMMUNICATION 69
.Planning a Program
Song: America the Beautiful
O beautiful for spacious skies,
For amber waves of grain,
For purple mountain majesties
Above the fruited plain.
America! America!
God shed his grace on thee,
And crown thy good with brotherhood
From sea to shining sea.
O beautiful for pilgrim feet
Whose stern impassion’d stress
A thorough-fare for freedom beat
Across the wilderness.
America! America!
God mend thine ev’ry flaw,
Confirm thy soul in self control,
Thy liberty in law.
Responsive Reading
Leader: A true and worthy person rec-
ognizes his or her obligations and does
them without being watched
or compelled.
Scouts: A Scout is trustworthy.
Leader: We owe much to many—to
home, school, community, nation,
and to God.
Scouts: A Scout is loyal.
Leader: The Good Samaritan showed
the spirit of doing a Good Turn.
Scouts: A Scout is helpful.
Leader: A real friend is one who
remains loyal in victory and in defeat.
Scouts: A Scout is friendly.
Leader: Courtesy is the mark of an
honorable and courteous person. It is
shown in thoughtful acts and kindly
respect for everyone.
Scouts: A Scout is courteous.
Leader: Kindness is the way people
show respect for others.
Scouts: A Scout is kind.
Leader: Life is filled with things that
we must do whether we like them or
not. One of the marks of growing up
is to willingly accept responsibilities.
Scouts: A Scout is obedient.
Leader: Our moods make our days. If
we are grouchy, our day is gloomy. If we
are happy, the day is always happier.
Scouts: A Scout is cheerful.
Leader: The world offers many gifts.
A wise person uses them with care.
Scouts: A Scout is thrifty.
Leader: To each of us comes danger,
difficult tasks, and temptations. When
faced with a choice between courage
and cowardice, we must be brave.
Scouts: A Scout is brave.
Leader: Cleanliness is next to
godliness. To have a clean body,
a clean mind, and a clean record
is a rewarding achievement.
Scouts: A Scout is clean.
Leader: Character is determined by
the things we worship. If we respect
ourselves and others, and see them
as gifts of goodness from God, we
live on a high plane.
Scouts: A Scout is reverent.
Benediction
May the Lord bless you and keep you.
May the Lord make his face to shine
upon you and be gracious unto you.
May the Lord lift up his countenance
upon you, and grant you peace.





COMMUNICATION 71
.Careers in Communication
Careers in
Communication
A career in communication will give you many choices. As in
most fields, the better your education, the more likely your
success. Many communication professionals have bachelor’s
degrees from colleges with journalism or communication depart-
ments. Their specialty might be public relations, advertising,
or print or broadcast journalism. Others may have a bachelor’s
or an advanced degree in business, law, or engineering.
Competition for communication positions is fierce, and more
students are learning to work with all types of media. Training
in technology is very helpful, because many communication
specialists now work mostly with websites and other digital
media. This is because of the links among video, audio, and
text in online communication.
Most college
students seek
internships or
other related
work experiences
so they will
graduate with
useful career-
related skills.If you hope to enter the communication field, be
prepared to be a “jack of all trades” rather than
specialize in only one area. Doing so will give you an
edge over those who have more narrow expertise.


72 COMMUNICATION
Careers in Communication.
Advertising
If you are creative and like to write, you may want to be a
copywriter. This professional writes the text, or “copy,” for
advertisements and commercials. Other advertising careers
include account executive, sales manager, advertising or
marketing specialist, media planner, creative director, media
sales representative, and public opinion researcher.
Communication Education
Most communication educators teach at four-year colleges, but
communication teachers also work at elementary and secondary
schools and community colleges. To teach, you will need at least
a bachelor’s degree related to the subject you will be teaching.
Big universities and graduate schools prefer that instructors be
trained in a specific area such as organizational communication,
rhetoric and public address, or interpersonal communication.
Careers in this field include language arts coordinator, high
school speech teacher, forensics (debate) coach, drama director,
college or university professor, and speech communication
department chair.
Electronic Media, Radio,
and Television Broadcasting
Network newscasters and talk-show hosts are considered by
many to be glamorous positions in this field. However, radio and
television offer far more off-camera and off-microphone positions
than on-air ones. Many of these are technical, creative, sales, and
administrative careers. Positions include broadcast station manager,
video/audio librarian, community relations director, unit manager,
video/audio editor, news director, news writer, transmitter engineer,
technical director, media buyer, market researcher, producer,
casting director, researcher, and floor manager.
There is a healthy market for management and
corporate trainers. These communication specialists
help individuals develop or sharpen special types
of skills like project or time management, customer
service, and presentation skills.


COMMUNICATION 73
.Careers in Communication
Journalism (Print or Electronic)
Journalism involves researching and gathering
information and communicating it to the public
through written, spoken, visual, or electronic
means. Careers in journalism include
reporter, editor, photographer, newscaster,
author, scriptwriter, publisher, news
service researcher, technical writer,
and acquisitions editor.
Converging Media
Today, print and broadcast are converging
(coming together). Video/audio editing and
production positions are now common at
traditional print media companies. Today’s
newspaper reporters are almost as likely to carry
a small video camera as a notebook and pen.
Likewise, there are print-related positions at broadcast
media companies. For example, reporters may write news
updates for a broadcaster’s website. Web editors and producers
are in demand at all kinds of media companies.
Completely new media are forming. One such example is
the professionally produced blog, which may have millions of
viewers. Often people with good training in journalism and
communication operate these sites.


74 COMMUNICATION
Careers in Communication.
Web-Related Careers
Some of the newest positions in the digital age are webmaster
(the person who creates or maintains a company’s website),
web developer, web designer, information architect, web
producer, graphic designer, programmer, multimedia specialist,
systems administrator, and e-commerce specialist (someone
who maintains the systems that process payments made online).
Still other positions involve developing, monitoring, and
managing websites.
Public Relations
This field usually involves managing the public image of an
organization or an individual. Careers in public relations
include publicity manager, advertising manager, marketing
specialist, press agent, lobbyist, corporate public affairs
specialist, account executive, development officer, fund-raiser,
membership recruiter, sales manager, media analyst, media
planner, creative director, audience analyst, news writer, and
public opinion researcher.
If you plan to pursue a career in the communication
field, look for classes and training in writing, editing,
radio and TV production, as well as web production.
You may specialize later, but it is wise to cover all the
bases as you prepare.


COMMUNICATION 75
.Careers in Communication
Theater/Performing Arts/Dramatic Arts
Stars do exist in this glitzy industry, but successful performing
careers are few and far between. The majority of actors do
not reach star status. Rather, many performers take advantage
of theatrical opportunities found in professional, community,
and educational theaters across the country.
Choosing a Career
Think about which careers in communication might suit
you. Choose one position that interests you. Research
the primary responsibilities of that position and the
qualifications, education, and preparation it
requires. (See the resources
section at the end of this
pamphlet.) Share what you
learn when you and your
buddy meet with your coun-
selor to discuss requirement 9.
Now that you have fin-
ished the requirements for your
Communication merit badge, you should
have a much better understanding of
how important effective communica-
tion is to every aspect of daily life.
Whether you are communicating with
your family and friends, troop mem-
bers, elders, or the general public,
the skills you learned to meet your
badge requirements will serve you
well throughout your life.
Off-stage positions exist in theater management, instruction, technical,
and production positions. Careers in performing arts include performing
artist, scriptwriter, producer, director, costume designer, scenic designer,
lighting designer, theater critic, makeup artist, stage manager, model,
theater professor, and casting director.
Local theater groups or performing arts venues may offer internships
to those interested in learning more about these fields.





COMMUNICATION 77
.Resources in Communication
Scouting Literature
Journalism, Moviemaking, Photography,
Public Speaking, Radio, and Theater
merit badge pamphlets
Books
Alba, Jason, et al. I’m on Facebook—
Now What??? How to Get Personal,
Business, and Professional Value
from Facebook. Happy About, 2013.
Banks, Michael A. Blogging Heroes:
Interviews With 30 of the World’s
Top Bloggers. Wiley, 2007.
Briggs, Nadine, and Donna Shea. How
to Make and Keep Friends: Tips for
Kids to Overcome 50 Common Social
Challenges. CreateSpace Independent
Publishing Platform, 2010.
Dowis, Richard. The Lost Art of the
Great Speech: How to Write One—
How to Deliver It. Amacom, 1999.
Bair, Amy Lupold. Blogging for
Dummies, 6th ed. For
Dummies, 2016.
Hounshell, Liz, and Erika Karres. 101
Do’s and Don’ts and Double Don’ts
on Texting. YouthLight Inc, 2010.
Jones, Bob. Oratory, 2nd ed. CDE, 2002.
Lamb, Sandra E. How to Write It:
A Complete Guide to Everything
You’ll Ever Write, 3rd ed. Ten Speed
Press, 2011.
Lopuck, Lisa. Web Design for
Dummies, 3rd ed. Wiley, 2012.
Mierau, Christiana. Accept No
Substitutes! The History
of American Advertising.
Lerner, 2000.
Otfinoski, Steven. Speaking Up,
Speaking Out: A Kid’s Guide
to Making Speeches, Oral Reports
and Conversation. Millbrook
Press, 1997.
Pease, Allan, and Barbara Pease.
The Definitive Book of Body
Language. Bantam, 2006.
Strunk Jr., William. The Elements
of Style. Tribeca Books, 2011.
Resources in Communication
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


78 COMMUNICATION
Resources in Communication.
Organizations and Websites
Animation Factory
animationfactory.com
Association for Education in
Journalism and Mass Communication
aejmc.org
Broadcast Education Association
beaweb.org
Freedom Forum
First Amendment Center
freedomforum.org
GoDaddy
godaddy.com
National Communication Association
natcom.org
Public Relations Society of America
prsa.org
Toastmasters International
toastmasters.org
Acknowledgments
Scouting America is grateful to the men
and women serving on the National
Merit Badge Subcommittee for the
improvements made in updating this
pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration Credits
Wikipedia.org, courtesy—page 37
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of
or are protected by Scouting America.
Dan Bryant—pages 56 and 60
Mark A. Duncan—pages 8
(photographers), 25, and 36
Stephen Gilpin—page 41
John McDearmon—all illustrations on
page 38
Steven Michaels Studio—page 15
Brian Payne—page 31
Randy Piland—page 62


.Notes
COMMUNICATION 79


Subscribe today at go.scoutlife.org/subscribe
Use promo code SLMBP15 to get a special
print + digital bundle offer priced just for Scouts!
Get ideas
for your next
merit badge
adventure in
every issue
of Scout Life
magazine.