SNOW
SPORTS


SNOW SPORTS
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


35951
ISBN 978-0-8395-3365-8
©2022 Boy Scouts of America
2023 Printing
Note to the Counselor
Like many other outdoor activities, the snow sports discussed in this
pamphlet have risks. These risks can be minimized by following the
complete guidelines under Winter Activities in the BSA’s Guide to Safe
Scouting, particularly those that pertain to winter-sports safety.
The abridged rules below highlight the guidelines that will help
you ensure the well-being of those Scouts under your supervision.
• Use only designated areas where obstacles have been identified and
marked, cleared away, shielded, or buffered in some way.
• At all times when Scouts are in the field, maintain direct supervision
by two or more mature and conscientious adults (at least one of whom
must be age 21 or older) who understand and knowingly accept
responsibility for the well-being and safety of the youth in their care.
They should be experienced and qualified in the particular skills and
equipment involved in the activity and committed to compliance with
BSA Winter Sports Safety as defined in the Guide to Safe Scouting.
The appropriate number of supervisors will increase depending on the
number of participants, the type of activity, and environmental conditions.
• Explain the potential hazards of snow sports before engaging in the
activity. Make sure Scouts understand and respect the rules of safety
and etiquette for snow sports, especially the rules of the local ski
patrol. Place emphasis on preventing accidents through adherence
to safety measures and proper technique.
• Be sure Scouts wear appropriate clothing and protective equipment,
including gloves, helmets, and goggles when appropriate. The use of
a helmet is required for snowboarding and downhill skiing.
• Comply with BSA medical requirements as outlined in the Annual
Health and Medical Record. Each participant—youth and adult—
must have a current physical examination performed by a licensed
health-care practitioner who has knowledge of the sport and its
particular physical demands.
• Make sure all specialized equipment such as snowboards, skis, snow-
shoes, and helmets fit and function properly.


SNOW SPORTS 3
Requirements
Always check www.scouting.org for the latest requirements.
1. Do the following:
(a) Explain to your counselor the hazards you are most likely
to encounter while participating in snow sport activities, and
what you should do to anticipate, help prevent, mitigate, and
respond to these hazards.
(b) Discuss first aid and prevention for the types of injuries
or illnesses that could occur while participating in snow
sports, including hypothermia, frostbite, shock, dehydration,
sunburn, fractures, bruises, sprains, and strains. Tell how to
apply splints.
2. Do the following:
(a) Explain why every snow sport participant should be
prepared to render first aid in the event of an accident.
(b) Explain the procedure used to report an accident to the
local ski patrol or local emergency personnel.
3. Explain the international trail-marking system.
4. Discuss the importance of strength, endurance, and flexibility
in snow sports. Demonstrate exercises and activities you can
do to get fit for the option you choose in requirement 7.
5. Present yourself properly clothed and equipped for the option
you choose in requirement 7. Discuss how the clothing you
have chosen will help keep you warm and protected.
6. Do EACH of the following:
(a) Tell the meaning of the Your Responsibility Code for
skiers, snowboarders, and snowshoers. Explain why each
rider must follow this code.
(b) Explain the Smart Style safety program. Tell why it is
important and how it applies to participants at snow sport
venues like terrain parks and pipes.
(c) Explain the precautions pertaining to avalanche safety,
including the responsibility of individuals regarding
avalanche safety.


4 SNOW SPORTS
(d) Tell the meaning of the Wilderness Use Policy. Explain
why each skier and snowboarder must adopt this policy.
7. Complete ALL of the requirements for ONE of the following
options: downhill (Alpine) skiing OR cross-country (Nordic)
OR snowboarding OR snowshoeing.
Downhill (Alpine) Skiing Option
(a) Show how to wax and maintain your skis and use/
maintain your release bindings. Explain the international DIN
standard and what it means to skiers.
(b) Explain the American Teaching System and a basic snow-
skiing progression.
(c) Discuss the five types of Alpine skis. Demonstrate two
ways to carry skis and poles safely and easily.
(d) Demonstrate how to ride one kind of lift and explain how
to ride two others.
(e) On a gentle slope, demonstrate some of the beginning
maneuvers learned in skiing. Include the straight run, gliding
wedge, wedge stop, sidestep, and herringbone maneuvers.
(f) On slightly steeper terrain, show linked wedge turns.
(g) On a moderate slope, demonstrate five to 10 christies.
(h) Make a controlled run down an intermediate slope.
(i) Demonstrate the ability to ski in varied conditions,
including changes in pitch, and snow conditions.
(j) Name the major ski organizations in the United States
and explain their functions.
Cross-Country (Nordic) Skiing Option
(a) Show your ability to select, use, and maintain equipment
for cross-country skiing in safety and comfort.
(b) Discuss classic, skating, touring, and telemark skis.
(c) Discuss the basic principles of waxing for cross-country
ski touring.
(d) Discuss the differences between cross-country,
backcountry/ski touring, ski mountaineering, and downhill/
telemark skiing.
(e) List the items you would take on a one-day ski tour.
(f) Demonstrate the proper use of a topographic map and
compass.
(g) On a gentle, packed slope, show some basic ways to
control speed and direction. Include the straight run, traverse,
side slip, step turn, wedge stop, and wedge turn maneuvers.


SNOW SPORTS 5
(h) On a cross-country trial, demonstrate effective propulsion
by showing proper weight transfer from ski to ski, pole
timing, rhythm, flow, and glide.
(i) Demonstrate your ability, on a 4-mile tour, to cope with
an average variety of snow conditions.
(j) Demonstrate several methods of dealing with steep hills
or difficult conditions. Include traverses and kick turns going
uphill and downhill, sidesteps, pole drag, and ski-pole
“glissade.”
Snowboarding Option
(a) Discuss forward-fall injuries.
(b) Show your ability to select the correct equipment for
snowboarding and to use it for safety and comfort.
(c) Show how to use and maintain your own bindings, and
explain the use of the different binding methods. Explain the
need for leashes.
(d) Discuss the four types of snowboards. Demonstrate how
to carry a snowboard easily and safely.
(e) Demonstrate how to ride one kind of lift and explain how
to ride two others.
(f) Demonstrate the basic principles of waxing a snowboard.
(g) Do the following:
(1) On a gentle slope, demonstrate beginning
snowboarding maneuvers. Show basic ways to control
speed and direction. Include the side-slipping maneuver.
(2) On slightly steeper terrain, show traversing.
(h) On a moderate slope, demonstrate an ollie, a nose-end
grab, and a wheelie.
(i) Make a controlled run down an intermediate slope.
(j) Demonstrate your ability to ride in varied conditions,
including changes in pitch, snow conditions, and moguls.
Maintain your balance and ability to turn.
(k) Name the major snowboarding organizations in the
United States and explain their functions.
(l) Demonstrate your ability to ride in varied conditions,
including changes in pitch, snow conditions, and moguls.
Maintain your balance and ability to turn.
(m) Name the major snowboarding organizations in the
United States and explain their functions.


6 SNOW SPORTS
Snowshoeing Option
(a) Name the parts of a snowshoe.
(b) Explain how to choose the correct size of snowshoe.
(c) Describe the different types of snowshoes and their
specialized uses. Discuss factors to consider when choosing a
snowshoe.
(d) Explain how to properly care for and maintain
snowshoes.
(e) List the items you would take on a one-day snowshoe
hike.
(f) Describe areas that are best for snowshoeing. Discuss
some advantages and dangers of backcountry snowshoeing.
(g) Discuss the benefits of snowshoeing.
(h) Demonstrate the most efficient ways to break trail, climb
uphill, travel downhill, and traverse a slope.
(i) Demonstrate your ability, on a 2-mile snowshoe hike, to
cope with an average variety to snow conditions.
(j) Demonstrate the proper use of a topographic map and
compass.


SNOW SPORTS 7
.Section 0
Snow Sports Resources
Scouting Literature
Deck of First Aid; Basic Illustrated
Wilderness First Aid; Emergency First
Aid pocket guide; Be Prepared First Aid
Book; Emergency Preparedness, First
Aid, Orienteering, Personal Fitness,
Search and Rescue, Signs, Signals, and
Codes, and Wilderness Survival merit
badge pamphlets
Books
Downhill Skiing
Bartelski, Konrad, and Robin Neillands.
Learn Downhill Skiing in a Weekend.
Knopf, 1992.
Fellows, Chris. Total Skiing. Human
Kinetics, 2010.
LeMaster, Ron. The Essential Guide to
Skiing: 201 Things Every Skier Must
Know. Peak Sports Press, 2004.
———. Ultimate Skiing. Human
Kinetics, 2010.
White, Chalky. Chalky White’s The 7
Secrets of Skiing, 2nd ed. Bernard
“Chalky” White, 2011.
Cross-Country Skiing
Hindman, Steve. Cross-Country Skiing:
Building Skills for Fun and Fitness.
Mountaineers Books, 2005.
McGee, J. Scott. Basic Illustrated Cross-
Country Skiing. FalconGuides, 2012.
O’Bannon, Allen, and Mike Clelland.
Allen & Mike’s Really Cool Telemark
Tips: 123 Amazing Tips to Improve
Your Tele-Skiing, 2nd ed.
FalconGuides, 2008.
Older, Jules. Cross-Country Skiing for
Everyone. Stackpole Books, 1998.
Petersen, Paul, and Rick Lovett.
The Essential Cross-Country Skier.
Ragged Mountain Press, 1999.
Volken, Martin, Scott Schell, and
Margaret Wheeler. Backcountry
Skiing: Skills for Ski Touring and Ski
Mountaineering. Mountaineers
Books, 2007.
With your parent’s permission, visit
the Boy Scouts of America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org,
for a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


8 SNOW SPORTS
Section 0.
Snowboarding
Bennett, Jeff, Scott Downey, and Charles
Arnell. The Complete Snowboarder,
2nd ed. Ragged Mountain Press, 2000.
Howe, Susanna. (Sick): A Cultural
History of Snowboarding. St. Martin’s
Press, 1998.
Jensen, Julie. Beginning Snowboarding.
Lerner, 1996.
Kleh, Cindy. Snowboarding Skills: The
Back-to-Basics Essentials for All
Levels. Firefly Books, 2002.
McNab, Neil. Go Snowboard: Read It,
Watch It, Do It. DK Adult, 2006.
Reichenfeld, Rob, and Anna Bruechert.
Snowboarding. Human Kinetics,
1995.
Rottman, Alexander, and Nici Pederzolli.
Freestyle Snowboarding: Tricks, Skills
and Techniques. Firefly Books, 2010.
Ryan, Kevin. The Illustrated Guide to
Snowboarding. Masters Press, 1998.
Smith, Jim. The Art of Snowboarding:
Kickers, Carving, Half-Pipe, and
More. Ragged Mountain Press, 2007.
Snyder, Rocky. Fit to Ski and
Snowboard: The Skier’s and
Boarder’s Guide to Strength and
Conditioning. Ragged Mountain
Press, 2006.
Teter, Hannah, and Tawnya Schultz.
Mastering Snowboarding. Human
Kinetics, 2012.
Weiss, Christof. Snowboarding Know-
How. Sterling, 1993.
Snowshoeing
Bair, Diane, and Pamela Wright.
Snowshoe Routes: New England.
Mountaineers Books, 2006.
Burakian, Eli. Basic Illustrated
Snowshoeing. FalconGuides, 2012.
Ingersoll, Bill. Snowshoe Routes:
Adirondacks & Catskills.
Mountaineers Books, 2006.
Olmsted, Larry. A Trailside Guide:
Snowshoeing. W.W. Norton
and Co., 1998.
Prater, Gene. Snowshoeing: From Novice
to Master. 5th ed. Mountaineers
Books, 2002.
Recor, Mary Lou, and Chris Hanna, eds.
Snowshoeing in Vermont: A Guide to
the Best Winter Hikes, 2nd ed. Green
Mountain Club Inc., 2010.
Savignano, Phil. Basic Essentials
Snowshoeing. Falcon, 2000.
Walter, Claire. The Snowshoe Experience:
Gear Up & Discover the Wonders of
Winter on Snowshoes. Storey
Publishing, 2004.
———. Snowshoeing Colorado, 3rd ed.
Fulcrum Publishing, 2004.
Organizations and Websites
American Association of
Snowboard Instructors
133 S. Van Gordon St., Suite 200
Lakewood, CO 80228
Telephone: 303-987-9390
www.aasi.org
American Institute for Avalanche
Research and Education
avtraining.org


SNOW SPORTS 9
.Section 0
Cross Country Ski Areas Association
Telephone: 802-236-3021
www.xcski.org
National Ski Patrol
133 S. Van Gordon St., Suite 100
Lakewood, CO 80228
Telephone: 303-988-1111
www.nsp.org
Professional Ski Instructors
of America
133 S. Van Gordon St., Suite 200
Lakewood, CO 80228
Telephone: 303-987-9390
www.thesnowpros.org
United States of America Snowboard
and Freeski Association
P.O. Box 15500
South Lake Tahoe, CA 96151
Toll-free telephone: 800-404-9213
www.usasa.org
United States
Snowshoe Association
678 County Route 25
Corinth, NY 12822
Telephone: 518-654-7648
www.snowshoeracing.com
U.S. Ski & Snowboard
1 Victory Lane
Box 100
Park City, UT 84060
Telephone: 435-649-9090
usskiandsnowboard.org