WHITEWATER


WHITEWATER
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Whitewater
1. Do the following:
(a) Explain to your counselor the most likely hazards you may encounter while
participating in whitewater activities, including branches and trees in water along
a shore and stretching across the stream, rocks, hydraulics over ledges or low-
head dams, strong wind, low water or air temperature, and thunder and light-
ning storms. Explain what you should do to anticipate, help prevent, mitigate,
and respond to these hazards.
(b) Review with your counselor the prevention, symptoms, and first-aid treat-
ment for the following injuries or illnesses that could occur while participating in
whitewater activities including cold-water shock; hypothermia; head, neck, and
back injuries; heat-related illnesses; sunburn; dehydration; blisters; bruises; cuts;
sprains and strains; shoulder dislocation; and submersion injuries.


(c) Discuss with your counselor the BSA Safety Afloat policy and the
American Whitewater safety guidelines, including the use of helmet and
life jackets.
2. Do the following:
(a) Demonstrate understanding of the following river features by drawing lines
to show the flow of water: upstream V, downstream V, eddy with an eddy line,
ledge, river bend, current at different depths, drop, horizon line,
and hydraulic.
(b) Describe how waves form including standing waves and wave trains.
(c) Explain how to tilt or edge the boat without leaning your body
(1) When entering and exiting an eddy.
(2) When ferrying in downstream and upstream directions.
(d) Explain when, why, and how you should scout a river while ashore and
while on the river and when you should portage your boat.
3. Before doing requirements 4 through 12, earn the Canoeing merit badge if you
will be using a canoe to earn this merit badge. If you will be using a kayak,
earn the Kayaking merit badge. Then do the following:
(a) If you will be using a canoe to earn this merit badge, demonstrate strokes
and maneuvers from the Canoeing merit badge to the satisfaction of your
merit badge counselor.
OR
(b) If you will be using a kayak to earn this merit badge, demonstrate strokes
and maneuvers from the Kayaking merit badge to the satisfaction of your
merit badge counselor.
4. Do ONE of the following:
(a) If you are completing these requirements as a tandem canoeist, perform
the following on calm water:
(1) Demonstrate the following strokes in the bow: cross forward, bow
draw, cross bow draw, bow pry, and sculling draw.
(2) Demonstrate the following strokes in the stern: stern draw, stern pry,
sculling draw, and forward with stern pry.
(3) Demonstrate a high brace, low brace, and righting pry.
OR
(b) If you are completing these requirements as a solo canoeist, perform the
following on calm water:
(1) Demonstrate the following strokes: cross forward, bow draw, cross
bow draw, stern draw, pry, stern pry, sculling draw, and forward with
stern pry.
(2) Demonstrate a high brace, low brace, and righting pry.
OR


(c) If you are completing these requirements as a solo kayaker, perform the
following on calm water:
(1) Demonstrate the following strokes: bow draw, rudder, and
sculling draw.
(2) Demonstrate a high brace and low brace.
5. Do the following:
(a)Explain the International Scale of River Difficulty and apply the scale to
the stretch of river approved by your counselor.
(b) Identify the specific characteristics of the river that are factors in your
classification according to the International Scale.
(c) Discuss how the level of flow changes a river from one class to another and
what effects different flow rates have on the features of a river and its hazards.
6. Explain the importance of communication during every whitewater outing.
Demonstrate knowledge and ability to use the following American Whitewater
Universal River Signals, both visual and auditory: “Stop,” “Are you OK?,”
“Help/emergency,” “Run river right,” “Run river left,” and “All clear—
come ahead.”
7. Do ONE of the following:
(a) If completing this merit badge in a canoe, describe the various types
of canoes used on moving water and how they differ in design, materials,
and purpose.
OR
(b) If completing this merit badge in a kayak, describe the various types
of kayaks used on moving water and explain how they differ in design,
materials, and purpose.
8. Discuss the personal and group equipment necessary for a safe whitewater out-
ing and how and why it is used. Explain how to pack and protect these items.
9. Demonstrate your ability to read a Class II section of river approved by your
counselor. Describe the most desirable paths or lines of travel as well as
alternative routes and options. Point out how to use the existing water fea-
tures to your advantage, and explain how to best avoid the hazards present.
10. Wearing a proper life jacket and being appropriately dressed for the weather
and water conditions, perform the following skills in moving water in a prop-
erly equipped whitewater craft of your choice (tandem canoe, solo canoe, or
solo kayak). If a tandem canoe is used, the skills must be demonstrated from
both the bow and stern positions.
(a) Launch and land.
(b) Paddle forward in a straight line at least 10 boat lengths.
(c) Backpaddle in a straight line at least five boat lengths.
(d) Ferry upstream from both sides of the river.
(e) Ferry downstream from both sides of the river.


(f) Eddy turn from both sides of an eddy.
(g) Peel out from both sides of an eddy.
11. Explain and demonstrate the following to your counselor:
(a) Self-rescue and procedures when capsized in moving water, including a
wet exit if necessary
(b) Proper use of a throw rope to rescue a swimmer in whitewater
(c) Proper technique for receiving a throw rope as a swimmer
(d) Portaging—where portaging would be appropriate, and when and how to
do it
(e) The whitewater buddy system using at least three persons and three craft
12. Participate in one or more whitewater trips using either a canoe or kayak on a
Class I and/or Class II river. The trip(s) must involve at least six hours of
paddling time. For each trip:
(a) Help to prepare a written plan, specifying the route (put-ins and take-
outs), schedule, equipment, safety precautions, and emergency procedures.
(b) Determine local rules and obtain permission from landowners and land
managers in advance.
(c) Explain what steps have been taken to comply with BSA Safety Afloat
and the American Whitewater safety guidelines.
(d) Show how to protect personal and group equipment from water and how
to load and secure the containers in boats to be used in the trip. Execute the
plans with other paddlers.
(e) Explain to your counselor how well your plans worked for each
trip taken.


78 WHITEWATER
Whitewater Resources.
Scouting Literature
Boy Scout Handbook; Fieldbook;
Deck of First Aid; Emergency First Aid
pocket guide; Be Prepared First Aid
Book; Kayaking BSA Award application;
Canoeing, Rowing, and Small-Boat
Sailing merit badge pamphlets
Books
Bennett, Jeff. The Complete Whitewater
Rafter. International Marine/Ragged
Mountain Press, 1996.
———. The Essential Whitewater
Kayaker. International Marine/
Ragged Mountain Press, 1999.
Blaine, Mark. Whitewater: The Thrill
and Skill of Running the World’s
Great Rivers. Black Dog and
Leventhal Publishers, 2001.
Bechdel, Les. River Rescue: A Manual
for Whitewater Safety. Appalachian
Mountain Club Books, 1997.
Grant, Gordon. Trailside Guide:
Canoeing. W. W. Norton &
Company, 2003.
Harrison, Dave. Canoeing: The Complete
Guide to Equipment and Technique.
Stackpole Books, 1996.
Jackson, Eric. Whitewater Paddling:
Strokes & Concepts. Stackpole
Books, 1999.
Krauzer, Steven M. Trailside Guide:
Kayaking. W. W. Norton &
Company, 2003.
Mason, Bill. Path of the Paddle:
An Illustrated Guide to the Art of
Canoeing (revised and updated by
Paul Mason). Firefly Books, 1999.
Mason, Paul. Thrill of the Paddle:
The Art of Whitewater Canoeing.
Firefly Books, 1999.
Nealy, William. Kayak: A Manual
of Technique. Menasha Ridge
Press, 1986.
Ray, Slim. The Canoe Handbook:
Techniques for Mastering the Sport of
Canoeing. Stackpole Books, 1992.
Whitewater Resources
Visit the Boy Scouts of America’s
official retail Web site (with your
parent’s permission) at http://
www.scoutstuff.org for a com-
plete listing of all merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


WHITEWATER 79
.Whitewater Resources
Magazines
Canoe & Kayak
10526 NE 68th St., Suite 3
Kirkland, WA 98033
Telephone: 425-827-6363
Web site: http://www.canoekayak.com
Paddler
12040 98th Ave. NE, Suite 205
Kirkland, WA 98034
Toll-free telephone: 425-814-4140
Web site:
http://www.paddlermagazine.com
Organizations and Web Sites
American Canoe Association
7432 Alban Station Blvd., Suite B-232
Springfield, VA 22150
Telephone: 703-451-0141
Web site: http://www.acanet.org
American Whitewater
P.O. Box 1540
Cullowhee, NC 28723
Toll-free telephone: 866-262-8429
Web site:
http://www.americanwhitewater.org
USA Canoe/Kayak
301 S. Tryon St., Suite 1750
Charlotte, NC 28282
Telephone: 704-348-4330
Web site: http://www.usack.org
United States Canoe Association
53 Ross Road
Preston, CT 06365
Web site: http://www.uscanoe.com
Acknowledgments
The Boy Scouts of America thanks
writer and whitewater enthusiast Bruce
Newell for his assistance with revising
the Whitewater merit badge require-
ments and for writing the manuscript
for this new edition of the pamphlet.
We are grateful for the input
of Dr. Richard Thomas, Scottsdale,
Arizona, for his assistance with
revising the requirements and for
reviewing the manuscript, photos,
and illustrations. Dr. Thomas, who
is a BSA Aquatics Instructor and an
American Canoe Association Canoeing
Instructor Trainer, is an avid Scouter
who serves as a Western Region
National Camping School Aquatics
section director and Grand Canyon
Council Aquatics Committee chair.
Thanks also to Gordon Black, national
director, American Canoe Association
Safety Education and Instruction, for
his input on revising the requirements
and for his review of the manuscript,
photos, and illustrations.
The BSA appreciates Scouters
David Bell, Ph.D. (BSA Health and
Safety Committee member), Chris Stec
(ACA Canoeing Instructor Trainer), and
Sam Fowlkes (ACA Chairman of Safety,
Education, and Instruction, and ACA
Canoeing Instructor Trainer) for their
assistance with this new edition of the
Whitewater merit badge pamphlet.
Thanks also to Lynn Brennard and
John Brennard for their input.
Thanks to American Whitewater,
in particular Jason Robertson, for
allowing the BSA to adapt its American
Whitewater Safety Code for the safety
section of this pamphlet.