PIONEERING
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


35931
ISBN 978-0-8395-3377-1
©2022 Boy Scouts of America
2022 Printing
Note to the Counselor
Before counseling Scouts, Pioneering merit badge counselors must
become familiar with the Guide to Safe Scouting, an essential plan-
ning tool for all Scouting volunteers. The Guide to Safe Scouting
provides an overview of Scouting policies and procedures. Unit
leaders are also expected to review the additional reference materials
cited (such as the Scouts BSA Handbook for Boys, Scouts BSA
Handbook for Girls, and the First Aid merit badge pamphlet) before
conducting certain activities. Counselors can access the Guide to
Safe Scouting online at www.scouting.org/health-and-safety/gss/.
Counselors should also ensure that Scouts follow the principles of
Leave No Trace in their pioneering projects. Just as hiking and camp-
ing without a trace are signs of expert outdoorsmanship, protecting the
environment is a mark of responsible pioneering. Minimize impacts to
the land. Use your judgment and experience to help Scouts tailor their
pioneering projects to the environment where the activities will occur.
To help keep participants safe during Scouting activities, the Boy
Scouts of America has an established set of procedures for physical
activities called the “Sweet 16 of BSA Safety.” In an effort to assist
Pioneering merit badge counselors, the following considerations
provide additional guidance of special interest to them.
Qualified Supervision. The Pioneering merit badge counselor
should have knowledge of the proper use of pioneering project tools
and equipment, structural limitations, and fall protection appropriate
for projects.
Safe Area or Course. Counselors should take reasonable
measures to provide participants with a safe outdoor environment.
Equipment Selection and Maintenance. Counselors should
ensure project building tools and equipment are well-maintained
and in good condition. Ropes, anchors, and spars should be
checked prior to each use.


PIONEERING 3
Safety Procedures and Policies. Counselors must ensure
compliance with safety procedures for certain projects such as con-
trolled access of participants, compliance with Safe Swim Defense
for projects located over water, and adherence to the 6-foot height
limit for pioneering projects. (See “Working at Heights and
Elevations” in the Guide to Safe Scouting.)
Discipline. Counselors should take reasonable measures
to ensure all participants are using pioneering tools and
equipment properly.
The Sweet 16 of BSA Safety procedures are accessible online by
visiting www.scouting.org/health-and-safety/gss/sweet16/.
Because this pamphlet will be used throughout the United States,
merit badge counselors should understand that not every method can
be fully described here. Different parts of the country might use other
names for a knot, a method, or a piece of equipment. Counselors
may employ other methods described and illustrated in other Scouting
literature, provided that no requirements are omitted, added, or altered
in order to accommodate them.
Some pioneering skills or methods called for in the requirements
will take practice and time to master. Therefore, having multiple
hands-on sessions to earn the merit badge is advisable. The term
“demonstrate” in the requirements means just that—it should be made
clear that the Scout has learned the skill and has the ability to use it.
Keep in mind that, because of equipment availability, parts of
some requirements might have to be done at summer camp, at
district or council events, or on a troop camp outing. In such
cases, the person conducting the review and approving any partial
completion must be approved to do so by the local council.
The appearance of a finished project or structure is not as
important as the correctness of individual knots and lashings. The
project should be judged for its structural soundness, to determine
if it was built to safely withstand the use for which it was intended.
Only the approved designs shown in this pamphlet or other official
Boy Scouts of America literature are recommended.
In earning this merit badge, the Scout has a chance to learn skills
that will be useful in a wide variety of Scouting and non-Scouting
activities. These skills should become an ongoing part of a Scout’s
advancement and growing participation in new and challenging
adventures. Earning the Pioneering merit badge could equip the Scout
to later teach younger Scouts, or could add another dimension to the
Scout’s value as a camp staff member.
Planning ahead, making certain as you go, and ensuring safety
go hand in hand with the Scout motto, Be Prepared. In pioneering,
discipline is essential. Pioneering is a challenge that can instill long-
term habits of doing things right the first time.


4 PIONEERING
Requirements
1. Do the following:
a. Explain to your counselor the most likely hazards you
might encounter while participating in pioneering
activities and what you should do to anticipate, help
prevent, mitigate, and respond to these hazards.
b. Discuss the prevention of, and first-aid treatment for,
injuries and conditions that could occur while working
on pioneering projects, including rope splinters, rope
burns, cuts, scratches, insect bites and stings,
hypothermia, dehydration, heat exhaustion, heatstroke,
sunburn, and falls.
2. Do the following:
a. Demonstrate the West Country method of whipping a
rope.
b. Demonstrate how to tie a rope tackle and the following
knots: clove hitch formed as two half hitches, clove
hitch on a bight, butterfly knot, roundturn with two
half hitches, and rolling hitch.
c. Demonstrate and explain when to use the following
lashings: square, diagonal, round, shear, tripod, and
floor lashing.
3. Do the following:
a. Using square and tripod lashings from requirement 2c,
build a Tripod Wash Station (or with your counselor’s
permission, another camp gadget of your own design).
b. Using rolling hitches or roundturns with two half
hitches, and round lashings from requirements 2b and
2c, build a 15-foot Scout Stave Flagpole (or with your
counselor’s permission, another camp gadget of your
own design).


PIONEERING 5
c. Using shear, square, and floor lashings, clove hitches on a
bight, and rope tackles from requirements 2b and 2c, build a
Simple Camp Table (or with your counselor’s permission,
another camp gadget of your own design.
4. Explain the differences between synthetic ropes and natural fiber
ropes. Discuss which types of rope are suitable for pioneering
work and why. Include the following in your discussion: breaking
strength, safe working loads, and the care and storage of rope.
5. Explain the uses for the back splice, eye splice, and short splice.
View a demonstration on forming each splice.
6. Using a rope-making device or machine, make a rope at least
6 feet long consisting of three strands, each having three yarns.
Whip the ends.
7. Explain the importance of effectively anchoring a pioneering
project. Describe to your counselor the 3-2–1 anchoring system
and the log-and-stake anchoring system.
8. Describe the lashings that are used when building a trestle,
how the poles are positioned, and how X braces contribute to
the overall structural integrity of a pioneering project.
All pioneering projects must comply with height
standards as outlined in the Guide to Safe Scouting.
9. Working in a group, (or individually with the help of your
counselor) build a full size pioneering structure, using one
of the following designs in the merit badge pamphlet.
• Double A-Frame Monkey Bridge
• Single A-Frame Bridge
• Single Trestle Bridge
• Single Lock Bridge
• 4x4 Square Climbing Tower
• Four Flag Gateway Tower
• Double Tripod Chippewa Kitchen
• Another type of structure approved in advance by your counselor
Carefully plan the project, assembling and organizing all the
materials, referring to the points under Safe Pioneering, and
complying with the height restrictions in the Guide to Safe
Scouting.


PIONEERING 6
Scouting Literature
Scouts BSA Handbook for Boys; Scouts
BSA Handbook for Girls; Guide to Safe
Scouting; Deck of First Aid; Emergency
First Aid pocket guide; Wilderness First
Aid Manual; Wilderness First Aid Field
Guide; Knots pocket guide; Deck of
Knots; Knots and How to Tie Them;
Camping, Climbing, First Aid, Model
Design and Building, Textile, and
Woodwork merit badge pamphlets
Books
Ashley, Clifford W. The Ashley Book of
Knots. Doubleday, 1993.
Bigon, Mario, and Guido Regazzoni.
The Morrow Guide to Knots. William
Morrow, 1982.
Budworth, Geoffrey. The Ultimate Book
of Everyday Knots. Skyhorse
Publishing, 2012.
Budworth, Geoffrey. The Ultimate
Encyclopedia of Knots and Ropework.
Southwater, 2010.
Jarman, Colin. The Knot Tying Bible:
Climbing, Camping, Sailing, Fishing,
Everyday. Firefly Books, 2013.
Pawson, Des. Handbook of Knots.
DK Publishing, 2004.
Pawson, Des. Knot Craft: 35 Ropework
Projects. Paradise Cay, 2011.
Pawson, Des. Knots: The Complete
Visual Guide. DK, 2012.
Penn, Randy. The Handy Box of
Knots: Useful Knots for Every
Situation, Indoors and Out.
Sterling Innovation, 2008.
Perry, Gordon. Knots. Whitecap
Books, 2006.
Perry, Gordon. Knots: A Practical
Step-by-Step Guide to Tying Over
100 Knots. Metro Books, 2003.
Salvadori, Mario. The Art of
Construction: Projects and Principles
for Beginning Engineers & Architects.
Chicago Review Press, 2000.
Sweet, John. Scout Pioneering. Scout
Association, 1974.
Toghill, Jeff. Knots & Splices. Sheridan
House, 1998.
Toss, Brion. The Complete Rigger’s
Apprentice: Tools and Techniques for
Modern and Traditional Rigging.
International Marine/Ragged
Mountain Press, 2016.
Online Resources
First Aid merit badge pamphlet,
http://scoutlife.org/merit-badges/
first aid-merit-badge/
Guide to Safe Scouting, www.scouting.
org/health-and-safety/gss/
Pioneering Resources
With your parent’s permission, visit
the Boy Scouts of America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org,
for a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.