BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES

CLIMBING

“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”

Note to the Counselor
Young people today seek greater challenges, and climbing and
rappelling offer a worthy challenge. The satisfaction of safely
climbing a rock face is hard to top. While introduction of the
Climbing merit badge in 1997 spurred interest in these activities
through the Boy Scouts of America, the proliferation of climbing gyms and facilities has also made climbing and rappelling
readily available throughout the United States.
This increased interest has made the BSA more aware of
the inherent risks of climbing and rappelling. More accidents
occur during unit rappelling than during council-managed
climbing or rappelling, and more accidents have occurred
during rappelling than climbing. Many climbing and rappelling
accidents could be avoided by having qualified instruction from
a conscientious adult who has the attention and respect of the
youth entrusted to his or her care. Supervision by a caring adult
who fully understands and appreciates the responsibility he or
she assumes helps assure safety when youth engage in or
prepare for climbing or rappelling.
The adult supervisor’s relationship with youth should
reinforce the importance of following instructions. The adult
leader in charge and the climbing instructor share this responsibility. The instructor is responsible for all procedures and for
safely conducting the climbing/rappelling activity. The adult
supervisor works cooperatively with the climbing instructor
and is responsible for all matters outside of the climbing/
rappelling activity.

35873
ISBN 978-0-8395-5001-3
©2022 Boy Scouts of America
2022 Printing

Climb On Safely is the Boy Scouts of America’s
recommended procedure for organizing
BSA unit climbing/rappelling activities at a
natural site or a specifically designed facility
such as a climbing wall or tower.
Belay On, No. 430-500, is the most authoritative
guide currently available from the Boy Scouts of America.
Mountaineering: The Freedom of the Hills, ninth edition,
edited by Eric Linxweiler and Mike Maude, is a recommended
reference for specific questions not covered in BSA literature.
The chapter on transportation in the Guide to Safe Scouting,
No. 34416, is an appropriate resource for instruction on how to
safely get your unit to and from the climbing/rappelling site.
Units that elect to participate in lead climbing and snow and
ice climbing are required to receive training from a nationally
recognized organization that trains climbing and rappelling
instructors. All council and district climbing must comply with
the current year’s National Camp Standards, No. 430-056, and
must be top-roped.
Each of the following points plays an important role in
the overall Climb On Safely program. Fun and safe climbing/
rappelling activities require close compliance of Climb On
Safely by the adult supervisor and instructor. These points also
apply to bouldering—traversing a few feet above ground level.

BELAY
ON

1. Qualified Supervision. All climbing and rappelling must be
supervised by a mature, conscientious adult at least 21 years
of age who understands the risks inherent to these activities.
This person knowingly accepts responsibility for the wellbeing and safety of the youth in his or her care. This adult
supervisor is trained in and committed to compliance with
the eight points of the Boy Scouts of America’s Climb On
Safely procedure and responsible for recruiting and verifying
the qualifications of the qualified instructors. One adult supervisor is required for every 10 participants with a minimum of
two adults for any one group.

CLIMBING    3

The adult supervisor is responsible for ensuring that someone
in the group is currently trained in American Red Cross First
Aid and CPR (a six-and-one-half-hour course). In addition,
Wilderness First Aid (a 16-hour course) is recommended for
units going to remote areas. A course of equivalent length and
content from another nationally recognized organization can
be substituted. A higher level of certification such as emergency medical technician (EMT), licensed practical nurse (LPN),
registered nurse (RN), and licensed healthcare practitioner is
also acceptable if the person is trained in backcountry medical
care. The ARC’s Emergency Response, a 43½-hour course that
includes CPR, is highly recommended.

2. Qualified Instructors. There must be a minimum of two
instructors for all climbing and rappelling activities (up to
12 participants) and one additional instructor for each additional six participants, maintaining a 6-to-1 ratio.

4    CLIMBING

The qualified instructor managing the climbing/rappelling
activity must be at least 21 years of age, and be current in
his or her training from one or more of the sources listed
below or equivalent:
• BSA Level II climbing instructor or climbing director
• BSA Level II COPE instructor or COPE director (artificial
structures only)
• Instructors trained by professional organizations or their
accredited providers:
— American Mountain Guides Association (AMGA)
		 •

Rock instructor

		 •

Single pitch instructor

		 •

Climbing wall instructor (artificial structures only)

— Professional Climbing Instructors Association (PCIA)
		 •

Base-managed climbing instructor

		 •

Top-managed climbing instructor

		 •

Single pitch instructor

		 •

Climbing wall instructor (artificial structures only)

— Professional Climbing Guide Institute (PCGI)
		 •

Top rope guide

		 •

Single pitch guide

		 •

Lead guide

		 •

Multipitch guide

— Climbing Wall Association (CWA)
		 •

Climbing wall instructor (artificial structures only)

• Professional climbing guide/instructors who are licensed by
the state or accredited according to:
— AMGA, PCIA, or PCGI for natural rock climbing
—	AMGA, PCIA, CWA, PRCA, or ACCT for
artificial structures
• University or college climbing/rappelling instructors who are
current in their training (assessment within three years) as
rock climbing instructors (or climbing wall instructors for
artificial structures only)
CLIMBING    5

3. Physical Fitness. Require evidence of fitness for the climbing/
rappelling activity with a current BSA Annual Health and
Medical Record, No. 680-001. The adult supervisor should
adapt all supervision, discipline, and precautions to anticipate
any potential risks associated with individual health conditions.
The adult supervisor should inform the climbing instructor
about each participant’s medical conditions.
4. Safe Area. All BSA climbing/rappelling activities must be
conducted using an established climbing/rappelling site or
facility. A qualified climbing instructor should survey the site
in advance of the activity to identify and evaluate possible
hazards and to determine whether the site is suitable for
the age, maturity, and skill level of the participants. The
instructor should also verify that the site is sufficient to
safely and comfortably accommodate the number of
participants in the activity within the available time. An
emergency evacuation route must be identified in advance.
A separate area should be established for onlookers.
Each participant and staff member in the fall zone of a
climbing/rappelling site must wear a UIAA- or CE-approved
rock-climbing helmet. Everyone must be belayed or tethered
when within 8 feet of an edge where a fall of more than
6 feet could occur.
5. Equipment. The climbing instructor should verify that the
proper equipment is available for the size and ability level of
participants. Helmets, rope, and climbing hardware must
meet appropriate requirements as outlined in Belay
On. All equipment must be acquired new and/or
furnished by the instructor and retired according
to the manufacturer’s recommendations.
When using a climbing gym, the climbing facility’s procedures apply.

6    CLIMBING

6. Planning. When planning, remember the following:
•	Share the climbing/rappelling plan and an alternate with
parents and the unit committee.

The concept of

•	Secure the necessary permits or written permission for
using private or public lands.

choice applies

challenge by

•	Enlist the help of a qualified climbing instructor.

to all climbing/

•	Be sure the instructor has a topographic map for the area
being used and obtains a current weather report for the
area before the group’s departure.

rappelling activities.

It is suggested that at least one of the adult leaders has an
electronic means of communication in case of an emergency.
Before any activity, an adult leader should develop and share
an emergency plan that includes the location of a nearby
medical facility and the means of communicating with parents during the activity.
7. Environmental Conditions. The instructor, each adult
leader, and each participant assume responsibility for
monitoring potentially dangerous environmental conditions
that may include loose, crumbly rock; poisonous plants;
wildlife; and inclement weather. Use the buddy system to
monitor concerns such as dehydration, hypothermia, and
an unusually high degree of fear or apprehension. The adult
supervisor is responsible for ensuring that the group leaves
no trace of its presence at the site.

No one should
be forced or
pressured into
doing something
with which he
or she is not
comfortable.

8. Discipline. Each participant knows, understands, and respects
the rules and procedures for safely climbing and rappelling
and has been oriented in Climb On Safely and Leave No Trace.
All participants should respect and follow all instructions and
rules of the climbing instructor. The applicable rules should
be presented and learned prior to the outing and should be
reviewed for all participants before climbing or rappelling
begins. When participants know the reasons for rules and
procedures, they are more likely to follow them. The climbing
instructor must be strict and fair, showing no favoritism.

CLIMBING    7

Requirements
1. Do the following:
a. Explain to your counselor the most likely hazards you
may encounter while participating in climbing and
rappelling activities and what you should do to anticipate,
help prevent, mitigate, and respond to these hazards.
b. Show that you know first aid for and how to prevent
injuries or illnesses that could occur during climbing
activities, including heat and cold reactions, dehydration,
stopped breathing, sprains, abrasions, fractures, rope burns,
blisters, snakebite, concussions, and insect bites or stings.
c. Identify the conditions that must exist before performing
CPR on a person.
2. Learn the Leave No Trace principles and Outdoor Code, and
explain what they mean.
3. Present yourself properly dressed for belaying, climbing,
and rappelling (i.e., appropriate clothing, footwear, and a
helmet; rappellers can also wear gloves).
4. Location. Do the following:
a. Explain how the difficulty of climbs is classified, and
apply classifications to the rock faces or walls where you
will demonstrate your climbing skills.
b. Explain the following: top-rope climbing, lead climbing,
and bouldering.
c. Evaluate the safety of a particular climbing area.
Consider weather, visibility, the condition of the climbing
surface, and any other environmental hazards.
d. Determine how to summon aid to the climbing area in
case of an emergency.
8    CLIMBING

5. Verbal signals. Explain the importance of using verbal
signals during every climb and rappel, and while bouldering. With the help of the merit badge counselor or another
Scout, demonstrate the verbal signals used by each of
the following:
a. Climbers
b. Rappellers
c. Belayers
d. Boulderers and their spotters
6. Rope. Do the following:
a. Describe the kinds of rope acceptable for use in climbing
and rappelling.
b. Show how to examine a rope for signs of wear
or damage.
c. Discuss ways to prevent a rope from being damaged.
d. Explain when and how a rope should be retired.
e. Properly coil a rope.
7. Knots. Demonstrate the ability to tie each of the following
knots. Give at least one example of how each knot is used
in belaying, climbing, or rappelling.
a. Figure eight on a bight
b. Figure eight follow-through
c. Water knot
d. Double fisherman’s knot (grapevine knot)
e. Safety knot
8. Harnesses. Correctly put on a commercially made
climbing harness.

CLIMBING    9

9. Belaying. Do the following:
		 a. Explain the importance of belaying climbers and
rappellers and when it is necessary.
		 b. Belay three different climbers ascending a rock face or
climbing wall.
		 c. Belay three different rappellers descending a rock face
or climbing wall using a top rope.
10. Climbing. Do the following:
		 a. Show the correct way to directly tie into a belay rope.
		 b. Climb at least three different routes on a rock face or
climbing wall, demonstrating good technique and using
verbal signals with a belayer.
11. Rappelling. Do the following:
		 a. Using a carabiner and a rappel device, secure your
climbing harness to a rappel rope.
		 b. Tie into a belay rope set up to protect rappellers.
		 c. Rappel down three different rock faces or three rappel
routes on a climbing wall. Use verbal signals to
communicate with a belayer, and demonstrate good
rappelling technique.
12. Demonstrate ways to store rope, hardware, and other gear
used for climbing, rappelling, and belaying.

10    CLIMBING

.Climbing Resources

Climbing Resources
Scouting Literature
Belay On; Scouts BSA Handbook for
Boys; Scouts BSA Handbook for Girls;
Climb on Safely; Learn and Live
Knot Cards
With your parent’s permission, visit
the Boy Scouts of America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org,
for a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.

Linxweiler, Eric, and Mike Maude, eds.
Mountaineering: The Freedom of the
Hills, 9th ed. Mountaineers Books, 2017.
Long, John. How to Rock Climb! Globe
Pequot Press, 2010.
Long, John, and Bob Gaines. Climbing
Anchors. Falcon Guides, 2013.
Loughman, Michael. Learning to Rock
Climb. Random House, 1982.
Luebben, Craig. Knots for Climbers.
Falcon, 2011.

Instruction and Guidebooks

Mellor, Don. Rock Climbing: A Trailside
Guide. W. W. Norton, 2003.

Allen, Linda B. High Mountain
Challenge: A Guide for Young
Mountaineers. AMC Books, 1989.

Roper, Steve, and Allen Steck. Fifty
Classic Climbs of North America.
Sierra Club, 1996.

Burbach, Matt. Gym Climbing:
Improve Technique, Movement,
and Performance. Mountaineers
Books, 2018.

Sherman, John. Better Bouldering,
2nd. ed. Falcon, 2012.

Donahue, Topher and Craig Luebben.
Rock Climbing: Mastering Basic Skills,
2nd ed. Mountaineers Books, 2014.
Fawcett, Ron, et al. The Climber’s
Handbook: Rock, Ice, Alpine,
Expeditions. Sierra Club, 1987.

Skinner, Todd, and John McMullen.
Modern Rock Climbing: Beyond the
Basics. ICS Books, 1993.
Takeda, Pete. Extreme Sports: Climb!
National Geographic, 2002.
Toula, Tim. Rock ’n’ Road: An Atlas of
North American Rock Climbing
Areas, 2nd ed. Falcon, 2003.

Lewis, S. Peter. Climbing: From Gym to
Crag, Building Skills for Real Rock.
Mountaineers Books, 2000.
CLIMBING    11

Climbing Resources.

Voeller, Edward A. Sport Climbing.
Capstone Books, 2000.
Wilkerson, James A., ed. Medicine for
Mountaineering and Other
Wilderness Activities, 6th ed.
Mountaineers Books, 2010.

History and Biography
Bonington, Chris. Mountaineer: Thirty
Years of Climbing on the World’s
Great Peaks. Sierra Club, 1996.
Curran, Jim. K2: Triumph and Tragedy.
Houghton Mifflin, 1987.
Fraser, Mary Ann. On Top of the World:
The Conquest of Mount Everest.
Henry Holt, 1991.

Sherman, John. Stone Crusade: A
Historical Guide to Bouldering
in America. American Alpine
Club, 1999.
Weihenmayer, Erik. Touch the Top of
the World: A Blind Man’s Journey to
Climb Farther Than the Eye Can See:
My Story. Plume, 2001.
Whittaker, Jim. A Life on the Edge:
Memoirs of Everest and Beyond,
50th anniversary edition.
Mountaineers Books, 2013.

Periodicals

Jones, Chris. Climbing in North America.
Mountaineers Books, 1997.

Climbing Magazine
5720 Flatiron Parkway
Boulder, CO 80301
Telephone: 303-253-6412
www.climbing.com

Krakauer, Jon. Into Thin Air: A Personal
Account of the Mount Everest
Disaster. Anchor Books, 1998.

Organizations and
Online Resources

MacDonald, Dougald, ed. The Best of
Rock and Ice: An Anthology.
Mountaineers Books, 1999.
Messner, Reinhold. The Crystal Horizon:
Everest­—The First Solo Ascent.
Mountaineers Books, 1989.
Rosen, Mike. The Conquest of Everest.
Bookwright Press, 1990.

12    CLIMBING

Mountain Project
www.mountainproject.com

