DIGITAL
TECHNOLOGY
STEM-Based


DIGITAL
TECHNOLOGY
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


2 DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY
Requirements
1. Show your counselor your current, up-to-date Cyber Chip.
2. Do the following:
a. Give a brief history of the changes in digital technol-
ogy over time. Discuss with your counselor how digital
technology in your lifetime compares with that of your
parent’s, grandparent’s, or other adult’s lifetime.
b. Describe what kinds of computers or devices you
imagine might be available when you are an adult.
3. Do the following:
a. Explain to your counselor how text, sound, pictures,
and videos are digitized for storage.
b. Describe the difference between lossy and lossless data
compression, and give an example where each might
be used.
c. Describe two digital devices and how they are made
more useful by their programming.
d. Discuss the similarities and differences between comput-
ers, mobile devices, and gaming consoles.
e. Explain what a computer network is and describe the
network’s purpose.
4. Do the following:
a. Explain what a program or software application or
“app” is and how it is created.
b. Name four software programs or mobile apps you or
your family use, and explain how each one helps you.
c. Describe what malware is, and explain how to protect
your digital devices and the information stored on them.


DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY 3
5. Do the following:
a. Describe how digital devices are connected to
the internet.
b. Using an internet search engine (with a parent or
guardian’s permission),find ideas from at least three
different websites about how to conduct a troop court of
honor or campfire program. Present the ideas to your
counselor and explain how you used a search engine to
find this information.
c. Use a web browser to connect to an HTTPS (secure)
website (with your parent’s permission). Explain to
your counselor how to tell whether the site’s security
certificate can be trusted, and what it means to use this
kind of connection.
6. Do THREE of the following. For each project you complete,
copy the files to a backup device and share the finished
projects with your counselor.
a. Using a spreadsheet or database program, develop a
food budget for a patrol weekend campout OR create a
troop roster that includes the name, rank, patrol, and
telephone number of each Scout. Show your counselor
that you can sort the roster by each of the following
categories: rank, patrol, and alphabetically by name.
b. Using a word processor, write a draft letter to the
parents of your troop’s Scouts, inviting them to a
troop event.
c. Using a graphics program, design and draw a campsite
plan for your troop OR create a flier for an upcoming
troop event, incorporating text and some type of visual
such as a photograph or an illustration.
d. Using a presentation software program, develop a report
about a topic approved by your counselor. For your
presentation, create at least five slides, with each one
incorporating text and some type of visual such as a
photograph or an illustration.
e. Using a digital device, take a picture of a troop activity.
Send or transfer this image to a device where it can be
shared with your counselor.


4 DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY
f. Make a digital recording of your voice, transfer the file
to a different device, and have your counselor play back
the recording.
g. Create a blog and use it as an online journal of your
Scouting activities, including group discussions and
meetings, campouts, and other events. Include at least
five entries and two photographs or illustrations.
Share your blog with your counselor. You need not post
the blog to the internet; however, if you choose to go
live with your blog, you must first share it with your
parents AND counselor AND get their approval.
h. Create a webpage for your troop, patrol, school, or place
of worship. Include at least three articles and two pho-
tographs or illustrations. Include at least one link to a
website of interest to your audience. You need not post
the page to the internet; however, if you decide to do
so, you must first share the webpage with your parents
AND counselor AND get their approval.
7. Do the following:
a. Explain to your counselor each of these protections
and why they exist: copyright, patents, trademarks,
trade secrets.
b. Explain when it is permissible to accept a free copy of a
program from a friend.
c. Discuss with your counselor an article or a news report
about a recent legal case involving an intellectual prop-
erty dispute.
8. Do TWO of the following:
a. Describe why it is important to properly dispose of
digital technology. List at least three dangerous chemi-
cals that could be used to create digital devices or used
inside a digital device.
b. Explain to your counselor what is required to become
a certified recycler of digital technology hardware
or devices.


DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY 5
c. Do an internet search for an organization that collects
discarded digital technology hardware or devices for
repurposing or recycling. Find out what happens to that
waste. Share with your counselor what you found.
d. Visit a recycling center that disposes of digital technol-
ogy hardware or devices. Find out what happens to that
waste. Share what you learned with your counselor.
e. Find a battery recycling center near you and find out
what it does to recycle batteries. Share what you have
learned with your counselor about the proper methods
for recycling batteries.
9. Do ONE of the following:
a. Investigate three career opportunities that involve digital
technology. Pick one and find out the education, train-
ing, and experience required for this profession. Discuss
this with your counselor, and explain why this profes-
sion might interest you.
b. Visit a business or an industrial facility that uses digital
technology. Describe four ways digital technology is
being used there. Share what you learned with
your counselor.


6 DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY
Section 0.
Digital Technology Resources
Scouting Literature
Drafting, Electricity, Electronics,
Engineering, Game Design, Graphic
Arts, Inventing, Photography,
Programming, and Robotics merit
badge pamphlets
With your parent’s permission, visit
the Boy Scouts of America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org,
for a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.
Organizations and Websites
American Society for
Engineering Education
Websites: www.asee.org and
www.engineeringk12.org
Computer and Information
Technology Occupations
Occupational Outlook Handbook:
www.bls.gov/ooh/computer-and-
information-technology/home.htm
The Computer History Museum
Website:
www.computerhistory.org
Entertainment Software Association
Website: www.theesa.com
Environmental Protection Agency
Website: www.epa.gov
IEEE (Institute of Electrical
and Electronics Engineers)
Website: www.ieee.org
IEEE Computer Society
Website: www.computer.org
International Game Developers
Association
Website: www.igda.org
International Intellectual
Property Alliance
Website: www.iipa.org
Library of Congress
Website: www.loc.gov
Recording Industry Association
of America
Website: www.riaa.com
U.S. Patent and Trademark Office
Website: www.uspto.gov
World Wide Web Consortium
Website: www.w3.org
For more information and
resources about digital
technology, go to http://boyslife.
org/digitaltechnology.


DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY 7
.Section 0
E-Waste Resources
Call2Recycle
Website: www.call2recycle.org
Earth911
Website: http://earth911.com
Terracycle
Website: www.terracycle.com/en-US
Acknowledgments
The Boy Scouts of America grate-
fully acknowledges the team that
helped update this edition of Digital
Technology, which replaces the
Computers merit badge pamphlet:
Celeste Rance—Digital
Technology merit badge lead;
coauthor, Programming merit badge
pamphlet; software development
manager, Pearson
Rick Folea—Eagle Scout;
Programming merit badge lead;
coauthor, Robotics merit badge
pamphlet; AutomationDirect.com
Laszlo Hideg—Ph.D., P.E.—
Transmission Algorithms and Control,
GM Powertrain; coauthor, Robotics and
Programming merit badge pamphlets;
FIRST® Robotics competition judge
and volunteer
Steve Petersen—Eagle Scout;
BSA Cyber Chip codeveloper; web
development professional
Robert J. Caruso, CISSP—
Information security architect, Battelle
Memorial Institute; inventor and
software product developer; U.S.
CyberPatriot mentor and lifelong
Scouter; coauthor, Programming merit
badge pamphlet; BSA Cyber
Chip codeveloper
Steve Wincor—Chief systems
architect, Lockheed Martin; BSA
Nova Awards mentor; coauthor,
Programming merit badge pamphlet;
BSA Cyber Chip codeveloper
Dr. Philip Stahl, Ph.D.—Eagle
Scout; senior optical physicist, NASA;
2014 president, SPIE (Society of Photo-
Optical Instrumentation Engineers)
Thanks also to Eagle Scout
Christopher Hideg for his assistance
with sidebars for this merit
badge pamphlet.
We appreciate Scott Stuckey for
writing the previous edition of the
Computers merit badge pamphlet,
upon some of which this new pam-
phlet is based. Mr. Stuckey is a former
editor of Boys’ Life magazine.
The BSA is grateful to the
Components, Packaging, and
Manufacturing Technology Society
of the Institute of Electrical and
Electronics Engineers, in particular
longtime national Scout jamboree staff
member Ralph W. Russell II, IEEE
Precollege Education Coordinating
Committee, for their assistance with
previous editions of the Computers
merit badge pamphlet that formed the
basis for much of this revised edition.


8 DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY
Section 0.
Photo and Illustration Credits
American Museum of Radio,
courtesy—page 16 (transistor)
Apple Computer Inc., courtesy—page
16 (Macintosh®)
Federal Bureau of Investigation,
courtesy—page 83 (FBI logo)
Christopher Folea, courtesy—cover
(e-recycling logo)
Rick Folea, courtesy—page 75 (Scout)
Christopher Hideg, courtesy—
page 43 (all)
Library of Congress, Prints and
Photographs Division, courtesy—
pages 16 (Babbage) and
20 (Edison)
MIT Museum, courtesy—
page 21 (Bush)
NASA, courtesy—page 23
Oak Ridge Leadership Computing
Facility at the Oak Ridge National
Laboratory, courtesy—page 56
Shutterstock.com—cover (phone,
©Dragance137; game controller,
©Ralko; teenager, ©auremar; brain,
©VLADGRIN); pages 3 (ASCII code,
©cristi180884), 7 (©Elena
Belkina), 8 (©obermeuw), 9
(©bikeriderlondon), 10 (microchip,
©Robert LucianCrusitu), 12
(illustration, ©nmedia), 13
(passport, ©topseller; scanner,
©Bacho), 14 (woman on tablet,
©Antonio Guillem; phone bill,
©Thorsten Rust), 15 (movie
scene, ©Stokkete), 16 (abacus,
©Chatchawat Prasertsom), 18–20
(picture frame only, ©spaxiax),
26 (youth, ©Syda Productions),
27 (person with tablet, ©rzoze19;
QR code, ©bloomua), 28 (Earth
illustration, ©Sergey Nivens; server
room, ©zentilia), 29 (©Ye Liew),
30 (©raigvi), 31 (©Robert Lucian
Crusitu), 32 (©Shahril KHMD),
33 (RAM card, ©Dragon Images;
smartphone apps, ©Cienpies
Design), 34 (flash card, ©Tatiana
Popova; USB port, ©THANAWAT
TEAWPIYAKUL; flash drives,
©Natthapenpis Jind), 35 (©XYZ),
36 (©bikeriderlondon), 37 (©Janos
Levente), 38 (©tele52), 41 (binary
numbers, ©URRRA; laptop,
phone, and tablet, ©Nata-Lia), 42
(©tuulijumala), 44 (©zphoto), 45
(smartphone, ©Nikola Spasenoski;
youth, ©bikeriderlondon), 49
(©LightField Studios), 50 (©Umberto
Shtanzman), 51 (CAD illustration,
©3DDock), 52 (icons, ©tele52; person
at computer, ©Pressmaster), 53
(©Jaimie Duplass), 54 (©Lukiyanova
Natali), 55 (©Michal Modzelewski),
57 (©Fernando Cortes), 60 (©Mr.
X3dart), 61 (address bar, ©Nixx
Photography; laptop security,
©Christos Georghiou), 62 (youth,
©Greg Daniels), 63 (login
screen, ©Angela Waye), 64–65
(©Halfpoint), 66 (©Angela Waye),
68 (©bikeriderlondon), 70 (©Maksim
Dubinsky), 71 (©Gorodenkoff), 72
(©Huguette Roe), 74 (©Piotr Zajc),
75 (computer hardware, ©Surachai),
76 (©Kheng Guan Toh), 78 (©Wilm
Ihlenfeld), 79 (©Michael D Brown),
80 (©Arcady), 81 (©Drazen),


DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY 9
.Section 0
83 (piracy graphic, ©eldeiv), 84
(©Samuel Borges Photography),
85 (binary code, ©USBFCO; cloud
computing, ©beboy; handheld
device, ©Sergey Nivens), 86 (free
trial icon, ©faysal; integrated circuit,
©Julio Embun), 87 (microprocessor,
©aarrows; ports, ©kastianz; router,
©Nelia Sapronova), 88 (server room,
©Oleksiy Mark; data ports, ©pearls),
89 (©Liashko), and 90 (girl,
©Olena Yakobchuk; background,
©VLADGRIN)
University of Pennsylvania, courtesy—
page 22
Wikipedia.org—pages 17, 18 (Pascal,
King), 19, 20 (Hollerith), and 24
Wikipedia.org/Asim18—page 25
Wikipedia.org/Gwern—page 21
(punched card)
Wikipedia.org/Adam Schuster—page
16 (Hollerith’s electric tabulator)
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the prop-
erty of or are protected by the Boy
Scouts of America.
Brian Payne—page 12 (youth)