MINING IN SOCIETY
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


35737
ISBN 978-0-8395-0049-0
©2022 Boy Scouts of America
2022 Printing
Requirements
1. Do the following:
a. Select 10 different minerals. For each one, name a product
for which the mineral is used.
b. Explain the role mining has in producing and processing
things that are grown.
c. From the list of minerals you chose for requirement 1a,
determine the countries where those minerals can be found,
and discuss what you learned with your counselor.
2. Obtain a map of your state or region showing major cities,
highways, rivers, and railroads. Mark the locations of five min-
ing enterprises. Find out what resource is processed at each
location, and identify the mine as a surface or underground
operation. Discuss with your counselor how the resources
mined at these locations are used.
3. Discuss with your counselor the potential hazards a miner may
encounter at an active mine and the protective measures used
by miners. In your discussion, explain how:
a. The miner’s personal protective equipment is worn and used,
including a hard hat, safety glasses, earplugs, dust mask or
respirator, self-rescue device, and high-visibility vest.
b. Miners protect their hands and feet from impact, pinch,
vibration, slipping, and tripping/falling hazards.
c. Monitoring equipment warns miners of imminent danger,
and how robots are used in mine rescues.
4. Discuss with your counseleor the dangers someone might
encouter at an abandoned mine or quarry.
5. Do ONE of the following:
a. With your parent’s approval and your counselor’s assistance,
use the internet to find and take a virtual tour of two types
of mines. Determine the similarities and differences between
them regarding resource exploration, mine planning and per-
mitting, types of equipment used, and the minerals pro-
duced. Discuss with your counselor what you learned from
your internet-based mine tours.


MINING IN SOCIETY 3
b. With your parent’s permission and counselor’s approval,
visit a mining or minerals exhibit at a museum. Find out
about the history of the museum’s exhibit and the type of
mining it represents. Give three examples of how mineral
resources have influenced history.
c. With your parent’s permission and counselor’s approval,
visit an active mine.* Find out about the tasks required to
explore, plan, permit, mine, and process the resource mined
at that site. Take photographs if allowed, and request bro-
chures from your visit. Share photos, brochures, and what
you have learned with your counselor.
d. With your parent’s permission and counselor’s approval,
visit a mining equipment manufacturer or supplier.* Discuss
the types of equipment produced or supplied there, and in
what part of the mining process this equipment is used. Take
photographs if allowed, and request brochures from your
visit. Share photos, brochures, and what you have learned
with your counselor.
e. Discuss with your counselor two methods used to reduce
rock in size, one of which uses a chemical process to
extract a mineral. Explain the difference between smelt-
ing and refining.
f. Learn about the history of a local mine, including what
is or was mined there, how the deposit was found,
the mining techniques and processes used, and
how the mined resource is or was used. Find out
from a historian, community leader, or business
person how mining has affected your community.
Note any social, cultural, or economic conse-
quences of mining in your area. Share what you
have learned with your counselor.
6. Do the following:
a. Choose a modern mining site. Find out what is
being done to help control environmental
impacts. Share what you have learned about
mining and sustainability.
*Visiting a mine site, a mining equipment manufacturer, or an equipment supplier requires advance planning.
These sites can be potentially dangerous. You will need permission from your parent and counselor, and the
manager of the mine site, or equipment manufacturer or supplier. While there, you will be required to follow
closely the site manager’s instructions and comply with all safety rules and procedures, including wearing
appropriate clothing, footwear, and personal safety equipment.


4 MINING IN SOCIETY
b. Explain reclamation as it is used in mining and how mine
reclamation pertains to Scouting’s no-trace principles.
c. Discuss with your counselor what values society has about
returning the land to the benefit of wildlife and people after
mining has ended. Discuss the transformation of the BSA
Summit Bechtel Family National Scout Reserve from a mine
site to its current role.
7. Do ONE of the following:
a. Explore the anticipated benefits of interplanetary mining.
Learn how NASA and private investors may search for,
extract, and process minerals in outer space, and the
primary reasons for mining the moon, other planets, or near-
Earth asteroids. Find out how exploration and mineral
processing in space differ from exploration on Earth. Share
what you have learned with your counselor, and discuss
the difficulties encountered in exploring, collecting, and
analyzing surface or near-surface samples in space.
b. Identify three minerals found dissolved in seawater or found
on the ocean floor, and list three places where the ocean is
mined today. Share this information with your counselor,
and discuss the chief incentives for mining the oceans for
minerals, the reclamation necessary after mining is over, and
any special concerns when mining minerals from the ocean.
Find out what sustainability problems arise from mining the
oceans. Discuss what you learn with your counselor.
c. Learn what metals and minerals are recycled after their
original use has ended. List four metals and two nonmet-
als, and find out how each can be recycled. Find out how
recycling affects the sustainability of natural resources and
how this idea is related to mining. Discuss what you
learn with your counselor.
d. With your parent’s permission, use the
internet and other resources to deter-
mine the current price of gold, cop-
per, aluminum, or other commodities
like cement or coal, and find out the
five-year price trend for two of
these. Report your findings to
your counselor.


MINING IN SOCIETY 5
8. Do ONE of the following:
a. With your parent’s and counselor’s approval, interview a
worker in the mining industry. Discuss the work, equipment,
and technology used in this individual’s position, and learn
about a current project. Ask to see reports, drawings, and/or
maps made for the project. Find out about the educational
and professional requirements for this individual’s position.
Ask how the individual’s mining career began. Discuss with
your counselor what you have learned.
b. Find out about three career opportunities in the mining
industry. Pick one and find out the education, training, and
experience required for this profession. Discuss this with
your counselor, and explain why this profession might
interest you.
c. With your parent’s permission and counselor’s approval,
visit a career academy or community college to learn about
educational and training requirements for a position in the
mining industry that interests you. Find out why this posi-
tion is critical to the mining industry, and discuss what you
learned with your counselor.


6 MINING IN SOCIETY
Section 0.
Scouting Literature
Archaeology, Composite Materials,
Energy, Engineering, Environmental
Science, Geology, Surveying, and
Sustainability merit badge pamphlets
With your parent’s permission, visit
the Boy Scouts of America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org,
for a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.
Books
Cumming, John, ed. Mining
Explained, 11th ed. The Northern
Miner, 2012.
Lagomarsino, James. The Ultimate
Guide to Rocks and Minerals.
Parragon Books Ltd., 2011.
Prinz, Martin, George Harlow,
and Joseph Peters, eds. Simon
and Schuster’s Guide to Rocks
and Minerals. Simon and
Schuster Inc., 1978.
Organizations and Websites
Mineralogical Society of America
Website:
http://www.mineralogy4kids.org
Minerals Education Coalition
Website:
http://www.mineralseducationcoalition.org
The More You Dig
Website:
http://www.themoreyoudig.com
National Mining Association
Website:
http://www.nma.org/index.php/
mining-resources/mining-
associations-and-organizations
Society for Mining, Metallurgy,
and Exploration
Website: http://www.smenet.org
U.S. Geological Survey Minerals
Information
Websites: http://minerals.er.usgs.gov/
minerals
http://minerals.er.usgs.gov/minerals/
pubs/general_interest
Mining Resources
Tourmaline