surveying

BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES

Surveying

Requirements
1. Show that you know first aid for the types of injuries that
could occur while surveying, including cuts, scratches,
snakebite, insect stings, tick bites, heat and cold reactions,
and dehydration. Explain to your counselor why a surveyor
should be able to identify the poisonous plants and
poisonous animals that are found in your area.
2. Find and mark the corners of a five-sided lot that has been
laid out by your counselor to fit the land available. Set an
instrument over each of the corners and record the angle
turned between each line and the distance measured
between each corner. With the assistance of the counselor,
compute the error of closure from the recorded notes. The
error of closure must not be more than 5 feet. From the
corners, take compass readings or turn angles to trees,
shrubs, and rocks, and measure to them. All measurements
should be made using instruments, methods, and accuracies
consistent with current technology.
3. From the field notes gathered for requirement 2, draw to
scale a map of your survey. Submit a neatly drawn copy.
4. Write a metes and bounds description for the five-sided lot
in requirement 2.
5. Use one of the corner markers from requirement 2 as a
benchmark with an assumed elevation of 100 feet. Using
a level and rod, determine the elevation of the other four
corner markers.

35956
ISBN 978-0-8395-3327-6
©2004 Boy Scouts of America
2010 Printing

BANG/Brainerd, MN
8-2010/060789

6. Get a copy of the deed to your property, or a piece of
property assigned by your counselor, from the local
courthouse or title agency.
7. Tell what GPS is; discuss with your counselor the
importance of GPS and how it is changing the field
of surveying.
8. Discuss the importance of surveying with a licensed
surveyor. Also discuss the various types of surveying and
mapping, and applications of surveying technology to
other fields. Discuss career opportunities in surveying
and related fields. Discuss the qualifications and
preparation for such a career.

surveying    3

.Surveying Resources

Surveying Resources
Scouting Literature
Architecture, Computers, Drafting,
Engineering, Landscape Architecture,
and Orienteering merit badge pamphlets.

information include your local or state
library, college or university department
of surveying or civil engineering, a local
professional surveyor, a technical or
college bookstore, or the ACSM.

Visit the Boy Scouts of America’s
official retail Web site at http://
www.scoutstuff.org for a complete listing of all merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.

American Congress on
Surveying and Mapping
6 Montgomery Village Ave., Suite 403
Gaithersburg, MD 20879
Telephone: 240-632-9716
Web site: http://www.acsm.net

This merit badge pamphlet touches
only briefly on a very complex subject.
Most of the details of instruments and
methods are left to your merit badge
counselor. If you have further interest in
surveying, ask your counselor to help
you learn more about it or to refer you
to books that match your interest and
background in mathematics.
Surveying changes so rapidly that
most books soon become obsolete. If
you borrow a surveying book from a
library, check the date of publication.
If the book is more than a few years
old, portions of it probably are obsolete.
After your counselor, other sources of

National Society of
Professional Surveyors
6 Montgomery Village Ave., Suite 403
Gaithersburg, MD 20879
Telephone: 240-632-9716
Web site: http://www.nspsmo.org
Topozone.com
73 Princeton St., Suite 305
North Chelmsford, MA 01863
Web site: http://www.topozone.com
U.S. Geological Survey
USGS National Center
12201 Sunrise Valley Drive
Reston, VA 20192
Telephone: 703-648-4000
Web site: http://www.usgs.gov

surveying    63

