INSECT
STUDY

STEM-Based

BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES

INSECT STUDY

“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”

Insect Study
1. Do the following:
(a) Explain to your counselor the most likely hazards associated with exposure to ants and bees and what you should do to anticipate, help prevent,
mitigate, and respond to these hazards.
(b) Discuss the prevention of and treatment for health concerns that could
occur while working with ants and bees, including insect bites and anaphylactic shock.
2. Tell how insects are different from all other animals. Show how insects are
different from centi­pedes and spiders.
3. Point out and name the main parts of an insect.
4. Describe the characteristics that distinguish the principal families and orders
of insects.
5. Do the following:
(a) Observe 20 different live species of insects in their habitat. In your observations, include at least four orders of insects.
(b) Make a scrapbook of the 20 insects you observe in 5a. Include photographs, sketches, illustrations, and articles. Label each insect with its
common and scientific names, where possible. Share your scrapbook
with your merit badge counselor.
6. Do the following:
(a) From your scrapbook collection, identify three species of insects helpful
to humans and five species of insects harmful to humans.
(b) Discuss the use of integrated pest management vs. chemical methods of
insect control. What are the advantages and disadvantages of each?
7. Explain the symbiotic relationship between bees and humankind. Explain
what colony collapse disorder (CCD) is and some of the possible causes.
Discuss how CCD affects our food supply.

8. Compare the life histories of a butterfly and a grasshopper. Tell how they
are different.
9. Raise an insect through complete metamorphosis from its larval stage to its
adult stage (e.g., raise a butterfly or moth from a caterpillar).*
10. Do ONE of the following:
(a) Observe an ant colony in a formicarium (ant farm). Find the queen and
worker ants. Explain to your counselor the different chambers found within
an ant colony.
(b) Study a hive of bees. Remove the combs and find the queen. Estimate
the amount of brood and count the number of queen cells. Explain how to
determine the amount of honey in the hive.
11. Tell things that make social insects different from solitary insects.
12. Tell how insects fit in the food chains of other insects, fish, birds,
and mammals.
13. Find out about three career opportunities in insect study. Pick one and find
out the education, training, and experience required for this profession.
Discuss this with your counselor, and explain why this profession might
interest you.
*Some insects are endangered species and are protected by federal or state law. Every species is found only in its own
special type of habitat. Be sure to check natural resources authorities in advance to be sure that you will not be collecting any species that is known to be protected or endangered, or in any habitat where collecting is prohibited. In most
cases, all specimens should be returned at the location of capture after the requirement has been met. Check with your
merit badge counselor for those instances where the return of these specimens would not be appropriate.

Insect Study Resources.

Insect Study Resources
Scouting Literature
Slugs and Bugs pocket guide; Animal
Science, Bird Study, Collections,
Environmental Science, Forestry,
Gardening, Mammal Study, Medicine,
Nature, Plant Science, Public Health,
Reptile and Amphibian Study, Soil and
Water Conservation, and Veterinary
Medicine merit badge pamphlets
Visit the Boy Scouts of America’s
official retail website at
http://www.scoutstuff.org for
a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other
helpful Scouting materials
and supplies.

Books and Brochures
Arnett Jr., Ross H. American Insects:
A Handbook of the Insects of
America North of Mexico, 2nd ed.
CRC Press, 2000.
Arnett Jr., Ross H., and Richard L.
Jacques Jr. Simon and Schuster’s
Guide to Insects, 2nd ed. Fireside
Books, 1981.
Berenbaum, May R. Ninety-Nine Gnats,
Nits, and Nibblers. University of
Illinois Press, 1989.
92    INSECT STUDY

–——. Ninety-Nine More Maggots,
Mites, and Munchers. University of
Illinois Press, 1993.
Bland, Roger G., et al. How to Know the
Insects. McGraw-Hill, 1978.
Chu, H.F., and Laurence K. Cutkomp.
How to Know the Immature Insects.
McGraw-Hill, 1992.
Dashefsky, H. Steven. Insect Biology:
49 Science Fair Projects.
Tab Books, 1992.
Dunkle, Sidney W. Dragonflies Through
Binoculars: A Field Guide to
Dragonflies of North America.
Oxford University Press, 2000.
Eisner, Thomas. For Love of Insects,
2nd ed. Belknap Press, 2005.
Eisner, Thomas, Maria Eisner, and
Melody Siegler. Secret Weapons:
Defenses of Insects, Spiders,
Scorpions, and Other Many-Legged
Creatures. Belknap Press, 2005.
Evans, Howard E. The Pleasures of
Entomology. Smithsonian, 1985.
Holldobler, Bert, and Edward O. Wilson.
The Ants. Belknap Press, 1990.
Lehmkuhl, Dennis M., et al.
How to Know the Aquatic Insects.
McGraw-Hill, 1979.

.Insect Study Resources

Milne, Lorus J. National Audubon
Society Field Guide to North
American Insects and Spiders.
Knopf, 1980.
Mound, Laurence, and Stephen Brooks.
Insects. Sagebrush, 2003.
National Audubon Society. National
Audubon Society Field Guide to
North American Butterflies.
Chanticleer Press, 1981.
Opler, Paul A. Peterson First Guides:
Butterflies and Moths. Houghton
Mifflin, 1998.
Peterson, Roger Tory. Peterson First
Guides: Insects, 2nd rev. ed.
Houghton Mifflin, 1998.
Turpin, Tom. Insect Appreciation, 3rd ed.
Kendall Hunt Publishing Co., 2002.
West, Larry, and Julie Ridl. How to
Photograph Insects and Spiders.
Stackpole Books, 1994.
White, Richard E. A Field Guide to the
Beetles of North America. Houghton
Mifflin, 1998.
Wilsdon, Christina, et al. National
Audubon Society First Field Guide:
Insects. Scholastic, 1998.
Winston, Mark L. The Biology of
the Honey Bee. Harvard University
Press, 1991.
Wright, Amy Bartlett. Peterson First
Guides: Caterpillars. Houghton
Mifflin, 1998.

Organizations and Websites
American Beekeeping Federation
Telephone: 404-760-2875
Website: http://www.abfnet.org
American Entomological Society
Telephone: 215-561-3978
Website:
http://www.ansp.org/hosted/aes/index.html
Bee Culture
Toll-free telephone: 800-289-7668
Website: http://www.beeculture.com
BugGuide.net
Telephone: 515-294-7400
Website: http://www.bugguide.net
Carolina Biological Supply Company
Toll-free telephone: 800-334-5551
Website: http://www.carolina.com
Entomological Foundation
Telephone: 608-232-1410
Website: http://www.entfdn.org
Entomological Society of America
Telephone: 301-731-4535
Website: http://www.entsoc.org
Monarch Watch
Toll-free telephone: 888-TAGGING
Website: http://www.monarchwatch.org
National Museum of Natural History
Department of Entomology
P.O. Box 37012, Smithsonian Institution
Washington, DC 20013-7012
Website: http://entomology.si.edu

Zim, Herbert S. Insects, rev. and
updated ed. St. Martin’s Press, 2001.

INSECT STUDY    93

