SIGNS, SIGNALS
AND CODES
STEM-Based


SIGNS, SIGNALS,
AND CODES
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


35777
ISBN 978-0-8395-0060-2
©2025 Scouting America/Boy Scouts of America
2025 Printing
Note to the Counselor
Thank you for offering your talents as a merit badge counselor.
Scouting’s merit badge program succeeds because of the
dedication and generosity of people like you.
The requirements for this merit badge are intended to
familiarize Scouts with several forms of communication that
may or may not be new to them. Traditional skills are covered,
such as signaling by Morse code and semaphore. Scouts also
will learn the basics of braille and American Sign Language
and how these systems aid communication for people with
disabilities. Additionally, the requirements highlight the ways
in which signs and signals are essential in public safety,
from traffic signs to tornado sirens, hurricane flags, and
rescue signals.
Given the breadth of requirements for this merit badge,
you, as counselor, are not expected to be an expert in all these
methods of communication. Rather, you will help to guide
Scouts as they explore the signs, signals, and codes introduced
in this pamphlet, making the learning experience fun and
hands-on. Where practical, Scouts should demonstrate the skills
in an outdoor setting and use the means of communication
referred to in the requirements.
Many references and resources are available to help Scouts
meet the challenges presented by the requirements and to assist
you, the counselor, in guiding the Scouts as they learn these
skills of communication. Candidates for this merit badge are
encouraged to explore beyond what is presented in this
pamphlet. Local libraries and online sources offer a wealth
of information including helpful illustrations, as well as
opportunities for interactive practice of Morse code and other
skills. For a few recommendations, see the resources section
of this pamphlet.
Thank you again for your service.





4 SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES
Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Signs-Signals-And-Codes or
check Scoutbook for the latest requirements.


SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES 5





SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES 7
Contents
Introduction: A World of Signals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
International Morse Code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
Semaphore and Nautical Flags . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
American Sign Language . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
Braille Code. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
Silent Scout Signals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
Trail Markers and Rescue Signals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
Signals in Sports and at Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
Sound Signals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
Symbols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
Cryptography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91





SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES 9
.Introduction: A World of Signals
Introduction:
A World of Signals
You live in a world of coded messages, with signs, signals,
and symbols all around you. In a typical day, you will likely
encounter scores of signals and signs. You will recognize many
of them at a glance, from the icons on a smartphone to the
traffic signs along a roadway. These are so familiar, their
meanings are instantly clear to you.
Others, however, may not be so obvious. Have you ever
noticed the dots next to the elevator buttons in a multistory
building? Do you know what they mean? If you were seaside
one summer and saw a flag flying that had a black block
centered on a red field, would you recognize the warning?
Do you know which rescue signals to use if you get lost
in the wilderness?
In fulfilling the requirements for the Signs, Signals, and
Codes merit badge, you will learn all these signals and more.
You will get to know the special languages used by sports
officials, military teams, and people with disabilities. You’ll
have an opportunity to create your own secret code and write
messages that others cannot read without the code key.
Along the way, you will practice skills that Scouts have
learned since Scouting began. Maybe you will never need to
send a signal by Morse code or semaphore, but by learning
these methods, you will be prepared to communicate in an
emergency, should the situation arise. Your life and the lives
of others might depend on your ability to send a distress
signal when all other methods of communication fail.
It’s good to be ready.


10 SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES
Introduction: A World of Signals.
The Development of Signaling
The first signals probably grew out of people’s gestures.
Someone long ago waved a hand, beckoning to another person
to come closer. Or perhaps a stick was raised, warning a
stranger to keep a distance. Though instantly recognizable,
these kinds of hand signals were limited to the immediate
distance over which they could be seen.
Long-distance visual communications became possible
when people discovered how to make and control fire. A bonfire
built on a hilltop could signal danger, or it might be understood
as a summons, calling across the miles to anyone who saw it.
To have clear meaning, its message would need to be decided in
advance—a prearranged signal that everybody understood.
The ancient Greeks established long chains of message
beacons. Each signal crew lit a fire as soon as a flicker was seen
on the far horizon, passing the message from beacon to beacon.
The Greek armies also discovered that, when the sun’s rays
fell at the proper angle, the brightly polished surfaces of their
shields blazed with a glare that could be seen for miles. From
this came the heliograph, a signaling device for flashing sunlight
from a mirror.
Like beacon fires, smoke signals are also an old form
of long-distance communication. In ancient China, soldiers
stationed along the Great Wall signaled with smoke from
tower to tower, transmitting a message hundreds of miles in
a few hours. Aboriginal Australians would send up smoke to
announce their presence, especially when they entered lands
that were not their own. The native peoples of North America
used elaborate smoke-signal codes, with each tribe having its
own system of sending news, signaling a warning, or calling
people together.
People also learned to send audible signals. Pounding
on a hollow tree trunk produced sounds that could be
heard a long way. Over time, the equipment improved,
and techniques of drum signaling developed that are
still used today.


SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES 11
.Introduction: A World of Signals
In the United
States, when the
Erie Canal was
completed in 1825,
the news was
sent from Buffalo
to New York City
in 90 minutes by
a booming line of
cannons spaced
within hearing
distance of
each other.
Coded Messages
You probably know the story of Paul Revere’s midnight ride of
April 18, 1775, to warn of the approach of British soldiers. The
famous phrase, “One if by land, two if by sea,” is an example of
a prearranged signal. The participants had decided beforehand
what the lantern signal would mean.
Two lanterns blazing from steeple of Old North Church
in Boston, per description from the church’s website:
“… the church sexton, Robert Newman, and Vestryman
Capt. John Pulling, Jr. climbed the steeple and held
high two lanterns as a signal from Paul Revere
that the British were marching to Lexington
and Concord by sea …”
For more complex communications,
signal codes were needed. To read or decipher
the message, the recipient would require
the code key but would not need to know
beforehand what the message said.


12 SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES
Introduction: A World of Signals.
In the United
States, Jonathan
Grout had the
job of building a
series of
semaphore relays
from the island of
Martha’s Vineyard
to Boston,
Massachusetts.
The system
relayed news of
incoming ships in
Nantucket Sound.
Even today, many
towns along
Boston’s South
Shore still have
their Signal Hill.
A practical method of sending encoded information was
designed by the Chappe brothers in France in the late 18th
century. The eldest brother, Claude, was in a boarding school
about a mile from the other two, and the boys wanted a way to
communicate. They set up a post with movable arms attached,
something like a windmill, and used levers to operate the arms
from the ground. Before long, they had devised a code with
dozens of different signal positions. Their system was called
semaphore, from the Greek for “signal carrier.”
The ingenuity of the Chappe brothers attracted official
interest. After refinements were made to simplify the code, the
French government financed the building of a test line. In 1794,
the first “télégramme” in history creaked toward Paris over the
“windmills” of the Chappe system. One station would receive
the message and relay it to the next by duplicating the position
of the signal arms, until finally the message was read at the
last station. The French army adopted semaphore for military
communications, and the system soon spread to other countries
in Europe and North America.


SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES 13
.Introduction: A World of Signals
The Electric Telegraph
During a European vacation, a young American named Samuel
Morse saw the most advanced semaphore systems in action.
They inspired his idea for transmitting messages using
electricity instead of with mechanical movable arms. A
telegraph line with 40 miles of wire was built from
Washington, D.C., to Baltimore, Maryland. On May 24,
1844, before a small group gathered in the nation’s
capital, the first message was sent humming over the
wires to Baltimore. Within a few moments, it had been
interpreted and telegraphed back to the waiting crowd.
The successful test marked the beginning of the
modern era of communications.
By 1851, more than 20,000 miles of telegraph
lines had been strung across the United States. The first
successful cable across the Atlantic Ocean was completed
in 1866, linking the United States with Great Britain. By 1872,
the world was wired with more than 600,000 miles of telegraph
lines and 30,000 miles of transoceanic cables.
Wireless Telegraphy
The next step in the development of signal communications was
from wired to wireless: that is, using radio waves. By 1897, the
Italian inventor Guglielmo Marconi had built the first commercial
wireless telegraphy system based on radio
transmissions. This system relied on Morse code
for transmitting messages. (Morse code is covered
in detail in the next section of this pamphlet.)
By 1920, voice transmission began to gain
ground for many applications and became the
basis for radio broadcasting. Wireless telegraphy
continued for many military communications.
Radio voice and satellite communications
have replaced many uses of Morse code and
semaphore. However, both systems remain
important communications methods that are
still practiced in some military and ham radio
settings, especially in emergency situations
when regular means of communication break
down. For this reason, Scouts continue to learn
and use these signals.





SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES 15
.International Morse Code
International
Morse Code
For use with his electric telegraph system, Samuel Morse
developed a code of dots and dashes. The principle of Morse
code is that each letter of the alphabet is formed from
combinations of something short and something long, whether
those “somethings” (the dots and dashes) are short and long
sounds (dit and dah), short and long light flashes, or
interrupted electrical pulses. Morse code can be sent using a
great variety of visual or sound signals—by flashlight, headlight,
searchlight, lantern, blinker, mirror, flag, horn, whistle, or radio.
Learning Morse Code
The quickest and most effective way to learn the code is by
sound. You can use anything that makes a suitably short and
long sound to indicate dit and dah. To tap out the code, you
might practice with a switch-operated electric buzzer or maybe
a Morse code smartphone app. Or you could simply use your
voice and say “di,” “dit,”and “dah.”
Morse code was adopted by radio operators worldwide.
Morse code sent by radio could be heard and
understood when other types of signals, including voice
communications, were disrupted by interference.


16 SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES
International Morse Code.
Character Code Sound
A • — di-dah
B — • • • dah-di-di-dit
C — • — • dah-di-dah-dit
D — • • dah-di-dit
E • dit
F • • — • di-di-dah-dit
G — — • dah-dah-dit
H • • • • di-di-di-dit
I • • di-dit
J • — — — di-dah-dah-dah
K — • — dah-di-dah
L • — • • di-dah-di-dit
M — — dah-dah
N — • dah-dit
O — — — dah-dah-dah
P • — — • di-dah-dah-dit
Q — — • — dah-dah-di-dah
R • — • di-dah-dit
S • • • di-di-dit
T — dah
U • • — di-di-dah
V • • • — di-di-di-dah
W • — — di-dah-dah
X — • • — dah-di-di-dah
Y — • — — dah-di-dah-dah
Z — — • • dah-dah-di-dit
1 • — — — — di-dah-dah-dah-dah
2 • • — — — di-di-dah-dah-dah
3 • • • — — di-di-di-dah-dah
4 • • • • — di-di-di-di-dah
5 • • • • • di-di-di-di-dit
6 — • • • • dah-di-di-di-dit
7 — — • • • dah-dah-di-di-dit
8 — — — • • dah-dah-dah-di-dit
9 — — — — • dah-dah-dah-dah-dit
0 — — — — — dah-dah-dah-dah-dah
, — — • • — — dah-dah-di-di-dah-dah
? • • — — • • di-di-dah-dah-di-dit
. • — • — • — di-dah-di-dah-di-dah


SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES 17
.International Morse Code
There is no single right way to learn Morse code. You may
choose to learn the alphabet in order from A to Z. Or you might
start with the letters composed only of dits, then the letters
made of dahs, and then learn the letters with both dits and
dahs. Or you might work according to the frequency with which
letters are used in the English language: ETAOINS HRDLUCM
PFWVYB GJQKXZ. Break the letters up into groups of six or
seven and learn one group at a time until you can recognize
each letter quickly and without hesitation.
The best method for you is the one that seems easiest or
most logical. No matter how you go about it, the secret is
practice and more practice.
As soon as you know a few letters, practice sending and
receiving. For most people, receiving is harder than sending,
so you will need to practice with a buddy to master both. Have
your buddy send code while you receive it. Then switch places
and have your buddy receive while you send.
Send single letters at first. Don’t worry about speed. The
important thing is to accurately communicate. Proceed at a
pace that allows the receiver to clearly hear and write down
each letter. As you become proficient with the individual letters,
move on to the slow sending of complete words and then short,
simple messages.
International Morse code consists of combinations of dots and dashes
representing the letters of the alphabet and numerals. To sound out
the code, say “dit” for a dot (•). For a dash (—), make the sound “dah.”
When you say “dit” and “dah” together quickly, shorten “dit” to “di.”
For example, the sound for the letter A is “di-dah.”
The distress
signal SOS
(• • • — — — • • •)
is an internationally
recognized call
for help, whether
sent by radio, flags,
flashing lights,
or any other
signaling method.
When using a buzzer, whistle, or other sound-producing
device, make each “dit” short and snappy. Make the
“dah” about three times as long as the “dit.” The break
between the dits and dahs of a letter should be the
length of a dit; the interval between letters should be
the length of a dah. When sending Morse code by
flashlight or blinker, make the dits, dahs, and intervals
the same length as in signaling with sound.


18 SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES
International Morse Code.
Procedure Signals
Besides learning the Morse code letters, for communicating
complete messages you also must know a few procedure signals.
In sending, you use the procedure signals for “attention,”
“error,” “end of word,” “end of message,” etc. In receiving, you
need the signals for “go ahead,” “repeat,” “word received,” and
“message received.”
During
emergencies, ham
radio operators
may handle
messages for the
Red Cross and
other agencies.
Sometimes, if
power lines
and cell towers
are down,
Morse code
messages can
be heard much
better than
voice messages.
Amateur (Ham) Radio
Earning the Radio merit badge no longer requires knowledge of
Morse code because the code is no longer used extensively in
business, government, or the military. However, the code is still
used by radio hobbyists worldwide, and you can hear it on
shortwave radio bands today. For fun, Scouts still use Morse
code or wigwag flags to communicate, just as Scouts always
have. It is also valuable in emergency situations when other
methods of communication fail.
Procedure Signals
Used by SENDER
Morse Code Meaning Explanation
AAAA Attention I have a message for you.
Are you ready to receive?
8 E’s Error I made a mistake. I will
start again on the word.
Pause
(interval)
End of word End of word.
More coming.
AAA Period End of sentence.
More coming.
AR (sent as
one letter) End of message Message completed.
Did you get it?
Used by RECEIVER
Morse Code Meaning Explanation
K Go ahead I am ready to receive.
You may start sending.
IMI Repeat Please send again;
I missed it.
T Word received I understood the word.
R Message received I got it OK.


SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES 19
.International Morse Code
In wigwagging, letters with several dits or dahs must be made
without stopping between swings of the flag. If the sender stops
in the middle of A (di-dah), for instance, the receiver will read it
as the letters E (dit) and T (dah).
Wigwag
In the past, Scouts traditionally used wigwagging to signal with
Morse code. The sender would swing a single signal flag to the
right for a dit, to the left for a dah, and dip the flag down in
front to indicate an interval. The flag is about 2 feet square,
attached to a staff 4 to 6 feet long. For signaling against a dark
background (trees, for instance), the flag used is white with a
red center that is about 8 inches square. For signaling against a
light background, such as the sky, the flag used is red with a
white square in its center. In an emergency, you can wigwag
with your Scout neckerchief.
To satisfy the Morse code requirement for this merit
badge, you can copy the series of dits and dahs that
make up each letter of the message you receive.
When you have finished copying the dots and dashes,
compare what you have written down against the list
of Morse code characters in the chart, and write out
the English-letter equivalents to see what message
was sent.
For example, if you hear dah / di-di-di-dit / dit, write
it like this: — / • • • • / •. Then use the chart to translate
this string of dashes and dots into the word “the.”
Use this process to copy each word you hear, translate
the Morse characters to English letters, and read
the message.


Semaphore has been a traditional code in the U.S. Coast Guard, the Army,
and especially the Navy, where its speed and simplicity have made it
useful for silent signaling from ship to shore and between ships close
together. The code remains in worldwide use. The Royal Canadian
Mounted Police have used hand semaphore for signaling in the mountains
or other situations where voice or electronic communication is difficult.


SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES 21
.Semaphore and Nautical Flags
Semaphore
and Nautical Flags
In the hands of a skilled signaler, semaphore is the quickest
method for sending a flag message (even quicker than wigwag).
But like any method of flag signaling, semaphore can be used
only in the daytime and only over short distances (typically not
more than a mile). The visibility must be good, with sender and
receiver in plain sight of one another.
Semaphore may be signaled with hand-held flags, disks,
or paddles. Flags are not required; their purpose is to make the
semaphore characters more obvious. You might want to learn
to signal not only with flags, but also with your bare or gloved
hands—a potentially useful skill in an emergency when no flags
or other signaling devices are available.
Each of the two flags commonly used in semaphore is 18
inches square and is divided diagonally into red and yellow
triangles. The flags are attached to lightweight poles or staffs
about 2 feet long, with the red triangle at the top and next to the
staff. (Semaphore flags used at sea are red and yellow. On land,
the flags are typically blue and white or red and white.)
To signal with semaphore flags, you hold a flagstaff in
each hand, grasping each so that the staff is a continuation of
your forearm. Place your forefinger along the staff to help you
maintain the correct angle. Get a buddy to help you from the
start by checking to see that you hold the flagstaff as a rigid
extension of your arm.
Semaphore flag signaling takes its basic movements—
as well as its name—from the earlier semaphore system
of mechanical movable arms.


22 SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES
Semaphore and Nautical Flags.
Learning Semaphore
Semaphore is an alphabet signaling system, with the letters
formed by extending each arm in one of eight directions and
placing the two flags at specific angles to each other. The pattern
resembles a clock face divided into these positions for each hand:
up, high, out, low, and down.
OUT
LOW
HIGH
OUT
LOW
HIGH
UP
DOWN
Semaphore flag positions
As you can see in the chart, the letters from A through G
are made with one flag in a specific position of the “clock face”
while the other flag remains at the “down” position. Similarly
for succeeding groups of letters, one flag is held in a particular
position while the other flag is placed at the proper angle to it.
These groups of letters are called circles.
Learn and practice the letters of the first circle, then send
your buddy several words made from only those letters: ACE,
BAD, CAGE, EDGE, FADE, GAB, etc. As you send each letter,
move crisply from the position of one into the position of the
next. That is, do not flail or flutter the flags, but do insert a
definite pause before you form the next letter of a word. If you
must think of the next letter, hold the previous letter until the
next one comes to mind.


SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES 23
.Semaphore and Nautical Flags
Keep your arms stiff. Have your buddy check that you make
the angles correctly. If your technique is sloppy, the receiver
won’t be sure of the flag’s exact position. You might be holding
your arm straight out in the 9 o’clock position, but if you crook
the flag out at an angle, the receiver might read it in the 10:30 or
“high” position.
When you have learned the first circle of letters, proceed to
the next group: H through N (except J). Note that as you make
each of these letters, you hold one flag in the “low” position.
Practice sending words made from these letters: HILL, HIM,
KILN, MILK, etc. Whenever double letters appear in a word
(such as the double L’s in HILL), use the rest or interval signal
to separate them. Make the first letter, then make the interval
signal, then immediately bring the flags again to the position of
the letter.
Proceed to the next group of letters, O through S. These are
made with the right arm straight out from the body. Practice
making words with these and the other letters you have learned:
PAIR, POOR, QUAIL, RAN, SEND, SHARP, etc.
Next, learn the letters T, U, and Y, each of which is made
with the right hand held high. J and V have the right hand up.
Practice making these words: JAY, TOY, URN, VAN, YOU, etc.
W, X, and Z require the right hand to cross the body.
Whenever you cross a flag in front of you so that both flags are
on the same side, twist your body slightly in the same direction.
Practice making these words: EXIT, WAY, WEST, ZERO, etc.
Instead of spelling out numbers, you may use the
“numeral” signal. The first 10 letters of the alphabet,
when sent after this sign, are read as numbers: A is 1;
B, 2; C, 3; D, 4; E, 5; F, 6; G, 7; H, 8; I, 9; and K, 0.
Generally, however, it is better to spell out numbers to
avoid mistakes and confusion. Navy signalers always
spell out any numbers (“ONE,” “TWO,” etc.) in their
messages. Additionally, no punctuation marks are used
in semaphore. If they are needed, they, too, must be
spelled out.


24 SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES
Semaphore and Nautical Flags.
A B C
G
M
S
Y
H
N
T
Cancel/Disregard previous signalZ
I
O
U


SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES 25
.Semaphore and Nautical Flags
D E F
J
P
V
K
Q
W
L
R
X
The semaphore characters presented here are shown as you would see
them when facing the signaler. To learn the semaphore code, work in short
sessions to memorize each character or each group of letters. There is no
easy shortcut; learning the positions takes time and practice. Start slowly
with emphasis on letter distinctness. Make your movements crisp so the
receiver immediately knows the exact position of each flag. Practice with
another Scout until the flags become extensions of your arms.


26 SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES
Semaphore and Nautical Flags.
Sending and Receiving Semaphore
To send a semaphore message, first get the receiver’s attention
with the attention signal, made by repeatedly waving both flags
up and down in a scissor-like motion. When the receiver sends
the letter C, then you can go ahead. To indicate the end of a
word, make the rest or interval signal by bringing the flags down
in front of you with their poles crossed. Two “rests” indicate the
end of a sentence. Except for the interval or rest position, the
flags do not overlap.
The receiver acknowledges each word by sending C. If the
receiver sends IMI (“I missed it”), it means they did not catch
your last word. You repeat the word and continue from there.
If you make an error, immediately send eight E’s and start
again from the beginning of the correct word you want to send.
End the message with AR and wait for the receiver to make the
letter R (short for “Roger”). Then you will know that your
message has been correctly received.
Because it is easier to send than to receive semaphore, you
should practice at least half the time with a buddy sending
messages for you to receive and translate. Write down each
letter you see and note the intervals or pauses between words.
Nautical Flags
Though semaphore flags may traditionally be associated with
ships and the sea, they are far from being the only flags seen
on or near the water. Ships fly national flags to identify their
countries of origin. They may raise various signal flags in
emergencies (“Man overboard!”) and to communicate their
movements and intentions (“I am altering course”); to make
requests (“I need medical assistance”); or to warn of hazards
(“I have a diver in the water—keep clear,” or “I am disabled and
cannot maneuver,” or “You are running into danger!”).
As shown in the chart of flags and pennants, nautical flags
(also called maritime signal flags) not only have meanings
all their own, they also can be arranged to spell out words.
Compare the alphabet flags illustrated here with the semaphore
characters that are pictured earlier in this section. While
semaphore denotes each letter by means of two identical flags
that are positioned relative to a person, each alphabet flag is
distinct and stands alone for an individual letter, A through Z.


SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES 27
.Semaphore and Nautical Flags


28 SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES
Semaphore and Nautical Flags.
Commercial ships and naval vessels use signal flags for
communications in international waters and when arriving
in ports. In a vessel’s signal flags, harbormasters, the Coast
Guard—and anyone who knows the “language”—can read a
ship’s status and intentions. For example, naval vessels hoist
the “B” hazard flag when loading munitions. Cruise ships in
port fly the “P” flag as a signal to passengers that the ship will
soon go to sea.
Besides communicating specific information, signal flags
also are used in a colorful tradition called “dressing ship,” in
which the flags are displayed from bow to stern. “Dressing” is
done for special occasions, such as launching a new craft on its
first voyage, entering a port for the first time, honoring special
visitors, or celebrating holidays. Stop by a marina, especially one
with larger boats, on the Fourth of July and see the flags fly! It’s
a beautiful sight.


SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES 29
.Semaphore and Nautical Flags
With your parent or guardian’s permission, find a
“nautical flag translator” on the internet. Type in a
phrase such as “Do a Good Turn Daily” to see how the
words are represented using alphabet flags. Enter the
same phrase in a semaphore translator and compare
the two results. Use the two translators to spell your
name with flags.
Maritime Warning Flags
Have you ever watched a broadcast about an approaching tropical storm
or hurricane that showed two red-and-black flags flying from a U.S. Coast
Guard Station? The two flags signal that a hurricane warning has been
issued. Similarly, one flag signals a storm warning (with strong but less
than hurricane-force winds). Two pennants warn of gale-force winds;
a single pennant is a small-craft advisory. This system of indicating
hazardous sea conditions tells people to seek shelter in the face of an
approaching storm. If you see any of these four warning flags flying,
you should not go out in a boat.
Small-craft
advisory (winds
up to 38 mph)
Gale warning
(winds 39–54 mph)
Storm warning
(winds 55–73 mph)
Hurricane
warning (winds
in excess of
74 mph)


People use the American Manual Alphabet for fingerspelling to communicate with
others in conjunction with American Sign Language.


SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES 31
.American Sign Language
American Sign
Language
“Signing” is a common method of communication among
people who are deaf. Signing is also done by people who can
hear but who cannot physically speak. More than 100 sign
languages are in use around the world. Countries have their
own, native sign languages. American Sign Language (ASL) is
the main sign language of deaf communities in the United States
and most parts of Canada.
American Sign Language is generally considered to have
originated about 200 years ago when the first schools for deaf
children were opened. At the beginning of the 19th century,
America had no schools specifically for deaf children. A recent
college graduate named Thomas Hopkins Gallaudet had a young
neighbor, Alice Cogswell, who had been deaf since she was
2 years old. Gallaudet was able to teach Alice words using
drawings and writing in the dirt.
The girl’s father asked Gallaudet to go to Europe to learn
teaching methods for the deaf. Gallaudet studied at a school in
Paris, France, learning manual communication methods (sign
language) from the school’s faculty members who were deaf.
One of the teachers, Laurent Clerc, returned to the United States
with Gallaudet to help teach American children. The two men
helped to establish what would become the American School for
the Deaf in Hartford, Connecticut, in 1817.
American Sign Language is a visual language that is
distinct from other languages. In fact, ASL is often accepted as
a “foreign” language for meeting degree requirements at many
colleges. Like any language, ASL has its own rules of grammar
and syntax (how words are put together). ASL has regional
“dialects” or varieties, and it is a living language that grows and
changes over time.


32 SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES
American Sign Language.
As ASL developed at the American School for the Deaf,
it included features of Native American sign languages
as well as French Sign Language and the personal
signing systems that students brought to the school.
Learning ASL
Several components make up each ASL sign. Signs are made
by either one or both hands. Each sign has a handshape—
the shape a hand takes when making the sign. Because your
hand is three-dimensional, the orientation of the handshape
(facing you or facing away from you) is important. Where
you make the sign in relation to your body is also important.
For example, in the word “think,” the tip of the finger touches
the forehead, while the same handshape touching the chin
means “disappointed.”
Signs may also require movement or a distinctive body
posture or facial expression. The movement can be in a
circle, forward or backward, up and down, etc. Changing the
movement can change the meaning. For example, the sign for
“chair” is made by moving the hand up and down twice; the
sign for “sit” is made by moving the hand down once. A simple
change of movement alters the sign’s meaning.


SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES 33
.American Sign Language
Shown are some common handshapes used in American Sign
Language. Knowing the names of these handshapes is important
because ASL classes, dictionaries, and instructors use these terms
to describe how to make signs. It is also important to know how to
correctly form these handshapes because changing the handshape
of a sign changes the sign’s meaning.
As you begin to learn ASL, keep in mind that the
language is not based on English. Its grammar does
not resemble the grammar of spoken English.
ASL is a different language entirely.
V handshape Bent V Closed hand Flat hand
Claw hand Cocked index Open handCurved hand
One-hand index Bent hand


34 SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES
American Sign Language.
Stop Go Busy
When you are beginning to learn ASL, it’s generally easiest
to start with common signs and phrases. These include signs or
phrases for greetings, introductions, family members, numbers,
colors, frequently used nouns and verbs, the Scout Law, and the
Scout Oath or Promise. You might also learn signs for giving
directions, helping in first aid or emergency situations, telling
time and dates, and asking common questions.
Learning ASL is similar to learning any foreign
language. It takes time, patience, hard work, and
practice. Work with your merit badge counselor to
arrange basic lessons with someone who is fluent in
ASL. Or for information on self-study courses, online
video tutorials, and practice apps, see the resources
section of this pamphlet.
Native American peoples used sign language to
communicate between tribes that did not share the
same spoken language. The manual signs represent
not only things in nature, such as rivers and mountains,
but also emotions, sensations, and ideas. For example,
slowly turning the hand, relaxed at the wrist, indicates
doubt or possibility; a similar gesture, with quicker
movement, is the question sign. The sign language of
the Plains Indians of North America is so sophisticated
that a detailed conversation can be carried on using
gestures alone.


SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES 35
.American Sign Language
Be aware that fingerspelling and American Sign
Language are not the same. Fingerspelling is only a
minor part of ASL. The manual alphabet is used mostly
for spelling out proper nouns (like people’s names) and
for terms that have no matching sign in ASL. You can
use the manual alphabet to spell your first name as part
of fulfilling the requirements for this merit badge.
Fingerspelling
Many people who are deaf learn to fingerspell by using hand
shapes and positions that stand for the 26 letters of the English
alphabet. Fingerspelling is like writing in air. The chart at the
beginning of this chapter shows how each letter of the American
Manual Alphabet is formed.
Fingerspelling uses the handshapes of ASL. Notice, for
example, that the signs for P and K use the same handshape
but different hand orientations.
Practicing ASL
When you communicate with someone who is deaf, maintain
eye contact. Looking away is considered rude. Do not expect the
person to read your lips. Not all people who are deaf are able to
read lips.
As you sign, go slowly. Don’t be embarrassed to ask the
person to repeat a sign or to slow down. Most people who are
deaf will welcome your attempt to communicate and will be
patient with you. Remember that ASL is a gestural language that
does not follow the same pattern as spoken or written English,
but if you aren’t sure how to sign a word or phrase, then
fingerspelling it letter-by-letter is appropriate.


36 SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES
Braille Code.
Braille Code
Braille is a system of writing and printing in
which letters and numbers, formed by raised
points or dots, can be read by touch. Every
written language has its own braille code, and
there are also braille codes for mathematics,
music, and computers.
The Development of Braille
Braille code was invented by a Frenchman
named Louis Braille, who lost his eyesight in
an accident when he was 3 years old. At age 10,
Louis got a scholarship to attend a school for
blind youth, where most of the lessons were
given as lectures. The school had a small
collection of books with raised letters but they
were difficult to read.


SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES 37
.Braille Code
When Louis was 12, a former soldier named Charles
Barbier visited the school and demonstrated the “point writing”
code he had invented. Barbier had developed the code at
the request of Napoleon Bonaparte so that soldiers could
communicate secret information silently and without a light at
night. The code used a cell, or template, with two columns of
six dots each. This meant that a total of 12 raised dots could
be required to represent a single symbol or character. The cell
was too large to fit under a fingertip—it could not be recognized
with a single touch—and Barbier’s code was too hard to read
and learn, so it was not successful.
Louis, however, saw the code’s possibilities for enabling
people who are blind to read and write. He set out to revise and
simplify the code. By 1829, he had reduced Barbier’s 12 dots to
six, creating the braille cell that is the basis for modern braille
code. Each letter, number, and punctuation mark is made up of
one to six raised dots arranged in a cell that is two dots wide
and three dots high. People read braille by lightly passing their
fingertips over the dots.
Louis Braille (1809–1852)
Born Jan. 4, 1809, in a small town near Paris, Louis
Braille was an intelligent and creative child who had a
good ear for music. After accidentally blinding himself
while toying with an awl—a pointed tool for making
holes—in his father’s workshop, Louis went on to
become not only a top student at the Royal Institute
for Blind Youth, but also an accomplished cellist and
organist. As a teenager, he developed the tactile
(touchable) code that bears his name, and he published
the first braille book when he was 20. At first, his code
was not widely used. Even at the school where Louis
became a professor after he graduated, braille was not
taught until after his death. By 1868, however, braille
began to spread worldwide and today nearly every
country uses braille.


38 SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES
Braille Code.
The braille alphabet
YV Z WX
A D GB EC F
K NLH MI J
TQO RP S U
Most punctuation marks are formed using the dots in the lower two rows of the cell.
A lower-right dot placed in front of a word indicates that the word begins with a
capital letter.
! -
‘ ?., Capital
Numbers are formed by placing the braille number sign (#) before the braille letters
A through J.
# 20 431
765 8 9
Should this
letter be placed
in alphabetical
order?


SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES 39
.Braille Code
To satisfy the braille writing requirement for this merit
badge, you do not need to emboss braille dots in thick
paper. Rather, you may use a pencil or pen to draw the
dots on ordinary paper, copying the characters of the
braille alphabet to spell out your message letter by letter.
The Braille Alphabet
The braille alphabet is shown here. Notice that the first 10 letters
(A–J) use only the dots in the upper two rows of the cell. The
next 10 letters (K–T) are formed by adding the lower-left dot to
each of the first 10 letters. The remaining letters (except W) are
formed by adding both lower dots to each of the first five letters.
The letter W is an exception because the French alphabet did
not have a W when Louis Braille created the code in the 1820s.
The symbol for W was added later.
Writing Braille
The raised dots are embossed in
heavy paper by hand or by machine.
The characters are embossed from
the back of the paper, working
in reverse, and are read from the
face of the paper in normal
reading direction.
People can write braille code
by hand, using a slate and stylus;
or the code can be typed by striking
keys on a braillewriter. Software programs also exist to translate
braille, special computer printers can emboss braille dots on
thick paper, and braille displays can make the characters on a
computer screen appear on a touchable surface. Other devices
in use today include electronic portable note-takers with braille
keyboards and synthesized voice readouts.


40 SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES
Braille Code.
Reading Braille
People who are blind learn to read braille by touch, and people
who have vision learn to read it by sight. A person who is blind
must learn to recognize all of the braille characters before
learning how to read.
To recognize the braille characters by touch, a person must
first develop the ability to tell the difference between line
thicknesses and symbols using the fingertips. In a technique
called tracking, the fingertips glide lightly and quickly across
the lines of raised dots, moving from left to right (horizontally).
Vertical tracking, or rubbing the dots up and down, is
considered poor technique because it slows the speed and
accuracy with which a person reads braille. Reading vertically
is called “scrubbing.”
If you are learning to read braille by sight, try making a
set of flash cards to help you memorize braille letters, numbers,
punctuation marks, and special symbols. You can make
your own cards, or search the internet (with your parent or
guardian's permission) for free printable flash cards.


SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES 41
.Braille Code
A skillful braille reader may use the “scissor” reading
technique: the left hand reads to the middle of the line, then the
right hand takes over and reads to the end of the line, and then
the left hand drops down to the next line of dots and continues
reading. A good braille reader has a light touch, only “tickling”
the tops of the dots.
Helen Keller (1880–1968)
Alabama-born Helen Keller was only 19 months old when a
serious illness left her unable to see or hear. She was largely
cut off from the world, frustrated by her lack of language and
limited ability to communicate, until age 7, when her parents
hired a teacher named Anne Sullivan. Anne taught Helen
letters by making the
signs for them in her
palm. Relying on her
sense of touch, Helen
learned sign language and
braille. As a 10-year-old,
she learned to speak. At
24, Keller graduated with
honors from Radcliffe
College, becoming the
first deaf-blind person
to earn a bachelor’s
degree. She worked as an
author, political activist,
and lecturer, traveling
extensively to speak on
behalf of people with disabilities. The lifelong relationship
between Helen Keller and her teacher and companion, Anne
Sullivan, inspired a famous play, “The Miracle Worker,” by the
author William Gibson.





SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES 43
.Silent Scout Signals
Silent Scout Signals
Scouts use silent signals to direct their patrol and troop in activities
at camp, meetings, ceremonies, and other events. As with any
visual signal, silent Scout signals require attention from the
receivers and a clear line of sight to the sender. The signals can be
anything the group wants to use, as long as the sender and the
receivers understand beforehand what the individual signals
mean and how to respond to them. For example, the Scout sign,
when held high, calls the group to silent attention.
Gathering
For gathering the group together, the leader may use an arm
held high above the head and moved in a circular motion.
After getting the group’s attention with the gathering
signal, the leader may extend the arms straight out to the sides
at shoulder height, which directs the members of the unit to
line up in straight lines in front of the leader. Holding the arms
partway up is a signal to form a half circle facing the leader. The
leader could also gather the members of the unit and then hold
one arm straight out to the side or straight in front, directing
everyone to line up in single-file formation. Then the leader
might use an overhead pulling motion while moving off in the
desired direction of travel, indicating “follow me.”
In the outdoors, loud shouts frighten away the wildlife.
Silent signals preserve the peace of the wilderness and
enhance the possibilities of seeing animals in their
natural habitat.


44 SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES
Silent Scout Signals.
Other Common Signals
Other familiar hand signals include:
• “Go that way” or “Move farther out”—Hand held high and
moved away from the body in a certain direction
• “Hurry up” or “Faster”—Hand held in a fist and pumped up
and down over the head
• “Stop”—Hand held motionless above the head
• “Get down!”—Hand held palm out at the end of the
outstretched arm, then moved sharply toward the ground
(accompanied in an emergency by a vocal signal yelling out
the command, directing the group to squat or lie down)
• “No” or “Disregard”—Hand held open and moved several
times from side to side across the face
Flags and Lights
One or more flags can be used to convey silent signals over
longer distances. A flag such as a patrol flag is larger than a
hand and can be seen from farther away. To improve the
distance over which group signals may be seen and understood,
lights may also be used, especially in darkness.
Other Messages
The group may establish any number of signals to convey other
messages, as many or as few as the group members need and
can remember. The signals should be easy to remember, but
they also must be practiced until they become second nature for
the group using them. In an emergency, there will not be time to
look up the signal in a book or ask someone what it means.


SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES 45
.Silent Scout Signals
These silent signals appeared in the October 1964 issue of Boys’ Life (now called
Scout Life), but they can still be used today to communicate quietly and effectively.





SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES 47
.Trail Markers and Rescue Signals
Trail Markers and
Rescue Signals
Trail signs help hikers find their way. Many recreational areas
have established trails that are well-marked. In some areas,
however, networks of trails intersect with no signs to help
hikers travel to their destination. Other, more remote areas
may have few or no well-defined trails. On your Scout outings,
especially wilderness treks, you need to know how to follow
and how to make trail markers.
Cairns and Blazes
A cairn, a traditional method of marking trails, is
simply a pile of stones. Some cairns are small and
identify the trail along which you are traveling.
Other cairns are large and high enough to be
visible over long distances such as in the desert,
along waterways and coastlines, or in
mountainous regions.
Another traditional marking method is
trailblazing. Originally, blazes were marks
chopped into trees to show the direction of
travel. This method is not used today because
it damages the environment. Instead, modern
blazes take the form of metal, wood, or plastic
pieces attached to posts or other objects. Or
marks may be painted on trees, rocks, or other
surfaces along the trail.
During the era of westward expansion in America, large
cairns were built, often on high hills and mountains, along
trails like the Oregon Trail, Santa Fe Trail, and California
Trail. Travelers could see the cairns for miles, and maybe
for days, marking the safe crossings of rivers and through
mountain passes. Some of these cairns still stand today,
more than a hundred years later.


48 SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES
Trail Markers and Rescue Signals.
Blazes are often brightly colored to contrast with the
surrounding forest or terrain. Usually they are placed from knee
high to eye level and are spaced so that the next blaze is visible
from the last blaze along the trail. When following markers
and blazes, hikers may find multiple marks of different colors
or designs on the same tree, rock, or signpost. The different
marks typically indicate side paths branching off from the main
trail. To avoid taking the wrong path, hikers must stay alert to
changes in trail markers and watch for places where the trail
forks or turns aside from the desired direction of travel.
Well-known trails like the Pacific Crest and
Appalachian Trails use a variation of blazes.
Emblems on posts mark the thousands
of miles of these national trails.
In mountainous areas, different colors of blazes may
indicate the difficulty levels of hiking trails, similar to
how green circles, blue squares, and black diamonds
are often used to identify the difficulty levels of downhill
or cross-country ski trails and hills.
Always prepare ahead by studying the area where
you plan to hike. Learn about the terrain, whether and
how the trails are marked, the dangers you may face,
and any special no-trace considerations. Remember
that it’s best to stay on established trails and limit
or avoid cross-country travel to avoid damaging the
environment. Always carry a good compass and a map
of the area—do not rely entirely on GPS, which can and
does fail. Always have a plan and a backup plan, and let
others know when and where you are going and when
you expect to return.


SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES 49
.Trail Markers and Rescue Signals
Marking Trails
Following trail signs can be tricky when the markers have faded
or crumbled from age, weathering, or other types of damage.
In situations where signs are absent or inadequate, hikers may
create temporary trail markers using the available materials,
such as twigs or pebbles. Or you can leave simple trail signs for
others to follow by scratching in the ground with a stick. A
pointed arrow means “This is the trail,” while an X warns “This
isn’t the trail—don’t go this way.” A square with a number in it
and with an arrow can mean, “Proceed in this direction, as
many steps as the number says.” A circle with a dot in its center
specifies that “This is the end of the trail,” or it may mean
“I have gone home.”
“This is the way.” “This is not
the trail.”
“End of the trail”
or “Gone home.”
“Proceed 3 steps
this direction.”
Scout trail signs


50 SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES
Trail Markers and Rescue Signals.
When following a trail marked with these kinds of
impermanent or improvised signs, use your eyes and do not
rush. Be sure each sign is actually a marker and not something
you are imagining. If you suspect you have missed a sign, return
to the spot where you brushed out or undid the last one and
start again. (If you fail to erase the signs as you go, you may
cause great confusion for other hikers or even yourself the next
time you travel the same path.)
Markers may be adapted from Native American trail signs, using
grass knotted into tufts, sticks pushed into the ground, small
stones stacked in low cairns, or pebbles arranged as arrows.
Leaving No Trace
Trail signs can be either permanent or temporary. Temporary
blazes are used especially in wilderness areas. No-trace principles
apply, however, regardless of whether the area is heavily hiked or
virtually untrammeled. When you lay out a trail for your patrol
or troop to follow, be sure afterward to remove your temporary
trail markers. Generally, the person who marked the trail is
responsible for removing the markers. Or, in a group of hikers, the
last person down the trail may have the job of clearing away your
temporary markers. Do not remove or alter permanent trail signs.


SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES 51
.Trail Markers and Rescue Signals
Ground-to-air signals are passive visible signals, requiring no further effort once
completed. Such signals work even if you are asleep or ill when a search plane comes.
Upon rescue, dismantle all ground signals.
V NX Y l
REQUIRE
ASSISTANCE
REQUIRE MEDICAL
ASSISTANCE
NO YES PROCEEDING
IN THIS DIRECTION
Rescue Signals
Knowing basic rescue signals could save
your life, the life of a fellow Scout, or even
your family. To attract the attention of
rescuers, use signals to make yourself
audible or visible.
Audible Signals
If you become separated from your group,
shout for anyone within earshot, and use
your whistle (which you should always
carry with you). Searchers may be close to
you but unable to see you. To signal your location,
blow on a whistle in groups of three blasts. (A combination
of any three signals is a universal sign of distress.)
Ground-to-Air Signals
To attract the attention of aircraft overhead, lay out large,
angular ground signals. You can make standard ground-to-air
symbols (shown in the illustration) by arranging brightly colored
tents, tarps, rescue blankets, or strips of fabric in an open area;
by stamping down sand or snow with your boots; by pulling out
clumps of turf; or by lining up branches, logs, stones, or any
available materials that contrast in color with the background.
Make the symbols as big as you can—10 feet high or larger,
if possible.
Construct these signals quickly, if you have reason to expect
an air search. Search planes will likely cover a large expanse in
a systematic pattern, flying over small sections of the area one
after another and crossing off a section if no trace of you is seen
there. If you are in that section and searchers fail to see you,
then you might have a long wait before they return for a second
look. To make your position known as soon as possible, lay out
ground signals without delay.


52 SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES
Trail Markers and Rescue Signals.
People sometimes hide from rescuers, mistakenly
thinking they will get in trouble for being lost. Do not
hide! Focus on getting found. Do what you safely can
to help rescuers see or hear you, but avoid putting
yourself in danger. Do not do anything that might cause
you physical harm. An injury would only make matters
worse. Also avoid aimless wandering, which could
get you even more lost. You might move to a clearing
so that rescuers can see you more easily, but do not
move far from where you were when you first realized
you were lost. Rescuers might be Scout leaders, police
officers, national guard members, or firefighters, but
often they are volunteers. Don’t make their job harder
than it already is. Stay put in a safe location. Rescuers
may have a large area to search—do not make it bigger
by moving around a lot.
Use any items you have that
might help rescuers see you.
An orange cloth, orange
garbage bag or poncho,
bright clothing, or anything
brightly colored can help
attract rescuers’ attention.
Search-and-rescue personnel
report that it is difficult to see
someone who is standing
motionless on the ground
and not trying to attract
attention. Things that move are more noticeable than
things that stay still. You can increase your chances of
being seen by making a tripod to suspend your orange
poncho or bright clothing so that it flutters in the breeze.


SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES 53
.Trail Markers and Rescue Signals
Active Visible Signals
Besides constructing ground signals, use active signals such
as mirrors, fires, smoke, and flares. Smoke is most visible in
daylight; fire at night. Much of the United States is under a
constant fire watch, and any unusual smoke will be investigated
(probably by air) even if no one knows you are missing. Make
a dense column of smoke by laying wet, green leaves and
branches, evergreen boughs, or moss on a fire.
Three fires, spaced equally apart, make a standard distress
signal. Build the second and third firelays about 50 yards from
the fire that is burning, locating them so the three form the
points of a large triangle. Keep a torch of flammable material
near the blazing fire, and as soon as you hear an approaching
aircraft, quickly light the additional fires. Be certain you can
contain any fire you start. An out-of-control blaze would put
you in grave danger.
On a sunny day, airborne rescuers can see the flash of a
mirror from many miles away. If the mirror in your survival kit
has an aiming device, use it. If not, hold the mirror in one hand
near your face, extend your other hand in front of you, and tilt
the mirror until you can fill your empty palm with reflected
light. Make a V with your illuminated fingers, then sight across
the top of the mirror and through the V toward an approaching
aircraft and drop your empty hand out of the way. Repeat these
steps frequently to adjust your aim. A glass mirror reflects light
best, but if you have no mirror you can use a bright can lid, a
piece of foil, or any other shiny, reflective object.


54 SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES
Trail Markers and Rescue Signals.
If using rescue flares or smoke devices, follow the directions
carefully. Such devices typically can be used only once, so activate
them only when you have sighted or heard the approach of a
search plane.
Survival Kit
Always be prepared by carrying the Scout Basic Essentials.
In an emergency, they can help you out of a jam.
• Pocketknife or multitool
• First-aid kit
• Extra clothing
• Rain gear
• Water bottle
• Flashlight
• Trail food
• Matches and fire starters
• Sun protection
• Map and compass
Also carry a whistle and a mirror. Signaling mirrors
are available in most Scout shops, sporting goods stores,
and outdoor-supply stores.
Wear or carry something bright. An orange poncho,
a space blanket (Mylar® emergency blanket), or a colorful piece
of plastic is light, packs easily, and can be used as a shelter as
well as a signaling device. By being prepared, you give yourself
the best possible chance of being found.


SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES 55
.Trail Markers and Rescue Signals
Emergency radio beacon
Radio Beacons
Emergency, position-indicating radio beacons are monitored
by aircraft and orbiting satellites. The satellites work together
(through triangulation) to determine your location and provide
the information to operations centers, which then mobilize
search-and-rescue personnel. If you carry a radio beacon,
use it if you need help, but remember that it is not a toy. Do not
play with the beacon or allow others to play with it, and never
experiment with it. Do not test it—it has a self-test function.
Improvised Signals
If you did not carry signaling devices with you, look
around for whatever you can find or make. Use rocks
or logs to lay out ground signals. Use a piece of broken
glass or a shiny credit card surface to reflect light
like a mirror.
If you have ever heard a beaver slap its tail on the water,
you know the sound can carry a great distance in the
woods. To improvise a sound-signaling device, imitate a
beaver by smacking two hard logs together.


In baseball, umpires use hand gestures to call balls and strikes,
to call a player out or safe, to indicate foul and fair balls, and to
enforce other rules of play.
SAFE
PLAY BALL TIMEOUT, FOUL BALL, OR DEAD BALL
FAIR BALLSTRIKE OR OUT


SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES 57
.Signals in Sports and at Work
Signals in Sports
and at Work
A police officer directs traffic with hand signals, a construction
foreman signs instructions to a crane operator, and a baseball
umpire signals that a runner is safe: These are a few of the
many ways in which signs and signals are used in sports
and in workplaces. Many types of activities have their own
standard hand signals, but these may vary from place to place
and among different users. As with any kind of signal, both the
sender and the receiver need to know and understand the
signals that are being used.
Sports Officials Hand Signs and Signals
Many sports rely on umpires, referees, or other types of
officials to ensure that the game is played by the rules.
Illustrated here are examples of the hand signals the officials
use in popular team sports.
Other sports such as soccer, field hockey, lacrosse, rugby,
and water polo also have officials using well-established
signals to control play and to inform players and spectators
about rule infractions.
A football game is full of signs, signals, and codes.
Coaches signal plays with signs and gestures, the
quarterback calls plays using codes, and the defense
calls its counter plays, to which the offense may
respond with another flurry of signs and verbal codes.


58 SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES
Signals in Sports and at Work.
INBOUND PASS
Basketball referees use hand gestures to start and stop the clock,
to signal shooting and scoring, and to call fouls and violations.
FOUL JUMP BALL
TECHNICAL FOULTRAVELING


SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES 59
.Signals in Sports and at Work
Football referees use gestures to signal such things as first
downs, touchdowns, timeouts, and infractions of the rules.
HOLDING
TOUCHDOWN FIRST DOWN
TIME OUTPERSONAL FOUL


60 SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES
Signals in Sports and at Work.
BACK,
TURN LEFT
BACK,
TURN RIGHT
STOP
DISTANCE
LEFT TO RIGHT
BACK UP
MOVE FORWARD STOP
SLOW DOWN
Hand signals for directing trucks
Equipment Operator Hand Signs
Construction sites can be dangerous and noisy places—so noisy
that shouted instructions cannot be heard above the din of
machinery and equipment. For communications on construction
sites, standardized systems of hand signals have been developed.
Different hand signs may be used at different worksites or by
different equipment operators, so it is essential that both the
signaler and the receiver know beforehand what the hand
signals mean.


SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES 61
.Signals in Sports and at Work
Concrete truck driver hand signals
START PUMP
SPEED UP
SLOW PUMP
DOWN
BOOM UP
BOOM RIGHT
STOP PUMP
LITTLE BIT BOOM DOWN
BOOM LEFT
As trucks or equipment come onto a construction site,
a guide is usually assigned to direct the driver to a particular
location using a set of directional hand signals. If the truck is
delivering concrete, a specific set of signals is used to direct the
positioning of the boom for pouring the concrete, and to start
the pump, adjust pump speed, add water to the concrete mix,
and stop pumping.


62 SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES
Signals in Sports and at Work.
Crane operator hand signals
HOIST LOAD STOP
EMERGENCY STOP
LOWER LOAD
SWING BOOM
For a crane operator, hand signals sometimes mimic the
actions of the machine. For example, the signaler may move
a hand in a circular motion overhead to direct the operator to
hoist (move up) the load, or circle
a hand held downward at the level
of the waist to signal for lowering
the load. Other signals direct the
positioning of the boom to safely
deliver the load. In crane operations,
the standard signal for “stop” is the
arm extended straight out to the side
and held rigidly. The hand moved
rapidly left to right from the stop
position signals an emergency stop.


SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES 63
.Signals in Sports and at Work
Aircraft Carrier Catapult Crew Signals
The flight deck of an aircraft carrier during flight operations has
been described as “controlled chaos.” Jets are catapulted into
the air while other aircraft are landing or being parked, refueled,
or loaded with armaments. The noise of jet engines and rotors is
so great, members of the deck crew must communicate mostly
through hand signals.
To direct a plane on the flight deck, more than 30 hand
signals are used. The general sequence to launch a jet is to
position the plane at the rear of the catapult (a device for
slinging a plane off the deck at high speed), attach a launch bar
and holdback to the plane’s
nose gear, raise the jet blast
deflector behind the plane,
make final safety checks, and
then release the holdback to
launch the plane down the
deck for takeoff. Throughout
this process, hand signals
relay vital information
between the deck crew and
the pilot. Only a few of the
many signals are shown here.


64 SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES
Signals in Sports and at Work.
Aircraft carrier catapult crew signals
FIRST READY/
CATAPULT READY
TAKING TENSION
FINAL TURNUP (NIGHT)
SUSPEND (NIGHT)
FINAL READY
FINAL TURNUP (DAY) FIRE/LAUNCH (DAY)
SUSPEND (DAY)


SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES 65
.Signals in Sports and at Work
Stopping/braking:
Extend left arm out
to the left, bent at the
elbow with the forearm
pointing downward.
When cycling in a group,
a stop may be signaled
by holding the hand
straight up in the air for
greater visibility.
An alternative right-turn
signal is to extend the left
arm out to the left, bent
at the elbow with the
forearm pointing upward.
Right turn: Extend right
arm straight out in the
direction of the turn.
Left turn: Extend left
arm straight out in the
direction of the turn.
Cyclist Hand Signals
Cyclists (and some motorists) make hand signals to indicate
their intentions to other traffic. Similar to automobile signaling,
cyclists use three main signals: left turn, right turn, and stopping.
Cyclists in a group may use additional signals to communicate
with other riders.
To signal to a group of cyclists to slow down, extend
the arm outward and move the hand up and down
as if gently patting an invisible dog.





SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES 67
.Sound Signals
Sound Signals
You might not often think of them, but you are familiar with
sound signals in many parts of your life. Most schools use a bell
system to start and end the school day and to
signal class changes, breaks, and lunch. Car
alarms are sound signals that are meant to
attract attention and discourage thieves. Fire
alarms are mainly sound signals, with some
also flashing warning lights. Outdoor sirens are
sounded to signal emergencies such as severe
weather and tornadoes.
Trains
As a warning to motorists and pedestrians,
trains must sound their whistles or horns
continuously for at least 15 seconds as they
approach railroad crossings, giving the required long-long-short-
long sequence of whistle or horn blasts. This sequence, which is
similar to the letter Q in Morse code, is not so much a letter as it
is a sequence of sound fluctuations that are unmistakable from
other nearby noises to make it useful as a warning. About a
dozen other standard train-whistle calls are also used, mostly to
communicate with railroad workers along the rails or in rail
yards. Whistles are used to give instructions, as a safety signal,
and to warn workers when a train is about to start moving.


68 SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES
Sound Signals.
Horn Signals
Engine Horn Meaning
“O” is a short blast;
“~” is a long blast.
O Apply brakes. Stop.
OO Engineer’s answer to any signal
unless otherwise specified.
OOO When standing, back up; when
running, stop at next station.
OOOO Engineer’s request for signals.
OOOOOOOOOO,
etc.
Person or livestock on track
(series of short blasts).
~~~~~~~~~~~~, etc. Approaching stations, junctions,
or railroad crossings at grade
(series of long blasts) without
stopping.
~OO A second section is following; call
for other trains to signal.
~OOO Flagman to go out to protect rear
of train.
~~ Release brakes. Proceed.
~~O~ Train is approaching public
crossing at grade.
~~~~ Flagman may return from west
or south.*
~~~~~ Flagman may return from east
or north.*
*These horn signals may be followed
by “O” or “OO” or “OOO” when
several tracks are in use. The number
of short blasts corresponds to the
track number.


SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES 69
.Sound Signals
Military Communications
The armed services have traditionally used various sound
signals, such as bugle calls to signal reveille, morning colors,
assembly, attention, retreat, and taps. At sea, boatswain (bosun)
pipes were first used because their high pitch could be heard
above the sound of wind and waves. Aboard ships today,
boatswain’s pipes are still used to call activities and ceremonies
such as “pipe aboard,” “away boats,” “all hands on deck,”
and “carry on.”
Military units may use whistle signals in drill or formation
maneuvers and short-range communications.
1. One long blast means “silence,” “attention,” or “look
for my next signal.”
2. Two short blasts mean “all right.”
3. A succession of long, slow blasts means “go out,”
“move farther way,” “advance,” or “scatter.”
4. A series of short, sharp blasts means “rally,” “come
together,” or “close in.”
5. Three short blasts followed by one long blast means
“leaders, come here.”
6. Three short blasts mean “danger,” “alarm,” or “caution.”
7. A succession of alternating long and short blasts means
“mess call.”
Boatswain’s pipe


70 SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES
Sound Signals.
Boating Signals
Vessels operating in U.S. waters that exceed certain length
and propulsion (power or sail) requirements must have a
whistle, horn, or bell and use sound signals when navigating
in low-visibility conditions, to get the attention of other vessels,
or to signal danger or distress. Often, these signals are repeated
every two minutes until the situation is resolved: the fog lifts,
for example. Sound signals notify other vessels that someone
is near them.
These signals are commonly used:
• Irregular sounds that cannot be mistaken for other signals are
used to attract attention.
• Long continuous blasts signal distress.
• One short blast means the vessel intends to turn to starboard
(to the right).
• Two short blasts means the vessel intends to turn to port
(to the left).
When you use any type of watercraft, make it a point to
carry some sort of sound signaling device. Your rescue whistle
(which you should always have with you) can be used to signal
distress when you are canoeing or kayaking.


SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES 71
.Sound Signals
Sound-only signals have their limitations. Louder
noises can drown them out. Motorists with the volume
cranked up on their car stereos may not hear the wail
of a fire truck or the whistle of an approaching train.
Pedestrians listening to music through headphones
may fail to hear an oncoming car. To be more
noticeable, therefore, warning signals often combine
sounds with lights. Many buildings have fire alarms
with flashing lights, and emergency vehicles such
as ambulances are equipped with both sirens and
lights. People who are deaf or hard of hearing may
use devices that flash or dim the lights in their home
whenever the doorbell rings. Cellphones can be set
to vibrate to signal incoming calls when the ringer is
turned off or inaudible.





SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES 73
.Symbols
Symbols
In its simplest sense, a symbol is a picture, letter, character, or
object that represents something. Symbols can be created to stand
for ideas, words, actions, organizations, or almost anything.
One familiar example is the universal recycling symbol
that appears on plastic bags, aluminum cans, and many other
everyday objects. The recycling symbol represents an unending
loop (like a Möbius strip) with three half-twisted arrows forming
a triangle. It was designed by 23-year-old college student Gary
Anderson to honor the first Earth Day in 1970. The symbol
indicates that an object or material is recyclable, and it is also
used on bins for storing and sorting recyclables.
Look for other symbols around your home, school, or troop
meeting place. Your school mascot is a symbol. Your town or
city might have its own symbol, or you might belong to a group
that uses a special emblem.
Map Symbols
Knowing what map symbols mean is an essential skill. Map
symbols use shapes and often colors to represent what is on the
land. Similar symbols appear on topographical maps, highway
maps, nautical charts, aeronautical charts, and other map types.
The symbols are explained in the map key or legend located in a
map’s margins.
Scouting has many symbols with meanings that are
woven into the designs. Consider the Tenderfoot
badge, a trefoil like the north point of an old
compass. The shape of the badge signifies
the way a Scout points the right way in life
just as a compass does in the wilderness.
The three points of the trefoil, like the three
raised fingers of the Scout sign, represent the
three parts of the Scout Oath.


74 SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES
Symbols.
The legend, or key, typically provides other
essential information:
• Directions. North is toward the top of most maps.
A map will often have a true north arrow in its
margin and an arrow showing the direction of
magnetic north.
• Scale. The scale of a map compares the size
of the map with the size of the area it represents.
A map scale of 1:24,000 means that one inch on
the map represents 24,000 inches or 2,000 feet
on the ground.
• Distances. Bar scales can be used for measuring
feet, meters, and miles on a map.
• Date. A map’s date tells when it was drawn or
last updated. An older map will not show new
buildings, roads, trails, or other recent changes
on the land.
The best maps for hiking are topographical
maps that use contour lines to show the shape of the
land—its hills, valleys, mountains, and plains. Each
point on a contour line is the same elevation above
sea level. Where the lines are close together, the land
slopes steeply. Where the lines are far apart, the
terrain is almost flat.
Contour lines are drawn in brown. Topographical
maps use other colors for other features:
• Blue for water—ponds, lakes, streams,
rivers, reservoirs
• Green for vegetation—forests, woodlands,
grasslands, orchards
• Red or black for human-built structures—
roads, rail lines, trails, buildings, boundaries
• White for open areas—fields, meadows,
rocky slopes
Basic map symbols


SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES 75
.Symbols
These colors, while common, may not mean the same thing
on all maps. Some maps show larger cities in yellow, airports
in pink, and areas such as military bases in orange. Some
maps are printed in only one color and may rely on shapes,
symbols, patterns, and different styles of lettering (fonts) to
indicate particular features, such as a flag atop a black square to
represent a school, all-capital letters for the name of a road, and
speckled patterns for marshes and swamps. Whenever you use a
map that is new to you, be sure to check the map key or legend
to familiarize yourself with the map’s specific symbology (its
system of signs and symbols).


76 SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES
Symbols.
Hazard and Safety Symbols
Hazard symbols are meant to alert people to dangers such as
radiation, toxins, and chemical, flammable, and electrical
hazards. Distinctive symbols also indicate the need for personal
protective equipment like eye or hearing protection.
Besides providing information to help you stay safe, symbols
may indicate the availability and locations of restrooms, litter
containers, public transportation, and countless other
conveniences and services.
The general caution sign displays an exclamation point to attract
attention. The skull and crossbones is often used to label poisons.
The radioactive symbol’s symmetrical three-sided shape can be
easily recognized from any angle. The electrical hazard symbol
warns of the danger of electrocution. Signs and symbols indicate
when eye or hearing protection or other personal protective gear
is required.


SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES 77
.Symbols
Evacuation Route and Exit Signs
In many parts of the United States, natural disasters
occur so frequently that evacuation routes have
been established. Blue signs designate these routes,
directing people to primary highways away from
the danger.
In any building you enter, look for the fire exit
or emergency exit signs or symbols, building maps
that show the locations of evacuation routes, and
signs or symbols that identify assembly areas
where people should gather when they are clear
of the building. Look for the fire hose or fire
extinguisher signs. Also find the symbols that
designate the locations of first aid kits, automated
external defibrillators (AEDs), and emergency
medical care.
Hurricane
evacuation route


78 SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES
Symbols.
Traffic Signs
If you have gone any distance along a roadway, highway, or
city street, you will have noticed traffic signs. Anyone who uses
public roads, whether cyclist or motorist, must understand and
know how to respond to traffic signs.


SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES 79
.Symbols
Orange is the background
color for temporary traffic-
control signs. During
road construction, orange
signs warn of detours,
closed lanes, changes in
road conditions, and the
presence of flaggers and
construction workers.
Signs for school zones,
pedestrian crossings,
and bicycle lanes are
yellow or fluorescent
yellow-green.
Mileposts, street
names, freeway
entrances and exits,
and other types of
destination, distance,
and guide signs have
green backgrounds.
Blue is used to inform
travelers about nearby
services such as food,
gas, lodging, tourist
information centers,
and hospitals.
Brown indicates public
recreation and
historical or cultural
sites such as parks,
landmarks, and
historical markers.
Night speed-limit signs
and truck regulatory
signs have black
backgrounds.
Traffic signs come in a great many shapes and colors, but
they can be grouped into fewer than a dozen basic types:
Other regulatory signs
usually have a white
background with black
letters. These include
speed limit, one way,
road closed, and keep
right (or left) signs.
Yellow is used for
warning signs about
road conditions, lane
changes, intersections,
turns and curves,
merging traffic, and
much more.
Signs that are red are
limited to stop, yield,
and prohibition signs
like “Do Not Enter” or
“Wrong Way.” These are
regulatory signs.


80 SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES
Symbols.
The only circle-shaped road sign gives advance warning of a
railroad crossing. A 12-sided crossbuck (X shape) also marks
railroad crossings. These signs are uniquely shaped to help call
drivers’ attention to the extreme dangers of collisions between
trains and vehicles.
Sign Shapes
Certain types of signs have special shapes so that travelers can
recognize them quickly and react appropriately. In general, the
more sides a traffic sign has, the more critical is the message the
sign sends.
A stop sign is an octagon (eight sides). Stop signs are the
only traffic signs in the United States that can have eight sides.
Warning signs are diamond-shaped, and yield signs are
downward-pointing triangles. A “No Passing Zone” sign is a
triangle pointing to the side; that is, a pennant.
A rectangle that is higher than it is wide is used for
regulatory signs such as speed limits. A wider-than-tall rectangle
is used mainly for guide signs about highway entrances, exits,
destinations, distances, and similar types of information.


SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES 81
.Symbols
Text Symbols and Emoticons
In emails and cellphone text messaging, symbols save space and
let users type less, communicate faster, and show their state of
mind. Text symbols and emoticons typically represent facial
expressions or suggest attitudes or emotions. They can also
stand for objects, with complicated symbols that resemble
pictographs (prehistoric drawings on rock walls). The chart
shows a few standard emoticons as well as less-common text
symbols. Dozens of such symbols are used.
EMOTICON TEXT SYMBOL MEANING
:-) Smiling
:-D Grinning
:-( Sad
:-\ Skeptical or undecided
:-| Determined
:0 Surprised
d:-) Baseball (cap)
T+ Think positive
(:::X:::) Adhesive bandage
/\(00)/\ Spider
Designing a Symbol
To design your own symbol, you must first decide what message
you wish to communicate. Do you want to give information,
convey a feeling, provide inspiration, or encourage action? What
shape(s) and color(s) best match the message you wish to
communicate? Is your design simple and easy to recognize?
Think about the elements of familiar symbols and what
makes them effective. For instance, the three arrows of the
universal recycling symbol can remind people to “reduce, reuse,
and recycle.” The symbol of your school or your favorite sports
team may express traditions or inspire loyalty. Your city or
town’s symbol might convey the community’s “personality” or
its residents’ way of life. In designing your own symbol, decide
on its basic purpose and use simple, uncluttered elements of
shape and color to clearly communicate your message.


While cryptography is the science of writing or creating hidden messages, cryptology
is the science of reading or deciphering hidden messages.


SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES 83
.Cryptography
Cryptography
In cryptography, secret codes or ciphers are used to hide
(encode or encrypt) the true meanings of messages. Strong
codes and ciphers use highly complex mathematical formulas
and algorithms (multistep procedures) to secure them and keep
them secret.
What Is a Code?
A code is a way to replace the actual words in a message
with other words or symbols that hide the message’s true
meaning. One example is a dictionary code, a system in which
two identical copies of a dictionary are used, one by the sender
and one by the receiver of the message. The sender might create
an unencoded message (called “plaintext”) and then look up the
page number in the dictionary where each word in the message
appears. Each word is coded according to the word’s position
on the dictionary page. For example, the code number “4625”
might mean, “Go to page 46 and look in the 2nd column for the
5th word down from the top.” That word might be bird; using
this system, the word bird when sent in code is “4625.” The
same procedure is followed to encode each word in the
message, creating a coded message that consists only of
numbers, with each group of numbers representing a word.
This type of “book code” has many variations. In fact, any
book can be used, not just a dictionary. Two copies of the same
editions of the Scouts BSA Handbook for Boys or Scouts BSA
Handbook for Girls could be used, for example, and the code
number “4625” might mean “go to page 46 and find the 25th
word appearing on that page.”
Cryptographers are people who are skilled at creating
codes and ciphers. Cryptanalysts are skilled in
code-breaking. Both kinds of specialists are usually
well-educated in math.


84 SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES
Cryptography.
What Is a Cipher?
A cipher differs from a code in that letters, instead
of words, are replaced. A cipher changes or rearranges
each letter in a message. For instance, a substitution cipher
might replace the letters in the word TRUSTWORTHY to
spell it AGWCADEGAMP, replacing each T with an A, each R
with a G, etc.
The History of Cryptography
People have used secret codes for thousands of years. In ancient
Greece, leaders of the city of Sparta wrote messages to their
generals across the edges of strips of parchment wrapped in a
spiral around staffs, or batons. Once the parchment was
unrolled, the message could be read only by wrapping the strip
around an identical staff belonging to the general to whom the
message was addressed. This method is a type of transposition
cipher—the message’s letters or characters are reordered
(transposed) instead of being replaced.
Early cipher device
of ancient Greece
Hiding in Plain Sight
Some secrets rely not on ciphers, but on clever
concealment. You are probably familiar with invisible
ink made from milk or lemon juice, a method of
concealment that dates to antiquity. The Roman
philosopher and military commander of the early Roman
Empire, Pliny the Elder (A.D. 23–A.D. 79), recommended
using the milky juice of a common plant that turned clear
as it dried. Messages also could be hidden in written
material (whether ancient scrolls or modern books) by
punching tiny holes under selected letters or words. The
pinpricked letters spelled out the message when the page
was held up to the light. Another method of revealing
certain letters or words was to lay a grille (a cutout pattern
of paper, metal, etc.) over written material to disclose a
secret message hidden within the text.


SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES 85
.Cryptography
The Italian philosopher and architect Leon
Battista Alberti invented a cipher disk in 1467. He
used two different alphabets arranged in two
rings, with the larger ring encircling the smaller
one. Lining up a letter from one ring with
a different letter in the other ring created a
simple substitution cipher that could be used
to encrypt or decrypt a message.
In the early 18th century, the Freemasons
began using a cipher commonly known as
the “pigpen cipher” to keep their records and
communications private. The method replaces
letters with symbols that are fragments of a grid.
Evidence suggests that George Washington’s army used the
cipher during the Revolutionary War, and it was used by both
sides during the American Civil War. It is a simple substitution
cipher. Using the example key shown in the illustration, the
message “X MARKS THE SPOT” is enciphered as follows:
Thomas Jefferson invented a cipher wheel in the early
1790s. The device had a set of wooden disks, each with the
26 letters of the alphabet arranged around its edge. The order
of the letters was random and different on each disk. The
cryptographer spelled out a plaintext message on the cipher
wheel and then copied down the line of characters above or
below it to encipher the message. The receiver deciphered the
message by rotating the disks on a matching cipher wheel so
they spelled out the encrypted message on one row, which
made the plaintext message appear on the row above or below
it. Jefferson’s cipher was among the
most advanced of its day. The U.S.
Army used a version of this cipher
wheel from 1922 until the beginning
of World War II.
Replica of a
Confederate
cipher disk;
only five
originals are
known to
exist today.
Thomas Jefferson’s “wheel cipher”


86 SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES
Cryptography.
During the American Civil War, signalmen waved flags
back and forth in the wigwagging system to send messages in
Morse code. The messages were sometimes encrypted with the
cipher wheel before being transmitted by wigwag. Both sides
in the Civil War tried to intercept and decipher the other side’s
messages to learn their plans.
In 1942, during World War II, United States military
intelligence successfully broke Japanese naval codes and learned
that a large Japanese force was headed for the U.S. base on the
Pacific island of Midway. Knowing the Japanese plan helped the
U.S. Navy defeat the enemy force. The Battle of Midway was a
major turning point in the war in the Pacific.
During the early days of World War II, cryptology experts
in Poland—with help from the French—broke the seemingly
unbreakable German Enigma cipher and shared their success
with the British, who in turn shared the secret with their ally,
the United States. Great Britain depended on supplies arriving
by ship from the United States, but the ships were in constant
danger of being hit by German submarines. The breaking of
the Enigma cipher helped the allies locate and sink German
subs before they could attack the supply ships, and ensured
that allied commanders had the information they needed
about enemy plans and movements. Many historians believe
this cryptanalytic success was vital in shortening World War II
in Europe.
The United States also began to analyze communications
of the Soviet Union, and in 1946, partially decoded the ciphers
that were used by Soviet spies in the United States. This
project, called “Venona,” took nearly 40 years, not ending
until about 1980.
Modern Codes and Ciphers
The invention of machines and computers made codes and
ciphers harder to break and easier to use, which has in turn
made the art of codebreaking both harder and easier. Machine
ciphers are stronger (less breakable) than manual systems
and are widely used to secure important information. Modern
encryption protects people’s data and privacy. Cellphones,
tablets, computers, and software use strong encryption
technology to help protect banking and financial details,
emails, text messages, and other personal information.


The National Cryptologic Museum, near Fort Meade in Maryland, displays
many exhibits on the history of cryptology, including an Enigma machine.


88 SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES
Cryptography.
The federal government is among the largest employers
of mathematicians in the United States, and many of these
mathematicians work to make or break codes and ciphers.
Cryptographers and cryptanalysts are employed by the
Department of Defense, the military, and other federal, state,
and local agencies.
The Code Talkers
During World War II, the United States military had a
secret code that baffled the enemy: Navajo “code
talkers” adapted their complex native language to
create an unbreakable system. They used everyday
Navajo words to represent terms that did not exist in
the Navajo language—“iron fish” for submarine,
“tortoise” for tank, “potatoes” for grenades, etc. The
code talkers often worked 35 hours straight without
food or rest, relaying vital military communications
without error. Only recently has the code talkers’
exceptional service been publicly recognized and
honored, because the Navajo language remained
potentially valuable as a secret code long after World
War II ended. For more about Navajo and other Native
American code talkers, see the Indian Lore merit
badge pamphlet.
Creating Your Own Code
To create your own secret code, you can use any of the methods
discussed above, such as a substitution cipher, pigpen cipher,
or book code. You could make a device with rings or disks of
letters, similar to the Alberti cipher disk or Jefferson’s cipher
wheel. Or do research to find the code system you want to use,
or make up your own code.
Whatever type of encryption you use, you must also make
a key that gives instructions or shares the secret for deciphering
the messages you write in that code. Give the key to the
recipients of your messages so they will know how to convert
the coded text back to the original (plaintext) information.


SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES 89
.Cryptography





SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES 91
.Resources
SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES 91
.Resources
Resources
Scouting Literature
Scouts BSA Handbook for Boys; Scouts
BSA Handbook for Girls; Fieldbook;
Communication, Digital Technology,
Disabilities Awareness, Emergency
Preparedness, Graphic Arts, Indian Lore,
Programming, Radio, Railroading,
Search and Rescue, and Wilderness
Survival merit badge pamphlets.
Websites, Tutorials, and Apps
American Sign Language
American Sign Language University
lifeprint.com
Handspeak®
handspeak.com
Signing Savvy
signingsavvy.com
Braille
Braille Works
brailleworks.com/braille-resources/
braille-alphabet
BrailleBack
A tablet/smartphone app
Braille Bug®
braillebug.org
Braille Flash Cards
printableflashcards.net/preview/Braille
Cryptography
Break the Code
cia.gov/spy-kids/games/games_code.html
CryptoClub
cryptoclub.org
Crypto Museum
cryptomuseum.com
Journey Into Cryptography
khanacademy.org/computing/computer-
science/cryptography
Secret Language: Cryptography
& Secret Codes
exploratorium.edu/ronh/secret/secret.html
Morse Code
Learn Morse Code
learnmorsecode.com
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


92 SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES
Resources.
92 SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES
Resources.
Nautical Flags
International Code Flags
or Signaling Flags
boatsafe.com/international-code-
signaling-flags/
Nautical Flags and Their Meanings
marinewaypoints.com/learn/flags/
flags.shtml
Nautical Flags—International Code Flags
soundkeepers.com/kids/alphabet
Rescue and Distress Signals
Basic Survival Strategy
cap-es.net/zips/bsssh.PDF
Boating Distress Signals
boatsafe.com/nauticalknowhow/
distress.htm
Ground-to-Air Signals
cap-es.net/zips/
gnd2airsignals.PDF
Semaphore
Semaphore Flag Signaling System
marinewaypoints.com/learn/flags/
semaphore/semaphore.shtml
Trail Signs
Trail Signs & Blazes
inquiry.net/outdoor/skills/seton/
blazes.htm
Trail Signs of Direction
inquiry.net/outdoor/skills/beard/
signs_direction.htm
Trail Signs: Traditional
inquiry.net/outdoor/skills/b-p/signs.htm
Wigwag and Other Signals
The Science Notebook
science-notebook.com/
gilbert-signal01.html
Sending WIGWAG Code
cranburyscouts.org/WigWagBL.htm
Signalman Sam’s Signaling
Resource Page
cranburyscouts.org/SamsPage.htm
Smiley Symbols Dictionary
planetpals.com/smiley.html
Wikipedia List of Emoticons
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
List_of_emoticons
Books and CDs
American Radio Relay League.
Your Introduction to Morse Code
(audio CDs). ARRL, 2008.
Araujo, Lynn. Historical Signals
and Semaphores.
U.S. Games Systems, 2006.
Blackwood, Gary. Mysterious Messages:
A History of Codes and Ciphers.
Dutton, 2009.
Collins, Harold S., et al. Braille for the
Sighted: Beginning Braille. Garlic
Press, 1998.
Fletcher, Archibald Lee. Boy Scouts
Signal Sender, or When Wigwag
Knowledge Paid. Big Rock, 2011.
Hubler, Michael S., and Lillian J.
Hubler. Scout Sign Language.
CreateSpace Independent Publishing
Platform, 2013.
Janeczko, Paul B. Top Secret: A
Handbook of Codes, Ciphers and
Secret Writing. Candlewick, 2006.
Johnson, Bud. Break the Code:
Cryptography for Beginners.
Dover, 2013.


SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES 93
.Resources
SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES 93
.Resources
Lunde, Paul. The Book of Codes:
Understanding the World of Hidden
Messages. University of California
Press, 2009.
National Imagery and Mapping Agency
(NIMA). International Code of
Signals. Starpath, 2009.
Seton, Ernest Thompson. Sign Talk:
A Universal Signal Code. Nabu
Press, 2014.
Signal Corps. Manual of Visual
Signaling. United States Army Signal
Corps, 2013.
Sternberg, Martin L.A. American Sign
Language Dictionary. Harper
Perennial, 1998.
Warner, Penny. Signing Fun: American
Sign Language Vocabulary, Phrases,
Games, and Activities. Gallaudet
University Press, 2006.
Acknowledgements
Scouting America thanks the following
members of the Signs, Signals, and
Codes Merit Badge Development Team,
who worked diligently to develop the
merit badge requirements and content
for this pamphlet.
Timothy I. Malaney—Eagle Scout and
team lead
Shane T. Hensley, MBA—Certified by
the Registry of Interpreters for the
Deaf (Certificate of Interpretation and
Certificate of Transliteration); video
relay interpreter; native user of
American Sign Language
James Lindfors—Patrol sergeant,
sheriff’s office, Hennepin County
(Minnesota); amateur radio operator;
SKYWARN® spotter; National
Weather Service instructor;
active Scouter
Michael J. Lopez—U.S. Army radio
operator for International Morse
Code; active Scouter and troop
committee member
Gary McKee—U.S. Coast Guard
Radioman First Class; technical
supervisor, RCA Global
Communications; member, U.S.
Power Squadron; park manager,
Florida State Parks; active Scouter
Patricia Mitchell, M.Ed.—Special
education teacher (retired); braille
instructor and certified teacher of the
visually impaired
James Mize—U.S. Navy Reserve
cryptologic specialist; amateur radio
operator; active Scouter


94 SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES
Resources.
94 SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES
Resources.
Ralph Rivera—U.S. Army cryptologist;
M.S. in telecommunications
management and M.A. in national
security and strategic studies; Naval
War College graduate; Scouter
Catherine Summ—Certified teacher of
the visually impaired, State of
Connecticut, Bureau of Rehabilitative
Services, Bureau of Education and
Services for the Blind; Scouter
Shannon Way—Major, U.S. Army
(Strategy and Policy); Master of
International Public Policy; mission
scanner, Civil Air Patrol; Scouter
Photo and Illustration Credits
Crypto Museum, courtesy—page 85
(Confederate cipher disk)
Library of Congress Prints and
Photographs Division, courtesy—
page 41
NASA Goddard/Rebecca Roth,
courtesy—page 55
National Security Agency/National
Cryptologic Museum, courtesy—
pages 82 and 87 (Enigma exhibit)
Wikipedia.org, courtesy—pages 11
(smoke signaling) and 84
Wikipedia/Bundesarchiv_Bild_101I-
769-0229-0A,_Frankreich,_
Guderian,_"Enigma".jpg: Borchert,
Erich (Eric), courtesy—page 87
(Enigma being used in German
command vehicle)
Wikipedia/Daniel Case, courtesy—
page 48
Wikpedia/Dbaisley, courtesy—page 47
Wikipedia/Lokilech, courtesy—page 12
Wikipedia/Nemilar, courtesy—
page 11 (lantern)
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property
of or are protected by Scouting
America.
John McDearmon—All illustrations on
pages 22, 24, 25, 33, 50, 53, 56, 60,
61, 62, 64


SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES 95
.Resources
SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND CODES 95
.Resources


