Dr. Albert Einstein Supernova Award
For Scouts BSA (age 14 years or older and 1st Class Rank),
Venturers and Sea Scouts
NOTE: A youth must be a registered Scouts BSA (age 14 years or older and 1st Class Rank), Venturer or
Sea Scout when this work is completed to earn this award.
1. Earn either the Thomas Edison Supernova Award while a registered Scouts BSA or the Wright Brothers
Supernova Award while a registered Venturer or Sea Scout (hereafter referred to as Scout).
2. Complete FOUR additional Supernova activity topics, one from each of the four different STEM areas.
Note: Upon completion of the Dr. Albert Einstein Supernova Award, the Scout will have completed two
Supernova activity topics in each of the four STEM areas for a total of eight.
3. Pick one of the eight Supernova activity topics you have completed and present the activity to a
group. The group may be fellow Scouts, students, adult leaders, friends, or family.
4. With guidance from your mentor, select a current STEM-related concern and develop a research
project or experiment (“the project”) related to that area. Prepare a one-page written proposal detailing
your scientific hypothesis or engineering objective and your proposed experimental methods, which
must be approved by your council’s STEM Committee before you begin work. Execute the project or
experiment, and then prepare a complete and well-documented written report AND an oral
presentation. Present both the oral and written reports to your mentor and to your local council STEM
committee.
a. This research project or experiment should be challenging and should require a significant
investment of time and effort on your part. (A guideline would be approximately 100 hours.)
b. If your mentor is not a specialist in the area of your project or experiment, they will request
assistance from a specialist who will serve as a STEM consultant.
5. Submit the Einstein Supernova application along with all the supporting documentation, reports, and
data for all parts of all requirements to your council’s STEM Committee chair or Advancement
Committee Chair, who will coordinate the group’s review and convey their decision.
A guide to earning and mentoring the Dr. Albert Einstein Supernova Award is available on the website.