MOVIEMAKING


MOVIEMAKING
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Moviemaking or check Scoutbook
for the latest requirements.
35869
ISBN 978-0-8395-3238-5
©2025 Scouting America/Boy Scouts of America
2025 Printing


MOVIEMAKING 3





MOVIEMAKING 5
Contents
What Is Moviemaking? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
A Moviemaker’s Tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
The Importance of Preproduction Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
Picking the Right Equipment for the Project . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
Basic Techniques for Shooting Your Project . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
Editing and Showing Your Project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
Careers in Moviemaking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
Glossary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62





.What Is Moviemaking?
What Is Moviemaking?
Moviemaking is a way to tell stories visually through the art
and science of motion picture photography. A cinematographer
uses framing, camera movement, and lighting to set a mood
and tell a story. Although “canned” or stock photography and
technical processes are vital to moviemaking, the art and sci-
ence of the moving picture are truly what give life to a picture.
This merit badge pamphlet describes the fundamentals
of producing motion pictures, focusing on the video and digital
formats rather than film. Video and digital imaging equipment
is readily available and less expensive to use than film.
Although there are some who prefer working with film, most
major movies these days are produced using digital technology.
A cinematographer learns to use effective light, accurate
focus, careful composition (or arrangement), and appropriate
camera movement to tell stories. This pamphlet will also teach
you how to develop a story and describe other pre- and post-
production processes necessary for making a quality
motion picture.
Earning this merit badge can
• Provide tools for the storyteller
to express ideas visually for a
greater audience.
• Strengthen communication skills.
• Build a foundation for a career
in making movies.


8 MOVIEMAKING
What Is Moviemaking?.
History of Making Movies
It is amazing to think how far moving pictures and the
making of movies have come in a relatively short time.
It is also remarkable to think of what a strip of movie film
actually is—a series of individual still photos recorded in a
camera at a certain speed (about 24 frames per second) and
projected onto a screen at the same or a similar speed.
On a filmstrip, the frames are separated by thin, dark lines.
When the filmstrip is loaded into a projector, a rotating
shutter opens and closes to obscure those lines and permits
each frame to be flashed twice on the screen. An audience
watching a film in a theater actually sees only the pictures
depicted on each of the frames (and sits in darkness in
between). What appears to be the flowing movement of
action on the screen is just an illusion through a natural effect
your eyes provide called “persistence of vision.”
By the time photography was invented in 1826, hundreds
of optical toys were already in existence. These gadgets used
images on cylinders with shutter devices to produce the illusion
of motion. The phenakistoscope (Greek for “deceitful view”) of
1832 and the zoetrope (Greek for “live turning”) of 1834 had
“phase drawings” (like a rider mounting a horse) on the inside
of a rotating disk that, when viewed through slots, seemed to
move. By 1849, the drawings had been replaced with phase
photographs—for example, a horse and rider jumping trestles—
that were set up and posed, not recorded from a live event.
With wet plate photog-
raphy, people had to
hold a pose for several
minutes until the plate
dried so that the image
would not blur. This
photo of President
John Tyler was taken
circa 1860–1865.


MOVIEMAKING 9
.What Is Moviemaking?
In 1876, the wet plate negatives used in photography
were replaced with dry plates. The use of dry plates reduced
the exposure time from minutes to as little as one-hundredth
of a second. The rapid speed allowed “series” photography.
Photographer Eadweard Muybridge (1830–1904) gained
worldwide fame by photographing animal and human move-
ment that could not be perceived by the human eye. In 1872,
he used photography to prove that there was a moment in a
horse’s gallop when all four hooves were off the ground at
one time. In his test, 12 cameras were triggered in succession,
showing the horse’s stages of galloping motion.
Two years after Muybridge photographed a galloping
horse, hand-drawn, tinted drawings based on series photos
were mounted on a circular glass disk and projected with a
magnifying lens and light source onto a wall in a dark room.
In 1882, a “chronophotographic gun” (it looked like a rifle)
recorded the first series of photos of live action in a single cam-
era that imprinted images on a rotating glass plate. In 1883, the
glass plate became a roll of paper film. By 1887, celluloid was
used to make the roll of film.
In 1889, inventor Thomas Edison devel-
oped the kinetograph, a motion picture camera
that used a stop-motion device to ensure regu-
lar movement of the film through the camera.
Holes in the celluloid filmstrip let clawed gears
pull it through the camera and projector. One
of Edison’s first film subjects was the famous
cowgirl Annie Oakley. She was a crack sharp-
shooter with Wild Bill Cody’s Wild West Show,
a traveling live entertainment show of that era.
Edison filmed Oakley shooting at balls in the
air from a kneeling position, standing, and
while jumping over a table.
Eadweard
Muybridge spent
the latter part
of his career
producing
thousands
of images
that capture
progressive
movements
within fractions
of a second.
Celluloid was originally invented as a substitute for
ivory in billiard balls.
Thomas Edison’s kinetoscope


10 MOVIEMAKING
What Is Moviemaking?.
Edison’s kinetograph led to the wildly popular kinetoscope,
a coin-operated viewing device the size and shape of a small
icebox. From the kinetograph, a person could view short mov-
ies such as boxing matches, ballets, or vaudeville or variety rou-
tines. These movies ran on spools between an electric lamp and
shutter. As they became the rage after debuting in New York City,
the Edison Manufacturing Company began supplying
60-second “shorts” to run on kinetoscopes.
By 1893, the first movie studio was created. It was a small
room with a section of roof that opened to admit sunlight. The
studio moved on a circular track, which allowed the moviemak-
ers to “follow” the sun across the sky. Hundreds of shorts were
produced in this studio, but only as recordings of a particular
event or subject, not as stories to be told. Editing such things
was unheard of, because no one wanted to edit “reality.”
A new kind of projector was invented that broke the film
less often than earlier machines, leading to films of greater length
(six minutes). These longer films were soon shown to larger
audiences and showed politicians’ speeches, narrated tours of
foreign cities, barbers cutting hair, and the like. It was not until
1900 that the revolutionary idea arose to use this new medium
to tell a story. This trend led to artistic innovations such as fading
to black between scenes (like the curtain coming down during
a stage play); combining interior and exterior settings; cutting
or “shifting” between staged scenes and stock footage (which
came from the Edison archive); and using the first special effects
(enhancing a gun battle with extra bursts of smoke).
One of Thomas Edison’s assistants, W.K.L. Dickson, captured this
series of a man sneezing using Edison’s kinetograph.


MOVIEMAKING 11
.What Is Moviemaking?
By 1907, a million people per day were seeing movies in
nickelodeons across the United States. Sound and color were
added. Filmmakers in countries around the world began pro-
ducing their own works. Westerns, musicals, comedies, horror
films, documentaries, gangster films, romantic tearjerkers,
science fiction, suspense, epics, and blockbusters—all of them
came to the big screen in just 40 years.
Elements of Moviemaking
Moving images that are flashed across television screens and
the big screens at motion picture theaters have a tremendous
and immediate impact on people. Live news pictures that are
collected from events—sometimes at the moment they occur—
stir a wide range of emotions in viewers around the world.
On the other hand, some images on the screen have been
painstakingly crafted to create deep impressions on viewers.
Live images are the work of news photographers and camera-
people, but “manufactured” images—called imagery—form
the art of the moviemakers.
With imagery such as what you see in weekly dramatic
television programs and theatrical motion pictures, the director
and the production team can generate the same heartfelt feel-
ings conjured by live images. However, movies can take the
viewer a step further by creating visual environments that may
not exist in real life. Motion pictures might also capture a
moment from an actor that would be nearly impossible to record
in a live event. The entire moviemaking team, then, collaborates
by combining technical skills with visual storytelling to help
create a compelling story.
Since the late 1800s, when the first big-screen movies were
made, the process of telling a story on film has evolved as an
art form. Telling a visually compelling story with lighting,
camera angles, an eye for composition and detail, and special
effects is the ultimate goal.
Simply
videotaping family
or friends could
be your start
in moviemaking.
Nickelodeons, popular in the early 20th century, were
small, neighborhood movie theaters where admission
was only a nickel. Often, a pianist accompanied the
action on the screen.


12 MOVIEMAKING
What Is Moviemaking?.
Visual Storytelling
Independent filmmaker John Stone says one of the
most important ways to expand a story visually is to
show the action from a number of different perspec-
tives. “Cinematography is all about that: capturing the
same dialogue, the same action, the same characters,
in various ways to evoke the intended emotion from
the audience,” he said. “For film and TV, where you are
creating a drama or comedy or live-action film, using a
single camera allows you to create the most ideal light-
ing from whatever perspective you are shooting. You
film the same scene over and over from lots of different
perspectives, and then during the editing process, it is
pulled together to most effectively tell the story.”
Stone developed his first film, Down
and Derby, about the competitive
Scouting event known as the
pinewood derby. (He was a
Cub Scout as a child and
had competed in a pine-
wood derby. As a father
of three sons, he has also
been a Scout leader on the
West Coast.) The movie
ends with a big pinewood
derby race. In real time,
a derby race lasts about
3 seconds; that would have
been very anticlimactic in the movie.
To slow down the race, a variety of techniques
were used—not just slow motion. “You show the race
action, the crowd, individual expressions, close-ups,
and faraway shots,” Stone explained. “In the end, what
we were able to do is to extend a 3-second race into a
53-second sequence.”
In TV and
moviemaking
today, filmmaker
John Stone said
it is still most
common to make
movies using a
single camera.


MOVIEMAKING 13
.What Is Moviemaking?
In some movies, you will see aerial views of land-
scapes or cityscapes. Those types of scenes give the
audience perspective of where the action is taking place.
In Down and Derby, a camera was mounted on a dolly
so it could ride down the track behind and in front of the
pinewood derby cars. “Visually you bring moviegoers
in as if they are right in the action,” he said. In other
words, the moviegoer sees what the characters in the
movie see.
The combination of great creativity by the entire
production team, good writing, and the ability of a tal-
ented director to bring all of these elements together in
a visually pleasing and interesting way are what make
moviemaking so fascinating.





MOVIEMAKING 15
.A Moviemaker’s Tools
A Moviemaker’s Tools
When working on feature films and cable and TV productions,
a variety of tools and techniques can be used to create the
images sought by directors and producers. Just as an artist
works with many colors on a palette, the cinematographer has
a variety of tools that can be mixed and matched to create
desired effects. But instead of paint, the cinematographer uses
cameras, different lenses, and lighting to create the mood.
Many effects are achieved by talented editors and special-
effects professionals who use computer-generated imagery.
The sound of a movie is also very important. Having just the
right music or sound effect can have a very large impact on
an audience.


16 MOVIEMAKING
A Moviemaker’s Tools.
Cameras
Quiet, synchronized-sound film cameras are used for dialogue
scenes, while loud, high-speed cameras capture special effects
and action. A camera that runs at 500 frames per second will
take a one-second live-action event and make it appear on
screen for almost 21 seconds. This ability to warp or slow
down time is just one part of movie magic.
Lenses
Professional motion picture cameras accept prime and zoom
lenses. Prime lenses are designed and built to offer only one
field of view for the camera. A zoom lens lets you change the
magnification of an image without changing lenses. Video cam-
eras usually have a single zoom lens instead of a selection of
prime lenses, but that does not mean you have to zoom (close
in or pull back from a subject) during a shot. Many professional
cinematographers use a zoom as a “variable prime lens,” select-
ing the focal length appropriate for each scene without having
to mount a different prime lens for each shot. This ability to
quickly change focal lengths speeds up the photography process.
Parts of a Zoom Lens
Three basic parts of a zoom lens are the focus, zoom, and aperture.
• The camera operator uses the focus to adjust the sharpness of
an image.
• The zoom changes the lens’ focal length.
• The aperture controls the amount of light passing through the lens (or
distance away from the subject).
Prime lens Zoom lens


MOVIEMAKING 17
.A Moviemaker’s Tools
Three sets of numbers are used to describe lenses.
F-stop. The lower the f-stop number (such as f/4), the wider
the aperture (opening) of the lens and the more light it passes
to the camera and, therefore, the film. Prime lenses generally
have wider apertures and are helpful when shooting in low-
light situations.
Millimeter. This number represents the focal length of the
lens. A low number represents how “wide angle” the lens is
and how wide the camera’s field of view is. A high number
indicates how “long,” “tight,” or “telephoto” and how narrow
the angle of view is. A zoom lens is adjustable, giving you a
range of focal lengths in one housing.
Zoom range/ratio. Dividing the larger millimeter number
by the smaller millimeter number determines the range of
magnification a zoom lens can deliver. A zoom with a 100mm
telephoto and a 10mm wide angle is considered a 10-to-1 zoom
(100/10=10). If the zoom were 210mm to 14mm, the zoom
range would be 210/14=15, a 15-to-1 ratio. When shopping for
a workable zoom lens, look for the widest aperture (a low
f-stop) and the greatest zoom range.
The focal length is the distance between the film
and the optical center of the camera’s lens when it is
focused. The larger the focal length, the greater the
amount of zoom.
Aperture openings and f-stops
f/16 f/11 f/8 f/5.6 f/4 f/2.8


18 MOVIEMAKING
A Moviemaker’s Tools.
Film
These are the two most commonly used sizes of film.
35mm. Major motion pictures have been photographed for
many years on 35mm film. However, more and more motion
pictures are now being shot on high-definition digital video.
Cameras that use 35mm film are normally large and bulky.
These cameras are mounted on cranes or special dollies. Up
on the movie screen, 35mm film shows less grain than 16mm.
It is used mainly by the motion picture industry.
Depth of Field
Depth of field is the area in front of and behind the subject in which it
appears in acceptably sharp focus. If you zoom a lens to its full telephoto
position, the long lens will “narrow” the depth of field and provide only
a few inches of focus in front of and behind the subject’s position. This
“shallow” depth of field is the same as when viewing through a pair of
binoculars. You have to continuously maintain focus when the subject
moves toward or away from the camera because the depth of field is
very narrow.
On the other hand, selecting a wide angle on a zoom lens produces a
great or “deep” depth of field where everything in front of and behind the
subject is in focus. This infinite depth of field is similar to that of a front
door peephole. Everything is in focus; your subject may move around yet
you won’t need to refocus your lens to follow the movement.


MOVIEMAKING 19
.A Moviemaker’s Tools
16mm. This type of film was more lightweight, faster, and
less expensive to produce than 35mm. Many low-budget,
educational-type, or independently produced films used the
16mm format. Videotape became a typical substitute, and today
many cinematographers and producers use high-definition
digital video for creating high-value projects at a reduced cost.
Digital Recording
Regardless of how images are acquired, they can be edited
and enhanced with special effects by using computer software.
With a digital video camera, the cinematographer shoots raw
footage and edits many of the images through the lens while
recording. The video camera can be plugged into a computer
with a cable and viewed on a TV or saved on the computer’s
hard drive. From there, the production can be edited and special
effects can be added.
Lighting Equipment
Professionals have at their disposal many sizes of
lights and special effects techniques to create
moods for any shot envisioned by a director. Like a
theatrical set, lights can be placed around the
action in a scene for illumination or to cast shad-
ows. For a dramatic sequence, the cinematographer
may use a single lightbulb to create an eerie, high-
contrast scene. Yet, when photographing a court of
honor, the cinematographer may choose to use only
the candles available in the room. This is called
available lighting.
Sound Equipment
Depending on your circumstance, there are various types of
microphones that can be used. When recording a dramatic scene,
for instance, you would likely want to use a microphone that
cannot be seen. During interviews or on newscasts, microphones
are often visible, as they do not detract from the storytelling.
In some situations, using only
available lighting imparts a
special effect.
To complete your moviemaking project, you will follow the same basic
steps as used in the motion picture and TV industry, but along the way
you will need to wear a variety of hats.





MOVIEMAKING 21
.The Importance of Preproduction Work
The Importance of
Preproduction Work
Before you can begin producing your film, you need to know
what your film will be about and what style you will use to tell
your story. So, your first priority is to select a category from the
three options in the requirements: documentary, drama, or
demonstration piece.
Documentary
A motion picture production that captures a news event or
records information on a particular topic with little or no fic-
tionalization does not need a lot of preproduction. However, it
requires being in the right place at the right time with a “story”
you want to tell. Examples might include the demolition of a
historical building, the opening of a new city park, or a day
in the life of your town’s mayor or police chief.


22 MOVIEMAKING
The Importance of Preproduction Work.
Dramatic Story
A made-up story with characters and action and/or emotion
requires a script, cast, and rehearsal before shooting begins.
Any logical and tasteful scenario you can think of can become
a worthwhile production project.
Staged Demonstration
Shooting a procedure presented by an expert will benefit from a
script and some predetermined camera angles to show elements
an audience would not be able to see in person. Plan for inter-
esting close-ups that show unusual elements. You might show
other Scouts how a blacksmith shoes a horse or how a Scout
starts a fire without matches. Discuss with your counselor the
subjects you might explore. Once you have a firm idea, go to
the next step: preproduction.


MOVIEMAKING 23
.The Importance of Preproduction Work
Good Planning Ensures Success on the Set
Good moviemaking requires working with a team. Many
elements are planned to come together on the same day and at
the same time. It is always best to have a preplanned shooting
schedule in place to help minimize any surprises.
Preproduction involves all the preparation that occurs up to
the day of shooting—from deciding on a story to determining
locations and securing equipment. In preproduction, you must
seek to eliminate problems that could sabotage a project once it
is in actual production. Preempting glitches in preproduction is
part of having what are called high production values and
avoiding failure.
The tools used to produce a film—camera, batteries,
support equipment, and additional lighting—are the same
items that may cause defeat. If you are hesitant about camera
operation or if your batteries are not charged, these things
can ruin an otherwise well-planned shooting experience.
Interviewing Techniques
for Documentaries
Augie Heibert, an Alaskan television pioneer who was
a Lone Scout in the 1930s, has been lauded by the
national radio and television industry for his work to
bring high technology capabilities to remote Alaskan
Bush villages. Heibert offers the following tips about
interviewing subjects on camera.
• Remember the subject, if not versed in being a
model or experienced as an actor, will be nervous.
Treat the subject with kindness and respect by
giving suggestions on what you want, not harsh
or rude demands.
• Remember, a friendly subject is one who will per-
form for you more naturally than one who has an
unfriendly or antagonistic attitude or demeanor.
• Common courtesy and the Scout Law work!
Check out sites
thoroughly, even
if you are shooting
in familiar
surroundings.


24 MOVIEMAKING
The Importance of Preproduction Work.
Just as months of planning go into preparing an Indy
500 race car to cross the finish line, you need to plan before
your first video can be shown, or screened. In fact, before you
take your first camera shot, you will have greater success if
your budget, staff, and equipment needs have been carefully
planned. Using a checklist may help you keep tabs on your
equipment and preparation.
Budget
Figure how much money is available for your production;
that is your budget. Remember, a car cannot run without gas.
Consider the equipment you may need—such as camera(s),
tripod, lighting equipment, and a digital software program along
with the accompanying financial considerations. Take the time
to understand each process of production. Realistically deter-
mine how much time and money it will take. Doing so will
help you avoid one trap novice filmmakers sometimes fall into:
an unfinished film.
The preproduction checklist is an essential tool for planning
all aspects of the project. Here is a sampling of steps for the
different aspects of production.


MOVIEMAKING 25
Crew
Determine what kind of staff you will need, if any. Decide
whether you want to assign any responsibilities to other
people. Here are some of the positions related to film and
video/digital production. Depending on your budget and
your ability to enlist volunteers and secure donations,
you may be able to get help in these areas. Remember,
though, that as the filmmaker, you should be involved
in all these facets of your production.
The producer is in charge of the entire production
and bears responsibility for its success. This person
hires everyone connected with the project, including
the director, the designers, and the cinematographer.
The associate producer helps the producer and
usually stays on the set during production.
In consultation with the producer and casting
director, the director of a movie usually hires and guides
the actors. It is the director’s vision that will ultimately
appear on screen. Writers prepare and update the script.
The cinematographer is responsible for creating the look,
the mood, and the feel of the visuals.
The camera operator frames the shot in the camera
and plans moving shots. The assistant camera operator
works with the camera operator to move the camera from
setup to setup; adjust the focus; keep track of batteries,
tape, and film stock; and take notes as they relate to the
camera department.
The lighting director or gaffer controls the lighting
before and during the shoot. The best boy serves as chief
assistant to the lighting director or gaffer. The set designer
creates the artificial settings for scenes.
The key grip controls most of the hardware for the pro-
duction such as the dolly track, camera platforms and rig-
ging, and overhead sunlight and control with butterflies and
scrims. As the gaffer controls the light, the key grip controls
the shadows. The grip sets up equipment to create shadows,
which give a scene depth.
Engineers manage the machines that control or mix
sound, lighting, and special effects, and the editor or cutter
selects the scenes that tell the story effectively.
The Importance of Preproduction Work.


26 MOVIEMAKING
The Importance of Preproduction Work.
Create a Script and Storyboard
A script is made up of written or typed pages, while a story-
board has rough pictures to represent the scenes to be shot.
A script or storyboard should clearly state the video and audio
elements and what the characters will be doing. Write the script
as if you were going to give it to someone else to direct; include
what will be said, along with some idea of what will be seen.
Number each scene. Be sure everyone who needs a script has
a copy well ahead of shooting and that all questions have
been reviewed.
Make a simple but accurate storyboard, numbering each
scene with those in the script. Use it as a guide during the
filming process, but look for better angles and coverage while
shooting. The primary thing to remember with a storyboard is
its purpose. You are creating a tool to help you in the produc-
tion of your movie. Use colored drawings and/or simple black-
and-white stick figures. Visualize each scene in your mind’s
eye, then draw the scene in the approximate field size (wide,
medium, or close-up shots).
The storyboard affords an objective preview of the finished
project—in other words, what it will look like on the screen.
For example, you might want to insert a shot of the moon
between two interior sequences to tell the audience that the
second scene occurs at night. This also establishes a different
time frame. A shot of a sunrise tells an audience that what
follows occurs on a different day.
Write a Treatment
Whether you are planning a documentary, drama,
or demonstration piece, put the story of your idea
together and write it in a few paragraphs. This is called
a treatment. It will make you focus on the visual way
you are going to tell the story. It will help define your
“artistic canvas.” You will find that self-imposed limits
on a project will make you work harder to produce
smarter. Present the treatment to your counselor for
review so you can move on to writing a script and
making a storyboard.


MOVIEMAKING 27
.The Importance of Preproduction Work
The storyboard
Inserted exterior scenes help establish locations and time
frames for interior action. They also add variety and depth to
stories that take place mainly indoors.
You might see from the storyboard that there are too many
close-ups. Perhaps too much of the action takes place in the same
location or from the same angle. Many potential problems can
be worked out in preproduction by using a storyboard.


28 MOVIEMAKING
The Importance of Preproduction Work.
Lines From a Typical Script
Internet Predators*
Characters:
Laura: 17, high school senior
Alan: 17, high school senior and Laura’s friend
Luke: 22, pedophile, Internet predator (nonspeaking extra)
FADE IN:
SCENE 3: INT. SCHOOL HALLWAY
Laura pulls Alan back around the corner.
LAURA—Will you promise not to tell my mom
or dad any of what I’m gonna tell you?
ALAN—Sure, what’s the problem?
LAURA—That guy’s name is Luke . . . and he’s been
stalking me.
ALAN (SKEPTICAL)—Stalking you?! Come on,
Laura!
LAURA—No, really! It started out pretty
innocent. I met him in an Internet chat room.
We had some common interests, so I gave him
my e-mail address.
ALAN LOOKS
MILDLY SHOCKED.
LAURA RESPONDS.
LAURA—Hey, I figured, what could it hurt? It’s not
like I told him where I live or anything.
WAVY GRAVY DISSOLVE TO (A TERM USED TO DENOTE THE PASSAGE
OF TIME):
SCENE 4: FLASHBACK - INT. LAURA’S ROOM - NIGHT
As Laura recalls, we flashback as she sits at her COMPUTER. Camera slow-
ly tracks around until we see the screen. . . .
LAURA (V.O.)—Anyway, we sent e-mails back and
forth for about three months and got pretty close.
Well, I mean, how “close” can you get in cyberspace,
but he really seemed to “know” me. I was gettin’
kinda interested in him. You know . . . curious. Then
he asked me what I looked like. I told him I’d upload
a picture of myself if he’d do the same for me.
*These lines are from Vignette #2, “Youth Protection Training,” produced by the Boy Scouts of
America, ©1998.


MOVIEMAKING 29
.The Importance of Preproduction Work
DIGITAL E-MAIL
PICTURE OF
LUKE POPS
ONTO SCREEN. . . .
LAURA (V.O.)—We exchanged pictures. He’s a
little older than I thought he was . . . but good-
looking. Anyway, he asked me for my phone
number, and I thought that was safe enough,
so I gave it to him.
WAVY GRAVY DISSOLVE TO:
SCENE 5: INT. SCHOOL HALLWAY—DAY—PRESENT
WE RETURN TO
LAURA AND ALAN. . . .
LAURA—We talked a couple times on the phone,
and then all of a sudden he shows up at my
house one day. Then he surprises me at the
mall last weekend.
LAURA—Now, today he stops me on the way into
school and says he’ll give me a ride home tonight.
He’s cute, Alan, but he seems a little weird. I’m kinda
scared of him.
ALAN—Laura, you gotta be really careful what infor-
mation you give out on the Internet.
You know, I’ve heard that all they have to do is get
your name and they can find out anything they want
to know.
I mean, your phone number, alone, gave him a way
to start narrowing what part of town you live in . . .
and what school you’d probably be going to. Pretty
easy to find you after that.
If he’s into the Internet, he prob’ly traced your
address through your phone number.
LAURA—I really screwed up. Bad.
ALAN—Hey, you’re not the first. Guys like this Luke
are out on the Internet every day.
LAURA LOOKS DESPERATE. . . .
LAURA—But what am I gonna do now?!
FADE OUT:


30 MOVIEMAKING
The Importance of Preproduction Work.
Scout for Locations
Professionals plan very carefully and scout locations before the
shooting begins. Here are some of their concerns.
• Is the on-site power sufficient to run all the equipment?
• Can meals be served easily, and are bathrooms nearby?
• Can vehicles get in and out?
• Will traffic or airplane noise interfere with sound quality or
the picture’s time element?
• At what time of day will the location be prettiest? When will
the site be needed?
• What special problems will need to be solved?
Carefully Choose Audio Options
The audio in your project can be as important as the visuals.
Some elements and options to consider include music, narration
(called a voice-over or V/O), the talking head (talent on screen
talking in real time with the scene), special effects (SFX) like
thunder or footsteps, or any combination of the above.
The simplest method is to use the audio that surrounds
the scene you are shooting. But be sensitive to the continuity
of the sound levels and background noises that may come and
go, which could cause serious problems during editing.
The lighting
director or gaffer
might also come
along to determine
what special
equipment, such
as a bounce card
or reflectors, will
be needed.


MOVIEMAKING 31
.The Importance of Preproduction Work
Mix the music at a
low enough level
so it does not
cover up either
the live sound or
narration, but not
so low that the
audience has to
strain to hear it.
A little practice
will help pinpoint
the correct level.
The music
selected to
accompany the
movie should, like
the camera, not
attract attention
to itself but
complement
the visual story
being told.
Here are some considerations pertaining to the
soundtrack of a movie.
• Respect the intellectual property of others. Use only
music that you have appropriately obtained.
• Popular or well-known tunes tend to distract an
audience from visuals. Unless there is a strong
reason for using them, avoid doing so.
• Repetition can become boring, so avoid repeating
the same tune during the film.
• Music that has pronounced loud and soft passages
is hard to mix, so avoid this type of music.
• Avoid music that contains many passages by instru-
ments such as flutes that may cover the pitch range
in which the narrator’s or actors’ voices fall and ren-
der them unintelligible.
• No law says a movie must have an uninterrupted
musical accompaniment from start to finish. Fade
it out when it seems desirable, and fade it back in
when it will help enhance the visuals.
• If a narrator is used, select one with care. Make sure
the narrator has read the script aloud several times
before recording begins. Doing so will enable the
narrator to give proper voice emphasis to those
passages that require it.





MOVIEMAKING 33
.Picking the Right Equipment for the Project
Picking the Right
Equipment for the Project
Your first production may not get you an Oscar nomination,
but do not despair. Take this time with the camera equipment
to refine your skills in composition, camera movement, and
lighting. These elements are as important as the story being
told. As you move through the badge requirements, you will
develop greater moviemaking techniques and skills.
Selecting the Right Equipment
After determining the budgetary limits during the preproduction
stage, review the equipment needed to shoot your project. For
your first projects, use a consumer video or digital camera you
either own, borrow, or rent. These cameras give the new cine-
matographer almost every important element needed to make a
first production. Today’s video cameras are relatively easy to
use. There are various settings to help with exposure and
lens settings. They also integrate easily with home
computers to upload your material for editing.
If you decide to
rent a camera, be
sure to reserve
it, so it will be
available when
you need it.


34 MOVIEMAKING
Picking the Right Equipment for the Project.
Video Cameras and Lenses
Most lenses on video cameras are auto-focusing zoom lenses
rated with a ratio such as 6-to-1. This means the lens can
expand the view to a full scene that is six times as wide
as what the telephoto saw. Newer camcorders have 8-to-1
zooming, while professional/industrial cameras can accommo-
date 12-to-1 and 14-to-1 zooms and cost thousands of dollars.
Many camera lenses have a manual aperture control that
opens the iris of the lens wider or makes it narrower, just like
the iris in your eye widens in dim light and narrows in bright
light. The iris can be manually controlled for forced fading
and/or special effects with light. The aperture is rated in
changeable f-stops. Video cameras automatically make
aperture adjustments.
A large number indicates a small opening in the iris of
the camera. A small number indicates a large opening.


MOVIEMAKING 35
.Picking the Right Equipment for the Project
Keep in mind the following rules of optics concerning the f-stop
on a lens.
When shooting on bright days:
• You may need a small opening in the iris (a small aperture).
• Use a high f-stop number, such as f/16.
• You will have a large depth of field (the amount of focus in
front of and behind the subject).
• You will need less light for a usable picture.
When shooting on gray (or low-light) days:
• You may need a large opening in the iris (a wide aperture).
• Use a lower f-stop number, such as f/4.
• You will have a limited depth of field (could be inches).
• You will need more light for a usable picture.
Camera Supports
Using a tripod is the best way to hold a camera steady. Most
tripods have panning heads that allow smoother movement.
They have adjustable legs that can be locked into position.
On more expensive models, casters can be added to make
the tripod somewhat mobile. When selecting a tripod,
request one with a fluid head if you plan to pan in your
shots. Even if you are shooting only static objects (as in a
demonstration) or “talking heads” (as in an interview),
plan to use a tripod.
To create a moving tripod or dolly, you need a heavy
object on rubber tires and a smooth surface, not to
mention a volunteer to push you and your equipment
around. A wheelchair can be used as a serviceable dolly.


36 MOVIEMAKING
Picking the Right Equipment for the Project.
Recording Your Story
Video cameras record to various types of media. Some cameras
have built-in hard drives, while others may use memory cards.
Always be sure to have enough memory in your hard drive or
storage devices to record multiple “takes” of each scene. A good
rule of thumb to consider would be having 10 times more
record time and storage available than the total estimated time
of your project.
Microphones (Audio)
Determine if you need an external microphone for audio.
Most cameras and camcorders come with microphones that
usually are attached to the camera. However, they are so sensi-
tive that they might also pick up distant sounds, motor noises,
and even the camera operator’s breathing, all of which can be
a distraction.
A lavaliere microphone can provide flexibility and set a profes-
sional tone during shooting.
A microphone may be clipped onto a subject’s clothing,
used as a table mike, attached to a stand, or clamped to
an aluminum pole for use as a “shotgun” mike.


.Picking the Right Equipment for the Project
If you feel your production requires it, you can budget an
external microphone and a 50-foot extension cable with heavy-
duty molded ends. Because some microphones experience audio
loss with extension cables, ask before you rent. A common
handheld microphone usually is less expensive than a miniature
microphone that can be clipped to clothing (called a lavaliere
microphone). If you plan to record talent (the person you are
shooting), a lavaliere can add realism and professionalism to
the shoot.
Lighting Equipment
Lighting from the sun is free, and video loves sunlight. If you
must shoot indoors, try to use available indoor light. Guiding
your subject to the light keeps your lighting budget at zero
dollars. If you must light a scene, use spotlights bouncing off
white sheets or walls and ceilings to keep the subject from being
“hot,” or losing detail in the lightest areas. Renting a spotlight
and its holder can be pricey, so it makes sense to use available
light whenever possible.
You may also need a light stand or large alligator-type
clips to clamp the lights to support poles. Gaffer’s tape, also
known as plumber’s tape in hardware stores, works well in
awkward situations. You also will need insulated gloves to
handle hot fixtures.





MOVIEMAKING 39
.Basic Techniques for Shooting Your Project
Basic Techniques for
Shooting Your Project
You have read bits and pieces that apply to shooting a story
(for example, the need for a tripod or dolly, lighting, budget
considerations, preproduction). Now that you are ready to step
behind the camera to begin shooting your story, here are some
other basics to remember.
• Break down and organize your script before filming begins.
Save valuable time by shooting the common scenes together,
even though they may not run together in the final piece.
As you shoot each scene, mark it as it is completed.
• Plan the day or days of shooting and follow your schedule.
Following this schedule helps keep volunteers motivated for
the next shooting day or project.
• Have cast and crew on the set at least an hour before shoot-
ing. Provide proper directions (if you are going to a site), and
have timetables understood.
• Do not record people, private homes (outside or inside),
or business locations unless you have secured prior
written permission. (Secure these
permissions in writing during the
preproduction phase.)
• Have more than enough storage
to record to, batteries, cables,
and light-reflective materials.
• Plan to serve any volunteers a
meal or refreshments. Provide
beverages on the set to keep
volunteers from wandering away.
Try to stick to
your scenes, but
if you imagine a
scene you had
not planned, shoot
it. The worst that
could happen is
that it is never
used. The best
that could happen
is that the scene
saves the day.


40 MOVIEMAKING
Basic Techniques for Shooting Your Project.
Basic Techniques of Lighting and Continuity
A moviemaker wants to tell a story in a way that will hold the
attention of the audience and keep people interested without
any annoying distractions. Here are some points to consider
relating to lighting and continuity.
The filmmaker keeps these points in mind during filming.
• Each new framing will lead the audience to the next
part of the story.
• Each composition helps define your intentions with
the mood of the story being told.
• Each angle will nudge the audience toward the
desired impact.
Reflectors can be made from
plastic mirrors, matte-white sur-
faces like foam core, aluminum
foil, or other reflective surfaces.


MOVIEMAKING 41
.
Lighting
Strive to compose each shot carefully and make each as photo-
graphically beautiful as possible. Outdoors, you should usually
keep the sun roughly beside you and the camera. Avoid shoot-
ing outdoors at noon and during the middle of the day; the
high sunlight causes black shadows under trees and shrubs in
scenics and under the eyes of your actors—very unflattering.
If you are in a backlit situation, have a helper hold a reflector
so it reflects a little sunlight onto the actors’ faces. But pay
attention and do not overdo it.
When using sunlight as the light source, move the subject
until the sun makes an interesting source. Many times backlight
is the most flattering for dramatic shots, but you may want the
benefit of three-quarter front light to effectively illuminate all
elements of a demonstration.
If you cannot get the natural lighting you need, shoot at
a different time of day or add reflective lighting to compensate.
For the most dramatic lighting, shoot early in the morning and
shortly before sunset.
When shooting indoors, set lights carefully. For most shots
you will not need many—perhaps a single floodlight bounced
off the ceiling of a room to pump up the overall level of illumi-
nation, with maybe a few low-wattage spots. Aim one spot on
each actor’s face and another on any object the actors might
focus on. Set the lights so the shadows they cast fall outside
the scene. Adjust the intensity of lighting by moving the lights
farther away or closer to the subjects.
Know that a light moved twice as far from a subject cuts
the light falling on the subject by a factor of four. If you have a
small color television set, patch or connect it to your camcorder
to see the effect of lighting before you shoot the scene, and
adjust the lighting if necessary.
Make little scrims
or filters out of
pieces of window
screen and fasten
them over the
lenses of the
spots with
wooden clothes
pins. In general,
a single thickness
of window screen
will cut the
intensity of the
light by half an
f-stop, while a
double thickness
will cut the
intensity by half.
Lighting Terms
intensity. Brightness (affects exposure).
quality. Hard (shadow-forming) or concentrated; soft
(shadowless) or diffused.
contrast. A ratio between the lightest and darkest areas
in the shot.


42 MOVIEMAKING
Basic Techniques for Shooting Your Project.
Too little light may cause picture “noise,” smearing, or
trailing effects with some cameras.
High light levels can be compensated for by
• Moving the subject away from hot lights
• Adjusting the f-stop
• Using a filter or switching off lights
• Using a dimmer or placing diffusing material over a light (but
not touching the bulb!)
• Bouncing the light off a wall or white surface
Continuity
To be effective, a movie must have the events flow in an
orderly, logical manner. Continuity is one of the important rea-
sons for preparing a script, storyboard, and scene long before
shooting a movie.
Continuity errors can be either glaring or subtle. In either
case, they create a distraction for an audience, and viewers are
apt to lose their understanding of the story. A glaring continuity
error may evoke laughter from an audience during a serious
moment. A subtle continuity error may make an audience
feel uneasy, distracting them from focusing on the story.
For example, if you establish in your movie that Scout
camp is to the left as viewed on screen and the river is to the
right, whenever your actors move from the camp to the river,
they must always move from left to right across the screen.
When they return to camp, they must always move from right
to left. This is called screen direction. An error in screen direc-
tion is a subtle error that will almost always cause a sense of
unease in an audience.
Similarly, if one of your actors is wearing a green sweat-
shirt in a long shot of a certain scene, he or she must still be
wearing it in the following close-up, unless the audience saw
Proper Light Intensity Needed
The camera may not operate properly if
• There are low light levels.
• The lens aperture is too small.
• The filter being used is too dense.


MOVIEMAKING 43
.Basic Techniques for Shooting Your Project
him or her remove it on camera. The same goes for inanimate
objects shown in a scene. If, say, an alarm clock is present on a
bedroom nightstand in the first shot of a bedroom, it must be
present and in the same position in each subsequent shot of
that set. Likewise, if it is absent in the first shot, it must not
appear as if by magic in subsequent shots.
The list goes on and on—the actors’ clothing, the time of
day as determined by the position of the sun in outdoor shots,
cloudy versus bright days. To record in writing the content of
each scene and help prevent continuity errors, a professional
production employs what is called a script supervisor.
Some moviemakers utilize visual effects to join together
separate segments of movies, and this technique can be effec-
tive. For example, a “lap dissolve”—the beginning of the next
scene appears before the end of the last scene completely disap-
pears—may be used to denote a change in time. A fade-out or
fade-in may be used to denote a change in place. Some cameras
have preset effects such as dissolves, wipes, or fades built in.
However, these effects are more commonly used during the
postproduction editing phase.
The Rhythm of a Movie
Every well-made cinematic story has a definite rhythm, or
development of the story or action, and syntax, a harmonious
arrangement of parts or elements. When the rhythm is smooth,
an audience is comfortable and knows what to expect. When
the rhythm becomes rougher, the audience becomes vaguely
uneasy in new and possibly unfamiliar surroundings. This
means the cinematographer has a responsibility to introduce the
audience to a new place without turning off the viewers.
Therefore, each scene of your project should flow smoothly
and logically to the next. For example, you would not cut from
a brightly lit camping scene to a dimly lit court of honor and
back to the outdoor shot without a good reason for doing so.
It is perfectly
acceptable to
use flashbacks
in movies to
establish events
that led up to
the situation
being currently
portrayed. But if
you do so, the
audience must be
aware that what
you are showing
is a flashback
(revealing a
close-up of a
calendar with a
previous year, for
example).
When shooting a scene, be aware of the following.
• Continuity. Try to ensure audio levels of different
shots of the same scene match.
• Effects. Record typical background noises, if neces-
sary, for later mixing.


44 MOVIEMAKING
Basic Techniques for Shooting Your Project.
Cinematic Elements to Remember
During the past century of cinematic development, certain prac-
tices in moviemaking have become de rigueur—standards and
techniques that are easily understood parts of a moviemaker’s
everyday language. Here are some points to consider as you
begin shooting your first film.
The 180-Degree Axis Rule
Imagine entering an elevator where two people are already
in conversation. The individual on your left, a man, is looking to
your right. The other person, a woman, is looking to your left
to respond. If you were filming this conversation in close-up
shots, only one person might be seen speaking at a time. If the
man changes the direction he is looking, the audience will be
confused as to who is talking to whom.
When you develop a scripted conversation between two
actors, there is an imaginary line called the axis line. A scene
will be easier for an audience to follow if the camera position
does not cross this line. Think of what might happen if the
camera “crossed the axis” during a football game. Imagine
the ball carrier running from screen left to screen right. If a
director were to cut to a camera angle on the other side of
the “axis,” it will seem like the player is running right to left,
which would be physically inaccurate and visually confusing.
This illustration shows how the axis line works.


MOVIEMAKING 45
.Basic Techniques for Shooting Your Project
Camera Movement
The camera functions as an invisible observer of scenes.
Camera movement follows and frames the action and helps the
viewer become aware of the environment and understand new
information about the story being told. Unless the concept of
your movie is different, handle the camera so that it will attract
as little attention as possible. Use a tripod to avoid shaky pic-
tures that will distract an audience.
Keep both eyes open as much as possible when you shoot. This allows you to better
follow the action. If necessary, find something stable for support while shooting.


46 MOVIEMAKING
Basic Techniques for Shooting Your Project.
A well-framed, stable shot will provide an audience a solid
point of reference from which to start. A frame that nervously
searches the scene as a result of an unsteady, handheld camera
will signal your audience to be nervous, too. If your intention
is to make the audience uncomfortable, use the camera in this
way. Otherwise, keep the horizon level. Take care to level the
camera on a tripod by adjusting its legs to conform to the slope
of the ground every time you position a new setup; it is easy
to accidentally tilt the camera.
Remember that
wide-angle lenses
and the wide-angle
position of zoom
lenses minimize
camera shake
because of their
wide fields of
view, while
telephoto focal
lengths amplify
camera shake.
Handheld cameras are extremely lightweight and must
be held steady. To keep the camera steady without a
tripod, try some of the following tips.
• Practice until you find a stance that provides the
easiest shooting and best results.
• Position your eye
firmly against the view-
finder eye cup and
assume a comfortable,
stable position.
• Relax your shoulders,
and put your elbow
firmly against your
side to help stabilize
the camera.
• Rest both elbows on your knees while seated on
the ground.
• Walk with your knees bent (moving backward is
suggested rather than forward).
• When kneeling, keep one knee firmly on the ground
for the most stability.
• To better follow the action and anticipate other
movements in the scene, keep both eyes open when
you shoot.
• Whenever possible, lean against a tree, the side of a
building, or something else stable when shooting.


MOVIEMAKING 47
.Basic Techniques for Shooting Your Project
Pan and Tilt
Camera moves advance a story. Use pan, tilt, and zooms only
to “frame” the action in the scene. If there is no action to fol-
low, resist using the camera to “point.” To make an audience
look toward a particular window in a wide shot of a building,
stop the camera, reframe with a longer lens, and then roll. This
“cut” will provide the same emphasis to the window as a zoom
would but will keep viewers from becoming “seasick.” Begin
the pan with a static shot of a well-composed A scene and end
with a static shot of a well-composed B scene. Otherwise, the
pan is incomplete. The same is true for tilts and combinations
of the two.
Limit the number of pans, tilts, and zooms. Too many
can distract an audience, particularly if they are made
too fast. Shoot them half as fast as what seems to
be the right speed, and they will seem about right
on the screen.
There is nothing wrong with letting actors
walk into a frame, play their parts in front of the
camera, then walk out. You do not have to pan
with them. However, if you are panning with a
moving object, such as a running animal or a
sports car, keep the subject centered in the frame;
do not get ahead of it or behind it.
Frequently change the shooting angle to add
interest to scenes. For example, shooting down on
someone from a stepladder makes that person seem
less significant cinematically. Shooting up at some-
one from near floor level makes that person seem
dominant, perhaps even sinister or threatening.
Use camera angles to enhance your shots,
but be careful not to overdo it.
Use pans and
tilts to reveal
story elements
and not as much
to establish
environments.
Use a dolly when you want to move a camera along with actors or better
define an environment. Because pictures are two-dimensional, full depth
of a scene is often lost without camera movement. For instance, when
looking at a forest with hundreds of trees, a dolly move will show the
foreground trees moving through the frames more quickly than the dis-
tant ones—a powerful effect when a complicated environment must be
defined. A busy office will look and feel much more hectic if the camera
moves and gives the viewer the benefit of depth.


48 MOVIEMAKING
Basic Techniques for Shooting Your Project.
Panning
To make professional-looking handheld pans:
• First, stand so you face in the direction where the pan will end.
• Without moving your feet, rotate your upper body so your camera faces the direc-
tion where the scene will begin.
• Start shooting. Rotate your body slowly to the point where the pan will stop.
• Hold your breath while panning; the result will be much smoother.
• Avoid repeated pans of the same scene.
The pan shown here might
not be very interesting if it were
not for the people walking in the
foreground. Whenever possible,
use a tripod for panning. For
best results, lock the tripod to
prevent tilt.


MOVIEMAKING 49
.Basic Techniques for Shooting Your Project
Framing and Composition
Cinematographers use a combination of focal length, camera
angle, and composition to visually frame stories. There is no right
or wrong way to shoot a scene, but there are always stronger or
weaker shots as they relate to telling a story.
The Long Shot (LS). A visual story of a troop’s court of honor
will benefit from an opening (or establishing) wide-angle (or
long) shot. The long shot defines the environment, establishes
the participants, and helps the audience get a feeling of the
overall mood.
Follow the wide angle with a shot of what your eye has
been drawn to in the wide angle. You might look at some portion
of the room, say, a group of people or objects that seem more
interesting than the overall scene. In moviemaking, this is called
a medium shot. It could be a shot of the color guard during the
Pledge of Allegiance or a shot of the honors table gleaming with
awards waiting to be presented to deserving Scouts.
Then, you could zero in on one person or object in the
group that seemed for some reason to be the most interesting.
In moviemaking, this is called a close-up (CU). If it were a spe-
cial night to honor grandparents, then the strongest close-up
might be of their faces beaming with pride.
Shooting a statuette of Baden-Powell from an angle below
(an “up” angle) will honor tradition, while shooting across the
statuette toward the award’s recipient will connect that Scout
with the tradition. Both are excellent angles, but the second may
be a more compelling and a more telling shot of a court of honor.
Size the scene. Mix long, medium, and close-up shots. Continuous use of long shots
or close-ups gives a movie a monotonous, flat impression.


50 MOVIEMAKING
Basic Techniques for Shooting Your Project.
Framing people the right way takes practice. Here are tips for effectively framing
basic shots.
Even if you cut off the hairline, don’t
cut off the chin.
When shooting a profile, leave the
space in front of the face to create a
“sight line.”
For a bust shot, focus on the chest
and above.
The waist shot is taken from the
upper hips and above.
The knee shot includes the knees
and above.
The full shot includes the entire body.


MOVIEMAKING 51
.Basic Techniques for Shooting Your Project
Close-Ups. Close-ups are important, and audiences love them.
However, certain guidelines are as reliable in filming close-ups as
a compass and a map are to hiking and backcountry camping.
• In a close-up of a person’s face, it is permissible to cut off the
frame at his or her hairline, but not at the person’s chin or
mouth (exception: extreme close-ups, known as ECUs, show-
ing eyes only or lips only).
• If shooting the action of hands, such as picking up an
object or using a tool, use a medium shot and then repeat
in a close-up, making sure the action overlaps and progresses
accurately to make for a smooth cut. For example, if a Scout
is hammering a tent peg into the ground, a medium shot
would establish a swing and hit, and the close-up would
emphasize another swing and hit. Resist editing out a portion
of the action—called a “jump cut”—because it will feel
unnatural to the audience.
• Calling for eye contact with the camera in a dramatic story
is rare, but a camera-aware Scout or presenter is always pre-
ferred to a speaker who never makes eye contact.
These techniques establish the rhythm of a film. In general,
each sequence in a movie consists of long shot, medium shot,
close-up; long shot, medium shot, close-up; and so on.
Frequently it is necessary to break up this sequence to tell a
more interesting story. The variety of shots is what keeps an
audience interested.
The close-up


Editing and Showing Your Project.
Editing and Showing
Your Project
The images you shoot will likely need to be edited into a final
product for viewing. Editing is the last step in moviemaking
before showing your finished work. It is also one of the most
important steps because editing determines what your final
product will look like. Effective editing will give your finished
project the result that you intended while keeping your audi-
ence absorbed in your story.
You probably have seen a movie you thought was too long
or that included scenes that did not flow with the rest of the
movie or move the story along. To create the finished video or
film, a skilled editor takes out the “fluff” footage, puts together
all the important elements, and watches the film from the criti-
cal perspective of an audience member.
How complicated the process of editing is may depend
on how complex your project is and how the scenes are shot.
A simple production—like recording a court of honor—can
be shot in sequence; little editing is necessary. This is called
“shooting on the fly,” and the technique can be used on more
complex projects with careful planning. A com-
plicated piece may require the breaking up of
sequence shooting into sections (shooting all
exterior settings, then interiors), which
requires more editing.


MOVIEMAKING 53
.Editing and Showing Your Project
The art of editing calls for attention to things such as pace and tempo;
mood, emotion, and performance; lighting, color, and tone; movement/
motion and angle; sound and narration/dialogue; special effects; fore-
ground and background; and continuity and order.
For your purposes, you might not incorporate some of these finer
points of editing (that will come later, in future projects). However, in the
end, your edited video should capture and clearly communicate your
message and entertain the audience.
Getting Ready to Edit
In simple terms, editing means taking information from one
source and selecting pieces to go to another source, enhancing
picture and sound quality, correcting mistakes, and assembling
it all into a whole. In your case, individual shots and scenes are
added one at a time to build a story. Think of it as putting a train
together: first the locomotive, then the cars, one after the other
connected properly, then the caboose.
An edited production is no different; the idea does not
move if the pieces do not connect. However, most editing pro-
grams allow you to assemble your story in a nonlinear way.
This means you can insert each scene on your timeline and
then reorder them as you determine best.
Following Your Storyboard
Pick out the scenes and the order in which they will appear on
your computer software program’s timeline viewer according to
your storyboard. This “train” of scenes becomes the basis for
your production.
Become familiar
with your editing
software. Know its
limitations and
what it can do.


54 MOVIEMAKING
Editing and Showing Your Project.
Editing on a Computer
If you are not going to edit as you shoot (or “edit on the fly”),
you need to learn how to edit your production on a computer.
Most new computers come with image/motion software and
can burn a motion DVD of your web camera movies.
Follow the software program’s instructions to edit your pro-
duction. This type of software usually comes with an onscreen
tutorial that will guide you through the various steps of adding
a title, special effects, fade-ins and fade-outs, close-ups, and
stock footage, and mixing sound/music overlay.
It will probably work something like this: After you shoot
your raw footage, you plug your camera into a computer using
a cable. Your camera should also be plugged into a power
source. Turn on your camera. Then open the software program
for home movies on your computer screen.
Never erase your raw footage from your camera until you
have completely finished your project on the computer and
have saved it to a DVD or other permanent storage device. This
practice can save the beginning moviemaker a lot of heartache
down the road.
The computer will prompt you to create a project name.
You may be able to import only the scenes you want to save as
they come up or your entire file of recorded material. Now that
your clips are imported, you can switch over your computer
program to “edit” mode.
Turn off your camera. “Drag” the clips from the raw foot-
age you saved into a “timeline viewer” frame. This will allow
you to see on a timeline where that clip belongs in the whole
film. Or you can put the scene in “clip” mode, which will line
up the clips in order so that they can be edited or rearranged.
If you extract the audio, you can normally see a graph
of the sound in wavelength form with your timeline viewer.
Depending on the program, you should be able to create a title
in different colors and fonts, drop in still or stock photos from
a library that comes with the software, and do zoom-ins, fade-
ins, and fade-outs.
To save your edited work to a DVD, be aware of your
file size and how many DVDs it will take to hold it. Or you
can compress it into a QuickTime file. Then you simply burn
the project to a disk.


MOVIEMAKING 55
.Editing and Showing Your Project
Showing Your Finished Project
You must be prepared, as in the Scout motto, for the showing
of your completed work. Consider the following steps.
1. Show your work to your parent or guardian and counselor.
Ask if they spot any serious problems you might have
missed. Correct or eliminate the problems if you can before
the showing.
2. Write a brief introduction about the making of the movie
to use when you introduce your work. Integrate events
that occurred during production and specifically relate
what you may have discovered about the art and science
of moviemaking.
3. Watch the audience closely and judge viewer reactions to see
if mood and environment are conveyed through your visuals.
Take negative comments
politely. Listen and learn for
future productions. Do not ask,
“Did you like it?” or “How can I
improve?” If people like it, they
will tell you. If your project has
weak spots, your counselor will
tell you.
Be proud of your work.
This is a learning process. Just
think how far you came.
If you get trapped doing something in the editing pro-
cess and cannot seem to make it work, just dump it
without saving and go back to your most recently
saved version to start again.





MOVIEMAKING 57
.Careers in Moviemaking
Careers in Moviemaking
You can discover a lot when you visit a movie set or television
production studio and watch how professional production work
is done. The world of film is a fascinating place for creative
people to find their niche in an engaging career.
There are many careers related to film and video produc-
tion. You should visit the library or go online to learn more about
various positions in this highly competitive industry. But here is
a little more information about key areas in moviemaking that
you may want to research further.
Director of Photography. A
cinematographer is the person
filming with a motion picture
camera. Generally referred to
as the director of photography,
this person is the chief over the
camera and lighting crews work-
ing on a production. He or she
is responsible for achieving
technical and artistic decisions
relating to the images. The
director of photography is the
final decision maker on both
lighting and framing.
Camera Operator. The camera operator is the second person
on a four-person camera crew working on a feature film for the
cinema or filmed drama for television. This team is headed by
a director of photography, or cinematographer. The operator’s
duties involve working with the director, the director of photog-
raphy, and the actors in devising camera setups—angles, lenses
to use—and developing camera tracking moves on dollies or
cranes to best interpret the dramatic scene. When shooting, the
camera operator is solely responsible for both physically operating
the camera and the composition of framing throughout a shot.


58 MOVIEMAKING
Careers in Moviemaking .
Producers. Producers are the people in control of the produc-
tion. Preproduction—which includes hiring actors, buying props,
and booking studio time—does not start until the producers
agree on a date for actual filming. Producers decide which films
to bring to the screen, find the money to finance them, and
make most of the planning decisions. The producer is also in
charge of hiring the director, who makes the majority of the cre-
ative decisions that go into making a movie. Together, they plan
the movie, develop the idea for a screenplay, and decide on a
budget and shooting schedule.
Directors. The look, feel, and sound of the film is the director’s
venue. During shooting, the director may make edits and
changes to the script or ask the writer to do so to enhance
the film’s impact. “A director shouldn’t get in the way of the
movie, the story should,” quipped Oscar-nominated filmmaker
Frank Darabont.
Casting Directors. Casting directors decide which actors they
think should play each part. They bring their ideas to the pro-
ducers and director. It may sound easy but there are few posi-
tions in the industry that are as important to the overall success
of the film. Screenplays may sometimes be written for a specific
actor. Finding talented actors who offer the specific qualities the
film calls for in its characters is an art. Putting the right people
together for a shoot calls for judgment about actors’ abilities
and range and the ability to figure out what their chemistry will
be like together on the screen.


MOVIEMAKING 59
.Careers in Moviemaking
Location Managers. Location managers scour the country
looking for places to shoot various scenes in the film. For
example, if the film calls for an 1830s-era farmhouse, the
location manager will scout around until he or she finds a
suitable farmhouse, then contacts the farmhouse owner to
get permission for use of the property, and so forth.
Screenwriters. Screenwriters take an idea or turn a book
into a screenplay or a written treatment of the film to be pro-
duced. The screenwriter adapts a book or idea into a screenplay
one scene at a time. Each scene in the screenplay is numbered.
This position requires a lot of patience and the ability to rewrite
and revise work depending on the director’s desires and
evolving vision for the film.
Set Designers. Set designers develop sketches and models to
design the set for a production. This work may require an enor-
mous amount of research, particularly for period productions
that require adherence to specific details of the era
being depicted.
Costume Designers. Costumes are important to help the
audience believe what they are seeing on the screen is real,
whether they are depicting actors in a scene from ancient times,
the present, or some screenwriter’s idea of what the future might
look like. This is another arena within the film industry where
much research must be done to ensure accuracy to detail.
Sometimes, the same costume must be re-created numerous
times in different conditions. For example, in Gone With the
Wind, the actress who played Scarlett O’Hara (Vivien Leigh)
wore many different versions of the exact same dress during the
scene of Atlanta being burned by Yankee soldiers. As she made
her way through the blazing city, her dress had to be changed
27 times, starting with it in perfect condition and ending with it
tattered and dirty.
Special Effects Technicians. Cars explode in a fiery crash, peo-
ple morph into robots, rain pours onto a bustling street scene, a
gale force wind blows up. If it goes crash, boom, or bang in a
film, it probably is due to the carefully planned work of a special
effects technician. These technicians can use computer graphics
to make the impossible possible; they can create scenes on a
screen that do not exist in real life. They can use computers
to animate anything from creatures to screen models.


60 MOVIEMAKING
Glossary.
Glossary
anncr. Announcer, the narrator.
BG. Background or “music under.” With reference to music,
under a narration.
crawl. A graphics effect whereby words scroll on the screen.
CU. A close-up. A tight shot on an element included in a longer
shot, typically faces.
cut. The abrupt jumping from one visual to another, without
a fade or dissolve. Also refers to a director’s command to the
crew to stop the action or to stop shooting.
depth of field. The amount of focus in front of and behind a
subject being photographed.
diss. Dissolve. A film or video term referring to one shot
blending into another.
dolly. A heavy cart or object with rubber wheels used to
support a moving camera in a shot that “tracks,” or follows,
action or establishes a setting.
ECU. Extreme close-up. An extremely tight camera shot.
fade. When a picture or sound fades out or in.
FG. Foreground.
freeze; freeze frame. The freezing of a video frame or field.
grain. The often hazy quality of silver-emulsion film that is
enhanced when it is magnified, or blown up.
library music. Existing, copyright-free music found in
software programs.
LS. Long shot. Camera sees a wide field of view.
MCU. Medium close-up. Camera is in medium range of
the subject.


MOVIEMAKING 61
.Glossary
mix. Refers to blending of various elements of a sound
track such as music, narration, and sound effects into one
master track.
nar, narr. Narrator, narration.
pan. Horizontal camera move on a tripod or support from
left to right or vice versa.
postproduction. Work that goes on after the shoot until
the edited master is finished.
preproduction. All the planning and budgeting necessary
before production can begin.
roll; rolling titles. Words that move up or down across a picture.
set. A set can be in a studio or on location.
SFX. Special effects.
stock footage. Existing footage from a film library or
commercial film source that can be inserted, or intercut,
with live footage. Usually less expensive than shooting
original footage.
storyboard. A series of simple sketches that depict a sequence
of scenes for a production. Critical as a guide in production
and postproduction.
supers; superimposition. Double-exposure of words over a
video scene or film frame. A “lap dissolve” (short for overlap),
for example, superimposes a fade-out over a fade-in.
tilt. Vertical camera move up or down.
track shot; dolly shot. When the camera moves along with the
talent on a mobile tripod or actual “track.”
V/O. A voice-over. Narration from off-screen, usually recorded
independently from footage.
wipe. An optical cutting effect where one shot “wipes” another
off the screen.
WS. A wide shot. Same as long shot.
zoom; zoom in; zoom out. Effect produced with a zoom lens,
where the camera seems to come to, or pull away from, the
action of a scene.


62 MOVIEMAKING
Resources.
Resources
Scouting Literature
Digital Photo Magic; Architecture, Art,
Communication, Journalism, Model
Design and Building, Photography,
Public Speaking, and Theater merit
badge pamphlets
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.
Books
Andersen, Yvonne. Make Your Own
Animated Movies and Videotapes:
Film and Video Techniques From the
Yellow Ball Workshop. Little Brown
and Company, 1991.
Andersson, Barry, and Janie L. Geyen.
The DSLR Filmmaker’s Handbook:
Real-World Production Techniques.
Sybex, 2012.
Andrew, James Dudley, ed. The Image
in Dispute: Art and Cinema in the
Age of Photography. University of
Texas Press, 1997.
Box, Harry. Set Lighting Technician’s
Handbook: Film Lighting Equipment,
Practice, and Electrical Distribution,
4th ed. Focal Press, 2010.
Brown, Blain. Cinematography: Image
Making for Cinematographers and
Directors, 2nd ed. Focal Press, 2011.
———. Motion Picture and Video
Lighting, 2nd ed. Focal Press, 2007.
Ettedgui, Peter. Cinematography:
Screencraft. Focal Press, 1999.
Glebas, Francis. Directing the Story:
Professional Storytelling and
Storyboarding Techniques for
Live Action and Animation.
Focal Press, 2008.
Griffith, Richard, Arthur Mayer, and Eileen
Bowser. The Movies: Revised and
Updated Edition of the Classic History
of American Motion Pictures. Random
House Value Publishing, 1992.
Katz, Steven D. Film Directing,
Cinematic Motion, 2nd ed. Michael
Wiese Productions, 2004.
———. Film Directing Shot by Shot:
Visualizing from Concept to Screen.
Michael Wiese Productions, 1991.


MOVIEMAKING 63
.Resources
Kenworthy, Christopher. Master Shots:
100 Advanced Camera Techniques to
Get an Expensive Look on Your Low-
Budget Movie, 2nd revised ed.
Michael Wiese Productions, 2012.
Laybourne, Kit. The Animation Book: A
Complete Guide to Animated
Filmmaking—From Flip-Books to
Sound Cartoons to 3-D Animation,
revised ed. Three Rivers Press, 1998.
Levy, David B. Your Career in
Animation: How to Survive and
Thrive. Allworth Press, 2006.
Lowell, Ross. Matters of Light
and Depth. Lower Light
Management, 1999.
Lumet, Sidney. Making Movies.
Vintage, 1996.
Malkiewicz, Kris. Cinematography: The
Classic Guide to Filmmaking, 3rd ed.
Fireside Press, 2005.
Maltin, Leonard. The Art of the
Cinematographer: A Survey
and Interviews With Five Masters.
Dover Publications, 1978.
Mascelli, Joseph V. The Five C’s of
Cinematography: Motion Picture
Filming Techniques. Silman-James
Press, 1998.
Mercado, Gustavo. The Filmmaker’s Eye:
Learning (and Breaking) the Rules of
Cinematic Composition. Focal Press,
2010.
Murch, Walter. In the Blink of an Eye,
2nd revised ed. Silman-James
Press, 2001.
Oxlade, Chris. Movies.
Heinemann, 1997.
Rickitt, Richard. Special Effects: The
History and Technique. 2nd ed.
Billboard Books, 2007.
Samuelson, David W. David
Samuelson’s “Hands-On” Manual for
Cinematographers. Focal Press, 1994.
Scott, Elaine. Movie Magic: Behind the
Scenes With Special Effects.
HarperCollins Publishers, 1995.
Van Sijll, Jennifer. Cinematic
Storytelling: The 100 Most Powerful
Film Conventions Every Filmmaker
Must Know. Michael Wiese
Productions, 2005.
Zettl, Herbert. Video Basics. Cengage
Learning, 2012.
Organizations and Websites
Creative America
creativeamerica.org
Moving Image Collections
movingimage.org/collections
Videomaker
videomaker.com


64 MOVIEMAKING
Resources.
Acknowledgments
Scouting America is grateful to Eagle
Scout Steve McWilliams for his expertise
in the writing and revision of
this pamphlet. Mr. McWilliams is a
director/cameraman with numerous
feature and commercial credits to his
career in cinematography that spans
more than 25 years. Scouting America
thanks Nancy Schiesari, cinematography
professor at the University of Texas
Radio, TV, and Film School in Austin;
Augie Heibert, founder of Northern
Television in Alaska; and Robert Brown
with the Texas Film Commission for
their advice and help with this edition.
Special thanks to Gwen Scott of
HeritagePhoto in Georgetown, Texas, for
her help with the digital editing section.
Scouting America is grateful to inde-
pendent filmmaker John Stone of
Stonehaven Media for so generously giv-
ing his time and his knowledge about cin-
ematography and filmmaking, and for his
assistance with the manuscript. We also
appreciate his allowing us to use photos
of pine-wood derby racing from the film
Down and Derby.
Scouting America is grateful to the
men and women serving on the
National Merit Badge Subcommittee for
the improvements made in updating this
pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration Credits
Edison National Historic Site, National
Park Service, U.S. Department of the
Interior, courtesy—page 9
Library of Congress, Prints and
Photographs Division, courtesy—
pages 8 (Tyler) and 10
James Reeb; property of Pinewood
Derby LLC, used by permission—
pages 13 and 58
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of
or are protected by Scouting America.
Dan Bryant—pages 16 (both) and 35
Tom Copeland—page 47
Bryan Hayek—page 51
Sam Kolich—page 21
John McDearmon—all illustrations on
pages 17, 27, 44, and 48–50
Brian Payne—pages 22, 30 (horses), and
52–53
Randy Piland—pages 18 (both), 20, 36,
and 55
Steve Seeger—page 30 (left)