SKATING


SK ATING
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Note to the Counselor
Skating activities present inherent safety concerns, primarily
the risk of falls and collisions. The guidelines below emphasize
prevention and are meant to cover all Boy Scouts of America
skating programs. Scouts should always practice safety and
courtesy and obey all local, rink, or park rules. Every Skating
merit badge program or activity must follow the BSA guide-
lines, which are set forth in the Guide to Safe Scouting and are
repeated here. Review these guidelines with Scouts, and be sure
they understand each one.
1. BSA skating at any level shall be supervised by an adult who
is at least 21 years of age, experienced in the use of skates
and skateboards, willing to conscientiously accept respon-
sibility for the safety of all participants, and committed to
compliance with BSA safety guidelines and local laws.
2. In-line skating, hockey, racing, or similar activities are to be
held only in areas free of pedestrian and vehicular traffic,
and hazardous fixed objects. No skating activity is autho-
rized on streets that have not been blocked off to traffic.
3. Pathways and skating surfaces must be free of defects or
features unsuited to skating. Evaluation of the area by the
supervisor should precede any BSA activities.
4. Before permitting equipment to be used in a BSA activity,
the supervisor should determine that all skates and skate-
boards are well-maintained and in good repair consistent
with the manufacturer’s recommendations. Actual mainte-
nance and repair are the owner’s responsibility.
35949
ISBN 978-0-8395-5006-8
©2015 Boy Scouts of America
2019 Printing


SKATING 3
5. For all street or pavement skating activities, participants
should wear properly fitted helmets that meet American
National Standards Institute standards, padded gloves, wrist
supports, and elbow and knee pads. No street or pavement
skating is authorized without helmets.
6. Skaters must NEVER “hitch a ride” on any vehicle.
7. Parents or legal guardians must be informed and must
consent to youth participation in a BSA skating activity.
8. The adult supervisor must be sure that all participants
understand and agree that skating is allowed only with
proper supervision and in compliance with the safety
guidelines. Youth members should respect and follow all
instructions and rules of the adult supervisor. When people
know the reasons for rules and procedures, they are more
likely to follow them. Supervisors should be strict and fair,
showing no favoritism.
Skating merit badge instruction should follow the requirements,
procedures, and techniques presented in this pamphlet for
the discipline of choice (ice skating, roller skating, or in-line
skating). The information contained in this pamphlet has been
organized for the individual skating disciplines in a sequence
that the authors have found to be most practical when working
with Scouts. The learning objectives, which can be attained
by the average Scouts BSA member, should emphasize safety
and basic skill proficiency.
Terms shown in
italics can be
found in the
terminology
section at
the back of
this pamphlet


4 SKATING
Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Skating or check
Scoutbook for the latest requirements.


SKATING 5


6 SKATING


SKATING 7





SKATING 9
Contents
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Power Ice Skating . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
Roller Skating . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
In-Line Skating . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
First Aid for Skating Injuries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
Skating Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91
Skating Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 95





SKATING 11
.Introduction
Introduction
This merit badge will introduce you to the exciting world of ice
skating, roller skating, and in-line skating. Get ready for new
challenges, fun, and improved confidence in your skating skills.
You can choose ice, roller, or in-line skating for this merit
badge. If you have never skated before, you will learn the basic
moves first. If you already know how to skate, you can perfect
your techniques and move on to more advanced skating skills
while training for the merit badge.
Try going to public skating sessions or enrolling in group
lessons for more instruction at a reasonable price. Visit a local
ice rink or roller rink (for roller and in-line skating) to ask about
classes, examine equipment, and talk with an instructor or
skating professional.
Regardless of which kind of skating you choose, this sport
offers many opportunities beyond what you learn for the merit
badge. If you try ice skating or roller skating, you might launch
an athletic career in figure skating, freestyle, pairs, dance,
hockey, or speed skating. In-line skaters can get involved in
marathons, speed skating, hockey, and aggressive skating—
both street and vert.





SKATING 13
.Power Ice Skating
Power Ice Skating
Tips for the Beginner
The following tips can help you start out on the right foot with
ice skating.
Choose Skates That Fit
When you visit an ice skating rink for the first time,
you might need to rent skates. Rental skates are not
sized like regular street shoes. Make sure you know
your street shoe size and then, when renting skates,
ask for one size smaller. (If you have a small foot, ask
for a half-size smaller.)
Your toes should come to the end of the skating
boot but should not feel cramped. Try on the rental
skates. If there is too much toe space, ask for a
smaller size.
Before putting on your skates, loosen the laces all
the way down to the base of the skate. Otherwise, the
boot may seem too small when you attempt to slide
your foot in. With your foot correctly in place, pull
up your socks to remove any wrinkles. Pull the long
tongue of the skate up firmly, in case you have pushed it
down in front of your toes.
When lacing your boots, do not overtighten the laces
near your toes. Your toes should be free to wiggle. Lace firmly
from the bottom of the boot until you reach the ankle area.
On most boots, this area coincides with the top pair of eyelets
or fasteners. At this point, lace tightly. Lace the bottom hooks
tightly, and then go back to lacing just firmly again. At the top,
the lacing should be relatively loose to avoid restricting circula-
tion in your legs and feet. Lastly, tie and tuck in the laces.
FIRM
FIRM
LOOSE
TIGHT
RELATIVELY LOOSE


14 SKATING
Power Ice Skating.
Although beginners do not need to have extremely sharp
skates, the blades should not be blunt. To test for sharpness,
run the back of your thumbnail across the edge of the blade
with light pressure. An adequately sharpened edge should scuff
off a fraction of the thumbnail surface.
It is important to note that new skates are shipped from
the factory with dull blades so that the skates do not get dam-
aged in shipping. You must always have a new pair of skates
sharpened before skating on them for the first time.
Understand the Edges
Take a look at the bottom of your figure skate blade. It has
a concave groove running along the length. When you place
the blade on the ice in an upright position, the two sharpened
edges make contact with the ice. When the skate moves over
the ice with both edges making contact, the skate will move in
a straight line.
Now hold the skate upright on a smooth, flat surface.
Look at it from the side. You will notice the blade is rockered
(slightly curved), so only about an inch of its length actually is
in contact with the surface. This degree of blade that is not in
contact with the surface makes the figure skate maneuverable.
Classes for Beginners. Check at an ice rink about ice skating classes
for beginners. Learning the right way from the start will help you
avoid bad habits. Many rinks offer special skating classes for Scouts at
reduced prices.


SKATING 15
.Power Ice Skating
The rockering permits spins on one foot, just as a quarter
will spin if you hold it vertically on a surface and flick it.
If the blade of a skate is touching the ice at an angle, only
one of the two sharpened edges will cut into the ice, while the
other edge will not make contact. Since the sharpened edge
that is in contact is curved (rockered), the skate will move over
the ice in a curving arc.
Skate edges have different names. As you look down at
the skates you are wearing, observe the following:
• The edge to the outside of the right-foot blade is the
right outside edge.
• The edge to the inside of the right-foot blade is the
right inside edge.
• The edge to the outside of the left-foot blade is the
left outside edge.
• The edge to the inside of the left-foot blade is the
left inside edge.
LEFT OUTSIDE EDGE
RIGHT INSIDE EDGELEFT INSIDE EDGE
RIGHT OUTSIDE EDGE
LEFT
OUTSIDE
EDGE RIGHT
INSIDE
EDGE
LEFT
INSIDE
EDGE
RIGHT
OUTSIDE
EDGE


16 SKATING
Power Ice Skating.
Once you understand the effects of the edges, you will
know that to make a curve to the left while skating forward,
you must have your left outside edge or your right inside
edge—or both of them—cutting into the ice.
To make a curving movement to the right while skating
forward, you must have your right outside edge or your left
inside edge—or both of them—cutting into the ice.
The Skating Leg and the Free Leg
The leg you are skating on is called the skating leg, while the
leg that is removed from contact with the ice is called the free
leg. We also refer to the skating foot and the skating hip as
opposed to the free foot and the free hip.
As a general rule, the skating leg should be held in a
flexed position, bending as the foot makes contact with the ice,
and the free leg should be stretched as it leaves the ice. Keep
this expression in mind: “When the skating leg bends, the free
leg extends.”
Safety Rules and Etiquette
A skating rink’s safety and courtesy rules are designed to
prevent accidents and make skating a fun and friendly experi-
ence for everyone.
If you fall, get up quickly and avoid touching the ice with
your hands as much as possible. Serious accidents while skating
are rare, but many accidents involve cut fingers.
If you find yourself about to fall, do not grab onto another
skater. Instead, try to lower your arms and bend your knees.
This lowers your center of gravity. Try to remain on two feet. If
you fall backward, keep your hands and fingers facing forward
as they make contact with the ice.
Safety Rules at Ice Rinks
Ice rinks post their safety rules on notice boards. Rules
may include:
• No eating, drinking, or chewing gum on the ice.
• No playing tag, follow-the-leader, or crack-the-whip.
• No cutting across the path of other skaters.
• No speeding.
• No skating against the direction of skating traffic.


SKATING 17
.Power Ice Skating
• No roughhousing or shouting.
• Limit skating while holding hands to three skaters.
• Skates may be worn off the ice only in those rink areas cov-
ered with protective flooring. Avoid carpeted areas and bare
concrete unless using blade guards.
Don’t drop anything on the ice that could cause another skater
to trip and fall. If you do drop something, pick it up quickly.
Natural Ice and Ice Rescues
If you live in a place where rivers, ponds, and lakes ice over in
the winter, you probably know that skating outdoors on natural
ice presents many hazards.
Small bodies of water freeze more quickly than larger
ones. The ice on a small site usually remains frozen longer
and generally provides a smoother, better skating surface. Ice
formed over swift water or where water depth rises and falls
is always unsafe. Ice must freeze to a uniform thickness of
4 inches before it is safe for skating or walking.
Two general rules apply in all cases in which a person
breaks through ice:
1. The person should not attempt to climb out immediately.
2. The person should kick the feet to the surface to the rear to
avoid jackknifing the body beneath the ice rim.
After breaking through ice into freezing water, the person
should extend the hands and arms forward on the unbroken
surface, kick to a nearly level position, and attempt to work
forward on the ice. If the ice breaks again, the victim should
maintain the level position and begin to slide forward again.
Upon reaching firm ice, the victim should not immediately
stand, but should roll away from the break area. This position
will distribute the weight over as broad an area as possible on
the weak ice.
Never go onto any ice-covered water while alone. A
responsible adult should always accompany you. In
case of an accident, an adult can either go for help or
use the proper methods for rescuing people who have
fallen through the ice.


18 SKATING
Power Ice Skating.
One of the most useful devices for ice rescue is a light lad-
der, from 14 to 18 feet long, with a light, strong line attached
to the lowest rung. The ladder should be shoved out on the ice
to the limit of its length with the line serving as an extension.
If able to do so, the victim can climb onto the ladder and move
along its length in a prone position.
For rescues in which the rescuer must remain at a distance
from the victim because of ice conditions, a ring buoy with
a line attached or a coiled line with a weighted end can be
thrown to the victim. The buoy can be skidded along the ice
over long distances.
A hockey stick also can be attached to a line and skidded
along the ice. Sometimes a sturdy tree branch or board may
be the only available device. A spare tire, preferably with a line
attached, may be used for an extension rescue and will support
several people. Also, a victim of an ice accident may be rescued
by shoving a small flat-bottom boat along the ice and pulling
the victim over the stern.
When no other rescue techniques are available, it may be
necessary to form a human chain to attempt a rescue. To form
this chain, several rescuers get as close to the victim as they
safely can. They then lie prone on the ice, forming a chain.
Each person holds tightly to the skates or ankles of the person
ahead. If possible, the lightest person should be closest to the
victim. When the lead
person grasps the
victim, the person
nearest shore pulls
the others back. If the
ice breaks under the
weight of the lead
person in the chain,
the individual can be
held and drawn to
safety by the others.


SKATING 19
.Power Ice Skating
Skating Equipment
Newcomers to ice skating seldom understand the importance
of a good fit and well-constructed boots. Traditionally, ice
skating boots were made of leather. However, many modern
skates are now made from composite materials that can provide
more support and durability than natural leather. All skates
should have these features:
• A double sole
• An inner lining made of natural or synthetic leather (not
cloth or plastic)
• A padded tongue
• An inner and outer strengthening stay that runs up the back
of the boot
• Eyelets and/or hooks
In addition, your ice skating boot should have a strong and
durable counter. The counter is a stiffener built into the boot
to support the ankle.
Blade Design
Three major factors go into skating blade design:
• Speed
• Maneuverability
• Strength
PADDED TONGUE
HOOKS
EYELETS
ALL-LEATHER
BOOT
HEEL
OUTER
STAY
INNER
STAY
INNER
LINING
DOUBLE SOLE STRONG COUNTER
Figure skate


Power Ice Skating.
Unfortunately, it is impossible to combine all three factors into
one blade. The thinner the blade, the faster it will move, but a
thin blade is not as strong as a thicker one.
Blade designers must compromise, depending on the type
of blades they want. To gain more maneuverability and strength,
they sacrifice a certain amount of speed. To gain more speed,
they sacrifice some strength and quite a bit of maneuverability.
The more a blade is rockered or curved, the more maneu-
verable it will be. However, it cannot provide the same speed
that a flat, unrockered blade does, because a rockered blade
makes less blade contact with the ice as you thrust against it.
Figure skates require strong blades that can withstand the
landings of high-speed jumps. The blades must be exceptionally
maneuverable. This is why figure blades are made thick for
strength and are heavily rockered. They do not provide great
speed, but speed is not of the greatest importance in figures,
pair skating, and freestyle.
Hockey skates need strong blades to withstand impact
from pucks, hockey sticks, and other players’ skates. They need
to provide extra speed but require only limited maneuverability,
so hockey blades are thinner than figure skate blades. At the
same time, hockey blades should be thick enough to withstand
damage during the tough sport. They are rockered enough to
offer limited maneuverability.
Speed skates are not subject to impact from other sources,
so they do not need to be strong. They seldom are used for
jumping (although barrel jumpers use speed skates). Speed
skate blades can be made very thin to provide maximum speed.
Speed blades have very little rocker—they do not need to be
maneuverable, because speed skaters are not concerned with
tight turns.
Figure Blade Design
Figure skating blades are all similar in design, but there are sev-
eral types made for different purposes, including the following:
• General-purpose recreational figure skates
• Special skates for advanced jumps and spins (freestyle)
• Special skates for ice dancing
General-purpose recreational
skate blade


SKATING 21
.Power Ice Skating
Hockey Blade Design
Hockey players need to move at high speeds—backward
and forward—and to execute quick turns. Their blades
are not designed to give the extreme maneuverability of
figure skates. Skates used by hockey players need more
ice lay, or contact with the ice, than figure skates.
Jumps, spins, and intricate footwork are not a big
part of hockey, so hockey blades have no toe picks and
are smoothly curved at the toe. The blades are thinner
than figure blades, since a thinner blade permits greater
speed. Still, hockey blades must be rugged enough to take
hard impacts.
The hockey boot has a hardened top cap, interior
padding, and a high, extended back to help prevent ten-
don damage. Although most hockey boots are made of
leather, some manufacturers have introduced innovative,
molded synthetic shell technology and offer removable
inner linings. The hockey boot is similar in some ways to
the modern ski boot.
The Speed Skate
These skates are designed for fast-forward motion and
possess little maneuverability. Since they are not subject
to impact, they can be made with thin blades, which
permit greater speed. These blades have a projecting
nose, beyond the front of the foot, to permit a longer
ice lay (contact). The blades have almost no rocker, so
they are nearly flat against the surface of the ice.
Advanced freestyle skate blade
The toe picks are larger, there
is a special jumping pick, and
the side-honed blade has deep
hollow-ground edges.
Ice dancing skate blade
The blade is thinner for high
speed with minimum effort,
and the shorter heel helps pre-
vent tripping during intricate
overlap footwork.
Hockey boots
Speed skate


22 SKATING
Power Ice Skating.
Caring for Your Boots
and Blades
The leather used in figure, hockey, and
speed skating boots must be kept clean
and supple. Check the screws or rivets that
attach the blades to the boots for tightness.
Check the laces, and replace frayed laces
promptly. Constantly check the blade edges
for sharpness.
When you carry your skates, cover the
blades with blade guards. When you wear
your skates off the ice, use the guards to
protect the floor and your blades. Never wear
skates on cement. Remove the guards before
storing your skates to prevent blemishes from
forming on the metal.
After each use, thoroughly dry your
skates (boots and blades) with a towel. This
helps prevent the blade from rusting and
the leather from deteriorating. When storing
skates between uses, place each skate in a
bag so that the blades do not hit each other.
When putting on or removing your
skates, loosen the laces so your foot will enter
and leave the boot easily. Tugging the boot off
and on can stretch it out of shape.
Buying Ice Skates
Rental skates are available at ice rinks and may save you
money if you do not plan to pursue ice skating past the
requirements of your merit badge. If you can afford the cost
and plan to continue skating, it is best to own your own pair
of skates.
Take a pair of thin wool socks with you to the store to try
on skates. When you talk to a salesperson, be sure to describe
accurately your present skating skills and how you plan to use
your skates.
A beginning
skater does not
need high-tech
boots and special
blades used by
advanced skaters.
Terry cloth covers come in handy
for skate storage.
Dry blades thoroughly after use.


SKATING 23
.Power Ice Skating
Ice Skating Skills
When learning to ice skate, extend your arms forward and
sideways so your hands are at waist length with palms down-
ward. It will feel like you are placing your hands wide apart on
an invisible table in front of you. By keeping your hands in this
position, you will balance more easily on the skates.
Keep your arms still, allowing a space between your upper
arms and your body. Stand upright, not leaning forward. Keep
your knees slightly flexed, not stiff or overly flexed. Keep your
feet about 6 inches apart and almost parallel, but with your
toes turned slightly outward.
With your feet still in this position, practice transferring
your weight first onto one skate, then onto the other. Always
keep your ankles close together, lifting one foot and then
the other.
Alternating Pushes With Two-Footed Glides
After a minute or two of practicing
weight transfers, stand with your heels
together and toes turned outward in
a V-position. Tilt the left skate inward
slightly onto its inside edge, so it will
grip the ice. Keep your back upright.
Extend your arms at waist height, with
your hands held palm downward.
Slightly bend both knees and place your
weight over the heel of your right foot.
Follow these steps:
Step 1—Apply sideways pressure on the
left blade. This will cause the right skate
to glide forward.
Step 2—Remove the left skate from the
ice and bring the ankle of the left skate
beside the ankle of the gliding right
skate, allowing both skates to glide
forward parallel to each other, with
the blades vertical and upright. Push off with the
left foot, forward
glide on the right
foot, and follow up
with the two-footed
parallel glide.
L R
L R
Push off with the
right foot, forward
glide on the left
foot, and follow up
with the two-footed
parallel glide.
L R
L R


24 SKATING
Power Ice Skating.
Step 3—Now transfer your weight onto the heel section of
the left skate and push sideways against the right skate’s
inside edge. This will cause the left skate to increase the
forward motion.
Step 4—Remove the right skate from the ice and bring the
ankle of the right skate close to the ankle of the gliding left
skate, allowing both skates to glide forward parallel to
each other.
Step 5—You will maintain some forward momentum at this
point. Keeping both feet on the ice and parallel to each other,
glide on two feet until your forward motion is nearly ended.
Step 6—Repeat what you have just done, but take four side-
ways pushes instead of only two. Always keep yourself
balanced and in control of your motions.
Step 7—Remember after each sideways push to bring both
feet together and parallel. Keep your arms still, because
moving your arms disturbs your balance.
When you can do four sideways pushes and two-footed glides
without losing stability or coordination, work on doing six in a
row. Form is important. If you tend to push backward against
the toe picks of the skates, do not increase the number of
consecutive pushes yet. Practice properly. A few correctly
executed pushes will get you on the right track and are worth
20 times that number in incorrect pushes.
Always move gently. As you gain stability on your skates,
keep increasing your number of consecutive pushes, from six
to eight, then from eight to 10.
Learning to Stroke
You have made a sideways push and then immediately placed
the pushing foot back onto the ice. You then glide on two feet
before starting the next push with the other foot. When you
can do six or eight consecutive pushes without difficulty, it is
time to shorten the length of time or the distance you glide on
two feet after each push.
Eliminating these rests between strokes increases your
speed and calls for well-timed transfers of weight as you step
onto each gliding foot. Make your initial pushes gentle and
try only four or five before taking a rest and going into a
two-footed glide.


SKATING 25
.Power Ice Skating
Constantly check to make sure you do not push backward
against the toe picks and that your arms do not rise above waist
level. Remember to keep
your arms still and do not flail
around. Also bring your feet
together between each step. Do
not let yourself develop a wide-
legged stance.
Learn to anticipate your trans-
fers of weight. As you transfer your
weight from one skate to the other,
allow your weight to start moving
over the next skate a little before it
actually makes contact with the ice.
After you can accomplish
10 or 12 skating strokes without
much trouble, concentrate on
making your movements smooth,
with your back upright, your arms
steady, your skating leg well-flexed,
and your free leg well-extended.
Excess speed at this point will
only hurt your progress. Slower,
steady, controlled skating will serve
you much better during the early
stages of learning.
R L
0º
90º
135º
180º
225º
270º
When stroking forward on ice skates, a sideways/backward push causes the inside
edge of the pushing blade to cut down into the ice, forcing the blade of the other
foot to move forward on a shallow outside edge. Never use the toe picks for pushing.
0º
45º
90º
180º
270º
315º
Above is an aerial view of the proper posi-
tion of the arms in relation to the head
when the skater is moving forward. The
arms should never be held farther back
than 90/270 degrees. The hands should be
held at waist height, with palms down,
and fingers together and extended.


26 SKATING
Power Ice Skating.
Forward skating does not create a pattern
of straight lines on the ice. It actually creates
a pattern of very shallow S-shaped curves.
If you skate on perfectly clean ice, you should
be able to see cuts on the ice that look like
this illustration.
Step 1B repeats.
Step 1A repeats.
Step 3—The left foot, at the end of its glide,
presses sideways to supply thrust.
Step 2B—The left-foot edge changes from the
outside edge to the inside edge as the skater
begins to transfer weight toward the right leg,
before actually stepping onto the right leg.
Step 2A—The left-foot glide begins on the
shallow outside edge of the left blade.
Step 2—The right foot, at the end of its glide,
presses sideways to supply thrust, making a
deeper cut into the ice.
Step 1B—The right-foot edge changes to the
inside edge as the skater begins to transfer
weight toward the left leg, before actually
stepping onto the left leg.
Step 1A—The right-foot glide begins on the
shallow outside edge of the right blade.
Step 1—The left blade presses downward and
sideways against the ice to supply thrust.START HERE.
Power Ice Skating.
1b
1a
3
2b
2a
2
1b
1a


SKATING 27
.Power Ice Skating
Points to Remember
Always
• Keep your arms still.
• Keep your hands at
waist height.
• Place your weight on the
heel of the new skating foot
as you step onto it (when
skating forward).
• Push to the side, against
the blade.
• Maintain a straight back.
• Bring the legs together
between strokes.
Never
• Push backward using the
toe picks.
• Take a step without first
placing your weight onto
the skate.
• Allow the free foot to rise
more than 2 to 3 inches above
the ice.
• Skate with your hands in
your pockets.
• Raise your arms if you begin
to lose balance.
• Impede the flow of skate
traffic; get up quickly if you fall.


28 SKATING
Power Ice Skating.
The Two-Footed Snowplow Stop
If you want to stop while skating, follow these easy steps:
Step 1—Glide forward on two feet. Keep your feet parallel
and 12 inches apart. Your back should be straight. Keep your
arms extended sideways and slightly forward, hands at waist
level. Bend both knees while continuing to glide forward in a
straight line.
Step 2—Push the heels of both skates outward at the same
time, against very shallow inside edges of both blades. This
causes both sets of toes to turn inward toward each other and
both feet to incline inward slightly.
Step 3—Apply pressure downward and sideways against
both heels and blades, causing the blades to start a skidding
action on the ice. Keep your back upright (although as you first
slow down, you will tend to lean forward). Keep both knees
bent throughout.
Step 4—Allow the skid to
continue slowing until you
eventually reach a complete
stop without body move-
ment. Do not move your
arms from their extended
position until three or four
seconds after you stop.
You should travel straight
forward throughout the
entire maneuver.
Notice the extended arms, straight back, and bent knees. When making a two-footed
snowplow stop, start from a two-footed glide in a straight line forward. The blades’
skidding action kicks in as the heels are forced outward on the inside edges and the
toes turn inward.


SKATING 29
.Power Ice Skating
The One-Footed Snowplow Stop
Once you get the hang of the two-footed snow-
plow stop, try a one-footed snowplow. Follow
these steps:
Step 1—Glide forward on two feet. Keep your
feet parallel and 12 inches apart. Your back
should be straight. Extend your arms sideways
and slightly forward, hands at waist level. Bend
both knees while continuing to glide forward in
a straight line, both blades vertical to the ice.
Step 2—While continuing the forward two-footed
glide, transfer your weight onto your left foot.
Although both skates continue to touch the ice,
the greater part of your weight is now over your
left foot.
Step 3—Keep the left blade quite vertical, so
it continues to ride in a perfectly straight line.
Allow both knees to increase their bend while
you turn your right blade inward, onto its inside
edge. Remember, there should be almost no
weight on the right blade. The right toes should
now be turned inward while the right heel is
pushed outward.
Step 4—Gradually transfer weight from the left
foot onto the right foot, making sure the left foot
continues to ride in a straight line and the right
foot continues to be turned toes-inward. As you
transfer the weight, press downward and sideways
against the right heel to make the blade of the
right skate begin a skidding action on the ice.
Step 5—As you increase the skid with the right
foot, let your left arm move forward until it is
fully extended, with your left hand directly in
front of your stomach. Let your right arm travel
backward, fully extended, to end up pointing
slightly backward.
As you finish a one-footed
snowplow stop, turn the right
blade inward and skid against
its inside edge.
1
5


30 SKATING
Power Ice Skating.
Step 6—While skidding with the turned-inward right foot, be
sure your left foot continues to be upright, traveling over the
ice in a straight line. Keep your back upright throughout the
entire maneuver, but allow your left knee to bend freely as you
continue the skidding action of the right blade.
Step 7—Continue the skid until you come to a complete stop.
Do not allow your arms to move from their extended position
until three or four seconds after you have stopped.
Forward Right-Foot Glide
Skate forward to gain a fair amount of speed.
Interrupt your pushes and glide forward on
both feet, keeping the blades upright while
traveling in a straight line. Your feet should
be about 12 inches apart. Keep your arms
still, your back upright, your knees slightly
bent, and your shoulders level.
Without removing your left foot from
the ice, transfer your weight to your right
foot, making sure you continue moving in a
straight line.
Gently allow your left foot to travel
forward in a straight line and lift it until it is
no more than 3 inches off the ice. Keep your
thighs close together and make sure the right
blade remains upright, traveling straight.
Carefully balance, allowing your right foot
to continue onward, slightly increasing the
bend of your right knee. See how far you can
travel in a straight line.
Forward Left-Foot Glide
Start the maneuver again from the begin-
ning. Gain speed, make a two-footed glide,
and gently transfer weight onto your left
foot without taking your right foot from the
ice. Once you transfer your weight, carefully
move your right foot forward until it comes off the ice, allowing
it to rise no more than 3 inches above the ice’s surface. Make
sure you skate in a straight line throughout the entire maneuver.
Keep your back straight and your arms extended.


SKATING 31
.Power Ice Skating
Stroking From a T Position
For requirement 2b, you should start from a T position and
stroke forward. In the T position, your front foot points straight
forward. Your back foot is turned outward with the instep
against the heel of the front foot. Now you are ready to push
off with the back foot and glide forward on the front skate.
Remember to avoid the use of toe picks if wearing figure
skates as you complete this maneuver. Your counselor will be
looking for good style and coordination rather than speed. You
should try to avoid toe-pushing and double-tracking (resting on
two feet between alternating pushes).
The skating leg should bend each time you step onto a foot,
and the free leg should extend each time you remove it from
the ice. Do not look down at the ice. Keep your back upright,
and keep your arms controlled, extended, and waist high.
When you skate around corners, lean into the curve,
extending your outside arm forward so your hand is in front of
your stomach. The inside arm and shoulder should be pulled
horizontally backward. During the merit badge review, you
may skate around curves on two feet, or by stroking, or by
performing forward crossovers.
T position Stroking


32 SKATING
Power Ice Skating.
Gliding Backward
You may choose your own method of
gaining speed in a backward direction
before starting your glide on two feet.
With the scissors method, you
keep both blades on the ice. With your
skate toes together and heels angled out
45 degrees apart, use side pressure on
the inside of each skate to force your
feet apart to a distance roughly equal to
your shoulder width.
At this point, with continued
pressure on the inside of your skates,
your heels should turn inward until
they are about 3 inches apart. Then the
blades run parallel. Repeat this move-
ment, heels going out and then pulling
back in, with a continuous, unhurried,
rhythmic action.
When you skate backward, you
place your weight over the ball of each
foot (in forward skating, it is over the
heel of the foot.) Keep your back straight, bending your knees
slightly. Hold your hands at waist height, palms down. Your
wrists should not droop. Do not twist your head to see where
you are going. That will cause your body to turn, and you may
lose your balance. Arrange for a friend to skate in front of you,
to warn you if you are skating too close to other skaters or
the rink fence. Resist the tendency to bend forward to look at
your skates.
Some skating professionals prefer that skaters lift each
skate off the ice separately when moving backward, just as
in forward skating. Each backward step begins on an outside
edge rather than an inside edge.
Once you gain speed, bring both skates to a parallel posi-
tion about 12 inches apart, with the blades running upright
and your weight on the ball of each foot. Bend your knees
slightly, and keep your arms still and extended and your back
upright. The blades should run in a straight line backward.
Requirement 2c asks you to glide backward on two feet
for at least two times your height. Practice building up enough
speed to sustain the glide.
Two-footed backward glide


SKATING 33
.Power Ice Skating
Skating Backward
You must also skate backward for at least 20 feet using both
feet. If you use the scissors method for skating backward, try
to progress to the higher level of skill in which you lift each
skate off the ice separately. To do this, you must transfer your
weight onto each foot in turn as it contacts the ice.
First experiment with transferring your weight. Stand
with your toes touching and your heels about 8 inches apart.
Without moving from where you are, lift one foot from the
ice and put it down. Then lift the other foot and put it down.
Make sure your toes remain close together and your heels
apart, so you are pigeon-toed. Whenever you place a foot on
the ice, let the outside edge of your blade touch the ice by
slightly angling your foot outward. Do not look down, keep
your back upright, and keep your arms extended and still.
Even though you may not be attempting to move backward
while you experiment with transfers of weight, a backward
movement will probably start by itself. Allow the movement
to progress. Before placing a skate on the ice, make sure you
place the toes of your skates close together to avoid any
tendency for your legs to move wider
apart. Stay pigeon-toed. Make four
separate steps backward and then allow
both blades to run on the ice to stabilize
your balance and slow you down.
Go back to the pigeon-toed posi-
tion. Keep your toes together and your
back upright. Transfer weight from foot
to foot as you step onto the ice for six
steps before resting on two feet. Increase
the number of steps you can take. Once
you can take 10 successive steps, you will
progress rapidly to double that number.
Skating backward


34 SKATING
Power Ice Skating.
Glide and Turn
Skating forward on two feet in a curving arc is sometimes
called a hockey glide because hockey players use
this maneuver.
Follow these steps for the left hockey glide.
Step 1—Gain adequate speed and then interrupt your
skating strokes to rest on two feet in a straightforward
two-footed glide.
Step 2—To curve to the left, slide
the left foot forward, keeping it
parallel to the right foot and one
boot length ahead of the right
boot. Roll the left foot outward
so a firm cut is made into the ice
with the outside edge of the left
skate blade.
Step 3—At the same time, lean
to the left, rotating your upper
body with a firm, strong move-
ment. Allow both arms to rotate
to the left, so your left arm is fully
extended behind you and your
right arm is fully extended in front
of your stomach.
Step 4—Keep your feet parallel,
the left foot in front of the right.
Do not twist the left (leading) foot
to the left. This will cause the left
foot to jar and possibly to skid.
Step 5—Do not lean out of the
curve—lean inward. And remem-
ber, the whole upper body must
rotate, not just the arms.


SKATING 35
.Power Ice Skating
Step 6—To come out of the curve and resume movement in
a straight line, straighten up from your lean and let your arms
return to their normal position, extended to the sides of the
body. Straighten your blades so they are vertical to the ice.
Follow the steps below for the right hockey glide. After
performing your hockey glide to the left for 180 degrees around
a cone placed on the ice, you will perform it to the right.
Step 1—First, gain speed skating forward, then interrupt your
stroking to go into a straight two-
footed glide.
Step 2—Push your right foot
forward one boot length in front
of the left boot, keeping both
feet parallel.
Step 3—Just before you reach
the cone, drop the right boot over
so the outside edge of the right
blade cuts firmly into the ice. Lean
to the right, and allow the upper
body and both arms to rotate
strongly to the right.
Step 4—Maintain that position
throughout the 180-degree curve
around the cone and then
straighten up. Let both blades
run in a vertical position.
Step 5—Bring your arms and
body to the normal forward-skating
position as you resume movement
in a straight line.


36 SKATING
Power Ice Skating.
Crossovers: The Figure Eight
The crossover teaches you how to skate a curving path, for
instance, around the end of an ice rink. Crossovers involve
skating around the circle, making normal strokes onto the out-
side edge of the skate that is on the inside of the circle, then
crossing the outer skate around the front of the inner skate and
placing the outer skate on the ice on its inside edge. The term
“crossover” is not accurate because the foot does not cross
over the inner foot; it crosses in front of it.
You should learn forward crossovers in circles about
25 feet in diameter. To make a forward crossover in a counter-
clockwise circle:
Step 1—Rotate the upper part of your body toward the inside
of the circle. At the same time, rotate both arms firmly to the
left, so your left arm is extended behind you and your right arm
is extended in front of your stomach. Your palms should face
downward, and your wrists should not droop.
Step 2—Pushing sideways against the right blade, step with
your left foot, leaning into the circle so the left blade is on its
outside edge as it rides over the ice. Keep your arms and hands
in their correct positions. Do not let them move.
MAJOR AXIS
PUSH OFF
MINOR AXIS
Figure eight


SKATING 37
.Power Ice Skating
Step 3—As your right foot leaves the ice, take it
around the front of your left skate, keeping the
blade not more than an inch or two above ice
level. Take it so far around the left foot that the
calf of the right touches the shin of the left leg.
When it is fully around, step down onto the right
inside edge.
Step 4—As you step onto the right skate, lift
the left foot from the ice, toes first. Keep the heel
no more than an inch or two above the ice. This
prevents the left toe picks from digging into the
ice and greatly enhances the appearance of
the maneuver.
Step 5—Do not let the left blade rise more than
an inch or two above the ice level. Bring your left
foot around the rear of your right foot until your
left foot is parallel and very close to your right
foot. Then step onto your left foot, pushing side-
ways against the right blade to supply thrust.
Repeat the sequence of movements. If you lose coordination,
run on a curving two-footed glide for a while to restore your
balance, then try it again. At first, you may find it difficult to
perform more than two or three consecutive crossovers.
After a little practice, you will be able to make several
crossovers, but you may be toe-pushing. Resist toe-pushes
when doing crossovers because the habit is hard to break.
When you can successfully perform crossovers in a coun-
terclockwise direction, learn to do them in a clockwise direc-
tion. When skating around a circle to the right, lean to the
right, rotate the body and arms fully to the right, and
allow the left foot to make the crossing process.
When you can crossover in each direction, practice in a
figure-eight pattern, first completing a full circle counterclock-
wise and then changing direction into a full circle clockwise.
When making the change of direction, you may simply glide
on two feet forward before changing your lean and your body
and arm positions as you start skating into the new circle.
Forward crossovers are among the most important basic
skating skills. It is important to perform them equally well in
each direction. Most skaters find it easier to learn them counter-
clockwise, because in most rinks the public skating sessions are
run in a counterclockwise direction.
Forward crossover (right foot
around left)


38 SKATING
Power Ice Skating.
Racing on Ice
Racing is a lot of fun, but safety always comes first. It is best to
run the race on an oval track rather than just racing down the
center of a rink where you may be faced with a solid wall just
when you are reaching maximum speed. On an oval course,
the finish line should be about one-third of the distance along
one of the long sides of the oval. Plenty of ice space is then
available for slowing down as you cross the finish line.
Racing skaters should wear gloves to protect their hands
and fingers from other skaters’ blades in the event of spills.
Rules such as no pushing should be established. Skaters should
be warned that if they fall, they should immediately get onto
their feet again.
Hockey Stop
The hockey stop is one of the best ways to stop quickly when
you are skating forward. For requirement 3d, you will make a
complete stop using both feet in a skidding action. The hockey
stop must be performed in a straight line. Practice slowly at first.
Step 1—Stroke forward to build up some speed, then glide
on two feet.
Step 2—Bring your feet close together, bend your knees,
and turn your feet crosswise (90 degrees) to your direction
of travel. Meanwhile, your shoulders should face the line
of travel.
Step 3—At the same time, lean back slightly. This puts
your front skate on its inside edge and your back skate on
its outside edge. The result is a skidding action that brings
you to a stop.
Step 4—Keep your feet parallel. Your head, shoulders,
and torso should be parallel to your feet at the conclusion
of the hockey stop.
Step 5—Bend your knees more deeply to produce a
faster stop.








SKATING 41
.Roller Skating
Roller Skating
Tips for the Beginner
If you learn the correct fundamentals of roller skating from the
start, you will avoid bad habits that are hard to break. Check
into skating classes at your local rink. Taking lessons from a
skilled skating instructor can benefit you greatly in the long run.
Skate—Do Not Walk
Speaking of bad habits, do not walk on roller skates. A walking
movement serves only to send your leading foot out in front
of your body, pitching your body weight forward. The result is
your supporting skate slides out behind you.
To learn the correct method, visualize one skate as the
carrier of your body. You propel yourself forward with a slight
push from your other leg.
Follow-Through
Follow-through is as important for skaters as it is for baseball
players, golfers, and other athletes. Devote some time and atten-
tion to learning this concept.
The most efficient pushing stroke on roller skates begins
with your body upright, knees slightly bent, and skates under-
neath the body and parallel.
Step 1—Put your weight on the pushing skate and begin the
push out to the side and back, using pressure on the inside
of the pushing skate. This propels the carrying skate forward.
Use the entire leg in the pushing movement, not merely the
lower leg.


42 SKATING
Roller Skating.
Step 2—Keep the pushing skate on the floor with enough
body weight on it to ensure the longest possible push. The
pushing skate should be in contact with the skating surface
as long as possible.
Step 3—Gradually transfer your body weight to the carrying
skate as you leave the pushing skate behind. You will glide
forward with your weight on the carrying leg, which is called
the skating leg.
Step 4—Keep your pushing foot on the surface until your
knee straightens and the foot flows off the floor into a carried
position. Once your pushing leg is clear of the skating surface,
it becomes your free leg or balance leg. (Do not use a kick-
ing motion as you lift it from the skating surface, since this
deprives you of a full push.)
Step 5—When your free leg becomes the carrier, the knee
bends and the skate glides forward alongside the other skate.
Repeat the process.
Proper follow-through helps ensure smooth, steady skating.


SKATING 43
.Roller Skating
Forward Scissors Movement
A new skater can keep both skates in contact with the
skating surface while learning to skate forward by using
the scissors movement.
Step 1—Balance evenly over the centers of both skates.
Maintain a firm upright body carriage.
Step 2—Keeping your toes straight, bend both knees
slightly by dropping them forward toward the toes (but
avoid a sitting position).
Step 3—With your heels together and toes angled about
45 degrees apart, use sideways pressure on the inside of
each skate to force the feet to a shoulder distance apart.
Step 4—At this point, pull the skates in again, with pressure to
the inside of the skates and toes turned inward (pigeon-toed).
Step 5—The skates should pull back together until they are
roughly 2 inches apart. Repeat this movement (out and in),
with continuous, unhurried action.
Aiming the Skates
The curved path that results from proper body lean is called an
edge. This is the way all good skaters travel around the rink, in
a counterclockwise direction.
When a skater leans away from the free leg, the skating
foot is on an outside edge. A body lean toward the free-leg
side puts the skater on an inside edge.
As you skate around the ends of the rink, leaning in the
direction of the floor’s center, your skates follow a constant arc.
This is the result of the left outside forward edges and right
inside forward edges.
The scissors movement trains you to support your body
while in motion, and you gain valuable experience in
using side push movement.


44 SKATING
Roller Skating.
Safety Rules and Etiquette
As long as you are thoughtful and courteous, you will find the
roller rink an easy place to make friends and increase your
skating skills. Learn the house rules.
Fast skating, weaving suddenly in and out of the normal
flow of skating traffic, uncontrolled skating movements, and
trick skating are usually forbidden because these activities
endanger other skaters.
Your maximum speed should be the average speed of
skaters at the rink. Any skater who consistently passes more
skaters than pass him or her is skating too fast.
Rink Rules
Each roller rink has rules posted, so read them before skating.
Some typical rules include the following:
• No speed skating during public skating sessions.
• No tag or follow-the-leader.
• No crack-the-whip.
• No roughhousing of any kind.
• No eating or drinking while on the skating surface.
Equipment and Care of Skates
Shake each skate. Are there any rattles? Does anything feel
loose? If so, investigate and have the trouble corrected. A loose
wheel or skate assembly can separate from your skate, causing
a spill.
Check to see if your boots are properly laced and securely
tied. A loose bootlace can get into your wheels and cause
an accident.


SKATING 45
.Roller Skating
Skate Parts and Functions of Skates
The rubber cushion assembly on the bottom of a roller skate
allows the skate to be steered through side pressure on the
wheels. This lets you skate forward, skate backward, and turn.
Parts of a boot
1. TONGUE
2. EYELETS
3. LACES
4. SOLE
5. HEEL
1
2 3
4
5
Parts of a roller skate
1. TOE STOP
2. TRUCK
3. KING PIN
4. AXLE
5. CUSHIONS
6. WHEELS
(A) LOOSE BALL BEARING
(B) PRECISION BEARING
7. HANGER
8. PLATE
9. JUMP BAR
10. HEX NUT
11. PIVOT PIN
12. RETAINER CAP
13. ALLEN SCREW
14. DUST CAP
15. AXLE NUT
16. RIVET
1
2 3 4 5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
1613
14
15


46 SKATING
Roller Skating.
Care of Skates
• No skate should ever be used before it is oiled or lubricated. Ball-
bearing skates are oiled. A drop of oil in the bearings, on each side
of each wheel, should last for 10 wearings. Precision skates are
lubricated with a special lubricant, and this work should be done by
a rink mechanic every six months.
• Use a leather softener and preserver on your boots every six
months. Polish the boots regularly to preserve them and enhance
their appearance.
• When removing your skates, unlace them until they slip off easily.
Put laces inside for storage. Tugging on your boot when you put it
on or remove it will stretch the boot out of shape.
• Before you skate, make sure all nuts are on tight, especially the
wheel nuts.
• Do not let toe stops wear down to the point where the metal parts
or nails cut up the floor.
Equipment
Rental shoe skates are available at the roller rink. If you plan
to take lessons and are sure you want to keep skating long
enough to justify the expense, it is best to purchase your
own skates.
You must have a well-fitted
skate to become a good skater.
Buy the best skate you can afford,
and buy from people who are
experienced in the business of
roller skating.
If your budget is limited,
check local shops and rinks
for posted notices about used
skates for sale. Your parent can
help you make wise decisions
when purchasing skates and
other equipment.
BOOT
TRUCK
HANGER
PLATE
WHEELS
TOE STOP


SKATING 47
.Roller Skating
Roller Skating Skills
Learning these skills will help you progress
from a beginner to a polished, confident, and
safe skater.
Skating Forward: How to Start
Most skating strokes start from the same posi-
tion—the T position. You start with your feet
close together, with the right skate placed
behind the left heel, as shown.
You transfer your weight to your left skate
as you push with your right skate, which moves
to the rear. At the end of a comfortable distance
of travel, give a push with the big toe. This
move usually maintains enough momentum
until you can take the next stroke.
The pushing right foot returns to the
parallel position, and the left foot then moves to
the rear with the next push.
Practice forward skating in both directions
around the rink. Also practice skating forward
and gliding on one skate, then on the
other skate.
How to Stop
Stopping on skates is simple to learn, but you
should use caution at first. The T stop uses the
wheels as a source of friction.
Step 1—Stand still with the right skate placed
behind the heel of the left one in a T position.
Step 2—Keeping the body
upright, bend both knees slightly
and push off easily onto the left
skate. Maintain firm support of
your upper body.
Step 3—Return the right skate to
the T position but off the floor,
pressing the middle of the skate
into the heel of the left.
Step 4—Gradually lower the right
skate onto the skating surface, How to stop
How to start
Forward skating—foot moves to
the rear of the body


48 SKATING
Roller Skating.
keeping the skates pressed together. Slowly transfer your body
weight to the right skate. The friction of the right skate on the
skating surface is the braking factor, since the wheels are not
in a position to roll.
There are several variations on this stopping method,
all of them using slide friction. You will notice a tendency to
lunge forward while stopping. Try to resist by supporting your
body with a firm back and leaning slightly away from your
direction of travel until your skates come to a halt.
The stopping action should be gradual and controlled, not
quick. If you try to stop suddenly, the top part of your body
will pitch forward.
Skating Backward
Skating backward is a neat skill to learn as a
beginner. Once you can skate forward with
poise and coordination, you will have no
problem learning to skate backward.
Use a buddy system when you start back-
ward skating. Have a friend stand in front of
you and skate forward, supporting you by plac-
ing his or her hands under your elbows. Rest
your forearms on top of your friend’s arms.
After you master skating backward on two
feet, practice skating backward on one foot.
USING THE SCISSORS
Using a scissors technique is once again the
best way to start in this new direction. Stand
erect, without bending forward at the waist.
Balance your weight evenly over the center of
both skates. Resist the natural tendency to look
down and watch your skate movements.
The main difference in forward and
backward scissors is that the toe-in positions
are reversed.
Step 1—Begin the movement with toes inward (pigeon-toed).
Step 2—Drive the skates apart about shoulder width and then
bring them together with the heels leading inward.
Step 3—Maintain pressure to the inside of both skates. Action
should be unhurried but continuous.
The buddy system


SKATING 49
.Roller Skating
ONE-FOOT STROKING
Once you master the backward scissors move-
ment, it is a simple matter to convert to one-
foot stroking, using a side pressure push to the
front of the body.
Step 1—While gliding backward, bring your
feet together and parallel.
Step 2—Shift the weight of one foot and let
the other foot travel to the front of the body.
Step 3—After a short distance, give a
push with the big toe of your front foot to
continue motion, then return your foot to
the parallel position.
Step 4—Repeat the backward stroke with the
other foot. The photo shows how your foot
moves in front of your body.
Crosscutting on Skates
When done properly, crosscutting is a smooth
and graceful skating move.
The picture shows two Scouts doing the
left cross in front stroke. The diagram shows
the right cross in front stroke. Study it carefully
so you can repeat this movement to both left
and right.
How to Do It. With your left foot parallel, lift
the right foot and place it on the floor to the
left of the left foot and slightly in front. Move
the left foot to
the rear and raise
it from the floor.
Continue crossing
in front by placing
the left foot to
the right of the
right foot. Left cross in front
Right cross in front
R
RL


50 SKATING
Roller Skating.
Skating a Slalom Pattern
The illustration shows how to skate the slalom pattern. This
is a serpentine movement, following a course that is laid out
on the skating surface. Try it first by skating on both feet, with
skates parallel. After you master skating slalom style on two
feet, practice lifting one foot and keeping within the markers
on the floor.
Skating the Slalom Backward. While skating backward on
two feet, skate a slalom pattern as shown in the illustration.
Advanced skaters can try this on one foot, then on the
other foot.
Shuttle Skating
In this test of skill, you skate at varying speeds around the rink
and maintain balance while bending over to pick up an object
from the rink floor.
Four blocks or similar objects are placed on the rink sur-
face, one at each corner. Four containers are spaced at equal
distances away from the blocks. You must skate around the rink
and pick up each container and deposit it in the next container.START
Slalom
pattern
Shuttle skating and the shuttle rink pattern


SKATING 51
.Roller Skating
The Widespread Eagle
The widespread eagle is a basic position in skat-
ing that leads to doing two-footed turns properly.
The position is shown in the picture: the right
skate traveling forward, the left backward. After
accomplishing this position, the skater gradually
brings the feet closer together until the heels are
touching. This is the basic position for several
fundamental turns in skating.
Mohawk
You can use this turn to change from forward
skating to backward skating. You will still be
traveling in the same direction when you com-
plete the turn. The mohawk uses a variation
of the widespread eagle.
Begin by skating forward on the left foot.
Turn your shoulders and hips in the direction you want to
turn, and place your free right foot on the floor in the direction
of backward skating. Lastly, pick up the left foot and either
hold it to the rear or place it alongside the right foot, which is
now gliding backward. You are ready to take the next stroke.
Turning from backward skating to frontward skating uses
the same technique, but reversed.
1 2 3


52 SKATING
Roller Skating.
Spinning on Skates
You can perform a wide variety of spins on roller skates. One of
the easiest to learn is the heel-and-toe spin. Begin by standing
upright with your skates under your body, aligned about 3 to 4
inches apart.
Extend your arms to the side, straight out from the shoul-
ders. Take a deep breath to raise your rib cage. Straighten your
back, look forward (not down), and hold the body straight
without stiffness.
The remaining
instructions assume you
are right-handed. If you are
left-handed, change left and
right in the instructions.
Step 1—Without raising
any wheels from the skat-
ing surface, apply pressure
to the front set of wheels
on the left skate and rear
wheels on the right.
Step 2—While not allowing
the lower body or skates
to move, slowly rotate your
upper body, shoulders, and
arms clockwise (right) to
a “cocked” position, prelimi-
nary to triggering your spin.
Step 3—With upper body
unity, start the spin by snapping your arms and torso into a
counterclockwise direction (right to left), permitting the lower
body and skates to follow. Keep pressure on the right-heel and
left-toe wheels of your skates.
Balance is critical to spinning. Retain your upright body position
throughout. Your first attempts should be taken slowly and carefully,
with only one or two turns until you develop greater skill through prac-
tice. Drawing your arms slowly inward toward your body will increase
spinning speed.


SKATING 53
.Roller Skating
Hop, Skip, and Jump on Skates
This is a three-part requirement. The first part of the hop con-
sists of hopping on one foot a short distance above the floor.
The second part is also known as a bunny hop. It consists
of digging one skate, or pushing the skate toe sharply into the
floor, and hopping to the other skate.
The third part of this requirement is the jump. It is often
called the waltz jump. The jump consists of taking off from one
foot, turning the body while in the air, and landing on the other
foot in the opposite direction from which the takeoff was made.
Hop Skip
Takeoff In the air Landing
Jump
1 2 3


54 SKATING
Roller Skating.
Racing on a Speed Track
Speed skating or racing is one of the coolest parts of roller
skating. Racing should be done only under highly controlled
conditions. As in all sports where speed is the object, high
speed limits a person’s ability to change directions or stop to
avoid a collision with an obstacle or another skater.
Scouts must never go fast when other skaters are in the
rink at the same time. Speed skating and racing are generally
done in rinks at times set aside for that purpose only.
Using the skills you have learned so far will help you
practice the techniques and rules of speed skating. With help
from your counselor, you will be able to demonstrate correct
technique in starting, cornering, passing, and pacing.
The first picture shows two Scouts on the starting line
ready to take off in a race. The second photo shows them
rounding a pylon or corner in the proper way.


SKATING 55
.Roller Skating
Shoot-the-Duck
The photos here show the steps
you take in learning to shoot-
the-duck.
Step 1—First, use fast stroking to
build up some speed.
Step 2—Bend over and touch
your toes.
Step 3—Bend down in a squatting
position, with your hands extended
directly forward.
Step 4—Extend one leg out in
front, assisting by placing your
hands under the knee of your
extended leg.
Step 5—When you are nearly
stopped, rise into an upright
position by reversing the procedure.
After some practice, you should be
able to rise while on one foot.
You also can learn to skate in
a slalom pattern while in the
shoot-the-duck position. You can
also shoot-the-duck while skating
backward, but use extreme care to
avoid collisions.
2
3
4


56 SKATING
Roller Skating.
Limbo Under
The picture shows the entire procedure that will make you a
limbo champ. While skating forward, the skater leans back
and skates under a bar; the lower the bar, the more skilled the
limbo skater. If you can shoot-the-duck, you will be able to
pass under a lower bar.
The Stepover
For the roller skating requirement 2e, you will need to perform
the stepover, shown here. Note how the skater slowly steps
over the bar.


SKATING 57
.Roller Skating
Dribbling a Basketball
For this requirement, you
should be able to dribble the
ball the length of the floor
while skating, turn around,
and come back to your start-
ing point. This also can be
done in teams.
Hockey Puck on Skates
Practice skating completely around
the rink, using a hockey stick
to push a puck in front of you.
Pushing too hard will lessen your
control. Skate at an even speed
and push the puck smoothly. This
will keep the puck from getting
away from you.





SKATING 59
.In-Line Skating
In-Line Skating
Tips for the Beginner
In-line skating is a skill you can learn without injuring yourself
as long as you pay close attention to learning the basics.
If you have never been on skates before, it is a good idea
to start out on a soft, level surface like dry grass or even the
carpet inside your home.
First, sit on a sturdy surface and put on
your safety gear and skates. Always wear your
safety gear, no matter where you are skating.
Sitting on the edge of your seat, position your
skates with toes out, heels touching. This is
called the V-stance.
Holding onto the chair, rise in one smooth
motion and center your hips over your heels.
While you do the next exercise, keep your head
up and facing forward. Get used to the feel
of the skates underneath you without looking
down at them.
In-line Skating Positions
Next, you will assume the ready position.
Place your feet shoulder-width apart, and raise
your hands to waist level. Slightly bend your
hips, knees, and ankles. You will go down a few
inches when you do this. Imagine a line con-
necting your shoulders, hips, and ankles. Keep
your weight distributed this way, and you will be
much less likely to fall.
V-stance


60 SKATING
In-Line Skating.
In the ready position, test the way your body moves. Lean
forward and backward, remembering to keep your knees bent.
Try sinking several inches and rising up again a few times.
Notice how the pressure changes with your body movements?
Bend your knees carefully until you can touch them—
then go ahead and touch your toes. See how easy it is to move
around in your skates? Tip the skate wheels to the right and
then to the left to gain confidence in the support in-line
skates offer.
Now stand with your skates a little more than shoulder
distance apart. This is known as the
A-frame stance. Practice tipping
your skates inward, then return to the
normal A-frame stance. Do the same
thing again, except tip the skates
outward. In the A-frame stance, put
your toes as close together as possible
without hurting and heels out. This
is known as the A-stance.
Tip: Whenever
you are on in-line
skates, keep your
pelvis tucked and
your knees bent.
In this position
you are ready to
react in different
situations.
Ready position (front) Ready position (side)
A-stance


SKATING 61
.In-Line Skating
To stand still, use the safe-T. Roll
the skate without the brake back until
it touches the arch of the other skate,
making a T-shape. Practice this until you
feel securely anchored in the safe-T.
How to Fall Down and Get Back Up
Falling Down. With good skating skills and
the proper attitude toward safety and taking
care of your equipment, falling should not
be a problem. But if you feel a fall coming,
try to fall forward—so your wrist guards,
elbow guards, and knee pads provide you
some protection.
Getting Up. If you do end up on the
ground, here is the best way to get up:
Step 1—Get on hands and knees.
Step 2—Raise one knee and put that skate
on the ground close to your other knee.
Step 3—Keeping your upper body upright,
sit on the heel of the other skate. Center
yourself directly over both skates, so your
skates do not roll out from under you.
Step 4—Use your hands on the raised
knee to push yourself straight up in one
smooth motion.
V-Walk or Duck Walk
This exercise will help you get a feel for the inside wheel
edges. It is also the next step you take toward skating.
Step 1—Put your toes out, heels touching.
Step 2—Lift one skate at a time, stepping in place and shifting
your weight right, then left, and so on.
Step 3—Now advance each skate a few inches ahead as you
step and shift your weight. With your feet still in the V-stance,
you will waddle like a duck.
Safe-T
Getting up


62 SKATING
In-Line Skating.
Crab Walk
This step will help you gain confidence on skates. You also
will use it later to perform crossovers. The effect you should
try to achieve here is walking your skates to the left while
facing forward. You will repeat the walk to the right.
Step 1—Stand in the ready position. If possible, find a line to
stand on. Stand on the line so it is passing from your left to
right (not between the skates).
Step 2—With your arms raised in the ready position, look
toward the left and rotate your shoulders in that direction.
Step 3—Pass the right skate over the left skate and place it
back on the line, on the other side of the left skate. Let your
left ankle completely relax onto its left side to give your right
foot plenty of room.
Step 4—Bring the left skate from behind the right and place it
in its natural place to the left of the right foot on the line.
Step 5—Keep walking down the line to the left until you are
comfortable with the crab walk.
Step 6—Practice these same steps to the right until you are
back at your original position.
Crab walk
3 4


SKATING 63
.In-Line Skating
The Glide
Now try skating on dry grass or carpet. Practice by repeating
again and again.
Step 1—Put your feet in the safe-T position.
Step 2—Tip the back skate onto the inside edge and push
against that edge.
Step 3—Lean your upper body over the knee of the front
skate and lunge forward over that knee.
Step 4—When your weight transfers to the front skate,
pick up the back skate and move it forward, closing the gap
between the skates.
Safety Rules and Etiquette
Take safety seriously. Control your own safety by always using
protective gear and properly functioning skates, knowing and
practicing good in-line skating skills, and having a safe,
courteous attitude.
Skating Smart
One requirement for the Skating merit badge is to
explain skating safety rules. You must also know how
to safely pass a pedestrian. All safety rules fall under
skating etiquette, which is really just common sense.
• Always be in control of your skates and maintain a safe
skating attitude. Do not show off.
• Stay on the right side of the path. Always pass on the left,
and always call out a warning, “Passing on your left!”
• Skate with the flow of traffic.
• Do not wear headphones.
• Legally, you are a wheeled vehicle on in-line skates. Learn
and observe all traffic regulations. Remember to always yield
to pedestrians.
• Stay away from anything on the road surface, such as water,
oil, and rocks. These make an unsafe skating surface and
can damage your skates and send you flying.
• Avoid heavy traffic.
• Take care where you skate alone. Do not leave yourself open
to danger by skating in run-down areas after dark.


64 SKATING
In-Line Skating.
• If you do skate after dark, make sure your equipment and
skates are well-covered with reflective materials that show
up in the dark. It is a good idea to apply reflective mate-
rial when you first begin to skate because you never know
when you might stay out later than you had planned.
• Skate only where you know you are welcome. If you are
skating in a park, make sure the park allows in-line skating
and you are skating in an area that is not off limits. Do
not skate on private property unless you have the owner’s
permission. Never wear your skates inside a business or
someone else’s home.
Protective Gear
In-line skating requires a lot of protective gear.
Properly equip yourself for safe in-line skating—
wear a helmet, wrist guards, elbow guards, and
knee pads.
Always wear a helmet. Not only is a helmet
required by law in many cities and states, it will
protect your head and make you more noticeable
to motorists.
Wrist guards are important, too. The most
common skating injury involves injuries to the
wrist, followed by injuries to the lower arm. The
natural reaction when you are about to fall is to
put your hands out to break the fall. Wrist guards
can help reduce the risk of injury.
Elbow guards and knee pads are critical,
especially when you want to try a new turn. You
will be more willing to try new things if you know
you are protected.
Smart in-line skaters take safety
seriously and always wear
protective gear.
When you skate in groups:
• Do not give in to peer pressure to skate beyond
your level of expertise.
• Look out for one another.
• Give each other plenty of room to maneuver.
• Let an experienced skater bring up the rear.


SKATING 65
.In-Line Skating
Selection and Care of In-Line Skates
When you buy in-line skates, choose the best skates you can
afford. Cheaper skates can break while you are skating.
Ask the salesperson if the heel brake is replaceable. Your
brake will wear down and you will need to replace it. It is
certainly more practical to be able to replace a brake rather
than the whole skate.
What type of bearings does the skate have? The higher
the bearing number, the smoother your ride will be. While
an ABEC-1 bearing may be fine for you in your first months
of skating, you may want a smoother ride when you get your
speed and skills up. On the other hand, there is no need to
buy the most expensive skates with the highest grade if you
expect to do only occasional skating.
Caring for Your In-Line Skates
Here is how you can keep your skates in great condition:
• When you finish skating, pull the boot liner tongue back to
its original position. Remove the liner from the plastic boot
if it is wet. If you do not, the liner will wear out before its
time and the boot liner tongue may wear unevenly and sag.
• Replace the heel brake when it wears to one-half inch or
less. Pay special attention to this if you perform downhill
slaloms because brakes can burn up in an afternoon of
downhill skating.
• Rotate and replace wheels regularly. This will keep you
much safer on skates. Dirt and grit may get into your wheel
bearings so these must be cleaned regularly, too.
• Read the booklet that comes with your skates. The
manufacturer will give you specific instructions about
maintaining your skates. You also can take your skates
to a shop for maintenance.


66 SKATING
In-Line Skating.
In-Line Skating Skills
Whenever you learn a new skill, it is important to review what
you have already learned before heading out.
Beginning Stride
Choose a flat, traffic-free paved surface—preferably with grass
alongside it and a bench nearby. Here are some ideas:
• A park with an isolated play area, where no one is playing
• A playground at a school when no one is there
• The parking lot at your place of worship, when it is empty
(ask for permission beforehand)
• The patio in your backyard
The beginning stride builds on the V-walk
or duck walk. The duck walk helps you learn to
transfer your weight from foot to foot. Concentrate
on feeling your weight shift from side to side.
This rhythmic motion is essential to skating. This
is identical to the duck walk you did in your
first session.
Step 1—Waddle in tiny steps from right to left.
Step 2—Move each skate forward a few inches
each time.
Step 3—Keep your toes pointed out and your
heels as close together as possible, shifting your
weight from side to side.
Step 4—Remember to keep your ready position
while skating; your balance will be much better.
Step 5—If you start to roll, just coast into a
relaxed ready position and resume duck walking.
To do a beginner’s stride, start from the duck
walk and push off against the inside edge of your
back skate. Again, shift your weight as you do this. Keep your
strides short, shifting from side to side. Going too fast at first
can make you lose your balance.
Remember: Think about keeping your knees bent and your posture
upright. Do not let your upper body lean forward; this is the wrong
position and will make your back ache.
Do not use a path through a
park. Wait until you know how
to skate well before venturing
onto the paths.


SKATING 67
.In-Line Skating
STOP!
Before you go any farther, you need to learn how to stop.
Emergency Stop. Learn to use your heel brake as soon as you
can. Here are some other ways to stop right away.
• Step onto grass or dirt, or whatever nonrolling surface
is handy.
• Grab something if you are going slowly. (Do not grab
another person.)
• If you are going slowly enough, steer your toes together.
Heel Brake. The normal way of stopping on in-line skates is
with the heel brake on your skate. One requirement for this
badge is to stop on command on flat pavement, using the
heel brake.
To use your heel brake, first learn the scissors stance.
This is a position you will use again and again in other skills.
Practice this skill on grass or carpet. First, get a
good ready stance—except with your feet parallel
and no more than a few inches apart. Keeping the
braking foot in place, shift your weight to the other
foot. Bending your leg from the knee, slide your
braking foot forward, with all four wheels still on
the ground.
Braking Drill. Stopping is made up of the following
three parts:
1. The approach
2. The scissors position
3. The stop
To practice stopping, you need a bit of room to
coast, or approach. In this drill, you practice
engaging the brake by dragging it. This helps you
learn to feel and control your brake.
• Practice approaching by skating forward enough to get a
good steady momentum going, then coast for at least 10 feet
with your feet parallel and as close together as possible.
• Practice the scissors motion during the coast by shifting your
weight to the nonbraking foot while you extend your brak-
ing foot forward. Make sure to keep the feet flat, with all
four wheels of both skates on the ground. Keep a good ready
form with your hands waist-high.
In a true
emergency,
when you are
in danger, pitch
forward and
slide on your
wrist and
knee guards.
Scissors stance


68 SKATING
In-Line Skating.
• If you have a standard heel brake, engage the brake by
lifting the toe of your braking foot until you feel the brake
touch the pavement. Let the brake drag lightly.
• If your brake is cuff-activated, engage the brake by pointing
the toe of your braking foot forward. This presses the back
of your calf into the boot. If you find this difficult, you may
need to adjust the position of your brake.
Repeat this braking drill until you feel comfortable with the
feel of the brake. You should be able to drag the brake for
several feet.
Stopping. Brake lightly, then push the brake pad ahead of you.
At the same time that you push the brake forward, drop your
hips as if you are sitting down, then quickly straighten back up
to keep from losing your balance. It may sound as if there are
three separate actions here but that is not the case. This should
all be done in one smooth motion to keep you balanced.
Practice Stopping. Draw a line with a stick of chalk on the
pavement. Skate toward the line and get to a good coasting
speed. When you are a couple feet away from the chalk line,
begin your stop. It will probably take some practice before you
get the hang of it without going over the line. Try stopping
from a closer distance, or when skating faster, until you know
what it takes to stop at different speeds.
Braking, front view Braking, side view


SKATING 69
.In-Line Skating
A-Frame Turn
In this turn, you will turn to the left. As
always, practice on grass or carpet first. Get
into the A-frame position—a ready position,
with feet slightly more than shoulder-width
apart. The ready position always means your
hands are waist-high.
Rotate your head, shoulders, hands, and
hips toward the left. Always lead with your
head, looking in the direction where you are
going. Push against the inside edge of the
right skate. Let the lower body follow the
upper by pushing the right skate a foot or
more forward and steering toward the left.
Repeat the A-frame turn in both direc-
tions until you are comfortable with it. Now,
do the same drill on the pavement. Again,
repeat the turns in both directions until you
feel comfortable.
The Basic Stride
The basic stride builds on the beginning
stride you learned. The difference is that you
bend your knees more deeply. This lengthens
your stroke and your glide, which makes
you roll faster. It also helps strengthen your
one-footed glide, which is one of the in-line
skating requirements.
Begin this session by practicing the
beginning stride. For this stroke, bend
your knees to take yourself closer to the
pavement. Lengthen the duration of the
glide by counting to four between strokes.
This makes the stroke more efficient and
strengthens your one-footed skating ability.
When you push off, do not push to
the back—push directly to the side, keeping
your body centered. Recover the stroking leg
fully during the glide.
Practicing the basic stride helps a
good skater get even better.
The A-frame position prepares you
for the A-frame turn.


70 SKATING
In-Line Skating.
The Swizzle
You can use the swizzle to get around
in small spaces. This skill is also known
as sculling. For your merit badge in
this sport, you are required to perform
a series of linked swizzles, both forward
and backward. For now, we will learn
the forward swizzle.
Start by standing with your toes
out and heels touching. Push your
knees together and forward a couple
of inches, letting the skates tilt onto
the inside edges. Push outward against
both heels. As your legs straighten and
heels separate, you go forward. You
control how fast and how far you go
by the intensity you use to push.
Recover quickly into an A-frame ready
stance (with your legs slightly wider
than shoulder-distance apart).
Linking Swizzles. You can link a series
of swizzles by going directly from the
A-frame stance (a wide-legged ready
position) into an A-stance (with the
toes together). From there, move into a new V-stance and
do another swizzle. Practice this until you can link several
swizzles together easily, managing the changing of foot
position comfortably.
Half Swizzles. Here is how to accomplish the half swizzle.
Continue practicing until you get short glides from each
half swizzle.
Step 1—Skate into a moderate speed and begin making
forward swizzles.
Step 2—When your toes are out and your heels are touching,
shift your weight to the left skate. Begin a swizzle with the
right skate by pushing the back heel wheels to the right.
Step 3—Shift your weight onto the right skate and begin
to press the left skate into a swizzle, pushing out to the side
from the back two wheels. Keep both skates in contact with
the ground.
The swizzle helps skaters get out of
tight spots.


SKATING 71
.In-Line Skating
Spin Stop
Do not try the spin stop until you can easily do the
A-frame turn. If you cannot get this on the first try,
or even the second or third, just keep practicing.
Step 1—Skate at a moderate speed.
Step 2—Rotate your upper body to the left to
begin an A-frame turn. Make sure your A-frame
stance is very wide.
Step 3—As you put pressure on your right skate,
lift the left heel and rotate the left knee out until
your left heel is under your body. Both toes are
now pointed outward.
Step 4—Return the left skate to the pavement and
balance your weight evenly between your thighs.
Snowplow Stop. Skate at a moderate speed, then
begin making forward swizzles. Apply pressure to
both inside edges as your toes rotate in. Increase
the pressure with your hip muscles and by bending
your knees. Practice this technique using a chalk
line on the pavement as a stopping place.
Making the Turn
Practice in a place where you have a large
amount of room. Place a small obstacle (a rock,
for instance) in the area where you plan to do
the turn. Practice this until you can get close to
your obstacle but clear it with a U-turn. To do
the parallel turn:
Step 1—Skate at a moderate speed toward the
area around the obstacle.
Step 2—Put the right skate forward and lock your
left knee behind the right.
Step 3—Twist your upper body and hips halfway
around to the right, and look back in that direction.
Step 4—Let your head and shoulders pass over
the right skate's outside edge into the center of
the turn.
Step 5—After you turn at least 90 degrees,
straighten up.
2
3
4


72 SKATING
In-Line Skating.
Mobility Drills
Use mobility drills to strengthen your skating skills—especially
one-footed balance. Your ability to balance on one foot should
be very strong before you attempt to learn more complex skating
skills, such as crossovers.
Pick-Up. Skate forward into a coasting ready position. While
coasting, reach down to touch your knees, then your toes,
then straighten. Repeat this several times. Practice crouching
down to pick up small items from the pavement as you skate.
Use either hand so you develop your sense of balance without
overexercising the muscles on one side of your body.
Marching. Skate into a moderate pace. While coasting, start
making short marching steps. Try to stay on the supporting
skate as long as possible while the other skate is off the pave-
ment. Work on both legs.
Single-Foot Glides. Skate into a moderate pace. Lift a skate
up and out behind you, leaning forward slightly. Lift your arms
out to the side to balance yourself. Try to hold this position as
long as possible.
Training Wheel. Skate into a
moderate pace. Lift your left
heel and let the left front wheel
bear about a third of your weight
while rolling it a few inches
behind your right skate. Try
to keep the left skate from
wobbling, and keep your
knees close together.
The Kneel. Skate into a moder-
ate pace, and then do a training
wheel with your right foot. Let
your hips sink directly over the
right heel. Divide your weight
equally across the right toe and
the left skate. Keep the skates as
close as possible.
Single-foot glide


SKATING 73
.In-Line Skating
Crossovers
You will perform crossovers as one requirement for the Skating
merit badge. The crossover lets you stroke and maintain
momentum as you round corners. It builds on the crab step
you did at the beginning. To practice the crossover, find pave-
ment with a slight slope.
Step 1—Assume the ready position, arms waist-high, stand-
ing with your left side toward the slope. Rotate your head and
arms in that direction.
Step 2—Begin making crab steps to the left, stepping sideways
and downward. After making two steps, start turning your toes
toward the bottom of the slope as you return each skate to the
pavement. You will begin to roll down the slope with each step.
Step 3—Maintain your upper body rotation and your stepping
rhythm. Try to crab step your way around a big circle to
your left.
Backward Skating
Be sure to use a clear practice area without any traffic, because
you will not be able to see where you are going.
Backward Turns. On a slight incline, face away from the
incline and assume a wide A-frame stance. Allow your skates
to start rolling backward. Look over your right shoulder and
sweep your right hand around behind you at shoulder height
until it points down the hill. The pressure of the rotation on
your right skate’s inside edge results in a turn toward the right.
Repeat this two or three times, starting from the top of the
slope each time. Practice on both sides.
Repeat this drill, but begin with your right side facing
the slope. To get good practice doing crossover turns,
find a large circle on a school or park playground.
Skate toward the circle and repeat the moves you did
in the session above.


74 SKATING
In-Line Skating.
Backward Swizzle. The backward swizzle is an essential part
of skating backward, as well as being a requirement for your
merit badge. Here is how to do the backward swizzle.
To link several swizzles together, pull your heels together
and stand tall as you recover. Immediately turn into a new
A-stance and repeat the same movements described above.
Backward Strokes. Begin a series of backward swizzles and
get into the swizzle rhythm. When you reach the A-stance, shift
most of your weight to the left skate. Press the inside edge of
the right skate to begin a half swizzle. Immediately shift your
weight to the right foot and press the left skate into a half
swizzle. You should get a short glide from each backward
half swizzle.
1. Assume the A-stance
on the pavement.
2. Push outward quickly
against both skates’
toe wheels.
3. Recover into a wide
ready position.


SKATING 75
.In-Line Skating
Lunge Turns
Your counselor will choose an object around
which you will perform a lunge turn. First
practice the lunge turn movements. Repeat
several times in both directions, making sure
to bring your upper body forward over the
knee with each lunge.
Step 1—Assume the ready position with
your feet in the safe-T and your hands at
waist height.
Step 2—Rotate your body so your chest is
pointed in the same direction as your left toe.
Step 3—Lunge on the right leg by pushing
against the right skate’s inner edges.
Lunge Turn From an A-Frame. Repeat this
sequence until you are comfortable with
these motions.
Step 1—Skate into a moderate speed.
Step 2—Turn your upper body to the left and begin an
A-frame turn. Push the left skate ahead and position your
chest over the knee.
Step 3—After the turn, return to a normal, shoulder-
width stance.
Lunge Turn on the Course. Remember to practice turns in
both directions.
Step 1—Mark out a place on the pavement to represent a turn.
Step 2—From 25 feet away, approach the corner aggressively
with well-bent knees.
Step 3—About a yard before the mark, push the left skate for-
ward and turn your upper body toward the direction of the turn.
Step 4—Sink into a low lunge, centering your chest over the
left knee and transferring your weight to that skate. The other
leg has only enough weight to maintain some pressure.
Step 5—Let both skates tip onto their left edges and press into
the turn.
Step 6—Close the gap between the skates and straighten to
resume forward momentum.


76 SKATING
In-Line Skating.
Slalom Turns
Be sure you have mastered parallel turns before you attempt
slalom turns. First, practice the motions used in slalom turns.
Step 1—Start from the ready stance. Push the left skate
forward until the ankle is even with the toes on the right foot.
Step 2—Sink slightly while tipping both skates onto their left
wheel edges.
Step 3—Bring the left foot back under your hips and push the
right foot forward.
Step 4—Sink slightly while tipping both skates onto their right
wheel edges.
Slalom Skating. For in-line skating,
this merit badge requires you to perform
a series of one-footed slaloms on a
gentle slope.
Step 1—Skate into a moderate speed.
Step 2—Push the left skate forward,
sink, and bend both knees to the left.
This causes you to turn. As the turn
progresses, your weight transfers to
the right skate.
Step 3—Rise and straighten your bent
knees so you can shift your weight to
the left skate.
Step 4—As your skates straighten out
from the left turn, push the right foot
forward to prepare for a right turn.
Step 5—Sink as you roll both skates
onto their uphill edges, beginning the
next turn.
The Power Stride
Aerodynamics is the way the wind works with (or against) a
moving object. You see aerodynamic designs at work on sports
cars. Auto manufacturers try to keep their designs for these
cars as flat as possible. Tall, boxy cars generally will not move
as fast because their design works against the wind—causing
what is known as wind resistance.
One-footed slalom


SKATING 77
.In-Line Skating
The power stride takes aerodynamics into consideration,
helping you design your body into a sleeker, flatter shape that
moves more smoothly and quickly in the wind. This increases
your stride—and your speed.
In learning the power stride, you will learn the tuck, the
arm swing, the stride angle, and outside edging.
The Aerodynamic Tuck. This stance puts you in a position to
skate fast and smooth. Practice the stance until you are com-
pletely at ease with it. If you have a rough time balancing with
both hands behind your back, try it first with just one hand.
Step 1—Stand with feet shoulder width apart. Fold your
hands and place them under your chin, then bend until your
elbows touch your knees.
Step 2—Relax your ankles, knees, and hips just enough to rise
to a comfortable position. Your upper body should flex forward
at the hips with your weight over your arches.
Step 3—Clasp your hands in the small of your back.
1 2 3


78 SKATING
In-Line Skating.
The Arm Swing. Get into the power stride tuck. With both
hands at your thighs and palms in, swing one hand forward
and the other back.
The Angle.
Step 1—From the ready position, bend your knees to get your
hips closer to your heels, as in the basic stride position.
Step 2—Shift your weight to one foot and extend the other leg
to the side. Look out toward your action skate and notice its
position on the pavement.
Step 3—Now assume the tuck. Again, shift your weight to one
skate and extend the other out to the side. Notice how much
farther out the skate is. The lower position of your body allows
you to add length to your stride through the length of your leg.
Imagine a line crossing under your skates, left to right,
and do your best to stride as if the line is always there, with
strides going to the side.
The Edge. Now, picture a line running between your skates,
front to back. The first two strides you learned kept each skate
on its own side of this center line. With the power stride, you
are crouched into a lower position, swinging your arms front to
back, and striding straight out to the side.
You also are making this stride even more aggressive by
recovering on the opposite side of the center line. This puts
your skate on its outside edge, and you have to let the edge
roll back onto the inside edge to push out of the stroke. This
squeezes even more length out of the stride.
Outside Edge Swizzle. Here is how to perform the outside
edge swizzle:
Step 1—Begin by performing several swizzles.
Step 2—As your feet close into the A-stance with your toes
in and heels out, let your ankles relax so your skates tip onto
their outside edges.
Step 3—After several swizzles from your normal position, do
the same from the tuck.
Step 4—Begin doing swizzles with the right foot. Ride on the
center edge of the left skate while pushing the right skate out
and back to the middle.
Step 5—Roll the right skate from the outside edge onto the
inside edge as you push to the side.


SKATING 79
.In-Line Skating
Going Over the Line. Standing still, practice crab-stepping
just as you did when you first learned to skate. Now practice
the same steps first from a slow coast, then at a slightly faster
speed. Try it in the tuck position, since this is essential to the
power stride.
Practicing the Stride
Mastering the power stride requires putting four
elements together:
1. The tuck
2. The arm swing
3. The stride angle
4. Outside edging
Then follow these steps:
Step 1—Begin by practicing the power stride on one skate at
a time, using the basic stride for the other leg.
Step 2—In the tuck position, skate into a good rhythm, swing-
ing your arms front to back and pushing your strides straight
out to the side.
Step 3—On one skate, begin recovering on the opposite side
of the center line. With the other skate, continue using the
basic stride.
Practice this again and again with one skate until you are
comfortable with the feeling—then go on to the other skate.
Transitions
A transition is changing directions while you are rolling. It is
like a car shifting from forward to reverse.
Mohawk. For in-line skating, you are required to perform
a mohawk. Follow these steps to learn how to perform
this transition:
Step 1—Skate into a good speed.
Step 2—Begin a spin stop to the left. As soon as your left heel
wheel touches the pavement, shift onto the left skate.
Step 3—Pivot on the right toe wheel to make the skates parallel
as your hips rotate backward—and begin skating backward.


80 SKATING
In-Line Skating.
Backward-to-Forward Transition. To learn this transition,
you need to find a slight downward slope.
Step 1—Face uphill and allow yourself to start
rolling backward.
Step 2—Look over your right shoulder to begin
a backward turn.
Step 3—Rotate a quarter turn and shift your
weight to the left leg.
Step 4—Finish rotating, push off, and begin skating forward.
Backward Crossovers
First warm up with a series of crab steps
to the left.
Step 1—Begin this drill by making
backward swizzles clockwise in a circle,
looking over your left shoulder.
Step 2—Transfer your weight over your
left knee and continue around the circle
by making the swizzling motion with just
your right skate. Stretch out both arms
as you bend your knees and rotate your
upper body left, toward the center of
the circle.
Step 3—Push the right skate ahead of the
support skate and inside the circle with
each stroke. Keep your balance steady
over the supporting leg.
Step 4—Allow the left ankle to relax
and tip onto the outside edge. Let your
left skate go underneath your body and
away from the center of the circle, passing
under your hips.
Step 5—Swizzle the right skate forward inside the circle to
take your weight.
Step 6—Push the right skate back out. Recover the left skate
and return it to the pavement under your left hip.
Remember to keep your knees well-bent and your upper
body rotated.
Backward crossover


SKATING 81
.In-Line Skating
Hopping Over Obstacles
Practice this stationary exercise while standing on the grass or
carpet. Then practice while standing on the pavement. Make
sure you are comfortable with the stationary jump before you
progress to the rolling jump. Work on lifting your heels closer
to your hips when you jump, so you can clear taller obstacles.
Step 1—Assume a ready position, hands waist-high. Jump
an inch or two off the ground. Remember to keep the ready
position as your legs absorb the impact when you land.
Step 2—When you are ready to try your jump while rolling,
pick some line or mark on the pavement to represent an
obstacle. Stroke toward it, then coast into a ready position
as you approach it. Jump an inch or two off the ground,
letting your legs absorb the impact when you land. Keep
your knees bent and your arms at waist height as you land.


82 SKATING
In-Line Skating.
Curbs
Until you learn to hop while rolling, you will need to approach
curbs more slowly. Reach the curb at a slow speed.
Step 1—Lean over and reach forward with both arms as you
lift the action leg and clear the curb. Step onto the curb and
push off against the inside wheel edges of the support leg to
continue on your way.
Step 2—Approach stepping off a curb the same way. Lean
over the curb and reach forward with your arms while lifting
and extending the outside skate ahead enough to clear the
edge. Remember to allow extra clearance for the heel brake.
Step 3—Land on the outside edge and push off into a glide as
soon as you recover the other skate.
When you have learned to hop over obstacles, approaching
curbs becomes easier. Just hop up, remembering to lift your
heels closer to your hips.
1 2








SKATING 85
.First Aid for Skating Injuries
First Aid for
Skating Injuries
Like most sports, skating—whether on wheels or blades—has
a unique set of risks and precautions. Safety-conscious skaters
should be prepared to give first aid for the following conditions:
Hypothermia and Frostbite
Hypothermia occurs when the body’s core temperature falls
below the normal range. Any combination of cool weather,
wet skin or clothes, wind, exhaustion, or hunger can lead to
hypothermia. Skating may present hypothermia risks. As the
body cools, the victim will shiver in an attempt to create heat.
Be aware of hypothermia’s danger signs:
• Loss of muscle strength and coordination
• Disorientation or incoherence
• Pale or bluish skin tone
In severe stages, shivering stops, unconsciousness follows, and
death may occur unless immediate treatment is received.
Anyone who starts to shiver or who shows discoloration
around the lips or cheeks should be immediately moved to a
warm place. Wet clothing should be removed and the victim
thoroughly dried off. If no warm shelter or other heat source
is available, the victim should be pressed closely with one or
more persons so that heat can be transferred through direct skin
contact.
Frostbite may occur whenever flesh is exposed to low
temperatures. Toes, fingers, nose, cheeks, and ears are especially
susceptible. Skating in cold, windy weather risks frostbite if
feet, hands, and face are not well-protected.


86 SKATING
First Aid for Skating Injuries.
Also the body must be warm enough to supply warm blood
to those areas susceptible to frostbite, so it is important to
have warm clothing and cover the head, torso, and extremi-
ties. As the flesh begins to freeze, it reddens and is painful. In
severe frostbite cases, the skin stiffens and is grayish or whitish.
Blisters may appear.
When frostbite occurs, immediately warm the affected
area. Breathing on fingertips or placing chilled fingers beneath
clothing and against warm skin, such as under the arms, is usu-
ally sufficient in mild cases.
For more severe freezing, immerse the cold area in tepid
or lukewarm (104 to 108 degrees Fahrenheit) water. Avoid heat
or abrasion, which can injure or seriously damage tissue made
sensitive by the cold. Blistering in severe cases requires sterile
dressing, treatment for shock, and immediate medical attention.
Heat Reactions
Heat reactions result from overheating when the body cannot
keep itself cool enough. If a skater feels dizzy or faint, nauseous,
or weak; develops a headache or muscle cramps; or looks pale
and is sweating heavily, treat for heat exhaustion.
• Have the person lie down in a cool, shady spot with the
feet raised.
• Loosen clothing and cool the person with a damp cloth
or a fan.
• Have the victim sip water.
Recovery should be rapid. If the condition worsens, get medi-
cal help. Heatstroke is the extreme stage where dehydration
(body water loss) has caused a very high body temperature and
a cessation of sweating. The pulse is extremely rapid and the
person will be disoriented or unconscious. The victim must be
cooled immediately through immersion in cool water or with
cold packs, and the body’s fluid must be increased. Treat for
shock and seek emergency medical help.


SKATING 87
.First Aid for Skating Injuries
Fractures
Fractures are broken bones, injuries all too frequently associ-
ated with skating. There are two kinds: closed (simple) and
open (compound). A closed fracture is a broken bone where
the skin is not torn or punctured. If there is a wound through
the skin at the break, it is called an open fracture. Signs of a
fracture may include the following:
• Tenderness to the touch
• Swelling and discoloration
• Unusual or abnormal position or movement
• Grating sound or feeling
• Immobility
• Sharp snapping sound or feeling at the time of the injury
Keep the victim still and quiet with no movement of the injured
area. Treat for shock, if indicated. Apply cold packs to reduce
pain and swelling. For open fractures, use direct pressure to con-
trol bleeding. In all cases, get medical help to the victim. If the
victim must be moved, splint the fracture prior to transport.
Techniques for improvising a splint are discussed in the First
Aid merit badge pamphlet.
Sprains and Strains
Sprains are caused by twisting, wrenching, or lifting move-
ments that tear or stretch tissues around a joint. This type
of injury causes sudden pain and swelling at the joint. There
may be some discoloration, and the joint likely will be tender to
the touch and very painful when moved. Sprains are relatively
common injuries in skating due to falls. Elevate the injured joint,
apply cold compresses, and treat as a fracture or broken bone.
The term strain usually refers to a less severe joint or
muscle injury where tissues are not torn but may have been
overextended or overstressed. Depending on the severity, treat
the same as a sprain.


88 SKATING
First Aid for Skating Injuries.
Shock
When a person is injured or under great stress, the circulatory
system may fail to provide enough blood to all parts of the
body. This condition is known as shock. It can accompany
any serious skating injury. In severe cases, it can be fatal.
Indications include pale, moist, clammy or cool skin;
weak and rapid pulse; weakness; shivering; thirst or nausea; or
shallow, rapid breathing. Because of the risks and uncertainties
that may accompany a serious injury, every victim should be
treated for shock.
• Keep the victim lying down with the feet slightly elevated.
• Prevent loss of body heat.
• Keep the airway open and give rescue breathing if necessary.
• If the victim is conscious, give water.
• Treat the underlying injury and get medical help.
Bumps, Bruises, and Scratches
Contusion is the medical term for bruises—those black-and-
blue marks that appear on the arms and legs when you bump
into things or fall when skating. Most bruises are not serious
and are easy to recognize and treat.
Covering the site of a new bruise with a cold compress or
towel for 30 minutes will help reduce discoloration, pain, and
swelling. Also, slow the flow of blood into the damaged tissues
by resting the injured area.
Bruises that include possible bone injury, or any contusions
on the head or abdomen coupled with sharp or persistent pain,
should be seen by a medical professional.
Lacerations, incisions, and abrasions (cuts and scrapes)
may occur while skating, or more likely when falls occur on
rough surfaces. As in other situations, the wound should be
cleaned, disinfected, and covered. The unit or patrol first-aid
kit should provide for minor wound treatment. For severe
bleeding injuries, control bleeding with direct pressure or at
pressure points until emergency medical help is available.


SKATING 89
.First Aid for Skating Injuries
In skating, blisters are most likely to occur on the feet.
Skaters should be attentive to any tenderness or sensitive areas
(“hot spots”) that indicate the start of a blister. You may be
able to adjust lacing or socks to avoid friction on the sensitive
area. If not, be smart: Listen to your body and quit for the
day. If you have no choice but to continue the activity, follow
preventive steps such as taping and the use of commercial
skin tougheners.
Prevention goes hand in hand with mitigation, which
means “to lessen in force or intensity” and “to make
less severe.” By taking precautions to manage risk
and first aid, you can be prepared to anticipate, help
prevent, mitigate, and respond to just about any
skating hazard.





SKATING 91
.Skating Terminology
aggressive. This style of skating
emphasizes stunts, either on street
courses or special ramps and pipes
built for this purpose.
aim. The starting direction of an edge
or sequence of steps.
American National Standards
Institute (ANSI). This entity establishes
standards for protective gear such as
knee pads and helmets. Your equipment
should be certified by ANSI or Snell, a
similar body.
Annular Bearing Engineering
Council (ABEC). Organization that has
developed a scale to measure and rate
the precision of ball bearings. The scale
includes ABEC-1 (the least precise),
ABEC-3, ABEC-5, and ABEC-7 (the
most precise).
axel. Short for Axel Paulsen jump,
a popular advanced jump with 11
⁄2
forward rotations in the air.
axis. Imaginary line bisecting the circles
of figure eights either longitudinally
(long axis) or transversely (short axis)
bearings. These metal encasements
house the ball bearings that help give
you a smoother ride on your skates.
bunny hop. A forward-moving jump in
which the skater jumps upward while
gliding on one foot to land on the toe
of the other foot.
change of edge. A change of curve
from outside to inside or vice versa
on one skate without a change of
skate direction.
counters. The names of certain figure-
skating turns performed on one foot.
edge. In ice skating, the long side
of a skating blade that makes contact
with the ice. The word is also used
in figure skating to describe the mark
made on the ice by the blade edge.
In roller skating, a curve traced by
the employed skate.
flat. In ice skating, the mark left on
the ice when both the edges of a blade
make contact with the ice, causing the
skater to progress without curve. In
roller skating, a straight line direction
that is without curve.
free. Not in use. Not in contact with
the skating surface. Unemployed.
glide. The forward or backward
movement of the blade over the ice.
hockey glide. A two-footed glide
with one foot following the other in
a curving arc.
inside edge. A curve wherein the
inside of the foot is toward the center
of the curve being traced.
leading. (1) In the direction to be
traced. (2) In position to control or
having control of the team movement.
Skating Terminology


92 SKATING
Skating Terminology.
loops. The names of certain
compulsory figures in figure skating.
lunge. A body position with the
skating knee fully flexed, hips and
shoulders held vertically above the
skating foot, while the free leg is
fully extended backward.
mohawk. A turn from forward to
backward or backward to forward
during which the skater changes feet,
skating from one edge on the first foot
to an edge of similar character on the
second foot. Probably the most popular
move for changing direction.
opening steps. Preliminary edges to
gain momentum for execution of a
dance or other skating movements.
outside edge. Curve with the little-toe
side of the foot toward the inside of
the curve.
pivot. In ice skating, a circular skating
movement in which the toe picks of
one skate are used as the center while
the other skate revolves around the
center either forward or backward, on
either inside or outside edge. In roller
skating, a movement where one set of
the skate’s wheels is used as a center
while the other slides around that point.
rocker. Name given to certain figure
skating turns performed either forward
to backward or backward to forward
on one foot, from one edge to an edge
of a similar character.
Snell. Your protective equipment
should be certified by this foundation
or by ANSI (see entry for ANSI).
spin. A rotating action performed on
one or both feet around a spot on
the skating surface. There are many
spins in figure skating, some taking
their names from a description of their
appearance (for example, corkscrew,
headless, crossfoot), others from a
description of the edges and/or direc-
tion used, and others from their origi-
nator’s names. Some are performed on
edges; some are performed on the toe.
stop. Maneuver that causes either
one or both skates to discontinue
motion. In ice skating, some stops are
performed on two feet and some on
one foot. Most stops involve a skidding
action with one or both blades, but in
figure skating some stops are made by
use of the toe picks. In roller skating,
the skates are placed in the T position
to stop.
street. Refers to freestyle skating along
public streets, parking lots, sidewalks,
university campuses, government
buildings, and other public places.
Street could also refer to a type of
competitive course.
tracing. The mark left on the ice after
a skate has glided over the surface. It
is critically important in the judging of
compulsory figures.
vert. Short for vertical. Describes trick
skating that involves combinations of
aerial jumps, flips, spins, stalls, foot
grabs, and other moves using specially
made ramps and pipes.
waltz jump. A moving jump from the
forward outside edge of the takeoff
blade followed by a half-rotation in
the air and the landing on the back-
ward outside edge of the other foot.
wheel rotation. Flipping and/or
switching the positions of skate
wheels to help prevent uneven wear.








SKATING 95
.Skating Resources
Scouting Literature
Deck of First Aid; Emergency First Aid
pocket guide; Be Prepared First Aid Book
Books
Ice Skating
Kunzle-Watson, Karin. Ice Skating: Steps
to Success. Human Kinetics, 1995.
Morrissey, Peter, and James Young.
Figure Skating School. Firefly
Books, 1997.
Petkevich, John Misha. Figure Skating:
Championship Techniques. Sports
Illustrated, 1988.
Poe, Carl. Conditioning for Skating:
Off-Ice Techniques for On-Ice
Performance. McGraw-Hill, 2002.
Yamaguchi, Kristi, Christy Ness, et al.
Figure Skating for Dummies. IDG
Books Worldwide, 1997.
Ice Hockey
Brown, Newell, Vern Stenlund, and
K. Vern Stenlund. Hockey Drills for
Scoring. Human Kinetics, 1997.
Chambers, Dave. The Hockey Drill
Book. Human Kinetics, 2007.
Stamm, Laura. Laura Stamm's
Power Skating, 4th ed. Human
Kinetics, 2009.
Stenlund, Vern K., and Tom Webster.
Hockey Drills for Puck Control.
Human Kinetics, 1996.
Walter, Ryan, and Mike Johnston.
Hockey Plays and Strategies.
Human Kinetics, 2009.
Roller Skating
Donnellan, Marty. Teach Someone
to Rollerskate—Even Yourself!
Pine Cone Press, 2013.
Kulper, Eileen, Roller Skating.
Capstone, 1991.
Phillips, Ann-Victoria. The Complete
Book of Roller Skating. Workman
Publishing, 1981.
Skating Resources
With your parent’s permission, visit
the Boy Scouts of America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org,
for a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


96 SKATING
Skating Resources.
In-Line Skating
Millar, Cam. In-Line Skating Basics.
Turtleback, 1996.
Miller, Liz. Get Rolling. Get Rolling
Books, 2003.
Publow, Barry. Speed on Skates: A
Complete Technique, Training and
Racing Guide for In-Line and Ice
Skaters. Human Kinetics, 1998.
Skating Organizations
Inline Skating Resource Center
Website: www.iisa.org
Roller Skating Association
International
Telephone: 317-347-2626
Website: www.rollerskating.com
USA Roller Sports
Telephone: 402-483-7551
Website: www.teamusa.org/USA-
Roller-Sports
U.S. Figure Skating Association
20 First St.
Colorado Springs, CO 80906
Telephone: 719-635-5200
Website: www.usfigureskating.org
Acknowledgments
The Boy Scouts of America is grateful
to the following for their assistance
with the Skating merit badge pamphlet.
Susi Wehrli, United States Figure
Skating Association; Kimberly Kissel
and Nellie A. Lillie, both with Roller
Skating Association International; and
Richard J. Hawkins, USA Roller Sports.
Also thanks to Jayson “Shag” Arrington
and K2 InLine Skates, Vashon,
Washington; Lonnie Hannah, Arlington
Skatium, Arlington, Texas; and Cheryl
Pascarelli, Dallas StarCenter,
Irving, Texas.
A special thanks to the Scouts
and Scouters of Troop 800, Carrollton,
Texas, for their assistance with photos
for ice skating.
The Boy Scouts of America is
grateful to the men and women
serving on the National Merit Badge
Subcommittee for the improvements
made in updating this pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration Credits
Miller Sports Inc., Rancho Cordova,
California, courtesy—page 21
(speed skate)
Shutterstock.com—cover (hockey
player, ©iofoto; helmet, ©OZaiachin;
quad skate, ©Mordechai Meiri;
in-line skate, ©MaxkateUSA); pages
4 (©Rawpixel.com), 7 (©Sergey
Novikov), 8 (©Lucky Business), 27
(©Joy Brown), 39 (©begalphoto), 83
(©Sergey Novikov), 84 (©Ed Kritsada),
90 (©dotshock), 93 (©Vlad G), and 94
(©Corepics VOF)
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of
or are protected by the Boy Scouts
of America.
John McDearmon—all illustrations
on pages 13–15, 18–19, 25, 30, 45,
and 49–50