SPACE
EXPLOR ATION
STEM-Based


SPACE
EXPLOR ATION
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Space-Exploration or check
Scoutbook for the latest requirements.
35953
ISBN 978-0-8395-3354-2
©2025 Scouting America/Boy Scouts of America
2025 Printing


SPACE EXPLORATION 3





SPACE EXPLORATION 5
An astronaut uses a camera while working on the
International Space Station.
Contents
Why Explore Space? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Our Steps Into Space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
Model Rocketry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
The Way Things Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
Planetary Exploration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
Near-Earth Space Habitats . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
Planetary Bases and Settlements in Space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
The Future of Space Exploration and Space Development . . . 86
Careers in Space Exploration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91
Space Exploration Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 96





SPACE EXPLORATION 7
.Why Explore Space?
Why Explore Space?
Space is mysterious. We explore space for many reasons, not
least because we don’t know what is out there, it is vast, and
humans are full of curiosity. Each time we send explorers into
space, we learn something we didn’t know before. We discover
a little more of what is there.
When you are on a hike, have you ever wondered what
lies around the next bend in the trail, or beyond the next ridge,
or down in the valley below? If so, then you will understand
the thrill of sending a spacecraft to a world no human has
ever seen.
Historical Reasons
Space has beckoned us, from early observers such as the
Aztecs, Greeks, and Chinese; to 15th-century seafarers like
Christopher Columbus and 17th-century astronomers including
Galileo Galilei; to today’s Scouts. The stars and planets in the
sky have helped us shape our beliefs, tell time, guide our sail-
ing ships, make discoveries, invent devices, and learn about
our world.
When electricity, airplanes, rockets, and computers came
on the scene, some people realized it would be possible to put
machines and people into space. No longer would we be limited
to observing the wonders of space from the ground. Now we
could enter and explore this curious environment. The “final
frontier” could be opened.
However, it proved complicated and expensive to build a
rocket to put objects into orbit around Earth. In the mid-20th
century, only two countries had the knowledge, workforce, and
money to do it—the Soviet Union and the United States. The
Soviet Union showed its might by launching a small sphere
into orbit. The Soviets’ success with Sputnik 1 on Oct. 4, 1957,
began the “space race” between the two countries and launched
the Space Age.
Scientists found
in 2013 that a rock
sample collected
by Curiosity
contained
sulfur, nitrogen,
hydrogen, oxygen,
phosphorus, and
carbon—elements
that mean ancient
Mars could have
supported life.


8 SPACE EXPLORATION
Why Explore Space?.
For more than 10 years, the United States and the Soviet
Union competed by launching vehicles, animals, and people
into space. The United States achieved its goal of landing men
on the moon by the end of the 1960s. Meanwhile, the Soviet
Union built space stations to have a permanent presence
in space. (See the chart called “Historic Crewed Spaceflight
Programs” for more details about these early missions.)
We learned many new things from space missions focusing
on science and education. Astronauts collected rocks from the
moon and did medical and scientific experiments above Earth’s
atmosphere. Robotic spacecraft visited other planets. People
watched on television as an astronaut hit a golf ball on the moon
and when a rover sniffed at a Martian rock. Space looked like fun!
Current Benefits
Some business people looked beyond the fun and adventure of
space exploration. They saw space as a chance to make money
and satisfy society’s needs. The commercial satellite industry blos-
somed in the 1980s and into the 1990s, when constellations of
satellites began to provide increasingly affordable global coverage.
Today, our ability to place satellites in orbit gives us many
benefits. Seeing Earth’s atmosphere from space, meteorologists
can forecast weather and warn people of dangerous storms
more accurately than ever before. Looking down on the land
and the ocean from space, we have found natural resources
and seen disturbing evidence of their careless destruction.
Communication satellites help tie the world’s population
together, carrying video, telephone, computer, and internet
data for individuals, schools, governments, and businesses.
Apollo 15 astronaut Jim Irwin sets up the first Lunar Roving
Vehicle on the moon.


SPACE EXPLORATION 9
.Why Explore Space?
Program Country Years Major Accomplishments
Vostok USSR 1961-63 First manned spaceflight (Yuri Gagarin in
Vostok 1, 1961); first woman in space
(Valentina Tereshkova in Vostok 6, 1963)
Mercury U.S. 1961-63 First U.S. manned suborbital flight (Alan Shepard
in Freedom 7, 1961); first U.S. manned orbital
flight (John Glenn in Friendship 7, 1962)
Voskhod USSR 1964-65 First “spacewalk” or extravehicular activity
(Alexei Leonov in Voskhod 2, March 1965)
Gemini U.S. 1965-66 First U.S. extravehicular activity (Edward White in
Gemini 4, June 1965); first docking of two space-
craft in orbit (Neil Armstrong and David Scott in
Gemini 8 with unmanned Agena rocket, 1966)
Soyuz USSR 1967-Ongoing First extravehicular transfer of crew members from
one spacecraft to another (Yevgeny Khrunov and
Aleksei Yeliseyev from Soyuz 5 to Soyuz 4, 1969)
Apollo U.S. 1968-72 First manned orbit of the moon (Frank Borman,
James Lovell, and William Anders in Apollo 8,
1968); first manned lunar landing (Neil Armstrong
and Buzz Aldrin in Apollo 11, 1969); five other
successful manned lunar landings (Apollos 12
and 14–17, 1969–72)
Salyut USSR 1971-86 First space station; first extensive photography
of Earth from space; record-breaking endurance
flight of 237 days (aboard Salyut 7, 1984–1985)
Skylab U.S. 1973-74 First U.S. space station; three American crews
stayed for 28, 59, and 84 days, the last setting a
U.S. space-endurance record; first pictures of solar
activity taken above Earth’s atmosphere (175,000
pictures of the sun made from Skylab)
Apollo-Soyuz U.S.-
USSR
1975 First international docking in space (Thomas
Stafford, Deke Slayton, and Vance Brand in Apollo
18; Alexei Leonov and Valery Kubasov in Soyuz 19,
July 1975)
Space
Transportation
System (Space
Shuttle)
U.S. 1981-2011 First reusable vehicle; first U.S. woman in space
(Sally Ride, STS-7); first untethered spacewalk
(Bruce McCandless, STS-41B)
Commercial
Crew
U.S. 2011-Ongoing Commercially developed vehicles used to fly
astronauts to the space station; first crewed
SpaceX Dragon flight, May 30, 2020
Artemis U.S. 2023-Ongoing First uncrewed test flight, Nov. 16, 2023
Historic Crewed Spaceflight Programs


10 SPACE EXPLORATION
Why Explore Space?.
Materials, products, and technologies coming from the space program
are called “spinoffs.” Spinoffs from the space exploits of the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) include portable
coolers, scratch-resistant lenses, self-righting life rafts, water treatment
systems, virtual reality simulators, smoke detectors, cordless tools,
firefighter suits made of flame-retardant materials, “cool suits” to
lower a patient’s body temperature, programmable pacemakers,
and voice-controlled wheelchairs. For more on NASA’s spinoffs, visit
spinoff.nasa.gov (with your parent or guardian’s permission).
Agriculture • Education & workforce • Science & technology • Transportation
Health & medicine • Energy & natural resources • Environmental & public works
CLIMATE CHANGE PREDICTION
INTERNATIONAL
TV BROADCASTS
SATELLITE IMAGERY,
CROP MANAGEMENT,
AND RESOURCE MAPPING
LONG-DISTANCE
TELEPHONE NETWORKS
COMPUTERS ENERGY-SAVING AIR CONDITIONING
FOOD PROCESSING CONTROL
TELEVISION
WIRELESS ALARM
ENVIRON-
MENTALLY
SAFE
SEWAGE
TREATMENT
WATER
TREATMENT
SYSTEMS
HIGH-DENSITY
BATTERY
ROBOT-GUIDED
WHEELCHAIR
WIRELESS
PHONE
CAR CHASSIS
AND BRAKE
DESIGN


SPACE EXPLORATION 11
.Why Explore Space?
Military satellites provide intelligence of vital interest to our
armed forces and national security. The global positioning system
(GPS) operated by the U.S. Department of Defense is an example
of a military application of a space technology that has benefited
people the world over. The next time you see an automobile’s
GPS unit giving precise directions to a destination, think of the
global network of technology underlying those directions.
We have new medicines and medical devices thanks to
the astronauts’ experiences and experiments in space. With the
construction of the International Space Station (see “Near-Earth
Space Habitats”), we are learning how to build structures in the
vacuum of space. In the future, such structures could serve as
manufacturing facilities for “out of this world” products or as
hotels for thrill-seeking tourists.
NASA’s Technology Transfer and Commercialization Office
identifies those technologies developed by NASA or through
NASA-sponsored research and works with businesses to bring
products based on those technologies to the marketplace.
Humanity’s Future
Space is about the future. The people who work in space-related
projects—engineers and scientists, doctors and teachers,
corporations and entrepreneurs—are seeking to improve the
future of humanity.
Once we are able to carry people and cargo cheaply into
space, we could establish communities in space stations and
on the moon and Mars. We could harness the sun’s energy by
using solar-powered satellites to provide clean, reliable electric-
ity to everyone on Earth, eventually replacing polluting carbon-
based fuel sources. We could mine the moon and asteroids for
valuable minerals and metals rarely found on Earth.
The far side of the moon would be an excellent site for
astronomical observatories. Communities of people living and
working in space would cultivate new cultural activities and
arts. Micro- and low-gravity sports could provide exciting new
thrills for spectators. Having a growing and vibrant presence in
space also increases our ability to better address the threat of
asteroid impact.
Earth is only so big and it has only so many resources—
resources that our ever-growing population is using up.
Spreading humanity among the stars is a magnificent dream.
After you read this pamphlet and earn the Space Exploration
merit badge, perhaps you will do or discover something that
could lead the way to the stars.
Any small
nickel-iron
asteroid contains
trillions of
dollars’ worth of
valuable metals.
For more about
asteroids, see the
Astronomy merit
badge pamphlet.





SPACE EXPLORATION 13
.Our Steps Into Space
Our Steps Into Space
In 11th-century China, inventors and scholars developed gun-
powder. One Chinese scholar packed a tube with gunpowder
and sealed off one end. When the gunpowder was ignited, the
tube shot forward and sometimes it would explode. People
were hurt and property was destroyed during these experi-
ments. Then someone realized this “fire work” could become
a weapon, and the fire arrow was invented.
The first recorded use of rockets in war was in the year
1232 when the Mongols laid siege to the Chinese City of
Kaifeng. The Chinese chased off the Mongols with a barrage
of fire arrows. After the battle, the Mongols developed their
own rockets. Some historians believe the Mongols introduced
gunpowder and rockets to Europe.
From the 15th through the 17th centuries, cannons replaced
rockets as military weapons. During the 18th century, rockets
made a comeback thanks to William Congreve, an English
inventor. His rockets helped the English win battles against
Denmark, France, and Prussia. Francis Scott Key immortalized
Congreve’s weapons
when he wrote of
“the rockets’ red
glare” during
the British attack
on Fort McHenry
in Baltimore
Harbor during
the War of 1812.
From bottom to top: The development of the Chinese
“fire arrow”


14 SPACE EXPLORATION
Our Steps Into Space.
The Visionaries
Although the rocket became an instrument of war, a few
dreamers of the 19th and 20th centuries saw it as a method of
transportation. Could people fly into space on a rocket? As the
Industrial Revolution introduced new technology to the public,
these dreamers used a new form of fiction—science fiction—
to express their ideas of traveling beyond Earth in ways that
might actually be achievable.
Jules Verne (1828–1905) was born in Nantes, France. He went
to Paris to study law. Instead, inspired by balloons, airships, and
other new inventions, he began to write science fiction stories.
He wrote From the Earth to the Moon (1865), Around the Moon
(1870), and Around the World in Eighty Days (1873). In his
novel From the Earth to the Moon, a giant cannon in Florida
launches the space capsule. The astronauts, initially on an
incorrect trajectory, execute a propulsive maneuver that puts
them on a free-return trajectory. This allows them to circle the
moon and then land in the Pacific Ocean, where an American
naval vessel recovers the crew and capsule. Verne told this
story 100 years before the Apollo missions. Jules Verne is
considered the father of modern science fiction.
Konstantin Tsiolkovsky (1857–1935) was a Russian teacher
and scientist who wrote science fiction stories of interplanetary
travel that featured real-world technical and scientific issues.
He wrote about using liquid propellant to power rocket ships
and about the need for spacesuits to protect people in the
vacuum of space. He is credited with being the first to work
through the mathematics of the “rocket equation” that serves
as the foundation of spaceflight, and even considered a tower
from Earth to geostationary orbit, which would be called
a space elevator today. He is most noted for his quote
“Earth is the cradle of mankind, but one does not stay in
the cradle forever.”
Robert A. Heinlein (1907–1988) served as a U.S. naval officer
aboard the first modern aircraft carrier, the USS Lexington.
Due to health reasons, he retired from the Navy in 1934 and
focused on science fiction writing, becoming widely regarded
as the “dean of science fiction writers.” His novel The Moon
Is a Harsh Mistress describes a subsurface lunar colony and
electromagnetic launchers 40 years before any similar system
existed. Many of his young people’s novels were first published


SPACE EXPLORATION 15
.Our Steps Into Space
as series, such as “Farmer in the Sky,” which was published
as “Satellite Scout” in Boys’ Life (now Scout Life) magazine. A
large number of space program supporters credit Heinlein with
introducing them to the topic.
Arthur C. Clarke (1917–2008) wrote fiction and nonfiction
for more than 60 years. In 1936, he joined the British
Interplanetary Society, where he published their journal and
began to write science fiction stories. He served in the Royal
Air Force during World War II and tested radar systems. After
the war, he returned to school and received degrees in phys-
ics and mathematics. In 1945, he published a paper titled
“Extraterrestrial Relays” that laid down the principles of mod-
ern communications satellites in geostationary orbit, which is
sometimes referred to as the Clarke Orbit in his honor. Clarke’s
space-related works of fiction include the short story “The
Sentinel,” which was turned into the movie 2001: A Space
Odyssey (1968). His novels include Earthlight, Islands in the
Sky, The Sands of Mars, and The Fountains of Paradise.
Arthur C. Clarke


16 SPACE EXPLORATION
Our Steps Into Space.
The Makers
After the Wright brothers ushered in the age of flight, several
rocket scientists laid the foundations for the Space Age.
Dr. Robert H. Goddard (1882–1945), born in Worcester,
Massachusetts, is considered the “father of modern rocketry.”
In 1907, while a student at Worcester Polytechnic Institute,
he fired a rocket engine in the basement of the physics build-
ing, getting the attention of school officials. Seven years later,
he patented his rocket inventions. In 1920, he published “A
Method of Reaching Extreme Altitudes,” in which he sug-
gested using rockets to carry weather instruments aloft. Dr.
Goddard developed a rocket using liquid fuel and launched a
liquid-fueled rocket that went faster than the speed of sound.
He developed the first practical automatic steering device for
rockets.
Sergei Korolev (1907–1966) was born in Zhitomir, Russia. He
joined the developing field of aviation as a teenager and later
studied engineering. After reading the works of Tsiolkovsky,
he formed the Moscow Group for Study of Reactive Motion in
1931 and helped form the Rocket Research Institute in 1932. He
was sent to a gulag in 1938 as part
of Joseph Stalin’s great purges. By
1942, many technically adept pris-
oners were recruited to contribute
to the war effort, including Korolev.
At the end of World War II, Russian
leaders realized the importance of
developing rocket technology, and
Korolev became a valuable member
of the Soviet space program. During
his top-secret career, he directed the
launching of the first rockets into
orbit, the Vostok, Voskhod, Molniya
(now Soyuz), and Zond spacecraft,
and probes to the moon, Mars, and
Venus. His death in 1966 was a
crucial blow to the Soviet’s moon
program.
Dr. Robert H. Goddard standing next to the
rocket that would make the world’s first liquid
propellant rocket flight on March 16, 1926.


SPACE EXPLORATION 17
.Our Steps Into Space
Dr. Wernher von Braun (1912–1977) was born in Wirsitz,
Germany. Inspired by a race car driver when he was 12, von
Braun attached six rockets to a
coaster wagon and lit the fuses.
The wagon careened around his
backyard, emitting a fountain of
sparks. The commotion attracted
the police, who took him into
custody. Von Braun became
interested in space exploration
by reading the science fiction
of Verne and H.G. Wells and
received his doctorate in aerospace
engineering in the early 1930s.
Familiar with Dr. Goddard’s work,
von Braun designed and built
Germany’s V-2 missile during
World War II. At the end of the
war, the U.S. Army realized the
importance of Dr. von Braun’s
work. He was brought to the
United States with more than 500
fellow scientists and with many
V-2 missiles and components
under Operation Paperclip. He led
the Army missile development
program and launched the first
U.S. satellite, Explorer 1, in 1958.
His crowning achievement was the development of the Saturn
class of rockets that carried the Apollo astronauts to the moon.
Steve Squyres (1956– ) was raised in Wenonah, New Jersey.
He is a professor of astronomy at Cornell University, focusing on
large solid bodies in the solar system. He served on the Voyager
imaging science team and was on the teams for Magellan, Mars
Observer, and the Russian Mars ’96 mission. He was Principal
Investigator (PI) for the long-serving Mars Exploration Rovers
mission (Spirit and Opportunity), as well as on the teams of
Mars Express, Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter, and Odyssey and
the imaging team for Cassini. He published Roving Mars: Spirit,
Opportunity, and the Exploration of the Red Planet in 2006.
Dr. Wernher von Braun


18 SPACE EXPLORATION
Our Steps Into Space.
The Doers
The “doers” were pilots who became astronauts. Among them
were those who walked on the moon and piloted the space
shuttle.
U.S. Sen. John Glenn (1921–2016), an Eagle Scout, was born
in Cambridge, Ohio. He received his aerospace engineering
degree, joined the Navy during World War II, and earned his
wings as a Marine aviator. Glenn flew combat missions in
World War II and Korea. He attended Navy test-pilot school
and became one of the original Mercury astronauts. He was
the first American to orbit Earth, in the Friendship 7 Mercury
capsule on Feb. 20, 1962. He served as senator from Ohio for
24 years. Glenn returned to space on a space shuttle mission
in 1998, becoming (at age 77) the oldest person to fly in space.
Alan Shepard (1923–1998) was born in East Derry, New
Hampshire, and graduated from the Naval Academy. He flew
from aircraft carriers during and after World War II. Shepard
later attended test-pilot school and was selected as one of the
“The urge to explore
the unknown is part of
human nature. . . . It
enriches our spirits and
reminds us of the great
potential for achieve-
ment within us all. The
drive to develop the next
frontier also has been a
fundamental part of the
heritage of the people of
the United States.”
—John Glenn


SPACE EXPLORATION 19
.Our Steps Into Space
original Mercury 7 astronauts in 1959. He was the first American
to fly in space, on a Mercury suborbital mission in May 1961.
Shortly after his flight, an inner-ear problem grounded him. An
operation corrected the problem, allowing Shepard to lead the
Apollo 14 lunar-landing mission. He hit a golf ball on the moon
that traveled 900 yards—a record that still stands.
Neil Armstrong (1930–2012), an Eagle Scout, was born in
Wapakoneta, Ohio, and earned his aerospace engineering degree
from Purdue University. After serving
as a naval aviator, he went to work
for the National Advisory Committee
for Aeronautics (NACA) later the
National Aeronautics and Space
Administration (NASA) as an engineer
and test pilot flying the X-15 Aircraft.
Armstrong was selected as a Gemini
astronaut and commanded the Gemini
8 Mission. On July 20, 1969, as com-
mander of Apollo 11, Armstrong
became the first man to set foot on
the moon.
Sally Ride (1951–2012) was born
in Encino, California, and majored
in physics and English at Stanford
University. As one of NASA’s first
female astronauts, Ride became the
first and youngest American female
to travel to space. She completed
two spaceflights on the space shuttle
Challenger in 1983 and 1984. While
aboard, she became the first female
to operate the shuttle’s robotic arm,
which was used to help install
satellites into orbit. After retiring
in 1987, she taught physics at the University of California, San
Diego. In 1995, Ride founded the EarthKAM project for NASA to
integrate education with the space program.
Suborbital means
“not completing a
full orbit.”
Neil Armstrong


20 SPACE EXPLORATION
Our Steps Into Space.
Mae C. Jemison (1956– ) holds the
distinction of being the first Black female
in space. Born in Decatur, Alabama,
she earned her chemical engineering
degree from Stanford University in
1977. Jemison graduated from Cornell
University Medical College in 1981.
From 1983 to 1985, she worked as the
area Peace Corps medical officer for
the African countries of Sierra Leone
and Liberia. Shortly after her return
to the United States in 1985, Jemison
became the first Black female admitted
into NASA’s astronaut training program.
She worked as a science mission
specialist performing crew-related
scientific experiments on the space
shuttle. Jemison’s space mission was in
September 1992.
Peggy A. Whitson (1960– ) was born in Mount Ayr, Iowa,
and earned her doctorate in biochemistry from Rice University.
She worked as a research biochemist at NASA Johnson Space
Center. Whitson is America’s most experienced female astronaut,
traveling into space for the first time in June 2002 as a flight
engineer. She was the first female commander of the International
Space Station and NASA’s first female chief astronaut. Whitson
holds the U.S. record for the most time spent in space (665 days)
and the most spacewalks (10) completed by a female astronaut.
The Entrepreneurs
With space development moving to the private sector, the
entrepreneurs are moving into prominence.
Jeff Bezos (1964– ), founder and owner of Amazon, founded
Blue Origin in 2000 and chose property near Van Horn, Texas,
as its launch site. Its reusable suborbital system is called New
Shepard and its proposed orbital system New Glenn, each
named after a pioneering astronaut. On July 20, 2021, New
Shepard performed its first suborbital crewed mission, which
lasted about 10 minutes. The crew of this first mission was
Bezos, his brother Mark, Wally Funk, and Oliver Daemen.
Blue Origin is also working on a concept for NASA’s Human
Landing System, part of the Artemis moon-mission system.
Mae Jemison


.Our Steps Into Space
Create a Collector’s Card
For requirement 2, create a collector’s card of your favorite space
pioneer. You can copy or draw the person’s face. Include appropriate
biographical information. Give details of the person’s contribution to
spaceflight, including dates, missions, and other accomplishments.
Buzz Aldrin
Born Jan. 20, 1930, Montclair, New Jersey.
Graduate, U.S. Military Academy at West
Point.
Flew Sabre jets during the Korean War.
U.S. Air Force test pilot.
Doctorate in space science from
Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Crew member of Apollo 11.
Second human to step foot on the
moon, July 20, 1969.
Richard Branson (1950– ) and Burt Rutan (1943– ) founded
Virgin Galactic, an early commercial spaceflight company
offering customers suborbital flights. They used an innovative
launch system designed by Rutan featuring a carrier aircraft
and a suborbital rocket-powered spaceplane as a second
stage. Overcoming a number of technical setbacks including
a fatal crash, the company would lead the way in commercial
spaceflight. Its test pilots earned the first commercial astronaut
wings, award by the FAA in 2004.
Elon Musk (1971– ) formed Space Exploration Technologies
(SpaceX) in 2002 to build rockets that could inexpensively
carry payloads to low Earth orbit and geosynchronous orbit.
After years of successful rocket launches, the company began
transporting cargo to the International Space Station in October
2012 in its Dragon spacecraft.





SPACE EXPLORATION 23
.Model Rocketry
Model Rocketry
Model rocketry is a great way to learn about space exploration.
The rocket you build won’t reach space, but the science and
technology that goes into your rocket is the same as NASA uses
in launching giant rockets.
Model rockets are made of paper, balsa wood, plastic,
glue, and paint. You build them with simple tools such as a
modeling knife, sandpaper, scissors, rulers, and paintbrushes.
Model rockets are powered by solid propellant rocket engines.
Depending on the size and design of the rocket and the power
of the engine, model rockets may fly only 50 feet high or up to
a half mile in altitude.
You can purchase model rocket kits and engines online,
through mail-order catalogs, and in toy and hobby shops. If
you can borrow a rocket launcher, you can buy everything you
need to complete requirement 3 for less than $20. If you buy
or build your own launcher, the total cost for this requirement
could be about $35 to $40.
Building Your Rocket
If you have never built a model rocket before, it is best to
start with a simple kit. The kit will consist of a body tube, nose
cone, fins, engine mount, and parachute or some other recovery
system that will gently lower your rocket to the ground at the
end of its flight.
Though some toy stores sell model rocket kits,
model rockets are anything but toys. They are
powerful, and through misuse could harm animals,
people, or property. By following the commonsense
rules found later in this section, you can launch
your rockets in complete safety over and over.


24 SPACE EXPLORATION
Model Rocketry.
Engines must be purchased separately from the rocket. Be
sure to buy the recommended engines for your kit. If you use
engines that are too powerful, you may lose your rocket on its
first flight.
Unless your rocket kit comes with preformed plastic fins,
you will need to cut fins from sheets of balsa wood included
in the kit. The instructions will tell you to sand the leading
and trailing edges of the fins to
look like the edge of a knife. Sharp
edges on the fins help the rocket
slice cleanly through the air as
it flies upward, so you will want
to do a good job on this step.
Blunt fin edges cause turbulence
(rough air) that robs your rocket
of altitude.
Also do a good job painting
the fins, and sanding and painting
the nose cone if it, too, is made of
balsa wood. Very smooth surfaces
reduce friction with the air.
Stability-Checking
Your Rocket
Check every rocket for stability
before flying it. Stability checks
before launch assure you that your
rocket will fly properly. Unstable
rockets tumble in the air and may
head back toward the launchpad at
high speed.
Stability checks are simple and
require only a long piece of string,
a piece of tape, and a few min-
utes of your time. To check a new
model rocket, prepare the rocket
for flight and insert a live engine.
Tie a slipknot around the body of
the rocket and slide it to the point
where the rocket is perfectly bal-
anced on the string.
Although you may be tempted to
tear open the kit and begin slap-
ping together the parts, take time
to read all of the instructions twice
before starting. Reading all of the
instructions first will help you gath-
er the tools and supplies needed
for building your rocket.


SPACE EXPLORATION 25
.Model Rocketry
Hold the string in one hand over your head, and begin to twirl
your rocket as though you were spinning a lariat. As the rocket
picks up speed, gradually play out the string until the rocket
is about 6 to 8 feet away. If you are not tall, you may want to
stand on a chair at this point.
If your rocket is stable, it will
travel around you without tum-
bling. The nose cone will point
into the air and the tail end will
follow. If the tail end goes first or
if the rocket tumbles, your rocket
may be dangerous to fly. You can
correct this situation by putting on
larger fins or adding weight to the
rocket’s nose with a lump of clay.
Launching Your Rocket
When your rocket is ready for
its first flight, you must choose a
proper launching site. Your launch-
ing site should be a large field that
is free of power and telephone lines,
trees, buildings, or any other
structures that might snag a return-
ing rocket. Choose a field away
from airports.
You will need a launchpad.
Perhaps you can borrow a launch-
pad from a local model-rocket club,
or join the members on a day when
they are launching rockets (To
find a local club, see the National
Association of Rocketry listing in
the resources section.) If not, you
can either buy a launchpad kit or
build your own. A simple launch-
pad can be built from a block
of wood, a blast deflector made
from a flattened metal can, and a
straight rod. Rods made specifically
for rocket launchers are best and
inexpensive. Buy one where you
get your rocket supplies.


26 SPACE EXPLORATION
Model Rocketry.
Instructions for safe launching of your rocket will come with your rocket kit.
Follow these instructions carefully.


SPACE EXPLORATION 27
.Model Rocketry
Your launch system should be electric. It must have a
switch that closes only when you press it and then opens again
automatically. It also should have a master switch, or you
should be able to disconnect the batteries while you set up
your next flight. The wires from your batteries (about 6 volts)
should extend about 15 feet to small “alligator” clips at the
ends. These clips will be attached to the wires of the igniter.
Never use fuses or matches to ignite your rocket.
Accomplishing a Launch Objective
After you have made your first launch, make a second launch
with a specific objective in mind. You might try to spot-land
the rocket within a 50-foot circle. That isn’t as easy as it
sounds. You must make allowances for wind drift and aim your
rocket accordingly.
Another objective might be to carry a payload aloft and
recover it safely. Several rocket kits come with payload sections
for carrying hard-boiled eggs or other cargo.
Still another objective would be to launch a small camera
on your rocket to take a picture of the launch site from
high altitude. Specially designed cameras are available for
model rockets.
Some kits may come with payload sections for
carrying cargo. Never send up animals in your
rockets. Mammals and other animals with
backbones will possibly die from the experience.
Instead launch a payload weighing about 1 oz.
like condiment packages or game dice unless the
payload rocket is designed for launching eggs.
Not all cities and towns permit model rocket launch-
es. Check with your local fire department or police
to find out about local regulations governing model
rocket launches. You may have to travel to a rural
area to find a launch site. Or you may choose to
complete the alternate to requirement 3.


28 SPACE EXPLORATION
Model Rocketry.
Model Rocket Safety Code*
1. Materials. I will use only lightweight, nonmetal parts for the nose,
body, and fins of my rocket.
2. Motors. I will use only certified, commercially made model rocket
motors, and will not tamper with these motors or use them for any
purposes except those recommended by the manufacturer.
3. Ignition System. I will launch my rockets with an electrical launch
system and electrical motor igniters. My launch system will have
a safety interlock in series with the launch switch, and will use a
launch switch that returns to the “off” position when released.
4. Misfires. If my rocket does not launch when I press the button of my
electrical launch system, I will remove the launcher’s safety inter-
lock or disconnect its battery, and will wait 60 seconds after the last
launch attempt before allowing anyone to approach the rocket.
5. Launch Safety. I will use a countdown before launch, and will
ensure that everyone is paying attention and is a safe distance of at
least 15 feet away when I launch rockets with D motors or smaller,
and 30 feet when I launch larger rockets. If I am uncertain about
the safety or stability of an untested rocket, I will check the stability
before flight and will fly it only after warning spectators and clear-
ing them away to a safe distance. When conducting a simultaneous
launch of more than 10 rockets I will observe a safe distance of 1.5
times the maximum expected altitude of any launched rocket.
6. Launcher. I will launch my rocket from a launch rod, tower, or rail that
is pointed to within 30 degrees of the vertical to ensure that the rocket
flies nearly straight up, and I will use a blast deflector to prevent the
motor’s exhaust from hitting the ground. To prevent accidental eye
injury, I will place launchers so that the end of the launch rod is above
eye level or will cap the end of the rod when it is not in use.
7. Size. My model rocket will not weigh more than 1,500 grams
(53 ounces) at liftoff and will not contain more than 125 grams
(4.4 ounces) of propellant or 320 N-sec (71.9 pound-seconds) of
total impulse.


SPACE EXPLORATION 29
.Model Rocketry
8. Flight Safety. I will not launch my rocket at targets, into clouds,
or near airplanes, and will not put any flammable or explosive
payload in my rocket.
9. Launch Site. I will launch my rocket outdoors, in an open area at
least as large as shown in the accompanying table, and in safe
weather conditions with wind speeds no greater than 20 miles per
hour. I will ensure that there is no dry grass close to the launch
pad, and that the launch site does not present risk of grass fires.
10. Recovery System. I will use a recovery system such as a streamer
or parachute in my rocket so that it returns safely and undamaged
and can be flown again, and I will use only flame-resistant or
fireproof recovery system wadding in my rocket.
11. Recovery Safety. I will not attempt to recover my rocket from
power lines, tall trees, or other dangerous places.
*Approved by the National Association of Rocketry (NAR)
Revision of August 2012
Launch Site Dimensions
Installed Total
Impulse (N-sec)
Equivalent Motor
Type
Minimum Site
Dimensions (ft.)
0.00–1.25 1/4A, 1/2A 50
1.26–2.50 A 100
2.51–5.00 B 200
5.01–10.00 C 400
10.01–20.00 D 500
20.01–40.00 E 1,000
40.01–80.00 F 1,000
80.01–160.00 G 1,000
160.01–320.00 Two Gs 1,500


30 SPACE EXPLORATION
Model Rocketry.
Rocket Parts
The body tube is the barrel of the rocket. It holds the engine,
the recovery device, and the payload. The rocket’s fins and
launch lug are mounted to the body tube.
The engine mount is a small tube that is glued to the
inside of the body tube. The engine mount provides a sturdy
place for inserting the rocket engine.
Rocket fins are the main stability device of the rocket.
Their function is similar to that of feathers on an arrow.
Igniters are small wires that are inserted into the nozzle
of a rocket engine. When electricity is passed through the wire,
the wire heats, and chemicals coating the wire ignite. This, in
turn, ignites the rocket engine. The igniter wires are blasted
out the nozzle when the engine propellants start burning.
Before fins can stabilize a rocket, the rocket must be moving
through the air. The launch lug is a small straw-like tube
mounted to the side of the body tube. The lug slides over the rod
on the launchpad, and the rod stabilizes the rocket until the fins
are able to take over (which happens in a fraction of a second).
The nose cone is fitted at the upper end of the rocket. Its
purpose is to divide the air smoothly so the rocket can travel
through the air with little turbulence. Nose cones are usually
tapered to a point.
Payloads that can be carried on model-rocket flights
include small cameras, radio transmitters, and raw eggs.
Payloads carried on space rockets include satellites, spacecraft
bound for other planets, scientific experiments, and astronauts.
Model rockets can be recovered in many ways. Recovery
systems may be parachutes that are stored inside the body
tube and ejected automatically by the rocket engine near the
time the rocket reaches its maximum altitude. Streamers also
are used for recovery. They slow the rocket as it falls back to
Earth. Other recovery systems are helicopter-type rotors or
wings for gliding landings.
The rocket engine is the power plant of your model
rocket. An engine consists of a cylinder, called the casing, that
holds the solid propellant. The upper end of the casing usu-
ally has a plug and the lower end has a nozzle. The nozzle is
a small opening through which the burning gases escape. The
nozzle makes the gases travel at high speeds when they exit,
much the same way the nozzle on a garden hose makes water
squirt farther when the hole is smaller.


SPACE EXPLORATION 31
.Model Rocketry
Inside the engine are the solid propellants. The propellants have
oxygen built into their chemistry. This enables them to burn
even in outer space, where there is no outside oxygen. (Rocket
engines are different from jet engines. Jet engines must take in
air from the atmosphere to burn their fuel.)
Model rocket parts
PARACHUTE
(recovery system)
THRUST RING
(keeps engine
from sliding
forward)
ROCKET ENGINE
(use a
commercially
produced
engine only)
NOSE CONE
(smooths the air
flow around the
body tube)
BODY TUBE
(supports the
nose cone and
fins and contains
engine and
recovery system)
PAYLOAD SECTION
(holds instruments,
cameras, etc.)
SHOCK CORD
(absorbs shock
when engine blasts
off nose cone)
WADDING
(protects parachute
from burning
during ejection)
LAUNCH LUG
(straw that slips
over launchpad rod)
STABILIZER FINS
(guide rocket
in flight)


The July 16, 1969, launch of Apollo 11, which carried
Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin to the moon.


SPACE EXPLORATION 33
.The Way Things Work
The Way Things Work
Space exploration has been a reality since the late 1950s. Space-
age words such as rocket, satellite, and orbit have become part
of nearly everyone’s vocabulary. While many people use these
words, few really understand the important concepts behind
them, such as how a rocket works, how a satellite stays in
orbit, or how pictures taken of other planets arrive on Earth.
Physical Laws of Space Flight
In the 17th century, a great English mathematician and scientist
named Sir Isaac Newton developed the basics of modern phys-
ics. He formed the theories of gravitation when he was only 23
years old. Some 20 years later, he presented his three laws of
motion. These three laws explain how a rocket is able to work
and how satellites and spacecraft are able to get into orbit and
stay there.
Newton’s Three Laws of Motion
1. An object in motion tends to stay in motion,
and an object at rest tends to stay at rest,
unless the object is acted upon by an outside
unbalanced force.
2. Force equals mass times acceleration.
3. For every action there is an equal and
opposite reaction.
These three laws of motion help make it easier
to understand how rockets, satellites, and
spacecraft work.


34 SPACE EXPLORATION
The Way Things Work.
Conventional
rockets carry
propellant, which
consists of both
fuel and oxidizer.
For a rocket to
work in space,
it must carry
oxygen or a
chemical that
contains the
oxygen necessary
for chemical
combustion.
Multiplying mass
by velocity gives
a quantity called
momentum.
The First Law
Newton’s first law is a simple statement of fact. To make an
object move, an unbalanced force must be exerted on that
object. An unbalanced force is important because forces that are
balanced cancel each other out. Imagine two football players
pushing against each other. If they exert equal force, they stay in
the same place. If one player exerts more force than the other,
the weaker player is pushed backward.
It is the same with a rocket. When a rocket is sitting on
the launchpad, gravity tries to pull the rocket downward. The
structure around the rocket holds the rocket up. Each exerts a
force that balances the other, and the rocket stays at rest on the
launchpad. When the rocket engine fires, the rocket exerts a
greater force than the pull of Earth’s gravity. It begins to climb
slowly upward. As the rocket gets higher and farther from
Earth’s surface, the atmospheric pressure thins out and the
rocket’s mass gets lighter as fuel is expended, changing the
balance of forces and allowing it to climb faster and faster.
Once in outer space, the rocket goes into orbit around
Earth and the engine stops firing. The rocket continues to move
because forces have again become balanced. Its forward motion
balances the pull of gravity. (See the section “How Satellites
Stay in Orbit.”) To bring the rocket back to Earth, those bal-
anced forces must again be unbalanced to allow gravity to
take over. This time, the rocket engine fires in the direction of
motion to start slowing the rocket. When this happens, gravity
brings the rocket back down into the atmosphere.
The Second Law
Newton’s second law states that the force on a body is equal to
the time rate of change of momentum of that body, more com-
monly understood as “force equals mass times acceleration.” It
determines the amount of force (thrust) a rocket engine must
produce to leave the launchpad. Burning rocket propellants pro-
duce flames, smoke, and gas, which shoot out of the engine as
exhaust to produce the thrust.
The amount of thrust depends on two things—mass and
acceleration. Mass is the total amount of matter contained in
the fire, smoke, and gas. The more matter flowing from the
engine, the greater the thrust produced. Acceleration refers to
how fast the exhaust is expelled from the rocket engine. The
greater the acceleration, the greater the thrust. A rocket motor
achieves this with the “throat” of the nozzle, which constricts
the flow of mass and forces it to move faster. The higher the


SPACE EXPLORATION 35
.The Way Things Work
exhaust velocity, the more thrust a given quantity of propellant
can provide.
Putting mass and acceleration together gives the simple
formula F=ma. Keeping this formula in mind, a rocket designer
should try to make both the burned mass (m) and the accelera-
tion (a) as large as possible to get the maximum thrust (force,
F). This is complicated by the fact that as the engine burns fuel,
the vehicle gets lighter. If the thrust from the engine remains the
same, the acceleration continuously increases.
The Third Law
Newton’s third law is the most familiar to people. It is some-
times called the law of action-reaction. Imagine you are a
firefighter holding a fire hose. When the water is turned on, it
explodes out of the hose and douses the fire. The motion of the
water is an action. At the same time the water is thrown from
the hose, the hose produces a strong recoil (kick) on your body,
pushing you backward. This is a reaction. The reaction is in the
opposite direction from the action and is equal in its force.
How Rockets Are Propelled
Rockets are driven by engines that obey Newton’s three laws
of motion. While a rocket sits on the launchpad, it is in a state
of rest because all forces are balanced. When the rocket engine
fires, forces become unbalanced (first law). As exhaust rushes
downward out of the engine, an upward thrust is produced
because of action-reaction (third law). The strength of that
thrust is determined by the amount of matter expelled by the
engine and how fast the matter is expelled (second law).
Forcing the exhaust through a small opening called a nozzle
increases the speed of the exhaust, producing more thrust.
Imagine using a garden hose with a nozzle attachment. With
the nozzle wide open, the water streams out and lands a few
feet away. By shrinking the nozzle opening, you force the water
to move faster and it lands farther away. The greater the veloc-
ity, the greater the thrust. You can feel the thrust of the garden
hose if you hold it.
The same principle applies to rocket engines, which come
in many varieties based on the type of fuel used. Some types
of engines used on today’s spacecraft include solid propellant
engines, liquid propellant engines, hybrid engines, and ion
engines. Nuclear engines, solar sails, mass drivers, and other
kinds of “futuristic” engines are being studied or developed.
The movement of
a balloon when air
is released from it
also demonstrates
the third law
of motion. In
the case of the
balloon, what is
the action? What
is the reaction?


36 SPACE EXPLORATION
The Way Things Work.
Chemical Rocket: Solid Propellant
The first rocket engines, invented in China hundreds of years
ago, used solid propellant. A solid propellant is a chemical
compound in powder form that will burn but not explode.
The powder is burned inside an enclosed tube, with the
exhaust forced out a nozzle at one end.
Solid propellant engines have three advantages: simplicity,
low cost, and safety. However, they have two disadvantages:
the engine can’t be stopped or restarted after the fuel begins to
burn, and thrust cannot be actively controlled during the burn.
Solid fuel rockets are used for short tasks, like shooting missiles
or boosting spacecraft off the launchpad. To have more control
over a rocket, liquid propellant engines must be used.
Chemical Rocket: Liquid Propellant
In this engine type, the fuel and oxidizer are liquids carried
in separate tanks. The fuel and oxidizer are pumped into a
combustion chamber where the fuel is burned. The exhaust is
forced out of the combustion chamber through a nozzle and
produces thrust. The nozzle can be tilted (gimbaled) to point
the thrust in different directions, creating an effective way to
steer the rocket.
Liquid hydrogen (fuel) and liquid oxygen (oxidizer) are
the most efficient liquid propellants for rockets. They must be
kept very, very cold, so the fuel tanks are carefully insulated.
These super-cold fluids also are used to cool the super-heated
parts of the engine, like the combustion chamber and the
nozzle, allowing them to be made of thin metal. Using the
liquids as a coolant system allows the weight of the rocket
to be reduced.
Chemical Rocket: Hybrid Propellant
Hybrid engines combine a solid fuel with a liquid oxidizer.
The solid fuel is contained within the combustion chamber.
The oxidizer is fed into the combustion chamber from an oxi-
dizer tank. The exhaust is forced through a nozzle, creating
thrust. Because the liquid oxidizer cannot mix with the solid
fuel by accident, such a rocket is very unlikely to explode.
Ion Rocket Engines
Ion rocket engines accelerate ions to produce thrust. Ions are
created by stripping electrons from atoms. The propellant,
usually xenon gas, is heated to extremely high temperature,
which causes the xenon atom to give up an electron.
For more about
atoms, electrons,
and ions, see the
Electricity merit
badge pamphlet.
When you try to
push the same
poles of two
magnets together,
the magnets will
push each other
away—action
and reaction.
An ion engine
uses this effect
to accelerate
ions and
produce thrust.


SPACE EXPLORATION 37
.The Way Things Work
The positively charged ion is passed over a positively charged
plate that repels and accelerates the ion from the thrust chamber
at extremely high speeds.
Ion engines are the most efficient rocket engines in use
today. They produce a low thrust, but they operate for a long
time. This means they have a high thrust for the amount of fuel
used. An ion engine proved itself on the probe Deep Space 1,
launched in 1998 and powered by a first-of-its-kind ion engine.
The European Space Agency’s SMART-1 probe to the moon
and NASA’s Dawn mission to the asteroid belt also used ion
engines. (See “Planetary Exploration” in the next section.)
The Variable Specific Impulse Magnetoplasma Rocket
(VASIMR), first conceived in 1977 by astronaut Franklin Chang
Diaz, uses radio waves to create a plasma of argon or xenon
ions and electrons generated by a helicon plasma injector and
confined and shaped by high-temperature superconducting
magnets, which create a magnetic field that guides and
accelerates the plasma through the rocket chamber, where it is
further heated by radio frequency waves to 1 million degrees.
Small amounts of fuel can create significant thrust, and a
VASIMR motor has been proposed as a means to continually
reboost the orbit of the International Space Station so that
Proton rockets don’t have to be sent periodically to do so.
How Satellites Stay in Orbit
Isaac Newton reasoned that it was the force of gravity—not its
absence—that kept the moon in orbit around Earth. Artificial
satellites also operate under the same Newtonian laws.
To explain Newton’s reasoning, think about what happens
when you throw a ball. Imagine you are standing in a big field
and throw a baseball as hard as you can. The ball might travel
100 feet before gravity pulls the ball down to the ground.
Now imagine you are standing on Mount Everest. You
throw the baseball and it travels parallel to Earth for some
distance before it falls to Earth. Each time you throw the ball,
you increase the thrust and the ball travels farther. If you could
throw the ball fast enough (and if you ignore friction from the
atmosphere), the ball would fall at exactly the same rate that
the curve of Earth falls away from the ball. This situation is
called free fall. The ball would continue traveling parallel to
Earth’s surface, achieving orbit. This is the basis for how satel-
lites stay in orbit.


38 SPACE EXPLORATION
The Way Things Work.
All satellites ride on rockets to get into orbit. Satellites as
large as several tons make it safely into orbit on a regular basis.
Rockets travel straight up at first. This is the quickest way
to get the rocket through the thickest part of Earth’s atmo-
sphere. Once above the atmosphere, the rocket control
mechanism brings the rocket to a course that is parallel to
Earth’s surface while the rocket accelerates to the velocity
needed for that satellite to remain in orbit. This velocity is
determined by the weight of the satellite and the altitude of
the orbit to be achieved.
At higher
altitudes, where
the vacuum of
space is nearly
complete, there
is almost no drag
and a satellite
can stay in orbit
for centuries, up
to 100,000 years at
geosynchronous
orbits.
This photo, taken from the shuttle’s aft (rear) flight deck windows,
shows an astronaut from the space shuttle Endeavour trying to
capture the Intelsat VI communications satellite.
Knowing where satellites and space stations are
going to be in their orbit has helped to popularize
the pastime of satellite spotting. See the resources
section for positioning information.


SPACE EXPLORATION 39
.The Way Things Work
Orbital velocity is the speed needed to reach a balance
between gravity’s pull on the satellite and the satellite’s iner-
tial tendency to keep going. If too much velocity is imparted
to the satellite, it will escape from Earth and enter into a sun-
centered (heliocentric) orbit. If too little velocity is imparted
to the satellite, gravity will pull it back to Earth. At the correct
speed, the satellite will be in perpetual free fall.
The higher the orbit, the
longer the satellite can
stay in orbit. At lower
altitudes, a satellite
runs into traces of
Earth’s atmosphere,
which creates drag.
The drag causes the
orbit to decay, or
decrease, until the
satellite falls back
into the atmosphere
and burns up.
Space Pictures
Space pictures have evolved along with the digital technology
of the computer, internet, and cell phone. Early space pictures
were made on film, which had to be returned to Earth and pro-
cessed. Today, scientists use CCDs, or charge-coupled devices,
to gather the information digitally. Early video was grainy and
barely usable.
Because of this constant state of everything falling
together at the same speed, the satellite and
everything aboard seems weightless. That is
why astronauts can float inside the International
Space Station.
The arrows represent baseballs thrown at different velocities.


40 SPACE EXPLORATION
The Way Things Work.
As space probes ventured farther into space, scientists
needed better ways to record, store, and transmit pictures.
Information scientists developed a coding system that treats
each picture frame as a grid with numbered squares. Each
square is a picture element—pixel, for short. Every pixel has
its own address of numbers in the grid that gives the pixel’s
row and column. For example, the address of the pixel in
row 01, column 01, is 01-01. The address of the pixel in row 16,
column 10, is 16-10. (See the illustration.)
Images taken by spacecraft consist of many tiny squares called pixels. The picture of
Saturn, left, is made of hundreds of thousands of pixels, shown (greatly exaggerated)
at right.
c
o
l
u
m
n
01
c
o
l
u
m
n
02
c
o
l
u
m
n
03
c
o
l
u
m
n
04
c
o
l
u
m
n
05
c
o
l
u
m
n
06
c
o
l
u
m
n
07
c
o
l
u
m
n
08
c
o
l
u
m
n
09
c
o
l
u
m
n
10
c
o
l
u
m
n
11
c
o
l
u
m
n
12
c
o
l
u
m
n
13
c
o
l
u
m
n
14
c
o
l
u
m
n
15
c
o
l
u
m
n
16
Row 01
Row 02
Row 03
Row 04
Row 05
Row 06
Row 07
Row 08
Row 09
Row 10
Row 11
Row 12
Row 13
Row 14
Row 15
Row 16
01 White
02 Light Gray
03 Medium Gray
04 Dark Gray
05 Black
Tone Scale
In this “smiley face”
example, pixel 01-01 is
white, and therefore is
coded as 01-01-01. Pixel
06-02 is black. It is coded
as 06-02-05. Pixel 06-06 is
light gray. It is coded
as 06-06-02.


SPACE EXPLORATION 41
.The Way Things Work
When a space probe’s sensor views an object, it senses
the brightness or shade of each pixel in the scene. Shades are
measured on a gray scale, which is a gauge of the shades of
gray from pure white to pure black.
Let’s assume we have a simple gray scale with only five
shades. Each shade is numbered. White is 01, light gray is 02,
and so on to solid black, 05. The sensor assigns each pixel the
number that corresponds to the shade sensed.
These numbers are stored in a computer memory and
then transmitted to the waiting scientists. The receiving
computer is programmed to arrange the pixels into a grid,
show the correct shade of gray for each picture element, and
reconstruct the picture row by row.
In early missions where the data transmission rate was
slow and computer memory limited, it might take several
minutes to display one picture frame. Mariner 4, when it
photographed Mars in 1965, made images 200 x 200 pixels in
size. Each complete image took nearly 9 hours to reach Earth.
NASA launched the Solar Dynamics Observatory (SDO) in 2010
to collect data on our sun with a focus on the magnetic fields
and how they affect space weather. Imagine watching a high-
definition movie that never stops. The amount of data and
images SDO beams back per day is equivalent to downloading
a half-million songs each day. “By some estimates, SDO will
transmit as much as 50 times more science data than any
mission in NASA history,” says Dean Pesnell of the Goddard
Space Flight Center. “Images with 10 times greater resolution
than high-definition television recorded every 0.75 seconds will
reveal every nuance of solar activity.” (These robot spacecraft
are described in the next section, “Planetary Exploration.”)
A farmer in Kansas takes part in a program that
gives him satellite imagery of his farm. He can see
moisture content and decide when to plow and
seed his crops. As the crops grow, he can tell if
insecticides or fertilizers are required. The farmer
can tell when his wheat is ripe and can be harvest-
ed. This is just one of many examples of how space
pictures can improve everyday life.





SPACE EXPLORATION 43
.Planetary Exploration
Planetary Exploration
Long ago, the Greeks noticed bright, starlike objects mov-
ing among the stars. These “wanderers” included the sun,
the moon, Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn. People
thought all these objects circled Earth, which was thought to be
at the center of the universe.
In the 16th century, Nicolaus Copernicus determined that
Earth was a planet, too, and that the six known planets went
around (orbited) the sun while the moon circled Earth. Then,
in 1610, Galileo Galilei turned a newly invented instrument—
the telescope—toward the heavens. He looked at Jupiter, and
what he saw astounded him.
Through the telescope, Jupiter was not a wandering point
of light, but a round disk with four small starlets (moons)
circling it. Earth’s moon was not a smooth shadowy ball, but
a sphere pockmarked with craters and laced with cracks and
ridges. Venus went through phases like the moon, Saturn had
bumps on its sides (the rings), and the sun had spots on its
surface. The worlds of outer space were more exciting than
anyone had imagined.
Almost 350 years later, when people learned how to send
objects—spacecraft—into space, a new era of exploration began.
Scientific instruments and cameras could now be carried above
the filtering effects of Earth’s atmosphere, providing clearer
views of outer space than ever before. Spacecraft could go to
those faraway places Copernicus and Galileo barely knew.
Space Probes: Tools of the Space Age
A spacecraft is any vehicle that flies in outer space, whether
or not it carries people. An unmanned spacecraft is technically
known as a space probe. Such probes have been used since
the late 1950s to explore other worlds, large and small, in our
solar system.
For more about
planets, moons,
and stars, see the
Astronomy merit
badge pamphlet.


44 SPACE EXPLORATION
Planetary Exploration.
A space probe is a
clever arrangement of
mechanical and electronic
parts packed together inside
a sturdy, compact box or
shell that is launched aboard
a rocket. Once in space, the
box opens and the various
parts (components) begin to
operate. Each group of com-
ponents plays an important
role toward accomplishing
the mission—controlling the
spacecraft, taking measure-
ments of its surroundings, or communicating with people on
Earth, thousands or millions of miles away.
Scientific instruments aboard a spacecraft detect and mea-
sure what’s out there. Almost every probe carries one or more
cameras to capture images of the object it visits. Some probes
may have devices to measure radiation, temperature, and
magnetic fields. Those that land on an alien surface may carry
a miniature weather station and a scoop to sample the soil.
Other devices may be designed to detect certain chemical
elements or compounds, such as water.
A computer system stores commands that direct the other
components to function and to control the craft. The computer
also collects the information gathered by the instruments and
gets it ready for transmission to Earth. When it is time to send
the data to Earth, an antenna aims radio signals in the right
direction. Another antenna receives signals from Earth.
To do all these things, a spacecraft needs a power supply.
The probe may have solar cells to convert sunlight into elec-
tricity. Or it may have a nuclear-powered generator to provide
electricity, especially if it is visiting a planet far from the sun.
Because outer space is extremely cold, some power goes to a
heater that keeps the spacecraft at the right temperature for the
computer, instruments, and other components to operate.
After the probe has been launched into space, altering its
direction becomes necessary during millions of miles of travel.
A set of small rockets (thrusters) is used to adjust the probe’s
course or “put on the brakes” if the probe must go into orbit
around a planet or land on an alien surface.
The space probe Voyager 2
More recently
it has become
possible for landers
to relay their
communications
through an orbiter
around the same
planet that then
sends the data
to Earth at a
later time.


SPACE EXPLORATION 45
.Planetary Exploration
Robotic Missions to the Moon
Many attempts were made before the first probe flew past the
moon. On Jan. 4, 1959, the Soviet Luna 1 impactor flew within
6,000 km of the moon before entering an orbit around the sun.
Two months later, Pioneer 4 became the first U.S. probe to pass
by the moon, at a distance of 60,000 km, before also entering
a heliocentric orbit. The Soviets achieved additional lunar
firsts with the first hard lander, Luna 2, which landed in Palus
Putredinis in September of the same year, and Luna 3 a month
later, which provided the first images of the lunar far side. As a
consequence, all of the most easily photographed features bear
Russian names.
After a number of failures on both sides over the next
five years, the Ranger 7, 8, and 9 missions returned more
than 17,000 increasingly close-up images on their way to
impacting the moon’s surface in 1964 and 1965. In mid-1966,
NASA achieved the first controlled landing on the moon with
Surveyor 1. Four more Surveyor missions followed to research
the lunar surface in anticipation of the Apollo landings. Five
Lunar Orbiter spacecraft also mapped the lunar surface to pro-
vide greater detail on potential landing sites.
The Soviet Union continued to explore the moon into the
mid-1970s. Zond spacecraft flew around the moon, took pho-
tographs, and returned to Earth with their payload. The Soviet
moon program also included several successful sample return
missions and a pair of remote-driven rovers called Lunokhod
(“moon walker”), which covered 10.5 km and 37 km of the
lunar surface over a period of more than a year.
Another means of changing direction or speed
takes advantage of a large planet’s gravity—a
“slingshot” effect, known as gravity assist. With
careful aim, a probe can be pulled toward the planet,
whipped around, and then accelerated away in the
desired direction. Spacecraft use the gravity-assist
method to travel quickly to their destination while
conserving precious fuel.
The Soviet Union’s
Zond 5 was the
first spacecraft
to carry living
organisms other
than humans as
far as the moon. A
payload of turtles,
mealworms,
plants, and other
life-forms survived
the trip and
splashed down in
the Indian Ocean
in September 1968.
China’s Chang’e
4 lander took
seeds of potato,
rapeseed and
Arabidopsis plants,
as well as fruit-fly
eggs and yeast
to the moon in
January 2019.


46 SPACE EXPLORATION
Planetary Exploration.
NASA scientists increasingly turned their
attention to other destinations in the solar sys-
tem, while lunar scientists worked through the
enormous amount of data returned by Apollo.
This led to a long dearth of lunar missions.
The Japanese space agency conducted
its first lunar mission in 1990 with the Hiten
(meaning “celestial maiden” or “flying angel”)
probe, which achieved limited success in con-
junction with the deployed Hagoromo orbiter.
In 1994, the U.S. Department of Defense
launched an experimental spacecraft named
Clementine that orbited the moon for 70 days,
mapping its surface. It detected the possible
presence of frozen water at the moon’s south
pole with an experiment that demonstrated the
presence of hydrogen. In 1998, Lunar Prospector
mapped the lunar surface in more detail, mea-
sured magnetic and gravity fields, and studied geological
events. It also showed the presence of hydrogen near the poles.
After one year, it was intentionally crashed near the south pole
in the hope of revealing water ice.
The European Space Agency (ESA) launched its first mis-
sion to the moon, SMART-1, in 2003. This probe used an ion
thruster, slowly spiraling the probe up out of Earth’s gravity
well until it could be captured into the moon’s gravitational
sphere of influence. It arrived in late 2004 and began surveying
to identify chemical elements in the lunar surface. It too was
crashed into the moon in hopes of excavating a debris plume
with evidence of water.
In late 2007, Japan launched its Kaguya (“moon maiden”)
probe and China joined the roster of lunar visitors with its
Chang’e-1 (“moon princess”) probe. Both were designed to
map the surface and identify the chemicals found there. A
year later, India launched its first moon probe, Chandrayaan-1
(“moon vehicle”), which carried an international suite of sci-
entific instruments. Then came NASA’s Lunar Reconnaissance
Orbiter (LRO) and Lunar Crater Observation and Sensing
Satellite (LCROSS), which slammed a school bus–sized probe
into the lunar south pole region to try to excavate a plume
that was observed from Earth, and revealed a rich variety of
chemicals, including water. In 2010, China launched Chang’e-2.
This mosaic of the far side of the
moon is composed of more than
15,000 images taken by the Lunar
Reconnaissance Orbiter Camera
between November 2009 and
February 2011.
46 SPACE EXPLORATION


SPACE EXPLORATION 47
.Planetary Exploration
NASA launched the Gravity Recovery and Interior
Laboratory (GRAIL) mission in 2011 to study the moon’s
gravity fields and internal mass distribution. Under develop-
ment for future launch are LADEE, Luna-Glob, Chang’e-3,
Chandrayaan-2, and the first node of NASA’s International
Lunar Network (ILN).
Unveiling Venus and Mercury
Mysterious Venus, whose surface hides from Earth-based
telescopes under a shroud of clouds, was the first planet after
Earth to be examined by a robotic spacecraft. The United
States had Mariner 2, after orbiting the sun for almost a year,
approach and fly by Venus in December 1962. The spacecraft
reported the planet was over 900 degrees Fahrenheit, hotter
than Mercury.
The Soviet Union was bolder with its Venera program,
whose 16 probes intensively explored Venus between 1961
and 1983. Venera was the first spacecraft to probe the planet’s
atmosphere, the first to land there, the first to photograph its
surface, the first to analyze the soil, and the first to map the
terrain. Starting with Venera 4 (1967), the spacecraft was two
probes: a carrier that stayed up high and a lander
that dropped toward the surface. But the dense
Venusian atmosphere crushed each lander before
it could land. Eventually, Venera 7 was built
strong enough to safely descend. It lasted for 23
minutes on the surface of Venus in 1970.
The United States then sent Mariner 10,
which achieved two goals. Three months after
launch in November 1973, the probe flew by
Venus and took many measurements of the
atmosphere. With assistance from Venus’ gravity
(like a slingshot), it sped onward to Mercury, the
sun’s closest planet. Mariner 10, which photo-
graphed about 40 percent of Mercury’s surface,
has been the only probe to visit there until the
MESSENGER probe began flybys in 2008 and
started orbiting the planet in 2011.
In the 1980s, Vega 1, Vega 2, and Magellan visited Earth’s
“sister” planet. The Vegas, identical 36-foot-long probes from
the Soviet Union, reached Venus in June 1985. They dropped
a landing capsule onto the surface, released a balloon into the
atmosphere, and then got slingshot by the planet to intercept
SPACE EXPLORATION 47
Mercury photographed by
MESSENGER in October 2008 as
the spacecraft left the planet.


48 SPACE EXPLORATION
Planetary Exploration.
Halley’s Comet. The balloon carried
instruments that measured atmo-
spheric temperature, pressure, and
wind speed. The lander took simi-
lar measurements and photographs,
and analyzed the chemical makeup
of the air and soil.
Magellan was the first plane-
tary spacecraft to be launched from
the space shuttle (in May 1989).
After entering a polar orbit around
Venus in August 1990, Magellan
spent more than four years map-
ping 98 percent of the hidden terrain using radar.
Scientists returned to Venus in 2006, when the ESA’s Venus
Express probe entered into a polar orbit around the planet. The
probe revealed a thinner atmosphere than expected as well as
evidence that the planet may still be geologically active.
NASA’s MESSENGER probe has made several close
approaches to Mercury, providing imagery to fill in the gaps left
by Mariner 10. In March 2011, it became the first spacecraft ever
to orbit Mercury, where it has been studying the composition
and structure of the crust, among other things. The ESA has the
BepiColumbo probe that launched October 2018 and with arrival
at Mercury December 2025.
Missions to the Red Planet
At the end of the 19th century, astronomer Percival Lowell
focused a large telescope on Mars and reported seeing canals
on its surface. People’s imaginations soared, but scientists had
to wait until 1965 before a spacecraft flew to the Red Planet.
Pictures from Mariner 4 revealed a surface covered with craters,
similar to the moon. The probe’s instruments found Mars had a
thin atmosphere of mostly carbon dioxide. Not a single canal or
other sign of life was spotted.
Mariner 9 was the first U.S. spacecraft to orbit another
planet, arriving at Mars in November 1971 to find a dust storm
enveloping the planet. The probe delayed taking pictures of the
surface for several months until the dust settled. After 349 days
in orbit, Mariner 9 had transmitted more than 7,000 images,
covering over 80 percent of the Martian surface. Notable fea-
tures were river beds, massive extinct volcanoes, and a series of
Magellan
revealed the
presence of
large volcanoes,
lava plains, and
extremely long
lava channels.
It also discovered
deformed,
flattened
mountains.
We finally knew
what lurked
under Venus’
clouds: a
barren world.
Magellan’s view of Venus


SPACE EXPLORATION 49
.Planetary Exploration
canyons that stretched more than 2,500 miles long. The probe
found evidence of wind erosion, water erosion, weather fronts,
clouds, and fog—but no life.
The Soviet Union turned its attention to Mars in the 1970s,
beginning with the Mars 2 probe, which successfully arrived
in November 1971, a few weeks after Mariner 9. The Mars 2
spacecraft released a lander that descended into the raging dust
storm and crashed. However, the orbiter took photographs and
studied the atmosphere and surface. Mars 3, which was identi-
cal to Mars 2, had better luck. The vehicle landed safely and
transmitted the first television pictures of the Martian surface
for 20 seconds, then communication from the lander was lost.
Americans were excited when two Viking missions reached
Mars in 1976. Each craft had two parts, an orbiter and a lander.
Viking 1 landed on July 20, 1976, while Viking 2 settled on the
other side of the planet six weeks later. While each orbiter took
detailed photos and communicated with Earth, each lander
stood on three legs with large circular footpads and performed
its duties. A camera took the first close-up image of the Martian
surface—a footpad and a bunch of rocks. People were awestruck
by Mars—its red boulders, red soil, and pinkish sky.
Each Viking lander extended a long arm into the soil,
scooped up samples, and dropped them into three chemical
laboratories. The labs
tested the soil to find
chemicals that might
come from a microscopic
organism. The results of
all these experiments were
inconclusive, the scientists
decided, meaning there
was still much to learn
about Mars.
Mars Pathfinder was
the next spacecraft to
arrive safely, landing on
July 4, 1997. The craft
bounced onto the Martian
surface, its fall from space
cushioned by inflated airbags. The craft was shaped as a tetra-
hedron—four triangular sides—so that when it stopped bounc-
ing, the three sides standing up would fall open like a flower.
Mars’ giant
canyon was
named Valles
Marineris in honor
of the Mariner
spacecraft. The
canyon is three
times as deep as
the Grand Canyon.
One of Mars’
extinct volcanoes,
Olympus Mons, is
15 miles high, the
largest in the
solar system.
The redness of
the rocks and soil
on Mars is due to
the presence of
iron oxide, which
we know as rust.
The sky looks pink
because of the
dust blown about
by the wind.
The Viking 1 lander dug these
trenches on Mars.


50 SPACE EXPLORATION
Planetary Exploration.
Aboard was a small rover (two feet long and one foot
high) named Sojourner. Powered by a solar panel on its back,
the rover rolled down a ramp and traveled close enough to the
nearest rock for one of its instruments to touch the rock and
determine its composition. Then the rover visited other rocks,
large and small, around the lander. The rover was designed to
last for seven days and the lander for 30 days; each operated
for 83 days.
A Mars probe was launched in 1996, arriving in September
1997. After establishing a nearly polar orbit, the Mars Global
Surveyor began mapping the terrain in early 1999. Its original
two-year mission lasted until 2006.
After the success of Mars Pathfinder, NASA launched Mars
Climate Orbiter in December 1998 and Mars Polar Lander in
January 1999. As Climate Orbiter tried to orbit the planet, an
earlier miscommunication between NASA and a contractor that
did not specify English or metric units triggered an error in the
probe’s trajectory that plunged it too low into the atmosphere
during its aerobraking maneuver, causing it to burn up. Months
later, on Dec. 3, 1999, planetary scientists and space enthusiasts
waited anxiously as Polar Lander began its descent into the
Martian atmosphere. Since there had been no communication,
there was no way to know what went wrong.
After 2000, scientists began to explore the Red Planet
in a more robust and comprehensive manner. NASA’s Mars
Odyssey, which arrived in late 2001, mapped the global
distribution of near-surface ice on Mars, finding ice-rich
ground extending far toward the equator from the visible polar
caps. It was still returning data in 2016. ESA’s Mars Express,
which arrived in late 2003, provided critical radar scans of the
Missions to Mars show how difficult space exploration can be and, in
particular, what a challenge it is to send spacecraft to Mars. Several
missions to the Red Planet have failed. The Soviet Union had trouble
with every one of its Mars-bound probes—Mars 2–7, Phobos 1–2, and
Mars ‘96. The United States experienced a huge loss when its Mars
Observer craft, carrying many science instruments, vanished in space
in 1993. To prepare for orbit, the craft turned off its transmitter while
pressurizing its fuel tanks. Something went wrong, and the spacecraft
was never recovered.


SPACE EXPLORATION 51
.Planetary Exploration
subsurface of Mars and studies of the atmosphere and space
environment around the planet and its moons. It also carried
the Beagle 2 lander to study the surface, but contact was lost
with the lander after it separated from Mars Express.
In early 2004, the Mars Exploration Rovers (MER) Spirit and
Opportunity arrived at Mars for a three-month mission to “follow
the water,” looking for environments that had water in the past
and might have been able to support life. Spirit proved that some
of the planet’s rocks were formed in the presence of water in
ancient Mars, and both rovers found nickel-iron meteorites there.
Communication was lost with Spirit in 2010, but Opportunity
continued to return data for several more years.
Mars exploration continued in 2006
with the Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter
and in 2008 with the Phoenix Mars
Lander. Curiosity (rover) landed on Mars
August 2012. Its mission is to provide
an intensive study of its landing zone as
well as serve as a weather station with a
suite of climate and meteorology instru-
ments to provide a richer knowledge
of how Mars’ atmosphere and climate
works now, so we can better predict
how it worked in the recent and distant
past.
Spacecraft have made a number of discoveries about Mars:
• The entire north polar area of Mars may be a gigantic impact basin.
• Mars has climate cycles similar to Earth’s.
• Mars has methane in the atmosphere, which could be produced by
underground bacteria or geological events.
• Mars has millions of cubic miles of water frozen in its polar caps and
in its crust near the poles. Early Mars probably had a huge ocean
filled with icebergs and pack ice that covered its north polar area.
Liquid water on the surface became rare as the planet lost atmo-
sphere and got colder and drier.
• Mars has a very weak magnetic field, which allows some of its air to
leak into space more easily.
The Mars rover Curiosity


52 SPACE EXPLORATION
Planetary Exploration.
The Mars 2020 Mission: the Perseverance Rover
and Ingenuity Helicopter
The car-sized Perseverance rover, nicknamed “Percy,” was
launched as part of the Mars 2020 mission on July 30, 2020.
It safely landed on Mars on Feb. 18, 2021. Similar in design to
the Curiosity rover used during the Mars Science Laboratory
mission of 2011, Percy contained seven primary experiments
plus 19 cameras and two microphones. Two of these
experiments involved the collection of samples of the Martian
soil for retrieval on a later mission and an experimental
helicopter called Ingenuity.
Ingenuity was one of the major unique features of the
mission. This solar-powered helicopter was designed to fly
over the Marian surface, extending the range of Perseverance
while scouting the proposed path of the rover. On April 19,
2021, Ingenuity became the first craft to fly on another world.
It traveled more than 1,000 feet and reached an altitude of
The Perseverance rover
on the surface of Mars


SPACE EXPLORATION 53
.Planetary Exploration
about 59 feet
during these
flights. Mars
has a much
less dense
atmosphere than
here on Earth, so
that seemingly
low-altitude and
short-distance
flight on Mars
would be like
flight at the peak
of Mount Everest
or otherwise very
high in Earth’s atmosphere. Both the Perseverance rover and
the Ingenuity helicopter remained operational at the time of
the publication of this pamphlet.
The Ingenuity helicopter, at the right of this photograph taken by
the Perseverance rover, completed its 50th flight on April 13, 2023.


54 SPACE EXPLORATION
Planetary Exploration.
The Grand Tour: Exploring the Outer Planets
Jupiter and Saturn have mystified people for centuries. What is
that Great Red Spot? Why does Saturn have rings? How many
moons circle each planet? The Pioneer and Voyager missions
revealed those worlds to be more fascinating than expected.
Pioneer 10 was the first spacecraft to travel through the
asteroid belt. Some scientists
feared the craft might hit an
asteroid, but it reached Jupiter
safely in December 1973.
Pioneer 10 took the first up-close
photographs of Jupiter, which
showed the planet had colorful
swirling bands. Photos revealed
smaller white spots besides the
Great Red Spot, which is a
hurricane large enough to cover
at least two Earths. The craft
also measured Jupiter’s strong
magnetic field and radiation
belts. Pioneer 11 did the same, one year later.
The United States launched two Voyager probes in 1977.
Voyager 1 reached Jupiter in March 1979. Voyager 2 arrived four
months later. Each probe photographed the planet and its four
largest moons—Io, Europa, Ganymede, and Callisto—in detail.
Io has volcanoes and resembles a “pizza ball.” Europa has a
cracked, icy surface (and possibly a liquid ocean beneath the
ice). The probes discovered that lightning crackles in Jupiter’s
cloud tops, a thin ring surrounds the planet, and it has many
more moons than had been observed from Earth.
At Saturn in 1981, Voyager revealed the rings to be more
complex and grand than expected. Dark spokes could be seen,
and small moons were found that guided the ring material.
Saturn’s largest moon, Titan, was also studied, though its atmo-
sphere was too thick for cameras to see the surface.
While Voyager 1 headed out of the solar system, Voyager 2
took advantage of a rare alignment of the outer planets. The
spacecraft continued on to Uranus (1986) and then Neptune
(1989), achieving the “Grand Tour.” The craft detected faint
rings around both gas giants and discovered new moons.
A spacecraft named Galileo, launched from the space
shuttle in 1989, visited Jupiter in 1995, using gravity assist from
While Pioneer 10
headed into
interstellar space
(leaving the solar
system in 1983),
Pioneer 11 flew
by Saturn in 1979,
the first probe
to do so. It
photographed
and took
measurements
of the planet, its
rings, and some
of its moons, too.
The spacecraft
lost power in 1995.
Jupiter’s Great Red Spot


SPACE EXPLORATION 55
.Planetary Exploration
Venus and Earth. It released a small probe
that plunged into Jupiter’s cloud layers and
measured temperature, pressure, chemical
composition, and other characteristics before
the planet’s dense atmosphere crushed it.
Its orbiter flew around Jupiter often and vis-
ited the major moons, collecting much data.
Galileo survived for eight years in the Jovian
system despite the harsh radiation.
The Cassini mission to Saturn was
launched in 1997, carrying ESA’s Huygens
probe along for the long journey. After
gravity-assist visits to Venus, Earth, and
Jupiter, the robotic probe arrived at Saturn
in June 2004. Six months later it released
the Huygens probe for its descent to Titan.
The Cassini orbiter spent the next four years
studying Titan and Saturn’s rings and other
moons. Its operations were later extended,
first as the Cassini Equinox Mission and then
as the Solstice Mission through 2017.
Jupiter’s moon Io is one of the most
volcanically active bodies in the
solar system.
Cassini’s view of Saturn and Titan,
Saturn’s largest moon
Galileo was the first spacecraft to photo-
graph an asteroid (Gaspra) up close. It also
discovered a tiny moon named Dactyl orbit-
ing the asteroid Ida, above.


56 SPACE EXPLORATION
Planetary Exploration.
Wandering Through Space
Not every robot space probe visits a planet. Some head to much
smaller objects—comets and asteroids. When Halley’s Comet
approached the sun in 1986, some countries and space agencies
launched probes to meet it. From the Soviet Union, two Vega
spacecraft flew by the comet in March 1986 and took measure-
ments on their way to Venus. A few days later, Japan’s Sakigake
probe briefly passed by. Last and most daring was Giotto, a
probe sent by the European Space Agency.
Giotto traveled into the fuzzy
white “head” of Halley’s Comet, a
cloud of gas and dust surrounding
the nucleus. More than 200 dust
particles per second struck the craft.
One dust grain (about a third of an
ounce) knocked out communica-
tions with Earth for a short while,
but the 9-foot-long cylinder-shaped
probe survived its passage through
the comet. Giotto found that the
nucleus of the comet was about 9 miles long and 6 miles wide.
NASA launched NEAR Shoemaker in February 1996.
The craft’s name explained its objective: Near Earth Asteroid
Rendezvous. It reached the small, potato-shaped asteroid Eros
in February 2000 and became the first probe to orbit and land
on an asteroid.
The spacecraft Deep Space 1 had no destination when it
launched in October 1998. Its purpose was high-tech testing
in outer space. One device tested was an ion engine, first of
its kind, that performed better and longer than expected. Deep
Space 1’s mission was extended to encounter a near-Earth
asteroid in 1999 and Comet Borrelly in 2001.
Giotto found that
the nucleus of
Halley’s Comet
was about 9 miles
long and 6 miles
wide. Although
the comet lost
about 35 tons of
matter every hour
as it neared the
sun, it still has
enough material
to survive a few
hundred trips
through the
solar system.
NEAR Shoemaker was named for Dr. Eugene
Shoemaker, a famous geologist and astronomer
who studied how asteroids and comets may have
shaped the planets. He was co-discoverer of a
comet (Shoemaker-Levy No. 9) that smashed
spectacularly into Jupiter in 1994.
Uranus


SPACE EXPLORATION 57
.Planetary Exploration
The Stardust probe’s primary mission for its was to col-
lect comet samples and return them to Earth for study. It flew
by the comet Wild 2 (pronounced Vilt) in 2004, and in 2006
returned a canister of aerogel containing bits of comet dust,
which included small amounts of stardust grains. The robotic
probe visited comet Tempel 1 in 2011 to build on the Deep
Impact dataset.
NASA’s Deep Impact probe was designed to look inside a
comet. In mid-2005 it did so by hitting comet Tempel 1 with a
copper impactor and then examining the plume of debris from
that collision (including 250,000 tons of water). The probe visit-
ed comets Hartley 2, Garradd, and ISON before communication
was lost in September 2013.
ESA’s Rosetta probe was designed to provide long-term
data collection of a comet, 67P/Churyumov-Gerasimenko.
Launched in 2004, the probe arrived in 2014 after a series
of gravity boost planetary flybys of Earth and Mars. It then
delivered a lander to study the comet surface in detail.
On Sept. 30, 2016, Rosetta ended its mission by hard-landing
on the comet in its Ma’at region.
Japan’s Hayabusa (“peregrine falcon”) probe was launched
in 2003 to rendezvous with and collect samples from asteroid
Itokawa, an asteroid so small that other objects tend to just set-
tle up against it without creating a crater. Using an ion engine,
it was able to catch up with
and touch down on the aster-
oid to collect samples from
the surface. These samples
were returned to Earth by the
spacecraft in mid-2010.
NASA’s Dawn mission is
tasked with visiting the two
largest occupants of the asteroid Earth
For Stardust to collect the comet particles without
damaging them, NASA made use of a unique high-
tech material called aerogel which is 99 percent
air. Aerogels are now put to a variety of uses, from
hyperefficient winter coats to thermal insulation in
the construction trade.
The ecliptic
plane is the
two-dimensional
plane traced out
by Earth’s orbit
around the sun,
its orbital plane.
Eclipses can only
happen when the
moon is in this
plane, hence the
name. The other
planets in the
solar system have
orbital planes
whose inclinations
are very close
to Earth’s
orbital plane.


58 SPACE EXPLORATION
Planetary Exploration.
belt: Vesta and Ceres. The mission, launched in 2007, reached the
asteroid Vesta in 2011 where it orbited for one year while studying
the size, shape, mass, gravitational fields, surface and subsurface
composition, interior structure, and the nature and role of water in
the asteroid. Dawn went into orbit around Ceres in 2015.
What About Our Sun?
Let’s not forget the largest and most important member of the
solar system. Several space probes have been sent into orbit to
study our sun. Some of the Pioneer series did so in the 1960s.
Two Helios probes measured the solar wind in the mid-1970s.
The Solar Maximum Mission observed solar flares in the 1980s
and was repaired in space when a shuttle crew captured,
repaired, and released it in 1984.
The corona is the outermost and thinnest part
of the sun’s atmosphere. It is sometimes visible
during a solar eclipse. The solar wind is a stream of
charged particles coming from the corona.


SPACE EXPLORATION 59
.Planetary Exploration
Ulysses, launched in October 1990, was the first spacecraft
to travel in an orbit nearly perpendicular (vertical) to the
ecliptic plane. No human-made vehicle could produce the
power to break out of the ecliptic plane on its own, so Ulysses
relied on mighty Jupiter’s gravity to hurl it above that level.
During its 18-year mission, it was able to fly over the sun’s
north and south poles, which had never been observed or
measured in scientific detail before.
SOHO is the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory. Launched
in December 1995, SOHO was sent to study the nature of the
sun’s corona and inner structure, as well as detect the solar
wind. During its mission, SOHO discovered more than 50 sun-
grazing comets and made movies of coronal mass ejections,
which produce dangerous radiation that can cause communica-
tion blackouts on Earth. SOHO continues to operate and is still
returning data after more than 20 years in space.
Launched in late 2001, NASA’s Genesis mission was
designed to collect particles of solar wind to return to Earth for
study. After taking up station at the Sun-Earth L1 point that
same year, it spent the next 28 months in collection mode using
collector arrays of different materials as well as a bulk collector.
The probe then used its ion engines to maneuver into a low-
energy trajectory that swung it by the moon and back to Earth,
where it crashed into the Utah desert in 2004. Scientists were
able to recover some of the arrays
relatively intact and have been ana-
lyzing them since.
STEREO, or Solar TErrestrial
RElations Observatory, was launched
in October 2006 to study coronal mass
ejections. It consists of two observato-
ries, one of which is ahead of Earth in
its orbit and the other behind.
NASA’s Parker Solar Probe will
be the first-ever mission to “touch”
the sun. The spacecraft, about the
size of a small car, will travel directly
into the sun’s atmosphere about 4
million miles from the surface. Parker
Solar Probe launched aboard a Delta
IV-Heavy rocket from Cape Canaveral
on Aug. 12, 2018. Solar Dynamic Observatory’s view of the sun
in 2012. (See page 41 for more on SDO.)


Distinguished Eagle Scout Mike Fossum, STS-124 mission specialist, took a seven-
hour spacewalk during a mission at the International Space Station in 2008.


SPACE EXPLORATION 61
.Near-Earth Space Habitats
Near-Earth
Space Habitats
People need food, water, air, clothing,
shelter, waste disposal, and some measure
of safety to live. Earth gives us these things,
but outer space does not (not even on
other planets). There is no air to breathe
in space. Space is either too cold or too
hot for humans. Radiation from the sun and
cosmic rays can harm a person. There are
small and large objects—natural (meteoroids)
or artificial (pieces of rockets, paint chips, and
other “space junk”)—that travel fast enough
to make holes in metal sheets or spacesuits.
A habitat built in space must provide
everything essential for a comfortable life
while shielding people from the dangers of
space. There are four kinds of space habitats:
1. Spaceships (such as the space shuttle)
2. Space stations that orbit Earth
(near-Earth habitats)
3. Bases and settlements on other worlds
(such as the moon and Mars)
4. Permanent structures in deep space
This section covers the space shuttle
and space stations that go (or have gone)
around Earth. The next section discusses
the possibility of an inhabited base on the
moon or Mars. (The fourth kind of space
habitat—deep-space structures—will not
be discussed here.)
A spaceship is for travel;
a space station is for
living. A spaceship
carries a person from
one habitat (such as
Earth) to another (the
space station) and
provides a comfortable
environment for as long
as the trip lasts. A space
station, on the other
hand, must keep people
alive for months or years.


62 SPACE EXPLORATION
Near-Earth Space Habitats.
Features of a Near-Earth Habitat
Consumables are things that are used up and must continually
be replaced. For a near-Earth space habitat, the consumables—
food, clothing, water, and air (to start with)—are brought up
from the ground.
A space station keeps air at the same pressure as on the
ground. This lets the occupants live and work in regular clothes
rather than wear spacesuits all the time. The pressurized area
also protects occupants from some levels of radiation and tiny
meteoroids and space debris. To protect people from high
radiation events, such as solar flares, a small heavily shielded
area is usually provided.
For people to live in space for long periods, they must
have a way to dispose of wastes—solid and liquid body wastes,
wastewater from washing and cleaning, water from fuel cells
that generate electricity, used food containers, packaging, and
other trash. Water can be collected and recycled or discarded
into space. Garbage usually is put into a robot craft that burns
up in the atmosphere.
Heat is another waste product. People and equipment
produce heat as they work. If there is no way to get rid of the
excess heat, it will build up. Soon it would be too hot for either
people or machines to work. This heat is collected from living
and working areas and shed into space by radiators.
Many trips to a
space station are
necessary to
bring enough
supplies to keep
the occupants
alive and well for
a long time. This
is very expensive.
On a large space station, water and air can be recycled and some
food grown to reduce the amount that must be transported. Chemical
“scrubbers” remove carbon dioxide and return clean air to the habitat.
Water is recycled from the moisture collected from the air and from
wastewater (including urine).
Fuel cells use hydrogen and oxygen to make electricity, also producing
water. On the space shuttle, wastewater was dumped overboard, while
on the International Space Station, water from fuel cells is saved and
used for drinking.


SPACE EXPLORATION 63
.Near-Earth Space Habitats
Salyut
The first space station to orbit Earth was named Salyut.
The Soviet Union launched seven Salyuts between 1971 and
1982. The earliest Salyut stations were designed only for tempo-
rary operations. Crews flew to the stations in Soyuz spacecraft
and were resupplied by unmanned Progress vehicles. Salyut 6
(1977–82) and Salyut 7 (1982–86) were designed for longer
missions. The longest mission was 237 days. The last crew left
Salyut 7 in 1986. The space station re-entered Earth’s atmo-
sphere in 1991, burning up over Argentina.
Skylab
The United States launched its first space station, Skylab, in
1973 atop a Saturn V rocket, the same type that sent astronauts
to the moon. The third stage of the rocket was converted to pro-
vide living quarters, life support, and scientific instruments for
a crew of three. Apollo command modules carried astronauts to
and from Skylab.
Eleven days after Skylab was
launched, three astronauts docked
with it. They noticed one of two
large solar panels had torn away.
A second solar panel was jammed,
and part of the heat shield was
missing. The crew installed a
cover over the unshielded area
to cool the spacecraft. They freed
the jammed solar panel and
restored power to the craft. These
unplanned activities showed how
people could repair equipment
and structures in space.
Radiator panels that stick out into space work like the radiator in a car.
A liquid passes through the hot area and absorbs heat. The hot fluid
flows through the panels, where the heat is given off into space. This
process cools the liquid, which is then pumped back to the hotter area
to pick up more heat.
Skylab’s orbit decayed faster than expected
because greater than expected activity on the
sun “puffed up” the top of Earth’s atmosphere,
slowing the station down. Skylab was destroyed
as it burned up in the atmosphere in 1979.


64 SPACE EXPLORATION
Near-Earth Space Habitats.
Mir
In 1986, the Soviet Union launched the first module of Mir
(meaning “peace”), the next generation of space stations. Unlike
Salyut, the Mir space station could have modules attached to
each other. Eventually, Mir grew to be a set of six modules that
totaled 107 feet long and 90 feet wide.
Mir was occupied for more than 12 of its 15 years in orbit.
It served as a home in space for 104 people representing 11
countries. One of the cosmonauts (Soviet/Russian astronauts),
Dr. Valeri Polyakov, spent 438 days in space before returning to
Earth. Three other cosmonauts spent at least one year in space.
Three different
crews lived on
Skylab through
1974. They studied
the properties
of fluids and
materials and the
medical effects
of microgravity
(the nearly
complete absence
of gravity). They
also observed
the stars, the
sun, and Earth.
Their missions
proved people
could live
productively in
space over
long periods.
The End of Mir. Mir had its share of problems. Once,
the crew had to put out a dangerous fire. Another
time, a resupply craft collided with the station, seri-
ously damaging one module. Eventually, components
designed to last three years began to fail. The space
station was brought out of orbit in a controlled manner
and crashed into the Pacific Ocean in 2001.
This photo of the space shuttle Atlantis docked with Mir was
taken by the Mir-19 crew on July 4, 1995, as they undocked
the Soyuz spacecraft from Mir for a brief fly-around.


SPACE EXPLORATION 65
.Near-Earth Space Habitats
The Space Shuttle
The most ambitious space vehicle to date is certainly the United
States’ space shuttle, in service from 1981 to 2011. This system
used solid-fuel rocket boosters and a large external tank for
liquid fuel in combination with an airplane-like vehicle, the
orbiter, to lift up to seven crew members and 25 tons of pay-
load into a low Earth orbit and remain there for as long as
two weeks. Because the orbiter, which carried the expensive
liquid-fuel rocket engines, could be refurbished and flown
again repeatedly, the shuttle is regarded as the first reusable
space launch system. It was used for launching satellites,
repairing them in space, and even returning them to Earth,
and served as a kind of temporary space station for performing
scientific experiments.
Combining all these capabilities into one vehicle, how-
ever, proved problematic. Originally conceived as a low-cost,
frequent space transportation system accessible to commercial
users, the shuttle proved much more expensive to operate
than anticipated. Furthermore, in the course of 130 flights,
two orbiters—Challenger in 1986 and Columbia in 2003—were
destroyed with the loss of all crew members. After the loss of
Challenger, the types of payloads flown on the shuttle were
restricted, limiting it primarily to purely scientific missions.
While the space
shuttle was
intended to be
a method of
transportation
between the
ground and
low Earth orbit,
it became the
only space
habitat for
astronauts
from its first
launch until
the mid-1990s.
Fun Facts About the
Space Shuttle
• In 81/2 minutes, the space
shuttle accelerates at launch
from zero to 17,400 miles
per hour, almost nine times
as fast as a rifle bullet.
• If the main engines pumped water instead of fuel, they would drain
an average-sized swimming pool in 25 seconds.
• The solid rocket boosters consume more than 10 tons of fuel each
second at launch.
• The orbiter has more than 21/2 million parts, including 230 miles
of wire.


66 SPACE EXPLORATION
Near-Earth Space Habitats.
International Space Station
NASA began planning a permanent space station in the late
1960s. In 1984, President Ronald Reagan revealed the plans for
Space Station Freedom, a cooperative effort among the United
States, Canada, Japan, and some European countries. But the
space station was redesigned yet again. In 1993, Russia and
Brazil joined the project, and the name was changed to the
International Space Station (ISS).
The ISS is an engineering marvel, a challenge to design,
construct, test, outfit, assemble, and operate. While it was
originally built to last at least 15 years in orbit, it was designed
with a safety factor of 2, meaning it could last 30 years.
Sixteen countries have contributed to its construction. More
than 100 major pieces have been assembled in orbit more than
200 miles above Earth.
Metric Matters
The global international standard for measurement in science and
engineering is the metric system. To compete in global markets, as the
space industry does, you need to learn metric. This can, at first, lead to
confusion, as with the case of tons and tonnes. A ton in imperial units
is 2,000 pounds, with each pound weighing 16 ounces. The metric
version of the ounce is the gram, and of the pound is the kilogram
(kilo = thousand). One kilogram equals 2.2 pounds, and 1,000 kilo-
grams is a tonne (often noted as metric tonne or mT), which works
out to 2,200 pounds, or 10 percent more than the ton. For this reason,
and as Mars Climate Orbiter highlighted, it is very important to be
clear on what measurement system you are using.
In the 1990s, the United States and Russia brought U.S. astronauts and
Russian cosmonauts together to operate the Mir space station. Space
shuttle Atlantis docked with Mir for the first time in 1995. It was one
of nine trips to Mir to exchange crew members, bring supplies, and—
in this case—deliver a new module to the station. The two countries
gained valuable experience working together and laid the foundation
for the eventual construction and operation of the International
Space Station.


SPACE EXPLORATION 67
.Near-Earth Space Habitats
But why build another space station? Mir had gotten too
old. The United States, Russia, and other countries wanted a
larger, longer-lasting facility to do long-term research in space.
The space shuttle had supported some research, but flights had
been too few and too short. A bigger space
station also would provide better research
support services (such as data transmission)
than the shuttle could ever provide.
Purposes of the ISS
The International Space Station has several
purposes. One of the most important is that
the ISS provides a constant presence in space. Since November
2000, there have been from two to 13 (when the space shuttle
orbiter was docked) astronauts and cosmonauts at a time living
in space on the ISS. Rather than spend a few weeks in space,
astronauts and scientists can stay for three to six months to
study the effects of weightlessness on the human body and to
do experiments in microgravity.
The research done aboard the ISS may lead to break-
throughs in medicine, engineering, and technology that will
have practical uses for humanity on Earth. The research could
create jobs and economic opportunities tomorrow and in the
decades to come. As an investment in the future, the ISS pro-
vides ways to do research that cannot be done on Earth. With
its view of 85 percent of Earth’s surface, the ISS can help us
observe and understand changes in the environment and our
impact on the planet. By exposing materials to the harsh envi-
ronment of space, we can learn how materials are affected in
order to better design future spacecraft.
The million-pound ISS is the largest
construction project ever attempted
in space.
The 16 partner countries providing
equipment and support for the
International Space Station are the
United States, Russia, Canada,
Japan, Brazil, Belgium, Denmark,
France, Germany, Italy, the
Netherlands, Norway, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, and the
United Kingdom.


68 SPACE EXPLORATION
Near-Earth Space Habitats.
The ISS shows how countries can work
together for the peaceful use of space. We can
accomplish greater feats (like a crewed mission
to Mars) with cooperation rather than competi-
tion. Also, the lessons we learn from building
and operating the ISS will prepare us for future
manned missions in space exploration.
Components of the ISS
The International Space Station is made of
cylinder-shaped modules and other large parts
that are built on the ground, then assembled
and maintained in space. The station was
designed to be expanded.
• The first piece, a control module named Zarya (“Sunrise”),
came from Russia and was put into orbit by a Russian
rocket in November 1998. Zarya has docking ports for
additional modules and solar arrays for power.
• The second piece was Unity, which a space shuttle carried
into orbit in December 1998. As its name suggests, Unity
is a small module that allows six other modules to be
connected together.
• The ISS became a working space habitat when the third
piece, the service module Zvezda (“Star”) from Russia, was
attached to the station in July 2000. Zvezda provided living
quarters and life-support systems for the first few crews.
• Destiny, a U.S. laboratory, was delivered in February 2001.
Scientific research aboard the station could now begin.
More components have been added since, with 15 pres-
surized modules as well as a number of unpressurized compo-
nents making up the ISS. The central girder or truss, which is a
set of long beams fitted together, connects the modules and the
main solar power arrays. The truss provides a rigid framework
for the station.
Various countries are providing other pieces of the ISS.
The Space Station Remote Manipulator System, provided by
Canada, is a 58-foot-long robot arm that helps with assembly
and maintenance. The arm travels along the truss on a mov-
ing platform. Four solar arrays, which provide electrical power,
rotate on the truss to stay facing the sun. Six large radiators
provide cooling in pressurized areas. From Italy and Brazil


SPACE EXPLORATION 69
.Near-Earth Space Habitats
have come cargo containers. The Quest airlock, from the
United States, allows crew members to conduct spacewalks.
An emergency crew return vehicle (a Soyuz spacecraft for
every three crew members) is always docked at the ISS while it
is inhabited. This assures the safe return of all crew members if
a hazardous situation (such as a fire or loss of pressure) occurs
on the space station and a quick departure must be made.
The construction of the ISS was largely completed in 2010,
resulting in about 1 million pounds of hardware in orbit assem-
bled during 33 space missions with more than 150 spacewalks
over a period of 13 years. The ISS will be operated through at
least 2020 and will be deorbited into the Pacific Ocean when
its operational life is complete. The ISS is the largest structure
ever built in space and has honed and perfected our skills at
assembly, maintenance, logistics, and international cooperation
on scientific and technical endeavors. The use of distributed
power and cooling systems, the repair of the solar arrays and
rotary joints, and the recycling of water and air for life support
are good examples of what we’ve learned that could help us as
we explore the solar system and establish homes in space.
The ISS flies over
85 percent of
Earth’s surface
and 95 percent of
Earth’s population
and is as bright
as Venus. To find
out when the ISS
is visible over
your location, see
the resources
section.
Canada’s Space Station Remote Manipulator System can creep slowly along the
outside of the space station like an inchworm.
An airlock is a small room with one door to the pressurized area and
another door to the outside (vacuum). A control panel allows a crew
member to release the air out to space, after which the door to the
outside can be opened and a space-suited crew member can exit the
station on a spacewalk. When the space walk is finished, crew mem-
bers reenter the airlock and another control pumps air back into the
airlock until the pressure is equal with the interior of the space station
after which they can re-enter the station.


70 SPACE EXPLORATION
Near-Earth Space Habitats.
Living and Working in
Microgravity
It isn’t easy to provide for
eating, drinking, sleeping,
cleaning, and personal hygiene
on the space station. Air, water,
materials, and the human body
act differently in space because
of microgravity. Equipment we
use on Earth would not work
the same way, or not work at
all, aboard the space station.
Food for ISS crews is nutri-
tious and compact, and tasty
most of the time. The food
must come in convenient packages for easy handling in weight-
lessness. Astronauts select their menus before going to the space
station, but their choices are limited. Fresh foods sometimes
arrive with new crew members, although they do not last long.
Water must be added to most items to make them edible.
Personal hygiene is a novel experience on the ISS. A crew
member takes a shower using a hand sprayer and a washcloth.
Because loose water droplets floating around in weightlessness
can be a hazard for electrical equipment, the bather must catch
the sprayed water in a sponge or washcloth and then use the
wet cloth to clean themselves. In space, toothpaste is swallowed.
A special dry shampoo is rubbed into the hair with a towel
without needing to be rinsed. When shaving or cutting hair, a
vacuum tube is used to collect the hair and keep it out of equip-
ment and air filters.
Every few months, Russia launches a Progress resupply
rocket stocked with food, water, personal items, and spare parts.
The Progress spacecraft attaches to a Russian-made module. The
crew uses supplies from Progress and fills the craft with trash.
Eventually, the Progress undocks from the station and burns up
in the atmosphere, incinerating the trash it carries.
Robotic spacecraft from the European Space Agency, Japan,
and the United States can also be launched by expendable rock-
ets to resupply the ISS. Japan’s H-II Transfer Vehicle (HTV) and
SpaceX’s Dragon cargo ship are reusable crafts that can return
scientific samples to Earth.
The ISS is
designed to be
maintained while
in orbit. Most
parts, inside or
outside, can be
disconnected,
replaced, and
reconnected (like
a light bulb). This
makes it easier
for the crew to
make repairs.
Without gravity, hot air does not rise. Aboard the
ISS, an oven has a fan that forces the hot air to
move around. Hot metal shelves conduct heat
directly to food containers.


SPACE EXPLORATION 71
.Near-Earth Space Habitats
Crew members can work
outside for about eight hours
at a time—wearing spacesuits,
of course. While they work in
space, they have several ways
to move around. They can pull
themselves hand-over-hand
using handholds on the mod-
ules. They can ride on a small
railcar along the truss of the sta-
tion. Or they can hitch a ride on
a robot arm. Crew members use
tether lines to stay attached to
the ISS, keeping them from drift-
ing away if they lose their grip. Crew members wear small gas jetpacks that can
get them back to the station if they get sepa-
rated from the spacecraft.
Astronauts wear spacesuits made with 14 layers of fabric. Going from
the inside out, there’s nylon tricot, spandex, a lacing of plastic tubes,
urethane-coated nylon, polyester fiber, ripstop nylon, seven layers of
polyester film, and an outer layer made of fibers that are lighter and
tougher than steel.
Those same stronger-than-steel fibers, called aramid fibers, are
used to make bulletproof vests for police officers and flameproof
suits for firefighters. One of the best-known aramids has the trade
name Kevlar.
1. LIQUID-COOLING-AND-VENTILATION
GARMENT LINER (NYLON TRICOT)
2. LIQUID-COOLING-AND-VENTILATION
GARMENT LINER—OUTER LAYER (NYLON/
SPANDEX)
3. LIQUID-COOLING-AND-VENTILATION
GARMENT LINER—WATER
TRANSPORT TUBING
4. PRESSURE GARMENT
BLADDER (URETHANE-
COATED NYLON) 5. RESTRAINT LAYER (PRESSURE-RESTRAINING POLYESTER FIBER)
6. THERMAL MICROMETEOROID GARMENT LINER
(NEOPRENE-COATED RIPSTOP NYLON)
7–13. THERMAL
MICROMETEOROID
GARMENT
(ALUMINIZED
POLYESTER FILM)
14. THERMAL
MICROMETEOROID
GARMENT COVER
(A BLEND OF
KEVLAR, NOMEX, AND
OTHER MATERIALS)


72 SPACE EXPLORATION
Near-Earth Space Habitats.
ISS Crews
The ISS can hold a crew of three to six people (a group called
an expedition) for up to six months. Crew members arrive
and depart in either a space shuttle or a Soyuz spacecraft.
Most occupants have been American astronauts or Russian
cosmonauts, but European and Japanese astronauts have also
been part of the crews. A few wealthy “tourists” have paid to
visit for a few days to do experiments or educational outreach
or just relax but are not considered an official part of the
crew. The official language is English, but a lot of Russian
gets spoken, too.
Most crews have a commander, a flight engineer, and a
science officer. The commander has the overall responsibility
for running the station and managing the crew. The engineer’s
main duty is to keep the station’s mechanical and electrical
systems working properly. The science officer supervises the
scientific and medical experiments. Additional crew members
will work mainly on science experiments. All of the crew take
part in medical experiments and station maintenance.
Science on the ISS
The ISS may have as many as six laboratory modules,
becoming five times larger and having more research abilities
than any previous space station. The United States provided the
Destiny laboratory, Japan the Kibo module, and the European
Space Agency the Columbus module. Russia provided Poisk
Mini-Research Module 2 and Rassvet Mini-Research Module 1,
however Rassvet is used for cargo storage, not research.
Some experiments aboard the ISS study the effects of
microgravity on the body and research how plants and animals
could behave at different levels of gravity, such as one-sixth
Earth’s gravity (as on the moon) or one-third (as on Mars).
Other experiments investigate various properties of physics and
chemistry, while still others may produce new materials that
cannot be made on Earth.
The ISS is about
the length and
width of a football
field including the
end zones and
has an internal
pressurized vol-
ume similar in size
to the passenger
cabin of a 747 jet.
The first crew, known as Expedition One, boarded the station in
November 2000. American Commander Bill Shepherd and Russians
Yuri Gidzenko and Sergei Krikalev stayed for four months. They were
replaced by Expedition Two, which had a Russian commander and two
Americans, including the first woman on the station, Susan Helms.


SPACE EXPLORATION 73
.Near-Earth Space Habitats
Medical research aboard the ISS
may lead to the development of drugs
that can stop bone loss. Besides
helping space travelers, such drugs
would benefit millions of older people.
Other studies in space might lead to
a treatment for cancer or find ways
to make purer forms of medicines.
Researchers are also working to
develop vaccines for Salmonella and
Staphylococcus aureus, which causes
antibiotic-resistant staph infections.
Scientists want to better
understand how physical laws and
chemical processes work in space.
Materials act differently, fluids flow
differently, and fire burns differently
in a microgravity environment. New
materials could be made in orbit
from substances that will not stay
mixed on Earth due to their different densities. (See “All
Mixed Up.”) Studies of the process of burning could lead to
improvements in firefighting techniques and equipment or
help to strengthen pollution controls.
All Mixed Up. Imagine you are trying to mix molten
lead and molten aluminum. The large difference
in densities will cause them to separate in Earth’s
gravity before the metals can cool into solid metal.
In weightlessness, however, the two could mix
to form a new material (an alloy). Perhaps a new
material that was similarly made could be used to
build future spacecraft.
This photograph by cosmonaut Nikolai
Budarin of the ISS Expedition Six shows
how strange space gardening can be.
The air bubble trapped in this water drop
doesn’t rise because in space there is no
buoyancy. The droplet rests on the leaf
without bending the stalk or falling off
because of zero-gravity.
Flames in microgravity look different from those
we see. On Earth, a flame is shaped like a teardrop
and yellow in color. On the ISS, it would be round
and blue.


74 SPACE EXPLORATION
Near-Earth Space Habitats.
The knowledge gained from experiments that are not
possible on Earth will benefit us all. The International Space
Station is the next step to satisfy humanity’s ancient yearning to
explore, learn, and achieve. From this outpost, we can continue
to explore the frontier of space.
The Post-Shuttle Era
With the retirement of the space shuttle in 2011, the only
regular crew transport to the ISS was via the Russian Soyuz
crew vehicle. In the United States, a number of companies are
working hard to provide the next generation of cargo and crew
vehicles to supplement Soyuz. Having multiple launch vehicles
available reduces the risk of the space station crew being
stranded on the ISS or running short on supplies.
After the space shuttle, the government decided to invest
in and use the commercial sector for cargo-resupply missions
and crew-transfer flights to the space station. Three companies
were awarded contracts: SpaceX and Boeing for crew transfer
and SpaceX and Orbital ATK (now part of Northrop Grumman)
for cargo.
The SpaceX Dragon capsule was originally designed and
tested for cargo and later modified and updated for crew. The
capsule flew aboard the reusable Falcon 9 launch vehicle, with
the first cargo flight May 22, 2012 and the first crewed flight
May 30, 2020. Orbital ATK developed the Cygnus cargo capsule,
which launched on the Antares and Atlas V rockets in 2013.
SpaceX’s Dragon
cargo begins the
final approach to
the International
Space Station.
Dragon’s arrival
marked the
first time two
commercial
cargo vehicles
have been
docked
simultaneously
at the space
station.


SPACE EXPLORATION 75
.Near-Earth Space Habitats
As of early 2025, the Boeing Starliner had not flown a crewed
mission.
During the same time, NASA began the development of
the space launch system for the Artemis moon and deep-space
missions. With Artemis, NASA plans to land the first woman and
first person of color on the moon, and these missions will enable
the establishment of the first long-term presence on the moon.
Artemis I launched Nov. 16, 2022, the first integrated flight
test of NASA’s Space Launch System (SLS) rocket carrying the
Orion spacecraft. The Artemis II mission, scheduled for April
2026, will be the first crewed mission using the SLS rocket and
Orion spacecraft capable of transporting a crew of four to the
moon and later flights to deep space.
The SLS was an outgrowth of the space shuttle program,
using and advancing many of the component systems such as
The ISS’s robot arm captures the SpaceX Dragon spacecraft as it
approaches on a resupply mission.
On Dec. 5, 2014, the Orion spacecraft completed its first voyage to
space, traveling farther than any spacecraft designed for astronauts
had been in more than 40 years.


76 SPACE EXPLORATION
Near-Earth Space Habitats.
the solid rocket booster concept with an additional segment
along with upgraded engines and other components. The SLS
is capable of producing 8.8 million pounds of thrust at liftoff,
more than either the space shuttle or the Saturn V.
Orion spacecraft (officially the Orion Multi-Purpose Crew
Vehicle, MPCV) consist of a crew module (CM) or space capsule
designed to accommodate four astronauts for up to 21 days
using the European Service Module (ESM). While the capsule
looks like the old Apollo capsule, the Orion is bigger—about
1.5 time the useful volume—and features a glass cockpit, solar
panels and many automated features. It is designed for remain
docked for up to 6 months.
The Artemis missions will feature additional components to
enable the landing of the crew on the moon. This includes the
lunar gateway or gateway, a space station in lunar orbit, and
the human landing system (HLS) a ferry between gateway and
the lunar surface. All these systems are under development.
The SpaceX Dragon commercial cargo craft approaches the
International Space Station on May 25, 2012.


SPACE EXPLORATION 77
.Near-Earth Space Habitats
Astronaut Wings and Insignia
Early astronauts were members of the military and
civilians who completed training and flew
on a government spacecraft. The first
astronauts were selected for the
Mercury program and later the
Gemini, Apollo, space shuttle
and today’s commercial crew
and Artemis programs. The
military defined spaceflight as
flights over 50 miles so, besides
the classic NASA astronauts,
a number of military X-15 pilots
would earn astronaut wings.
In 2005 NASA adopted the 50-mile
definition and awarded wings to qualifying
civilian X-15 pilots. The Fédération Aéronautique
Internationale, which governs pilot certifications,
has defined 100 kilometers—about 62 miles—as
the height to qualify as an astronaut
Each of the U.S. military services has its own
astronaut wings presented to qualified members;
NASA has its own pins and patches. The gold
NASA pin is awarded to astronauts who have
flown in space; candidates who have successfully
completed astronaut training earn a silver pin.
The NASA gold-
grade astronaut pin
United States Navy
Naval Aviator Astronaut insignia
United States Army
Master Army Astronaut device
Official NASA
insignia for
Space Shuttle
Mission STS-
41G in 1984. It
was the first
flight to include
two women,
Sally Ride and
Kathryn Sullivan.
Sullivan was the
first American
woman to walk
in space.





SPACE EXPLORATION 79
.Planetary Bases and Settlements in Space
Planetary Bases and
Settlements in Space
Where would we build space bases and settlements? The moon
and Mars are current candidates. Bases and settlements could
also be built on asteroids, on the moons of other planets, and
even in space itself (in orbit). At first, these bases would depend
on supplies from Earth, but they could eventually become
self-sufficient as we learn how to make use of the materials
found in space.
A base is normally supported and supplied by a govern-
ment, while a settlement would need a financial basis to sup-
port itself and its inhabitants. By creating self-sufficient settle-
ments away from Earth, our civilization can spread to other
worlds, and even bring life to them. Having a space-based civi-
lization in existence would also make it easier to recover from
a widespread disaster on Earth.


80 SPACE EXPLORATION
Planetary Bases and Settlements in Space.
Free Space Facilities
Not every location of interest in space is on a planetary surface.
One example is the Earth-Moon L1 point (EML-1). Balanced
in one direction by the gravity of Earth and in the other by
centrifugal force and the gravity of the moon, the L1 point lies
about 86 percent of the way to the moon on an imaginary line
connecting the centers of Earth and the moon.
A facility in a halo orbit around EML-1 (like the SOHO and
Genesis probes at the Sun-Earth L1 point) would benefit from a
number of advantages:
• It is accessible from any inclination of low Earth orbit, even
from the ISS.
• It has access to any point on the lunar surface.
• It offers a “high-ground” view of space traffic out to geosta-
tionary orbit.
• It is the cheapest place, fuel-wise, to launch a mission to an
asteroid or to Mars.
• Probes can be sent out on the interplanetary superhighways
and brought back periodically to be serviced and upgraded
like the Hubble Space Telescope.
Another location of interest is the Earth-Moon L5 point,
trailing 60 degrees behind the moon in its orbit. This was
the location proposed by Dr. Gerard O’Neill for large orbital
colonies that would provide homes for thousands of individuals
in a climate-controlled environment. This type of free space
facility requires much more space development; we will need
to perfect methods of economically bringing many hundreds
of thousands of tons of materials from one space location or
object to another before we can build large space colonies.
A facility at EML-1 offers the possibility of considering
materials from multiple sources. The core modules might be
ISS-style or Bigelow inflatable modules, but radiation shield-
ing might be provided by slag from industrial processes on the
moon. There might be an industrial facility there manufacturing
solar cells from asteroid materials to be used for solar-power
satellites in geostationary orbit or as a garage for nonfunction-
ing satellites retrieved from geostationary orbit.
Also to be
considered is
what value the
facility will create
so that people
would want to live
and work there.
Removing scrap
satellites from
geostationary
orbit, for example,
would help keep
functioning
satellites safe so
that broadcasts of
satellite TV
and radio can
continue
uninterrupted.


SPACE EXPLORATION 81
.Planetary Bases and Settlements in Space
Asteroid Facilities
A natural extension of using asteroids for the natural resources
they contain is to create facilities on or in the asteroids. Such a
facility located in the asteroid belt would have access to virtually
unlimited resources. Locating a facility within an asteroid would
allow for great variability in design of interior spaces, and thick
layers of rock would mitigate the dangers from cosmic rays and
solar flares, as would be the case in lunar lava tubes. In addi-
tion, engines could be mounted on the asteroid, allowing it to be
directed to destinations of interest in the solar system.
Selection of a particular asteroid would depend on its com-
position. It is one thing to mine platinum group metals from
a large rock; it is another to have the supplies necessary for
life, mainly carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, and nitrogen, as well as
ample amounts of water. Consequently, any likely target will
be extensively examined by robotic probes to determine the
resources it would offer for a facility.
Visiting an asteroid would be just the first step.
Moon Bases
The moon is just a few days of travel from Earth. Earth-moon
communication takes only a few seconds round-trip. We have
had experience with crewed operations on the moon. The grav-
ity is only one-sixth of Earth’s, so landing on and lifting off
from the moon’s surface does not take much fuel. All of these
are advantages.
There are also disadvantages of establishing a lunar base.
The moon does not have an atmosphere. On its surface, people
would be unprotected from space radiation and the impacts of
micrometeorites. The moon rotates about once a month, creat-
ing a scorching hot day (+250 degrees F) that lasts two weeks,
followed by an intensely cold night (-250 degrees F) that also
lasts two weeks. No one knows how the low gravity might
affect the growth of children or the aging process if families
lived at the base. There are unlikely to be any concentrated
bodies of mineral ore to mine.
For these reasons, while moon is not the best place to
start a colony, it is suitable for scientific research.


82 SPACE EXPLORATION
Planetary Bases and Settlements in Space.
Purposes of a Moon Base
A moon base would allow continued exploration of the moon.
We can search for valuable materials, such as titanium,
helium-3, and rare earth elements. Bases near the north or
south poles would receive sunlight almost all the time to power
a base. Explorers working out of those bases might find polar
ice deposits in nearby areas that are always in darkness.
We also might set up an astronomical observatory. A tele-
scope on the moon’s stable surface, looking out through no
air, would have a superb view of the universe. A base on the
far side of the moon would be valuable for radio astronomy,
because it would be shielded from almost all the radio “noise”
generated on Earth and in space by human activity.
Businesses might be able to mine lunar material for a
profit. Common metals like iron, aluminum, and titanium
could be smelted from moon rocks to make building materials
and solar cells. Oxygen, taken out of the rocks, would provide
breathable air and rocket propellant. Someday a lunar hotel or
resort could be built, followed by a lunar colony.
Living on the Moon
A moon base would have modules for laboratories and living
quarters. The modules would be buried in lunar soil, except for
their entrances, to shield the inhabitants from space radiation
and solar flares. The lunar soil would also insulate the base
from extreme temperatures.
The modules would have the same life-support functions as
a space station, providing a breathable atmosphere, clean water,
food, power, and temperature control. Water would be recycled
as much as possible. Most food would be imported from Earth
but could eventually be supplemented by a greenhouse module.
A crew would either stay at the base or visit regularly to main-
tain and repair equipment and do scientific work.
At first, all of the modules would be built on Earth and
hauled to the moon. Because this will be expensive, a moon
base will grow faster if lunar materials are used to build the
modules. Once we develop the technology and capability to
mine, process, and transport lunar ore, a settlement on the
moon will be highly desirable.


SPACE EXPLORATION 83
.Planetary Bases and Settlements in Space
Mars Bases
Mars has many advantages for a base or settlement. Its
atmosphere (almost all carbon dioxide) would protect anyone
on the surface from micrometeorites and partly from space
radiation. The atmosphere is thick enough to produce wind and
clouds, and maybe support an airplane. However, the air lacks
oxygen and enough air pressure for a person to survive. Any
surface water would boil away very fast. Anyone exploring Mars
will need to wear a spacesuit, just like on the moon. What looks
like a raging dust storm would make it difficult to see afar.
The gravity on Mars is about 38 percent as strong as
Earth’s, so humans and animals might be able to grow and
reproduce there normally. A day on Mars is only slightly longer
than on Earth, so a person could easily adapt to a Martian day.
Mars has huge quantities of subsurface ice in many places,
and on the surface in the polar areas. There may be salt water
under the ice, which could be tapped by drilling. Elements,
such as sodium and chlorine, dissolved in the salty water could
be separated and used. Mars rocks would also contain useful
metals. In fact, most of the materials needed to build a base or
colony probably exist on Mars, but they must be found. Rocket
propellants can be made using the carbon dioxide atmosphere
and water on Mars, greatly reducing the cost of missions to Mars
and Mars settlements.
But Mars has its disadvantages, too. The planet lacks a
notable magnetosphere, which helps protect Earth from solar
wind particles. Additionally, Mars is much farther away than
the moon. With current technology, it would take five to six
months for a crew to reach Mars’ orbit from Earth. With better
technology, using nuclear-powered ion rockets, the crew’s trip
might be cut to two months. Cargo-only vehicles could be sent
as “slow boats” to use less energy, taking as long as a year to
reach Mars.
Any crew that takes a trip to Mars using a traditional trans-
fer orbit would likely have to stay there for about two years.
Because Mars is far from the sun, it does not get hot. However, it can
get cold enough in winter for dry ice to form directly on the polar caps
from the carbon dioxide in the atmosphere.


84 SPACE EXPLORATION
Planetary Bases and Settlements in Space.
Building a Mars Base
Before starting to build a base on Mars, we will need to send
robot rovers to locate several promising sites. Then humans
will survey those sites to find the best location. An orbiting
base would be established in a low Mars orbit, complete with
a propellant depot and a crew habitat. Vehicles to carry crew
and cargo to the surface base site would be sent from Earth to
the orbiting base. To make supporting the base more affordable,
these vehicles could be reusable, just like airplanes.
What would be a good place for a base? A location near
the equator for warmth, if possible. We would also want a
site with access to ice or water, and that might be closer to
the poles. Resources available from the rocks nearby would be
important. If we could use the water on Mars, by digging ice
out of the ground, we would not need to bring it from Earth,
making it much cheaper to build and maintain a base.
A low-lying location would provide the best protection from
space radiation. However, just as on the moon, all permanent
habitats would be buried underground, to reduce radiation
exposure. Temporary habitats could be on the surface, but they
would have to withstand the raging dust storms on Mars. All
habitat modules would be insulated against the cold. Methods
would need to be perfected to get rid of Mars dust on space-
suited explorers entering the habitats.
Just like on the moon, the first components to build the
base would come from Earth. Bulldozers and backhoes could
be used to dig holes and bury the habitat modules. To dig for
water or to look for life, heavy drilling equipment would be
designed to operate under Mars conditions. All habitat mod-
ules would be insulated against the cold.
The base would need energy for heat and to run its equip-
ment. Some power could come from solar panels during the
day, but a small nuclear reactor would be ideal for power
around the clock. Electricity from the reactor could be used to
turn carbon dioxide (from the air) and water or ice (from the
crust) into oxygen, hydrogen, and other materials. The oxygen
could be used directly to make breathable air. It might also be
possible to ship a small smelter and manufacturing plant to
Mars, for turning local materials into metal and parts for new
habitat modules. The water found there might make it possible
to use other kinds of construction materials, such as locally
produced concrete.


SPACE EXPLORATION 85
.Planetary Bases and Settlements in Space
Living on Mars
The oxygen and hydrogen from Mars’ water could be used as
rocket propellants for flights back into Mars orbit and to power
“over-the-road” vehicles. Vehicles for traveling on the surface of
Mars could include rovers large enough for several people, and
buggies that space-suited crew members could ride. The crew
would stay busy maintaining the base, conducting research,
and prospecting for better supplies of water and minerals. They
would explore and learn about the topography, geology, and
weather of Mars. Recent proof that methane is being produced
underground on Mars means that either bacteria or geologic
activity is producing it. A major focus of the base may be drill-
ing to find life.
Food for the crew would come from Earth at first.
But eventually food could be grown locally. Mars has enough
sunlight for plants to grow in pressurized greenhouses, but
keeping them warm would take much energy. By the time we
are ready to go to Mars, we may know how to make some
food synthetically, without using plants at all.
To find out if
Mars has (or
had) indigenous
life, we cannot
contaminate it
with our own.
For this reason,
precautions
are taken when
building space
vehicles
so they carry as
few microbes
as possible.
Build a Space Habitat
For requirement 7, you are to design a space habi-
tat. You can find material for this project around the
house and in your family’s recycling bin. A little
thought and ingenuity can make a potato-chip tube
into a lunar rover. Soda straws become the axles;
bottle caps become the wheels. Aluminum foil can
be wrapped around the tube, and a glue gun helps put it all together.
A three-liter soda bottle and similar imagination can make a habitation
module, a colony, or a space base. A cereal box can become a hangar
bay for ground and space operations.
As you plan this project, ask yourself: What
is the base’s intended use? How have you pro-
vided for crew quarters, power, breathable air,
radiation protection, food, water, and transpor-
tation? Your design must satisfy all these needs.


86 SPACE EXPLORATION
The Future of Space Exploration and Space Development
The Future of Space
Exploration and Space
Development
As this pamphlet points out, “Space is about the future.”
Because the Space Age is just six decades old, we assume that
the history of humankind’s adventures in and use of space is
only just beginning. There is a lot of future to anticipate!
Space activities in the United States and in other countries
are undergoing a major transformation. Because the space sta-
tion is nearly complete, astronauts
can turn more of their attention to
scientific investigations. Private rocket
vehicles are being developed to take
both cargo and passengers for short
suborbital (up and down) trips and
into low Earth orbit. Robotic probes
are being launched by countries other
than the United States and are now
playing a major role in exploring the
solar system.
There is a continuing public
debate on what role the U.S. govern-
ment can and should play in this new
era of space exploration. The private
decisions by companies and the public
ones by governments will determine
the future of the space program. While
some of these discussions may be
technical and complicated, many are
practical or about costs and benefits.
You can watch the new space program
take shape right before your eyes!


SPACE EXPLORATION 87
.The Future of Space Exploration and Space Development
Here are some of the issues under discussion:
• What should the next major goal of the U.S. crewed space
program be: Go back to the moon, go to Mars, visit an aster-
oid, focus on space development projects such as creating
space energy resources for use on Earth, focus on research
on the space station, focus on reducing launch costs, conduct
more robotic missions, or have multiple goals?
• What are the reasons for going to each destination or work-
ing on each goal?
• Should the government build another crew-carrying vehicle
itself, or rely on one or more private vehicles that can be
used without requiring much, if any, development cost from
the government?
• Should we build a “heavy lift vehicle” that can place objects
larger than 75 tons in low Earth orbit, or try to rely on smaller
rockets and assemble larger vehicles in orbit as was done with
the space station?
• If we build a “heavy lift vehicle,” should it be based on parts
from the shuttle or a brand new design, be expendable or
reusable, be built and operated by the government or by a
private company?
• What is the best way to build reusable space launchers to
reduce launch costs?
• How much should the U.S. space program rely on coopera-
tion with other countries?
• How much money can the government spend on the space
program each year?
• How much should be spent on robotic exploration, and how
much on the crewed program?
• What kind of vehicle should be built for crews to operate in
deep space away from low Earth orbit?


88 SPACE EXPLORATION
Space development represents a step beyond space explora-
tion—which is basically finding out what is there—and the use
of the resources in space. Many asteroids have large amounts
of very valuable platinum group metals in them, which we may
mine someday. The moon has large amounts of oxygen, silicon,
aluminum, and titanium in its soil.
Away from Earth, even as close as in the orbit used by
communications satellites, the sun shines virtually all the time
and is 30 percent stronger than on the ground. This makes it
a very good location for solar panels, which would get about
five to 10 times more energy per day than they would on Earth.
This concept is called space solar power, but the energy is used
on Earth.
Space development also means building infrastructure in
space for humans to use, just like building roads and power sta-
tions on Earth. Part of this involves equipment that would make
it easier, cheaper, and safer to move people and cargo from
Earth to space and to different locations in space. The space
station itself is an example of infrastructure. Other
examples include propellant depots to accumulate large
quantities of propellants for deep space missions and
reusable space tugs to move cargo between orbits instead
of using expendable rocket stages.
The Greatest Adventure
Earlier we asked: Why explore space? We have covered several
possible answers to that question, but they can all be summed
up like this: Because it is human to do so. People have always
explored the environment around them. As we have observed,
experimented, and taken risks, we have learned how to better
protect and maintain our environment and improve our way
of life.
Exploring space helps us better understand and protect our home
planet. As we begin our move into the universe, we look back at our
home world and see how small, yet how beautiful, it is. Boundaries
of states and nations are invisible. It becomes obvious that Earth itself
is a great spaceship on an unending journey and that all of us are
astronauts. Space exploration is the greatest adventure of all.
The Future of Space Exploration and Space Development


SPACE EXPLORATION 89
.The Future of Space Exploration and Space Development





SPACE EXPLORATION 91
.Careers in Space Exploration
Careers in Space
Exploration
A career in space exploration makes you think of being an
astronaut. Since 57 percent of the present and former astronauts
were Scouts, you have a good head start. But astronautics is
only one occupation among the many that will be needed to
explore and settle our solar system and beyond. Many positions
at NASA, at educational facilities, and in private businesses
involve space exploration and research.
Let's Get Started!
To prepare for a space career, you must study math and
science: mathematics from algebra through several levels of
calculus, plus sciences such as biology, chemistry, physics, and
computer science.
Speaking another language will also be an asset—
especially if you work on the International Space Station or
begin your career with a company overseas. Consider studying
art, drama, history, and philosophy; join a club or practice a
sport; and volunteer within your community (as every Scout
should!). Study hard but have fun, too! Being a well-rounded
person and someone comfortable around different people
or difficult situations are definite assets to develop within
yourself. Be that person who can adapt quickly to different or
difficult situations and you will reach any goals you set.
To get into college, you will need to keep your grades
high. Attempt for the best score as you can on standard exams
such as the SAT (Scholastic Aptitude Test) or ACT (American
College Test.) Yet, remember you are always so much more
than the sum of your grade average. Communicate effectively
with others, possess good people skills, be a problem solver,
and you will perform well in whatever career you choose.
Space ports,
space stations,
a lunar base, the
first people to
live on Mars —
many people
will be needed
for humans to
live and work
safely space.


92 SPACE EXPLORATION
Careers in Space Exploration.
Where Is the Work?
A decision to work within the space industry offers many
choices of possible employers, not just NASA. Space X, Bigelow
Aerospace, Blue Origin, Orion Span, Lockheed, and Boeing are
just a few of the private U.S. companies on the cutting edge
of space exploration and technology. Plus, supportive space
industry companies are as numerous. Help train future space
tourists and astronauts. Create art, create advertising, design
a bedroom suite for a future space hotel, discover the special
materials for clothing to dress those vacationers. All will be
needed. The opportunities in space exploration are endless.
NASA contracts private commercial companies like
those above to build rockets that can take astronauts to the
International Space Station. These companies also want to
send tourists into space, a vacation of a lifetime. You might not
work to build rockets, but you might be selected to blast off
and work at the first space hotel.
If you want to be
a pilot astronaut,
a military
background is
helpful. If you
want to be a
mission specialist
astronaut, a
scientific
or medical
background is
helpful. Most
importantly,
follow the
path where your
interests lie.
You might provide independent services to NASA,
as Mike Malin did. He developed the camera on the
Mars Global Surveyor, which has given us the best
map, to date, of the surface features on Mars.


SPACE EXPLORATION 93
.Careers in Space Exploration
A Sampling of Careers
Requirement 8 asks you to find out the qualifications, education,
and preparation required for two possible space careers, and
to discuss the major responsibilities of those positions. Here’s
a closer look at some space careers, and a list of careers you
might explore on your own.
Aerospace engineers design, develop, and test aircraft,
spacecraft, and missiles. They can develop new technologies
for space exploration. Most engineers earn their degrees in
electrical, electronics, mechanical, or civil engineering. Many
aerospace engineers are trained in mechanical engineering.
Often they will specialize in areas such as structural design,
propulsion systems, navigation and control instrumentation,
and communications.
A bachelor’s degree in engineering is required for
almost all entry-level engineering positions. Most engineers
earn their degrees in electrical, electronics, mechanical, or
civil engineering. Many aerospace engineers are trained in
mechanical engineering. Engineering students typically spend
their first two years of college studying math, basic sciences,
introductory engineering, humanities, and social sciences.
Courses in their last two years are mostly in engineering,
usually concentrating in one branch. The last two years of an
aerospace program might include courses in fluid mechanics,
heat transfer, applied aerodynamics, flight vehicle design,
trajectory dynamics, and aerospace propulsion systems.
Operations technicians need creativity to help with design
work, often using computer-aided design (CAD)software or
making prototypes of newly designed equipment. They must
be able to work with their hands to build and repair small,
detailed items without making errors. The position requires at
least a two-year associate degree in engineering technology.
Training is available at technical institutes, community colleges,
and vocational-technical schools and in the armed forces.
Research associates may take part in experiments or help
analyze data for research projects such as mapping the planets
and their moons. This work generally requires a master’s
degree, which takes two to three years of study beyond a
bachelor’s degree.


94 SPACE EXPLORATION
Careers in Space Exploration.
Food scientists use a knowledge of biology, chemistry and
engineering to develop and improve foods. They may alter a
food product nutritional value, flavor, texture or appearance,
as well as its packaging and production processes, especially in
space. Courses may include food microbiology and chemistry,
preservation, food safety and research methods. Food scientists
should have strong oral and written communication skills
as they often work with teams of other scientists such as
psychologists and sociologists among others.
No matter what your specialty, you must be able to
communicate and work well with others as part of
a team. You must be good at solving problems.


SPACE EXPLORATION 95
.Careers in Space Exploration
Space-related careers in the future will be varied and
indescribable in today’s terms. Some occupations could take
you into space; others could help someone else get there. We
stand on the shore of a great sea and can only imagine what
lies beyond the horizon. Perhaps your career will allow you to
find out!
Consider these careers:
• A systems programmer who designs, writes,
and maintains computer programs for scientific
analysis or for controlling a telescope in space
• A systems analyst who improves the perfor-
mance of complex systems, such as making it
easier for astronauts to conduct experiments
aboard a space station
• A space planning architecture determines how
to effectively plan an interior space like the living
quarters within a space station or an orbiting
space hotel. Your job may involve customizing
spaces and contents for maximum functionality
as well as be decoratively appealing. Mars is a
long way to go when you dislike your sleeping
quarters.
• A space scientist specializing in meteorology,
ionospherics, lunar and planetary studies,
radiation fields and particles, meteoroid studies
• A life scientist specializing in psychology, physi-
ology, microbiology, hematology, neurobiology,
botany, exobiology, biochemistry, interactions
between human and machine systems


96 SPACE EXPLORATION
Space Exploration Resources.
Information about space exploration
changes constantly. Each new mission
makes discoveries and shows that
some of our old ideas were incorrect.
When you look up information about
space and humankind’s efforts to explore
it, always try to find a recently published
book or a dependable website.
Scouting Literature
Astronomy, Aviation, Chemistry, Digital
Technology, Electricity, Electronics,
Engineering, Geology, Inventing,
Nuclear Science, Photography,
Programming, Radio, and Robotics merit
badge pamphlets
Books
Chaikin, Andrew, and James A. Lovell.
Space. Carlton, 2009.
Dethloff, Henry C., and Ronald A.
Schorn. Voyager’s Grand Tour: To
the Outer Planets and Beyond.
Konecky & Konecky, 2009.
Dyson, Marianne J. Home on the Moon:
Living on a Space Frontier. National
Geographic, 2003.
Dyson, Marianne J. Space Station
Science: Life in Free Fall. Windward
Publishing, 2004.
Engelhardt, Wolfgang. The
International Space Station: A
Journey Into Space. Tessloff/BSV
Publishing USA, 1998.
Furniss, Tim. The Atlas of Space
Exploration. Friedman, 2002.
Gifford, Clive. Astronomy, Astronauts,
and Space Exploration. Crabtree,
2016.
Lee, Wayne. To Rise From Earth:
An Easy-to-Understand Guide
to Spaceflight, 2nd ed. Checkmark
Books, 2000.
Pattison, Darcy. Nefertiti the Spidernaut:
the jumping spider who learned to
hunt in space. Mims House, 2016.
Reich, Tony, editor. Space Shuttle:
The First 20 Years—the Astronauts’
Experiences in Their Own Words. DK
Publishing, 2002.
Roby, Cynthia. Building Aircraft and
Spacecraft: Aerospace Engineers.
PowerKids, 2016.
Rouf, Don. NASA. Cherry Lake, 2017.
Space Exploration Resources
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


SPACE EXPLORATION 97
.Space Exploration Resources
Organizations and Websites
American Institute of Aeronautics
and Astronautics
Telephone: 800-639-2422
aiaa.org
European Space Agency
esa.int
“Europe’s gateway to space” has 22
member countries, including France,
Germany, and the United Kingdom.
Galileo Legacy Site
solarsystem.nasa.gov/galileo
Goddard Space Flight Center
nasa.gov/goddard
The center is “home to the nation’s
largest organization of combined scien-
tists, engineers, and technologists that
build spacecraft, instruments, and new
technology to study Earth, the sun, our
solar system, and the universe.”
NASA Image Galleries
nasa.gov/multimedia/imagegallery/
The NASA image galleries boast a col-
lection of more than a thousand images
“of significant historical interest.”
Jet Propulsion Laboratory
4800 Oak Grove Drive
Pasadena, CA 91109
Telephone: 818-354-4321
jpl.nasa.gov
The JPL is considered NASA’s leading
“center for robotic exploration of the
solar system.”
Johnson Space Center
Space Center Houston
2101 NASA Parkway
Houston, TX 77058
Telephone: 281-483-5111
nasa.gov/centers/johnson/home/
index.html
and spacecenter.org
Kennedy Space Center
Telephone: 321-867-5000
nasa.gov/centers/kennedy/
home/index.html
Marshall Space Flight Center
nasa.gov/centers/marshall/
home/index.html
National Aeronautics and Space
Administration
Telephone: 202-358-0001
nasa.gov
NASA’s website has a bounty of infor-
mation about space exploration for
students of all ages.
Opportunities at NASA:
nasa.gov/careers
Astronaut Selection Program:
astronauts.nasa.gov
SkyWatch applet to track satellite sight-
ings including the International Space
Station: spotthestation.nasa.gov/
sightings/
Spinoffs: spinoff.nasa.gov
National Association of Rocketry
Toll-free telephone: 800-262-4872
nar.org
The world’s oldest and largest sport
rocketry organization. Visit the website
to find the club nearest you.


98 SPACE EXPLORATION
Space Exploration Resources.
National Space Society
Telephone: 202-424-2899
space.nss.org
Planetary Society
Telephone: 626-793-5100
planetary.org
Smithsonian National Air and
Space Museum
Independence Avenue at Sixth Street, SW
Washington, DC 20560
Telephone: 202-633-1000
airandspace.si.edu
Technology Student Association
Toll-free telephone: 888-860-9010
tsaweb.org
TSA provides programs for middle
and high school students interested
in the technology.
Acknowledgments
Scouting America thanks the National
Space Society of North Texas and the
Austin (Texas) Space Frontier Society
for their hard work and diligence
in updating the Space Exploration
merit badge pamphlet. The NSS is a
nonprofit, international, educational
organization dedicated to the creation
of a free spacefaring civilization. We
are especially grateful to the following
individuals for their involvement with
this pamphlet.
• Tony Springer, director of NASA’s
Integrated Management Office,
helped with the 2025 update.
• Tracy Benninger, physicist and
graduate of the University of Texas
at Dallas in space science. She
contributed to the chapter called
“The Way Things Work.”
• Carol Johnson, physicist, space
advocate, and aerospace systems
engineer. She wrote the sections
about the space shuttle and the ISS,
and contributed to the overall editing
and reviewing of the manuscript.
• Curtis Kling, a software systems
engineer, is the club’s newsletter
editor. He wrote the section on the
unmanned planetary mission.
• Louis Mazza, a longtime space
advocate and historian. Mr. Mazza
served as chair of the editing
committee formed to update the
2004 edition of this pamphlet and
also was the primary writer for the
space history section.
• Kenneth Murphy, president of the
National Space Society of North
Texas, provided a thorough review
of the entire pamphlet for the 2013
revised edition.
• Terry O’Hanlon, an electrical
technician for Raytheon and a space
advocacy writer, focused his energies
on the chapter called “Careers in
Space Exploration.”
• Abigail Plemmons, a space
scientist, contributed to the chapter
called “The Way Things Work.”
• Mark Plemmons, a physicist in the
semiconductor business, contributed
to the chapter called “The Way
Things Work.”
• John Strickland Jr., senior analyst
III for the Texas Department of
Transportation (Information Systems
Division). He wrote the sections
about space habitats on the moon
and Mars and also contributed to the
section on why we explore space.


SPACE EXPLORATION 99
.Space Exploration Resources
Scouting America also thanks Vince
Huegele, education committee chairman
of the National Association of Rocketry,
for his input on the “Model Rocketry”
chapter. We appreciate Chris Martin,
associate professor of physics at Oberlin
College, Oberlin, Ohio, for his thorough
review of the pamphlet.
Scouting America is grateful to the men
and women serving on the National
Merit Badge Subcommittee for the
improvements made in updating this
pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration Credits
Johns Hopkins University Applied
Physics Laboratory/Southwest
Research Institute (JHUAPL/SwRI)—
page 6
Jonathan N. Harris, Space Debris Inc.,
space-debris.com, courtesy—page 15
Bill Ingalls—page 4
Louis Mazza, courtesy—page 40
(both pixelated images)
NASA/Scott Andrews—page 100
NASA, courtesy—cover (International
Space Station; lunar rover); pages 5,
19, 20, 21 (Aldrin), 32, 38, 42, 44,
48, 49, 54, 55 (all), 56, 57, 58, 60,
64, 65, 67–70, 71 (astronaut), 74,
75, 77, 86, 89, 90, 92, and 94
NASA/JPL-Caltech/MSSS, courtesy—
page 52 (Perseverance)
NASA/JPL-Caltech/ASU/MSSS,
courtesy—page 53 (Ingenuity)
NASA/Nikolai Budarin, flight engineer,
International Space Station
Expedition Six, courtesy—page 73
NASA/Sandra Joseph and Rafael
Hernandez, courtesy—cover
(rocket launch)
NASA/Robert Markowitz and Mark
Sowa, courtesy—page 18
NASA/David R. Scott, courtesy—page 8
NASA, courtesy; artwork by Pat
Rawlings—page 79
NASA/Goddard/Arizona State
University, courtesy—page 46
NASA/Johns Hopkins University
Applied Physics Laboratory/
Carnegie Institution of Washington,
courtesy—page 47
NASA/JPL-Caltech/MSSS, courtesy—
page 51
NASA/SDO/AIA, courtesy—page 59
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of
or are protected by Scouting America.
John McDearmon—all illustrations on
pages 10, 13, 31, 39, and 71
Brian Payne—pages 22, 24, 25, and 26


