SPACE
EXPLOR ATION

STEM-Based

BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES

SPACE
EXPLOR ATION

“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”

Space Exploration
1. Tell the purpose of space exploration and include the following:
(a) Historical reasons
(b) Immediate goals in terms of specific knowledge
(c) Benefits related to Earth resources, technology, and new products
(d) International relations and cooperation
2. Design a collector’s card, with a picture on the front and information on the
back, about your favorite space pioneer. Share your card and discuss four
other space pioneers with your counselor.
3. Build, launch, and recover a model rocket.* Make a second launch to accomplish a specific objective. (Rocket must be built to meet the safety code of the
National Association of Rocketry. See the “Model Rocketry” chapter of the
Space Exploration merit badge pamphlet.) Identify and explain the following
rocket parts.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)

Body tube
Engine mount
Fins
Igniter
Launch lug
Nose cone
Payload
Recovery system
Rocket engine

4. Discuss and demonstrate each of the following:
(a) The law of action-reaction
(b) How rocket engines work
(c) How satellites stay in orbit
(d) How satellite pictures of Earth and pictures of other planets are made
and transmitted
5. Do TWO of the following:
(a) Discuss with your counselor a robotic space exploration mission and a
historic crewed mission. Tell about each mission’s major discoveries, its
importance, and what was learned from it about the planets, moons, or
regions of space explored.

*If local laws prohibit launching model rockets, do the following activity: Make a model of a NASA rocket. Explain the
functions of the parts. Give the history of the rocket.

(b) Using magazine photographs, news clippings, and electronic articles (such
as from the internet), make a scrapbook about a current planetary mission.
(c) Design a robotic mission to another planet, moon, comet, or asteroid that
will return samples of its surface to Earth. Name the planet, moon, comet, or
asteroid your spacecraft will visit. Show how your design will cope with the
conditions of the environments of the planet, moon, comet, or asteroid.
6. Describe the purpose, operation, and components of ONE of the following:
(a) Space shuttle or any other crewed orbital vehicle, whether governmentowned (U.S. or foreign) or commercial
(b) International Space Station
7. Design an inhabited base located within our solar system, such as Titan,
asteroids, or other locations that humans might want to explore in person.
Make drawings or a model of your base. In your design, consider and plan for
the following:
(a) Source of energy
(b) How it will be constructed
(c) Life-support system
(d) Purpose and function
8. Discuss with your counselor two possible careers in space exploration that
interest you. Find out the qualifications, education, and preparation required
and discuss the major responsibilities of those positions.

Space Exploration Resources.

Space Exploration Resources
Information about space exploration
changes constantly. Each new mission
makes discoveries and shows that
some of our old ideas were incorrect.
When you look up information about
space and humankind’s efforts to explore
it, always try to find a recently published
book or a dependable website.

Scouting Literature
Astronomy, Aviation, Chemistry, Digital
Technology, Electricity, Electronics,
Engineering, Geology, Inventing,
Nuclear Science, Photography,
Programming, Radio, and Robotics merit
badge pamphlets
Visit the Boy Scouts of America’s
official retail website at http://
www.scoutstuff.org for a complete
listing of all merit badge pamphlets
and other helpful Scouting materials and supplies.

Dyson, Marianne J. Home on the Moon:
Living on a Space Frontier. National
Geographic, 2003.
———. Space Station Science: Life in Free
Fall. Windward Publishing, 2004.
Engelhardt, Wolfgang. The
International Space Station: A
Journey Into Space. Tessloff/BSV
Publishing USA, 1998.
Furniss, Tim. The Atlas of Space
Exploration. Friedman, 2002.
Lee, Wayne. To Rise From Earth:
An Easy-to-Understand Guide
to Spaceflight, 2nd ed. Checkmark
Books, 2000.
Mullane, R. Mike. Do Your Ears Pop in
Space? And 500 Other Surprising
Questions About Space Travel. John
Wiley & Sons, 1997.

Books

Reich, Tony, editor. Space Shuttle:
The First 20 Years—the Astronauts’
Experiences in Their Own Words. DK
Publishing, 2002.

Chaikin, Andrew, and James A. Lovell.
Space. Carlton, 2009.

Sagan, Carl, and Carol Sagan. Pale Blue
Dot. Random House, 1997.

Dethloff, Henry C., and Ronald A.
Schorn. Voyager’s Grand Tour: To
the Outer Planets and Beyond.
Konecky & Konecky, 2009.

Voigt, Gregory, and Alwyn T. Cohall.
Space Exploration Projects for Young
Scientists. Scholastic, 1995.

92

SPACE EXPLORATION

.Space Exploration Resources

Organizations and Websites
American Institute of Aeronautics
and Astronautics
Telephone: 800-639-2422
Website: http://www.aiaa.org
European Space Agency
Website: http://www.esa.int
“Europe’s gateway to space” has 19
member countries, including France,
Germany, and the United Kingdom.
Galileo Legacy Site
Website: http://solarsystem.nasa.gov/
galileo
Goddard Space Flight Center
Website: http://www.nasa.gov/centers/
goddard
The center is “home to the nation’s
largest organization of combined scientists, engineers, and technologists that
build spacecraft, instruments, and new
technology to study Earth, the Sun, our
solar system, and the universe.”
NASA Image Galleries
Website: https://www.nasa.gov/
multimedia/imagegallery/
The NASA image galleries boast a collection of more than a thousand images
“of significant historical interest.”
Jet Propulsion Laboratory
4800 Oak Grove Drive
Pasadena, CA 91109
Telephone: 818-354-4321
Website: http://www.jpl.nasa.gov
The JPL is considered NASA’s leading
“center for robotic exploration of the
solar system.”

Johnson Space Center
Space Center Houston
1601 NASA Parkway
Houston, TX 77058
Telephone: 281-244-2100
JSC website: http://www.nasa.gov/
centers/johnson/home/index.html
SCH website: http://www.spacecenter.org
Kennedy Space Center
Telephone: 321-867-5000
Website: http://www.nasa.gov/centers/
kennedy/home/index.html
Marshall Space Flight Center
Website: http://www.nasa.gov/centers/
marshall/home/index.html
National Aeronautics and Space
Administration
Telephone: 202-358-0001
Website: http://www.nasa.gov
NASA’s website has a bounty of information about space exploration for
students of all ages.
Opportunities at NASA:
http://nasajobs.nasa.gov
Astronaut Selection Program:
http://astronauts.nasa.gov
SkyWatch applet to track satellite sightings including the International Space
Station: https://spotthestation.nasa.
gov/sightings/
Spinoffs: http://spinoff.nasa.gov
National Association of Rocketry
Toll-free telephone: 800-262-4872
Website: http://www.nar.org
The world’s oldest and largest sport
rocketry organization. Visit the website
to find the club nearest you.
National Space Society
Telephone: 202-429-1600
Website: http://www.nss.org
SPACE EXPLORATION

93

Space Exploration Resources.

Planetary Society
Telephone: 626-793-5100
Website: http://www.planetary.org
Smithsonian National Air and
Space Museum
Independence Avenue at Sixth Street, SW
Washington, DC 20560
Telephone: 202-633-1000
Website: http://airandspace.si.edu
Technology Student Association
Toll-free telephone: 888-860-9010
Website: http://www.tsaweb.org
TSA provides programs for middle
and high school students interested
in the technology.

Acknowledgments
The Boy Scouts of America thanks
the National Space Society of North
Texas and the Austin (Texas) Space
Frontier Society for their hard work
and diligence in updating the Space
Exploration merit badge pamphlet.
The NSS is a nonprofit, international,
educational organization dedicated
to the creation of a free spacefaring
civilization. We are especially grateful
to the following individuals for their
involvement with this pamphlet.
• Louis Mazza, a longtime space
advocate and historian. Mr. Mazza
served as chair of the editing
committee formed to update the
2004 edition of this pamphlet and
also was the primary writer for the
space history section.
• Tracy Benninger, physicist and
graduate of the University of Texas at
Dallas in space science. She contributed to the chapter called “The Way
Things Work.”
94

SPACE EXPLORATION

• Carol Johnson, physicist, space
advocate, and aerospace systems
engineer. She wrote the sections
about the space shuttle and the ISS,
and contributed to the overall editing
and reviewing of the manuscript.
• Curtis Kling, a software systems
engineer, is the club’s newsletter
editor. He wrote the section on the
unmanned planetary mission.
• Kenneth Murphy, president of the
National Space Society of North
Texas, provided a thorough review
of the entire pamphlet for the 2013
revised edition.
• Terry O’Hanlon, an electrical
technician for Raytheon and a space
advocacy writer, focused his energies
on the chapter called “Careers in
Space Exploration.”
• Abigail Plemmons, a space scientist, contributed to the chapter called
“The Way Things Work.”
• Mark Plemmons, a physicist in the
semiconductor business, contributed
to the chapter called “The Way
Things Work.”
• John Strickland Jr., senior analyst III for the Texas Department of
Transportation (Information Systems
Division). He wrote the sections
about space habitats on the Moon
and Mars and also contributed to the
section on why we explore space.

