BIRD STUDY

STEM-Based

BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES

BIRD STUDY

“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”

Bird Study
1. Explain the need for bird study and why birds are useful indicators of the
quality of the environment. Describe how birds are part of the ecosystem.
2. Show that you are familiar with the terms used to describe birds by sketching
or tracing a perched bird and then labeling 15 different parts of the bird.
Sketch or trace an extended wing and label six types of wing feathers.
3. Demonstrate that you know how to properly use and care for binoculars, a
spotting scope, or a monocular.
(a) Explain what the specification numbers mean on binoculars, a spotting
scope, or a monocular.
(b) Show how to adjust the eyepiece and how to focus for proper viewing.
(c) Show how to properly care for and clean the lenses.
(d) Describe when and where each type of viewing device would be
most effective.
4. Demonstrate that you know how to use a bird field guide. Show your counselor
that you are able to understand a range map by locating in the book and
pointing out the wintering range, the breeding range, and/or the year-round
range of one species of each of the following types of birds:
56

(a) Seabird
(b) Plover
(c) Falcon or hawk
(d) Warbler or vireo
(e) Heron or egret
(f) Sparrow
(g) Nonnative bird (introduced to North America from a foreign country
since 1800)
5. Observe and be able to identify at least 20 species of wild birds. Prepare a
field notebook, making a separate entry for each species, and record the
following information from your field observations and other references.
(a) Note the date and time.
(b) Note the location and habitat.
(c) Describe the bird’s main feeding habitat and list two types of food that the
bird is likely to eat.
(d) Note whether the bird is a migrant or a summer, winter, or year-round
resident of your area.
6. Describe to your counselor how certain orders of birds are uniquely adapted
to a specific habitat. In your description, include characteristics such as the
size and shape of the following:
(a) Beak
(b) Body
(c) Leg and foot
(d) Feathers/plumage
7. Explain the function of a bird’s song. Be able to identify five of the 20 species
in your field notebook by song or call alone. For each of these five species, enter
a description of the song or call, and note the behavior of the bird making the
sound. Note why you think the bird was making the call or song that you heard.
8. Do ONE of the following:
(a) Go on a field trip with a local club or with others who are knowledgeable
about birds in your area.
(1) Keep a list or fill out a checklist of all the birds your group observed
during the field trip.
(2) Tell your counselor which birds your group saw and why some species
were common and some were present in small numbers.
(3) Tell your counselor what makes the area you visited good for
finding birds.
(b) By using a public library, the internet, or contacting the National Audubon
Society, find the name and location of the Christmas Bird Count nearest your
home and obtain the results of a recent count.
57

(1) Explain what kinds of information are collected during the annual event.
(2) Tell your counselor which species are most common, and explain why
these birds are abundant.
(3) Tell your counselor which species are uncommon, and explain why
these were present in small numbers. If the number of birds of these
species is decreasing, explain why, and what, if anything, could be done
to reverse their decline.
9. Do ONE of the following. For the option you choose, describe what birds you
hope to attract, and why.
(a) Build a bird feeder and put it in an appropriate place in your yard or
another location.
(b) Build a birdbath and put it in an appropriate place.
(c) Build a backyard sanctuary for birds by planting trees and shrubs for food
and cover.
10. Do the following:
(a) Explain the differences between extinct, endangered, and threatened.
(b) Identify a bird species that is on the endangered or threatened list. Explain
what caused their decline. Discuss with your counselor what can be done to
reverse this trend and what can be done to help remove the species from the
endangered or threatened list.
11. Identify three career opportunities connected to the study of birds. Pick one
and find out the education, training, and experience required for this profession. Discuss with your counselor if this profession might interest you.

58

Bird Study Resources.

Bird Study Resources
Scouting Literature
Eastern Backyard Birds pocket guide;
Western Backyard Birds pocket guide;
Fieldbook; Environmental Science, Fish
and Wildlife Management, Forestry,
Gardening, Landscape Architecture,
Mammal Study, Nature, Pets,
Photography, Reptile and Amphibian
Study, Soil and Water Conservation,
Sustainability, and Woodwork merit
badge pamphlets
Visit the Boy Scouts of America’s
official retail website at http://
www.scoutstuff.org for a complete
listing of all merit badge pamphlets
and other helpful Scouting materials and supplies.

Field Guides
Brinkley, Edward S. National Wildlife
Federation Field Guide to Birds of
North America. Sterling, 2007.
Dunn, Jon L., and Jonathan Alderfer.
Field Guide to the Birds of
North America, 6th ed. National
Geographic Society, 2011.
Griggs, Jack, ed. All the Birds of
North America: American Bird
Conservancy’s Field Guide. Collins
Reference, 2002.

92

Kaufman, Kenn. Kaufman Field Guide
to Advanced Birding. Houghton
Mifflin Harcourt, 2011.
———. Kaufman Field Guide to Birds
of North America. Houghton Mifflin
Harcourt, 2005.
Peterson, Roger Tory. Peterson Field
Guide to Birds of Eastern and
Central North America, 6th ed.
Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2010.
——— Peterson Field Guide to Birds
of Western North America, 4th ed.
Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2010.
———. Peterson First Guide to Birds of
North America, 2nd ed. Houghton
Mifflin Harcourt, 1998.
Robbins, Chandler, Bertel Bruun,
Herbert Zim, and Jonathan Latimer.
Birds of North America. St. Martin’s
Press, 2001.
Sibley, David Allen. The Sibley Guide
to Birds, 2nd ed. Knopf, 2014.
Stokes, Donald, and Lillian Stokes. The
New Stokes Field Guide to Birds:
Eastern Region. Little, Brown and
Co., 2013.
———. The New Stokes Field Guide to
Birds: Western Region. Little, Brown
and Co., 2013.
Thompson III, Bill. The Young Birder’s
Guide to Birds of North America.
Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2012.

BIRD STUDY

.Bird Study Resources

Other Books About Birds

Other Media

Able, Kenneth, editor. Gatherings of
Angels: Migrating Birds and Their
Ecology. Comstock Publishing, 2003.

Bird Brain 7.1 for Mac. Ideaform. Listing
and record-keeping software.
Download.

Choate, Ernest, and R.A. Paynter Jr.
The Dictionary of American Bird
Names. Harvard Common
Press, 1985.

Birder’s Diary. Jones Technologies.
Software for tracking bird sightings.
Download.

Dennis, John. A Complete Guide to
Bird Feeding. Castle Books, 2002.
Ehrlich, Paul, David Dobkin, and Darryl
Wheye. The Birder’s Handbook.
Fireside, 1988.
Elbroch, Mark. Bird Tracks and Sign:
A Guide to North American Species.
Stackpole Books, 2001.
Greenberg, Russell, and Jamie Reaser.
Bring Back the Birds. Stackpole
Books, 1995.
Holloway, Joel E. Dictionary of Birds
of the United States: Scientific and
Common Names. Timber Press,
2009.
Hoose, Phillip. Moonbird: A Year on the
Wind with the Great Survivor B95.
Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2012.
Kaufman, Ken. Lives of North American
Birds. Houghton Mifflin
Harcourt, 2001.

Birds of North America. Thayer Birding
Software, 2014. Photographs and
songs of all North American birds,
state checklists, bird club listings,
electronic version of The Birder’s
Handbook, and more. Download/
USB flash drive.
Cornell Laboratory of Ornithology. The
Cornell Guide to Bird Sounds. 2014.
Download/USB flash drive.
Dunn, Jon, Sheri Williamson, and John
Vanderpoel. Hummingbirds of North
America. 2003. 180 minutes. DVD.
iBird Pro Guide to Birds. App for iOS.
Male, Michael, and Judy Fieth. Watching
Sparrows. 2010. 75 minutes. DVD.
———. Watching Warblers. 2003. 60
minutes. DVD.
———. Watching Warblers West. 2009.
60 minutes. DVD.

Leahy, Christopher. The Birdwatcher’s
Companion to North American
Birdlife. Princeton University
Press, 2006.

National Geographic Birds: Field Guide
to North America. App for iOS.

Sibley, David Allen, illustrator. The
Sibley Guide to Bird Life and
Behavior. Knopf, 2009.

Peterson, Roger Tory. Field Guide to Bird
Songs: Eastern/Central North
America. 2002. Audio CD.

———. Sibley’s Birding Basics.
Knopf, 2002.
Thompson III, Bill. Bird Watching for
Dummies. IDG Books, 1997.

Peterson Field Guide to Birds of North
America. App for iOS and Android.

———. Field Guide to Western Bird
Songs. 1999. Audio CD.

BIRD STUDY

93

Bird Study Resources.

Porter, Diane. How to Start Watching
Birds. 2006. 79 minutes. DVD.

eBird
Website: http://ebird.org

Stokes, Donald. The Stokes Field Guide
to Bird Songs: Eastern Region. 2010.
Audio CD.

The Great Backyard Bird Count
Website: http://www.birdsource.org

———. The Stokes Field Guide to Bird
Songs: Western Region. 2010. Audio
CD.
The Audubon Bird Guide App. iOS and
Android.
The Sibley eGuide to Birds App. iOS and
Android.
Walton, Richard, and Greg Dodge.
Shorebirds: A Guide to Shorebirds of
Eastern North America. 2005. 60
minutes. DVD.
Walton, Richard, and Robert Lawson.
Birding by Ear: Eastern/Central. 2002.
Audio CD.
———. Birding by Ear: Western. 1999.
Audio CD.

Organizations and Websites
American Bird Conservancy
Toll-free telephone: 888-247-3624
Website: http://www.abcbirds.org
American Birding Association
Toll-free telephone: 800-850-2473
Website: http://www.aba.org
Cornell Laboratory of Ornithology
Website: http://www.birds.cornell.edu

94

BIRD STUDY

Hawk Migration Association of
North America
Website: http://www.hmana.org
Journey North
Website: http://www.learner.org/jnorth
National Audubon Society
Toll-free telephone: 844-428-3826
Website: http://www.audubon.org
North American Bluebird Society
Telephone: 508-238-3087
Website: http://nabluebirdsociety.org
Partners in Flight
Website: http://www.partnersinflight.org
Patuxent Wildlife Research Center
U.S. Geological Survey
Toll-free telephone: 888-275-8747
Website: http://www.pwrc.usgs.gov
Purple Martin
Conservation Association
Telephone: 814-833-7656
Website: http://www.purplemartin.org
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
Website: http://www.fws.gov

