CITIZENSHIP
IN THE NATION


CITIZENSHIP IN
THE NATION
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Citizenship-In-The-Nation or
check Scoutbook for the latest requirements.
35871
ISBN 978-0-8395-3248-4
©2025 Scouting America
2025 Printing
FPO


CITIZENSHIP IN THE NATION 3





CITIZENSHIP IN THE NATION 5
Contents
What the Fighting Was All About . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
The Foundation of American Democracy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Branches of Government . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
Parties, Splinters, and Special Interests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
National Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
National Treasures and Other Government Structures . . . . . . 43
Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .46





CITIZENSHIP IN THE NATION 7
.What the Fighting Was All About
What the Fighting
Was All About
America certainly has changed since immigrants first settled
here. Yet the government the colonists established in the late
1700s has remained intact because people believed in the basic
concepts of American democracy:
• The fundamental value and dignity of every individual
• The right to equality before the law, without regard to the
individual’s social status
• The belief in majority rule and minority rights
• The need for compromise
• The understanding that there are limitations to the federal
government’s powers; the states and the people have
more authority
As long as citizens continue to value these concepts, our
government will exist. But if citizens become complacent and
take their rights and freedoms for granted, then our rights will
be endangered.
Under other forms of government, people are told how to
live and what to believe. In our representative republic, U.S.
citizens enjoy freedom and govern themselves through elected
representatives. But to experience the full expression of individ-
ual freedom, all citizens must govern themselves so that their
own behavior doesn’t interfere with the freedoms of others.
“…I know not what course others may take;
but as for me, give me liberty or give me death!”
—From American statesman and orator Patrick
Henry’s call to arms speech, March 23, 1775


8 CITIZENSHIP IN THE NATION
What the Fighting Was All About.
Active citizens are aware of and grateful for their liberties
and rights. They participate in their governments by voting in
elections, attending public hearings, serving on juries, and
paying taxes. They protect freedom, help defend our country,
and stand up for individual rights on behalf of all U.S. citizens.
Like the people who fought for our independence, good
citizens today are patriots.
As you fulfill the requirements for this merit badge, think
about what you can do for your country.
A democracy is a form of government in which the
people have the power to govern themselves. The
citizens exercise their power directly or indirectly
through representatives chosen in free elections.
The majority rules.
The Founding Fathers established a republic—
with an elected president (instead of a monarch) as
head of state and freely elected representatives who
are responsible to the citizens and govern according
to law. The Democratic and Republican political
parties borrow their names from these forms of
government, and both parties support democracy and
the republican form of representative government.





“And so, my fellow Americans:
Ask not what your country can do
for you—ask what you can do for
your country.”
—From President John F. Kennedy’s
inaugural address, January 20, 1961


CITIZENSHIP IN THE NATION 11
.The Foundation of American Democracy
The Foundation of
American Democracy
Most free colonists brought with them to America the expecta-
tion that they would have at least as many rights as they had
in the old country. For centuries in England, British subjects—
first the privileged classes and then all people—had been pro-
tected from the arbitrary (random) acts of the monarch.
In 1215, English barons, tired of the Crown’s heavy-handed
tactics, forced King John to sign the Magna Carta to establish
that the power of the monarchy was not absolute. It set forth
certain basic rights such as trial by jury and due process of
law (acted out fairly and according to established rules), and
protected people from the monarch taking any life, liberty, or
property at will.
In the 1600s, the English Parliament—a representative
legislative body—insisted that the reigning monarchs sign the
Petition of Right and the English Bill of Rights. These documents
prevented further abuses by limiting the powers of the king
and queen. For example, they could no longer:
• Imprison or punish anyone except by the legal judgment of
the individual’s peers, or by law.
• Impose martial law, or have a standing army during peace-
time without the consent of Parliament.
• Demand that homeowners allow the king’s troops in their
home without the owners’ permission.
A monarchy is a form of government in which a
hereditary ruler governs for life. In the past, the
monarch claimed absolute authority. Today, a
monarch reigns but often does not rule.


12 CITIZENSHIP IN THE NATION
The Foundation of American Democracy.
• Make individuals pay a tax without the common consent
of Parliament.
• Suspend or execute laws without the consent of Parliament.
• Prosecute anyone for petitioning or making a formal written
request to the king.
Although the new American colonists owed allegiance to
the British monarch, they believed that a government across the
Atlantic Ocean should not meddle in their local affairs. Property
owners voted directly in town hall meetings; they elected
representatives to their assemblies or gatherings to pass laws
and levy taxes. No wonder they bristled when King George III
tried to tighten his control over the 13 colonies. He imposed new
taxes, restricted trade, and insisted that British troops stationed in
the colonies should be allowed to stay in private homes.
The colonists resisted the British by refusing to purchase
English products, by refusing to pay certain taxes, and by
throwing tea overboard in Boston Harbor. In response, King
George III further restricted the colonists’ rights, enacting what
were called the “Intolerable Acts.” The colonists had to make
a choice: Submit to the king’s authority as British subjects—or
revolt. Colonists organized into the First Continental Congress,
a convention of delegates to resist the “Intolerable Acts.”
Declaration of Independence
Representatives from the 13 colonies formed the Second
Continental Congress and asked statesmen Thomas Jefferson,
John Adams, Benjamin Franklin, Robert R. Livingston, and
Roger Sherman to write a statement of independence. Led by
Jefferson, the committee drew on popular political and social
Networking Before Email
Fearing that the British government had a plan to
abolish guaranteed liberties, Samuel Adams organized
the Boston Committee of Correspondence to link
all the towns in Massachusetts. Post riders (mail
carriers on horseback) delivered intelligence reports
about British acts affecting the colonies. Soon this
intercolonial information network helped unify many
colonists in opposition to British policies.


CITIZENSHIP IN THE NATION 13
.The Foundation of American Democracy
Thomas Jefferson
was only 33 years
old when he
drafted the
Declaration
of Independence.
theories, particularly the ideas of English philosopher John
Locke and French philosopher Jean Jacques Rousseau. In The
Social Contract, Rousseau stated that people are basically good,
and that government should be run according to the will of
the majority. Locke’s Two Treatises of Government explained
that people are born with natural rights (life, liberty, property)
and they form “states” or governments to protect those rights.
In Jefferson’s draft, the declaration asserted the right of
the people to “dissolve the political bands that have connected
them with another” and choose their own government. After
much argument and compromise, the Second Continental
Congress adopted the final version of the Declaration of
Independence on July 4, 1776.
The Declaration of Independence is the United States of
America’s birth certificate. But the truths described actually
apply to all people, not just Americans. This document had
a profound impact on the French Revolution and revolts in
South America, where countries fought to win their indepen-
dence from Spain. Today, the declaration continues to inspire
the fight for freedom around the world.
Constitution
People depend on government to assure freedom and order,
but recognize it as a possible source of harm and oppression.
The Founding Fathers wanted to establish a strong central
authority but limit its ability to abuse power. Their first attempt
at forming a government was a confederation of states. The
Articles of Confederation granted independence to each state
and gave little authority to the central government.
The Declaration of Independence has five main parts:
1. The preamble, which explains why the declaration was written
2. A series of “self-evident” truths about the rights of individuals and
the principles of government to which the people were committed
3. A list of 27 specific complaints against King George III
4. A summary of the efforts the colonists made to avoid a break
with England
5. A declaration that the 13 colonies are “free and independent” states,
completely separate from Great Britain


14 CITIZENSHIP IN THE NATION
The Foundation of American Democracy.
Under this confederation, each state minted its own
money and regulated its own trade. This caused confusion and
an economic slump in the United States. In 1786, thousands
of farmers in western Massachusetts, led by Daniel Shays,
attempted to prevent the courts from foreclosing mortgages on
their farms. The central government could not deal with the
uprising and the country’s economic problems, so the states
called for a convention to review the Articles of Confederation.
Delegates at the convention recognized the weaknesses in
the document:
• Each state had only one vote, regardless of its size
and population.
• Congress had no power to collect taxes and duties.
• Congress had no power to regulate interstate and
foreign commerce.
• There were no provisions for a national court system.
• An amendment could be ratified (approved) only with
the consent of all states.
• A 9/13 majority was required to enact a law.
• The Articles were at best “a firm league of friendship”
among the states.
A majority of the representatives at the convention decided
that the problems of the republic could be addressed only by
forming a new government and writing a new constitution. The
Federalists, led by James Madison and Alexander Hamilton,
favored a strong central government and supported ratification
of a constitution.
The Anti-Federalists, led by Patrick Henry and John
Hancock, objected to ratification mainly because they feared
the central government would become too powerful, and the
constitution did not include a bill of rights.
After much compromise and debate, a U.S. Constitution
was ratified based on the following principles.
Popular sovereignty. The people have supreme power.
They establish the government, which is subject to the will
of the people.
Limited government. The government may do only what the
people have empowered it to do.


CITIZENSHIP IN THE NATION 15
.The Foundation of American Democracy
Separation of powers. The responsibilities of the
government are divided among the executive, legislative,
and judicial branches.
Checks and balances. Each branch of government has the
authority and responsibility to check (restrain) the power of
the other two branches. This balance prevents the misuse of
power by any one branch.
Judicial review. Since 1803 it has been established that the
federal courts have the power to review acts of the executive
and legislative branches. If the court decides that an act or law
violates a provision of the Constitution, it can nullify (cancel)
the act.
Federalism. Power is shared between national and local
governments. This system ensures that the national government
is powerful enough to be effective, but that some powers (or
functions) are reserved to the states and the citizens themselves.
Preamble to the Constitution
The preamble is the introduction to the
Constitution. Only one sentence long, the
preamble states the six reasons for creat-
ing the document that embodies the basic
principles and laws of the United States.
The preamble clearly affirms that the
people—not the states, not the central
government—have the sovereign (supreme
and absolute) authority to ordain (establish)
the Constitution as the supreme law of the
land. The people’s intention is to:
• Strengthen the country by unifying
the states.
• Enact and apply laws that treat all
citizens reasonably, fairly, and impartially.
• Maintain order to ensure peace on home soil.
• Make sure that the country is prepared to defend itself from
its enemies.
• Provide services and make efforts to improve the quality of
life for all citizens.
• Preserve and protect the rights and liberties of Americans,
and to pass those freedoms on to future generations.
“W e the People of the
United States, in
Order to form a more perfect Union,
establish Justice, insure domestic
Tranquility, provide for the common
defense, promote the general Welfare,
and secure the Blessings of Liberty to
ourselves and our Posterity, do ordain
and establish this Constitution for the
United States of America.”


16 CITIZENSHIP IN THE NATION
The Foundation of American Democracy.
In his 1863
Gettysburg
Address,
President
Abraham Lincoln
defined American
democracy as
“government of
the people, by
the people, for
the people.”
Articles
The seven Articles of the Constitution lay the foundation for
the United States’ system of government. They establish three
separate and distinct branches of government; define the
relationships of the states between themselves and with the
federal government; describe the procedures for amendment;
state that the Constitution is the “supreme law of the land”;
and explain how the Constitution will be ratified.
Article I establishes the Congress—the legislative, or lawmak-
ing, branch of government that consists of the Senate and the
House of Representatives. This article explains the powers and
limits of the legislature, the qualifications for office, and the
methods of electing representatives. It also places some restric-
tions on state governments.
Article II establishes the executive branch of government
and the offices of the president and vice president. This article
explains the powers, duties, and limits of the president and
the qualifications and methods of electing the president and
vice president.
Electoral College
Have you ever seen a college sweatshirt with the name “Electoral
College” on it? Probably not. That’s because it’s not an actual college,
but instead is the name of the group of people who elect the president.
The number of these electors in each state is determined by and equal
to its number of senators and members of Congress. Each political
party appoints that number of electors to cast all their votes for the
party’s candidate. It’s a winner-takes-all system—that means that when
a candidate wins a state by even the slightest margin, that person gets
all the electoral votes for that state.
The Founding Fathers’ original intent for the Electoral College was
to allow each state a delegation of informed and knowledgeable people
who would select the president based on merit and without regard to
political party. Many people believe the Electoral College is a flawed
system because it does not exactly reflect the popular vote. In four
presidential elections, presidents who did not receive a majority of the
popular vote got elected because they were able to get a majority of
the electoral votes.


CITIZENSHIP IN THE NATION 17
.The Foundation of American Democracy
Article III establishes the judicial branch of government and
the Supreme Court. This article also gives Congress the power
to establish other “inferior” courts. The article explains the
judicial power of federal courts.
Article IV, adopted almost exactly from the Articles of
Confederation, describes the relationships the states must
have with one another, the relationships between the federal
government and the state governments, and the procedure
for adding states and territories.
Article V details the procedures for amending, or making formal
changes to, the Constitution.
Article VI states that the Constitution and all subsequent federal
laws are the supreme law of the land. This article requires all
state judges to follow the Constitution, even if state laws or
constitutions contradict it, and requires all legislative, judicial,
and executive officials of the federal and state governments to
swear under oath to support the Constitution.
Article VII explains how the Constitution shall be ratified, or
approved, by the states in order for it to be established.
Bill of Rights
The first 10 amendments to the Constitution are called the
Bill of Rights. These amendments, which guarantee individual
rights and freedoms, were added to the Constitution less than
three years after it became effective. James Madison drafted
the Bill of Rights, borrowing key points from the Magna Carta.
These amendments do not give us new liberties; they protect
the liberties we already have.
The First Amendment is perhaps the most well-known.
It protects freedom of religion, speech, and the press, and
grants citizens the rights to peaceably assemble and to petition
the government.
According to Article VII, only nine states had to
approve the Constitution for it to go into effect in
those states. On June 21, 1788, New Hampshire—
the ninth state—ratified the Constitution and made
it officially the law of the land. But several states
refused to ratify the document until Congress agreed
to add a list of basic rights held by the people. This
list became the Bill of Rights.


18 CITIZENSHIP IN THE NATION
The Foundation of American Democracy.
Unlike the First
Amendment,
which protects
your right to speak
out, the Fifth
Amendment
protects your
right to keep quiet
and not reveal
incriminating facts
against yourself.
The Second Amendment is one of the most controversial
of the 10 amendments. It asserts every state’s right to have a
“well-regulated militia” and the right of the people to have and
carry weapons.
The Third Amendment protects citizens from being
forced to take soldiers into their homes to feed and board
them. The exception to this is in wartime if Congress enacts
a law requiring that citizens do so.
The Fourth Amendment prohibits the unreasonable
search and seizure of people, their houses, papers, and private
property. In most cases, searches, seizures, and arrests require
a warrant issued by a judge.
The Fifth Amendment describes the rights of citizens in
criminal cases. A person may not stand trial for a serious
crime punishable by death or imprisonment unless a grand
jury decides there is enough evidence against the individual to
bring that person to trial. A citizen may not be tried twice for
the same offense (this is called double jeopardy), and may not
be forced to testify against himself or herself. This amendment
also states that no person shall be deprived of life, liberty, or
property without “due process of law,” or fair and legal proce-
dures. The last provision deals with “eminent domain,” or the
government’s power to take private property for public use. It
prevents the government from taking the property without pay-
ing the owner a fair price.
The Sixth Amendment guarantees the right to a fair trial.
A person charged with a crime must have a speedy and public
trial heard by an impartial jury. The defendant has the right to
be told of the charges against him or her, be confronted by the
accuser, be allowed to introduce witnesses for him or herself,
and have the benefit of legal counsel.
The Seventh Amendment guarantees the right to a trial
by jury in civil cases where the disputed amount exceeds $20.
Either party in the suit may ask for a jury trial.
Agree to Disagree
Supreme Court Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr.
(1902–32) urged people to think of free speech as
“the principle of free thought—not free thought for
those who agree with us but freedom for thought
that we hate.”


CITIZENSHIP IN THE NATION 19
.The Foundation of American Democracy
The Eighth Amendment prohibits courts from imposing
excessive bails and fines. It also forbids the use of “cruel and
unusual punishment.”
The Ninth Amendment makes clear that the rights men-
tioned in the first eight amendments include certain, but not
all, rights of the citizens. It states that the people retain any
rights not specifically listed in the Constitution.
The 10th Amendment asserts that the states or the
people retain those powers not delegated to the federal govern-
ment by the Constitution.
In all of world history, the Bill of Rights is one of the
greatest documents protecting individual rights. It has pro-
voked protest rallies, legal challenges, even riots, as Americans
interpret and defend their rights. Some of the most hotly
debated subjects include gun control, abortion rights, school
prayer, censorship, and the teaching of the theory of evolu-
tion. No matter where you stand on these issues, the First
Amendment guarantees that you can voice your opinion.
Does the Punishment Fit the Crime?
Americans debate every day about whether the death penalty is a cruel
and unusual punishment for a person convicted of murder. Some peo-
ple argue that paddling students for breaking school rules is cruel and
unusual. What do you think?
Changing the Constitution
Written words in the Constitution can be changed or added through
the formal amendment process described in Article V. An amendment
may be proposed in one of two ways: by a two-thirds vote in each
house of Congress; or by a national convention called by Congress
at the request of two-thirds of the state legislatures. The proposed
amendment may be ratified in one of two ways: by three-fourths of the
state legislatures; or by three-fourths of the states during conventions
called for that purpose.
In the informal amendment process, changes in the Constitution
take place over time without altering or adding to the written words.
These informal amendments develop as a result of congressional
legislation, presidential actions, Supreme Court decisions, activities
of political parties, and custom.


20 CITIZENSHIP IN THE NATION
The Foundation of American Democracy.
Amendments to the Constitution
The Constitution is a flexible document that adapts to the
changing needs of American society. Since the Bill of Rights
was adopted, the Constitution has been amended 17 times.
The 11th Amendment (1795) prohibits a citizen of one
state or a citizen of another country from suing another state
in federal court. However, a citizen may file suit in federal
court against state authorities for depriving that person of
constitutional rights.
The 12th Amendment (1804) requires members of the
Electoral College to cast two separate ballots: one for president
and one for vice president.
The 13th Amendment (1865) abolished slavery in the
United States and in territories under its jurisdiction.
The 14th Amendment (1868) declares that “all persons
born or naturalized in the United States” and under its author-
ity are citizens of the United States and in the state in which
they live. The intention of this amendment, known as the civil
rights amendment, was to give citizenship to former slaves.
The amendment also forbids states to pass and enforce laws
depriving people of their privileges as citizens. It prohibits
states from denying people equal protection of their laws or
from depriving a person of life, liberty, or property without
“due process of law.”
It’s a Tie
When the Founding Fathers wrote Article II of the
Constitution, they planned one election for both
president and vice president. Electors each had
two votes to cast for two people without specifying
the office. The person with the most votes became
president and the runner-up became vice president.
In the election of 1800, however, Thomas Jefferson
tied Aaron Burr. The House of Representatives, after
much argument, decided the outcome of the election
by casting more ballots for Jefferson.


CITIZENSHIP IN THE NATION 21
.The Foundation of American Democracy
The 15th Amendment (1870) prohibits the U.S. govern-
ment and the states from denying any citizen the right to
vote on account of race, color, or having been a slave. The
amendment also asserts that states must extend to the citizens
within their jurisdiction all the protections guaranteed in the
Bill of Rights.
The 16th Amendment (1913) grants Congress the right to
levy an income tax without regard to each state’s population.
The 17th Amendment (1913) gives the people of the
states the power to elect their senators. This amendment
repealed those parts of Article I relating to the election of U.S.
senators by state legislatures.
The 18th Amendment (1919), known as the prohibition
amendment, prohibits the manufacture, sale, and transporta-
tion of alcoholic beverages in the United States.
The 19th Amendment (1920), also known as the Susan
B. Anthony amendment, prohibits the U.S. government and the
states from denying any woman the right to vote.


22 CITIZENSHIP IN THE NATION
The Foundation of American Democracy.
“It was we, the
people; not we,
the white male
citizens; nor yet
we, the male
citizens; but we,
the whole people,
who formed
this Union.”
—From Susan B.
Anthony’s speech
defending a
woman’s right
to vote, 1873
The 20th Amendment (1933), often called the lame duck
amendment, changes the dates that newly elected presidents
and members of Congress take office, moving the inaugura-
tions closer to the date of the elections (January 20 for the
president, January 3 for Congress).
The 21st Amendment (1933) repealed the 18th
Amendment (prohibition amendment) in its entirety.
The 22nd Amendment (1951) limits a president’s term
of office to two terms. It also limits the term of office of a
president who has served more than two years of another’s
term to one elected term.
The 23rd Amendment (1961) grants residents of the
District of Columbia the right to vote in presidential elections.
The 24th Amendment (1964) prohibits the U.S. govern-
ment and states from denying citizens the right to vote in fed-
eral elections for “failure to pay any poll tax or other tax.”
The 25th Amendment (1967) establishes the order of
succession to the presidency if the president or vice president
leaves the office. It also provides for the vice president to suc-
ceed to the presidency if the president becomes disabled, and
it details how presidential disability is determined.
Lame Ducks
When the Constitution was written in 1787, travel
from one part of the country to another was slow
and difficult. For this reason, Article I and the 12th
Amendment allowed plenty of time for newly elected
officials to make their way from their home states to
the nation’s capital. However, those representatives
who were defeated or chose not to run for another
term had to serve four to 13 more months before
their successors were inaugurated. These officials
were called lame ducks because they worked without
power or prestige. But by 1933, with trains and cars
available, elected representatives could arrive at the
capital in a shorter period of time.


CITIZENSHIP IN THE NATION 23
.The Foundation of American Democracy
“Don’t interfere
with anything in
the Constitution.
That must be
maintained; for
it is the only
safeguard of
our liberties.”
—Abraham
Lincoln
The 26th Amendment (1971) grants the right to vote
to citizens 18 years of age and older.
The 27th Amendment (1992) bans midterm congressio-
nal pay raises.
The Constitution expands with each amendment, as if it
is breathing and growing with the people. This great document
has guided the United States through wars, racial strife, bigotry
and intolerance, and the unforeseen challenges of a diverse and
modern society. Ongoing, unresolved, and new issues continue
to shape the Constitution. Proposed amendments to balance
the budget, prohibit abortions, permit prayer in public schools,
set term limits for members of Congress, prohibit flag burning,
and eliminate the Electoral College will live or
die according to the wishes of the people.
Supreme Court Justice William J. Brennan
Jr. (1956–90) said: “The genius of the
Constitution rests not in any static meaning
it may have had in a world that is dead
and gone, but in the adaptability of its
great principles to cope with current
problems and present needs.”
Presidential Succession
The 25th Amendment was put to the test in 1973.
Vice President Spiro T. Agnew resigned after plead-
ing no contest to charges of tax fraud. So President
Richard M. Nixon appointed Gerald R. Ford, a con-
gressman from Michigan, to replace Agnew. Then,
just 10 months later, Nixon resigned because of
his role in the Watergate scandal. Vice President
Ford became president and appointed Nelson A.
Rockefeller, former governor of New York, to the
vice presidency.





CITIZENSHIP IN THE NATION 25
.Branches of Government
Branches of Government
The founders of the United States, concerned with the potential
abuse of authority, created a representative government that
divided the duties among three branches: legislative, executive,
and judicial. This separation of powers and system of checks
and balances prevented any one branch from becoming
too powerful.
Legislative
The Constitution established a bicameral (two-chamber) legis-
lature consisting of the Senate and the House of Representatives
so that one chamber might be a check on the other. The Senate
has 100 members; two senators are elected from each state. The
House of Representatives has 435 members; the number of
representatives from each state is based on the population of
the state according to the latest census. This plan, which was a
result of a compromise at the Constitutional Convention of 1787,
ensures that the states are represented in the Senate as coequal
members of the Union and in the House as democratically
proportional to their populations.
One Person, One Vote
The Constitution does not fix the number of members in the House
of Representatives, instead allowing Congress to determine the total.
As the population of the United States increased, so did the number
of House members. Congress worried that adding more members
would cripple the ability to do business in the House, so it passed the
Reapportionment Act of 1929 to limit the number to 435 members.
Every state is guaranteed at least one representative; the remaining
385 seats are reapportioned (redistributed) among the states after each
decennial census (taken every 10 years). Boundaries of congressional
districts are redrawn to keep the populations of voting districts equal.


26 CITIZENSHIP IN THE NATION
Branches of Government.
Senators are elected to six-year terms. Members of the
House are elected to two-year terms. Each term of Congress
(numbered consecutively) lasts two years with a new term
beginning, according to the 20th Amendment, at noon on the
third day of January of every odd-numbered year. Voters elect
senators in statewide elections and elect members of the House
from their congressional districts.
Executive
The president’s chief responsibility is to enforce and administer
the laws, but the office carries other responsibilities as well.
The Constitution gives the president the expressed powers to:
• Serve as commander-in-chief of the nation’s armed forces.
• Commission all military officers.
• Appoint the heads of executive departments.
• Appoint ambassadors, Supreme Court justices, and other
officials with the consent of the Senate.
• Appoint high-ranking officials to fill vacancies when the
Senate is in recess.
• Grant pardons and reprieves for federal crimes.
• Make treaties with the advice and consent of the Senate.
• Inform Congress from time to time about the state of
the Union.
If Congress
adjourns its
session within
10 days (excluding
Sundays) of
sending a bill to
the president,
and the president
keeps the bill
without signing it,
then the bill dies.
This is called a
pocket veto.
In addition to the power to pass laws, the Constitution
(Article I, Section 8) grants Congress the powers to
• Raise money to run the government.
• Regulate foreign and interstate commerce.
• Determine how aliens become U.S. citizens.
• Provide for and maintain the nation’s armed forces.
• Regulate weights and measures.
• Grant copyrights and patents.
• Establish post offices.
• Coin money.
• Declare war.
• Create the lower federal courts.


Committee Action
H.R. 1 is referred to a standing
committee. It goes to a sub-
committee for study, hearings,
revisions, and approval. It comes
back to the full committee for
more hearings and revisions.
It then moves to the Rules
Committee to set conditions for
debate and amendments.
Floor Action
H.R. 1 is debated, then passed
or defeated. If passed, H.R. 1
goes to the Senate.
Introduction
H.R. 1 is introduced in the House.
Introduction
S. 1 is introduced in the Senate.
Committee Action
S. 1 is referred to a standing
committee. It moves to a sub-
committee for study, hearings,
revisions, and approval. Then it
moves back to full committee for
more hearings and revisions.
Floor Action
S.1 is debated, then passed or
defeated. If passed, S. 1 goes to
the House.
Conference Committee
The Conference Committee resolves
differences between House and
Senate versions of the bill.
Congressional Approval
The House and Senate vote on final
passage. The approved bill is sent to
the president.
Presidential Action
The president signs, vetoes, or allows the bill to become law
without signing it. A vetoed bill returns to Congress. The veto
may be overridden by a two-thirds vote of each house.


28 CITIZENSHIP IN THE NATION
Branches of Government.
• Recommend necessary bills.
• Call either or both chambers of Congress into special
session, if necessary.
• Act as host to ambassadors and representatives of
other nations.
The president also has implied powers, including the
right to seek opinions of official advisers. The executive
departments have developed, by custom and tradition, into
an informal advisory body called the Cabinet, with each
department headed by a secretary (except the Department
of Justice, which is headed by the attorney general). Today,
there are 15 executive departments.
The executive branch includes independent agencies,
regulatory commissions, and other offices within the Executive
Office—including the National Security Council, the Council of
Economic Advisors, NASA, and the Office of Management
and Budget.
Implied powers
are rights that are
assumed but not
explicitly listed in
or granted under
the Constitution.
State 1789
Treasury 1789
Defense 1789
Justice 1789
Interior 1849
Agriculture 1889
Commerce 1903
Labor 1913
Health and Human Services 1953
Housing and Urban Development 1965
Transportation 1966
Energy 1977
Education 1979
Veterans Affairs 1988
Homeland Security 2002
Department Year Established


CITIZENSHIP IN THE NATION 29
.Branches of Government
Judicial
The judicial branch of the U.S. government interprets and
applies the laws. Although the Constitution names only the
Supreme Court, it authorizes Congress to establish and abolish
inferior, or lower, federal courts. All of these courts are called
guardians of the Constitution.
District Courts
The district court is the lowest level of the federal court system.
There are 94 courts at this level, and each state (as well as the
District of Columbia and Puerto Rico) has at least one district
court. Judges appointed by the president preside over these
courts and serve for life.
The district courts are the main trial courts in the federal
court system. These courts have original jurisdiction, or the
power to hear a case first—before any other court. The dis-
trict courts hear criminal and civil cases that involve federal
law. These are the only federal courts that regularly use grand
juries to indict defendants and petit juries to decide the guilt or
innocence of the accused.
Courts of Appeals
Congress created the courts of appeals in 1891 to relieve the
Supreme Court of the number of cases it heard on appeal
directly from the district courts. An appeal is a request for the
review or rehearing of a case. These courts also review the
decisions of federal regulatory agencies such as the Federal
Trade Commission.
The 94 district courts are organized into 13 judicial
circuits, including the District of Columbia, with one court
of appeals (appellate court) for each circuit. Each court of
appeals has from six to 28 circuit judges sitting on the court
as well as one assigned Supreme Court justice.
Except in
connection with
their checks
on the other
branches, the
three branches
of government
have distinct
orientations to
past, present,
and future: The
judicial branch
is primarily
concerned with
past actions,
the executive
branch with
present actions,
and the legislative
branch with
future actions.
A grand jury usually consists of 12 to 23 citizens
who meet in secret to investigate facts and hear
witnesses. This jury determines if the evidence
against a person charged with a crime is sufficient
to justify a trial. A petit jury is a trial jury made up of
12 (sometimes six) citizens. These jurors examine the
evidence and make the final decision about the facts
in a civil or criminal case.


30 CITIZENSHIP IN THE NATION
Branches of Government.
Supreme Court
The highest level of the federal court system is the Supreme
Court. This court is composed of the chief justice of the United
States and eight associate justices, all appointed by the presi-
dent, with the consent of the Senate, to preside for life. Because
the justices do not have to worry about being re-elected, they
are free to consider the law without the pressures of executive
control, public opinion, and political influence.
The Supreme Court hears three kinds of cases:
1. Cases in which the court has original jurisdiction, or that
involve a representative of another nation or a state as one
of the parties
2. Cases appealed from lower federal courts
3. Cases appealed from the highest appeals court in a state
Special Courts
Over the years, Congress has created two types of federal
courts: constitutional and special courts. Constitutional courts
include the courts described above as well as the U.S. Court
of International Trade. Special courts—often called legisla-
tive courts because Congress created them to help carry out
legislative power—hear a narrow range of cases. These courts
include the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Armed Forces; the
U.S. Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims; the U.S. Court of
Federal Claims; the U.S. Tax Court; territorial courts for the
Virgin Islands, Guam, and the Northern Marianas; and the
courts of the District of Columbia.
Before 1891,
people named
these courts the
circuit courts of
appeals because
the Supreme
Court justices
“rode circuit”
(traveled around
the judicial
district) to hear
appeals from the
lower courts.
Today, the courts
of appeals are
often still called
the circuit courts.
Most federal and state courts in the United States
may exercise judicial review, which is the important
power of deciding the constitutionality of an act
of government in any branch. The Supreme Court
has the final authority to interpret the meaning of
the Constitution and determine if the law is being
applied correctly and fairly. For that reason, the
Supreme Court is known as “the court of last resort.”


CITIZENSHIP IN THE NATION 31
.Branches of Government
The People: Partners and Watchdogs
Active citizens provide the most effective check, or restraint,
on government actions. The opportunities to get involved with
each branch range from support to management and even
opposition. Millions of civilians work directly for the govern-
ment. Others run for public office or campaign for candidates.
The best way to participate is to exercise your rights: Vote,
serve on juries, attend public hearings, pay attention to what
new bills are being considered by Congress, and tell your
elected officials how you want them to represent you.
Checks and Balances in the Federal Government
Congress creates lower courts and can
remove judges through impeachment. The Senate
approves or rejects any appointments of judges.
Courts can declare
acts of Congress to be
unconstitutional.
Legislative
Branch
Makes the law
Judicial
Branch
Interprets
the law
Judges are
appointed for life,
free from executive
control. Courts may
declare executive
actions to be
unconstitutional.
The
President
appoints
Supreme
Court justices
and other
federal judges.
Executive Branch
Carries out the law
Congress makes
laws, creates
agencies and
programs, appro-
priates funds to
carry out laws and
programs, may
override a veto with
a 2/3 majority vote,
can remove the
President through
impeachment. The
Senate approves
treaties and
presidential
appointments.
The
President
can veto
legislation,
call special
sessions,
recommend
legislation, and
appeal to
the people.





CITIZENSHIP IN THE NATION 33
.Parties, Splinters, and Special Interests
“I have already
intimated to you the
danger of parties
in the State. …”
—From George
Washington’s
farewell
address, 1796
Parties, Splinters, and
Special Interests
The framers of the Constitution mistrusted groups of people
who united to promote their own narrow causes over the
interests of the larger community. James Madison called
these groups factions. But he knew that trying to abolish
the factions would also abolish freedom.
History of American Political Parties
No political parties existed when the Constitution was written,
but the people soon split into camps over its ratification. The
Federalists, considered the party of the rich and well-born, rep-
resented the interests of merchants, bankers, businessmen, and
rich plantation owners. They favored a close relationship with
Great Britain and a broad interpretation of the Constitution to
promote their commercial interests. Federalists believed that
property owners should vote, and that ordinary people were
too easily influenced to handle much power.
The Anti-Federalists supported the common citizen—farm-
ers with little acreage and working people in the cities. They
thought that if people were educated, they could be trusted
to govern themselves. The Anti-Federalists worried that the
Federalists, who wanted a strong central government, would
destroy republican principles and individual liberties. This
made the Anti-Federalists favor a strict interpretation of
the Constitution.
By 1796, these two groups became political parties
and nominated presidential candidates. The Federalist Party
declined in power and disappeared by 1816.
Under Thomas Jefferson’s two-term presidential leader-
ship, the Anti-Federalists became known as the Jeffersonian
Republicans and remained in power for 40 years. But divi-
sions developed in the party. In the 1820s, supporters of John


34 CITIZENSHIP IN THE NATION
Parties, Splinters, and Special Interests.
Quincy Adams broke away to form the
National Republican Party. When Andrew
Jackson ran against Adams, his supporters
took the name Democratic-Republicans.
After Jackson won, he changed the party
name to Democrats. In 1834, the National
Republican Party united with other anti-
Jackson forces and formed the Whig Party.
The issue of slavery split the Whig
Party in the 1850s and fragmented the
Democratic Party. Those Whigs who
favored slavery left the party and joined
pro-slavery Democrats. Those Whigs
who opposed it sided with anti-slavery
Democrats and created the Republican
Party that we recognize today. When
Abraham Lincoln was elected in 1860 as
the first Republican president, he ended
the long era of Democratic control.
The Democratic Party survived in the South but was
crippled by the Civil War. The party slowly built up its base
of voters while the Republicans dominated national politics
for almost 75 years.
The 1932 election marked a big change in the public’s
attitude about the role of government. During the Great
Depression, which began in 1929, the unemployment rate was
high—33 percent. People wanted the government to help them
find jobs and take care of their families. When Franklin Delano
Roosevelt’s victory brought the Democrats back to power, his
New Deal programs put Americans to work and expanded
the social and economic responsibilities of the national gov-
ernment. For the next 36 years, Republicans criticized the
Democrats from the sidelines for their “big government”
and “bureaucracy.”
Since the late 1960s, control of the national government
has been divided. If one party had the White House, the other
party held the majority of seats in Congress. Although the
Founding Fathers did not foresee the rise of political parties,
they created a government that separated the powers of politi-
cal parties and a system of checks and balances.
Unlikely Partners
In the presidential election of
1796, the Federalists backed
Vice President John Adams
for president and the Anti-
Federalists backed Thomas
Jefferson. Adams beat
Jefferson by three electoral
votes, so Jefferson became
the vice president. Imagine
having an elected president
and vice president from dif-
ferent parties serving together
in the executive branch!


CITIZENSHIP IN THE NATION 35
.Parties, Splinters, and Special Interests
Two-Party System
The American political system started as a two-party system,
and the current election process follows this structure. People
form political parties to control government by winning elec-
tions and holding public offices. If one party gets control of the
executive and legislative branches, it can direct public policy
and enact laws to advance the party’s position. If different
parties have control of Congress and the Executive Office,
the elected officials must compromise to get anything accom-
plished. A two-party system, rather than a government splin-
tered by multiple parties, makes compromise much easier.
In most elections, voters can choose only one candidate
for an office, and only one candidate can win that office. Many
people think voting for a third-party candidate who has little
chance of winning is wasting their vote. Also, Republicans and
Democrats are able to work together to enact election laws that
make it more difficult for third-party candidates to get their
names on the ballots. In fact, non-major party candidates have
appeared on the ballot in every state only seven times in the
history of American presidential elections. While it’s more dif-
ficult for these minor party candidates to get on the ballot, they
are still a part of the system and many have large followings.
Minor Parties
A minor party is a cross between a major
political party and a special-interest group.
It generally forms around an ideology or
an issue, and then becomes a party to
nominate its own candidates for public
office. Minor parties are:
• Ideological, such as the
Libertarian Party
• Single-issue, such as the Right to
Life Party
• Economic protest, such as the
Populist Party
• Splinter, such as the Progressive Party
The Political
Party Family Tree
Today’s Democrats and
Republicans have their
roots in opposite party phi-
losophies. Although the
Democrats are direct descen-
dants of Thomas Jefferson’s
republican philosophies,
they also borrow Federalist
ideas about a strong federal
government and broad inter-
pretation of the Constitution.
Present-day Republicans have
taken Jefferson’s views sup-
porting “less government” as
their own platform.


36 CITIZENSHIP IN THE NATION
Parties, Splinters, and Special Interests.
“No party can fool
all of the people all
of the time. That’s
why we have
two parties.”
—Bob Hope
(1903–2003),
comedian who
entertained 12
presidents during
his lifetime
When the Republican Party nominated incumbent (cur-
rent) President William Howard Taft as its candidate for the
1912 election, former President Theodore Roosevelt broke away
from the Republican Party to run for president on his own
“Bull Moose” Progressive Party ballot. Roosevelt’s move split
the Republican vote, allowing Woodrow Wilson, a Democrat,
to win the presidency.
Unlike the two major political parties, minor parties
are willing to take a stand on controversial issues. They draw
the public’s attention to problems that the major parties might
try to avoid. As often happens, the two major parties steal
the positions of minor parties on those issues that stir the
public’s interest.
Minor parties serve important functions in the political
system, but the Republican Party is the only party in American
political history to rise from being a third party to becoming a
major political party.
Special-Interest Groups
People who share an interest often band together. Special-interest
groups form around a cause or an issue to help shape public
policy. These groups try to persuade elected officials to respond
to their particular concerns and to pass legislation that will
promote their causes.
Unlike political parties, special-interest groups do not
nominate candidates for public office. They are private orga-
nizations—only accountable to their members—that focus on
issues, not people. In fact, they are concerned with only those
issues and policies that directly affect the interests of the group
members. The groups may, however, support candidates who
support their positions.
A strong third-party candidate can have a great
impact on an election. In 2000, Ralph Nader ran
for president as the Green Party candidate against
Republican George W. Bush and Democrat Al Gore.
Nader received 3 percent of the popular vote but
received no electoral votes. Gore won the popular
vote, but Bush collected the most Electoral College
votes and became president. Having a third-party
candidate made this an extraordinarily close election.


CITIZENSHIP IN THE NATION 37
.Parties, Splinters, and Special Interests
These groups are as varied as their interests. Some
examples are:
• Business groups: Chamber of Commerce, National
Association of Manufacturers
• Trade associations: National Restaurant Association,
American Trucking Associations
• Labor organizations: Fraternal Order of Police, American
Federation of Labor–Congress of Industrial Organizations
(AFL–CIO)
• Agricultural groups: American Farm Bureau Federation,
National Grange
• Professional associations: American Medical Association,
American Bar Association
• Religious organizations: National Council of Churches,
American Jewish Congress
Some special-interest groups promote the welfare of
specific groups (American Association of Retired Persons);
promote or oppose certain causes (Sierra Club or The Brady
Center to Prevent Gun Violence; and advance public-interest
issues (Common Cause).
Special-interest groups raise awareness about public policies
that promote or threaten their causes. They serve as another
facet of the checks and balances system by keeping tabs on
public agencies and officials. These groups are another effective
way for citizens to participate in politics.
As James Madison knew when he drafted the First
Amendment (guaranteeing the rights to assemble and to peti-
tion the government), special-interest “factions” compete with
one another in the public arena and actually counterbalance
and moderate extreme points of view.
Campaigning on Infomercials
Ross Perot ran for president and started his own movement, the Reform
Party, in 1992. He frequently appeared on television with flash cards to
educate the public about the national budget deficit and explain his own
economic plan to balance the federal budget. Perot captured nearly 20
percent of the vote. Although Perot did not win, he tapped into public
dissatisfaction with elected officials and put the issue of fiscal (financial)
responsibility on the public agenda.





CITIZENSHIP IN THE NATION 39
.National Issues
National Issues
As you watch the evening news on television or read a news-
paper, consider how the national issues covered relate to what
you have already read in this merit badge pamphlet. Do the
topics affect a citizen’s rights and freedoms? Have new bills
been proposed in Congress? Are the senators and the president
deadlocked over an issue like health care or Social Security?
Did the Supreme Court rule on a controversial case? Which
Cabinet department dominates the news?
In countries where freedom of the press and the right to
free speech do not exist, the government controls mass media.
Citizens know only what their leaders are willing to tell them.
But in the United States, citizens have the right to know
the truth.
Mass Media
The vast communication network that reaches large audiences
of diverse individuals at the same time through television,
newspapers, radio, magazines, and the internet is called
mass media. These communication channels provide much
entertainment, but they are also important sources of
political information.
Although they don’t exist to influence the government, the
mass media have the power to focus the public’s attention on
certain issues. By telling audiences not what to think, but what
to think about, the media help to shape the public agenda.
If you want your opinion and your vote to matter,
you must make consistent efforts to seek informa-
tion. If you want to keep your rights and freedoms,
you must act.


40 CITIZENSHIP IN THE NATION
National Issues.
The public agenda
is the list of
those issues that
elected officials
and citizens
agree need
governmental
attention.
Even though requirement 3 asks you to track the evening
news on television OR read a daily newspaper, try to compare
on one day how a specific national issue is covered on television
and in the newspaper. You will probably discover that television
touches lightly on the topic and presents brief bits of informa-
tion. In a newspaper, reporters—like their readers—have more
opportunity to explore the issue in detail.
Speeches of National Historical Importance
Great leaders, great orators, and great speechwriters can mark
the importance of a historical moment so that it is fixed in
our memories. Certain speeches express the conscience and
spirit of a people. Others warn about oppression (domination),
memorialize fallen soldiers, or uplift a discouraged nation.
These speeches urge citizens to take action, inspire, and
redirect history.
Throughout this merit badge pamphlet, you have read
quotes from famous speeches. Consider reading those speeches
in their entirety. Or choose another speech such as:
• Martin Luther King Jr.’s “I Have a Dream” speech in which
he calls for an end to segregation and racial discrimination
• Franklin Delano Roosevelt’s speech one day after the
bombing of Pearl Harbor, asking Congress to declare
war on Japan
• Ronald Reagan’s “Tear Down This Wall” speech that
challenged Communist leaders to end the Cold War and
foster peace between West and East Germany
Fact or Opinion?
Learn how to recognize propaganda so that you do
not accept biased information as fact. Political parties
and special-interest groups want to persuade you to
agree with them. Read newspaper editorials to figure
out what issues and candidates the paper supports.
Think about whether the news report presents a one-
sided or balanced view. Are conclusions supported
by concrete information, or are opinions based on
selected facts?


CITIZENSHIP IN THE NATION 41
.National Issues
Voicing Your Own Opinion
It is our privilege as American citizens to contact our elected
representatives and expect an answer. You can find out how to
contact your senators or the representative from your congres-
sional district by looking in the government (blue) pages of
your local telephone book or on the internet (with your parent
or guardian’s permission).
Choose a national issue that interests you and gather the
facts before contacting your public official. Try to learn as
much as you can about all sides of the issue before forming
an opinion. The websites for the U.S. Senate and the U.S.
House of Representatives make it simple to contact your
representatives by email. You can write a letter online or
send a letter by mail.
To write an effective letter, follow these tips.
• Address the official using his or her correct title.
U.S. Senator
The address: The Honorable John Smith
The greeting: Dear Senator Smith:
Member of the House of Representatives
The address: The Honorable Mary Doe
The greeting: Dear Ms. Doe:
• Identify yourself and your reasons for writing
the letter.
• Refer to a specific bill by number or name,
if applicable.
• Explain—briefly, rationally, politely—why you
are concerned about the issue.
• Send your letter before the bill is brought to
the floor or while your representative can still
do something about your concern.
• Request a response and include your return address.
Senators and representatives want to know what you
think, but they receive thousands of letters each month. An
aide probably will answer your letter. However, you may have
an opportunity to contact your congressional representative in
person if he or she is visiting the local field office.





CITIZENSHIP IN THE NATION 43
.National Treasures and Other Government Structures
National Treasures
and Other Government
Structures
An important way for U.S. citizens to appreciate their hard-
won rights and freedoms is to visit the sites where major
historical events took place and where people from different
cultures settled, or tour public buildings and observe firsthand
their government officials at work.
Although books, photographs, and virtual tours on the
internet help us understand our heritage, nothing compares to
the experience of standing on a Civil War battlefield, touring
the White House, or exploring the Anasazi cliff dwellings built
in the Southwest more than a thousand years ago.
Your family may have lived in this country for hundreds
of years or for 20 years. It does not matter. If you are a U.S.
citizen, you share a heritage with every other American citi-
zen. So go see some of the significant public buildings, histori-
cal parks, landmarks, and monuments. After all, these national
treasures are our connections with this country’s past.
Landmarks and Monuments
The National Park Service, which is part of the U.S.
Department of the Interior, is in charge of national parks as
well as certain historic settings. Besides protecting those scenic
parks valued for their spectacular natural features, such as
Yellowstone National Park, the National Park Service identi-
fies and preserves all the historic buildings and sites that have
national importance—that is, those places that mean some-
thing to most Americans. The National Park Service maintains
an official list of cultural resources worth preserving called the
National Register of Historic Places. Three percent of the prop-
erties listed are designated as National Historic Landmarks.


44 CITIZENSHIP IN THE NATION
National Treasures and Other Government Structures.
Before you head for one of the National Historic Landmarks
or National Monuments, call to find out if visitors are allowed.
Schedules for tours vary and are always subject to change.
Government Facilities
Public buildings include a variety of government facilities
such as the Johnson Space Center, Federal Reserve banks, the
Library of Congress, and federal courthouses. Even if you live
in a small town, you probably can find a federal facility, such
as a post office, that serves the local community.
When you visit a federal facility, you see your government
working for you. Think about how the activity in that building
or on that site affects your life.
Preservation
American citizens have a debt to the people who came before
us, and an obligation to the generations to follow. National
landmarks and monuments are places to experience history.
Many are endangered, but they deserve to be preserved for
what they represent as part of America’s history and culture.
You can help preserve these places by joining a local or national
historic preservation organization and by volunteering to work
at one of the historic landmarks.
What’s the Difference?
National Historic Landmark—a particular site, structure, or object of
national importance (Vietnam Veterans Memorial)
National Monument—an area preserved for its historic, prehistoric,
or scientific interest that includes at least one resource of national
importance (Fort Sumter National Monument)
National Historic Site—a place of national historical significance,
usually with a single primary feature (Ford’s Theatre)
National Historical Park—a larger, more complex area than a National
Historic Site, it includes several areas and features of national historical
importance (Independence National Historical Park in Philadelphia)


CITIZENSHIP IN THE NATION 45
.National Treasures and Other Government Structures
Preserving national sites is only a part of preserving
America’s heritage. As a good citizen, you must guard your
rights and celebrate your freedom. Stand up for others. Seek
information. Become a concerned citizen.
The American people made their own government. It is
still a work in progress, but it bends and embraces its citizens.
You have the right, the duty, and the privilege to help shape
your government. Value your freedom.
As Thomas Paine wrote in his Common Sense pamphlets
of 1776: “The cause of America is in a great measure the
cause of all mankind. … We have it in our power to begin
the world again.”
Mount Rushmore


46 CITIZENSHIP IN THE NATION
Resources.
Scouting Literature
The Constitution of the United States;
American Business, American Cultures,
American Heritage, Citizenship in the
Community, Citizenship in the World,
and Law merit badge pamphlets
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.
Books
Feinberg, Barbara Silberdick. The
Articles of Confederation: The First
Constitution of the United States.
Twenty-First Century Books, 2002.
Freedman, Russell. Give Me Liberty!
The Story of the Declaration of
Independence. Holiday House, 2002.
Jaffe, Steven H. Who Were the Founding
Fathers? Two Hundred Years of
Reinventing American History.
Henry Holt and Co., 1996.
Kassinger, Ruth. U.S. Census: A Mirror
of America. Raintree Steck-Vaughn
Publishers, 1999.
Krull, Kathleen. A Kid’s Guide to
America’s Bill of Rights: Curfews,
Censorship, and the 100-Pound
Giant. HarperCollins, 2015.
Mackintosh, Barry. The National
Park Service. Chelsea House
Publishers, 1988.
Maestro, Betty. A More Perfect Union:
The Story of Our Constitution.
HarperCollins, 2008.
McHugh, Erin. National Parks: A
Kid’s Guide to America’s Parks,
Monuments, and Landmarks. Black
Dog & Leventhal, 2012.
McIntire, Suzanne, ed. The American
Heritage Book of Great American
Speeches for Young People. John
Wiley & Sons, 2001.
Panchyk, Richard. Keys to American
History: Understanding Our Most
Important Historic Documents.
Chicago Review Press, 2009.
Selzer, Adam. The Smart Aleck’s Guide
to American History. Delacorte
Press, 2009.
Zeinert, Karen. Free Speech: From
Newspapers to Music Lyrics.
Enslow Publishers, 1995.
Resources


CITIZENSHIP IN THE NATION 47
.Resources
Organizations and Websites
American Civil Liberties Union
125 Broad St., 18th Floor
New York, NY 10004
Telephone: 212-549-2500
aclu.org
Congress.gov
congress.gov
Democratic National Committee
Telephone: 202-863-8000
democrats.org
GovSpot
govspot.com
League of Women Voters
Telephone: 202-429-1965
lwv.org
National Constitution Center
Independence Mall
525 Arch St.
Philadelphia, PA 19106
Telephone: 215-409-6600
constitutioncenter.org
National Park Service
1849 C St. NW
Washington, DC 20240
Telephone: 202-208-6843
nps.gov
Republican National Committee
Telephone: 202-863-8500
gop.com
U.S. Census Bureau
4600 Silver Hill Road
Washington, DC 20233
Telephone: 301-763-4636
census.gov
The U.S. Constitution Online
usconstitution.net
U.S. Government Publishing Office
Telephone: 202-512-1800
gpo.gov
U.S. House of Representatives
Telephone: 202-224-3121
house.gov
U.S. Senate
Telephone: 202-224-3121
senate.gov
U.S. Supreme Court
Telephone: 202-479-3000
supremecourt.gov
USA.gov
usa.gov
The White House
1600 Pennsylvania Ave. NW
Washington, DC 20500
Telephone: 202-456-1414
whitehouse.gov
Acknowledgments
For this edition of the Citizenship in the
Nation merit badge pamphlet, Scouting
America thanks Harry C. Boyte,
Center for Democracy and Citizenship,
Humphrey Institute, for sharing his time,
expertise, and assistance.
Scouting America is grateful to
the men and women serving on the
National Merit Badge Subcommittee for
the improvements made in updating this
pamphlet.


48 CITIZENSHIP IN THE NATION
Resources.
Photo and Illustration Credits
Wikimedia.org, courtesy—page 21
All other photos not mentioned above
are the property of Scouting America.
John McDearmon—page 27
Randy Piland—pages 8, 9, 10, 24, 32,
45 (Scout at Cutler Hall), and 48
Michael Roytek—page 4