FIRE SAFETY


BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
FIRE SAFETY
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Fire Safety
1. Do the following:
(a) Demonstrate the technique of stop, drop, cover, roll, cover your face, and
cool. Explain how burn injuries can be prevented.
(b) List the most frequent causes of burn injuries.
(c) Explain how to safely discard and store flammable liquids.
2. Explain the chemistry and physics of fire. Name the parts of the fire tetrahedron.
Explain why vapors are important to the burning process. Name the products
of combustion. Give an example of how fire grows and what happens.
3. Name the most frequent causes of fire in the home, and give examples of ways
they can be prevented. Include a discussion about fires caused by smoking in
the home, cooking, candles, fireplaces, and electrical appliances.
4. Explain the role of human behavior in the arson problem in this country.
5. List the actions and common circumstances that cause seasonal and holiday-
related fires. Explain how these fires can be prevented.
6. Conduct a home safety survey with the help of an adult. Then do the following:
(a) Draw a home fire-escape plan, create a home fire-drill schedule, and
conduct a home fire drill.
(b) Test a smoke alarm and demonstrate regular maintenance of a smoke alarm.
(c) Explain what to do when you smell gas and when you smell smoke.
(d) Explain how you would report a fire alarm.
(e) Explain what fire safety equipment can be found in public buildings.
(f) Explain who should use fire extinguishers and when these devices can
be used.
(g) Explain how to extinguish a grease pan fire.
(h) Explain what fire safety precautions you should take when you are in a
public building.


7. Do the following:
(a) Demonstrate lighting a match safely.
(b) Demonstrate the safe way to start a charcoal fire.
(c) Demonstrate how to safely light a candle. Discuss with your counselor
how to safely use candles.
8. Explain the difference between combustible and noncombustible liquids and
between combustible and noncombustible fabrics.
9. Do the following:
(a) Describe for your counselor the safe way to refuel a liquid fuel engine,
such as a lawn mower, weed eater, an outboard motor, farm machine, or an
automobile with gas from an approved gas can.
(b) Demonstrate the safety factors, such as proper ventilation, for auxiliary
heating devices and the proper way to fuel those devices.
10. Do the following:
(a) Explain the cost of outdoor and wildland fires and how to prevent them.
(b) Demonstrate setting up and putting out a cooking fire.
(c) Demonstrate using a camp stove and lantern.
(d) Explain how to set up a campsite safe from fire.
11. Visit a fire station. Identify the types of fire trucks. Find out about the fire
prevention activities in your community.
12. Determine if smoke detectors are required in all dwellings within your
municipality. If so, explain which specific types are required. Tell your coun-
selor what type of smoke detectors your house has or needs.
13. Choose a fire safety–related career that interests you and describe the level of
education required and responsibilities of a person in that position. Tell why
this position interests you.


FIRE SAFETY 63
.Fire Safety Resources
Scouting Literature
Camping, Cooking, Emergency
Preparedness, First Aid, and Safety
merit badge pamphlets
Books
Bell, Karen Magnuson. Fire in Their
Eyes: Wildfires and the People Who
Fight Them. Harcourt, 1999.
Camenson, Blythe. Firefighting (VGM’s
Career Portraits). McGraw-Hill/
Contemporary Books, 1995.
Corso, Joe. Fire: The Broadway Central
Hotel. Black Horse Publishing, 2013.
Gorrell, Gena Kinton. Catching Fire:
The Story of Firefighting. Tundra
Books, 2013.
Halberstam, David. Firehouse.
Hyperion, 2003.
Landau, Elaine. Fires. Scholastic
Library Publishing, 2000.
McCourt, D.E. Notes From the
Firehouse: Seventeen Firefighting
Stories From a Retired Firefighter.
CreateSpace Independent Publishing
Platform, 2011.
National Commission on Fire
Prevention and Control. America
Burning. Lulu.com, 2014.
Patent, Dorothy Hinshaw. Fire: Friend
or Foe. Clarion Books, 1998.
Preston, Timothy. A Homeowner’s
Survival Guide to Fire Safety.
Liberty, 1991.
Shapiro, Larry. Fighting Fire: Trucks,
Tools and Tactics. Motorbooks, 2008.
Yoder, Curt. The Heart Behind the Hero.
Stoney Creek Press, 2000.
Fire Safety Resources
Visit the Boy Scouts of America’s
official retail website at http://
www.scoutstuff.org for a complete
listing of all merit badge pamphlets
and other helpful Scouting materi-
als and supplies.


64 FIRE SAFETY
Fire Safety Resources.
Organizations, Government
Agencies, and Websites
Federal Emergency
Management Agency
Toll-free telephone: 202-646-2500
Website: http://www.fema.gov
FireDepartment.net
Website: http://www.firedepartment.net
National Association of State
Fire Marshals
Telephone: 202-737-1226
Website: http://www.firemarshals.org
National Fire Protection Association
Telephone: 617-770-3000
Website: http://www.nfpa.org
Safe Kids Worldwide
Telephone: 202-662-0600
Website: http://www.safekids.org
U.S. Consumer Product
Safety Commission
Telephone: 301-504-7923
Website: http://www.cpsc.gov
U.S. Fire Administration
Telephone: 301-447-1000
Website: http://www.usfa.fema.gov
Acknowledgments
The Boy Scouts of America is grateful to
Roy Marshall, director of the Residential
Fire Safety Institute, for providing his
expertise during the development of
this new edition of the Fire Safety merit
badge pamphlet. The RFSI, which is
based in Osseo, Minnesota, is a public
interest group that promotes fire-safe
behavior and fire-safe homes through
built-in fire protection. Thanks also to
Walter Smittle III, West Virginia state
fire marshal, retired, for his contribution.
The Boy Scouts of America is
grateful to the men and women serving
on the Merit Badge Maintenance Task
Force for the improvements made in
updating this pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration Credits
HAAP Media Ltd., courtesy—cover
(fire truck, space heater)
Dave Powell, USDA Forest Service,
Bugwood.org, courtesy—page 50
Shutterstock.com, courtesy—cover
(matches); pages 4 (©Mike Brake),
7 (background, ©murengstockphoto),
11 (ashtray, ©Oleg Zinkovetsky),
13 (©Vladimir Jotov), 17 (©eans),
19 (©Africa Studio), 20 (©Tony
Campbell), 34 (©SaraJo), 39 (fire alarm,
©Sideways Design), 40 (matches,
©Nykonchuk Oleksii; lighter, ©Sanit
Fuangnakhon), 48 (©travis manley),
and 62 (©potowizard)
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of
or are protected by the Boy Scouts
of America.
John McDearmon—pages 8, 26, 38 (all),
43 (both), 46, and 56 (illustrations)
Randy Piland—pages 14, 28, 32,
40, 53, and 61 (all)