BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES

CANOEING

“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”

Note to the Counselor
Merit badge counselors are responsible for following the requirements, procedures, and techniques presented in this pamphlet and ensuring that each Scout
earning the merit badge is able to demonstrate knowledge and skills at a level consistent with the requirements. In addition, counselors must ensure that all applicable BSA safety policies, including Safe Swim Defense and Safety Afloat, are followed
during training, practice, and review.
Counselors for the Canoeing
merit badge must be registered members of the Boy Scouts of America,
have current training in both Safe
Swim Defense and Safety Afloat,
and be approved by the local council
advancement committee. Councils
with an aquatics committee should
utilize that committee to coordinate
with the advancement committee for
approval of qualified counselors.
All counselors should have formal training in the knowledge and
skills indicated by the requirements,
experience in teaching such skills to
youth, and experience in identifying and managing risks associated
with the activities involved. For the
Canoeing merit badge, appropriate credentials include: current or
previous certification as Aquatics
Instructor BSA, designation as an
instructor or successful completion of council-sponsored or council-approved training courses in canoeing such as the BSA Paddle Craft Safety course, or current or
previous certification as a level 1 instructor in canoeing by the American Canoe
Association. The council advancement committee may approve counselors with
similar experience and training in knowledge, skill, safety, and instruction.

35867
ISBN 978-0-8395-3305-4
©2022 Boy Scouts of America
2022 Printing

Requirements
1. Do the following:
a. Explain to your counselor the most likely hazards
you may encounter while participating in canoeing
activities and what you should do to anticipate, help
prevent, mitigate, and respond to these hazards.
b. Review prevention, symptoms, and first-aid treatment
for the following injuries or illnesses that could
occur while canoeing: blisters, cold-water shock and
hypothermia, dehydration, heat-related illnesses,
sunburn, sprains, and strains.
c. Discuss the BSA Safety Afloat policy. Tell how it applies
to canoeing activities.
2. Before doing the following requirements, successfully
complete the BSA swimmer test: Jump feetfirst into water
over the head in depth. Level off and swim 75 yards in a
strong manner using one or more of the following strokes:
sidestroke, breaststroke, trudgen, or crawl; then swim
25 yards using an easy, resting backstroke. The 100 yards
must be completed in one swim without stops and must
include at least one sharp turn. After completing the swim,
rest by floating.
3. Do the following:
a. Name and point out the major parts of a canoe.
b. Describe how the length and shape of a canoe affect
its performance.
c. Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of the different
materials used to make canoes.
4. Do the following:
a. Name and point out the parts of a paddle.
b. Demonstrate how to size correctly a paddle for a paddler
in a sitting position and a kneeling position.
CANOEING    3

5. Do the following:
a. Discuss with your counselor the characteristics of life
jackets most appropriate for canoeing and tell why a
life jacket must always be worn while paddling.
b. Demonstrate how to select and properly fit the correct
size life jacket.
c. Review the importance of safety and rescue equipment
such as a sound signal device, extra paddle, sponge,
bailer, bilge pump, rescue sling, ropes and throw bag.
6. Discuss with your counselor the general care and maintenance of canoes, paddles, and other canoeing equipment.
7. Do the following:
a. Discuss what personal and group equipment would be
appropriate for a canoe camping trip. Describe how
personal and group equipment can be packed and protected from water.
b. Using the containers and packs from requirement 7a,
demonstrate how to load and secure the containers and
other equipment in the canoe.
c. Using appropriate knots, including a trucker’s hitch,
tautline hitch, and bowline, demonstrate how to secure
a canoe to a vehicle or a trailer, or if these are not available, a rack on land.
8. With a companion, use a properly equipped canoe to
demonstrate the following:
a. Safely carry and launch the canoe from a dock or shore
(both, if possible).
b. Safely land the canoe on a dock or shore (both, if
possible) and return it to its proper storage location.
c. Demonstrate kneeling and sitting positions in a canoe
and explain the proper use for each position.
d. Change places while afloat in the canoe.
9. With a companion, use a properly equipped canoe to
demonstrate the following:
a. In deep water, exit the canoe and get back in
without capsizing.
b. Safely perform a controlled capsize of the canoe and
demonstrate how staying with a capsized canoe will
support both paddlers.
4    CANOEING

c. Swim, tow, or push a swamped canoe 50 feet to shallow
water. In the shallow water, empty the swamped canoe
and reenter it.
d. In deep water, rescue a swamped canoe and its paddlers
by emptying the swamped canoe and helping the
paddlers safely reenter their boat without capsizing.
10. With a companion, use a properly equipped canoe to
demonstrate the following paddling strokes as both a
bow and stern paddler:
a. Forward stroke
b. Backstroke
c. Draw
For stern paddling only:
d. J-stroke
e. Pushaway
f. Forward sweep

g. Reverse sweep
h. Rudder stroke
i. Stern pry

11. Using the strokes in requirement 10, and in an order determined by your counselor, use a properly equipped canoe
to demonstrate the following tandem maneuvers while
paddling on opposite sides and without changing sides.
Each paddler must demonstrate these maneuvers in both
the bow and stern and on opposite paddling sides:
a. Pivot or spin the canoe in either direction.
b. Move the canoe sideways or abeam in either direction.
c. Stop the canoe.
d. Move the canoe in a straight line for 50 yards.
12. Use a properly equipped canoe to demonstrate solo
canoe handling:
a. Launch from shore or a pier (both, if possible).
b. Using a single-blade paddle and paddling only on
one side, demonstrate proper form and use of the
forward stroke, backstroke, draw stroke, pushaway
stroke, forward sweep, reverse sweep, J-stroke, and
rudder stroke. Repeat while paddling on the other side.
c. Using a single-blade paddle and paddling only on one
side, demonstrate proper form and use of a combination
of a forward stroke, rudder stroke, and stern pry by canoeing to a target 50 yards away. Repeat while paddling on
the other side.
d. Make a proper landing at a dock or shore (both, if possible). Store canoe properly (with assistance, if needed).
CANOEING    5

Canoeing Resources.

Canoeing Resources
Scouting Literature
Basic Illustrated Canoe Paddling; Basic
Illustrated Canoeing; Deck of First Aid;
Emergency First Aid pocket guide;
Scouts BSA handbooks and Fieldbook;
First Aid, Kayaking, Rowing, SmallBoat Sailing, and Whitewater merit
badge pamphlets
With your parent’s permission, visit
the Boy Scouts of America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org,
for a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.

Books
American Canoe Association.
Introduction to Paddling.
Menasha Ridge Press, 1996.
Davidson, James West, and John Rugge.
The Complete Wilderness Paddler.
Vintage Books, 1983.
Gordon, I. Herbert. The Complete Book
of Canoeing, 3rd ed. Globe Pequot
Press, 2001.
Jacobson, Cliff. Basic Essentials:
Solo Canoeing, 2nd ed.
FalconGuides, 1999.
Jennings, John, ed. The Canoe: A Living
Tradition. Firefly Books, 2002.

6    CANOEING

Poling Sr., Jim. The Canoe: An
Illustrated History. Countryman
Press, 2001.
Rock, Harry. The Basic Essentials of
Canoe Poling. ICS Books, 1992.
Rounds, Jon, ed. Basic Canoeing: All
the Skills and Tools You Need to Get
Started. Stackpole Books, 2003.
Warren, Graham, and David Gidmark.
Canoe Paddles: A Complete Guide
to Making Your Own. Firefly
Books, 2001.

Organizations and Websites
American Canoe Association
503 Sophia St., Suite 100
Fredericksburg, VA 22401
Telephone: 540-907-4460
Website: www.americancanoe.org
American Whitewater
P.O. Box 1540
Cullowhee, NC 28723
Telephone: 866-262-8429
Website:
www.americanwhitewater.org

.Canoeing Resources

United States Canoe Association
Website: www.uscanoe.com

Scouting
Canoe Adventures
The Northern Tier National
High Adventure Base offers
wilderness treks through
Minnesota and Canada.
Information is available at
www.ntier.org. Several BSA
local councils offer highadventure canoe treks and
whitewater experiences.

Acknowledgments
This edition of the Canoeing merit
badge pamphlet is the work of a team
of experienced paddlers, instructors,
and Scouters. The team was headed by
Richard Thomas. Other team members
included David Bell, John Brennard,
Lynn Brennard, Scott Cameron, Jeff
Cannon, Kevin Cordray, Michael
Donigan, Douglas Kennedy, J. David
McClary, Jeremy R. Oyen, Richard
Shank, and Jim Virgin.

The Boy Scouts of America has
a long and proud canoeing tradition.
Many of the early pioneers in safety
and canoeing instruction were BSA
staff members and volunteer Scouters.
The Boy Scouts of America gratefully
acknowledges the contribution of these
pioneers to canoeing and to this
pamphlet: Fred C. Mills, W. Van B.
Claussen, Dr. John B. May, and
Ernest F. Schmidt. Recognition also is
given to the previous author of this
pamphlet, K. Gregory Tucker.
The Boy Scouts of America recognizes the significant contributions made
to canoeing by the American Canoe
Association in terms of safety, paddling
technique, and teaching. The information
contained in this pamphlet is consistent
with American Canoe Association curriculum and safety training.
The Boy Scouts of America is grateful to the men and women serving on
the National Merit Badge Subcommittee
for the improvements made in updating
this pamphlet.

CANOEING    7

