PIONEERING

BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES

PIONEERING

“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”

Section 0.

Requirements
1. Do the following:
a. Explain to your counselor the most likely hazards you
might encounter while participating in pioneering activities and what you should do to anticipate, help prevent,
mitigate, and respond to these hazards.
b. Discuss the prevention of, and first-aid treatment for,
injuries and conditions that could occur while working
on pioneering projects, including rope splinters, rope
burns, cuts, scratches, insect bites and stings, hypothermia, dehydration, heat exhaustion, heatstroke, sunburn,
and falls.
2. Do the following:
a. Demonstrate the basic and West Country methods of
whipping a rope. Fuse the ends of a rope.
b. Demonstrate how to tie the following knots: clove
hitch, butterfly knot, roundturn with two half hitches,
rolling hitch, water knot, carrick bend, sheepshank,
and sheet bend.
c. Demonstrate and explain when to use the following
lashings: square, diagonal, round, shear, tripod, and
floor lashing.
3. Explain why it is useful to be able to throw a rope, then
demonstrate how to coil and throw a 40-foot length of
¼- or 3/8-inch rope. Explain how to improve your throwing
distance by adding weight to the end of your rope.
4. Explain the differences between synthetic ropes and natural
fiber ropes. Discuss which types of rope are suitable for
pioneering work and why. Include the following in your
discussion: breaking strength, safe working loads, and the
care and storage of rope.
4

PIONEERING

.Section 0

5. Explain the uses for the back splice, eye splice, and short
splice. Using ¼- or 3/8-inch three-stranded rope, demonstrate how to form each splice.
6. Using a rope-making device or machine, make a rope at
least 6 feet long consisting of three strands, each having
three yarns. Whip the ends.
7. Explain the importance of effectively anchoring a pioneering project. Describe to your counselor the 1-1-1 anchoring
system and the log-and-stake anchoring methods.
8. With the approval of your counselor, demonstrate and use
a rope tackle. Be sure the rope tackle is secured properly.
Explain the advantages and limitations of using a rope
tackle. Describe the potential damage that friction can do
to a rope.
All pioneering projects constructed for this merit badge
must comply with height standards as outlined in the
Guide to Safe Scouting.
9. By yourself, build a trestle using square and diagonal
lashings. Explain why trestles are used when constructing
pioneering projects.
10. With the approval of your counselor and using appropriate
lashings and pioneering techniques, build and use one fullsize pioneering project from either group A or group B.
Your project must comply with the requirements of the
Guide to Safe Scouting.
Group A: Tower OR bridge
Anchor your project as appropriate and necessary. Explain
how your anchoring system works. Group A projects may
be worked on in a group and with others.
Group B: Camp chair OR camp table
Group B projects must be worked on individually.

PIONEERING

5

.PIONEERING RESOURCES

Pioneering Resources
Scouting Literature
Boy Scout Handbook; Guide to Safe
Scouting; Deck of First Aid; Emergency
First Aid pocket guide; Basic Illustrated
Wilderness First Aid; Be Prepared First
Aid Book; Basic Illustrated Outdoor
Knots; Deck of Knots; Knots and How to
Tie Them; Camping, Climbing, First Aid,
Model Design and Building, Textile, and
Woodwork merit badge pamphlets
Visit the Boy Scouts of America’s
official retail website (with
your parent’s permission) at
http://www.scoutstuff.org for
a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other
helpful Scouting materials
and supplies.

Books
Ashley, Clifford W. The Ashley Book of
Knots. Doubleday, 1976.

Budworth, Geoffrey. The Ultimate
Encyclopedia of Knots and Ropework.
Southwater, 2010.
Jarman, Colin. The Knot Tying Bible:
Climbing, Camping, Sailing, Fishing,
Everyday. Firefly Books, 2013.
Pawson, Des. Handbook of Knots.
DK Publishing, 2004.
Pawson, Des. Knot Craft: 35 Ropework
Projects. Paradise Cay, 2011.
Pawson, Des. Knots: The Complete
Visual Guide. DK, 2012.
Penn, Randy. The Handy Box of
Knots: Useful Knots for Every
Situation, Indoors and Out.
Sterling Innovation, 2008.
Perry, Gordon. Knots. Whitecap
Books, 2006.
Perry, Gordon. Knots: A Practical
Step-by-Step Guide to Tying Over
100 Knots. Metro Books, 2002.

Bigon, Mario, and Guido Regazzoni.
The Morrow Guide to Knots. William
Morrow, 1988.

Salvadori, Mario. The Art of
Construction: Projects and Principles
for Beginning Engineers & Architects.
Chicago Review Press, 2000.

Budworth, Geoffrey. The Ultimate Book
of Everyday Knots. Skyhorse
Publishing, 2012.

Sweet, John. Scout Pioneering. Scout
Association, 1974.
Toghill, Jeff. Knots & Splices. Sheridan
House, 1998.
PIONEERING

95

PIONEERING RESOURCES.

Toss, Brion. The Complete Rigger's
Apprentice: Tools and Techniques for
Modern and Traditional Rigging.
International Marine/Ragged
Mountain Press, 2016.

The Boy Scouts of America is
also grateful to the men and women
serving on the Merit Badge Maintenance
Task Force for the improvements and
updates to this pamphlet.

Online Resources

Photo and Illustration Credits

First Aid merit badge pamphlet,
http://boyslife.org/merit-badges/
first aid-merit-badge/

Larry Green, courtesy—pages 57, 65, 73,
76, 77, 78, 82 (3-2-1 anchor), and 84

Guide to Safe Scouting, http://www.
scouting.org/HealthandSafety/GSS.aspx

Acknowledgments
The Boy Scouts of America thanks Larry
Green and Dr. James Roberts for their
assistance in updating this pamphlet.
We are grateful to pioneering legend
Adolph Peschke, West Des Moines,
Iowa, for writing the 1993 edition of
the Pioneering merit badge pamphlet.
Mr. Peschke’s son, Donald Peschke,
also was instrumental in developing the
1993 edition. Many of the techniques
shown in that edition have been
adapted for subsequent printings.
Over the years, many Scouters and
pioneering experts have assisted with
revising the merit badge requirements,
pamphlet text, and illustrations, and
we are grateful for their input.
Among these individuals have been
Ken Hammond, Richard Jahn, Mike
Kleckner, Ken Knowles, R. G. Kruger,
Brian Nulle, Paul Oliphant, Clarence
Olson, Bill Schrichte, Dan and Gretchen
Walters, and Elaine Waraczynski.

96

PIONEERING

Shutterstock.com, courtesy—pages
15 (©wacpan), 17 (©Iokvi),
18 (©magmarcz), 19 (manila,
©Hellen Sergeyeva; sisal, ©Irina
Sokolovskaya; cotton, ©Stock image;
coir, ©chinahbzyg); 21 (©Sementer),
and 28 (©Mikhail Pashchenko)
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of
or are protected by the Boy Scouts
of America.
Eric Bakke—page 10
Dan Bryant—page 11
Bruce Levitt—page 94
John McDearmon—all illustrations on
pages 23–24, 26–27, 29–39, 41–45,
47–50, 53–56, 60–64, 66–69, 79–80,
85–88, and 90–93
Christian Michaels—page 14

