INVENTING
STEM-Based


INVENTING
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
The Inventing merit badge and pamphlet were made
possible in part by the Lemelson–MIT Program.
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Note to the Counselor
While the scope of inventing projects is far too wide to cover
here, there are some general guidelines and concerns that a
merit badge counselor should keep in mind. Be mindful of
managing risk and using good judgment when undertaking
any invention project. Remember, an injury that doesn’t
happen needs no treatment; an emergency that doesn’t occur
requires no response.
Safety is the top priority, so Scouts who are working on
their inventions should follow safety precautions whenever
using tools, equipment, and other materials. In a workshop
setting, use the buddy system. Be sure Scouts know they
should always work under the supervision of a responsible
adult who is knowledgeable about the tools, equipment, and
materials they plan to use.
Working on inventions can take place in home
workshops, in school shops, or even in community shops.
When working outside of the home, be sure to familiarize
Scouts with the safety requirements of the shop. Some
shops require a basic safety class or will have minimum age
requirements to use equipment like a lathe or milling machine.
Here are some basic rules to follow:
• Use the proper personal protective equipment, including
body, hand, ear (such as protective foam ear plugs),
and eye-face protection (such as safety glasses with side
shields), closed-toe shoes, and foot coverings.
• Use protective clothing whenever necessary to prevent
exposure to hands, eyes, and face, and to keep hazardous
materials from contaminating street clothes.
35833
ISBN 978-0-8395-5833-0
©2021 Boy Scouts of America
2021 Printing
See the Composite Materials, Home Repairs, Woodwork,
Emergency Preparedness, and First Aid merit badge
pamphlets for more information about safety, first aid,
and managing risk.
FPO


INVENTING 3
• Be trained on any equipment you plan to use before you
get started.
• If fine particles in the air are anticipated—even in a well-
ventilated area—be sure to have the proper respiratory
equipment on hand for protection from dust, exhaust,
and fumes.
• Never tolerate horseplay when using tools.
• Stay an arm’s length away from others using tools or equipment.
• Know where the “off” switch is before turning on a power tool.
• Clean up the area every time work is finished and return all
tools to their proper location.
• Have a first-aid kit and fire extinguisher on hand.
• Ask questions; never assume or guess!
Wear close-fitting
clothing. Loose
or baggy clothing
can easily
get caught
in machinery.


4 INVENTING
Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Inventing or check Scoutbook for the
latest requirements.


INVENTING 5


6 INVENTING


INVENTING 7
Contents
What Is Inventing? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
History of Inventing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
Impact of Inventing on Humankind . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
Inventors in the Community . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
Intellectual Property, Patents, and Trademarks . . . . . . . . . . . 37
Inventing Closer to Home . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
The Inventing Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
Building the Prototype . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
Community Resources for Inventors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
Inventing As a Career . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87
Glossary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91
Inventing Resources. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 94





INVENTING 9
.What Is Inventing?
What Is Inventing?
Inventing is the process of finding technological solutions to real-
world problems.
The Spirit of Inventing
The spirit of inventing involves a combination of experimenta-
tion, investigation, inquisitiveness, and creative thinking.
Inventing is an exciting journey of discovery, often yielding
mixed or unexpected results along the way. In a sense, inventing
is described by the phrase “thinking outside the box.”
By learning about inventors and the way they think, you
will begin to understand the importance of developing skills
and approaches to thinking that are essential for the process of
inventing. You have probably heard of McCormick, Ford, and
the Wright Brothers, but what about Leatherman, Ball, Dietrich,
or Amarasiriwardena? They are all modern or contemporary
inventors. As you work toward your Inventing merit badge, you
will discover that it is never too early to begin your own journey
toward inventing.
Inventing Defined
To invent is to create something new that is useful or help-
ful, by means of your own investigation, experimentation,
and thinking.
Inventors are
curious about
the world
around them.
Italicized terms such as inventing, engineering,
entrepreneurship, and innovation can be found in the
glossary toward the end of this pamphlet.


10 INVENTING
What Is Inventing?.
An invention is the product of
the inventing process. Inventions
can be manufactured products,
machines or electrical devices,
chemical compounds and drugs,
varieties of plants, methods of
doing something, designs for
useful objects, or improve-
ments to any of these.
How is inventing
different from routine
problem-solving? Inventing
crosses the boundaries
of the way things have
been done in the past. It ties
together academic disciplines
in unexpected ways, redefines
the problem itself, or challenges
long-held beliefs about the limits
of what is possible. Inventive thinking
challenges what we expect or anticipate.
Inventiveness is
a form of creative
problem-solving,
resulting in
an invention.
The Segway® Personal Transporter was
invented by Dean Kamen, the $500,000
Lemelson-MIT Prize winner in 2002 and
founder of FIRST Robotics.


INVENTING 11
.What Is Inventing?
A few groundbreaking inventions, known
as seminal inventions, have created entirely
new industries or totally changed the nature of
an existing industry. For example, in 1942 the
common way to make a copy of a letter was to
place carbon paper between two sheets of plain
paper, reproducing on the bottom sheet whatever
was written or typed on the top sheet. To make
multiple copies, people used wet, smelly “spirit
duplicators” (“spirit” refers to the alcohol solvents
used in these machines), or they photographed
the letter and had prints made, or they used
expensive typesetting and a printing press. In that
year, a physicist named Chester Carlson received
patent number 2,297,691 for a machine to make copies on
plain paper using static electricity and powder. Carlson’s
invention—which he named “xerography” (a term that
means “dry writing”)—led to plain-paper copiers in every
office. Haloid, the company to which he licensed the patent,
changed its name to Xerox®. Since then, all of the patents
issued for inventions in the field of plain-paper printing—
including the laser printer—are improvement patents upon
Carlson’s basic system.
Invention vs. Innovation
Innovation is not the same as invention, although
sometimes the two terms are used interchangeably. In its basic
sense, invention is the creation of a product or the introduction
of a process for the first time. Innovation is improving on or
making a significant contribution to developing a product,
process, or service. Society benefits from an invention after
innovation proceeds to develop and introduce the new idea
into use. Inventing, engineering, and entrepreneurship are all
part of innovation.
Plain-paper
photocopying is an
example of a seminal
or original invention.





INVENTING 13
.History of Inventing
History of Inventing
By nature and necessity, human beings are inventive. The wheel,
compass, paper, paved roads, matches, and many other important
discoveries date from antiquity. Within the last 500 years, the
scientific revolution (1520–1750) and the first industrial revolution
(1760–1850) laid the foundation for an outpouring of inventions.
The second industrial revolution, which
began in the late 1860s, after the Civil War,
brought about a period of accelerated inventive
activity into the early 1900s. This led to dramatic
changes in our society as we transitioned from an
agriculturally based market to a manufacturing-
oriented economy. Our economic system is now
knowledge-centered. Along the way, inventions
have improved living conditions for countless people
around the world.
The Boy Scouts of America’s involvement in
inventing goes back to the early 20th century at the
height of the second industrial revolution. In 1910,
the BSA was founded to “cultivate courage, loyalty,
patriotism, brotherliness, self-control, courtesy, kind-
ness to animals, usefulness, cheerfulness, cleanliness,
thrift, purity, and honor” in boys. That same year, youth
were introduced to the fictional inventor Tom Swift. A series of
books about Tom portrayed him as a natural inventor with an
American entrepreneurial spirit. By testing, tinkering, building,
and experimenting, Tom created his own inventions, including
an airship, photo telephone, and a Taser-like device he called an
electric rifle.
Like Tom Swift, many Scouts were experimenting with
inventions of their own as they worked toward the Invention
merit badge. As the 1911 Boy Scouts of America Handbook for
Boys states, “To obtain a merit badge for Invention a Scout
must: 1) Invent and patent some useful article; and 2) Show a
The first Tom
Swift book
was published
in 1910.


14 INVENTING
History of Inventing.
working drawing or model of the same.” With such stringent
requirements, only 10 Invention merit badges were ever earned,
and the badge was discontinued in 1915. But the ideas of
invention and innovation—finding new solutions to problems,
understanding new technologies, learning new skills, and
thinking in new ways—were prevalent in other Scouting activities
and throughout America during the decade of 1910–1920.
In 1913, Henry Ford adopted the assembly line
manufacturing process, revolutionizing the automobile industry.
By 1915, the millionth Model T had rolled off the assembly line.
At an average cost of about $500 each, cars became affordable
for the first time for many American families. The widespread
availability of cars created the need for a range of innovations:
new road systems, laws, service stations, and repair shops.
Scouts were earning the Automobiling merit badge, which
required them to obtain their driver’s license, and understand
the functions of various automobile parts, including the clutch,
carburetor, and spark plugs.
In 1911, electricity was changing American family life.
Through early 20th century innovations, electricity was
becoming more accessible to Americans, especially in urban
areas. Electricity in homes meant consistent and reliable
lighting, heating, and eventually, appliances like toasters and
electric ovens. In 1911, Scouts could earn an Electricity merit
badge by making an electromagnet, repairing broken electric
connections, and knowing how to resuscitate someone who
received an electric shock.
The Invention
merit badge,
circa 1911
The Automobiling
merit badge,
circa 1911


INVENTING 15
.History of Inventing
Thomas A. Edison, American Inventor
The inventor Thomas Alva Edison (1847–1931) helped to shape the
modern world with such inventions as the incandescent light bulb,
the phonograph, and the motion picture camera. He also made
improvements to the telegraph and telephone. In his lifetime, he acquired
1,093 patents. He was also a successful manufacturer and entrepreneur
who marketed his inventions to the public.
Edison’s laboratory in Menlo Park, New Jersey, was an “invention
factory” that produced a nearly constant stream of inventions and
improvements. In 1877, he invented a phonograph by which sound
could be recorded on a tinfoil-coated cylinder. Within two years came his
long-lasting incandescent electric light bulb, which was perhaps his most
important contribution. In 1882, in New York City, he installed the world’s
first commercial electrical lighting system.
In 1888, Edison and his associate, William K.L. Dickson, invented
the kinetoscope, a type of motion picture camera. By synchronizing his
phonograph and kinetoscope, Edison’s laboratory produced the first
talking motion pictures in 1913.
His other significant
inventions included an
alkaline storage battery, the
mimeograph machine (an
inexpensive printing press
that forced ink through a
stencil onto paper), and a
wireless telegraphic method
for communicating with
moving trains.
Thomas Edison was among the most
productive inventors in history.


16 INVENTING
History of Inventing.
Scouts and Radio
The German physicist Heinrich Hertz made possible the
development of radio, television, and radar by proving that
electricity can be transmitted wirelessly in electromagnetic
waves. In 1887 he became the first to broadcast and receive
radio waves.
Hertz did not recognize the full importance of his
experiments. Others, however, better understood how to put
his discoveries to practical use. The Italian electrical engineer
Guglielmo Marconi is generally credited as the inventor of radio.
In 1896, Marconi transmitted radio signals for more than a mile,
and applied for his first British patent. By 1902, messages were
regularly radioed across the Atlantic Ocean, and by 1905 many
ships were using radio to communicate with shore stations.
Inventions today,
just like 100 years
ago, help make
life healthier, more
comfortable, more
informed, more
engaging, and
more productive.
The first Boy Scout handbook (1911) included complete
instructions for making “an up-to-date wireless
apparatus for stationary use in the home or at the
meeting place of each patrol.”
In the early years of this new technology,
many Scouts built their own radios
and experimented with simple
receivers called crystal sets. The
name came from the receiver’s
most important component, a
crystal detector originally made
with a lump of mineral such as
galena, a form of lead ore. The
user could move a fine wire
called a “cat’s whisker” along the
flat surface of a galena crystal
to find a spot where the surface
formed a natural semiconductor.
At that point, the crystal set would
start receiving radio signals. Sold
and homemade by the millions, the
inexpensive crystal radio played a major role in
introducing radio to the public.
During the 1920s, radio blossomed, bringing music,
news, and new ideas into American homes. Other technologies
also developed: Airplanes, movies, and refrigerators changed the


INVENTING 17
.History of Inventing
ways Americans lived. The nation changed, and so did the
Boy Scouts of America, introducing merit badges to help
youth explore and master new technologies, and to help
them become “efficient leader[s] in the paths of
civilization and peace.”
While we don’t know the names of the 10 Scouts
who earned the first Invention merit badges, nor do
we know what they invented, we do know that they
were living in a technologically exciting time. Today is
just as exciting. We are not inventing airplanes just to fly
in the air or automobiles just to drive on roads, but rather we
are inventing airplanes that can be both flown and driven.
Inventors are developing ways to target tumor cells with gold
nanoparticles to treat cancer, with fewer side effects. Cell phones
are being used to collect health care data so the quality of life can
be improved in developing countries like Kenya.
The Aviation merit
badge, circa 1911
The Transition roadable aircraft is a plane that can fold its wings
and be driven along the road like a car.
What will Scouts who earn the Inventing merit
badge invent?





INVENTING 19
.Impact of Inventing on Humankind
Impact of Inventing
on Humankind
The impact of inventing on humankind is inestimable. Not only
have inventions improved the quality of life for countless people
around the world, they have also changed the course of history
and the foundations of modern society. Technology has become
such a large part of our daily lives that we cannot imagine
surviving without the conveniences it has brought to us.
Imagine living without your cell phone. Texting would not exist,
and to make phone calls you would have to use a landline.
The changes our society has experienced in moving from an
agriculturally based market to a manufacturing-oriented economy
and now to a knowledge-centered economic system have created
fertile ground for Scouts to devise ingenious solutions to a wide
range of problems to help humankind. There are countless
opportunities for new products and services that take advantage
of high-speed worldwide communications and transportation. We
live in an exciting time with a global environment for knowledge
sharing and distance learning, both of which foster opportunities
for working together to develop solutions.
Recounting all of
the inventions that have
impacted humankind
could fill a library. Let’s
look at three “historical”
inventors and their
inventions to see how they
changed our world.


20 INVENTING
Impact of Inventing on Humankind.
Cyrus McCormick
invented the
mechanical reaper,
which resulted in
a revolutionary break-
through in agriculture.
Cyrus McCormick (1809–1884)
Cyrus McCormick is called the “father of modern agriculture”
because he invented the first successful mechanical reaper in
1831 when he was 22 years old. With his reaper, McCormick
single-handedly increased the potential yield of farming at least
tenfold, with a minimum of effort by farmers. The reaper was
the beginning of a new mechanical harvesting industry that
made significant contributions to the prosperity of Americans.
Cyrus had a talent for agriculture and invention at an early
age. When he was 15, he invented a lightweight cradle for
carting harvested grain. The mechanical reaper was actually
a project on which his father, also an inventor, had given up.
Cyrus used his father’s incomplete model as a starting point.
He sketched plans for a machine that would automatically cut,
thresh, and bundle grain while being pulled through a field by
horses. Within six weeks—before the 1831 harvest was over—
he had built, field-tested, remodeled, and successfully
demonstrated to the public the world’s first mechanical reaper.
Farmers were initially uninterested in the mechanical
reaper, and for nine years there were virtually no sales, probably
because farmers were reluctant to change what they knew.
Undaunted, McCormick spent 10 years making improvements
and was awarded his first patent in 1834. He also utilized novel
business practices, including lenient credit for purchases,
written performance guarantees (“15 acres a day”), readily
available replacement parts, and advertising to educate farming
communities about the
benefits of technology.


INVENTING 21
.Impact of Inventing on Humankind
Henry Ford (1863–1947)
Henry Ford did not invent the automobile. That honor
goes to Karl Benz (1844–1929) of Germany. Ford gained
fame, however, for his pioneering achievements in
the automobile industry, and he held many patents
on automotive mechanisms. From boyhood he was
interested in machinery, and after experimenting for
several years in his spare time, he finished building his
first automobile in 1893. Ten years later, he founded the
Ford Motor Company.
In 1908, the company began selling Ford’s Model T for $850.
Sturdy, reliable, and easy to operate, the Model T quickly became popular,
and Ford soon found he was unable to meet the demand for his cars.
In 1913, Ford began using standardized parts and a moving assembly
line in his factory. Now his employees built cars one piece at a time instead
of one car at a time. Each worker could focus on doing one thing very well,
rather than being responsible for a number of tasks. Ford did not invent
the assembly line, nor was he the first to use it. He is generally credited,
however, with its general adoption for large-scale manufacturing.
Ford’s innovations
helped to raise the
American standard of
living. The new assembly
system produced cars
quickly and efficiently—so
efficiently that the cost
of building cars was
lowered considerably. He
passed this savings along
to his customers, and
in 1915, he dropped the
price of the Model T to
$290. That year, Ford sold
the millionth Model T. Henry Ford’s adoption of the moving assembly line
transformed the automobile from an expensive
luxury into a practical vehicle that working people
could afford.


22 INVENTING
Impact of Inventing on Humankind.
Jack Kilby (1923–2005)
For one invention alone, Jack Kilby can be justly
considered one of the greatest electrical engi-
neers of all time. He invented the monolithic
integrated circuit, or microchip, which made
microprocessors possible, thereby allowing
high-speed computing and communications
systems to become efficient, convenient,
affordable, and used everywhere.
After earning a Bachelor of Science degree
in electrical engineering at the University of
Illinois in 1947 and a Master of Science degree
in electrical engineering at the University of
Wisconsin in 1950, Kilby took a research position
with Texas Instruments Inc. in Dallas, Texas.
Within one year, Kilby had conceived and created
a small, self-contained, monolithic integrated
circuit in a single piece of semiconductor material about the
size of a fingernail. At the first professional presentation of his
invention at the Institute of Radio Engineers Show of 1959,
Kilby’s colleagues were both astonished and overjoyed—and a
new generation of computers and microelectronics was born.
Jack Kilby invented the integrated circuit at Texas Instruments in
1958. Composed of only a transistor and other components on
a slice of germanium, Kilby’s invention, 7
⁄16 by 1
⁄16 inches in size,
revolutionized the electronics industry and our lives.


INVENTING 23
.Impact of Inventing on Humankind
The breadboard (construction base) for the first electronic hand-
held calculator fills a room.
For his invention
of the integrated
circuit, Kilby was
awarded the
Nobel Prize in
Physics in 2000.
Also credited with
the invention of
the thermal printer
and the handheld
calculator, Kilby
had patented
more than
60 inventions.
Kilby went on to develop the first industrial, commercial,
and military applications for his integrated circuits—including the
first pocket calculator (the Pocketronic) and the first computer
in which the integrated circuit was used. By the mid-1970s, the
microchip formed the basis of modern microelectronics. Without
it, no personal computer, fax machine, cell phone, satellite
television, or any other computer or mass communication system
would exist.
Cyrus McCormick, Henry Ford, and Jack Kilby all solved
important problems with technological solutions. Their
solutions significantly impacted the quality of life,
standard of living, and nature of modern society.





INVENTING 25
.Inventors in the Community
Inventors in the
Community
Inventions can help people
live longer, be more
comfortable, and lead more
productive lives. For these and
other reasons, it’s easy to see that
inventors are important members of the community.
Can you locate an inventor in your community? Listed
below are a few suggestions to help you.
• Ask the reference librarian at your local library.
• Talk to an engineer or entrepreneur.
• Call a local manufacturing business.
• Use the internet (always with your parent’s permission first).
The internet can “bring the world” to you. It is a tool to
be used appropriately to gain information while avoiding
dangers. Websites that will help you locate inventors in
your local community are listed in the resources section.
Before you send an email to an organization asking for
information, be sure you have your parent’s permission
to do so.
Researching Patents
One way to locate inventors living in your community is to
research a patent. Inventors can legally protect their inventions,
just as McCormick, Ford, and Kilby did, by patenting them with
the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO).


26 INVENTING
Inventors in the Community .
Patents give the inventor the “right to exclude others from
making, selling, or using” the invention. Anyone who tries to
benefit financially from someone else’s patented invention,
or uses it without licensing it from the patent owner, can be
found guilty of patent infringement, and may be required by
law to pay the inventor a royalty, lost profits, and maybe even
punitive damages.
Through the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office, inventors
can obtain legal protection for a period of time in exchange for
sharing their ideas with the public. In the United States, current
patent laws generally grant protection for 20 years from the date
the patent application is filed with the USPTO.
One important purpose of the patent system is to
help inventors justify the effort and expense of making
something that is new and useful. Some inventions, like new
pharmaceutical drugs, can cost millions of dollars and take
years to develop, so the prospect of getting a patent that
excludes others from making and selling the drug offers an
incentive for companies to invest in the necessary research
and development.
Patents are explained in detail under “Intellectual
Property, Patents, and Trademarks,” later in this pamphlet.
The Scouts BSA
handbook and the
Digital Technology
merit badge
pamphlet include
tips on avoiding
internet dangers.
FPO
FPO—FreePatentsOnline.com—
is a free patent search engine that
is fast and easy. (You can find some
of the most crazy patents.) To search
for a patent that was granted to an
inventor in your community, use the
Quick Search tab and fill in the name
of your city and state. Be sure you
have your parent’s permission first.


INVENTING 27
.Inventors in the Community
From Problem-Solving to Inventing
Scouts solve problems all the time. If you sprain your ankle while
hiking, your Scout patrol can make a crutch for you by using a
tree branch. Three ropes, a few lashings, and wood supports
become a bridge to cross over a bog. Remember the Pinewood
Derby races from Cub Scouting? Building a Pinewood Derby car
was all about solving problems in order to be the fastest 5-ounce
car made from a block of pine with four nails for axles and plastic
wheels. While Pinewood Derby cars are solutions, they are not
inventions. Why? Because they are not unique solutions.
Invention is at one end of the problem-solving spectrum;
routine problem-solving is at the other end. As you move
toward invention, you are moving away from predictable and
specific solutions. By creatively thinking about a problem, you
can find a unique solution. Sometimes, this creative thinking
becomes breakthrough thinking (a Eureka! moment) when you
connect the problem you are trying to solve with something
from an unrelated area.
Designing and building Pinewood Derby cars involves solving
many problems, but Pinewood Derby cars are not inventions
because they are not unique solutions.
PROBLEM SOLVING
The spectrum of problem-solving
CREATIVE
AND UNIQUE
INVENTION
ROUTINE AND
PREDICTABLE


28 INVENTING
Inventors in the Community .
From Bridges to Backpacks
John Fabel was an inventor whose creative thinking about a
problem led to a breakthrough. John was trained as a geographer
and designer. His work as an inventor involved environment,
community, and design. As a child, he continually asked
What if questions: What if I could make this work better?
What if I built this?
Because of the way he looked at problems, he was able to
see a connection between the suspension bridges he saw in New
York City and the problem he was trying to solve. This thought
process led him to design a backpack that would distribute
weight evenly so that after long hours of cross-country skiing,
the straps of his backpack wouldn’t bruise his shoulders. That
is breakthrough thinking, sometimes referred to as a Eureka!
moment.
The EcoTrek™ backpack that John Fabel invented does not
rely on shoulder straps to carry the load. It transfers much of the
weight to the hips. When wearing it, your hips act like a tower on
a suspension bridge, and the backpack is similar to the roadway.
Like cables on the bridge, the triangular flap between the backpack
and the hip belt helps distribute the weight evenly. John filed
for a patent on his backpack design in 1995. It was granted in
1997. Initially, he manufactured and sold his backpack directly
to customers, but eventually he licensed the design to Marmot, a
maker of backpacks, tents, sleeping bags, and outdoor clothing.
By creatively
thinking about
a problem,
you can find a
unique solution.
Sometimes, this
creative thinking
becomes break-
through thinking
when you connect
the problem
with something
totally unrelated.


INVENTING 29
.Inventors in the Community
Inventor John Fabel
was a Scout in western
Massachusetts, as were his
father and grandfather.
The suspension bridge helped inspire
John Fabel’s invention.
Fabel’s EcoTrek™ backpack does not rely on
shoulder straps to carry the load because it
transfers much of the weight to the hips.


30 INVENTING
Inventors in the Community .
Who Says You Can’t Rappel…in Reverse?
Nate Ball had a passion for inventing long before he could define
the word. He recalls that at age 2, he dug up the family garden to
build, wreck, and rebuild mud dams and underground forts. In
the fourth grade, he created a bottle rocket launcher that shot
two-liter bottles of water 100 feet into the sky. This creation
was followed in sixth grade by a hovercraft powered by
a vacuum cleaner motor.
By the eighth grade, he was attempting to build a
Tesla coil in his parents’ garage, making capacitors
out of glass bottles and aluminum foil. “I saw
Tesla coils on the internet shooting lightning,”
said Ball. “It was the coolest thing I’d ever seen,
and I knew I had to build one.” Amazingly,
Ball did not touch a machine tool until he was
in college. He credits limited resources during
his early years with forming his ability to think
unconventionally about problems and to come
up with efficient solutions.
In 2004, along with three other mechanical
engineering students at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Ball founded Atlas Devices,
LLC. The goal of the company was to develop and
commercialize the ATLAS Powered Rope Ascender,
which uses a rope-handling mechanism, conceived by Ball.
This portable device can raise more than 250 pounds at 10 feet
per second, giving rescuers, emergency personnel, and soldiers
faster and more controllable climbing capabilities. The U.S.
Army awarded funding for this invention.
Ball is a coapplicant of multiple patents. His awards and
achievements include the SAIC Award in the 2005 Soldier
Design Competition, sponsored by the Institute for Soldier
Nanotechnologies at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
for his team’s ATLAS Powered Rope Ascender. He also won
the Luis De Florez Design and Innovation Award in 2005 for
outstanding ingenuity and creativity from MIT’s Department
of Mechanical Engineering for an electric scooter. Nate Ball
received his undergraduate and graduate degrees in mechanical
engineering from MIT.
Nate Ball using the
ATLAS Powered
Rope Ascender


INVENTING 31
.Inventors in the Community
In 2015, Ball was named chief executive officer of Atlas
Devices, which is now a global provider of innovative solutions for
security, defense, and rescue operations. The company provides
high-tech jobs for products that are 100% made in the United
States. In addition to leading the company he co-founded with
Eagle Scout Dan Walker, he is also a children’s book author, host
and producer of the PBS series Design Squad, and dedicated
to inspiring youths of all ages to consider STEM careers and
inventing solutions to real-world problems.
Inventor Nate Ball demonstrates reverse rappelling over a pool
using the patented ATLAS Powered Rope Ascender. Nate was
awarded the $30,000 Lemelson-MIT Student Prize in 2007 for
his inventiveness. Today, Nate and his co-founder have built a
successful business out of their invention. Their products help
people do dangerous jobs more safely.


32 INVENTING
Inventors in the Community .
A Street-Legal Airplane
Carl Dietrich traces his earliest design innovations to his
childhood, building tree forts in his backyard and elaborate
spaceships from Fisher-Price® Construx building sets. He credits
his father’s fascination with model planes as the inspiration
that led to his passion for aeronautics and aerospace. By the
time Dietrich entered high school, his inventive drive had
produced remote-controlled airplanes and designs for a
hydrogen-powered aircraft.
Dietrich earned his undergraduate and graduate degrees from
MIT, including a Ph.D. in 2006 in aeronautics and astronautics.
His doctoral work led to an efficiency improvement design that
he patented for a desktop-size Penning Fusion Reactor, following
a research internship at Los Alamos National Laboratory in 2002.
Carl Dietrich credits this internship with sparking his initial
curiosity about a distributed network of reactors that could
potentially replace the strained power grid of the United States.
In 1998, Dietrich cofounded the MIT Rocket Team. He holds
a patent for his Centrifugal Direct Injection Engine—a low-cost,
high-performance rocket propulsion engine. The CDIE operates
without a conventional turbo pump pressurization system, which
greatly reduces its complexity
and cost.
He also invented the
PickProd—a blast-safe demining
pick for safer removal of
antipersonnel landmines in
environments with hard-packed
earth, like Afghanistan. He made
the decision not to patent his
invention, so it could be used
by anyone in need.
“The best way to think of an invention is to think
of a need,” says inventor Carl Dietrich.


INVENTING 33
.Inventors in the Community
In 2006, Carl Dietrich and four MIT colleagues (and fellow
pilots) launched a start-up company called Terrafugia to create
the Transition, a personal air vehicle (or PAV) concept. The
Transition completed its flight test program in June 2009. It will
make use of the nation’s thousands of underutilized public-
access airports by providing a practical transportation alternative
to travelers whose destinations are 100 to 500 miles away. The
Transition vehicle can be driven on any type of surfaced road,
requires only a sport pilot’s license to fly, and operates on
premium unleaded gasoline. According to Dietrich, it’s not a
flying car; it’s a road-able aircraft.
Carl Dietrich has two patents pending for the Transition,
including overall configuration and a load-bearing hinge for the
foldable wings.
The Transition’s folding wings are the unique invention that make it different from
a flying car.


34 INVENTING
Inventors in the Community .
Inventors in Your Community
As previously described, the internet can help you find inventors
in your local community by researching their patents. Inventors
may choose to patent their inventions in order to protect their
creations. They may find out how to apply for and receive a
patent through the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office. When a
patent is granted by the U.S. government, the invention receives a
U.S. Patent number. While you can search for patents on the U.S.
Patent and Trademark Office website, there are other websites
that might be easier to use.
Remember to
always have
your parent’s
permission
before you
use the internet.


INVENTING 35
.Inventors in the Community
patents.google.com
This site is easy to use, particularly if you already
have the U.S. patent number, inventor name or other
keywords. You can search patents from the U.S.
Patent and Trademark Office, view the patent and
accompanying images, and download patents.
FPO
(FreePatentsOnline)
The FreePatentsOnline.com site
allows users to easily search
by the inventor’s geographical
location. Searches also can
be conducted chronologically
beginning with the most
recent dates. To search, use the
“expert” or “quick” functions.
You will not be required to
create a free account.
U.S. Patent and
Trademark Office
The U.S. Patent and Trademark Office is the definitive
site for all official patent and trademark issues. The
site informs the public about patents, trademarks, and
intellectual property law. Searching for patents on this
powerful website is a more complicated process than
searching on Google or FreePatentsOnline. The U.S.
Patent and Trademark Office offers an eight-step patent
process. Check out the information on the Patent Pro
Bono Program, free for independent inventors.
www.uspto.gov/patents/basics/using-legal-services/
pro-bono/patent-pro-bono-program





INVENTING 37
.Intellectual Property, Patents, and Trademarks
Intellectual Property,
Patents, and Trademarks
It is important to be familiar with the laws of the United States that
protect the property of inventors. The contributions of inventors
result in a better quality of life for others in our society, and those
inventors have the right to enjoy the financial benefits derived
from their hard work and persistence in solving problems that lead
to invention and innovation.
What Is Intellectual Property?
“Intellectual property” is a legal term that includes patents
(which protect inventions), trademarks (which indicate a source
of goods or services), copyrights (which protect the works of
authors and artists), and trade secrets (secret knowledge that is
used in business). Because you cannot touch, feel, smell,
or taste a patent, trademark, copyright,
or trade secret, these are often called
“intangible.” Nevertheless, such
intangible things have value in the
same way that physical property, such
as land, houses, or cars, has value.
Different government agencies
have the job of helping creative people
establish their rights to their intellectual
property. The U.S. Patent and Trademark
Office, as the name implies, grants
patents on inventions and registers
trademarks. Copyrights can be registered
in the Copyright Office, a part of the
Library of Congress.


38 INVENTING
Intellectual Property, Patents, and Trademarks.
What Is a Patent?
A patent protects an invention by giving the inventor the right
to stop other people from making, using, or selling the patented
invention. The word patent means open, and that describes the
“deal”—in return for the patent, the inventor must be open
about what his or her invention is, so that society can benefit
from the inventor’s knowledge. The inventor gives up secrecy
and gets protection for a period of time. Everyone else gives up
the ability to make, use, or sell the invention during the patent
term (period of time), but they will know about it and will be
able to use that knowledge, perhaps to make even better
inventions in the future.
If someone else makes, uses, or sells the patented invention
during the term of the patent without permission, he or she has
infringed the patent. The owner of the patent can sue the infringer,
asking a court to issue an injunction ordering the infringer to stop
the infringement or asking the court to order the infringer to pay
money. A monetary award can be either actual damages (the
profits the patent owner might have made from selling the product
or the profits the infringer has made from the infringement) or
punitive damages (money that punishes the infringer).
There is no such thing as a “worldwide patent.” Each
country has its own patent system, and each country’s patents are
effective only in the country that issued the patent. A few regional
patents cover a number of countries, such as the European Patent
Convention for 27 European countries, ARIPO and OAPI in
Africa, and the Eurasian Patent in some former Soviet countries.
Inventors who want protection in more than one country will
need to obtain a patent in each country or get a regional patent
covering several countries.
As mentioned before, the part of the United States government
that is responsible for issuing patents to inventors is the U.S. Patent
and Trademark Office, a part of the Department of Commerce. The
inventor files a patent application with the USPTO. The application
describes the invention in detail complete enough that a person
could build the invention from the description. The application is
reviewed by a patent examiner, who will search earlier patents and
patent applications to see whether anyone had already invented the
invention. If the examiner decides the invention is new, the patent
is issued. It remains “alive” for a term of 20 years from the date
the application was filed, as long as the inventor pays the USPTO
maintenance fees four, eight, and 12 years after the patent is issued.


INVENTING 39
.Intellectual Property, Patents, and Trademarks
1. Utility patents cover machines, products (articles of manufacture),
methods (processes), compositions of matter (chemicals, cell lines),
or improvements to any of these things. When people talk about a
“patent”—including most of the discussions in this pamphlet—they
usually mean a utility patent; this is the most common type. An example
of this type of patent is number 7,581,715, for a “Powered Rope Ascender
and Portable Rope Pulling Device” owned by Atlas Devices and invented
by Nathan Ball and others. This patent is shown later in this chapter.
2. Design patents cover the appearance of useful objects. These patents
do not cover the function or construction of the object. An example of a
design patent is D41,412, issued in 1911 to Robert Baden-Powell for the
design of the Scout badge.
3. Plant patents cover plants that are asexually reproduced (that is,
plants that are grown from cuttings or rootstock rather than from
seeds or bulbs). An example of a plant patent is PP13,286, owned by
the University of California, for an “Almond tree named ‘Winters’”
developed by Professor Dale Kester and others at UC Davis.
A design patent for Robert
Baden-Powell’s design of
the Scout badge


40 INVENTING
Intellectual Property, Patents, and Trademarks.
Even at the very beginning of our country’s
history, the value of protecting intellectual
property was recognized. The first patent
in what is today the U.S. was issued long
before we were a country. A “Method of
Making Scythes” was patented in 1646 by
the Massachusetts Bay Colony.
When the U.S. Constitution was written
in 1787, the framers included a requirement in
Article 1 to “promote the progress of science
and useful arts by securing for … inventors the
exclusive right to their … discoveries.” The first
patent issued by the United States of America
in 1790 is shown here. Protecting a method of making
potash and pearl ash for fertilizer, it was examined by
Thomas Jefferson and signed by George Washington.
While that is the first U.S. patent, it isn’t “patent No. 1.” Patents
were not numbered until 1836, when John Ruggles received patent
No. 1 on “Traction Wheels.” More than 10 million patents have been
issued since 1790.
Components of a Patent
Patents reveal treasure troves of information.
Because one of the requirements for a patent is
full disclosure of the invention, you can read
detailed information as to how a particular
technology works. Most technical information
found in patents does not exist anywhere else,
so the USPTO is an excellent place to learn
about how things work.
After the current numbering system for
patents was established in 1836, the first
design patent was granted in 1842, and the first
plant patent in 1931.
This patent, granted to inventor Nathan
Ball on Sept. 1, 2009, is U.S. Patent
7,581,715 for the Powered Rope Ascender
and Portable Rope Pulling Device.


INVENTING 41
.Intellectual Property, Patents, and Trademarks
The basic parts of U.S. patent 7,581,715 are:
A Patent
Number
7,581,715 Unique number issued by
USPTO within each class of
patents (utility, design, plant)
B Title POWERED ROPE
ASCENDER AND
PORTABLE ROPE
PULLING DEVICE
Technical title of the invention
C Inventors Nathan Ball
Timothy Fofonoff
Bryan Schmid
Daniel Walker
Four inventors are listed for
this invention.
D Assignee Atlas Devices, LLC The assignee is the owner of
the patent.
E Abstract Short, one-paragraph overview
of the invention
F Drawings 11 drawing sheets
or figures
Description A detailed
description of the
invention begins
in column 3, line
47, and ends in
column 9, line 51.
The description should fully
disclose the technical details of
the invention so that someone
skilled and knowledgeable could
build or make it. Patents do not
have page numbers but rather
column and line numbers.
Claims The 20 claims
begin in column 9,
line 52, and end in
column 12, line 10.
The claims set out exactly what
the patent protects. Claims are
like an outline, determining
the “legal boundary” of the
patented invention.


42 INVENTING
Intellectual Property, Patents, and Trademarks.
Trademarks
A trademark is something used to identify the source of a particular product
or service. Trademarks originally came from the “hallmarks” that early met-
alsmiths stamped into their work to show who had made the pieces and to
guarantee the purity of the metal. Today, nearly anything that can distinguish
one maker’s goods or services from those of a competitor can be considered a
trademark. Familiar examples include:
• A word or name—”Exxon” for petroleum products, or “Eagle Scout” as an
indication of rank in the Boy Scouts of America
• A phrase or slogan—”Just Do It” for sneakers (Nike), or “Prepared. For
Life.” for “promoting the interests of members of a youth development and
community service organization” (the BSA)
• A way of presenting a word—the striped IBM logo, or Walt Disney’s
signature on films
• A symbol or drawing (logo)—the apple on Apple computers, or the Order
of the Arrow arrow for sashes
• A character—Mr. Peanut for nuts (Kraft), or the Energizer Bunny for batteries
• A shape—the curved and ribbed Coca-Cola bottle
• A distinctive building design—KFC’s striped roof, or McDonald’s
Golden Arches
• Details of packaging (“trade dress”)—the square,
textured, silver-foil wrapper on Klondike ice cream bars,
or the red-and-white label on Campbell’s soup cans
• In rare instances, things such as a sound, color, piece
of music, and even a smell (in one case, for scented
sewing thread)
Placing a superscript “TM” (™) next to the mark tells
others that the owner is claiming trademark rights. If
the owner of a mark registers it with the U.S. Patent and
Trademark Office, the owner of the mark may use the
symbol ® to show that the trademark has been registered.
You may be familiar with trademarks from your
camping gear. For instance, the Coleman Company
Inc. of Wichita, Kansas, owns this trademarked
design for recreational sports equipment.
The trademark is visible
on this lantern sold by the
Coleman Company.


INVENTING 43
.Intellectual Property, Patents, and Trademarks
Requirements for Patentability
You can get a patent if (a) your invention is one of the types of
things the patent law says is
protectable—a machine or product,
a method of doing something, or a
“composition of matter”; (b) you
can describe your invention well
enough that it can be built from
your description (if you can’t
explain how a working model
would be built, you have an idea,
not an invention); and (c) the
invention meets the requirements
for patentability.
The three major requirements for patentability are that the
invention must be novel, useful, and not obvious.
• “Novel” means that no one has previously patented the
invention, described it in a publication, used it in public, or
sold it. All of these conditions also apply to your own actions
more than one year before you apply for a patent. In other
words, if you ever want patent protection, you have one year
from your first public disclosure to apply for a patent.
• “Useful” generally means the invention would work to do
something—anything at all. As long as you can explain what
your invention does, it is considered “useful.” Very few patent
applications are rejected on the grounds of “not useful”—
mostly so-called “perpetual motion” inventions or chemical
compounds and gene sequences with no known use. If you
think you have invented something as apparently impossible
as a perpetual motion machine, the Patent Office will expect
you to prove it with a working model.
• “Not obvious” means the invention must not be an obvious
combination of things that are already known. This is often
hard to define—every invention seems obvious, after it has
been invented. The question is what the combination of
known things would have taught a hypothetical “person
having ordinary skill in the art” before the invention was
created. That is, your invention is deemed to be “obvious”
if a person with “skill in the art” would have thought to
combine the previously existing inventions to result in your
invention without first having seen your patent application.
The technical
information
contained in
a patent often
cannot be found
anywhere else.


44 INVENTING
Intellectual Property, Patents, and Trademarks.
Unpatented Inventions
Not all inventions are patented. Some cannot be patented
because they are not patentable subject matter.
For an invention that is otherwise patentable, however,
the reasons for not getting a patent are often economic. The
inventor might decide that he or she will not be able to make
enough money from the invention to pay for the patent, or it is
so easy and cheap to copy the invention that the market would
quickly be flooded by competitors who would disappear before
the inventor could stop them.
The decision not to patent could also be related to timing.
On average, it takes three or more years to get a patent. If the
invention is the kind of thing that will be a big hit in the short
run but unfashionable within three years, patenting it would be
a waste of money. For example, when the patent application on
the hula hoop was filed in 1958, every kid wanted one. More
than 100 million of the plastic hoops were sold that year. But by
the time patent number 3,079,728 was issued on March 5, 1963,
the craze had long since passed.


INVENTING 45
.Intellectual Property, Patents, and Trademarks
Still other inventions are not patented because they are
more valuable if some part of them is kept secret. For example,
the formula for Coca-Cola® is still a well-kept trade secret. If
Atlanta pharmacist John Pemberton had patented the soda
when he developed it in 1886, the formula would have been
published in the issued patent. Pemberton might have been able
to stop imitators for 17 years (the term of patent protection at
the time), but after that everyone would have been able to make
identical drinks.
Inventors As
Humanitarians
Inventors may choose not to patent
devices that can be of great help
to people in need. This bicycle-
powered device, which was field
tested in Tanzania, shells corn 40
times faster than by hand. This
frees people of manual labor and
generates an income from the sale
of excess corn kernels.
Inventors
sometimes make
their inventions
available without
patenting them
because they
believe the
invention will be
of more benefit
to society and
people if it is
freely available.
Jonas Salk (1914–1995) created the first polio vaccine—
one of the most important vaccines of the 20th
century—and chose not to patent it. Polio is an infectious
viral disease that attacks nerve cells and sometimes the
central nervous system, causing paralysis, permanent
disability and deformity, and in some cases death. It is
estimated that Salk’s decision not to patent the vaccine
cost him $7 billion in profits, but he was acclaimed as an
international hero.


46 INVENTING
Intellectual Property, Patents, and Trademarks.
Nikola Tesla
Nikola Tesla (1856–1943) was a Serbian inventor and
a pioneer in electric power. An experienced electrical
engineer, Tesla immigrated to the United States in 1884
to work for Thomas Edison in New York City. He soon
left Edison to set up his own laboratories and companies
to develop electrical devices, including his patented
alternating current (AC) motor, now used worldwide in
industry and household appliances. In 1888, Tesla designed the
first practical system of generating and transmitting alternating current for
electric power. AC beat out DC (direct current) to become the form in which
electric power is delivered to businesses and residences today.
Tesla also conducted experiments with radio waves and wireless
communications. He patented the basic system of radio in 1896, and his
published schematic diagrams described all the basic elements of the
radio transmitter that was later used by Guglielmo Marconi. In 1898, Tesla
demonstrated a remote-controlled boat, which may have been the first such
radio-controlled device ever exhibited to the public.
Tesla’s fondness for showmanship earned him a reputation as a
kind of “mad scientist.” At his laboratory in Colorado Springs, Colorado,
he conducted spectacular high-voltage experiments, producing artificial
lightning with discharges in the millions of volts and arcs up to 135 feet long.
His many inventions include
the Tesla coil, a transformer used
to produce huge voltages of high-
frequency alternating current.
Circuits related to the Tesla coil are
still used in radio and television
receivers. At least 275 patents were
issued to Tesla in 26 countries, and
he developed many other inventions
that were not patented. In large part,
his inventions and discoveries form
the basis for much of the modern
world’s electrically powered lifestyle. Nikola Tesla sat calmly reading in his
Colorado Springs laboratory as his
“magnifying transmitter” generated
millions of volts of electricity and
produced long, crackling arcs.


INVENTING 47
.Intellectual Property, Patents, and Trademarks
Famous Women Inventors
Among the inventors whose ingenuity has helped to shape the modern
world are many women, some of them famous and some relatively
unknown. Listed here are a few women inventors and their inventions.
Inventor Invention Year
Margaret Knight Machine to produce flat-bottomed paper bags 1871
Mary Anderson Windshield wipers 1903
Ruth Wakefield Chocolate chip cookies 1930
Patsy Sherman Scotchgard™ stain repellent 1956
Bette Nesmith
Graham
Liquid Paper® correction fluid 1958
Stephanie Kwolek Kevlar®, a synthetic material used
in bulletproof vests
1971
Sally Fox Machine-spinnable naturally
colored cotton
1989
Stephanie Kwolek (1923–2014) invented Kevlar, widely used in the making of
bulletproof vests. She once said, “I don’t think there’s anything like saving
someone’s life to bring you satisfaction and happiness.”





INVENTING 49
.Inventing Closer to Home
Inventing Closer to Home
Each time you go camping, you take camping gear to keep you
dry, help you prepare food, and find your way on hikes and
watercraft trips. The products you rely on represent years of
research, development, refinement, and input from numerous
inventors. Many of these items are either patented or patent
pending—meaning a patent application has been filed with the
U.S. Patent and Trademark Office and is being processed. Below
are examples of a few common camping items and their U.S.
patent numbers.
When you prepare for a camping trip, do you consider
the environmental conditions where you will be spending the
night? What is the weather forecast? What do Scouts who have
previously camped there recommend? Can you use gear made of
particular material without harming the plants and animals
that live nearby? Can you purchase environmentally friendly
equipment to protect our planet?
The Scouting outdoor ethics are held in the highest regard.
This means that, whenever possible, you and other Scouts
should make every effort to minimize the environmental
impact of your actions and the gear you use. As you make
these considerations, you can think inventively to devise
solutions to your problems—not least of which are issues
concerning outdoor gear.
Think inventively
about how to
make your
camping equip-
ment more useful.
What problems
do you have with
your equipment?
Can you think of
any solutions?
While this might
be routine
problem-solving,
it is an
excellent way
to start inventing.
Camping stove U.S. Patent No. 5423308;
patented in 1995
Tent with screen porch U.S. Patent No. D418572;
patented in 2000
Disposable rain poncho U.S. Patent No. 3665518;
patented in 1972
Tent with U.S. Patent No. 6499497;
retractable fly patented in 2002


50 INVENTING
Inventing Closer to Home.
How Would You Improve
on These Items?
Mess Kit. As commonly used
camping products, mess kits are
subjected to heavy use and a
variety of environmental conditions.
If your mess kit shows signs of
rust or bends easily, you might
suggest that the manufacturer
consider using different materials
in its construction. When buying a
mess kit, it is important to consider
the material from which it is made. For
example, if you camp in areas prone to extreme
temperatures or heavy precipitation, you need gear that
can withstand the conditions. Do you have suggestions
for improving the durability of your mess kit? Do you
have other suggestions for its improvement?
Collapsible Cup. Folding cups and collapsible mugs
take up little space in a backpack, but they can be
prone to collapsing at the wrong time—when they’re
full of liquid. Can you suggest improvements for
stability? Might a different material be more durable?
Might a different
material provide better
insulation for hot or
cold drinks? Would a
handle make the cup
more functional?
How would
you improve
a mess kit?
How would you improve
a collapsible cup?


INVENTING 51
.Inventing Closer to Home
Backpacking Tent. As you know, a tent is the
quintessential piece of gear for overnight outings.
However, you have probably had your share of tent
troubles. You know how it feels to discover that a part is
missing, there is a hole in the material, or the zipper is
stuck, especially when you are setting up camp as it is
getting dark or raining!
Depending on where you camp, your tent
may perform better than other tents under certain
environmental conditions than others. For example, some
tent materials are sensitive to intense, direct sunlight.
Others are made with material that
deflects sunlight and maintains
structural integrity. Based on
your camping experiences,
how would you improve
your tent? Can you think
of problems you have
encountered and offer
ideas as to how they
might be fixed?
How would you improve your tent?
For more inventive solutions that are creative and unique (and less
routine), consider unrelated things and how they could help you solve
a problem with your camping equipment. Can you relate an umbrella or
a bicycle pump to putting up a tent? What inspiration is there in nature
for putting up a tent? Generate solutions by combining unrelated factors.
Remember John Fabel’s suspension backpack. What is your “bridge?”
How would
you improve
your tent?


52 INVENTING
Inventing Closer to Home.
Think inventively about improvements to your own gear. The following matrix
might help spark ideas for making improvements to your camping gear.
Current Usefulness
Improving
Marketability and
Appearance
Improving Function
Propane Lantern Used for lighting
entire camp area.
Different sizes
needed; could use a
transport case.
Needs a switch to
turn on light.
Needs to be adjust-
able for different
light intensity.
Needs to hang
more easily.
Flashlight Used when
camping at night
for making trips to
tents, cabins,
or bathrooms.
Choice of colors and
sizes would
be welcome.
Needs to be
waterproof.
Could be brighter
with LEDs.
Provide extra battery
pack and bulbs
with purchase.
Leatherman®
Multi-Tool
Used as a screw-
driver, can opener,
and saw.
A selection of
colors for easy
identification would
be beneficial.
Add graphics;
customize with
name.
Additional features
would be fire starter
(lighter or magne-
sium stick).
Pen/pencil would
be useful.
Flashlight with
tools would
be useful.
Hot pot lifter.
Wire strippers.
Hiking Shoes Used for walking
and hiking on
varying types
of terrain.
Different graphics
on shoes, maybe
camouflage.
Make boots
fireproof.
Cover with material
that does not
attract burrs.
Scouts from Troop 4 in Brillion,
Wisconsin, thought the functionality
of a Leatherman multi-tool could be
improved by adding a hot pot lifter and
fire starter.


INVENTING 53
.Inventing Closer to Home
The Leatherman Multi-Tool Story
A Scout knife was not the right tool to fix an old Fiat. The multi-tool was
dreamed up in 1975 by Tim Leatherman when he needed pliers but had
only a pocketknife. Five years later, he was granted U.S. Patent 4,238,862
for a pocket multiple tool. His idea became reality in 1983, when two mail-
order companies offered his multi-tool in their holiday catalogs.
Tim is an inventor, engineer, and entrepreneur. After earning his
degree in mechanical engineering, he found work as an English teacher,
a helicopter mechanic, and in other fields. After he dreamed up the multi-
tool, he made models out of cardboard. Then his
brother-in-law taught him how to work metal.
Tim eventually built a steel prototype of the
multi-tool in his garage.
Tim’s road to success was neither
quick nor easy, but he didn’t give up.
Today, the Leatherman Tool Group
employs more than 400 people
and makes more than a million
tools a year. Leatherman tools are
sold in more than 80 countries.
There are 46 Leatherman tools for
activities ranging from bicycling to
camping, fishing to gardening, and
even Scouting.
An early photo of Tim Leatherman working in
his garage shop. Tim was a Life Scout and active
in the Order of the Arrow from Troop 811 in
Portland, Oregon.


54 INVENTING
Inventing Closer to Home.
Record Your Ideas
It is important to keep a notebook of your ideas. When you see
a problem that needs to be solved, write it down. What are you
curious about? What bugs you? When you come across some-
thing that doesn’t work the way it should, write down ways to
make it better. Keep an Idea Matrix, like the one the Scouts from
Brillion, Wisconsin, used for the improved Leatherman Multi-
Tool. If you develop the habit of recording your ideas, you will
never be at a loss for a good problem to work on solving.
As you record how you would solve a problem, your idea
will move forward from an idea to something real.
A laboratory
or engineering
notebook is as
important today
as it was when
Jack Kilby
was recording
his ideas for
the microchip.
America Invents Act: First to File
Any inventor who hasn’t heard the phrase “first to file”
should take note. In the past, inventorship was based on
the “first to invent.” Today, the America Invents Act gives
priority to those who are the “first to file” a patent. Even
if you kept a notebook and could prove you came up with
an idea first, if someone else filed an application with the
U.S. Patent and Trademark office before you, with few
exceptions, you will be out of luck.
This change took effect in March 2013 to help inventors
bring their creations to market sooner, among other
outcomes. First to file also allows American inventors to
protect their intellectual property abroad by making the
patent process more efficient, predictable, and in line with
the patent laws of the international community.


INVENTING 55
.Inventing Closer to Home
Since a notebook is a permanent record of your ideas, some
thought should go into the form of your entries. Your notebook
binding ideally should be sewn and not spiral bound, preventing
pages from being easily torn out. Inexpensive composition
books have sewn bindings, as do more expensive laboratory or
engineering notebooks, available at office supply stores. Since
drawings will be part of your record, grid paper is preferable to
lined paper.
Number and date each page of your notebook. Be sure
to list dates chronologically and do not skip pages. After you
have recorded your ideas and findings, add a suitable title to
each page. Supplement your entries with hand sketches. If you
add something printed to your notebook, tape it in securely.
Handwriting should be neat and legible. All entries should be
written with a pen, not a pencil. If you make a mistake, cross
it out with a single line and add a note about what the error
was. You cannot erase because you are using a pen. Don’t use
correction fluid.
It is important to have the bottom of each page
in your notebook witnessed, signed, and dated
by someone who understands what you are
describing. Your Inventing merit badge
counselor, science teacher, or perhaps an
engineer are appropriate witnesses of
your work. There are rules concerning
the notebook as a permanent record
for obtaining future intellectual prop-
erty rights. So, early in your inventing
career, get into the habit of keeping a
notebook.
It is important to sign and date the bottom of
each page in your engineering notebook. Have
your ideas witnessed by your Inventing merit badge
counselor or someone who understands your work.
You often learn from your mistakes, so don’t try to hide
them. Mistakes may be valuable when you look back at
your work.





INVENTING 57
.The Inventing Process
The Inventing Process
There are so many possibilities for inventions that will solve
problems and improve human existence. But if someone asks
you to invent “right now,” your mind might very well draw a
blank. In the inventing process, gather information, think about
how to solve a problem, and narrow your focus. Here are a few
tips to help you get started.
What to Invent
Inventing is probably easier when it involves items you use fre-
quently, or activities you like to do or in which you have gained
expertise. For example, you might like to ride horses. Have you
noticed a problem in connection with your horseback riding
experience? What about playing video games? Brushing your
teeth? Would you like a better fire starter on campouts? Have
you ever talked to your grandfather about his pocketknife
options when he was a kid? Remember, Tim Leatherman’s idea
for the multi-tool occurred when his Scout knife would not do
the trick to keep his old Fiat running.
This is the Scout knife that the New
York Knife Company made in 1911.
How much more useful is the Leatherman
Super Tool compared to a knife that was
available to Scouts in 1911?


58 INVENTING
As you ponder possible inventions,
use the activities you enjoy to think
of “spin-off” ideas. For example, if
you are a horseback rider, imagine
how the experience of riding a horse
could be improved. What about the
care of horses when they are not being
ridden? What about feeding, grooming,
or training horses? What could you invent
that might be useful in these spin-off areas?
Perhaps your horse-care ideas might spin off
into pet care of other types of animals. If you have
a pet, wouldn’t it be helpful if you didn’t have to feed
and water your pet every day? You could invent new ways of
caring for your pet while you are away for the weekend.
Merit Badge Design
Illustrator and artist Nick
Dragotta developed the
concept behind the Inventing
merit badge logo, which
features a Stone Age–wheel.
But who invented the wheel,
and why was it invented?
Much of the early history of
the wheel is not known because it was invented such a
long time ago, in 5000 B.C. by ancient Mesopotamians.
The wheel may be the very first technological invention.
The earliest wheel was most likely for a potter’s wheel.
The technology of wheeled travel was invented around
3500 B.C., about the same time as the domestication of
the horse.
The wheel represents how something so basic and
intuitively simple can have a profound effect on the
history of humankind. What will Scouts invent, and
what impact will their inventions have on the history
of humankind?


INVENTING 59
.The Inventing Process
Once you have listed your ideas, discuss them with your
parent, merit badge counselor, Scout patrol, and friends, and
select your three favorite ideas. Think about how you would
turn these ideas into inventions. Identify the ONE idea that
would be fun and feasible to work on.
List Your Ideas
As you think about possible inventions, list ideas in your invention note-
book. Your list might begin like this:
1. Toothbrush that has a guard to keep hands dry and free from saliva
2. Portable toolbox/stool with handle and storage space for brushes and
equipment used to groom my horse
3. A water bottle that doesn’t need to be held when filtering water into it
4. Bicycle tires that never go flat
5. Self-cleaning fish tank
Inventing is a cycle; it is not a step-by-step process.
Throughout the cycle, inventors get input from users or
potential customers of the product they are inventing.
TEST
BUILD
CONCEPTUALIZE
INVESTIGATE
INPUT FROM
USERS


60 INVENTING
The Inventing Process.
Investigate
Remember that you will not be the only user of your invention.
The most successful inventions affect tens, hundreds, or
thousands of people. Think about how many people use water
bottles: school children, athletes, campers, and hikers. Some
water bottles are disposable. Some are easy to hold. Still others
may be insulated.
What if the water bottle had been designed to be useful only
to the person who invented it? Its usefulness would be severely
limited. Your invention should be appealing and desired by a
broad range of people. Ask potential users of your idea what they
think would be important in your invention, and include more
ideas than just your own. The people you interview should know
something about the idea, be interested in it, and currently use
something similar. If you want to design a new water bottle for
hiking, talk to Scouts, hikers, backpackers, park service workers,
sporting goods store employees, and professionals who use water
bottles in their work. Ask questions like:
Scouts discussing ideas for water bottles and attachment devices at San Juan High
School in Blanding, Utah.


INVENTING 61
.The Inventing Process
• When do you use a water bottle?
• How often do you use a water bottle?
• What kind of water bottle do you use? Why?
• If you could change something about your water bottle, what
would it be?
• What kinds of negative experiences have you had when using
a water bottle?
Record the answers in your invention notebook.
Conceptualize
After you gather information from users, conceptualize your
ideas on paper, both in words and with sketches. Describe your
idea so that those assisting you could build a model from your
notes. Do not worry if you cannot draw as well as you would
like. You will improve with practice.
Continuing with the example of the water bottle idea, one
of the challenges backpackers face is trying to hold a water
bottle while pumping fresh water, standing in a running river.
Come up with performance criteria about what you want
your invention to do. This is the beginning of your invention
statement. An example of an early invention statement might
read like this:
I am inventing a clip that will slip around the neck
just under the lid of a water bottle and attach to
a belt, waistband, or backpack. It will attach
easily and firmly but can be removed
with minimal effort. The clip
will never fall off the bottle,
making it possible for
one person to easily
refill a water bottle
through a filter device
in a stream or river.
Water bottle clip in 2D CAD. Drawings in 2D
CAD are usually printed and show the image
as a 3-view drawing.


62 INVENTING
The Inventing Process.
As you begin work on your invention, you will develop
specifications based on what you and other users want. Record
the specifications in your notebook. Add quantifiable terms to
define your specifications. Use the invention statement to guide
your development work. Modify the statement as you move
through the invention process, as needed.
Although you don’t have to be an artist, the drawing for
an invention represents a critical piece of its description. Once
you do your best sketch, have someone review it to determine
whether you have visually and clearly communicated
your invention.
Professional inventors use specific drawing
techniques to communicate exactly what they want
to build. These techniques follow critical guidelines
regarding where things are and how to build them.
This work, previously done by hand with pencil and
drawing tools on drafting tables, has been done since the
early 1980s in 2D (two dimensions) on the computer or
through powerful computer-aided design (CAD) software.
The old way to create a drawing was to simply draw
each view separately on a single page in Front, Top, and
Side views. If a change was needed, it was time-consuming to
redraw each view.
Today, when a 3D model
is created, it can be changed
in one drawing, the model,
and printed out in three
views. The new process is
called parametric modeling.
There is software available
to help you learn more about
parametric modeling and how to
use it. However, for this merit badge,
all you need is your notebook and a pencil. If you have never
been exposed to technical drawing, you may want to earn the
Drafting merit badge along with the Inventing merit badge.
A 3D model of
a robotic arm
Water bottle
clip in 3D CAD.
Today, almost
all drawings
are done in 3D
as models.


INVENTING 63
.The Inventing Process
Build a Model
For many, the model is one of the most
enjoyable parts of the inventing process. It is a
critical step. Building a model gives you the
chance to experiment inexpensively with many
issues so you can fine-tune your concept.
Professionals usually begin by building
scale models of new things like boats, vehicles,
or airplanes that are expensive to create.
Inventor Carl Dietrich did not begin by build-
ing his “road-able aircraft” at full scale.
Since a new airplane takes years to make
and costs millions of dollars, a lot of time is
spent making models of everything from the
body and instrument panel to the ailerons and
landing gear. By making models, inventors
can refine design and mechanical issues and
correct mistakes and make improvements
before building the final product.
Models can be made from a variety of
materials: Clay, cardboard, wood, fabric, LEGO®
blocks, metal conduit, and PVC pipe all are
useful materials. Check out the trash.
You will be amazed at what useful
things you can find there.
One of Tim Leatherman’s first
models of a multi-tool was made
of cardboard.
Information on obtaining free access to SolidWorks® 3D CAD software is
available in the resources section of this pamphlet. Enjoy experimenting
with it. Have fun. Use the tutorials. However, be prepared to spend some
time learning it well enough to build an invention from your 3D model.
SR-71 Blackbird model
A model that accurately reflects the dimensions of a project at a reduced or
enlarged size is called a scale model. For more information about scale, see
the Drafting merit badge pamphlet.


64 INVENTING
The Inventing Process.
Find A Problem To Solve
Linda Mentz, an Eagle Scout in Troop 21, Gainesville,
Florida, is an inventor. Her Eagle project—a
drying system for firefighters’ gear—was widely
publicized. People from all over the world
reached out to her for information on her
invention. She says she didn’t realize she
was inventing, though, until she had gotten
through a lot of her Eagle project in the fall of
2020. When she started her project, she did
research and knew what others had done to
help solve the problem of drying the bulky
gear firefighters wear. She saw images online
of things that were similar to hers. “In a way,
that was just the idea of the product. I thought
of myself more as an inventor as I did more work,
between the manipulation of the materials and
taking measurements of air flow. I actually got my
own ideas into the product I built,” Linda says.
Like all inventors, Linda set out to understand the
problem she was trying to solve. She observed how
firefighters dried gear outdoors. She talked to her local fire
departments. Eventually, the fire departments asked her
to build her design. She drew designs and listed materials and
instructions. With the help of her fellow Scouts, Scouters, and
other adults, Linda built two dryers for four sets of gear each.
Linda delivered the bunker gear drying system to Gainesville Fire and Rescue Deputy
Chief Rice, receiving the Chief’s Award for Excellence. Scouts— and inventors —help
others. Linda’s invention helped firefighters to be safe and ready for the next emergency.
Inventor Linda Mentz,
Eagle Scout


INVENTING 65
.The Inventing Process
List Parts and Materials
When a model is complete and you are satisfied with
the design, generate a list of the parts and types of
materials for the actual invention. These lists will help
you get an idea of how much it might cost to build
the invention.
Test in the Field
The next step of the invention process is getting the best
working model of your idea into the hands of potential users.
Share your invention statement and model with users. This is
called field-testing. Ask users for likes and dislikes about your
model. Write those comments in your notebook and analyze
them to see if you agree. Make a list of the things you would like
to change when you build your next model.
Getting input
from users
is important.
However, if you
do not have
access to users
of your invention,
share your model
and invention
statement with
your Inventing
merit badge
counselor, and
ask for feedback.
Parts List for Water Bottle Clip
Top ring Ultrahigh Molecular Weight Polyethylene
(UHMW PE)
Dimensions Outside diameter, 2.4”; inside diameter, 2.2”;
thickness, 0.125”
Base UHMW PE
Outside diameter, 2.4”; thickness, 0.125”
Back Type 2024-T52 aluminum alloy
Thickness, 0.10”; width, 0.75”; height, 5.0”
To be stamped in shape shown on drawing
Clip Type 2024-T52 aluminum alloy
Thickness, 0.10”; width, 0.50”; length, 2.0”
To be stamped in shape shown on drawing
Netting 5/16” plastic mesh; 1000/250 denier polyester
Weight, 5.50 ounces per square yard
Width, 5.0”; length, 6.5”
To be thermally fused to top ring and base
Rivets 7 aluminum
Diameter, 0.125”; length, 0.25”
3 rivets at top ring; 4 rivets at base


66 INVENTING
The Inventing Process.
Meeting Personal Needs
Gihan Amarasiriwardena, an Eagle Scout from Troop 504, Great
Trails Council (now the Western Massachusetts Council), was
inspired to invent a piece of lawn care equipment that didn’t
exist. From fifth grade through high school, Gihan had a small
business taking care of lawns in his neighborhood. He saw that
he could save time and earn more money by doing two lawn
maintenance chores simultaneously—mowing and trimming.
With parts given to him by a local lawn mower repair shop,
Gihan added a trimmer assembly to a push mower.
Always interested in building tree forts or simply creating
things with Erector® construction sets, Gihan learned to work
with his hands so he could turn his ideas into reality. After
Scouting campouts, Gihan began to see the need for low-cost,
high-performance outdoor gear. Prior to a trip to the Philmont
Scout Ranch, he spent time with his patrol looking at materials
and designs for outdoor gear at outfitter stores. Eventually, Gihan
and two fellow Scouts were so dissatisfied with the performance
gear that was on the market that they set out to design their own.
An early prototype was a waterproof fleece vest. Through
trial and error, Gihan came up with a vest design that met his
needs. Materials selection for the vest’s inner layer took him from
plastic trash bags to DuPont™ Tyvek®, a lightweight waterproof
and breathable barrier, popular in the construction industry.
The inner layer is thermally laminated to two layers of Polartec®
fleece. Gihan would use scraps of Tyvek from construction sites or
shipping envelopes made of Tyvek when sewing his prototypes.
Remember, inventors are resourceful.
Gihan Amarasiriwardena’s vest being used out in the field
“To invent, you
need a good
imagination and
a pile of junk.”
—Thomas A.
Edison, inventor


INVENTING 67
.The Inventing Process
Today, Gihan continues to invent. He has interned with
a sports engineering company to develop personalized racing
shoes using rapid prototyping techniques. He continues
to develop his own performance apparel and equipment
line, Ascendure Mountain Technologies, for climbers and
backpackers. “An engineer at heart, and with an appreciation for
aesthetics, I love to develop new, innovative solutions that fuse
technology and design.” He graduated from MIT in 2011 with a
degree in chemical and biological engineering.
How did Gihan
Amarasiriwardena
decide to major in
chemical engineering?
“Scouting has had a
huge role in guiding
me toward my
career goals. In fact,
I first learned about
chemical engineering
through the Personal
Management merit
badge. One of our
objectives was to
learn about careers
that may be of interest
to us. I found that with
chemical engineering,
which is now my major, I could learn how to solve
problems and combine my passion for innovation and
business.”
Inventor Gihan Amarasiriwardena,
Eagle Scout
Developing a classic vest meant that Gihan had to learn
some new things, like how to sew. While his favorite
tool is an MIG welder, the tool that he uses most often
is a sewing machine. He learned how to weld and how
to sew at his high school. For sewing, he took a class in
clothing and textiles.


68 INVENTING
The Inventing Process.
Models to Rapid Prototyping
Eventually, you will end up with a prototype that is very close to
a finished invention. Inventors, engineers, and product designers
use rapid prototyping to make the final design as quickly as
possible. Prototypes may be scaled down in size but they are
working models. This allows for a real-world check of the
product’s functionality before costly manufacturing.
A prototype is
a functioning
model of a
design, concept,
or invention.
Removing the smoke stack for a toy train from a 3D printer
Feedback Is Key
It is important to get feedback on your idea while it is in
development. By showing the intended user or potential
customer models of your invention at the beginning
of the design phase, their feedback will help you make
improvements that will allow you to meet the needs of
the user. Then, once you have a prototype, you will be
able to seek feedback from users.
Writing down user feedback in your notebook is
important. You may want to revisit what they have to
say as you move forward with turning your idea into
an invention.


INVENTING 69
.The Inventing Process
A technology that helps inventors, engineers, and product
designers with rapid prototyping is 3D printing. A 3D printer
will make a physical model from a 3D CAD design. A 3D printer
works much like an inkjet printer. Instead of laying down
just one layer of ink on a piece of paper, though, a 3D printer
lays down thin layer upon thin layer of material to build up a
physical prototype. Since 3D printing is now more affordable,
high schools and libraries in your community may have printers
that you can use.
Joshua and Jonathan Marino are playing chess. The
board and the pieces were all printed on a 3D printer
using ABS plastic. The plastic starts out in a cartridge and
looks like grass trimmer line. No color is added;
the material is ordered by
color. The plastic is about 1
⁄32”
diameter when in the cartridge.
The 3D printer feeds the ABS
plastic into the head and melts
it down to create a prototype
with a 0.010” diameter bead
of plastic.
0.010” DIAMETER
BEAD OF PLASTIC
LAYERED TO CREATE
3D PROTOTYPE





INVENTING 71
.Building the Prototype
Building the Prototype
Taking an invention from an idea to a working prototype is a
challenging project and can be a lot of work. You may want to
consider putting together a team to jointly conceptualize, design,
and build an invention. A team is similar to a patrol in Scouts
BSA where many hands make light work.
Teenagers can form teams that focus on invention. A
Lemelson-MIT InvenTeam from San Juan High School in
Blanding, Utah, invented a power-assisted litter device for
search and rescue. A volunteer search and rescue team member
introduced the problem of backcountry rescues to a group of
students in a pre-engineering class at the high school. After
working together on a solution, the team defined its invention in
this way:
PAL (Power-Assisted Litter) is a single-wheeled, motor-
ized, portable, power-assist device. It is attachable
to the majority of types and brands of current rescue
litters and is to be used by rescue teams in a variety
of terrains and rescue situations around the globe.
An electric motor and a gas engine will be available
for mine and backcountry rescues. PAL will reduce
rescuer fatigue by 30 percent and improve rescue speed
by 15 to 30 percent in both mine and backcountry
settings, and will reduce the number of people needed
by 50 percent for backcountry rescues.
Most inventions are developed by groups of people
who all have strengths to bring to the team. Look at
U.S. Patent 7,581,715 for the Powered Rope Ascender
and Portable Rope Pulling Device. Besides Nathan Ball,
there are three other inventors listed: Timothy Fofonoff,
Bryan Schmid, and Daniel Walker.
Lemelson-MIT
InvenTeams are
teams of students,
teachers, and
mentors who
work together to
identify real-world
problems and
then find inven-
tive, technological
solutions to these
problems. Eight
members of the
InvenTeam from
San Juan
High School
were Scouts.


72 INVENTING
Building the Prototype.
The first thing the young inventors at San Juan High School
did was investigate the problem by participating in a mock
search and rescue expedition with members of their county’s
search and rescue team. They asked questions about the rescue
process and tested current technologies. They learned from
users the limitations and strengths of existing equipment.
Based on interviews with potential users—search and
rescue team members—they began to conceptualize and list
specifications, or basic things, that the PAL would have to do.
This included the speed required, steepness of the hill it could
climb, the weight of the person it could carry, how much it
should weigh, and how durable it would be. Many times, the
specifications changed, based on feedback from intended users.
An early concept
drawing of PAL
from October 2007


INVENTING 73
.Building the Prototype
The expedition was videotaped and viewed by team
members. Everyone talked about their experiences and what
they learned from the county search team members. The
research was documented, specifications were written, and
sketches were drawn. CAD models were designed.
In order to prove that the concept would work, a simple
model was made combining the best
ideas from the sketches. Building began
once the model was created. A working
prototype was built using thin-walled
tubing called conduit for a frame; the
front wheel was fashioned from an old
tricycle; and a 12-volt battery was hooked
to an electric motor with a simple chain
drive. Field testing with users indicated
necessary design changes.
Since building the initial prototype,
three more have been designed, built,
and field tested. More than 30 search and
rescuers have tested one or more of the
prototypes and provided useful feedback.
Many things have changed since the original model, including
the use of a smaller, lighter wheel; heavier-duty motors; more
efficient batteries; hydraulic
disk brakes; and a new belt
drive. The electronic circuitry
is being redesigned to give it
variable-speed capability, and a
future mine rescue version of PAL
is being considered.
A 2D drawing of second PAL prototype
Scouts can earn merit badges that require tools. The Automotive
Maintenance, Farm Mechanics, Home Repairs, Leatherwork, and
Pioneering merit badges all require Scouts to use a variety of tools.
This 3D model of the second PAL prototype was
created using SolidWorks 3D CAD software. High
school inventors from the team and their teacher
were awarded U.S. Patent 8,613,455 in 2013.


74 INVENTING
Building the Prototype.
Building an Invention Requires Tools
You cannot build an invention or a working prototype without
tools. You may need to find tools and learn how to use them
outside the home environment. Perhaps your troop or shop class
at school can be a resource. The drama club might have tools and
a place to build sets. Or a local high school or school district may
have vocational or technical programs offering after-school,
evening, and summer enrichment courses in carpentry, machine
technology, electronics, and robotics. Your merit badge counselor
can help you locate resources.
Students at Brillion High School in Brillion, Wisconsin,
are lucky enough to have a modern shop equipped to
the hilt. This 10,000-square-foot facility includes
a large four-plex processing lab for wood,
metal, plastics, and composites, a
state-of-the-art design room with
computers, computer-numerical
controlled machine tools,
electronics, robotics equipment,
and a 50-student lecture area.
The center allows students to
work on larger, more complex
activities and on integrated
projects with other disciplines,
such as mathematics and
science.
The Design Room of the Brillion High
School Ariens Technology Center. Ariens
Company Foundation funded the con-
struction of the $1.5 million Technology and
Engineering Education Center for students in
Brillion, Wisconsin.


INVENTING 75
.Building the Prototype
Safety With Tools
Scouts should always take appropriate safety precautions when
using tools. Use eye and ear protection; have a fire extinguisher
nearby; and do not work with tools without responsible adult
supervision. You may have tools at home or have someone
associated with your troop who can help you properly and
safely learn the use of power tools.
For more information about safety with tools and build-
ing materials, see the Composite Materials, Home Repairs, and
Woodwork merit badge pamphlets.
Safety Equipment
With a chest of basic tools, a bench, and a few power
tools, you have a workshop. No shop is complete,
however, without safety equipment, no matter how
basic or how few one’s tools may be.
• Safety glasses
• Hearing protection
• Fire extinguisher
• Goggles
• Dust mask
• Gloves


76 INVENTING
Building the Prototype.
Tools for Building
As an inventor, you may
eventually want to have your
own tools. When purchasing
tools, buy the best quality you
can afford. Inexpensive
screwdrivers are often made
with soft metal edges that
bend or break under stress.
Besides being difficult to work
with, they can be unsafe. Tool
expert and professional
engineer William Gurstelle
suggests the following must-
have tools and equipment.
• Electric drill, cordless
or corded
• Files and brushes (flat and
round files, wire brushes)
• Cutters (scissors, wire
cutter, utility knife)
• Mixing and volume-
measuring equipment
• Hacksaw (for cutting some-
thing harder than wood)
• Handsaw (for
cutting wood)
• Linear measuring gear
(tape measure, protractor,
combination square)
• Socket and wrench set
(English and metric sockets,
Allen wrenches)
• Pliers (standard, needle-
nose, locking)
• Hammers (claw hammer
and rubber mallet)
• Digital multimeter for
electronics projects
• Screwdrivers (assortment of
Phillips/cross-headed and
plain/flat-headed)
• Scale
HOWTOONS: The Possibilities Are Endless!
offers the “Anatomy of a Tool Bucket.”


INVENTING 77
.Building the Prototype
Special tools such as a soldering iron and
magnifying lens can be surprisingly handy
when you are building a prototype.
A soldering iron is a must for
electronics projects
Power Tools Beyond the Drill
When you have built a basic tool kit, you may decide to add a
workbench and a few more useful power tools.
General Supplies
To complete your workshop, add a few general supplies to make
your building easier. Remember that Kettner Griswold built his
Trash to Treasure invention with very basic tools and hot glue.
• Tapes (masking, duct, clear adhesive)
• Adhesives (white glue, wood glue)
• Twine and ties
• Sandpaper for metal and wood of various grit
• Markers (pencils and permanent markers)
While this is a complete list of tools, you can get
started with just a few tools of your own in a useful
bucket. Check out local garage sales. Your bucket need
not be new, but sturdy and large enough to carry your
tools, supplies, and safety gear.
• Drill press
• Cut-off saw
• Grinder





INVENTING 79
.Community Resources for Inventors
Community Resources
for Inventors
Inventing need not be a “lone” process. Because we are often
inspired by others, getting together with like-minded inventors
can prove both enjoyable and useful as you work toward your
inventing goals.
Inventing in Your Community
While you can experience the fun of inventing in your community
as an independent inventor like Linda Mentz and her firefighter’s
gear invention, you might want to broaden your experience by
becoming a member of a team, dedicated to addressing real-world
problems with unique, technological solutions. There are many
organized after-school opportunities to allow you to
combine your knowledge of science,
technology, engineering, and math with
the ability to build something
useful—a combination of inventive
thinking and inventive doing.
Following are a few excellent
opportunities for young
inventors.
FIRST
FIRST LEGO League® (FLL)
is a team-based competition
for youth. An annual theme-
based challenge, focusing on a
current technological or
scientific situation, requires
teams to build and program LEGO
MINDSTORMS® robots. A research
project that explores a real-world
challenge is required for competitions.


80 INVENTING
Community Resources for Inventors.
Inventor Dean Kamen
In 2002, Dean Kamen was awarded the $500,000
Lemelson-MIT Prize for his inventions, particularly
his medical technology breakthroughs such as the
stair-climbing Independence™ IBOT™ Mobility
System, which was revealed in 1999. The IBOT is
a battery-powered wheelchair built from sensors,
microprocessors, and gyroscopes that can climb
stairs and stand upright on two wheels, empowering
wheelchair users to see and move at eye level. Dean
Kamen donated his Lemelson-MIT Prize money to
his nonprofit organization, FIRST (which stands for
“For Inspiration and Recognition of Science and
Technology”). Many young people across the globe
participate in robotics competitions organized by FIRST.
Kamen held more than 400 United States and
foreign patents when he was
inducted into the National Inventors
Hall of Fame for his invention of the
AutoSyringe®.
Dean Kamen rides his invention the Segway
during the Lemelson-MIT Prize ceremony.


INVENTING 81
.Community Resources for Inventors
FIRST Tech Challenge (FTC) is for young people in grades
7 through 12. Small teams of up to 10 youths design, build, and
program robots from reusable kits. Awards are given for the
robot competition, community outreach, design, and other
real-world accomplishments.
FIRST Robotics Competition (FRC) is for those in grades 9
through 12. In a highly competitive, sports-like atmosphere, teams
of 25 or more build and program robots with time and resource
limitations.
Destination ImagiNation®
This creative problem-solving program is for participants from
elementary school through college. The Destination ImagiNation
(DI) program provides competitive team challenges and instant
challenges each academic year. Competitions are held at the
regional, state, and international levels.
eCYBERMISSION
eCYBERMISSION is a free, web-based science, math, and technol-
ogy competition for students in grades 6 through 9, who compete
for regional and national awards while working to solve problems
in their communities. The U.S. Army sponsors eCYBERMISSION
with awards for winners, regionally and nationally.
FIRST (For Inspiration and Recognition of Science and Technology) was
founded by inventor Dean Kamen. With a passion for inventing, he has
devoted his career to enhancing human capabilities through technology
and innovation and exciting young people about science and engineering.


82 INVENTING
Community Resources for Inventors.
Lemelson-MIT InvenTeams®
The Lemelson-MIT InvenTeam initiative is the premier national
grants initiative for inventive high school students. Teams of
students and mentors receive grants of up to $10,000 each to
conceptualize, design, and build technological solutions to
real-world problems. Projects are collaborative efforts,
driven by the students. InvenTeams research
intellectual property issues, design parts, build
models, and make modifications as they
develop prototypes of their inventions.
InvenTeams showcase their prototypes
each June at MIT.
Museums Dedicated to Inventions
Inventors live in all types of communities. You can find
them in urban, suburban, and rural areas. One way to find
inventors who have been important to your community is
through your local historical society. There may be a museum
nearby that highlights technologies and inventors.
The 3M Birthplace Museum is operated by the Lake
County Historical Society in Two Harbors, Minnesota. The small
museum is located in Two Harbors because the founders of
3M (Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing Company) found a
mineral there in the early 1900s that they thought could be used
for making sandpaper. The museum highlights the importance
of research and development, product diversification, and
growth of a company through innovation.
Dalton Oesterreich is a member
of the Omro (Wisconsin) High
School InvenTeam. He’s a technical
designer with a team working on
a local problem: to keep people
and vehicles from falling through
thin ice on lakes in the winter.
This InvenTeam is inventing an
“Internet of Things” (IoT) device
that will measure and report
ice thickness from on top of the
ice and from a distance. Dalton
encourages others to look for ideas
that will improve the way we live—
just like his team’s device, which can
prevent accidents from happening in
Wisconsin and in other places where
outdoor winter enthusiasts live and play.


INVENTING 83
.Community Resources for Inventors
The Cyrus McCormick Farm is located at the Shenandoah
Valley Agricultural Research and Extension Center in rural Steeles
Tavern, Virginia. McCormick, the father of modern agriculture,
invented the first successful mechanical reaper in 1831 when
he was in his early 20s. The reaper was the beginning of a
new industry of mechanical harvesting and made significant
contributions to American prosperity.
Highlighting Invention at Museums
The Bakken Library and Museum in Minneapolis, Minnesota,
collects artifacts related to the history of electricity and
magnetism in medicine. Young inventors are supported through
its Inventors Club.
The Exploratorium in San Francisco is a hands-on science
center with a Tinkering Studio for the community.
The Franklin Institute Science Museum in Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, focuses on science and technology learning.
The Henry Ford Museum of American Innovation in
Dearborn, Michigan, offers educational programs and exhibits
based on the life of Henry Ford.
The Jerome and Dorothy Lemelson Center for the Study
of Invention and Innovation is located in the Smithsonian
Institution’s National Museum of American History in
Washington, D.C.
McCormick’s invention is on display at his ancestral home,
Walnut Grove Farm (now called Cyrus McCormick Farm),
in Steeles Tavern, Virginia.


84 INVENTING
Community Resources for Inventors.
From the Wright
Flyer to the SR-71
The 1903 Wright Flyer and a
Lockheed SR-71 Blackbird
are both part of the
Smithsonian Institution’s
collection of historically
significant airplanes.
The Wright Flyer was the
first powered airplane that
made a 12-second flight and
traveled 120 feet. Sixty-one
years later, the Blackbird, a high-
speed, high-altitude reconnaissance
airplane, made its first flight and continued
in service for more than 20 years.
When one of the last Blackbirds was retired to the Smithsonian
Institution in 1990, it flew from Los Angeles, California, to Washington, D.C.,
at a record-setting speed by crossing the United States in 1 hour,
4 minutes, and 20 seconds
averaging 2,124 miles per hour.
From the Wright Flyer to the
Blackbird, air transportation
has been made possible by
skilled engineers, advances
in materials science, and
innumerable inventions.
The 1903 Wright Flyer
The Lockheed SR-71 Blackbird


INVENTING 85
.Community Resources for Inventors
The MIT Museum in Cambridge,
Massachusetts, offers insights to the
foundations of science and technology.
The Museum of Science in Boston,
Massachusetts, focuses on the importance
of science for individuals and society.
The Museum of Science and
Industry in Chicago, Illinois, offers hands-
on interactive exhibits including one on
inventing the future.
The New York Hall of Science in
Queens, New York, focuses on science and
technology with hands-on exhibits, events,
and programs.
The Oregon Museum of Science
and Industry in Portland, Oregon, focuses
on science and technology.
The Science Museum of Minnesota
in St. Paul has an Invention Playhouse to
stimulate inventive thinking.
The Smithsonian National Air and
Space Museum in Washington, D.C.,
houses airplanes and spacecraft with
historical significance.
The Tech Museum in San Jose,
California, focuses on science and technology.
The Perot Museum of Nature and Science in Dallas,
Texas, offers hands-on, interactive ways to learn about science,
math, engineering, and natural history.
Each museum listed has an extensive webpage that lists
the exhibits and special programs available to Scouts
and their families. Even if you cannot visit the museums
in person, with your parent’s permission, use your
favorite search engine to find their websites. You can
virtually explore concepts to build your knowledge of
science and technology that will be useful to you as an
inventor.





INVENTING 87
.Inventing As a Career
Inventing As a Career
Earning your Eagle Scout rank takes years of preparation just as
being an accomplished athlete requires years of training. These
accomplishments do not happen by accident. Nor does becoming
an inventor happen by accident. Building your academic and
technical foundation will greatly help you prepare for your
journey of inventive thinking and doing.
Preparing to be inventive begins with the toys you play with
and the classes you take in school. Choosing classes that help you
become more aware of your world will benefit you as an aspiring
inventor. Math and science—including computer science—are
important for working on your experimental and problem-solving
skills. English helps you communicate your ideas to others. Art
classes help you develop creativity and imagination.
Eureka!
The word “eureka” is commonly attributed to
Archimedes, the Greek inventor and mathematician
famous for Pi, when he realized an answer to a problem
that seemed impossible to answer.
The king wanted Archimedes to determine if his new
crown was made of pure gold—as specified—or of a
cheaper alloy. Archimedes knew the mass of the crown.
If he could determine the volume of the irregularly
shaped crown, he could calculate the density by dividing
the mass by the volume. Thus, he could compare the
crown’s density to that of pure gold. As the story goes, he
discovered how to determine the volume when getting
into a bath and displacing the water. This illustrative story
about breakthrough thinking and a Eureka! moment has
endured over time.
Inventors are
leaders. They
recognize prob-
lems in their
world and seek
solutions. They
bring together
resources—
people, materials,
money—to build
appropriate
solutions.


88 INVENTING
Inventing As a Career.
In addition to your everyday school work, preparation comes
from the activities you choose. Extracurricular activities that
stretch you outside of your normal comfort zone are important for
real-life problem-solving.
Consider joining a science club, math team, or robotics
program. Being part of a drama club will help you develop
confidence in presenting yourself and your good ideas. The key is
to find something you love and throw yourself into it. When Isaac
Newton was asked how he made so many great discoveries, he
said, “By thinking about it night and day.” Thinking about math,
science, and English will help you apply and integrate concepts
in unique ways.
Biologists can
be inventors.
So can chemists,
engineers,
auto technicians,
nurses, and
cross-country
skiers.


INVENTING 89
.Inventing As a Career
Does a young person decide to become an inventor and
then study to become one? Not usually. People develop inventive
skills over time while they are also becoming profoundly
knowledgeable about their area of work or interest. Biologists
can be inventors. So can chemists, engineers, auto mechanics,
nurses, and cross-country skiers, like John Fabel. All career
fields can benefit from inventive thinking, particularly when the
objective is to solve a real-world problem with a technological
solution.
Inventions do not come easily. Thomas Edison, one of the
greatest inventors of all time, recognized the value of hard work.
In the end, great inventions happen because great inventors work
hard. Doing your best in school and your other activities may be
the best way to BE PREPARED to be inventive.
Be curious and observe the world around you. Never
stop wondering WHY or asking “What if . . .” questions.
Inventors are not trapped by what they know or don’t
know; they are flexible thinkers and can find their
own answers. Inventors have certain traits that you
may want to develop. They are persistent; they work
through and learn from failures; they are comfortable
working with complexity and ambiguity; and they
are comfortable dealing with answers that aren’t
necessarily right or wrong.
“Opportunity is
missed by most
people because
it is dressed
in overalls
and looks
like work.”
—Thomas A.
Edison, inventor





INVENTING 91
.Glossary
Glossary
2D. Two dimensions.
2D CAD. Software used to create two-dimensional models.
3D. Three dimensions.
3D CAD. Software used to create three-dimensional models.
3D printing. Technology for creating physical models
(prototypes) by building up layers of material.
3-view drawing. A 2D drawing that provides three views
of a model: Front, Top, and Right Side views.
algorithm. A predetermined set of instructions for solving
a specific problem in a limited number of steps.
breadboard. A reusable thin plastic board for prototyping
electronic circuits.
CAD. Computer-aided design.
computer-aided design. The use of computer software to
create 3D models.
copyright. The exclusive right to the publication, production,
or sale of the rights to a literary, dramatic, musical, or artistic
work, or to the use of a commercial print or label, granted by
law for a specified period of time to an author, composer, artist,
distributor, etc.
crystal set. A primitive type of radio receiver with a crystal
detector instead of an electron tube detector.
design. To plan and carry out, especially by artistic arrangement
or in a skillful way.
design patent. Granted to the inventor of a new, original, and
ornamental design for an article of manufacture.


92 INVENTING
Glossary.
division of labor. A sequential system of manufacture and
assembly whereby each worker focuses on a specific task,
which they repeat, instead of assembling the entire product.
engineering. The profession using science and technology to
meet the needs of people; some specialties in engineering are
civil, mechanical, electrical, chemical, aerospace, and biomedical.
entrepreneurship. The act of being an entrepreneur; an
entrepreneur is someone who turns an idea into a new
business venture.
eureka. Loosely translated as “I have found (it)”; an exclamation
supposedly uttered by Archimedes when he discovered a way
to determine the purity of gold by applying the principle of
specific gravity.
intellectual property. Ideas and expressions of the human
mind considered unique and original and to be worth money
in the marketplace—and deserving of protection under the law.
These include patents, trademarks, and copyrights.
innovation. The complex process of introducing new ideas
into use and practice, primarily through entrepreneurship.
inventing. The process of coming up with and making—
through independent investigating, experimenting, and think-
ing—something that is useful and that was not previously
known or created.
invention. The product of the inventing process, which can
encompass many things, ranging from devices and machines
to chemical compounds and varieties of plants.
inventiveness. The form of creativity that results in an invention.
microchip. A semiconductor body in which an integrated
circuit is formed.
monolithic integrated circuit. An electronic circuit containing
many interconnected amplifying devices and circuit elements
formed on a single body, or chip, of semiconductor material.
nanoparticles. Micro-miniature particles created by manipulating
atoms and molecules as if they were parts of a machine.


INVENTING 93
.Glossary
parametric modeling. A system of CAD in which the
parameters of a model are mathematically linked, enabling
automated changes to all parameters associated with a single
change.
patent. The right to exclude others from producing, selling,
or realizing a profit from an invention or process for a specific
number of years.
patent infringement. When someone tries to benefit
commercially from a patented item or uses it without licensing it
from the patent owner.
plant patent. Granted to someone who invents or develops,
and asexually reproduces, any distinct or new variety of plant.
prototype. A working model of a design, concept, or invention.
rapid prototyping. Any technology that enables the production,
creation, or manufacture of a physical model quickly
and inexpensively.
routine problem-solving. Developing solutions to problems
that have specific and predictable results.
seminal inventions. Inventions of such sizable impact that they
change the way people live. The monolithic integrated circuit is
an example of a seminal invention.
trademark. A symbol, design, word, brand name, letter,
slogan, etc., that is used by a manufacturer or dealer to
distinguish a product or products from those of competitors.
unique. The one and only; single; sole; having no like or
equal; unparalleled; highly unusual; extraordinary; rare; etc.
utility patent. Granted to someone who invents or discovers
a new and useful process, machine, article of manufacture, or
composition of matter, or any new and useful improvement
thereof—the most common type of patent.


94 INVENTING
Inventing Resources.
Scouting Literature
American Business, American Labor,
Architecture and Landscape Architecture,
Composite Materials, Digital Technology,
Drafting, Electronics, Engineering,
Entrepreneurship, Game Design, Home
Repairs, Metalwork, Model Design and
Building, Programming, Robotics, Textiles,
and Woodwork merit badge pamphlets
Books
Anderson, Maxine. Amazing Leonardo
da Vinci Inventions You Can Build
Yourself. Nomad Press, 2006.
Boy Scouts of America. Boy Scouts
Handbook, The First Edition, 1911,
reprint. Dover Publications, 2005.
Brown, David E. Inventing Modern
America: From the Microwave to the
Mouse. MIT Press, 2002.
Brown, Travis. Popular Patents America’s
First Inventions From the Airplane to
the Zipper. The Scarecrow Press, 2000.
Carson, Mary Kay. The Wright Brothers
for Kids. Chicago Review Press, 2003.
Griffith, Saul, Nick Dragotta, and Joost
Bonsen. Howtoons: The Possibilities
are Endless. HarperCollins
Publishers, 2007.
Macaulay, David, and Neil Ardley. The
New Way Things Work. Houghton
Mifflin Company, 1998.
Robinson, James. Inventions.
Kingfisher, 2006.
Sobel, Dava, and William J. H.
Andrewes. The Illustrated Longitude.
Walker and Company, 1998.
Woodford, Chris, James Flint, Ben
Morgan, Clint Witchalls, and Luke
Collins. Cool Stuff and How It Works.
DK Publishing Inc., 2005.
Periodicals
Make
makezine.com
Inventors Digest
www.inventorsdigest.com
Organizations and Websites
CreativeFuture
www.creativefuture.org
Design Squad
pbskids.org/designsquad
FreePatentsOnline
www.freepatentsonline.com
Inventing Resources
With your parent’s permission, visit
the Boy Scouts of America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org,
for a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


INVENTING 95
.Inventing Resources
Howtoons
www.howtoons.com
This do-it-yourself comic website with
tools of mass construction includes
fun projects.
Lemelson-MIT Program
Massachusetts Institute
of Technology
lemelson.mit.edu/
The program recognizes outstanding
inventors, encourages sustainable new
solutions to real-world problems, and
enables and inspires young people to
pursue creative lives and careers through
invention. The program is funded by the
Lemelson Foundation and administered by
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
OpenCourseWare
ocw.mit.edu/index.htm
A special section, “Highlights for High
School,” features materials useful for
students and their teachers.
SolidWorks®
www.solidworks.com
Free trial software is available.
U.S. Patent and Trademark Office
www.uspto.gov
Acknowledgments
The Boy Scouts of America thanks the
Lemelson–MIT Program and Dassault
Systèmes SolidWorks Corporation for
their support in the development of
the new Inventing merit badge and
production of the inaugural edition of
the Inventing merit badge pamphlet.
Special thanks to patent attorney
Mike Brown for his guidance on legal
issues and terminology and for providing
much of the material for the revisions in
this edition of the Inventing merit badge
pamphlet.
The Boy Scouts of America
is grateful to the men and women
serving on the National Merit Badge
Subcommittee for the improvements
made in updating this pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration Credits
Gihan Amarasiriwardena, courtesy—pages 66
and 67
Jared Berrett, courtesy—cover (power-
assisted litter); pages 60, 61, 62 (water
bottle clip), 72 (drawing, litter), and 73
(drawing, model)
Edward Byrnes, courtesy—page 74
The Coleman Company, courtesy—pages 42
(lantern, logo) and 50 (mess kit)
Greg Crenshaw—page 48 (Scout)
Dassault Systèmes SolidWorks Corporation,
courtesy—cover (iPod docking station);
pages 25, 62 (robotic arm), and 93
Sara DeSalvo, courtesy—pages 68 and 69
(Scouts, chess piece)
George Doyle—page 24 (car)
The vision for this merit badge and much of the content for the Inventing
merit badge pamphlet was provided by Scouts from across the country,
many of whom are young inventors. In addition to Scouts, many people
from university laboratories, high schools, museums, and corporations gave
freely of their time and resources to make this merit badge a reality because
they believe in the inventive spirit.


96 INVENTING
Inventing Resources.
Nick Dragotta—pages 28–29 (bridge
illustration) and 52
Eureka Lab Book Inc., courtesy—pages 54
(notebook) and 55
John Fabel, courtesy (illustration by Steve
Johnson)—page 29 (backpack)
John Fabel/Lemelson Center/National
Museum of American History,
Smithsonian Institution, courtesy—page
29 (John Fabel)
FLL, courtesy—page 79
Ford Motor Company, courtesy—page 21
(Henry Ford, assembly line)
John Foxx—page 24 (bike)
Freepatentsonline.com—page 26
Global Cycle Solutions, courtesy—page 45
William Gurstelle, courtesy—pages 75, 76
(tools), and 77 (workshop)
HarperCollins Publishers, used by permis-
sion—page 76 (tool bucket illustration)
Hemera Technologies—pages 16, 18 (crank
electric bulb), and 48 (folding chair)
Christopher Hideg and Laszlo Hideg,
courtesy—page 34
The Leatherman Tool Company, courtesy—
cover (SuperTool); pages 53, 57
(SuperTool), and 63 (tool models)
Lemelson-MIT Program, courtesy—pages 30,
31, 32, 40 (printed patent), 77 (soldering
iron), 80, 82, and 85
Eric Long, National Air and Space Museum,
Smithsonian Institution (SI 94-2311),
courtesy—page 63 (SR-71 Blackbird model)
Eric Long and Mark Avino, National Air and
Space Museum, Smithsonian Institution
(SI 2000-9346), courtesy—page 84
(SR-71 Blackbird)
Linda Mentz, courtesy—page 64
Project Gutenburg, gutenburg.org—page 20
(mechanical reaper)
Segway Inc., courtesy—cover (Segway®
Personal Transporter); page 10
Jessica Erin Simpson, courtesy—pages 39
(Scout), 86 (Scout), and 90
Terrafugia Inc., courtesy—cover (Transition
aircraft); pages 6, 6–7, 17, and 33
Texas A&M University Racing Team/Dassault
Systèmes SolidWorks Corporation,
courtesy—page 89
Texas Instruments Inc., courtesy—pages 22
(Jack Kilby, integrated circuit) and 23
U.S. Library of Congress Prints and
Photographs Division—pages 15
(Thomas Edison) and 84 (Wright Flyer)
U.S. Library of Congress/Wikipedia.org—
page 20 (Cyrus McCormick)
U.S. Patent and Trademark Office—page 39
(Scout badge patent)
uspto.gov—page 35
Virginia Agricultural Experiment Station,
courtesy—page 83
Sam Wallander, courtesy—pages 43, 56, 70,
78, and 86 (soldering, cutting)
Wikimedia.org, courtesy—page 46
(Nikola Tesla)
Wikimedia.org/Dickenson V. Alley,
courtesy—page 46 (lab)
Wikipedia.org—pages 13 and 40
(handwritten patent)
Wikipedia.org/Harry Kalish, courtesy—
page 47
Zedcor Wholly Owned—page 48
(picnic backpack)
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of
or are protected by the Boy Scouts
of America.
Brian Payne—page 24 (cyclists)