ENERGY
STEM-Based


ENERGY
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Energy or check Scoutbook for the
latest requirements.
35889
ISBN 978-0-8395-3335-1
©2024 Scouting America/Boy Scouts of America
2024 Printing


ENERGY 3


4 ENERGY


ENERGY 5
Contents
Where Would We Be Without Energy? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
A Scout Raises Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Energy From the Stars . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
Earthly Energy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
The First Law: Good News. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
The Second Law: Bad News. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
A Good Energy Family . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
A Good Energy Neighbor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
A Good Energy Citizen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
The Future of Energy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
Careers in Energy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89
Epilogue: Nate’s Story . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93
Energy Information Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 94


6 ENERGY
Where Would We Be Without Energy?.
A high personal
energy use rate
is an indicator
of a high
living standard.
Where Would We Be
Without Energy?
Energy is necessary to heat, cool, and light our homes, schools,
offices, and factories. Energy moves cars, trucks, buses, planes,
trains, and ships. Our bodies, insects, the internet, instruments,
farms, frogs, fish, phones, televisions, trees, wind, weather,
and the water cycle all require energy. You cannot understand
the world you live in without understanding energy.
The United States in the 21st century is the most energy-
intensive society in human history. In our high-tech country,
we take for granted complex communication and transportation
systems, unrivaled health care, safe water, comfortable homes,
and a prepackaged food supply. All of these features that
American citizens expect require abundant energy to produce
or operate.
The level of goods and services in one’s everyday
life is known as the standard of living. The kinds and
amounts of energy a nation uses is a major factor in
creating its standard of living. Access to energy leads
to economic freedom—having the resources to live
and work comfortably. To understand the possibilities
and problems of America’s future, we must understand
our use of and reliance on various kinds of energy.


ENERGY 7
.Where Would We Be Without Energy?
Electricity is a big part of how Americans use energy
today. You can do no work at all without energy. Think how
your life changes when the power fails during bad weather.
You cannot flip on a light, watch television, use the computer,
run a fan, toast bread, warm a drink in the microwave, or do
anything else that requires electricity. Most of your regular
activities abruptly stop.
Now think what would happen if the entire United States
had to go without power. The life of the country as we know it
today could not continue.
To understand energy and its importance in our way of
life, you will need to understand the science of energy and the
engineering of energy-using devices—engines and machines.
You will need to learn about people’s use of energy and how
habits can be hard to break.
Saving, producing, and using energy wisely will be critical
to America’s future. If we are to leave future generations with
a world in which they can live as well as or better than we
have, you and other potential leaders of tomorrow must begin
the hard work of understanding energy and the vital role it will
play in the future.
Efficient operation of traffic in our country requires consistent supplies of fuel as well
as electricity to control traffic signals.





ENERGY 9
.A Scout Raises Questions
A Scout Raises
Questions
Nate walked out of the court of honor wearing a wide, proud
smile. He could still hear his name being called to come to the
front and receive his new rank patch: “Nathan Robert Gomez,
Star Scout.”
Already he was planning his next step. What merit badge
would he work on next? He had talked about it with Joe Philips,
an assistant Scoutmaster with Troop 21. Joe said: “Energy is
a good badge to work on. Understanding energy and its use
is important to Scouts who want to be responsible members
of their family, community, country, and world. Responsible
energy use touches every aspect of our modern lives every day.
The Energy merit badge will show you how to conserve energy
and use it wisely. It will help you understand why energy is
vital to the way we live.”
That was good enough for Nate. Energy it would be.
The next day, Nate and his family went shopping. Nate
wanted to see what he could learn about energy while shop-
ping, so he brought along a notebook. His family needed a
new refrigerator. The store had rows of refrigerators and other
appliances. While his mother talked with the salesperson, Nate
walked up and down the rows. He noticed a large yellow sticker
on each refrigerator.
The sticker was the EnergyGuide® tag and it contained lots
of information. The statement that drew Nate’s attention was
“This model’s yearly operating cost is $44.” He looked at other
models. Their tags gave different yearly operating costs, ranging
from $31 to $59. Nate wrote in his notebook the operating costs
of several models.


10 ENERGY
A Scout Raises Questions.
Nate wondered why
operating costs would be
different. He saw that the
refrigerators were differ-
ent sizes, shapes, colors,
and brand names. They
were lined up more or
less in the order of their
yearly operating cost.
Then Nate realized they
also were lined up in
order of selling price. He
observed that the least
expensive refrigerators
were the most costly per
year to operate, and the
more expensive models
were cheaper to operate.
“Why is that?” Nate
wondered. He tried to
think of things that might
affect the price of a refrig-
erator and the cost of run-
ning it. Why would one
refrigerator use more elec-
tricity than another? Nate
didn’t know much about
how a refrigerator works,
so he didn’t get far with
his questions. “Those will
be good questions to ask my Energy merit badge counselor,”
thought Nate, and he made a note for himself in his notebook.
After finishing at the appliance store, the family stopped
at a car dealership. Nate’s dad needed a new truck and he
wanted to look at different models. Every truck had a sticker
the size of a sheet of notebook paper on the side window.
These stickers contained lots of information besides the vehicle
price. Each listed the make and model of the truck and the
various options that came with it—air-conditioning, power
windows, power door locks, etc. The price of some of the
options was listed, but some were included in the base price.
Most appliances come with an EnergyGuide® tag that
tells how much it costs to operate the
appliance for one year.


ENERGY 11
.A Scout Raises Questions
Nate saw that every sticker also listed the “MPG highway”
and “MPG city.” He wondered why these two numbers for miles
per gallon would be different. He also wondered if the more
expensive trucks were cheaper to operate, like the refrigerators.
However, after checking, Nate found that higher-priced trucks
generally got lower fuel mileage, making them more expensive
to drive than lower-priced models.
A salesman saw Nate scribbling in his notebook and came
over. Nate explained what he was doing, and the salesman did
his best to explain what affects mileage figures: engine size,
air-conditioning, weight of the truck, transmission type, and
more. Nate made notes, but he was not satisfied. He now had
more questions for his Energy counselor.


12 ENERGY
A Scout Raises Questions.
When he got home, Nate searched the internet for informa-
tion on gasoline mileage. He read how Congress in 1975 passed
a law requiring companies that make cars and light trucks
including pickups, SUVs, and vans to build these vehicles so
they get certain gas mileages. The law was supposed to require
more efficient cars and trucks so the country would use less
gasoline and diesel fuel. The website said the law was meant
to get average gas mileage up to 40 miles per gallon.
Nate wondered: If requiring 40 miles per gallon saved gas,
why not make the law so that vehicles got 45 miles per gallon?
Or 50? Or 100? If you can pass a law requiring car companies
to build cars with better mileage, why was 40 miles per gallon
the goal?
“Hey, look at this!” Nate’s dad exclaimed. “You’re working
on the Energy merit badge, right?” Mr. Gomez handed
Nate the evening television schedule, which had this program
listed: “America’s Energy Future," 7 p.m.


ENERGY 13
.A Scout Raises Questions
At 7 p.m. Nate was in front of the television with his
notebook and pencil. He recorded information that especially
caught his attention. This included:
• Of the electricity produced in the United States, more than
half comes from coal-fired power plants.
• A large coal-fired power plant can consume 10,000 tons of
coal per day.
• The same size plant will produce more than 10,000 tons of
carbon dioxide, water vapor, particulates, and fly ash.
• Of the energy in the coal that goes in, only about 35%
comes out as energy in the electricity produced.
Nate watched the scenes of a coal-fired plant and its huge
cooling towers. The narrator told how waste heat was released
into the air as the plant operated. Nate saw giant plumes of
steam rise into the sky. “Why don’t they insulate the plant so
the heat doesn’t escape?” he thought. “Or reuse the heat?”


14 ENERGY
A Scout Raises Questions.
When the show was over, Nate put aside his notebook
and grabbed the Daily Chronicle to check the sports scores.
The sports section was in the same part of the paper as the
business news. Nate saw a headline in the business pages:
“Fuel Cells Trying to Be the Future Today.”
The article talked about pollution-free cars and clean energy
sources. Every line told how fuel cells were marvels of energy
production. A sidebar article described other alternative sources
of energy: photoelectric cells that convert sunlight directly into
electricity; wind turbines using the free energy of the wind to
power homes and businesses; garbage changed to useful energy
by producing a gas called methane.
As Nate read the fuel-cell article, a date caught his atten-
tion: “Fuel cells were first developed by William Grove in the
1830s.” That made Nate stop and think. “If fuel cells are clean,
quiet, and a good source of energy, why don’t we use more of
them? If they have been around for more than 170 years, why
are we still talking about how they will provide energy in the
future? In fact, with all the good things said about solar cells,
windmills, and other forms of renewable energy, why are we
using coal and gasoline and running power plants that lose
two-thirds of the energy they take in as fuel?”
Nate’s questions bounced in his head. He thought:
“Understanding energy seems easy. So why can’t scientists,
engineers, politicians, and other adults answer these easy ques-
tions?” As he headed for his first meeting with his merit badge
counselor, he had a notebook full of information and a head
full of questions. Nate understood there was much to
discover about energy that he did not understand right now,
but he was willing to learn.
Renewable energy from sources such as sunlight,
wind, and water is replaced by natural processes.
Nonrenewable energy sources (including coal and
oil), once used, cannot be replaced.


ENERGY 15
.A Scout Raises Questions
Alternative energy sources, like these solar panels, can help cut down on pollution.





ENERGY 17
.Energy From the Stars
Energy From the Stars
The questions Nate asked as he prepared to study energy
are important ones. To understand the answers, you must
learn about the science of energy. Then you will understand
that the answer to all of Nate’s questions (and many others)
relies on the same basic principle, called the second law
of thermodynamics.
To learn the second law, you must first learn about the
forms and characteristics of energy, where energy comes from,
and (naturally) the first law of thermodynamics. All of this
important information begins with the story of energy.
The Story of Energy
All forms of energy trace their origin to the stars.
Stars are huge balls of mostly hydrogen held together in
space by crushing gravity. Stars radiate vast amounts of energy
in all directions by changing hydrogen into helium and other
heavier elements. Through this process, stars either release
energy or store it in the nuclei of the heavier elements they
create. In the tremendous heat and pressure of a star, two
hydrogen atoms are crushed together until they join nuclei
in a process called fusion.
Elements are fundamental substances that cannot be
broken into simpler substances by chemical means.
Elements that occur naturally on Earth range from
lightweight hydrogen and helium to metals such as
iron and gold to dense, radioactive uranium. An atom
is the smallest unit of a chemical element having the
properties of that element. The core of an atom is its
nucleus (plural nuclei).


18 ENERGY
Energy From the Stars.
The new nucleus formed through the fusion of hydrogen
is of a different element—helium. The mass of the helium
nucleus is less than the mass of the two hydrogen nuclei that
formed it. The tiny amount of lost mass is converted into
energy that spreads out from the star into space. This radiant
energy is the main character of our story as it moves energy
from the stars to Earth.
As stars get older, they fuse atoms into heavier elements.
However, stars cannot form atoms heavier than iron because
for fusion to continue, it must produce more energy than it uses
in forming the heavier atoms. To make atoms heavier than iron
by fusion requires energy put into the process.
Heavy atoms form
in a spectacular way. Very
large stars eventually
explode in an event called
a supernova. This explosion
creates very heavy atoms
and spreads them into
space. Scientists believe
that all atoms heavier than
iron were produced by
supernova explosions.
Some nuclei have
energy stored in them after
their formation. Over time
they release this energy
through radioactive decay.
By radioactive decay, an
atom may release pure
energy and become more
stable, or discharge particles
that carry off the energy.
Some very heavy elements release energy in still another way. The
nuclei of uranium or plutonium can break apart in a process of fission.
The mass of the pieces formed is less than the mass of the original
nucleus that broke apart. The lost mass is converted into pure energy.
Supernova


ENERGY 19
.Energy From the Stars
Our Nearest Star: The Sun
All of the energy sources in the world around us come from
the energy pouring out of stars. And most of the energy that
powers the functions of our world comes from a tiny portion
of the energy of the sun—our nearest star.
The sun constantly produces about 400 billion billion
megawatts of energy. The amount that hits Earth is tiny (about
five 10-billionths of the total energy of the sun), but that tiny
portion powers all of Earth’s life forms, food production, and
weather processes. The rest of the sun’s energy goes flying past
us into space.
Products of the Sun’s Energy
Radiant energy floods from the sun as a mixture of different
forms of electromagnetic radiation. Think of this as a fountain
that constantly sprays a mixture of different beverages. In the
mixture are coffee, tea, fruit punch, soda, grape juice, orange
juice, and lemon juice. We can understand the whole mix by
understanding the different types of beverages that make it up.
While this concoction is made of seven different drinks, they
all are alike in one way—each is made of mostly water.
Similarly, electromagnetic radiation is a mix of seven dif-
ferent kinds of what is basically one thing—radiant energy.
Scientists divide the mixture into different categories for ease of
study and discussion. The seven kinds, from lowest to highest
energy, are as follows.
A watt is a
measure of power.
One horsepower
equals 746 watts.
A megawatt is
1 million watts.


20 ENERGY
Energy From the Stars.
The visible spectrum of light
RADIO
MICROWAVE
INFRARED (HEAT) ULTRAVIOLET
GAMMA
RADIATION
X-RAY
VISIBLE
LIGHT
WAVELENGTH INCREASES ENERGY INCREASES
1. Radio waves. People use radio waves to send information
to receivers—radios. Many stars and nebulae (dust and gas
clouds in space) also give off radio waves. Another natural
source is lightning. As a thunderstorm approaches, you hear
crackles on the radio caused by bursts of radio waves created
by lightning flashes.
2. Microwaves. Stars and galaxies create natural microwaves.
In microwave ovens, microwaves penetrate food and cause
water molecules in the food to vibrate, producing heat to cook
the food.
3. Heat (infrared radiation). Heat possesses enough energy
that we can feel it if it is intense enough.
4. Visible light. Objects in the world around us scatter and
absorb visible light,
allowing us to see.
The electromagnetic spectrum


ENERGY 21
.Energy From the Stars
5. Ultraviolet light. Ultraviolet light has enough energy in its
waves to damage the receptors in our eyes or the outer layers
of our skin. UV radiation is the cause of suntans, sunburns,
and some forms of skin cancer.
6. X-rays. X-rays have so much energy they can pass through
our bodies and create a digital image on the other side. Hot
gases in our galaxy emit natural X-rays.
7. Gamma radiation. This is energy so powerful it can pene-
trate deep through solid materials. Star processes or the decay
of some radioactive atoms produce gamma radiation.
The powerful energy of an X-ray can be put to use in the
medical field.





ENERGY 23
.Earthly Energy
Earthly Energy
Energy comes to Earth from electromagnetic radiation given
off by the sun, stars, nebulae, and other sources in our galaxy.
Energy is stored in heavy atoms made in the death explosions
of stars. So how does this celestial energy drive the natural
processes in our earthly world?
Mechanical Energy: Objects in Motion
Mechanical energy is the motion energy of physical objects.
Solar radiant energy can move objects, including air molecules
in Earth’s atmosphere. As air molecules absorb heat from the
sun, they gain energy and move faster. As they move faster,
they spread out. As they spread out, the air in a given space
gets thinner, making it lighter, and it rises. The rising of heated
air causes winds that have many powerful effects on Earth.
For example, if wind becomes strong enough, it picks up
sand and dust and becomes a powerful eroding force. Wind
blowing over water creates waves and currents. Wind pushes
sailing ships, and it can help you ride your bike (or hold
you back).
All of the effects
of wind are due to
the radiant energy
of the sun heating
the air.


24 ENERGY
Earthly Energy.
Another form of mechanical energy is the effect of the wind
on movable solid objects. As wind vibrates leaves, a dining fly,
or the siding on a house, it produces sound. Any time the use
of energy causes air vibrations, the result is sound waves. Sound
carries the energy of molecules in motion.
Radiant energy has other effects on the natural environ-
ment. Heat, microwaves, and visible light all make water mole-
cules move faster. Solar energy increases the temperature at the
surface of the oceans and adds energy to snow and ice until
they are warmed enough to melt into water. But probably the
most important effect of the sun’s radiant energy on water is
to evaporate liquid water into water vapor, which rises into the
atmosphere and is moved about by the winds. When it cools,
it condenses back into liquid water and falls as rain.
The water cycle
Sound can be powerful. Sonic waves can blast cavities out of teeth
or crush kidney stones. The roar of a jet engine or an explosive blast
can cause pain. People who are deaf can feel music coming out of
strong speakers.
GROUNDWATER
PERCOLATION (SOAK-IN)
SURFACE RUNOFF
TRANSPIRATION
EVAPORATION
S T R E A M
T O
O C E
A N
PRECIPITATION (RAIN)
(CONDENSATION)
CLOUD
FORMATION


ENERGY 25
.Earthly Energy
Chemical Energy
The sun’s radiant energy drives processes by which atoms form
bonds that store energy. The best-known way this is done is
photosynthesis. A plant absorbs low-energy substances from
its environment (mainly carbon dioxide and water) and, using
radiant energy from the sun, builds complex molecules (glucose
being the most important). The complex molecules have energy
stored in their bonds.
The plant may use the energy in these complex molecules
for its own growth, repair, and reproduction. An animal may eat
and digest the plant and use the energy released from the plant’s
molecules to make molecules for its own use. Also, burning
the plant will release the chemical energy stored in the mol-
ecules. Burning gives radiant energy—light and heat.
This process of storing radiant energy in high-energy mole-
cules has been happening on Earth for a long time. Uncountable
tons of plants and animals have lived, stored up the sun’s
energy in their molecules, then died. In many places, large
amounts of these plants and animals were buried under layers
of sediment that turned to rock. Under the pressure of the rocks
and the heat from the interior of Earth, these materials became
coal, oil, and natural gas. These forms of stored chemical energy
are known as fossil fuels.
Chemical
energy includes
the energy
in batteries.
Light energy is converted to chemical energy stored in the bonds of glucose
and other molecules.
Glucose
Water
and
Carbon Dioxide
Sunlight
Energy


26 ENERGY
Earthly Energy.
Nuclear Energy
The heat from inside Earth that helped form the fossil fuels is
radioactive decay—one of the few forms of energy that does
not come directly from our sun. Radioactive atoms, formed in
stars, release energy from their nuclei. Inside Earth, a constant
release of this energy continues to heat the interior. If not for
this process, Earth would long ago have cooled to a frozen
mass, even with the energy input of the sun.
Electrical Energy
Radiant energy from the sun produces electrical energy in
nature by stirring the winds and clouds. This stirring builds up
electrical charges in clouds and results in lightning. Lightning
produces the flash of light (electrical energy) we see.
Volcanoes and hot springs are evidence that radioactive decay is releasing heat
energy inside Earth.


ENERGY 27
.Earthly Energy
Another source of electricity in nature comes from certain
electrochemical reactions. The most interesting of these may
be the reactions in the bodies of electric eels that use bursts of
electricity to stun prey and for defense. Electrochemical reac-
tions also produce the electricity in most batteries.
Another form of nuclear
energy, mentioned earlier, is
fission. Fission occurs when
very heavy atoms absorb
neutrons (atomic particles)
and split, converting mass
to energy. Today, the fission
process is used in nuclear
reactors in power plants that
produce electrical energy.


28 ENERGY
Earthly Energy.
People have discovered that the most useful way to produce
electricity is to move a strong magnet near a conductor like
copper. The field of the magnet causes an electric current in
the conductor. Such a device is called a generator and is used
in cars, power plants, and other places. By using sources of
mechanical energy, magnets can be spun inside coils of wire,
producing huge amounts of electrical energy.
Summary of the Kinds of Energy
We are awash in a sea of energy. Everything that moves, makes
sound, gives off light or heat, changes from a solid to a liquid,
changes from a liquid to a gas, burns, grows, or does much of
anything else interesting involves energy. Most of that energy
traces its origins to our sun.
This introduction to the forms of energy allows us to dis-
cuss the scientific rules and helps us understand energy use.
We will cover more about most of these ideas later.
While chemical energy is useful for storing radiant
energy until it is needed, electrical energy is useful
for moving energy from place to place. Electrical
energy is convenient, making energy available at the
flip of a switch. For more about electric currents, see
the Electricity merit badge pamphlet.
Electrical energy is important as an easily transferred,
readily available, on-demand form of energy.


ENERGY 29
.Earthly Energy
This satellite image shows how developed countries like the United States are
brightly lit compared with less developed areas of the world (like the interior of
South America), which are dimly lit.





ENERGY 31
.The First Law: Good News
The First Law:
Good News
To appreciate why we should not waste energy, we must under-
stand the rules that describe the behavior of energy. These rules
were learned mostly over the past 200 years.
By the end of the 1840s, three scientists—Julius Mayer,
James Joule, and Hermann Helmholtz—all came to the same
conclusion from different evidence. They learned that energy
is never destroyed, nor can it be created. Energy does change
from one form to another, but the universe always has the
same total amount of energy. This principle that energy cannot
be created or destroyed is known as the law of conservation
of energy.
This was a key discovery because it focused the study of
energy on understanding energy conversions. Scientists at this
time were mostly interested in one form of energy—heat—and
its movements. Because of this, the name given to the study of
heat energy comes from two Greek words meaning “heat” and
“movement”—thermodynamics. The law of conservation of
energy also is known as the first law of thermodynamics.
We usually think of conservation as saving resources
and using them wisely. But to a scientist studying
energy, conservation of energy means that, in any
system that runs on energy, the energy going in
must equal the energy coming out.


32 ENERGY
The First Law: Good News.
A Common Unit of Energy
Energy from different sources is measured in different
units. To study energy conversions, we must be able
to compare amounts of different kinds of energy. To do
this we usually will discuss energy in British thermal
units. One Btu is the amount of heat energy required
to raise the temperature of 1 pound of water 1 degree
Fahrenheit. The energy equivalents of different kinds
of fuels are shown in the table.
Converting Energy Units to Btu
Energy Source Comparison Unit Btu in 1 Unit
Coal Ton (2,000 pounds) 1,700,000
Electric heat pump Kilowatt-hour 6,803
Electric radiant heater Kilowatt-hour 3,413
Food Candy bar (252 calories) 1
Fuel oil Gallon 139,000
Gasoline Gallon 125,000
Natural gas Cubic foot 1,030
Nuclear fission Gram of uranium 235 10,000,000
Nuclear fusion Gram of hydrogen 100,000,000
Solar energy Square yard 16 x 106
Water power Gallons per 100-foot fall 0.234
Wood (white oak) Cord 28,200,000
Wood (pine) Cord 20,500,000


ENERGY 33
.The First Law: Good News
The first law of thermodynamics (energy cannot be created
or destroyed, but only changed in form) helps us understand
how we might use energy to drive some useful process. We
must concentrate a form of energy and then create a system
that changes it into the form we want (usually light, heat, or
motion). To make electricity, we must get machine parts mov-
ing. Electricity can be used to make light, heat, and motion.
Chemical energy of fuels is used to make cars move.
Energy Conversion Devices
Every useful process happens through the conversion of
energy from one form to another. Before people invented
cars, tractors, and power plants, they had only the muscle
power of humans and animals. Living animals (includ-
ing humans) are complex systems for converting the
chemical energy stored in food to heat and move-
ment. Some of that chemical energy is used to make
the heat that keeps our bodies warm. When we use
our muscles to breathe, pump blood, run, or pitch a
tent, the muscles must have energy that comes from
the food we ate.
Other than muscle power, fire has been the
most useful energy conversion. Fire is an energy
conversion from chemical
energy to light and heat.
Furnaces and heaters func-
tion to make heat available
to keep us comfortable in
cold weather. Many devices
have been invented to
make use of heat to
help us accomplish
other tasks.
In every case where we want useful work done, we
must find a source of energy, because energy cannot
be created.


34 ENERGY
The First Law: Good News.
An engine is any device designed to convert thermal (heat)
energy into useful motion (mechanical energy). People have
invented many different systems to accomplish this vital energy
conversion. Early steam engines used fire to power trains,
ships, and farm machinery. Today cars, trucks, buses, trains,
airplanes, and tractors get their power from internal combus-
tion engines, which use fire inside a chamber in the engine. A
rocket engine uses the rapid burning of its fuel to provide the
powerful pushing force to send vehicles into space.
Electric motors are machines that convert electrical energy
into mechanical energy. Many devices rely on electric motors
creating movement when we need it. Fans move air and push
air out of furnaces and air conditioners to heat and cool us.
Freezers and refrigerators use electric motors to move heat.
The windshield wipers of cars work on electric motors. Water
pumps, garage door openers, elevators, drawbridges, car hoists,
and construction cranes all rely on electric motors.
Substances with stored chemical energy that can
be converted to useful motion in an engine are
fuels. The most common fuels are materials that are
burned to produce heat or power. Food is fuel—the
source of the energy we use to move, think, and heat
our bodies. Materials used in a nuclear fission or
fusion reactor also are called fuels.


ENERGY 35
.The First Law: Good News
Energy conversions are used to make electricity. Many
power plants rely on a combustion boiler to use a chemical fuel
to boil water into steam. Nuclear plants use a nuclear reactor
as their source of heat and steam. Steam-powered power plants
need to convert the motion of the steam from a straight line
into a circular, spinning motion. The device that does this is a
turbine. The spinning motion of the turbine shaft can then be
connected to a generator, which converts this mechanical energy
to electricity.
We often convert electrical energy into light. The most
common electric light is an incandescent light, which super-
heats a wire inside a bulb until it glows. Fluorescent lights are
different and actually make two energy conversions. First,
electrons passing through a mercury gas strike mercury atoms
and give off ultraviolet light. The UV light strikes a coating on
the inside of the tube and changes UV light into white light.
This effect is known as fluorescence. We also are able to convert
electricity into a useful form of light with lasers.
Batteries provide portable, stored electricity. They com-
monly power flashlights, radios, and other portable devices.
Inside these batteries, reactions change chemical energy into
electric current. When all of the chemicals have reacted, the
battery cannot be made to produce more electricity.
Electrons are
particles of an
atom that carry a
negative charge
of electricity.
TURBINESTEAM GENERATOR ENERGY
Steam-powered power plant


36 ENERGY
The First Law: Good News.
Storage batteries make use of two energy conversions. They
use electricity to store chemical energy, then switch chemical
energy back to electricity when needed. A car battery is a stor-
age battery that uses an acid solution and lead plates to store
the electricity used to charge it. Rechargeable lithium batteries
produce electricity by transferring lithium atoms from the anode
(negative pole) to the cathode (positive pole). By applying
electricity to the battery, the lithium atoms can be forced back
to the anode. Then the battery is ready to use again.
Most modern cellphones get their energy from
rechargeable lithium batteries. Cellphone manufac-
turers strive for the lightest batteries possible that
can store the most energy. This energy is converted
to radio waves, or electromagnetic energy, when the
phone is in use. This electrical energy conversion
gives off thermal energy as waste and is why your
phone can sometimes feel hot when you are using it.
So many other devices convert energy, it is impossible to
name them all here. This list, however, may give you additional
ideas for completing requirement 2.
• Radio transmitters convert electricity into radio waves, and
radio receivers convert the radio waves back into electricity
that speakers can change to sound (mechanical) energy.
Lithium ion batteries have high power and energy.


ENERGY 37
.The First Law: Good News
• Solar cells convert radiant energy, or sunlight, directly
into electricity.
• Explosives convert chemical energy into motion—in a hurry!
• A car transmission takes in mechanical energy and gives
out mechanical energy, but it allows us to control this
energy more precisely.
• A computer takes in electricity and makes many changes to
it to store and use the information it represents.
• Sailboats use the mechanical energy of the wind to create
mechanical motion of the boat.
• Telescopes and microscopes work by gathering light energy
and organizing it so we can see hidden objects better.
The first law of thermodynamics is good news for energy
users because it tells how energy can be changed from one
form to another to make it usable. Many different devices use
energy conversions to provide the systems that make modern
living possible.


38 ENERGY
The First Law: Good News.
The Forms of Energy table lists devices that convert energy
from one form to another. The columns represent the energy
that is used; the rows show the energy that results. Shaded
boxes mean there is no practical device that makes the conver-
sion described. For example, no way is known to use chemical
energy to make atomic (nuclear) energy.
Some of the devices in the table will be familiar
to you, and some are probably unfamiliar. Discuss
the table with your counselor as you complete
requirement 2.


ENERGY 39
.The First Law: Good News
From
To
Forms of Energy
Heat Light Mechanical Electrical Chemical Nuclear
Heat Sauna,
Trombe wall
Greenhouse Bow drill,
friction, air
resistance
Toaster, resis-
tance heater,
wire resistance
Fire Fission, fusion,
radioactivity
Light Incandescent
lightbulb
Lasers Steel striking
flint
Fluorescent
light tubes
Fire, glow
sticks, fireflies
Fission or
fusion
Mechanical Boiling water
to steam
Radioscope Turbine, car
transmission,
propeller,
collisions
Electric motor,
voltmeter
Internal
combustion
engines
Motion of fis-
sion fragments
or fusion nuclei
Electrical Thermocouple Photovoltaic
(solar) cell
Generator,
piezoelectric
effect
Transformers,
rechargeable
batteries, cell-
phones
Wet batteries,
fuel cells
Chemical Chemosyn-
thetic bacteria
Photosynthesis Electrosyn-
thesis
Chemical
reactions
Nuclear Fusion in stars





ENERGY 41
.The Second Law: Bad News
The Second Law:
Bad News
Now we come to the second law of thermodynamics, the
scientific principle that will let us answer all the questions
Nate asked as he began working on the Energy merit badge.
The second law is one of the most important principles in
science yet one of the most difficult to understand. It will be
the basis for almost all of the remaining work you will do to
understand energy. Are you ready? Here it is:
Heat flows from hot to cold.
There! Don’t you feel smarter already? Come to think of
it, it doesn’t look all that hard. However, the important thing
is that you understand what it means—how it is applied to the
world we live in. That is what makes it difficult.
First, take the statement apart and make sure you under-
stand the key words and the ideas behind the words: heat, hot,
and cold. Heat is a form of radiant energy that can increase the
temperature of materials or cause melting, evaporation, or other
physical effects in matter. Hot and cold are comparative terms
that refer to the relative temperature of different parts of a sys-
tem. Any part of a system with more heat than another part is
hot. The part of the system with less heat is cold. An ice cube
with a temperature of 30 degrees Fahrenheit sitting outdoors on
a 20-degree day is hot for the purposes of the second law. Heat
will flow from the ice cube, making the cube colder than it was.
But the second law still does not explain much. Why can’t
legislators pass a law requiring 100-mile-per-gallon cars? Why
do electric power plants waste so much heat? The second law
does not answer those questions—yet.


42 ENERGY
The Second Law: Bad News.
To make the second law more useful, we must ask, “What
causes heat to move from hot to cold?” The answer is that noth-
ing makes it move; it just does. That is a critical point of the
second law. You do not have to do anything to make heat move
from hot to cold. In fact, you cannot do anything to stop it.
The process is spontaneous.
We often want to stop heat from flowing from hot to cold.
Materials designed to do exactly that are called insulation. When
we have heat energy in a place where it is useful, we try to keep
it there. We build homes so they retain heat during the winter.
We have insulated containers to keep soup or hot chocolate
warm. Ovens are lined with materials to keep the heat inside
to cook the food and not warm up the kitchen.
We can slow the movement of heat from hot to cold, but
we cannot stop it. That is an important part of the second law
of thermodynamics. To remind us that heat flows from hot to
cold with no action needed to start it, and that we cannot stop
it from flowing, we state the law as:
Heat flows spontaneously from hot to cold.
Another element of the second law is that when heat is concen-
trated in one place in a system, it will move toward all parts of
the system that are cooler. It moves in all directions. If you build
a fire in a fireplace, the heat not only moves into the room, it
also heats the bricks in the back and floor of the fireplace. Some
of the heat goes up the chimney with the smoke.
Insulation only slows the movement of heat from hot to cold.


ENERGY 43
.The Second Law: Bad News
Just as we insulate to slow heat flow, we use reflecting
materials to direct heat to where we want it. However, we can
never get all of the heat in a system to go where it will do what
we want it to do. That is part of the second law as well.
The flow of heat in all directions is important to the second
law. To help us remember the importance of this idea, we will
add another phrase:
Heat flows spontaneously from hot
to cold in all directions.
Energy Is Lost But Not Destroyed
Energy losses are possibly the most important thing you must
understand about the second law. The most common form of
lost energy is simply the tendency for heat to move spontane-
ously in all directions. Earlier you learned that engines depend
on producing heat and using it. Every engine must produce
extra heat because some of the heat will go away from where
it is useful. Heat that goes where it does not do the work of
the system is wasted heat.
The first law of thermodynamics says energy can-
not be created or destroyed. If energy cannot be
destroyed, then you might think we will never run
out of energy. However, even with lots of energy
around, it may not be in forms we can apply for
practical purposes. Energy is not destroyed, but it
can be lost to us as a source of useful energy.


44 ENERGY
The Second Law: Bad News.
Physical systems generate waste heat in other ways. Some
heat that we do not intend to produce occurs anyway. All
systems with moving parts that contact other parts produce
heat through friction. Lubrication or bearings can reduce but
not eliminate friction. In every real system, friction converts
mechanical energy into heat.
All electrical systems also produce heat. As electricity
passes through any conducting material, some heat is gener-
ated. The more resistance a conductor has, the harder it is for
electricity to pass through and the more waste heat it makes.
Systems with parts that move through a fluid lose energy.
(Gases and liquids are fluids.) In air, the energy loss is through
air resistance or drag. Parts moving through air stir the mole-
cules and cause them to increase their motion. The energy used
to increase the air-molecule motion must come from somewhere
(the first law). This energy gain in the fluid (air) becomes an
energy loss in the system.
Energy-using
systems produce
waste heat.
Resistance causing a conductor to become hot does
useful work in a toaster. The wires in this small appli-
ance heat up to toast bread.
Friction is a force that resists motion when surfaces come in contact with each other.


ENERGY 45
.The Second Law: Bad News
Another energy loss comes from sound or noise. Noise
(sound) is a shock wave that moves air molecules as it travels
through them. This increased motion of the air molecules is
increased heat in the air. Any system that is making a sound is
losing energy and releasing heat.
The second law says that no system can use all the energy
in its source. Every time we try to take advantage of the first
law by converting energy from one form to another, some of
the source energy gets lost—it cannot be used to do the work
of the system.
Scientists and engineers divide energy in mechanical sys-
tems into two categories. The energy that does what the system
was built to do is called useful energy. The energy that is lost
because all systems obey the second law is called waste energy.
To compare different systems, we look at the ratio of useful
work the system does to the total energy it uses. This ratio is the
efficiency of the system and usually is expressed as a percent-
age. It is determined by dividing the useful energy by the total
energy that went into the system and then multiplying by 100.
The useful energy plus the waste energy must always exactly
equal the total energy that was put into the system (the first
law). Efficiency of a real system must always be less than 100%
because the total energy must always be more than the useful
energy of a system (the second law).
Efficiency = (Light
Output/Power
Input) x 100
Planes lose energy through air resistance during flight.


46 ENERGY
The Second Law: Bad News.
We can improve efficiency by building better-quality
devices made with more refined materials, more precise
parts, and more careful construction. However, even using
the best materials and the most careful processes, lightbulbs,
car engines, and other machines always achieve less than 100
percent efficiency. This is the second law at work.
Another way to increase energy efficiency is to develop
better technologies. While incandescent lightbulbs are only
about 5% efficient, a fluorescent lamp works at almost 12%
efficiency. A coal-burning steam locomotive may have been
only about 4% efficient, but modern train engines have
efficiencies of about 35%. Cars became more energy-efficient
when they switched from carburetors to fuel injectors.
No physical
system can be
100% efficient.
Here are some common situations you might consider
for requirement 3: A traditional incandescent lightbulb
changes electricity into light with about 5% efficiency.
LED lighting consumes up to 90% less energy than
incandescent bulbs. Gasoline cars are less than 10%
efficient. Motorcycles are about 20%. Plants convert
between 3% and 10% of the sunlight they receive
into stored chemical energy. The rest of the sunlight
just warms their leaves.


ENERGY 47
.The Second Law: Bad News
The second law says that heat flows from hot to cold,
and we can use this heat to do useful work, but some energy
always will be wasted. And there is more bad news. We know
that as a fire burns, it produces low-energy materials such as
carbon dioxide, water, ashes, and smoke. These materials have
some energy in their molecules, but we cannot make use of
it—ashes do not burn. Every system that uses fuel to do useful
work eventually ends up with low-energy waste materials.
If we want more work out of the system, we must put more
high-energy material (fuel) into the system. The more fuel we
use, the more wastes we produce. Those wastes must go some-
where. If we release those wastes into the environment, they
affect plants, animals, and ecosystems. The second law now
says that we cannot use energy for useful purposes without
producing pollution.
Now you know that the simple, six-word second law of
thermodynamics has proven to be highly complex. It explains
why we use insulation and reflectors to control heat energy. It
tells us why machines cannot be 100% efficient. It shows us
why all energy systems produce some kind of pollution.
Next, we will apply the second law and answer some of
the questions Nate raised.
Fuels will be
reduced to
low-energy
materials that
can be a source
of pollution.





ENERGY 49
.A Good Energy Family
A Good Energy Family
A fish never thinks about the water it swims in. In the modern
world, people are like fish living in a sea of energy. Energy is
all around us, and yet we tend to overlook it the way a fish
ignores the water.
Some uses of energy are more obvious than others. We
may heat our homes with oil or gas. We put gasoline in our
cars to make them go. Electricity cooks our food, lights our
way, and operates the television. These are easy-to-find uses
of energy.
But much of the energy we use
is unseen. Millions of Btu are
hidden in the materials of our
houses, furniture, appliances,
food, and clothing. Thousands
of Btu may go into your garbage
can every day, in the energy
used to make the paper, plastic,
and other materials you discard.
To become aware of the sea of
energy, you must learn to look at
a newly mown lawn or the snow
removed from a driveway and
see it in terms of the energy it
took to accomplish that task.
Consider one example: a can
of corn. What forms of energy go
into producing it?


50 ENERGY
A Good Energy Family.
A farmer starts a tractor. The tractor is made with about a
ton of steel. One ton of steel requires 52 million Btu of energy
to produce. To form the steel into a tractor requires more energy.
The tires, wiring, windshield, and other parts are made of other
materials that also require energy to make.
The farmer fills the tank with diesel fuel, hooks up a
plow, and plows the field. (A modern 12-bottom plow is made
from another ton of steel.) The plowed field is rough, so the
farmer hooks up a disk (another ton of steel), refills the diesel
tank, and smooths the soil. Then to plant the corn, the farmer
refuels (more diesel), hooks up the corn planter (more steel),
and pulls the planter over the field.
The corn sprouts. Solar energy drives the complex chemical
interactions that cause the plants to grow. The plants use sun-
light to convert carbon dioxide, water, and soil nutrients into
roots, stems, leaves, and corn.
The new plants need water. If rainfall is scanty, water
must be pumped to the crop. The water pumps (made of steel)
usually are fueled by propane, butane, or natural gas.
Insects, fungi, and other pests try to feed on the growing
plants. Weeds invade, blocking the sunlight and robbing the
corn of water. The farmer fights back with the sprayer (made
of steel) that is filled with chemicals to kill the pests. These
chemicals are made from oil or natural gas that can be manu-
factured into weed killers, insecticides, and fungicides.
The United States
supplies food to
a good part of
the world with its
energy-efficient
food production
and distribu-
tion system.


ENERGY 51
.A Good Energy Family
When the corn is ripe, the farmer fuels the corn picker
(more diesel and steel) and harvests the corn. The corn is
loaded into a truck (more diesel and steel) and driven to the
packing plant.
The packing plant is a building made of steel, concrete,
and glass. The corn is processed, cooked (usually with natural
gas), and canned. The cans are packed into cardboard boxes,
which are loaded into a different truck (more diesel and steel)
and taken to a grocery store (more steel, concrete, and glass).
The store has electric lights, refrigeration, air-conditioning, and
heating. The store’s electrical supply likely comes from coal or
nuclear electrical plants.
You ride to the grocery store in a car
(made of steel, runs on gasoline). You buy
the corn, take it on your next campout,
empty the can into a steel pot, and heat the
corn over a fire.
The corn you have eaten is a product
of modern agriculture that would not be
possible without abundant energy. It took
coal, oil, natural gas, propane, butane, gaso-
line, diesel fuel, nuclear power, hydropower,
muscle power, a fire, and lots of energy
stored in tons of steel and other materials.
And where did it all begin? The energy the
corn needed to grow came from the sun.
Now you have some idea how much
energy surrounds us and affects our
daily lives.
How Much Energy Does It
Take to Make?
Aluminum 48 million Btu per ton
Cardboard 19 million Btu per ton
Concrete 75 million Btu per ton
Glass 90 million Btu per ton
Steel 52 million Btu per ton


52 ENERGY
A Good Energy Family.
The Second Law at Home
A modern home is a complex collection of systems that provide
heat; light; shelter; water; entertainment; ways to store, cook,
and eat food; sewage disposal; and garbage removal. (And that
is only a partial list.) In all systems designed to do these tasks,
the first law of thermodynamics will be at work. To use energy
to do useful work, the energy must be changed from one form
to another.
Survey Where You Live
For requirement 4, watch for energy use (and energy
waste) in your home. You might:
• List devices that do work for you. Record the task
done, the device used, the energy source, and how
the task would get done without the device.
• Keep track of energy hidden in materials. Watch the
garbage can as a meal is prepared or while yard
work or some other task is done. If possible, weigh
some of the discarded materials and convert the
amounts into Btu lost.
• Compare the energy used
in one room, such as
the kitchen, with
another room, like
the bathroom.


ENERGY 53
.A Good Energy Family
Whenever the first law is functioning to get useful work
done, the second law also will be acting to limit the efficiency
of the energy conversions. In modern homes, people pay for
the electricity and fuels they use to operate the various sys-
tems. Therefore, in our homes we have a special case of the
second law:
Energy wasted = Money wasted
An example of the second law at work at home is the
effect of overheating. If the inside of a house is warmer than
the outside, heat will move from the inside to the outside. If
the difference between inside and outside is small, the energy
loss will be small. If the inside is much hotter than the outside,
the energy loss will be much greater.
Many home appliances (such as a washer, dryer, mixer, fan,
garage door opener, or water pump) have motors that use
electrical energy to move mechanical parts.


54 ENERGY
A Good Energy Family.
Trade-Offs
The second law of thermodynamics in your home is also a law
of trade-offs. In a trade-off, when you act to seek a good thing,
other things happen too. You can never eliminate all problems.
At one time, people heated their homes by building fires
indoors. Fires make smoke, and smoke filling the space where
you live and breathe is bad for your health. So people built
stoves that contain the fire, release the smoke, and radiate heat
into the living space.
One trade-off in building a stove is that you must have
energy to use energy this way. You cannot build a proper stove
from wood or stone. You need a material like steel to contain
the fire and transfer the heat. You must live in a society that
has the energy to make steel to build stoves to help make your
living space more comfortable.
A second trade-off is that a stove is less efficient than a fire
in your living room. As the stovepipe carries the smoke away,
some of the heat of the fire goes out the chimney with it. Now
you must use more fuel to get the same amount of heat into
your home. You have improved the safety and comfort of your
heating system, but the new system is less energy-efficient
than the original.
Whenever people use energy, they want it to be convenient.
Warming a house during a cold winter takes much wood. Coal
has more concentrated heat. Where coal is available, people
can switch to it for more convenient heating.
But coal does not grow aboveground like wood. Coal must
be mined. Coal miners need special tools for mining. Energy
goes into making those tools. It is easier to mine coal with
powerful machines, but building mining machines takes more
steel and also energy to run the machines.
Although coal is a good heating fuel, someone must regu-
larly feed it into the furnace. Oil can be fed in by automatic
pumps. Heating with oil requires electricity to start the furnace,
pump the oil, and run a fan to blow air over the firebox. Also,
oil has many uses other than for heating. If we use oil for
home heating, we have less for other purposes.
Using electric heaters is the most convenient way to heat
a home. If you want more heat, just turn up the heater. The
trade-off is that electricity comes from a system that is about
30% efficient. Therefore, we must use 100 Btu of fuel to deliv-
er 30 Btu of heat energy to a home.


ENERGY 55
.A Good Energy Family
Recovery Costs
Earlier we tagged along as Nate Gomez looked at refrigera-
tors. Nate found that more energy-efficient refrigerators cost
more money. This is the second law at work, resulting in
another trade-off.
The principle of building a refrigerator is simple: Construct
a box and place a cooling unit against the outside surface. The
cooling unit uses energy to do work in removing heat from the
sides of the box. Then the heat in the air inside moves to the
cooler side of the refrigerator. Heat in food put inside then goes
into the air.
As soon as you start up a refrigerator, the second law kicks
in. The motor changes electricity into motion and makes noise
and waste heat in the process—energy is lost. The coils draw
heat from the food box, but they also draw heat from the air
around the refrigerator. Not all of the cooling does the work we
want. As soon as the food box is cool, heat from the outside
starts moving in—heat moves from hot to cold.
The refrigerator we are considering uses a lot of energy
(and wastes much additional energy). We want to make it
work better. We can reduce the noise and waste heat of the
compressor by building it more carefully with better materials.
The trade-off for a better compressor is higher cost of labor
and materials. We can use more efficient coils, with the trade-off
of more labor, materials, and cost. We can slow the movement
of heat into the refrigerator by insulation, but more or better
insulation adds to the cost. It is harder to assemble this better
refrigerator, and that costs more in labor.
We end up with a refrigerator that may cost much more
than our original one. Who would buy it? Smart Scouts, that’s
who! The cost of using a refrigerator is not only the price to
buy it, but also the cost to run it.
Trade-offs are an unavoidable consequence of the second law of
thermodynamics. Solving problems of safety, pollution, supply, and
convenience requires making more complex systems. Complex
systems have more energy conversions. With each energy conversion,
some energy is lost. These energy losses require more fuel to run the
system and, as a result, produce more pollutants (any material that
can harm the health, survival, or well-being of an organism).


56 ENERGY
A Good Energy Family.
Consider two refrigerator models, A and B, as compared
in the chart. If you buy one and use it for 15 years, which
refrigerator is more expensive?
Refrigerator B saves money over time. The more expensive
electricity is in your area, the more model B will save you.
(Better appliances also usually last longer.) But the trade-off
is you must spend more money now to purchase the
better appliance.
More Trade-Offs
Still other trade-offs affect energy use at home. Comfort is an
issue with home heating in the winter. A house heated to 66
degrees Fahrenheit uses about 8% less heat than one at 72
degrees Fahrenheit. However, people like to be warm. They
may not be willing to lower the heat and wear more clothes
indoors to save energy.
Sometimes, appearance is a trade-off for energy efficiency.
A solar home may get much of its energy free from the sun,
but some people dislike the look of solar panels on the roof,
a Trombe wall on the southern face, or other adaptations that
solar houses have.
A government-backed program called Energy
Star® identifies appliances that are espe-
cially energy-efficient. Energy Star® appliances
exceed federal efficiency standards. (To qualify
for the Energy Star® rating, refrigerators must
exceed federal standards by 20%.)
Refrigerator A Refrigerator B
Purchase price $ 379 $ 499
Energy for 15 years $1,299 $ 975
Total cost $1,678 $1,474


ENERGY 57
.A Good Energy Family
Habits may be the most powerful barrier to energy savings.
People get used to how they use energy, and these habits are
hard to break. Wearing more clothes in a cooler house feels
different. Many people would rather spend more money (and
use more energy) than change their habits.
Reduce: The First R
One strategy for cutting energy use and costs at home is to
reduce activities that use energy. This can be as simple as using
electronic devices less often for entertainment or making it a
habit to turn off lights you are not using.
Here are some other ways to reduce your energy use.
• Lower the thermostat. Every 1 degree the thermostat is
lowered saves about 1% of the heating energy. (Be sure to
discuss this with your family first!)
• Have your parent or guardian lower the temperature of the
water heater. Water heaters do not need to be set above
120 degrees Fahrenheit. The hotter the water, the more
heat will flow out of the heater and the more money it will
cost to operate.
• Every three months, drain a quart of water from the valve
on the bottom of the water heater. This prevents sediment
buildup and keeps the unit efficient.
A Trombe wall is a masonry or other thick wall that absorbs solar heat by day and
releases it into the building at night.


58 ENERGY
A Good Energy Family.
• Hand-shovel snow, use a push mower, use hand-operated
trimmers, rake leaves, and sweep walks and driveways
with a broom.
• Replace ordinary (incandescent) lightbulbs with compact
fluorescent lightbulbs, which are more energy-efficient.
• If possible, your parent or guardian can pay household bills
by computer. Many companies will send an electronic bill,
and customers can pay the same way.
Reuse: The Second R
Another great way to save energy and money is to reuse things
that require energy to produce or process. By using products
twice, you can cut energy use, and therefore costs, by half
or more.
As a Scout, you may already practice this idea on long
camping trips. (When you must carry what you use, you learn
to be efficient.) Maybe you carry one towel and use it at least
twice before it is washed.
You can do the same at home. Hang up a towel and use
it again, and you will cut the energy needed to wash towels
by 50%. By using towels twice, each year a family of four can
save 73 loads of laundry, 1,000 gallons of heated water, deter-
gent, fabric softener, and the cost of running a dryer.
What other items can you reuse to save energy? A short
list might include the following.
• Use the back of scrap paper for printing drafts on your
computer or doing homework.
• Take bags with you to the store to carry purchases home.
• Check junk mail for envelopes you can reuse.
• Get things you want (like video or computer games, music
CDs, videos, and DVDs) from yard sales or swap with
friends to save money and energy.
• Build a compost pile to turn food scraps, leaves, and dead
plants into free, effective fertilizer for a garden or landscaping.


ENERGY 59
.A Good Energy Family
A Formal Energy Audit
Do a thorough analysis of
energy use and waste in
your home by performing
an energy audit. Look for
air leaks that allow heat to
escape in winter or enter in
summer. Examine the set-
tings on your thermostat
and water heater. Look at
the kinds of lightbulbs and
other energy devices in
your home.
By now you should see every piece of glass, plastic,
steel, aluminum, wood, concrete, and paper as both
raw materials and the energy it took to turn the mate-
rials into finished products. Efficient energy use not
only conserves vital natural resources, but also saves
money. An energy-efficient family today must break
wasteful habits and find ways to use energy more
wisely. When the second law of thermodynamics has
free run of a home, energy and money go out into
the cold.
Most local utilities will give customers free
pamphlets or kits for doing an energy audit. You can
also locate helpful internet sites (with your parent or
guardian’s permission) by searching for “energy audit.”





ENERGY 61
.A Good Energy Neighbor
A Good Energy
Neighbor
Think about what makes up your local community—the houses,
businesses, schools, churches, government buildings, banks,
restaurants, gasoline stations, recreation facilities, and maybe
power plants. Just as we obey laws in our community, we
also must obey the second law of thermodynamics. At home,
the second law means wasted energy and wasted money.
Fighting energy waste is even more important when we gather
together in communities of people. In communities, energy
waste means wasted taxes and fees, community lands polluted
or spoiled, and energy abuse (deliberately using more energy
than is necessary) that harms our neighbors.
Bad News/Good News
Running modern communities takes large amounts of energy.
In the past 150 years, Americans have obtained the necessary
energy by building power plants, hydroelectric (water power)
dams, oil refineries, coal mines, and other energy-producing
systems. In every case we are trying to concentrate energy into
fuels and electricity. This gives us the forms of energy we need
but produces waste energy and pollution.
Consider a coal-fired electric power plant. To produce
800 megawatts of electricity, a modern coal-fired plant uses
10,000 tons of coal per day. The carbon compounds in the
coal are burned with air to release heat that was stored in the
compounds. This burning produces tons of carbon dioxide and
water that go up the chimney stack.
A lump of coal is only partly carbon compounds. It also
contains minerals that will not burn. Some of the unburnable
material becomes a fine powder that will go out the stack with
the water and carbon dioxide, if allowed.


62 ENERGY
A Good Energy Neighbor.
But this fine dust is not good for plants, animals, or humans. It
must be contained. Containing it uses some of the energy the
plant produces and so reduces the total efficiency of the system.
A coal-fired power plant cannot run at 100% efficiency.
Comparing the energy in the fuel (the coal) to the energy
in the delivered electricity shows that a well-running plant
is about 35% efficient. The energy in the fuel must be
converted to heat in steam, converted to motion in a turbine,
and converted to electricity in a generator. In each of those
conversions, energy is lost.
Oil refineries, nuclear plants, solar electricity, coal
mines, hydroelectric dams, and natural gas systems all have
environmental impacts. They cannot escape the second law.
Coal ash may contain uranium, arsenic, antimony,
cadmium, beryllium, lead, and other substances that
harm humans and the environment if released in
large amounts, and so they must be disposed of in
some safe way.
If society did not accept some energy trade-offs, much of our
medical technology would not be available to help save lives.


ENERGY 63
.A Good Energy Neighbor
However, the second law is a law of trade-offs, which
means good news comes with the bad. A power plant produces
energy that we use to live our lives. Without large-scale energy,
we could not light, heat, or cool our buildings. We could not
communicate through phones, television, radio, or the inter-
net. We would not have access to a safe supply of food as it
is grown, harvested, processed, delivered, refrigerated, and
cooked. We could not operate modern hospitals, water-treat-
ment facilities, waste-treatment plants, and other health and
safety systems.
The American Car
Modern American communities depend on people’s ability
to easily move around in personal vehicles (passenger cars,
light trucks, SUVs, etc.). According to the U.S. Department of
Transportation, there are more than 200 million household
vehicles in the United States. These vehicles travel more than
4 billion passenger miles each year.
The gasoline-powered piston engine is the most widely
used car engine today. Cars are mechanical systems that obey
the laws of thermodynamics. You already have learned that
there is a limit to the efficiency achievable in burning fuels to
do work. Because of the limitations, car engines run at about
30% efficiency; that is, 30% of the potential energy in the fuel
is converted to useful work.
A 100-watt
lightbulb left
burning for a
year creates 600
pounds of air
pollution at a cost
of about $60.
While every large-scale energy use affects people and
the environment, modern society greatly benefits from
energy availability. Our challenge is to balance benefits
and costs—a trade-off. We live with the second law
every day.
Nate stopped reading and put down his merit badge pamphlet. “I see,”
he thought. “This answers a question I had when I started to work
on Energy. Legislators might want to pass laws to require better gas
mileage. But even if they want to, they can’t pass a law that makes
a car more efficient than the laws of thermodynamics allow. Nature
gets the last word!”


64 ENERGY
A Good Energy Neighbor.
An engine efficiency of 30% would be good if all of
the energy went directly to the wheels to make the car go.
However, the force made by the engine must go through a
clutch and transmission so we can shift gears. The transmis-
sion must turn a driveshaft that is connected to a differential
that allows the wheels to turn at different rates around a
corner. Finally, an axle turns the tires, which rub on the road
by friction to make the car move. This adds up to at least
five energy conversions.
The second law of thermodynamics says there is an energy
loss in each conversion. In the end, only about 14% of the
energy in the car’s fuel produces motion of the vehicle. When
the trip is completed, the car’s movement is stopped by road
friction, air resistance, and braking. Considering that the only
useful work performed was moving you from one place
to another, the process is less than 5% efficient.
More efficient diesel engines are one alternative to gaso-
line-powered cars. Diesel fuel has a higher energy content
than gasoline, and diesel engines can operate at up to 45%
efficiency.
Then why aren’t more personal vehicles diesel-powered?
Partly because diesel engines are harder to start in cold weather,
are noisier, and tend to vibrate. Diesel engines also are more
expensive to build. America’s fuel supply system is set up
mainly to deliver gasoline. Personal preferences and habits
also have a part. Car buyers complain that diesels smoke more
than gasoline cars and the exhaust has a bad odor.
A future option may be the electric car. Electric cars
are beginning to have the power, speed, and range that con-
sumers want.
Many people see electric cars as a pollution-free method of
transportation. However, the electricity used to charge an electric
car does not come without energy losses and pollution. A local
utility may use coal, oil, or liquid petroleum or natural gas to
produce electricity for electric cars. As utilities increase elec-
tric production, they produce more carbon dioxide and water
vapor, which go into the atmosphere with other pollutants.
Burning more fuel to produce more electricity means the whole
system can actually produce more pollution.
The first functional
electric car was
built in 1915.


ENERGY 65
.A Good Energy Neighbor
Efficient electric cars may come in the future. But in the
meantime, inventors have developed a cross between a gaso-
line car and an electric car. Called hybrid cars, these are on
the market today. A hybrid car uses a conventional engine for
accelerating and an electric motor for cruising. Hybrid cars use
dynamic braking, which slows the car by taking energy from
the car’s motion to charge the battery.
Recycling: The Third R, A Community Effort
To save energy at home, you can reduce energy use and reuse
materials that require energy to produce. The third R—recy-
cling—is a little different. Recycling requires more than an indi-
vidual or family commitment. It takes a community effort.
Recycling is collecting used materials to serve as raw mate-
rials for manufacturing. Recyclable materials required energy to
produce. The heat that was necessary originally to separate iron
or aluminum from its natural ores is not needed in melting
steel or aluminum cans. Far less energy is needed to make new
goods from recycled materials. Also, many plastics are made
from oil. Recycling therefore saves energy resources two ways.
The first law is at work in dynamic braking. The energy
to charge the battery must come from somewhere. It
comes from the motion of the car, and so, makes the
car slow down.
Recycling not only saves energy, but also keeps
materials out of landfills and garbage dumps.


66 ENERGY
A Good Energy Neighbor.
As shown in the table, it takes much less energy to recycle
used materials than to use new raw materials.
Most communities today have recycling programs. People
who bring materials to recycle or put them on the curb for col-
lection need only be careful to clean and separate. For example,
newspaper is efficient to recycle, but papers with too much
dirt, mold, or other contamination are not suitable. Metals
can be recycled many times, but problems arise if consumers
include paint cans or containers with toxic materials.
As a good energy neighbor, you have a responsibility to
use energy wisely to reduce pollution that might harm others
or the environment. As you complete requirement 5 for the
Energy merit badge, remember that the laws of thermodynamics
say we cannot use energy on a large scale without waste heat,
noise, and pollution. But by encouraging community leaders to
use energy wisely and to have a community recycling program,
we can lessen the chance our energy use might harm our
neighbors or our environment.
Energy Savings From Recycling*
Material Btu per Pound Energy Saved
by Recycling
Cardboard 9,600 25%
Glass 45,000 30%
Paper 8,500 60%
Steel 26,000 76%
Plastic 40,000 90%
Aluminum 24,000 95%
*The data in this table come from various sources. Different sources
may give other figures.


ENERGY 67
.A Good Energy Neighbor
For recycling to do the most good, people must make it part of everyday living. Many
sources have information on recycling and how to start a program in your community
if one does not already exist.





ENERGY 69
.A Good Energy Citizen
A Good Energy Citizen
Today, with 5% of the world’s population, the United States
consumes 25% of the world’s energy and produces more than
25% of the world’s goods and services. To understand energy
use nationwide, we must look at how energy is consumed and
supplied.
Understanding energy use on a national scale requires
a unit of measure called the quad, which stands for
1 quadrillion British thermal units, or Btu. A Btu is a
relatively small amount of energy. (A candy bar has
about 1 Btu of food energy.) A quadrillion of anything,
however, is a huge amount. An ounce is small, but 1
quadrillion ounces is more than 31 billion tons. And 1
quadrillion seconds is more than 317 million years.
At the start of the 21st century, the United States
was using almost 99 quads a year from all energy
sources—more than three times the national use
in 1949.
U.S. Energy Consumption 1950-2023
Year Quads of use
1950 33.5
1955 39.2
1960 43.9
1965 52.6
1970 66.1
1975 69.8
1980 76.0
1985 74.1
Year Quads of use
1990 82.2
1995 88.5
2000 96.5
2005 98.0
2010 95.0
2015 94.3
2020 88.7
2023 93.6


70 ENERGY
A Good Energy Citizen.
The good news is that U.S. energy consumption decreased
in 2020 to levels not seen in more than two decades—even
though U.S. homes power more devices than ever before.
According to the Energy Information Administration, several
factors contributed to this drop:
• Consumers moved from energy-sapping desktop comput-
ers to energy-sipping tablets, laptops, and cellphones. The
Electric Power Research Institute reports that it costs just
$1.36 to charge an iPad each year compared with $28.21 to
use a desktop computer.
• Some of today’s flat-screen TVs use 80% less power than
old models.
• Federal regulations led to increased energy efficiency
in household appliances such as refrigerators and air
conditioners.
• Energy-efficient home-building practices, better insulation,
and energy-efficient windows reduced consumers’ use of
energy to heat and cool their homes.
Supply and Demand
In discussing energy use, we look at four main sectors. The
residential sector is made up of all U.S. homes. Schools, places
of worship, and businesses together comprise the commercial
sector. Farms, factories, and plants that produce items such as
food, steel, glass, and plastic or finished goods are part of the
industrial sector. The fourth sector, transportation, includes
cars, trains, planes, buses, and every other form of moving
people and goods.
RESIDENTIAL—
15%
INDUSTRIAL—
35%
COMMERCIAL—
13%
TRANSPORTATION—
37%
U.S. energy use in 2023


ENERGY 71
.A Good Energy Citizen
Earlier, in considering energy in our homes and com-
munities, we mainly examined the residential and commercial
sectors. We looked at energy used to light, heat, and cool our
homes; supply water and electricity; store and prepare food;
and provide entertainment. Energy use by the residential and
commercial sectors in 2023 amounted to about 28% of the
U.S. total. Industrial energy use in 2023 took about 35% of the
national total. The food, paper, chemical, petroleum, and pri-
mary metals industries use the most energy in this sector.
The transportation sector relies heavily on liquid fuels.
Individual cars, not public mass-transit systems, use much of
the energy for transportation in the United States. Because of
our reliance on individual vehicles, 10% of the world’s oil use
every day goes to fuel personal cars and light trucks in the
United States. Transportation accounts for about 28% of U.S.
energy use and more than two-thirds of our oil use.
Fossil fuels, besides being used as fuels, are converted
into many products. Coal is used in making plastics,
tar, synthetic fibers, fertilizers, and medicines. Oil
is a resource to make paints, lubricants, wax, syn-
thetic rubber, plastics, drugs, and detergents. Liquid
petroleum gas is used to replace fluorocarbons as
an aerosol propellant, and to fuel vehicles and heat
appliances. Natural gas is important in the produc-
tion of fertilizer, plastics, antifreeze, dyes, medicines,
and explosives.
The information in this section on energy use
and supply by sector is taken from year 2023
data available from the Energy Information
Administration, an agency of the U.S. Department of
Energy. In completing requirement 6, use the most
current information available to you.


72 ENERGY
A Good Energy Citizen.
Production by Source
Fossil Fuels
Fossil fuels, including petroleum, natural gas, and coal, have
long produced most of the world’s electricity and powered
the transportation sector. Fossil fuels continue to account
for the largest share of energy production and consumption.
In 2020, fossil fuels accounted for almost 80 percent of U.S.
energy consumption and 61 percent of our electricity gen-
eration. In addition, currently, 99 percent of U.S. hydrogen
production is sourced from fossil fuels, with 95% from natu-
ral gas. Hydrogen is emerging as a low-carbon fuel option
for transportation, electricity generation, and manufacturing
applications, because it could decarbonize these three large
sectors of the economy.
A growing concern with the use of fossil fuels is that
their combustion produces carbon dioxide and other green-
house gas emissions. Research is ongoing to find innovative
ways to capture and store these gasses, for example carbon
dioxide, as well as to develop technologies and systems that
operate more efficiently and emit fewer greenhouse gases.
Oil
Oil is the largest source of energy in America, supplying
almost 35% of the energy we use. Crude oil taken from the
earth must be processed or refined into specific products
such as gasoline, heating oil, diesel fuel, or kerosene before
it can be used. To meet our demand, we depend on oil from
other countries. We import about 45% of the oil we use. Our
nation’s transportation fuels (gas, diesel, jet fuel) account for
almost 70% of crude oil consumed.
Natural Gas
Natural gas provides about one-third of our energy supply.
Natural gas requires little processing before use. It has fewer
pollutants than other fossil fuels so it keeps the air cleaner.
It also does not produce a solid waste for disposal like coal.
About 41% of homes in the United States are heated with
natural gas. Gas also is useful to operate stoves, clothes dry-
ers, and water heaters. Nearly 42% of our natural gas is used
to produce electricity. Like oil, gas must be produced through
wells and also raises concerns about environmental impacts.


ENERGY 73
.A Good Energy Citizen
Coal
Coal is the fossil fuel most abundant in the U.S., and we lead
the world with over 260 billion short tons of recoverable coal
reserves—28% of total global reserves. Coal meets 9% of our
energy demand. Almost 92% of the coal burned in the United
States is for producing electricity. In 2023, coal-fired power
plants supplied about 19% the electricity we use. Because coal
produces ashes and smoke as it burns—as well as sulfur and
nitrous oxides, carbon dioxide, and water vapor—we must
consider and address environmental concerns associated with
coal utilization. Coal mining also raises environmental issues.
Nuclear Power
Nuclear energy is one of the largest sources of emissions-free
power in the world. There are more than 440 commercial
nuclear reactors around the world, including more than 90
units in the United States. The main job of each reactor is to
house and control nuclear fission—a physical process where
atoms split and release energy. It generates nearly 800 billion
kilowatt hours of emissions-free electricity each year and meets
25% of the nation’s total electric power needs. More than 90
U.S. reactors operate around the clock and operate at full power
Oil is available within the United States; however, today’s technology and costs limit
the amount of oil that can be produced. Concerns about environmental damage limit
exploration for new oil fields and pipeline construction.


74 ENERGY
A Good Energy Citizen.
more than 92% of the time making nuclear energy one of the
most-reliable energy sources on the grid today. The nuclear
industry supports nearly half a million jobs in the United States
with average salaries that are 50% higher than other energy
sources. This process yields millions of times more energy than
other sources (has a higher energy density). Nuclear power
has the potential to produce substantial amounts of electricity
without adding carbon dioxide or other gases to the atmosphere.
The disposal of radioactive wastes is the trade-off, however,
which must be managed when using nuclear power.
Hydroelectric (Water) Power
Hydroelectric power is a type of renewable energy that uses
moving water as a source of power. Hydropower is one of the
oldest types of renewable energy. In 2023, hydropower provided
about 37% of America’s
renewable energy
(10% total) generation.
Water constantly moves
through a vast global
cycle, evaporating
from lakes and oceans,
forming clouds,
precipitating as rain or
snow, then flowing back
down to the ocean.
Because the water cycle
is an endless, constantly
recharging system
that is not reduced
in the hydropower
process, hydropower
is considered a renewable energy. Three states—California,
Oregon, and Washington—produce more than half of the
hydroelectricity in the United States. While the fuel (flowing or
falling water) is free and hydropower creates little pollution, it
does affect migratory fish and local environments as river valleys
are flooded to build the necessary dams.
Other Power Sources
Biomass, geothermal, solar, and wind power contribute most
of the remaining 8% of our energy supply. Biomass (chemical
energy stored as plants process sunlight) currently accounts for
Grand Coulee
Dam in central
Washington


ENERGY 75
.A Good Energy Citizen
most of this amount. Wood burning is the most common use
of biomass for energy. Plant and animal materials also can be
converted to liquid or gaseous fuels such as ethanol or methane.
The Second Law, Again
In all of this, the second law of thermodynamics is vital for
understanding the problems in controlling our energy use.
Of the approximately 93.6 quads of energy consumed in the
United States annually, 32.1 quads (almost 35%) are converted
into only 12.4 quads of electricity (with a 59% loss). Of the
13.2 quads of electricity, 0.8 quad (more than 6%) is lost from
resistance in electrical lines.
Internal combustion engines are only 15% to 20%
efficient at converting the chemical energy in petroleum fuels
to mechanical energy that moves our vehicles. In other words,
80% of all fuels used in transportation become wasted energy
cast out into the environment.
The effect of dumping wasted energy into the environment
is only one impact of the second law. In addition, energy waste
assures that we will continue to rely on imported oil to meet
our energy needs—especially transportation fuels. As other
countries develop their economies, they will rely more on the
world’s limited energy supplies. Competition and tensions will
grow as more people seek a share of energy resources. It is
important that we use our available resources wisely even as
we move to develop sustainable energy technologies.
To be a good energy citizen, you must understand the tight-
knit relationships between energy and our economy, energy and
our standard of living, energy and our security in the world,
and energy and our future.
Energy reserves are supplies that are known to exist.
Coal is the largest of the world’s fossil-fuel reserves.
Known sources of coal could last 140 years at today’s
rate of use. The global oil reserve, however, could be
exhausted within 50 to 60 years. Natural gas reserves
also could be used up in about 60 years. Uranium
reserves for nuclear fission are projected to be
sufficient through 2050 according to the International
Atomic Energy Agency.





ENERGY 77
.The Future of Energy
The Future of Energy
When Nate began work on the Energy merit badge, he raised
several questions that made him think about the past and
future of energy. If electric cars, fuel cells, solar electricity, and
other technologies have been used for many years, why are we
not using more of them? Because Nate had learned so much
about the science, technology, and economics of energy, he
could now see the answer.
At any time, people use the forms of energy that meet
their needs at the lowest expense. Hydrogen may burn more
cleanly than wood, but if wood is plentiful and cheap and
hydrogen is expensive, people will use wood. To keep down
the cost of using wood, wood users find ever-better ways of
managing it. This means improving wood-using technologies.
In most uses of energy, the technology is improved to its
greatest practical efficiency until replaced by a better, more
efficient technology. For example, car engines had carburetors
for many years. As gasoline increased in cost, carmakers needed
to make ever-more-efficient carburetors. Eventually carburetors
could not be any more efficient, but fuel injectors, a superior
technology, replaced them. Then the technology turned to
making more efficient fuel-injected engines.
In the same way, as oil and other nonrenewable energy
sources become scarcer, they will become more expensive. Then
other forms of energy will be less expensive than nonrenew-
ables. Costly fossil fuels will be used less and less, until renew-
able sources completely replace them. This eventual switch of
technologies will happen before the world runs out of oil, coal,
or any other nonrenewable fuel.
Renewable, or sustainable, energy comes from sources that
theoretically cannot be exhausted, such as solar, water, and wind.
Fossil fuels are nonrenewable sources of energy.


78 ENERGY
The Future of Energy.
The Future of Fossil Fuels
Fossil fuels have long produced most of the world’s electricity.
Coal will continue to be a vital fuel for electrical generation. One
option for improving coal use is coal gasification. By separating
the burnable components of coal from the impurities, the solid
fuel can be changed into a gas. In the short term, coal gasifica-
tion can boost the efficiency of electricity production to 50%,
up from about 33% now.
Carbon dioxide is the major greenhouse gas that is pro-
duced in large quantities in any process that burns carbon. Coal
gasification technologies concentrate carbon dioxide, which
can be captured and used for other purposes. In addition, coal
gas can be used like natural gas in other applications including
high-grade transportation fuels.
New burners and catalytic (gas busting) systems will reduce
pollution emissions from burning coal. New technologies are
being developed to recycle ash into construction materials such
as masonry blocks, concrete, and asphalt. Computer systems,
sensors, and controls linked through state-of-the-art software
also will help to control pollution.
As power-plant fuels, oil and natural gas are more expen-
sive than coal. However, oil and gas plants can be built more
cheaply and quickly. And they can be started up as needed
more easily than coal or nuclear facilities. New high-tech tur-
bines are being developed, including some that can switch
between gas and oil to use the fuel that is cheapest at the time.
Biomass
Bioenergy is a form of renewable energy that comes from
organic materials (previously living organisms made up of car-
bon-based compounds). Some of the most common biomass
materials include crop wastes, forest residues (the parts of trees
To meet the world’s future energy needs, existing tech-
nologies must be improved and new ones developed.
In this section you will read about several technolo-
gies, each of which needs development to change our
future. Use this information to help meet requirement
7 and as a starting point to locate other resources for a
fuller picture of energy technologies.


ENERGY 79
.The Future of Energy
and plants that aren’t used when we harvest wood), grasses
and woody plants grown for use as biomass, algae, wood
waste from urban areas, and food waste. Biomass can be used
to produce transportation fuels, heat, electricity, and products.
Biomass is versatile because the material can be put to
many uses. Bioenergy technologies allow us to reuse the car-
bon compounds that exist in biomass materials: when we use
biomass to make products and energy, we use carbon that
could otherwise be wasted by sitting in a landfill or decaying.
We turn biomass material into reduced-emissions fuels, bio-
products (like new kinds of plastic that can replace plastics in
items you buy at the grocery store), and renewable power.
When biomass is specifically used as an energy source, it
is transformed into heat and electricity using similar processes
as fossil fuel energy. There are three ways to convert the ener-
gy stored in biomass into biopower: burning, bacterial decay,
and conversion to a gas or liquid fuel. Burning involves set-
ting dry biomass material on fire in a controlled environment,
and using the heat and chemicals produced by the fire to heat
stored air or water, which can then be used to warm or cool
buildings or move turbines to produce kinetic energy (energy
that comes from moving) to create electricity.


80 ENERGY
The Future of Energy.
The Greenhouse Effect
Carbon dioxide, water vapor, and methane are known as greenhouse
gases because, in Earth’s atmosphere, they act to trap energy from
the sun much like the glass roof and walls of a greenhouse. Here is
what happens.
Sunlight comes to Earth as waves of radiant energy with different
wavelengths. The short-wavelength energy easily passes through air
(or greenhouse glass). When that energy reaches land or water, it is
absorbed. The second law of thermodynamics holds that the process
of absorption and release cannot be 100% efficient. The waves lose
some energy to the molecules they strike, heating the molecules and
increasing the wavelength of the energy waves.
Figures A and B can help you understand the relationship between
wavelength and energy. Trace wave A with your finger as you say “the
second law” (not too fast). Do this a few times. Because all radiant
energy waves travel at the same speed, wave B crosses the page in
the same time. Trace wave B as you say “the second law” at the same
speed as before.
Repeat this and feel
the difference.
It takes more
energy to trace wave
B because the wave-
length is shorter. You
felt the difference
that shows wave A
carries less energy
than wave B.
The greenhouse
effect occurs because
short-wavelength
radiant energy can
pass easily through air, but longer wavelengths do not. Light that
comes freely into a greenhouse loses energy, and the glass holds the
heat waves inside. The atmosphere works the same way as sunlight
warms the land and sea, and air traps the heat near Earth’s surface.
A
B


ENERGY 81
.The Future of Energy
Human activities, including the burning of fossil fuels, add carbon
dioxide and water to the atmosphere. These gases can increase the
greenhouse effect by more effectively trapping heat in the atmosphere.
An increased greenhouse effect could lead to global warming with a
worldwide temperature increase that affects weather, sea levels, agricul-
ture, forests, and other natural and human systems.
Many concerned scientists and leaders are working on ways to
manage human activity that will not increase the greenhouse effect. It
is hoped that nature will compensate for past and future human activ-
ity in a way that will minimize or avoid global warming. Much research
still is needed to understand the greenhouse effect, and even more
research will be needed to solve the problems it may cause.
REFLECTED
RADIATION
ESCAPING
HEAT
ATMOSPHERE
SHORT
WAVELENGTH
RADIATION
LONG
WAVELENGTH
RADIATION
TRAPPED
BY
ATMOSPHERE
EARTH


82 ENERGY
The Future of Energy.
Bacterial decay means we leave materials to break down,
which releases chemicals like methane in the process. We can
capture the released chemicals (in the form of gas) and burn
those to produce energy in the same way as directly burning
the material. Finally, when we want to convert biomass to a
gas or a liquid, we use chemical processes to change the physi-
cal properties of the biomass. Different types of materials are
put in different controlled environments (like in machines that
have extremely high temperatures or pressures), which can
break some of the material’s chemical bonds and cause it to
change its state from a solid to a liquid or a liquid to gas.
Biopower can reduce the need for burning fossil fuels in
power plants, since these fossil fuels create greenhouse gas-
ses which create major changes in our world’s climate. Some
forms of renewable energy can only be used under certain
environmental conditions (solar power can only be created
when the sun is out, and wind power can only be created
when there are fast enough winds), but since biomass can be
stored and turned into energy whenever we need it, it can help
keep the electric grid “flexible”, meaning we can make sure to
provide electricity to people at any time of day and under any
type of weather conditions.
Cogeneration
Cogeneration systems produce useful heat and usable power
from a single process. The most common design is to capture
the heat in the exhaust gases of industrial boilers or machinery.
This produces hot water or steam that can be used for space
heating or other processes. Heat from running generators, air
compressors, and other machinery also can be put to good use.
Cogeneration is being used today in the automotive, metal, and
mining industries and in water and wastewater treatment.
Two factors make cogeneration an important part of our
energy future. First, industries face growing pressures to reduce
their impact on the natural environment. Second, the rising
cost of traditional fuels means energy must be used and reused
as efficiently as possible, which cuts costs at the same time it
reduces pollution.
Hydrogen and Fuel Cells
Hydrogen is the simplest and most abundant element on earth,
making up 75% of the total universe’s mass. Hydrogen is an
A car heater
uses waste heat
from the engine
to warm the
car’s passenger
compartment.
This is an example
of cogeneration—
waste energy
used for a
practical purpose.


ENERGY 83
.The Future of Energy
energy carrier, not an energy source. It is found within water,
fossil fuels, and all living matter, but it rarely exists as a gas
on Earth – it must be separated from other elements. We can
make hydrogen from water using our nation’s abundant energy
resources such as wind, solar, and nuclear, or from natural gas
with carbon capture to avoid emissions. When we produce
hydrogen from water using electricity generated from renewables
or zero-carbon sources – a process called electrolysis — hydro-
gen becomes a zero-emission resource to deliver, store, and use
energy.
We already produce nearly 10 million
metric tons of hydrogen annually in the
United States which is roughly one seventh
of the global supply. Today, hydrogen is pri-
marily used to refine oil, and as part of many
industrial and chemical processes required
to make food and other essential products
like plastic, fuels and even cosmetics. Current
hydrogen infrastructure includes over 1,600
miles of pipelines, a growing network of
stations, and thousands of tons of storage
in underground caverns. More than 45,000
hydrogen-powered forklifts help move goods
in warehouses and supermarkets, and thou-
sands of fuel cell backup power units, which
may use hydrogen, can provide electricity
during blackouts.
Hydrogen can help reduce emissions in
hard to decarbonize sectors when used as
an input in metals and steel manufacturing,
and as a fuel in heavy duty transportation,
including trucks. When blended with natural
gas, hydrogen can help make natural gas
burn cleaner. Hydrogen can also complement
our electrical grid by storing energy from solar, wind, or nuclear
energy sources, and with the help of a fuel cell, hydrogen can
be converted back into clean electricity to be used when it is
needed.
Much like a battery, a hydrogen fuel cell produces electricity
through an electrochemical reaction, which generates electricity
without any combustion. It uses hydrogen and oxygen as inputs
and releases electricity and water as outputs. Unlike batter-
ies, a hydrogen fuel cell doesn’t run down or need to recharge.
NEGATIVE
PEM
(PROTON
EXCHANGE
MEMBRANE)
Fuel cell
H2
H20
O2
CATALYST
POSITIVE
OXYGEN GAS
FLOWS IN
WATER FLOWS
OUT AS
EXHAUST
FUEL
FLOWS IN


84 ENERGY
The Future of Energy.
As long as there’s a constant source of hydrogen and oxygen,
hydrogen fuel cells will continue producing electricity to power
systems as large as a utility power station and as small as a lap-
top computer. Hydrogen fuel cells do not emit carbon dioxide
or other air pollutants which makes them an important tool to
address climate and air quality challenges.
Geothermal
Under Earth’s crust, deep down, the Earth is really hot (many
hundreds of degrees Fahrenheit). The heat at the center of
Earth is a byproduct of chemical and nuclear reactions happen-
ing deep in the Earth’s core - reactions that have been occur-
ring for billions of years. A common byproduct of these reac-
tions is heat, which then slowly migrates up through the Earth
until we can reach it by drilling into the ground. This heat can
be used to generate energy, called geothermal energy, and pro-
duce electricity and heat and cool homes. Geothermal energy
is available all the time, across the entire country, and does
not produce greenhouse gas emissions. Because these reactions
deep inside the earth will continue to happen, any heat we use
will be replaced, or renewed.
How Fission Works
In nuclear reactors, fission is induced by neutron absorption:
large atoms absorb a neutron, causing them to excite and split
into two smaller atoms, also known as fission products. In
addition to tremendous amounts of energy, individual neutrons
are often released during a fission event. These neutrons then
interact with heavy isotopes (large atoms), inducing more fis-
sion events. Eventually, this becomes a chain reaction. Due to
their high probability to undergo fission, uranium and pluto-
nium are the most commonly used elements in nuclear reactor
fuel. Fission in nuclear reactors is easily regulated by introduc-
ing control rods, which contain a neutron absorbing material.
Nuclear power plants do not produce carbon dioxide or
other emissions that contribute to greenhouse gases in the
atmosphere. Problems arise, however, with disposing of highly
radioactive spent nuclear fuel.
The field of
study for fusion
processes and
related research
is called plasma
science. Today,
nuclear fusion
can be done only
in research labs.
Geothermal generation accounted for about 30% of
electricity from renewable sources in 2022.


ENERGY 85
.The Future of Energy
How Reactors Work
Nuclear reactors use low enriched uranium for nuclear fuel.
The uranium is fabricated into small ceramic pellets and
stacked together into sealed metal tubes called fuel rods.
Typically, more than 200 of these rods are bundled together to
form a fuel assembly. Each reactor core is made up of a couple
hundred assemblies, depending on the power level and reactor
design. Inside the reactor vessel, the fuel rods are immersed
in water which acts as both a coolant and moderator. The
moderator helps slow down the neutrons produced by fission
to sustain the chain reaction. This is necessary because even
though neutrons from fission are born fast, fission in current
reactor designs has a higher probability of happening when
induced by slow neutrons. The energy released during fission
reactions heats up the water. The water temperature increases
until it starts to boil. The steam from the boiling water is used
to turn turbines, generating electricity. Control rods absorb
neutrons and can be inserted into the reactor core to reduce
the reaction rate or can be withdrawn to increase it. All com-
mercial nuclear reactors in the United States are light-water
reactors. This means they use normal water as both a coolant
and neutron moderator. New advanced reactor designs are cur-
rently being developed that can use molten salt, gas, or liquid
metal as a moderator to operate at higher temperatures, result-
ing in higher efficiencies.
Safeguards are technical measures used to detect and
deter the diversion of nuclear material and the misuse of
nuclear facilities. The International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) works to independently verify the correctness and
Inside a reactor


86 ENERGY
The Future of Energy.
completeness of nuclear programs in states that have signed
the corresponding safeguards agreements. New technologies
and reactors under development in the United States will be
smaller in size and more flexible and affordable to operate.
These systems, along with the current fleet of reactors, can use
their thermal heat and power to generate clean hydrogen, drive
industrial processes and even purify water without emissions.
New designs such as small modular reactors and microreactors
could be online within the decade.
Nuclear Fusion
As described earlier, fusion is the energy process that powers
the sun and other stars. To use fusion on Earth, systems must
be created to carry on the fusion process and convert that
energy into electricity.
Even after we learn to control the process, it will take
years to develop power plants to deliver substantial amounts
of energy to people. Engineers will need to design systems
to transfer the heat to fluids that could power turbines and
generators. Separate plants will be needed to produce deuterium
(the hydrogen fuel for fusion reactions) and lithium (a light
metal) in large amounts to fuel the process.
Fusion energy has advantages over fossil-fuel and nuclear-
fission plants in producing electricity. The fuel for fusion
(hydrogen) is abundant. Its main by-product, helium, can be
released without increasing greenhouse gases or air pollution.
However, the process does create some radioactive waste.
During fusion, high-energy neutrons strike the materials of
the fusion reaction vessel. This will cause some of the atoms in
these vessel materials to become radioactive. After many years
of operation, these materials will have to be permanently dis-
posed of as radioactive wastes.
In 2023, the first-ever demonstration of fusion ignition
was achieved in the U.S. by Lawrence Livermore National
Laboratory’s National Ignition Facility; a breakthrough for
fusion energy and a key initial step in a decades-long quest for
limitless clean energy.
A small portion of
the heat stored in
the ocean could
power the world.
Each day, the
oceans absorb
enough heat
from the sun to
equal the thermal
energy contained
in 250 billion
barrels of oil.


ENERGY 87
.The Future of Energy
Solar Energy
Solar energy is the energy that comes from the sun as sunlight.
Every location on Earth receives sunlight at least part of the
year. The amount of sunlight that reaches any one spot on the
Earth’s surface varies according to geographic location, time of
day, season, local landscape, and local weather.
A major problem slowing widespread use of direct solar energy is
personal taste. Solar homes need to be oriented to the sun, not
parallel to the nearest road. They may be low or built partially into
the ground. Many people do not like the distracting look of solar
panels on their roof or property.


88 ENERGY
The Future of Energy.
Solar energy can be captured and turned into useful
forms of energy, such as heat and electricity, using a variety
of technologies. Because the earth is round, the sun strikes
the surface at different angles, ranging from 0° (just above the
horizon) to 90° (directly overhead). When the sun’s rays are
vertical, the Earth’s surface gets all the energy possible. The
more slanted the sun’s rays are, the longer they travel through
the atmosphere, becoming more scattered and diffuse.
Solar photovoltaic (PV) technologies convert sunlight into
electrical energy. A single PV device is known as a cell. When
the sun shines onto a solar panel, energy from the sunlight
is absorbed by the PV cells in the panel. This energy creates
electrical charges that move in response to an internal elec-
trical field in the cell, causing electricity to flow. In order to
withstand the outdoors for many years, cells are sandwiched
between protective materials in a combination of glass and/or
plastics.
In order for solar energy to be useful in a home or busi-
ness, a number of other things must be in place. The best way
to install solar is through a qualified professional who holds
a certification to work with and install solar panels. You can
install solar panels on the rooftop of your home depending on
that rooftop’s size, shading, tilt, location, and construction. PV
technologies must be mounted on a stable, durable structure
that can support it and withstand environmental elements
like wind, rain, hail, and corrosion over time. Another way
to install is by rack mounting. Rack mounting is currently the
most common method for large fields of solar panels because
it is versatile and easy to construct and install.
Solar energy works well with other technologies, like bat-
teries, which help save solar energy for longer periods of time.
The reason: Solar energy is not always produced at the time
energy is needed most—like at nighttime or on cloudy days.
Solar energy can help to reduce the cost of electricity, because
once you install a solar system, you don’t ever need to refuel
it—just point it to the sky! It can also help to produce backup
power when the power goes out, like after a major storm.
Solar energy and other renewable energy is quickly replacing
older forms of electricity generation like coal or gas power
plants. This transition—or “modernization”—will help to
reduce our impact on climate change and will create millions
of new jobs around the country.


ENERGY 89
.The Future of Energy
The cost of solar electricity is about 10 to 13 cents per
kilowatt-hour. This cost must be reduced to about 2 to 5 cents
per kilowatt-hour for solar cells to be competitive. An alterna-
tive for producing electricity from the sun is to build generat-
ing plants powered by solar energy. However, it is difficult to
produce the temperatures that are required to heat water or
other fluids to make steam because sunlight comes to us very
diffusely (spread out).
Ocean Energy
Earth’s oceans can produce two types of energy: thermal
energy from the sun’s heat and mechanical energy from the
tides and waves. Though ocean energy has great potential,
much work is needed before this source can become a practical
energy supply that is competitive in cost and friendly to ocean
life and shorelines.
Oceans cover more than 70% of Earth’s surface, mak-
ing them the world’s largest solar collectors. The sun’s heat
warms the surface water much more than the deep ocean
water, and this temperature difference produces thermal energy.
Ocean thermal energy conversion systems use this energy to
drive turbines and generators to make electricity.
The mechanical energy in ocean waves can power various
systems to generate electricity. One system uses floats or pitch-
ing devices to produce electricity from the bobbing or pitching
movements. Another makes electricity from the wave-driven
rise and fall of a column of water powering a turbine. A third
system funnels or channels waves into a reservoir, then releases
the water through turbines to generate electricity.


90 ENERGY
The Future of Energy.
To convert tidal energy into electricity, a dam typically is
used to hold water at high tide, then release the stored water
through a turbine at low tide. A major disadvantage of tidal
power plants is that they can generate electricity only during
falling tides. Also, the plants can be built in few places because
tidal power requires large differences between high and low
tide. In the United States, large tidal differences occur only in
Maine and Alaska.
Wind Energy
Wind is caused by the sun unevenly heating the atmosphere
and the earth’s surface, combined with the rotation of the
earth. Modern high-tech wind turbines capture the energy
of wind to produce electricity. They can vary in size from
smaller turbines for local use at homes or farms, to groups of
very large turbines for electric utilities, called a wind farm.
The most efficient place for a wind turbine to operate is high
above the ground, where winds are stronger and steadier than
at ground level. The towers for utility-scale wind turbines are
often 300 feet tall. At the top of the tower, 3 blades form a
rotor which is turned by the wind and connected to a genera-
tor to create electricity.
Wind energy is abundant, renewable, and available nearly
everywhere – on land and offshore. Wind flow patterns and
speeds vary greatly across the United States and are modified
by bodies of water, vegetation, and differences in terrain. Some
of the strongest wind sites may be found in In the American
West, the Great Plains, New England, and off the Atlantic and
Pacific coasts. In the past 20 years, the price of wind-generated
electricity has dropped significantly, so that in some places it
is the cheapest source of energy. Wind energy has become an
important source of electricity nationwide and is continuing to
grow.
Technology and commercial advancements are driv-
ing down the costs of wind energy. More wind energy was
installed in 2020 than any other energy source, accounting for
42% of new U.S. capacity.
One critical issue
with wind farms is
that they often are
located far from
where the energy
is needed.


ENERGY 91
.The Future of Energy
Wind power is now the fastest growing energy
source worldwide, and many predict it will soon be
a major energy contributor in the United States.





ENERGY 93
.Careers in Energy
Careers in Energy
Nate enjoyed learning about energy, and he started thinking
about a career in the field. In his merit badge work, he had
learned that the energy industry includes many different kinds
of companies that find, develop, generate, and transport various
forms of energy. Universities and government agencies do addi-
tional research to improve technologies and ensure public safety.
Nate asked his merit badge counselor, Mr. Stevens, what
classes he should take now to pursue a future in energy. Mr.
Stevens said high school and college graduates had many
opportunities in the field. His main advice was to stay in school
and do well in all subjects. Reading, writing, and mathematics
form a good foundation for any career. And high school classes
in science, including physics and chemistry, along with any
available math courses help anyone interested in preparing for
a technical field.
The Companies
Nate did follow-up research to learn more about the energy
industry and the careers it creates. He found three basic groups
of related industries making up the energy field: fossil fuels,
nuclear power, and renewable technologies including hydro-
electricity. Each has specific needs and opportunities for careers.
A small number of companies make up the coal segment
of the fossil-fuel industry. They collaborate and jointly sponsor
research to improve their generating efficiency and reliability
and reduce environmental impact.
The oil and natural gas industry also is composed of large
companies, or majors, but also small companies called inde-
pendents. Majors mostly work internationally and in high-cost
areas (Alaska and offshore). The independents find and produce
most supplies within the United States. These major and inde-
pendent companies compete to find new resources and closely
guard their research results.
An area of study
that students in
technical fields
often overlook
in college is
writing. To sell
an idea for
future study or
to explain to
someone the
results of your
research, you
need a good
command of
written and
spoken English.


94 ENERGY
Careers in Energy.
The nuclear industry consists of electric utility companies
and the businesses that support them. The utilities operate
the actual plants that make electricity. They maintain the
machinery, put fuel in and remove waste products, and monitor
the environmental impact. Corporations supply equipment and
produce uranium fuel, among other activities. The U.S. govern-
ment is involved in regulating the industry and directing the
systems that dispose of radioactive wastes.
The renewable energy industry has many smaller firms
producing goods and services and doing ongoing research. The
exception to this is hydropower, where a few large public and
private companies make up the industry.
The Careers
Each segment of the energy industry needs engineers, opera-
tors, technicians, and managers. These businesses also need
accountants, marketers, and lawyers. Skilled tradespeople
such as electricians, plumbers, carpenters, truck drivers, and
machinists find careers in the energy field. Researchers for
corporations, universities, and government agencies develop
better technologies and make other innovations.
Energy industry people can be found in large and small
cities; in offices, laboratories, or plants; or in the field main-
taining the miles of electric lines and oil and gas pipelines that
bring energy to the public. Some are based in wild, remote
areas, including Alaska and offshore in the Gulf of Mexico,
looking for sources of fuel.
The two largest engineering disciplines, civil and mechani-
cal, are found in all of the energy industries. These engineers
are responsible for the design, construction, and operation of
physical plants.
Renewable
energy has
produced many
entrepreneurs—
people who build
a business around
a new idea
or technology.
The technical side of the energy industry demands spe-
cial skills and generally requires an engineering or sci-
ence degree from a college or university. People with
these skills not only build, operate, and maintain the
generating plants, but also discover improvements that
reduce costs and lower risks. These technical positions
require education emphasizing math and science often
including physics, chemistry, and calculus.


ENERGY 95
.Careers in Energy
The fossil-fuel industry employs petroleum, chemical,
and mining engineers. Petroleum engineers drill and produce
oil and natural gas and ensure its safe transport and storage.
Chemical engineers refine petroleum products into useful fuels
and products like plastics. Mining engineers bring coal resources
from the ground to the power plant. The nuclear industry
employs nuclear engineers with special training to solve the
many technical issues in handling nuclear materials.
Scientists also have career options in energy. Computer
scientists are needed in all industry segments to help in design,
operation, and maintenance. Geologists and geophysicists
usually handle fossil fuels, often in outdoor laboratories discov-
ering where the fossil fuels are hidden so that petroleum
or mining engineers can extract them safely and economically.
Chemists and physicists also find careers in energy research.
What Lies Ahead
The current, exciting transition from traditional energy sources
to long-term future sources is also bringing a transition for
energy careers. Before long, we will need people to improve
existing technologies and delivery systems as well as manage
human systems that operate manufacturing, sales, and services.
Many new careers will come about as we move to increasing
efficiency and controlling pollution—especially reducing car-
bon emissions.
Building and maintaining hybrid and electric cars is an
area where jobs will require keeping your skills up to date as
systems develop. A biofuels industry will create systems that
capture carbon dioxide and convert it into liquid fuel. In addi-
tion, existing careers like photovoltaic systems installers and
wind turbine technicians will be changing drastically.
Converting traditional electrical grids to “smart grids” is
one of our biggest challenges. This will require inventions and
technology systems as well as information technology experts,
project managers, and systems engineers. Current systems of
pump-storage hydroelectric facilities and gigantic battery sys-
tems will be augmented by technologies we have not dreamed
of yet.
With energy careers, this old saying remains true: “The
sky is the limit.”
All types of
engineers are
in demand for
various renewable
energy and
conservation
approaches.





ENERGY 97
.Epilogue: Nate’s Story
Epilogue: Nate’s Story
Nathan Robert Gomez looked up into the starry night sky and
smiled at his latest achievement. Earning the Energy merit
badge had been fun and fascinating. Nate felt he had learned
much about energy and was ready to be a responsible family
member, community member, and citizen.
Now he looked at everything around him in terms of the
energy it took to produce and operate. He knew about the con-
nections among cost, supply, waste, pollution, and many other
issues. He understood the second law of thermodynamics and
saw it in play in his world each day. He was excited about the
possibility of a career in the energy field.
Nate gazed down at the new pocketknife his parents had
given him when he completed the Energy merit badge. He
turned it over and examined the monogram on the reverse side.
“Well, no wonder!” he thought. “I had to be the most
prepared Scout ever to earn the Energy merit badge. Just look
at my initials—N.R.G. En-aR-Gee. Energy!”


98 ENERGY
Energy Information Resources.
Energy Information Resources
Scouting Literature
Chemistry, Citizenship in the
Community, Citizenship in the World,
Electricity, Electronics, Engineering,
Environmental Science, Geology, Home
Repairs, Nuclear Science, Oceanography,
Plumbing, Pulp and Paper, Radio,
Railroading, Space Exploration,
Sustainability, Truck Transportation,
and Weather merit badge pamphlets
Books
Bickerstaff, Linda. Oil Power of the
Future: New Ways of Turning
Petroleum Into Energy. Rosen, 2002.
Boxwell, Michael. Solar Electricity
Handbook, 12th ed. Greenstream
Publishing, 2018.
Boyle, Godfrey. Renewable Energy:
Power for a Sustainable Future, 3rd
ed. Oxford University Press, 2012.
Chiras, Dan, Mick Sagrillo, and Ian
Woofenden. Power From the Wind:
Achieving Energy Independence. New
Society Publishers, 2009.
Draper, Allison Stark. Hydropower of the
Future: New Ways of Turning Water
Into Energy. Rosen, 2003.
Goldemberg, José. Energy: What
Everyone Needs to Know. Oxford
University Press, 2012.
Graham, Ian S. Fossil Fuels: A Resource
Our World Depends On. Heinemann,
2004.
———. Fossil Fuels (Energy Forever
Series). Hodder Wayland, 2001.
———. Geothermal and Bio-Energy
(Energy Forever Series). Hodder
Wayland, 2001.
———. Water Power (Energy Forever
Series). Raintree, 1998.
Green, Dan. Eyewitness: Energy. DK
Publishing, 2016.
Hawkes, Nigel. New Energy Sources.
Franklin Watts, 2003.
Hayhurst, Chris. Biofuel Power of the
Future: New Ways of Turning Organic
Matter Into Energy. Rosen, 2003.
———. Hydrogen Power of the Future:
New Ways of Turning Fuel Cells Into
Energy. Rosen, 2003.
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


ENERGY 99
.Energy Information Resources
Jones, Susan. Solar Power of the Future:
New Ways of Turning Sunlight Into
Energy. Rosen, 2003.
Kidd, J.S., and Renee A. Kidd. Nuclear
Power: The Study of Quarks and
Sparks. Chelsea House, 2006.
MacKay, David J.C. Sustainable
Energy—Without the Hot Air. UIT
Cambridge Ltd., 2009.
Parker, Steve. Fuels for the Future.
Raintree, 1998.
Riddle, John. Coal Power of the Future:
New Ways of Turning Coal Into
Energy. Rosen, 2003.
Schobert, Harold. Energy: The Basics.
Routledge, 2013.
Tecco, Betsy Dru. Wind Power of the
Future: New Ways of Turning Wind
Into Energy. Rosen, 2003.
Tester, Jefferson W., Elisabeth M. Drake,
et al. Sustainable Energy: Choosing
Among Options, 2nd. ed. The MIT
Press, 2012.
Organizations and Websites
GENERAL ENERGY INFORMATION
Energy Efficiency and
Renewable Energy
U.S. Department of Energy
1000 Independence Ave. SW
Washington, DC 20585
energy.gov/eere
Energy Kids
U.S. Energy Information Administration
eia.gov/kids
ENERGY EFFICIENCY
AND CONSERVATION
Energy Star
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
energystar.gov
Home Energy Saver
Energy Technologies Area,
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
eta.lbl.gov
ENERGY SOURCES AND DATA
American Clean Power Association
202-383-2500
cleanpower.org
International Atomic Energy Agency
iaea.org
National Hydropower Association
202-682-1700
hydro.org
National Renewable
Energy Laboratory
nrel.gov
Nuclear Energy Institute
202-739-8000
nei.org
U.S. Energy Information
Administration
eia.gov


100 ENERGY
Energy Information Resources.
Acknowledgments
Scouting America thanks Dennis E.
Showers, Ph.D., for his work as prin-
cipal author of the previous edition
of the Energy merit badge pamphlet.
Dr. Showers serves as director of the
Center for Science, Mathematics and
Technology Education and associate
professor of Science Education at State
University of New York (SUNY) at
Geneseo. He received the Xerox Center
for Multicultural Teacher Education
Award of Excellence in 2003.
Contributing authors to this edition
are Susan Hamm, Begonia Aranguren,
and Don Harris. Contributing additional
expertise to the previous edition of
the Energy merit badge pamphlet was
Robert J. “Bob” Silva, PE, PG, program
analyst with the U.S. Department of
Energy’s Office of Fossil Energy. Thanks
also to Danrick Alexander for his
involvement.
Scouting America is grateful to
the men and women serving on the
National Merit Badge Subcommittee for
the improvements made in updating
this pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration Credits
Getty Images—pages 46, 51, 85, 89,
and 92
Warren Gretz, Office of Science and
Technical Information, Department of
Energy/National Renewable Energy
Laboratory, courtesy—pages 36 and 57
NASA, courtesy—cover (sun); page 29
U.S. Department of Energy/Energy
Information Administration, cour-
tesy—charts on pages 69, and 70
U.S. Department of Energy, Office of
Energy Efficiency and Renewable
Energy, courtesy—page 59
U.S. Geological Survey, courtesy—page 26
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of
or are protected by Scouting America.
Tom Copeland—pages 33 and 60
John McDearmon—all illustrations on
pages 20, 24, 35, 42, 43, and 80-83
Brian Payne—page 23
Randy Piland—pages 8, 11, 12, 38, 48,
49, 51, and 96