DISABILITIES
AWARENESS


DISABILITIES
AWARENESS
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


35883
ISBN 978-0-8395-3370-2
©2016 Boy Scouts of America
2020 Printing FPO
Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Disabilities-Awareness or
check Scoutbook for the latest requirements.


DISABILITIES AWARENESS 3


4 DISABILITIES AWARENESS


DISABILITIES AWARENESS 5
Contents
People First . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Agencies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
Activities and Adaptations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
Accessibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
Accommodations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
Advocacy, Attitudes, and Awareness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
Career Opportunities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
Disabilities Awareness Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61





DISABILITIES AWARENESS 7
.People First
People First
Look around at the Scouts in your unit, the members of your
sports teams, and the kids in your class. You are not all alike,
are you?
Your friends, teammates, and classmates have separate
personalities, distinct interests and ideas, and different physical
features. You do not all look alike, think alike, or act alike.
You have your own skills and strengths, and your own needs
and situations.
People who have disabilities are no different from the
members of your group or any other group of individuals.
A person might use a wheelchair or be deaf or hard of
hearing. A friend from school might be a terrible speller.
Your Scout patrol leader might dislike heights.
You know there is more
to your patrol leader than an
aversion to high places. You
know your friend does many
things well, even if he or she
has a hard time spelling. In the
same way, people who have
disabilities are not defined
by their disabilities. A person
might have hearing loss, wear
leg braces, or have a medical
condition such as epilepsy, but
that’s not who the person is.
Having a “disability” means only that someone is
“differently able.”


8 DISABILITIES AWARENESS
People First.
Person-First Language
Many people with disabilities want to emphasize what they are
able to do rather than emphasize their disabilities. Remember
that people with disabilities are people first. Each person gets
to decide how he or she should be described. You should use
person-first language when talking about people who are not
personal acquaintances or about people with disabilities as a
group. When you make a new friend or talk about an individual,
show a person-first attitude by calling the individual what he or
she wants to be called.
Many people with disabilities see their condition as part of
who they are, just like their gender, hair or eye color, or ethnicity.
For example, an individual might prefer to be called “deaf” or
“hard of hearing” instead of being identified as someone with
“a hearing impairment.” Honoring their preference might seem
to be the opposite of person-first language, but it definitely
reflects a person-first attitude.
Writing and talking with person-first language is a good
habit to get into because it is the proper form for most situa-
tions. Don’t call someone an epileptic when you mean to say
the person has epilepsy. The condition and the person are not
one and the same. For example, when describing someone with
attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), you would
say “this child has ADHD” rather than “this ADHD child.” The
examples in the list on the next page will help you get into a
person-first language habit.
A disability is a condition that may
limit a person’s mobility, hearing,
vision, speech, or mental function.
A handicap is a restriction or a dis-
advantage that is placed on a person.
For example, some people with
disabilities use wheelchairs. Stairs,
curbs, and narrow doors are handi-
caps that hinder people who use
wheelchairs. People with disabilities
are not “handicapped” unless these
kinds of barriers are put in their way.


DISABILITIES AWARENESS 9
.People First
Say Instead of
Person with a disability Disabled person
People with disabilities The disabled or the handicapped
Disability Handicap
Person who has epilepsy,
autism, a spinal cord
injury, etc.; or ask the
individual how he or she
prefers to be identified.
An epileptic, an autistic, a quadriplegic,
etc. (Never identify people only by their
disability. A person is not a condition.)
Seizure Fit
Person who is deaf or hard
of hearing
Hearing-impaired person (“Hard of
hearing” is preferred to “hearing-
impaired,” which translates in sign lan-
guage as “broken hearing.”)
Person with Down
syndrome
A Down’s person
Has a cognitive or
developmental disability
Is retarded or slow
Has had a disability since
birth, or was born with
a disability
Has a birth defect
Wheelchair user/person
who uses a wheelchair, or
person who uses or walks
with crutches
Confined/restricted to a wheelchair;
wheelchair-bound (People use wheel-
chairs and crutches for getting around.
Most people who use such devices see
them as liberating, not confining.)
People without
disabilities/nondisabled
Healthy, normal, able-bodied (Calling
people who are not disabled “healthy”
suggests that people with disabilities
are unhealthy. In fact, many people
who have disabilities are in excellent
health. Similarly, labeling nondisabled
people as “normal” incorrectly implies
that people who have disabilities
are “abnormal.”)
Accessible parking/
accessible restrooms
Handicapped parking/handicapped
restrooms


10 DISABILITIES AWARENESS
People First.
Invisible Disabilities
Typically, a physical disability is visible—you can see how it
affects people and identify what they need in the way of
assistance or adaptation.
However, more than 70 percent of people with disabilities
have disabilities that you can’t identify just from looking at the
person. These invisible disabilities may make it hard for people
• To interact socially because they struggle to understand
others or to recognize facial expressions.
• To learn, remember, read, write, or do math.
• To concentrate or to restrain sudden impulses.
• To speak; that is, make the right sounds, find the right words
to express themselves, or correctly understand the words
spoken to them.
• To maintain a good mood. They find themselves stressed
out by everyday life, easily frustrated, angered, or afraid.
• To cope with sensory overload. People who have extra-acute
senses can be agitated by loud noises, bright or cluttered
walls, textures or flavors of foods, textures of clothing, types
of touch, and many other things.
All of the conditions described here
have names, such as attention deficit
disorder (ADD), autism spectrum disorder
(ASD), obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD),
depression, anxiety, dyslexia, dysgraphia,
expressive and receptive communication
disorders, and more. Dozens of conditions
have been identified, but in real life the bound-
aries and definitions are blurry. One person
can have a blend of different disabilities. Many
people have a characteristic of one condition or
another—not severely enough to be disabled,
but it still affects them.
You may have
found something
in this list that
describes you,
and that is OK.
Many traits that
make things
harder also create
new opportunities.


DISABILITIES AWARENESS 11
.People First
Disability Etiquette
When you meet someone who has a disability, that might be
the first thing you notice. Because the person seems different,
you might be a little uncomfortable or even scared at first.
Just remember that the disability is not the person. Look
beyond the wheelchair, crutches, leg braces, hearing aid, or
whatever seems different. Treat the person as an individual—
the way you like to be treated.
Here are some tips for disability etiquette.
1. When you meet someone who has a disability, it is always
appropriate to smile and say hello. You also may offer to
shake hands (shaking hands with the left hand is OK).
While people with artificial limbs or limited use of their
hands do shake hands, remember that not everyone can.
When in doubt, ask the person whether he or she would
like to shake hands with you.
2. When you talk with someone who uses a wheelchair, sit
down so you will be at eye level with the wheelchair user.
This is not only polite, but it shows the same level of respect
with which you like to be treated.
3. Do not lean on a person’s wheelchair.
The disability is
not the person.


12 DISABILITIES AWARENESS
People First.
4. Do not touch or move a person’s wheelchair, crutches,
cane, or other gear without permission.
5. If a sign-language interpreter helps you talk with a person
who is deaf, look at and speak to the person, not the inter-
preter. In fact, any time you talk with a person who has a
disability, speak directly to that person rather than to any
companion who may be along.
6. Be patient if a person with a disability takes a little extra
time to do or say something.
7. When you talk with someone who has difficulty speaking,
never pretend to understand if you do not. If you don’t
catch what was said, ask the speaker to repeat it. Then tell
the speaker what you understood. The person will correct
or clarify things if necessary.
8. Speak in a normal voice. Do not shout. Shouting hinders
lipreading and distorts the sounds that hearing aids pick
up. Obviously, it does not help to shout at people who are
blind or visually impaired. They might not see you, but
they can hear you.
9. Never pet or play with service animals such as guide dogs.
Service animals are working animals, not pets, and should
not be distracted from their duties.
10. Ask before giving help. If the person accepts your offer of
help, wait for instructions or ask how you can help.
11. Offer your arm to a person who has a visual impairment,
or suggest that the person put a hand on your shoulder.
This will let you guide, rather than push or pull, the person
as you walk together. Give warning of doors, stairs, or
curbs as you approach them.
12. When talking with someone who is deaf or hard of hearing,
first get the person’s attention with a light tap on the shoul-
der, or wave your hand or stand in front of the person and
make eye contact before you speak. If the person lip-reads,
face him or her directly. Speak clearly and not too fast. Let
the person choose the means of communication, such as
lipreading, sign language, or writing notes.
Ask your parents
or adult leaders
not to park in
places reserved
for people with
disabilities. People
need the large
parking spaces
to maneuver
wheelchairs,
wheelchair lifts,
and other mobility
equipment.


DISABILITIES AWARENESS 13
.People First
13. When talking with someone who is blind, identify yourself
and anyone with you by name. When you are ending the
conversation or getting ready to leave, let the person know.
Don’t just walk away.
14. Relax and be yourself. It is fine and natural to use common
expressions such as “Did you hear about . . . ?” or “See
you later” or “Got to run.” Everyday language does not
offend people who are deaf or blind or use wheelchairs,
and is understandable to most people with mental dis-
abilities. Picking your words with too much care will make
everyone self-conscious and uncomfortable.
15. If you want to know about someone’s disability, it is OK to
ask, politely. It is also OK for the person not to talk about it.
16. Treat people with friendship and respect. A Scout is courte-
ous. Show courtesy to all people, those with and those
without disabilities.


14 DISABILITIES AWARENESS
People First.
David Larson, wheelchair-racing
champion, competitor in four
Paralympic Games, and winner
of five gold and three bronze medals,
was diagnosed with cerebral palsy
at age 2.
Chris Waddell, champion mono-
skier and winner of numerous gold,
silver, and bronze medals in the
Paralympics and world champion-
ships, was paralyzed below the waist
in a skiing accident when he was 20.
Tim Tebow, an outfielder for the
New York Mets and former quarter-
back for multiple NFL teams, was
diagnosed with dyslexia while in
elementary school. Instead of a
playbook, he used flashcards to
remember formations and plays.
Harriet Tubman, who at age 29 escaped
slavery and dedicated herself to
slave rescuing and women’s suffrage,
suffered from a form of epilepsy.
Franklin D. Roosevelt, who served as
president of the United States longer
than any other president, used a
wheelchair most of his life after
nearly dying from polio.
James E. West, successful attorney
and the first Chief Scout Executive
of the Boy Scouts of America, had a
disease in one leg that gave him a
permanent physical disability.
Who Are People With Disabilities?
Randall Anderson/Rossmiller Photography, courtesy


DISABILITIES AWARENESS 15
.People First
When Will You Be Disabled?
Nearly everyone will be disabled at some time in their life, if only
temporarily. An injury, surgery, or unexpected medical condition can
suddenly create a need for crutches, walkers, or wheelchairs. As we
age, things crop up that change our ability to use our senses, keep our
balance, or do difficult mental tasks that once were easy. By paying
attention to the needs of people with disabilities and advocating for
them, you will make the world better and may make it easier to man-
age your own potential disability when it happens.





DISABILITIES AWARENESS 17
.Agencies
Agencies
To fulfill requirement 2 for the Disabilities Awareness merit
badge, you will visit an agency that serves people who have
physical, mental, emotional, or learning disabilities. Work with
your merit badge counselor to choose an appropriate agency
or organization and make an appointment to visit.
Be prepared to ask questions during your visit. Find out
about the services provided.
Depending on the agency, the services offered might
include the following:
• Physical therapy to
develop or restore
movement, strength,
or flexibility lost
because of an injury,
an illness, or a
physical condition
Tip: Many national organizations have state and
regional affiliates, as well as local chapters. To find
a chapter near you, look in the white pages of your
local phone book, or (with your parent’s permission)
check the agency’s website. Also see the resources
section of this pamphlet.


18 DISABILITIES AWARENESS
Agencies.
• Speech-hearing therapy to improve or recover limited or lost
communication skills, treat disabilities such as language
delay and stuttering, and teach other ways of communication
to people who are unable to speak or hear
• Occupational therapy to develop the ability and independence
to do everyday activities such as bathing, dressing, and eating
• Educational programs matched to students’ ages, needs,
and abilities
• Skills training to build skills that people need at work
• Employment services to help people find the kinds of
positions they want
Many agencies are available to help people with temporary or permanent disabilities.


DISABILITIES AWARENESS 19
.Agencies
The agency or organization also might sponsor camps, arts
and crafts, recreation programs, or sports teams for young people
with disabilities. Perhaps you can talk with someone your age
who has taken part in recreational programs or received services.
Take home any brochures or fliers from your visit. Read the
material. Then discuss with your counselor what you learned
about the agency, its activities, and the people it serves.
Understanding the physical struggles of a person who has a disability may help you
recognize the individual’s unique challenges.





DISABILITIES AWARENESS 21
.Activities and Adaptations
Activities and
Adaptations
In your personal or patrol camping gear, you have tents, cook
kits, backpacking stoves, sleeping bags, and other tools that
help you live well and be self-sufficient in the outdoors. People
with various types of disabilities use various types of tools to
be comfortable and self-sufficient at
home, at school, at work, during lei-
sure time, and while traveling.
Tools for independent living
may be as basic as a variable-height
table that a wheelchair user can
adjust to fit. Tools can be as simple
and commonsense as lights that
flash when the doorbell rings to let a
person who is deaf know someone is
at the door.
Other tools are more high-tech.
People who cannot use their hands,
for example, to type on a keyboard
or move a computer mouse,
can operate computers by talking.
Voice-recognition software lets
users speak commands to call up
programs, dictate documents, write
emails, move the cursor on the
screen, navigate online, and
create webpages.
Here are some other tools and
supports that can help people with
disabilities do the things they want
and need to accomplish.
Adaptations to automobiles such as raised
roofs, hand controls, left foot gas pedals and
brakes, and digital driving systems allow
more people with disabilities to have
greater independence.


22 DISABILITIES AWARENESS
Activities and Adaptations.
Service Animals
Guide dogs can help people who are blind get around safely,
quickly, and with confidence. A guide dog responds to its own-
er’s hand signals and spoken commands. The main commands
spoken to a guide dog are “forward,” “left,” “right,” “hop up,”
“halt,” and “steady.” A guide dog is trained to disobey a com-
mand that might put its owner in danger. If the owner gives
the command “forward,” but the dog sees an obstacle in the
way, such as a car, the dog will refuse to move forward.
People who are deaf or hard of hearing may have hearing
dogs to alert them to important sounds: a ringing telephone,
a knock at the door, an alarm clock buzzing, or a noise that
might mean danger. A hearing dog will lead its owner to most
sounds. But at the shriek of a smoke alarm, the dog is trained
to take its owner to the nearest exit.
Assistance dogs can help people with physical or devel-
opmental disabilities do everyday tasks. Assistance dogs can
open and close doors and drawers, flip light switches on and
off, retrieve dropped items, and bring or carry objects such as
keys, coins, mail, books, a phone, or a water bottle. An assis-
tance dog can be trained to make its body rigid so its owner
can brace against the dog when standing up. If the owner uses
a wheelchair, the dog may pull the wheelchair short distances
while the owner holds onto the dog’s harness.


DISABILITIES AWARENESS 23
.Activities and Adaptations
Capuchin or “organ grinder” monkeys are smart, friendly,
nimble-fingered, and particularly well-suited to be trained
as monkey helpers. They can help people with many kinds
of daily activities: opening doors, holding pencils, operating
switches, fetching out-of-reach items, bringing a cool drink,
turning the pages of a book, or putting on a video or CD to
play. Monkey assistants can even be office workers, helping
people with quadriplegia (paralysis of both arms and both
legs) do work from their homes.
People who have epilepsy may rely on seizure response
dogs to live on their own and get help in an emergency. A
seizure response dog is trained to run back and forth from its
owner to someone who can help, getting the second person’s
attention and repeating the alert signal as long as needed. If
the dog is alone with its owner, the dog can pull a cord on a
call box to bring emergency medical personnel. The dog stays
with its owner until the seizure ends or help arrives.
Assistance dogs are trained to perform everyday tasks for their owners.


24 DISABILITIES AWARENESS
Activities and Adaptations.
Touching Words: The Braille Alphabet
Braille is a system of printing and writing that uses raised points or
dots. In Braille, each letter, number, and punctuation mark is made up
of one to six raised dots arranged in a “cell.” The cell, two dots wide
and three dots high, fits under a fingertip. People read Braille by light-
ly passing their fingers over the dots.
The Braille alphabet is shown here. Notice that the first 10 letters
(a–j) use only the dots in the upper two rows of the cell. The next
10 letters (k–t) are formed by adding the lower-left dot to each of the
first 10 letters. The remaining letters (except w) are formed by adding
both lower dots to each of the first five letters.
The letter w is an exception because the French alphabet did not
contain a w when French inventor Louis Braille created the code in the
1820s. The symbol for w was added later.
Braille can be written by hand using a slate and stylus, or typed
by striking keys on a machine resembling a typewriter, called a braille-
writer. Today, there are software programs that translate Braille; com-
puter printers that emboss Braille dots on thick, heavy paper; portable,
electronic note takers with Braille keyboards and synthesized voice
readouts; and Braille displays that make the characters on a computer
screen appear on a touchable surface.
The Braille alphabet
A B C D E F G H I J
K L M N O P Q R S T
U V X Y Z W


DISABILITIES AWARENESS 25
.Activities and Adaptations
White Canes
The white cane is both a tool for travel and a symbol telling
others that the person using the cane is blind. The white cane
makes blind pedestrians more visible to motorists, helping
them travel in greater safety.
By tapping the cane from side to side
in front of them as they walk, people who
are blind or visually impaired can check
for objects in the path of travel, find
doorways and steps, and locate potential
dangers such as holes in the sidewalk or
curbs and drop-offs.
Power Chairs
Modern battery-powered wheelchairs
hardly resemble the push-from-behind
type of wheelchair you may have seen
used in hospitals. Most power chairs
have a variable speed control that can
be set between 0 and a top speed of
about 5 miles per hour. With a fully
charged battery, most power chairs will
travel between 15 and 20 miles on level
surfaces. Some power chairs break down
into sections to fit in the trunk of a car
for transport.
It takes much practice to learn how to
skillfully use a cane to avoid obstacles
and travel independently.
A modern power
wheelchair


26 DISABILITIES AWARENESS
Activities and Adaptations.
Augmentative Communication Devices
With advances in technology, augmentative communication
devices are constantly changing to help people with hearing
loss and/or speech disabilities. These devices can amplify
sounds, convert noises to lighted signals, or change speech to
text or American Sign Language. Many such communication
devices are in use. The most common ones are shown here.
Telecommunications Relay Service
All of the phones described above can use a Telecommunications
Relay Service (TRS). By law, telephone and videophone companies
provide services to allow people with hearing or speech disabilities
to place and receive phone calls. TRS is available throughout the
United States and its territories. The service uses a third person,
called a relay officer, as the interface between the hearing or
verbal person and the non-hearing or nonverbal person in the
conversation. Every communication technology can be used for
TRS, including video for signing, typed text, spoken word, and
language translation.
Captioned telephones are used by people
with some hearing who are able to speak
for themselves. A built-in screen displays
text (captions) for every word the other
party speaks during the conversation.
Videophones are used to communicate
with American Sign Language. The
screen allows people to sign rather
than type or speak their messages.
Voice recognition and text-to-voice features
in smartphones allow hearing-impaired,
visually impaired, nonverbal, dyslexic,
and dysgraphic people to communicate
freely with others. Cameras,
microphones, and apps allow phones to
become magnifiers and hearing aids as well.
American Sign
Language (ASL) is
not just a signed
version of spoken
English. ASL is its
own language,
with its own gram-
mar, syntax, and
word-order rules.
As the technology
advances, soon
we all may have
automated text-
to-speech and
speech-to-text
translators in our
mobile phones.


DISABILITIES AWARENESS 27
.Activities and Adaptations
S
I
G
N
S
Finger Spelling
Many people who are deaf
learn to finger spell by using
hand shapes and positions
that stand for the letters of
the written alphabet. Finger
spelling is like writing in air.
Try using the manual alpha-
bet shown here to spell out
your name.
The American Manual Alphabet
used for finger spelling
S P E
A
K
S
S
P
E
A
K
S
SIGN
S
S
I
G
N
S
Relay officer
A third person,
called a relay
officer, acts as
the go-between
to enable
communications
between a
non-hearing
or nonverbal
person and
a hearing or
verbal person.


28 DISABILITIES AWARENESS
Activities and Adaptations.
Adaptive Sports
Many people with disabilities use adaptive equipment to
take part in sports and recreational activities. Any sport
can be an adaptive sport. Among the most popular are:
• Adaptive golf
• Adaptive snow skiing
• Adaptive water skiing
• Archery
• Beep baseball
• Bocce
• Canoeing
• Goal ball
• Handcycling
• Horseback riding
• Kayaking
• Power wheelchair hockey
• Quad rugby
• Sailing
• Sitting volleyball
• Sledge hockey
• Snowboarding
• Swimming
• Wheelchair basketball
• Wheelchair football
• Wheelchair road racing
• Wheelchair soccer
• Wheelchair softball
• Wheelchair tennis
• Wheelchair track
and field
• Whitewater rafting
Alert Devices
Alert devices use loud noise, lights, and vibrations to alert
people with hearing loss to various actions or environmental
dangers. These devices can respond to a specific signal like a
doorbell, smoke alarm, or alarm clock; or to certain types of
sounds like a baby crying or a fire alarm in the building. An
alert system transmits signals to receivers located throughout
a home or workplace, activating flashing lights or vibrating
devices in multiple rooms.
Adaptive sports
have gone
big-time and
international.
There are now
Paralympic
Games,
Deaflympics,
and Special
Olympics interna-
tional games.


DISABILITIES AWARENESS 29
.Activities and Adaptations
Sports may need a few modifications to be accessible to
people with disabilities. Canoeists with disabilities, for example,
may use seats that give extra back support and paddles with
modified shafts and grips. Wheelchair archers commonly use
the same archery tackle as standing archers. An armrest of the
wheelchair may be removed to allow the archer to fully draw
the bowstring.
Custom equipment opens other
popular sports to people who have
disabilities. Adaptive snow-skiing
gear includes the bi-ski (two skis
with a molded bucket seat for the
skier to sit in), mono-ski (a one-ski
type of sit-down ski), four-track
(stand-up skiing using two skis with
two handheld outriggers for balance,
giving the skier four points of con-
tact with the snow), and three-track
(stand-up skiing with one ski and
two handheld outriggers).


30 DISABILITIES AWARENESS
Activities and Adaptations.
Handcycling is among the newer sports popular with
athletes who have disabilities. Three-wheeled handcycles
have gears like bicycles, and riding one is much like riding a
bike except you power the cycle by cranking with your arms
and upper body muscles instead of your legs. Recreational
handcyclists typically cruise along as fast as an average
bicyclist. Handcycle racers are setting human-powered
vehicle speed records.
To find out what adaptive sports and recreation activities
are available in your community, contact the parks and
recreation department, school athletic department, rehabilita-
tion centers, or sporting goods stores that sell adaptive sports
equipment. To learn more about your sport of interest, you
may be able to attend an introductory clinic, seminar, or
demo day given by an adaptive sports organization.


DISABILITIES AWARENESS 31
.Activities and Adaptations
Can You Adapt?
Test your creativity. Choose one of your favorite activities and think
of ways you could adapt it so people with various types of disabili-
ties could enjoy it, too. Will you need to modify the rules? The rules
of wheelchair basketball, for instance, allow players to hold the ball
while pushing once or twice on their wheels. When a player with the
ball makes more than two consecutive pushes (without dribbling,
passing, or shooting), a traveling violation is called.
Will you need to create specialized equipment? Beep baseball is
played with a large softball that beeps so players can track it by hearing,
not sight.
Use what you have learned about adaptive sports to come up
with your own adapted activity. You might invent a new pastime or a
new way of playing an old game that will catch on big!


32 DISABILITIES AWARENESS
Activities and Adaptations.
The Voice of Experience
Whatever activities you enjoy, you can be sure there are many
people—with and without disabilities—who like doing the same
things. Maybe you belong to a club for people who share your
interest, such as an astronomy club or a collectors’ group. You
might have a friend from the club who has a disability.
Talk with your friend about his or her experiences. Find out
what adaptations or adjustments, if any, your friend has made
or used to take part in favorite activities or do everyday tasks.
Talk with a Scout who has a disability and learn about the
Scout’s experiences in Scouting. What merit badges have been
enjoyable to earn? Have any badges presented especially dif-
ficult or unsolvable problems? Find out about any adaptive gear
or techniques the Scout may have used to achieve Scouting
goals. Also learn about adaptations or adjustments the Scout
may use in daily life and activities outside Scouting.


DISABILITIES AWARENESS 33
.Activities and Adaptations
Alternative Requirements for Scouts BSA
• Scouts with physical or cognitive disabilities who are unable to
complete any or all of the requirements for Tenderfoot, Second
Class, or First Class rank may complete alternative requirements
if certain criteria are met.
• Scouts with physical or cognitive disabilities may become Eagle
Scouts by earning as many required merit badges for Eagle Scout
rank as their abilities permit and qualifying for alternative merit
badges for the rest.
To learn more about alternative requirements, see the Scouts BSA
handbook and the Scouts BSA Requirements book, and talk to
your Scoutmaster.





DISABILITIES AWARENESS 35
.Accessibility
Accessibility
Curbs or steps without ramps, narrow doorways and aisles,
revolving doors and turnstiles, high counters, tight parking spaces
with no room to maneuver a wheelchair—any of these can make
it impossible for people with disabilities to take part in everyday
activities such as shopping in a store, watching a movie in a the-
ater, eating at a restaurant, or even going to school or work.
Next time you are in a public place, look at how accessible
(usable) the location is for people with disabilities. Are there:
• Ramps and curb-cuts for wheelchair users?
• Steps that are low and wide enough to be easily climbed by
people using crutches or canes?
• Wide doorways?
• Elevators (in buildings of two or more stories)?
• Signs and directions printed in Braille?
• Visual warning signals and directions for people who are deaf?
• Accessible parking spaces wide enough for wheelchairs?
• Accessible restrooms, public telephones, and drinking fountains?
• Tables high enough for a wheel-
chair user to sit at without banging
his or her knees?
• Illustrated or printed menus at food
service counters so customers can
order nonverbally?
For requirement 4a, you are to give
examples of the features of a certain
place that make it accessible to people
with disabilities, and also some things
that could be done to improve upon the
site. Some improvements are easy and


36 DISABILITIES AWARENESS
Accessibility.
inexpensive to make. You may be able to increase the accessibility
of your school, place of worship, or Scout camp or meeting place.
Here are some simple adaptations you or your patrol
might make. Be sure to get permission, and ask for an adult’s
help if needed.
• Build and install a wooden ramp for wheelchair users.
• Replace round doorknobs (which must be tightly grasped
and twisted) with lever handles that are easier for many
people with disabilities to use.
• Move displays so they do not block aisles or hallways.
• Widen a path so people in wheelchairs can use it.
• Remove a fixed seat or bench (one that is bolted to the floor or
wall) and replace it with a movable seat that can be moved
aside to make room at the table for a person using a wheelchair.
• Make pen and paper available for exchanging written notes
with people who are deaf or hard of hearing.
• Make large-print signs using a computer and printer,
or by hand-lettering.
• Make signs in Braille using a slate and stylus (a tool
used to write Braille much as paper and pencil are
used for writing print).
• Read aloud and record on cassettes, CDs, digital voice
recorders, or computer audio the newsletters, brochures,
or other printed pieces that give important or useful
information about your school, place of worship, or
Scout camp. Make the recordings available to visitors
or newcomers who are blind or visually impaired.
Some of the
accessibility
projects suggested
in this pamphlet
might be done as
service projects
for achieving the
ranks of Star, Life,
or Eagle Scout. If
you wish to do a
project for rank
advancement,
check with your
Scoutmaster to
be sure your
undertaking meets
the standards
for leadership
service projects.


DISABILITIES AWARENESS 37
.Accessibility
Recreation Survey
Here is another service idea. Develop a list of local outdoor recreation
spots and camping facilities that are accessible to people with dis-
abilities. Create this list by checking with officials at federal, state, and
local parks. Ask them the following questions:
• Are the parks barrier-free?
• Are pathways smooth and wide enough for wheelchairs?
• Are drinking fountains and restrooms accessible to wheelchair users?
• Are signs printed in Braille?
• Is any adaptive equipment available for people with disabilities?
• At museums and historical sites, are printed scripts or American
Sign Language videos available for people who are deaf or hard
of hearing?
When you have compiled your list, neatly type and print it.
Distribute photocopies to local organizations for people with disabilities,
schools, places of worship, and anywhere else the information will
serve people in your community.





DISABILITIES AWARENESS 39
.Accommodations
Accommodations
Accommodations may not be obvious to others because they
don’t change the environment at large, but they are like acces-
sibility in that they help to simplify everyday life for people with
disabilities. An accommodation is just a different way of doing
things that is tailored to the individual needs of a person with
a disability. While accessibility features may be easy to see
and provide opportunities for those with physical disabilities,
accommodations can provide opportunities for those with invis-
ible disabilities. Most schools are accommodating students with
disabilities to make learning better. Accommodations also happen
in workplaces to make work easier and in public attractions to
make experiences more enjoyable.
For requirement 4b, you are to identify accommodations
that already exist at certain places and suggest better accommo-
dations. You will need to talk with staff members at the locations
or facilities to help you understand the accommodations, because
they often are not obvious. An accommodation that works for
one person with a disability may not work for everyone else, so
it isn’t always possible to accommodate everyone or to include
everyone in the same space.
Accommodation Methods
Here are some ideas and examples to get you thinking.
Timing
• Allow extra time for completing a task, such as a test at school.
• Do the hard-thinking work in the morning or afternoon, or
whenever is best.
• Break a task into smaller pieces and take breaks in between.
• Slow down or speed up the pace.
• Allow time for physical activity or movement.


40 DISABILITIES AWARENESS
Accommodations.
Sensory
• Move to a more open or uncrowded space where other
people or objects present fewer visual distractions.
• Change the type of lighting to adjust the light’s brightness or
color, or to eliminate flickering.
• Use earplugs or noise-canceling headphones to reduce noise,
or mask noise with intentional background sounds or music.
• Adjust sound louder or softer to a comfortable and
functional level.
• Adjust ventilation to eliminate distracting odors.
• Hold or squeeze an object to occupy the hands or provide
needed tactile (touch) stimulation.
Presentation and Communication
• Change the group size when teaching.
• Use technology to interact and communicate instead of
verbal or face-to-face methods.
• Provide captioned screens or captioning glasses for video
presentations and in movie theaters.
• Change the method of communication—verbal to visual to
written—as needed.
• Have a sign-language interpreter for meetings, performances,
ceremonies, and similar events.
• Use hands-on activities or demonstrations instead of words.
A sign-language
interpreter assists
during an arena
show at the
2010 National
Scout Jamboree.


DISABILITIES AWARENESS 41
.Accommodations
Organization, Memory, and Attention
• Have an assistant to help with tasks or keep time.
• Use electronic devices, or paper and notes to record impor-
tant information.
• Have an aide redirect a person’s attention back onto the topic
when they drift off or become distracted.
Medications
Medications can help ease the symptoms of some
disabilities. They do not eliminate the disability or
all of the difficulties. Many laws and rules limit how
medications can be used, especially for youth. If a
youth takes a medication, a responsible adult should
keep track of when and how much medication is
given. Depending on the medication and what it does,
a person with a disability may need to plan to do
some activities at certain times to get the most benefit
from the medication.
As a matter of good manners, you should never
talk about a person’s medications with anyone other
than that person. Whether a person is “on meds” or
“off meds” is never a joking matter. If you are truly
concerned about a person not receiving necessary
medications, talk with the person directly, the parent
or caregiver, or the adult responsible for the outing
or event.
Scout leaders
should refer to
the Guide to
Safe Scouting,
“Personal Health
and the Annual
Health and
Medical Record”
section, for BSA
guidance about
handling prescrip-
tion medications
for Scouts.





DISABILITIES AWARENESS 43
.Advocacy, Attitudes, and Awareness
Advocacy, Attitudes,
and Awareness
Advocacy means supporting, promoting, encouraging, or
defending something. To be an advocate for people with dis-
abilities means you support and encourage positive attitudes
about people with disabilities. It can also mean that you are
brave enough to challenge false and unfair beliefs or call to
account those who mistreat people with disabilities. You help
strip away the labels so that people can see each other as indi-
viduals. You help build bridges of understanding and respect
among all people, regardless of their abilities.
In completing the requirements for the Disabilities
Awareness merit badge, you have learned things that you can
now teach to others. Use what you have learned to put together
a disabilities awareness program that you present (with your
counselor’s approval) to a Cub Scout pack or other group.
Teach the group about person-first language and demonstrate
its importance while giving your presentation.


44 DISABILITIES AWARENESS
Advocacy, Attitudes, and Awareness.
Or, volunteer your time with an education program or
advocacy agency in your school or community. The agency you
visited for requirement 2 likely will welcome you back as a
volunteer. Your school might have education programs with
which you could help.
Maybe a group has organized in your area to support a
specific issue affecting people with disabilities. You might
join with the group (or start one, if none exists) to advocate
accessible parking spaces, wheelchair-friendly picnic tables at
local parks and playgrounds, or sign-language interpreters for
government meetings such as meetings of the city council or
school board.
Your counselor might know of, or help you find out about,
other volunteer opportunities in your neighborhood. Maybe you
can help with programs at a rehabilitation center or camp for
children with disabilities. Or be a big brother or big sister to
a boy or girl who has a disability, giving the child your friend-
ship and help with homework or other needs. Or tutor a
student who has learning disabilities, or assist at a Special
Olympics competition.
Talk with a physical therapist, occupational therapist, speech
therapist, adaptive physical education instructor, recreation
program leader, special education teacher, social worker, or
other specialist to learn where your efforts are needed.
Special Olympics is an international program of
games and athletic competition for children and
adults who have mental and often physical disabili-
ties. Events are modeled on those of the Olympic
Games. Scouts often take part, both as competitors
and as helpers. You might organize your patrol or
troop to help at a Special Olympics meet.


DISABILITIES AWARENESS 45
.Advocacy, Attitudes, and Awareness
Disabilities come in all sizes, shapes, and forms, just like the people
who have them. If you already know something about a specific dis-
ability, or you would like to learn more about it, you may want to focus
on researching and sharing information about that disability and the
people who have it. You may choose to give a talk or volunteer with
an advocacy program that focuses on the disability of interest.
Here are some possibilities. Add your interest if it is not on this list.
Amputation
Arthritis
Asthma
Attention deficit disorder, or ADD
(with hyperactivity—ADHD)
Autism spectrum disorder
Blindness/low vision
Brain injury
Cerebral palsy
Cleft palate
Cognitive (formerly mental)
disabilities
Cystic fibrosis
Diabetes
Down syndrome
Dwarfism
Epilepsy
Hearing loss
Heart conditions
Hemophilia
Learning disabilities
Leukemia
Multiple sclerosis
Muscular dystrophy
Polio/post-polio
Sickle-cell anemia
Speech impairments
Spina bifida
Spinal cord injury
Stroke


46 DISABILITIES AWARENESS
Advocacy, Attitudes, and Awareness.
Myths and Misconceptions
We are all hurt by mistaken ideas and misunderstandings
about people with disabilities and what they can and cannot
do. Here are some myths you may hear. Learn the facts so you
can share the correct information with others.
Myth: A person with a disability is sick.
Fact: Having a disability is not the same as being sick. Many
people with disabilities are in excellent physical condition,
healthy, athletic, and strong. Some people who have disabilities
also have illnesses, just as some nondisabled people are ill.
Myth: A person with a disability has a poor quality of life or
lives a life totally different from people without disabilities.
Fact: Overall, people with disabilities live like anyone else.
The attitude that a disability ruins a person’s life can be more
disabling than the disability itself. People can make adjustments
and adaptations that allow them to fully participate, to live full
lives, and strive to reach their potential. Although they may do
some things differently, depending on the type and extent of
the disability, people with disabilities are no different from
anyone else.


DISABILITIES AWARENESS 47
.Advocacy, Attitudes, and Awareness
There are heroic people with disabilities who deserve
our admiration. What makes them heroes is personal
courage, commitment to serving others, and determi-
nation to keep striving when most others have given
up. Heroes are heroes because of their character, not
simply because of, or despite, their disability.
Myth: People with disabilities deserve special admiration for
having the courage and creativity to overcome their disability.
Fact: People with disabilities do not have special virtues. They
do not become heroes by adapting to disabilities. Many people
with disabilities do not like to be called “brave” or “inspira-
tional.” They are just living their lives when they drive to work,
shop for groceries, pay their bills, or compete in athletic events.
Myth: Only people in wheelchairs or who use crutches
are disabled.
Fact: Many disabilities, such as learning or emotional
disabilities, cannot be seen or are not obvious.
Myth: People with disabilities need expensive, high-tech
devices for mobility and other assistance.
Fact: Simple, inexpensive tools often are the only help a
person with a disability needs to live independently. Assistive
devices can be as low-tech as reachers with jaws for grasping
objects and bringing them within reach, or grippers for holding
eating utensils, toothbrushes, and other small items.
Myth: People with disabilities can do only light work or only
simple, repetitive work.
Fact: People with disabilities work successfully in many
different trades, businesses, and professions, having the
same responsibilities as nondisabled people. Individuals
with disabilities have many different skills to offer, the
same as everyone else.
Myth: People with disabilities need to be protected from failing.
Fact: An opportunity to fail is also an opportunity to succeed,
and people with disabilities have a right to do both. Opportunities
to try difficult things allow us to grow and improve ourselves.


48 DISABILITIES AWARENESS
Advocacy, Attitudes, and Awareness.
Myth: People with disabilities always need help at school
or work.
Fact: A person’s ability to work or study independently depends
on the person’s preparation, training, skills, experience, and
motivation. These qualities vary among individuals. Having a
disability does not necessarily affect a person’s qualifications to
work unaided or unsupervised.
Myth: People who are deaf can easily work in noisy places.
Fact: Loud noises can damage anyone’s organs of hearing.
People who are deaf should be chosen for positions based on
the skills and talents they have, not the disability they have.
Myth: People who are deaf cannot speak.
Fact: Deafness does not affect the vocal cords. People with
hearing loss may not hear the sounds they make when they
speak. Because they are unable to hear the sound of their voice,
some people who are deaf make a conscious choice not to use
their voice. Others choose to speak. The age at which the
person became deaf also influences speaking ability. People
who lost their hearing after learning to talk as a child may
speak more readily than those who were born deaf and
never heard human speech.


DISABILITIES AWARENESS 49
.Advocacy, Attitudes, and Awareness
Myth: People who are deaf do not enjoy television shows or
movies because they cannot hear.
Fact: Many movies and TV shows are captioned—the words
appear on the screen. Performances at theaters may be inter-
preted into sign language. The type and extent of hearing loss
and the age at which the person became deaf also may influ-
ence a person’s appreciation of vocal art and entertainment.
Myth: All people who are deaf or hard of hearing can read lips.
Fact: Some people lip-read; some do not. Those who do read
lips also read facial expressions, gestures, and other body lan-
guage for help understanding.
Myth: People who are blind have extra-sharp hearing.
Fact: Loss of vision does not affect hearing. However, people
who are blind may depend more on their hearing and be more
alert to sounds than people who are sighted.
Myth: People who are blind develop a “sixth sense.”
Fact: Most people who are blind develop their senses of smell,
hearing, taste, and touch more fully, but they do not gain a sixth
sense—or a power of perception that most people don’t have.
Myth: Employees with disabilities miss more days of work than
employees without disabilities.
Fact: Several studies have shown that employees with disabili-
ties are not absent any more often than other employees. In
fact, the studies show that, on average, people with disabilities
have better attendance rates than their nondisabled coworkers.
Myth: People without disabilities should take care of people
with disabilities.
Fact: Anyone may offer help, but most people with disabilities
prefer to be self-sufficient and responsible for themselves
when possible.
It’s the Law. The Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA) of 1990 is a federal
civil rights law that protects people with disabilities from job discrimi-
nation. The law also requires that public buildings and transportation
systems be accessible to people with disabilities. In addition, the ADA
requires telephone companies to provide relay services so that people
who are deaf or hard of hearing or who have difficulty speaking can send
and receive messages by telephone.


50 DISABILITIES AWARENESS
Advocacy, Attitudes, and Awareness.
Acceptance
People with disabilities need and deserve to be accepted by the
community around them just as they are. All people have the
right to be comfortable in their own skin and to have dignity and
respect. People with disabilities should not be asked to become
someone else for the convenience of others. Nor should they be
sheltered from the difficulties of life that they can manage. They
should not be praised for doing ordinary things that are easier for
others. Rather, they should be praised for true accomplishments
and embraced as full members of the community. “They” are “us.”
Ableism (or able-ism) is a bias that leads to discrimination and denial of
opportunities, much like racism or sexism. Ableism is the attitude that
those without disabilities are fundamentally better (or better off) than
people with disabilities. This viewpoint sees people with disabilities as
unable to live happily or independently and needing to be “fixed” by
medical therapy. Even when well-intended, a person with an ableist
viewpoint tends to pity people with disabilities or push them to change
for the “better,” rather than accept them as they are.
Bullying
Many people with disabilities are bullied as children or adults.
Sadly, though we all know bullying is wrong, some bullies see
what they do as “just having fun” or “joking around” with the
one being bullied. You might think of bullying as physical abuse
or intimidation, but there are other forms that people with
disabilities often have to deal with, such as
• Teasing—making fun of or pointing out differences
• Taunting—hurling insults to provoke or challenge
• Excluding—denying participation in an activity or group
• Ignoring—pretending someone doesn’t exist or doesn’t
matter as a person
• Harassing—persistently irritating or aggravating someone
Be watchful, especially when you are with friends, to not
be a bully or put up with one of your friends acting that way.


DISABILITIES AWARENESS 51
.Advocacy, Attitudes, and Awareness
Changing Attitudes
To wrap up your work on the Disabilities Awareness merit
badge, discuss with your counselor your own attitudes about
people with disabilities. Has your work on this badge given you
insight or changed your outlook? Tell your counselor how you
intend to use proper disability etiquette, show positive attitudes,
and encourage them in others.
You have seen that people with disabilities are all individuals.
Each person has talents, abilities, feelings, likes, dislikes, wants,
and needs. Each person has the right to be treated respectfully, as
an individual.
You also have learned that people with disabilities are peo-
ple first. And maybe you have realized that all people are more
alike than different. People are people. Individual variations
aside, we are all much the same.
“If you inquire what the people are like here, I must
answer, ‘The same as everywhere.’”
—Johann Wolfgang van Goethe (1749–1832),
German poet and novelist





DISABILITIES AWARENESS 53
.Career Opportunities
Career Opportunities
Many types of specialists work with people who have disabili-
ties. Some of the careers you might pursue are described here.
Your merit badge counselor may know of other positions in this
field that might appeal to you.
Occupational therapists teach skills to help people with
disabilities do the things they need to do. Occupational thera-
pists work in hospitals, clinics, rehabilitation centers, mental
health centers, schools, nursing homes, child-care centers, and
in some cases patients’ private homes. A bachelor’s or master’s
degree in occupational therapy is required. College programs
include courses in biology, psychology, and occupational therapy
theory and practice.
Physical therapists use treatments of heat, cold, light,
sound, water, and exercise to treat diseases or injuries, build
stamina and strength, and restore function to parts of the body.
In occupational therapy, the focus is on practical
activities and the skills of daily life. For example,
someone who has lost both legs may learn how to
drive a specially equipped car. A person who uses
a wheelchair might be taught how to maneuver in
the kitchen and cook while seated. To help a child
with a learning disability learn to recognize shapes
or colors, an occupational therapist might have the
child play games or do crafts that require matching
items of different shapes, sizes, and colors.


54 DISABILITIES AWARENESS
Career Opportunities.
Physical therapy can help prevent, reduce, or relieve condi-
tions that affect a person’s physical abilities. Physical therapists
work in the same types of places as occupational therapists.
Most physical therapists have a master’s degree, but a growing
number of them have a doctor of physical therapy (DPT) degree.
Physical therapy studies include courses in anatomy, physiology,
psychology, and therapeutic exercise. In the United States, phys-
ical therapists must be licensed before they may practice.
Special education teachers help children with disabilities
learn to the fullest of their abilities. These teachers may work in
schools, homes, hospitals, and institutions. They help students
get mainstreamed into regular education classes and succeed
in life after leaving school. This career field requires at least a
bachelor’s degree and teaching credential.


DISABILITIES AWARENESS 55
.Career Opportunities
Audiologists are trained to detect and diagnose hearing
problems. An audiologist uses an instrument called an
audiometer to test a person’s hearing. An audiologist also
may give behavioral tests to find out how a person reacts
to various sounds and vibrations. Most audiologists have at
least a master’s degree and many have a doctorate degree.
College programs in audiology include courses in hearing,
speech, and language. Audiologists may work in schools,
hospitals, clinics, private offices, and community speech and
hearing centers. To practice audiology in the United States, a
person usually needs a certificate or license.
Speech therapists (also called speech-language patholo-
gists or speech clinicians) work with children and adults who
have speech disorders that interfere with communication or
make people self-conscious when they talk. Most speech
therapists have at least a master’s degree. They work in
schools, hospitals, speech clinics, specialized speech and
hearing centers, or private practice. College students
interested in speech therapy take courses in biology,
linguistics, psychology, physics, and speech correction.
Psychologists study mental processes and behavior and
how people relate to one another and to the world around
them. Many psychologists treat emotional problems and serve
as counselors or therapists in schools, hospitals, rehabilitation
centers, clinics, mental health centers, or private practice. Some
positions in psychology require only a bachelor’s or master’s
degree, but most require a doctorate degree. A doctorate usually
takes four or more years of study beyond a bachelor’s degree.
If a career in audiology interests you, you should
begin early to get the background needed. In
school, take biology, physical science, language,
and physical education classes. Get an after-school
job or volunteer with an agency or organization that
serves people who have disabilities.


56 DISABILITIES AWARENESS
Career Opportunities.
In addition, most people who plan to become clinical psycholo-
gists work at least a year as an intern, treating patients under
the supervision of experienced psychologists.
Psychology is similar to a medical field called psychiatry.
Psychologists may or may not specialize in treating mental
disorders. Psychiatrists, however, are medical doctors whose
field is the treatment of mental disorders. A psychiatrist might
work in a mental health center, in a mental institution, or in
private practice.
Some of the more common speech disorders include
stuttering, lisping, slurred speech, delayed speech
and slow language development, the inability to make
certain sounds, and the partial or total inability to
speak or understand language.


DISABILITIES AWARENESS 57
.Career Opportunities
Other physicians working with people who have disabilities
are specially trained in physical medicine and rehabilitation.
Many hospitals have a rehabilitation department that provides
patients with physical and occupational therapy. Treatment is
usually carried out by a team of specialists that may include
physicians, nurses, psychologists, social workers, speech pathol-
ogists, and various other therapists.
Vocational rehabilitation programs prepare people with
physical or mental disabilities to hold jobs. There are three
main areas: rehabilitation counseling, vocational evaluation,
and placement. A rehabilitation counselor advises people with
disabilities about the type of training they may need or the
tasks they can perform. A vocational evaluator gives tests to
discover a person’s abilities and interests and determine what
specific position or field of training will suit the person. A
placement specialist helps people put their interests and skills
to use. Careers in vocational rehabilitation generally require
at least a bachelor’s degree; most require a master’s degree.


58 DISABILITIES AWARENESS
Career Opportunities.
College students majoring in rehabilitation take courses in
counseling, human relations, psychology, statistics, and testing,
and complete an internship. Vocational rehabilitation specialists
may work for hospitals and rehabilitation centers or for state-
operated vocational rehab programs and programs serving
military veterans with disabilities.
Support for Independent Living
Many people with disabilities can live on their own when they
have support. Delivering support services has created many career
opportunities. The purpose is to provide enough help to allow
people to live as independently as they possibly can. The people
served, who are referred to as “clients” or “residents” rather than
“patients,” may live in sheltered apartments, group homes, or
senior housing facilities. Others live on their own in their own
apartment or home. The range of support services is huge, from
something as simple as walking dogs up to complex in-home
nursing care.


DISABILITIES AWARENESS 59
.Career Opportunities
Numerous agencies, nonprofit organizations, churches, and
others provide independent living resources and services. If mul-
tiple services are needed, different agencies can work as a team to
provide the amount of support that is “just right” for the client.
Space prevents listing all of the job possibilities in support
services, but here are a few to consider: habilitation coordinator,
social worker, transportation coordinator or driver, community
living coordinator, nutritionist or dietitian, recreation activities
coordinator, in-home care housekeeper, Medicaid service coordi-
nator, residential house manager, visiting nurse, day facilitator
program manager, food preparation worker, and clinical service
coordinator. Can you find out about others?
Some careers in support services take a high school
diploma, while others require a specialized training
certificate or a two- or four-year college degree.
Besides health-care and education-oriented degrees,
look at degrees in psychology, sociology, recreation,
or social work.





DISABILITIES AWARENESS 61
.Disabilities Awareness Resources
Scouting Literature
Architecture and Landscape Architecture,
Athletics, Citizenship in the Community,
Citizenship in the Nation, Citizenship in the
World, Communication, Digital Technology,
Engineering, First Aid, Inventing, Medicine,
Public Speaking, Robotics, Signs, Signals,
and Codes, and Sports merit badge pam-
phlets; Guide to Safe Scouting, No. 34416;
and Guide to Advancement, No. 33088
(section 10.0.0.0)
Boys’ Life magazine in Braille. National
Library Service for the Blind and
Print Disabled, Library of Congress,
Washington DC.
Toll-free telephone: 800-424-8567
Scouts BSA handbook in large print.
Pilots and Program Development,
Boy Scouts of America.
Send requests via email to
advancement.team@scouting.org.
The following materials are
available at www.scouting.org/
resources/disabilities-awareness/:
• Scouting With Special Needs and
Disabilities, an information sheet
• Guide to Working With Scouts With
Special Needs and Disabilities,
No. 510-071
• Scouting for Youth With Disabilities
Manual, No. 34059
• Individual Scout Advancement Plan,
No. 512-936
• Abilities Digest newsletter
For more information, email Disabilities.
Awareness@scouting.org.
Resources for bullying prevention are
available at www.scouting.org/training/
youth-protection/bullying/.
Disabilities Awareness
Resources
With your parent’s permission, visit
the Boy Scouts of America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org,
for a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


62 DISABILITIES AWARENESS
Disabilities Awareness Resources.
Books
Fiction
Many of these novels are classics avail-
able in several editions and formats
including audio and large print.
Burnett, Frances Hodgson. The Secret
Garden. HarperCollins, 2010. A lonely
boy in a wheelchair misbehaves until
his orphaned cousin moves in. A locked
garden brings them closer as they trans-
form the garden and themselves.
Byars, Betsy. The Summer of the Swans.
Puffin Books, 2004. A teenager gains
new insight into herself and her family
when her brother with cognitive disabili-
ties goes missing.
De Angeli, Marguerite. The Door in
the Wall. Yearling Books, 1998. In 14th-
century England, a boy with physical
disabilities proves his courage.
Dorris, Michael. Sees Behind Trees.
Disney-Hyperion, 1999. An American
Indian boy with a special gift to “see”
beyond his limited eyesight journeys
with an old warrior to a land of mystery
and beauty.
Draper, Sharon. Out of My Mind.
Atheneum Books, 2012. When a girl
with cerebral palsy who cannot walk or
talk is given a device that lets her “speak,”
she surprises everyone around her.
Flegg, Aubrey. The Cinnamon Tree.
O’Brien Press, 2000. When a land mine
explodes beneath her, Yola Abonda must
learn to walk again after the amputation
of her leg.
Hoopmann, Kathy. Blue Bottle Mystery:
An Asperger Adventure. Jessica Kingsley
Publishers, 2006. A boy with Asperger’s
syndrome and his friend travel an
exciting fantasy adventure when they
discover an old bottle.
Janover, Caroline. How Many Days Until
Tomorrow? Woodbine House, 2000. A
boy with dyslexia spends an island sum-
mer with his grandparents, developing
strengths and discovering new talents.
Konigsburg, E.L. The View from
Saturday. Aladdin Paperbacks, 1998.
Four unique students attract the atten-
tion of their paraplegic teacher, who
chooses them to represent their class in
the Academic Bowl.
Lord, Cynthia. Rules. Scholastic Press,
2008. A sister helps her brother with
autism understand how to live in a world
that does not always have compassion.
Martin, Ann M. A Corner of the Universe.
Scholastic, 2004. After a school for
people with developmental disabilities
closes, a family must deal with a child-
like young man whose existence they
have denied for years.
Mikaelsen, Ben. Petey. Hyperion Books,
2010. A man with cerebral palsy is
misdiagnosed and institutionalized.
Sixty years later, he befriends a boy
and shares with him the joy of life.
Philbrick, Rodman. Freak the Mighty.
Scholastic Paperbacks, 2001. Two boys
unite to become a powerful team, using
their unique, differently abled talents as
their strengths.


DISABILITIES AWARENESS 63
.Disabilities Awareness Resources
Polacco, Patricia. The Junkyard Wonder.
Philomel Books, 2010. A teacher
inspires her class of students with
special needs to greater heights, and
discovers hidden genius.
Taylor, Theodore. The Cay. Yearling
Books, 2003. During World War II, an
adolescent boy, blinded by a blow on
the head, and an old man are stranded
on a tiny island where the boy gains a
new kind of vision.
Winkler, Henry. Niagara Falls, or Does
It? Turtleback Books, 2003. In a series
inspired by the author’s own experi-
ences with undiagnosed dyslexia, a
fourth-grader decides to “show’” how
he spent his summer instead of writing
the usual essay.
Nonfiction
Abramovitz, Melissa. Multiple Sclerosis.
Lucent Books, 2010. Offers insights into
the neurological disease known as MS,
what causes it, and how people live
with it.
Autism Speaks. Leading the Way:
Autism-Friendly Youth Organization
Guide, 2013. A guide to help commu-
nity organizations make their programs
more inclusive of children with autism.
Corman, Richard. I Am Proud: The
Athletes of Special Olympics. Barnes &
Noble Books, 2003. Portrays athletes’
dignity, grace, and joy in competition.
Dougherty, Terri. Epilepsy. Lucent
Books, 2009. Explains types of seizures
and their triggers, and provides a
historical perspective on treatments.
Flodin, Mickey. Signing for Kids: The
Fun Way for Anyone to Learn American
Sign Language. Perigee Books, 2007. An
introduction to the expressive language
used by many deaf people to speak
with their hands.
Floyd, Ingrid. Opening the Gate: Stories
and Activities About Athletes With
Disabilities. CreateSpace, 2013. An
introduction to the world of wheel-
chairs and prosthetics, with outstanding
athletes recounting the experiences that
helped them participate effectively in
sports and led them to the top of their
athletic careers.
Freedman, Russell. Out of Darkness:
The Story of Louis Braille. Clarion
Books, 1999. A biography of the 19th-
century Frenchman who developed
a system of raised dots on paper that
enabled others who are blind to read
and write.
Kent, Deborah, and Kathryn A.
Quinlan. Extraordinary People With
Disabilities. Children’s Press, 1997. A
collection of biographies of 48 famous
people who made great accomplish-
ments despite their disability.
Kling, Andrew A. Cerebral Palsy. Lucent
Books, 2012. Discusses the incurable
disorder that strikes about two in 1,000
infants yearly in the United States.
Krueger, Tira. Taking Tourette Syndrome
to School. JayJo Books, 2002. Portrays
Tourette syndrome from the point of
view of a child who has the condition.
Lauren, Jill. That’s Like Me! Stories
About Amazing People With Learning
Differences. Star Bright Books, 2009.
Stories of 16 adults and young
people who overcome by focusing
on their strengths instead of their
learning disabilities.


64 DISABILITIES AWARENESS
Disabilities Awareness Resources.
Meyer, Donald, ed. Views From Our
Shoes: Growing Up With a Brother or
Sister With Special Needs. Woodbine
House, 1997. Children ages 4 to 18
share their experiences of having a
sibling with a disability.
Naff, Clayton Farris, ed. Muscular
Dystrophy. Greenhaven Press, 2011.
Explains the causes and treatments
of muscular dystrophy.
Oleksy, Walter G. Christopher Reeve.
Greenhaven Press, 1999. Discusses
the life-altering accident of the actor
known for his role as Superman and
for his efforts on behalf of people with
spinal cord injuries.
Paquette, Penny Hutchins, and Cheryl
Gerson Tuttle. Learning Disabilities:
The Ultimate Teen Guide. Scarecrow
Press, 2006. Gives teenagers dealing
with learning disabilities tools for
coping with the obstacles they face.
Rogers, Dale Evans. Angel Unaware.
Revell, 2007. The story of a child with
Down syndrome born to celebrities
Roy Rogers and Dale Evans.
Stern, Judith, and Uzi Ben-Ami. Many
Ways to Learn: A Kid’s Guide to LD.
Magination Press, 2010. Describes
different learning disabilities and the
many things children with LD can do
to reach their goals.
Verdick, Elizabeth, and Elizabeth
Reeve. The Survival Guide for Kids
With Autism Spectrum Disorder
(and Their Parents). Free Spirit
Publishing, 2012. Helps young people
with autism spectrum disorders under-
stand their condition.
Vujicic, Nick. Life Without Limits.
Crown Publishing, 2010. Portrays a
man born without arms or legs who
lives a rich, fulfilling, independent life
as an internationally successful motiva-
tional speaker.
Warner, Penny. Learn to Sign the
Fun Way! Three Rivers Press, 2001.
Provides games and other activities
that help the reader learn to sign.
Weihenmayer, Erik. Touch the Top of
the World: A Blind Man’s Journey to
Climb Farther Than the Eye Can See.
Plume Books, 2002. An adventure-
packed memoir in which the author
recalls becoming blind, acquiring a
passion for mountain climbing, and
succeeding in climbing Mount Everest.
Williams, Donna. Nobody Nowhere:
The Remarkable Autobiography of
an Autistic Girl. Jessica Kingsley
Publishers, 2004. Takes readers into
the mind of a person who has autism,
giving an insider’s view of a little-
understood condition.
Woodyard, Shawn, and others.
Resources for People With Disabilities:
A National Directory, 2nd ed. Ferguson
Publishing, 2001. Provides information
about advocacy, assistive technology,
organizations and associations, reha-
bilitations, state programs, and more.


DISABILITIES AWARENESS 65
.Disabilities Awareness Resources
Organizations and Websites
In addition to those listed here, many
local and regional organizations
support people with disabilities.
Internet searches (with your parent’s
permission) will help you find them.
AbleData
103 W. Broad St., Suite 400
Falls Church, VA 22046
Toll-free telephone: 800-227-0216
Website: https://abledata.acl.gov/
Adaptive Sports USA
P.O. Box 621023
Littleton, CO 80162
Telephone: 720-412-7979
Website:
www.adaptivesportsusa.org
American Academy of Physical
Medicine and Rehabilitation
9700 W. Bryn Mawr Ave., Suite 200
Rosemont, IL 60018
Toll-free telephone: 877-227-6799
Website: www.aapmr.org
American Association of
People With Disabilities
2013 H St. NW, Fifth Floor
Washington, DC 20006
Toll-free telephone: 800-840-8844
Website: www.aapd.com
American Association on Intellectual
and Developmental Disabilities
8403 Colesville Road, Suite 900
Silver Spring, MD 20910
Telephone: 202-387-1968
Website: http://aaidd.org
American Council of the Blind
1703 N. Beauregard St., Suite 420
Alexandria, VA 22311
Toll-free telephone: 800-424-8666
Website: http://acb.org
American Foundation for the Blind
2 Penn Plaza, Suite 1102
New York, NY 10121
Telephone: 212-502-7600
Website: http://afb.org
American Printing House for the
Blind Inc.
1839 Frankfort Ave.
Louisville, KY 40206
Toll-free telephone: 800-223-1839
Website: www.aph.org
American Speech-Language-
Hearing Association
2200 Research Blvd.
Rockville, MD 20850-3289
Toll-free telephone: 800-638-8255
Website: www.asha.org
The Arc
1825 K St. NW, Suite 1200
Washington, DC 20006
Toll-free telephone: 800-433-5255
Website: https://thearc.org
Attention Deficit
Disorder Association
Toll-free telephone: 800-939-1019
Website: www.add.org
Autism Empowerment
P.O. Box 871676
Vancouver, WA 98687
Telephone: 360-852-8369
Website:
www.autismempowerment.org
Autism Society
6110 Executive Blvd., Suite 305
Rockville, MD 20852
Toll-free telephone: 646-385-8500
Website: www.autism-society.org


66 DISABILITIES AWARENESS
Disabilities Awareness Resources.
Autism Speaks
1 E. 33rd St., Fourth Floor
New York, NY 10016
Telephone: 212-252-8584
Website: www.autismspeaks.org
BlazeSports America
1670 Oakbrook Drive, Suite 331
Norcross, GA 30093
Telephone: 404-270-2000
Website: http://blazesports.org
Bookshare
Website: www.bookshare.org
Brain Injury Association of America
1608 Spring Hill Road, Suite 110
Vienna, VA 22182
Telephone: 703-761-0750
Website: www.biausa.org
Children and Adults With Attention-
Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder
National Resource Center on ADHD
4221 Forbes Blvd., Suite 270
Lanham, MD 20706
Telephone: 301-306-7070
Website: www.chadd.org
Disability Is Natural
P.O. Box 39076
San Antonio, TX 78218
Telephone: 210-320-0678
Website:
www.disabilityisnatural.com
Disabled American Veterans
3725 Alexandria Pike
Cold Spring, KY 41076
Toll-free telephone: 877-426-2838
Website: www.dav.org
Disabled Sports USA
451 Hungerford Drive, Suite 608
Rockville, MD 20850
Telephone: 301-217-0960
Website:
www.disabledsportsusa.org
Easter Seals
141 W. Jackson Blvd., Suite 1400A
Chicago, IL 60604
Toll-free telephone: 800-221-6827
Website: www.easterseals.com
Goodwill Industries International Inc.
15810 Indianola Drive
Rockville, MD 20855
Toll-free telephone: 800-466-3945
Website: www.goodwill.org
Guide Dogs for the Blind
P.O. Box 151200
San Rafael, CA 94915-1200
Toll-free telephone: 800-295-4050
Website: www.guidedogs.com
Helping Hands
541 Cambridge St.
Boston, MA 02134
Telephone: 617-787-4419
Website: https://monkeyhelpers.org/
International Dyslexia Association
40 York Road, Fourth Floor
Baltimore, MD 21204
Telephone: 410-296-0232
Website: https://dyslexiaida.org
Learning Disabilities Association
of America
461 Cochran Road, Suite 245
Pittsburgh, PA 15228
Telephone: 412-341-1515
Website: https://ldaamerica.org


DISABILITIES AWARENESS 67
.Disabilities Awareness Resources
Mental Health America
500 Montgomery St., Suite 820
Alexandria, VA 22314
Toll-free telephone: 800-969-6642
Website: www.mhanational.orgt
Muscular Dystrophy
Association USA
161 N. Clark St., Suite 3550
Chicago, IL 60601
Toll-free telephone: 800-572-1717
Website: www.mda.org
National Association of the Deaf
8630 Fenton St., Suite 820
Silver Spring, MD 20910-3819
Telephone: 301-587-1788
Website: www.nad.org
National Center for
Learning Disabilities
31 Thomas Circle NW, Suite 700
Washington, DC 20005
Toll-free telephone: 888-575-7373
Website: www.ncld.org
National Center on Health,
Physical Activity, and Disability
4000 Ridgeway Drive
Birmingham, AL 35209
Toll-free telephone: 800-900-8086
Website: www.nchpad.org
National Down Syndrome Congress
30 Mansell Court, Suite 108
Roswell, GA 30076
Telephone: 800-232-6372
Website: http://ndsccenter.org
National Down Syndrome Society
8 E. 41st St., Eighth Floor
New York, NY 10017
Toll-free telephone: 800-221-4602
Website: www.ndss.org
National Federation of the Blind
200 E. Wells St. at Jernigan Place
Baltimore, MD 21230
Telephone: 410-659-9314
Website: http://nfb.org
National Library Service for the
Blind and Print Disabled
1291 Taylor St. NW
Washington, DC 20542
Toll-free telephone: 800-424-8567
Website: www.loc.gov/nls
National Multiple Sclerosis Society
Toll-free telephone: 800-344-4867
Website:
www.nationalmssociety.org
National Organization on Disability
77 Water St., Suite 204
New York, NY 10005
Telephone: 646-505-1191
Website: www.nod.org
National Rehabilitation
Information Center
8400 Corporate Drive, Suite 500
Landover, MD 20785
Toll-free telephone: 800-346-2742
Website: www.naric.com
Special Olympics International
1133 19th St. NW
Washington, DC 20036-3604
Toll-free telephone: 800-700-8585
Website: http://specialolympics.org
TASH
(Equity, Opportunity, and Inclusion for
People with Disabilities)
1101 15th St. NW, Suite 206
Washington, D.C. 20005
Telephone: 202-817-3264
Website: https://tash.org


68 DISABILITIES AWARENESS
Disabilities Awareness Resources.
Telecommunications Relay
Service (TRS)
Federal Communications Commission
445 12th St. SW
Washington, DC 20554
Toll-free telephone: 888-225-5322
Website:
www.fcc.gov/consumers/guides/tele-
communications-relay-service-trs
United Cerebral Palsy
1825 K St. NW, Suite 600
Washington, DC 20006
Toll-free telephone: 800-872-5827
Website: http://ucp.org
United States Association
of Blind Athletes
1 Olympic Plaza
Colorado Springs, CO 80909
Telephone: 719-866-3224
Website: http://usaba.org
USA Deaf Sports Federation
P.O. Box 2011
Santa Fe, NM 87502
Website: www.usdeafsports.org
U.S. Paralympics
1 Olympic Plaza
Colorado Springs, CO 80909-5760
Telephone: 719-866-2030
Website: www.teamusa.org/
US-Paralympics
Acknowledgments
The Boy Scouts of America thanks
the following individuals, who were
generous with their knowledge and
time in assisting us with the Disabilities
Awareness merit badge pamphlet.
• Sara Qureshi, director, Program
Support, The Kids on the Block
• Chris Privett, communications
director, The Arc of the United States
• Doug Hind, manager, Special
Curriculum, The Church of Jesus
Christ of Latter-day Saints
• Dale McClellan, administrative
assistant to the Young Men general
presidency, The Church of Jesus
Christ of Latter-day Saints
The Boy Scouts of America is grateful
to the men and women serving on the
National Merit Badge Subcommittee for
the improvements made in updating
this pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration Credits
Burke-Triolo Productions—page 69
CapTel®/Ultratec Inc., courtesy; CapTel
is a registered trademark of Ultratec
Inc.—page 26 (captioned telephone)
Franklin D. Roosevelt Presidential
Library/Margaret Suckley,
courtesy—page 14 (Roosevelt)
©Guide Dogs for the Blind Inc.,
courtesy—cover (guide dog);
pages 22 and 23


DISABILITIES AWARENESS 69
.Disabilities Awareness Resources
Hemera Technologies—pages
17 and 52
Library of Congress Prints and
Photographs Division, courtesy—
page 14 (Tubman)
National Sports Center for the Disabled,
courtesy—cover (skier)
Randall Anderson/Rossmiller
Photography, courtesy—
page 14 (Waddell)
San Diego Hall of Champions,
courtesy—page 14 (Larson)
Shutterstock.com—cover (wheelchair,
©Jevgeni Mironov; prosthesis,
©Andrew Mayovskyy); pages 10
(©michaeljung), 15 (©Andrey_
Popov), 21 (©Goodluz), 25 (cane,
©Ververidis Vasilis; wheelchair,
©Jevgeni Mironov), 26 (smartphone,
©Sasithon-sj), 27 (man, ©Monika
Wisniewska; woman signing,
©adriaticfoto; woman on phone,
©Elena Elisseeva; manual alphabet,
©Littlekidmoment), 34 (wheelchair,
©Konstantin Yolshin), 36 (man
with recorder, ©wavebreakmedia), 38
(©Phovoir), 41 (©Chad McDermott),
42 (ribbon, ©GWImages), 45
(©Phovoir), 54 (©Deflector Image),
56 (©Monkey Business Images),
57 (©Monkey Business Images),
58 (©Photographee.eu), and 59
(©Monkey Business Images)
Special Olympics, courtesy—
page 42 (athlete)
Wikipedia.org, courtesy—cover
(hearing aid); page 29 (skier)
Wikipedia.org/Sarah Chester,
courtesy—cover (folding cane)
Wikipedia.org/James38—
page 26 (videophone)
Wikipedia.org/©Matt Martin, courtesy—
page 14 (Tebow)
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property
of or are protected by the Boy Scouts
of America.
Dan Bryant— pages 8, 34 (street), 35,
and 43
Tom Copeland Jr.—pages 13 and 32
Greg Crenshaw—page 5
Ernest Doclar—page 29
(basketball game)
Al Drago—page 7
Daniel Giles—pages 4, 40, and 60
Jeff Hattrick—page 20
Mary Oakes—page 48
Randy Piland—pages 6, 30, 33, and 37
Steve Seeger—page 28
Trey Spovey—page 51


Notes


Notes


Notes