ANIMATION
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


35778
ISBN 978-0-8395-0061-0
©2022 Boy Scouts of America
2022 Printing
Note to the Counselor
Thank you for offering your talents as a merit badge counselor.
The entire merit badge program succeeds because of the
dedication and generosity of people like you.
This merit badge is intended to introduce Scouts to the art
of animation; how to create their own animations; the ways in
which animation is used and experienced not only in cartoons
and movies, but also in everyday life; and the fun and exciting
career opportunities in animation.
To that end, the requirements are designed to expose
Scouts to several types of animation but not to turn them
into professional animators. The requirements are written to
support all age levels and allow the counselor to guide Scouts
in having fun with this merit badge while working within their
age-appropriate abilities. Even a Scout with little or no artistic
drawing ability can fulfill the badge requirements. (For ideas, see
the examples in the Stop-Motion and Experimental Animation
sections of this pamphlet.)
In scope, the requirements are limited to animation and
do not include visual effects. It is also important to differentiate
between animation and video. For the purposes of this merit
badge, animation is bringing life to inanimate objects by taking
multiple still images and building them into a video. Video is
recording live action and breaking the recording down to single
frames—the opposite of animation. Simply taking a video of
something moving is not considered animation for this
merit badge.


ANIMATION 3
At the online resource for this badge (http://www.boyslife.
org/Animation), the Scout will find extensive examples,
video tutorials, and animation tools, with most of the
material provided at a minimal cost or free. These resources
are presented with the young Scout in mind and serve as an
extension of this merit badge.
You and the Scouts you counsel are encouraged to take
advantage of the special features offered in this book, including
augmented reality. You can also flip through the pages and
see examples of animation running along the margins, and the
centerfold section includes cutout pages with which to create an
animation flip book. On the reverse side of the centerfold, you
will find another example of 2-D animation.
In short, this book marks a new era in Scouting. Now, have
fun with it—and let’s get some Scouts excited about animation!
Thanks for
all you do!


4 ANIMATION
Requirements
1. General knowledge. Do the following:
a. In your own words, describe to your counselor what
animation is.
b. Discuss with your counselor a brief history
of animation.
2. Principles of animation. Choose five of the following
12 principles of animation, and discuss how each one
makes an animation appear more believable: squash and
stretch, anticipation, staging, straight-ahead action and pose
to pose, follow through and overlapping action, slow in and
slow out, arcs, secondary action, timing, exaggeration, solid
drawing, appeal.
3. Projects. With your counselor’s approval, choose
two animation techniques and do the following for each:
a. Plan your animation using thumbnail sketches and/or
layout drawings either on paper or using an animation
software program.
b. Create the animations.
c. Share your animations with your counselor. Explain how
you created each one, and discuss any improvements that
could be made.
4. Animation in our world. Do the following:
a. Tour an animation studio or a business where animation
is used, either in person, via video, or via the internet.
Share what you have learned with your counselor.
b. Discuss with your counselor how animation might
be used in the future to make your life more enjoyable
and productive.
5. Careers. Learn about three career opportunities in animation.
Pick one and find out about the education, training, and
experience required for this profession. Discuss your findings
with your counselor. Explain why this profession might
interest you.


.Animation Resources
ANIMATION 5
Resources
Scouting Literature
Art, Communication, Digital Technology,
Drafting, Graphic Arts, Model Design
and Building, Moviemaking,
Photography, Programming, Robotics,
and Theater merit badge pamphlets
Books
Bancroft, Tom. Animator: The Coolest
Jobs on the Planet. Raintree, 2014.
———. Creating Characters With
Personality: For Film, TV, Animation,
Video Games, and Graphic Novels.
Watson-Guptill, 2006.
Blair, Preston. Animation 1: Learn to
Animate Cartoons Step by Step.
Walter Foster Publishing, 2003.
———. Cartoon Animation. Walter
Foster Publishing, 1994.
Goldberg, Eric. Character Animation
Crash Course! Silman-James
Press, 2008.
Johnston, Ollie, and Frank Thomas. The
Illusion of Life: Disney Animation,
3rd edition. Disney Editions, 1995.
Stanchfield, Walt. Drawn to Life: 20
Golden Years of Disney Master Classes,
volumes 1 and 2. Focal Press, 2009.
Williams, Richard. The Animator’s
Survival Kit: A Manual of Methods,
Principles and Formulas for Classical,
Computer, Games, Stop Motion and
Internet Animators, 4th ed. Faber &
Faber, 2012.
Online Resources
Animation merit badge
Website: www.scoutlife.org/Animation
Blender Foundation
Website: www.blender.org
DAQRI 4D Studio
Website: daqri.com
Ryan Woodward Art & Animation
“Advice for Parents With Artistic Children”
Website: ryanwoodwardart.com/info/
advice-for-parents-with-artistic-children
With your parent’s permission, visit
the Boy Scouts of America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org,
for a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.