SALESMANSHIP


SALESMANSHIP
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Salesmanship or check Scoutbook
for the latest requirements.
35945
ISBN 978-0-8395-3351-1
©2025 Scouting America/Boy Scouts of America
2025 Printing
FPO


SALESMANSHIP 3





SALESMANSHIP 5
Contents
What Salespeople Do. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Research a Product . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Build a Solid Relationship With Customers. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
Develop a Top-Notch Sales Plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
Deliver a Winning Sales Presentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
Time to Sell. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
Interview a Professional. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
Sales Career Opportunities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
Salesmanship Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47





SALESMANSHIP 7
.What Salespeople Do
What Salespeople Do
Sales can offer a challenging and rewarding career for those
who enjoy interacting with people from all walks of life. Self-
confidence, motivation, friendliness, and the persistence neces-
sary to overcome obstacles and solve problems—all of these are
important traits for people who choose sales as a career.
Top sales professionals know that customers who trust them
will buy again. They realize these customers will spread the word
about the positive experience they had, including news about the
courtesy and friendliness of the salesperson and the quality of the
product. Good salespeople will be customer-oriented and will be
able to help their customers solve problems with the products they
sell. Good salespeople will also remember their responsibilities to
their employers, whether it is to create revenue (income) through
sales, to raise funds for a non-profit organization, or to get people
to commit to an idea or concept.
What is a Product
Salespeople sell all sorts of products. A product can be either
a tangible product that you can see, touch, and/or hold. This
type of product is called a good. A product might also be a non-
tangible product that cannot be seen or touched, but still might
have great value. This type of product is called a service.
Responsibilities of Sales Professionals
Salespeople have important responsibilities to the company or
organization they represent and to the customers they serve.
These responsibilities include:
• Having in-depth knowledge of and showing support for the
quality of the product
• Learning and practicing sound sales techniques that offer a
win/win outcome for the company and the customers
Good salespeople
practice a
straightforward
philosophy: If
you are friendly
and honest,
people will buy
from you.


8 SALESMANSHIP
What Salespeople Do.
• Valuing and building excellent long-term relationships
with customers
• Representing the company honorably through high moral
character, straightforward actions, hard work, and high
performance
• Preserving public trust by dealing with people fairly
and honestly, and by solving problems quickly and to
the customer’s satisfaction
• Promoting economic growth through sales
Service to Customers
Salespeople’s most important duty is to serve customers in the
same way they would like to be served if the shoe were on the
other foot. A professional, well-groomed appearance, direct eye
contact, a winning smile, a courteous and kind manner, and an
open-minded approach to assisting people on their own terms
are crucial ways that salespeople can best serve their customers.
When customers feel comfortable with their
reasons for making a purchase, sales follow. In turn,
sales stimulate economic growth, not only of the
salesperson’s and employers’ bank accounts but
also of our communities and society.


SALESMANSHIP 9
.What Salespeople Do
The Hershey With a Heart
The Hershey’s chocolate factory in Hershey, Pennsylvania, offers a
perfect example of how product sales can promote the economic
growth of the community and beyond.
Born in 1857 to a Mennonite family in rural Pennsylvania,
Milton Hershey attended school through the fourth grade. He
later became an apprentice to a chocolate maker and learned
everything he could about the craft. At age 18, Hershey opened his
first candy shop. He later opened candy businesses in Chicago,
New Orleans, and New York, and the Lancaster Caramel Company
in Lancaster, Pennsylvania.
However, Hershey’s heart was wrapped in chocolate, so he
sold the caramel company for $1 million and used the money to
build a chocolate factory near his hometown in rural Pennsylvania.
It was an instant success. Countless positions and financial
security—not just for factory workers, but for candy suppliers and
distributors, cocoa farmers, truck drivers, construction workers,
health-care workers, and many other workers in Pennsylvania
and across the United States and abroad—were created by this
successful business.
Hershey’s employees were loyal, and he treated them well. In
addition to decent wages, Hershey invested in housing, education,
and health care for his employees. As the business grew, the
community around it grew, too. Today, as a tourist attraction,
Hershey, Pennsylvania, continues to spur broad economic growth.
Customers buy when they feel confident that the purchase
meets their needs, especially when it comes to big-ticket items
like cars and homes. To motivate a customer to buy, all lingering
doubts must be met by the salesperson’s ability to listen to, focus
on, and straightforwardly address the customer’s concerns. Good
salespeople are also able to provide product expertise and knowl-
edge about the industry, if the customer is another business.
The customers to whom salespeople sell products are either
other businesses (business-to-business sales) or to consumers
who are buying the product for their own personal use. Business-
to-business salespeople sell things like office supplies and other
goods to other companies. These companies then use these
products themselves or resell the products, as is the case with
retailers such as your local grocery store or huge retailers like
Walmart and Target. Consumer salespeople are often found
working in these retailers, or they might go door-to-door, sell
products over the telephone, or online.





SALESMANSHIP 11
As a salesperson,
your company’s
business is
your business to
know thoroughly!
Research a Product
You must learn all about the goods (such as popcorn or video
games) or service (such as lawn mowing or dog walking)
before you begin selling. If practical, visit the factory where the
product is made or the business is located to gain first-hand
knowledge about the product or service. If that is not possible,
search online (with your parent or guardian’s permission) or
visit a public library to find information about the company
and its products, including customer comments.
Salespeople must update their knowledge as the product
line expands or changes with the fluctuating marketplace. As
a salesperson, you must keep up with industry trends, pricing,
marketing, packaging, and other product developments.
.Research a Product or Service
Seasonal products


12 SALESMANSHIP
Research a Product or Service.
Questions a Salesperson Should Ask
You should be able to answer the following questions about your
product or service and the organization for which you work.
PRODUCT INFORMATION
• How long has the product been on the market?
• Is it new or improved?
• Is it an easily recognized brand?
• Is the product seasonal (Christmas trees), a fad (something
trendy that quickly fades from popularity), or a tried-and-
true standard (Hershey’s chocolate)?
• Why do people need or want it? What makes the product
different from or superior to the competition?
MARKETING
• How is the product marketed, and what do customers like
about it?
• What claims or promises about the product or service does
the company make, and are those claims provable?
• What is the downside of the product—what do unsatisfied
customers say about it?
CUSTOMER SERVICE
• What customer service standards does the company follow
before and after the sale?
• How does the company ensure customer satisfaction and
repeat business?
• How have quality-control issues with the product been
resolved?
• Can the customer return the product for a full refund?








SALESMANSHIP 15
.Build a Solid Relationship With Customers
To build a relationship with customers, be attentive to friendly,
respectful, and professional ways that you can help potential
buyers clear hurdles toward a purchase.
Professional Skills
Personal appearance is important. A well-groomed,
professional appearance from head to toe is the first thing
a customer should notice about you. Be considerate and
friendly, gracious and respectful. You want customers to feel
comfortable talking with you.
Successful salespeople stress the importance of inter-
personal skills for reaching sales goals. Use simple, clear
language when talking or writing to others about the product
and the sale. Your coworkers and customers will appreciate
clear communication, especially if the details are complicated.
Avoid jargon (slang) or highly technical language. Use simple
language to describe technical terms. The more you know
about the product you are selling, the easier it will be to
describe it in simple terms.
Listening is one key to customer satisfaction. Learning
about people’s likes, dislikes, problems, and goals will help
you sell a product that meets their needs. Remember to make
eye contact and other friendly gestures, such as nodding, to
show that you are listening and are interested.
Customers appreciate punctual sales professionals who
have self-discipline and initiative. If the sale involves a lot of
money, the salesperson might have to meet with the customer
several times to close the deal. Plan your schedule daily and
weekly, making sure you write down important information
about when to make introductory calls, callbacks, and
follow-up calls.
Always be on time
for meetings, and
be available to
your customers
when they need
you, whether by
phone, email, text,
or in person. If you
are running late
for a meeting,
call the customer
immediately and
explain what
happened. Do
not leave anyone
wondering where
you are.
Build a Solid Relationship
With Customers


16 SALESMANSHIP
Build a Solid Relationship With Customers.
When negotiation becomes complicated or difficult, a
salesperson must be able to handle the situation—however
stressful—with consistent tact, diplomacy, and persistence.
Even customers who act discourteously should be treated
tactfully. Staying calm and polite often will have a reassuring
effect and may enable you to politely carry on with business.
Never lose your cool with a customer, no matter how badly the
interaction goes. If you do find your temper rising—which can
happen if the customer becomes angry or makes unreasonable
demands—excuse yourself for a minute. Leave the room and
take 10 deep breaths to relax before returning.
Always think to yourself that the customer is always right;
this will help you avoid arguments and conflict with your
customers.


SALESMANSHIP 17
.Build a Solid Relationship With Customers
Customer Follow-Through
Following up with customers is one of the most crucial skills of
salesmanship. Why? Think of your customers as a loyal base
of friends who can help you increase sales, spread goodwill
about you and your company, and guide improvements to your
business strategy.
Customers welcome the chance to share their opinions
about a product they purchased, and they appreciate that the
salesperson cared to ask. You are likely to get good feedback,
even if it is negative, once customers have purchased the
product and had a chance to try it out.
Make every effort to fulfill an unsatisfied customer’s needs
in an efficient, quiet, and confident manner. This is your chance
to practice super salesmanship—to leap over tall obstacles and
find practical solutions to any and all problems. Any negative
feedback requires further follow-up once you have addressed
the customer’s concerns. More often than not, customers will
appreciate your determination and honesty when you have
made the effort to solve problems to their satisfaction. Helping
to solve a customer’s problems often creates even stronger
customer loyalty toward your product, brand, and company.
Your tone should
always convey
enthusiasm for
the product or
service, your
company, and the
customer. Honesty
in all your dealings
also is crucial.
Nothing destroys
buyer confidence
faster than a
salesperson who
breaks a promise
or misrepresents
the qualities of a
product.


18 SALESMANSHIP
Build a Solid Relationship With Customers.
Once you have a satisfied customer, don’t be afraid to ask
for future business: “I hope you will think of me the next time
you need your dog walked, and please recommend my service
to your friends.”
When you start to get repeat customers and recommen-
dations, consider other personal ways to keep in touch. For
example, send loyal customers a holiday or birthday card
annually, or offer free samples or discounts on future goods.
Try any number of attractive deals to show that you value
your customers’ continued business.
Many salespeople, particularly those who sell
expensive items such as automobiles and houses,
work on commission. When they make a sale, they
receive a percentage of the total sales price. They
do not make a regular salary. Rather, they rely
on their sales skills to provide income. A salaried
salesperson receives a salary or hourly pay. Many
salespeople who work in department stores receive
a steady paycheck. In general, salaried employees
do not earn a commission on sales made.


SALESMANSHIP 19
.Build a Solid Relationship With Customers
Gumball Guy
A medical supply
salesperson built his
business in hospitals
and doctors offices
throughout North
Carolina by bringing a
jar filled with gumballs
to clients on his first
sales visit. Each time
he returned to sell
medical supplies, he
brought gumballs to
refill the jar. Even if
he did not make a sale
that day, he refilled the
jar. Doctors and nurses
so looked forward to
his visits that they
wound up buying all of
their standard supplies from one salesperson—the
“gumball guy!”
A sales quota is a goal set by the company that the sales representative
must try to meet. For example, a person in tractor sales might have to
sell eight tractors per month to meet the sales quota. If the salesperson
consistently meets the quota over the course of a year, the company
might offer rewards like cash bonuses or free travel.





SALESMANSHIP 21
.Develop a Top-Notch Sales Plan
Develop a Top-Notch
Sales Plan
To develop a top-notch sales plan for your product or service,
start by writing down your thoughts. Describe your business
and the product. Then write down details about the market—
the specific group of people—you are targeting.
Next, write down your sales strategy. Decide how you
plan to market your product—by advertising, word-of-mouth,
mail, phone, or the internet, for instance. Perhaps you can
think of an unusual sales hook or a catchy slogan to increase
product awareness and recognition. Give your sales strategy
careful thought, because it will set the course
for your business.
Consider your competitors—who else
offers the same product you do? Identify how
your product stacks up to the competition,
how it is similar to and different from
your competition. Think of how you can
reach that portion of the market that your
competitors do not.
Identify the exact territory in which
you will sell your product. If you are
starting a neighborhood business, you
might want to include a local map
with your sales plan that shows
the area where you live and your
specific plans for canvassing the
territory to create sales. This can
mean going door-to-door (with a
buddy) or sending a brochure to each
person in your neighborhood.
Compare the price of your product to that of
competitors. If you charge $35 for mowing an average yard,
check the prices of other lawn-mowing services in your area.
sales territory.
An area assigned
to a salesperson
by his or her
employer.
The area can
cover a large
geographical area.


22 SALESMANSHIP
How much will it cost
you to buy, or at least maintain, your
equipment? Will you need a truck or special vehicle to
transport your equipment? How about hidden costs such as
gasoline and oil for the mowing equipment and transportation?
Write it all down, and be realistic about your expenses.
You might be able to attract customers by offering a slightly
lower rate for your service than competitors charge, or by
providing every 10th lawn mowing for free. Your competitors
might have a similar strategy, so stay on your toes. Be prepared
to adjust your sales strategy to meet market demands.
Remember to detail the bottom-line costs of creating and
selling your product or service. If you sell Christmas orna-
ments and it costs you $1 apiece for the materials and 25 cents
more per item to market them, care-
fully consider the selling price that will
allow you to make a profit. Be particu-
larly careful with seasonal items—you
don’t want to get stuck with unsold
inventory when the season ends. It
is easy to underestimate costs, espe-
cially as you start your own business.
Estimate all expenses, and always pad
your budget a bit, just in case.
Estimate your profits only after
you have created a realistic list of your
expenses. Be very conservative with
your profit estimates. You never know
when a quality-control problem or
market fluctuation might pop up and
quickly eat away your business.
Before you
develop a sales
plan, check local
laws and obtain
any permits
or insurance
required to
advertise and
conduct business
in your
sales territory.
Your time is valuable. Consider
a fair wage for your time and
for the type of work you are
doing, and add that to your list
of expenses. Be careful that
the amount of time you spend
is not worth more than your
expected earnings. Measure
the amount of time it takes
to do the work. If you spend
so much time working that it
diminishes your profits, find
ways to streamline your tasks.


SALESMANSHIP 23
.Develop a Top-Notch Sales Plan
Sales Phenomenon Michael S. Dell
Some people might say Michael S. Dell
is a natural salesperson. The founder and
chief executive officer of Dell Computer
Corporation started his amazing career
when he was a preteen. By age 12, he
had already made $2,000 through a
stamp auction. At age 16, Dell was
selling newspaper subscriptions to the
Houston Post. After noticing that his best
customers were new homeowners and
recently married people, he hired friends
to obtain names from local marriage
licenses and home mortgages. Instead of
cold-calling customers to meet his sales
quota, Dell focused on the people on his list. In just a year, he earned
$18,000 selling newspapers—a remarkable accomplishment.
Like many young entrepreneurs, Dell was not content to rest
on his laurels. As a freshman in college, he became fascinated with
personal computers. A hands-on guy, he took them apart and reas-
sembled them using better components, often adding more memory
and enhanced features. When he realized that components to build
a computer could be purchased for less than $1,000 and that retail
stores were then selling computers for $3,000, Dell decided to build
his own and compete with stores by selling his product directly to
customers. He aimed to provide fast, direct service.
The innovative sales plan worked, and his new business proved
very profitable. Dell reportedly earned tens of thousands of dollars a
month that first year. Despite his parents’ objections, Dell quit college
in 1984 at the end of his freshman year to found Dell Computer
Corporation. It was the first company to sell personal computers direct
to customers, bypassing the middleman—in this case, retail stores. It
also was the first computer company to offer next-day, on-site customer
support services—Dell customers received in-home repair services.
Today, Michael Dell is the chair and chief executive officer of Dell
Computer and is one of the world's wealthiest people.





SALESMANSHIP 25
.A Winning Sales Presentation
A Winning Sales
Presentation
Y&E: The Magazine for Teen Entrepreneurs* suggests the
following checklist to guide you through the steps of planning
and delivering a winning sales presentation.
STEP 1: Set a goal for your presentation.
■■ Determine who your customer is (in this case, your counselor)
and where you will meet.
■■ Set a controlling purpose. What do you want the customer to do?
■■ Brainstorm a list of ideas and facts you want to communicate.
STEP 2: Create the presentation.
■■ Develop a friendly introduction that tells who you are.
■■ Briefly introduce your product and explain several
important features.
■■ Explain the important ways your product improves life for
the customer.
■■ Explain why your product is better than others.
■■ State the price and/or make a special offer.
■■ Write a sentence that asks the customer to make a buying decision.
■■ Gather samples or visual aids to show as you speak.
■■ Prepare a flier or brochure to give to the potential customer.
STEP 3: Practice the delivery.
■■ Read your presentation aloud into a tape recorder, then listen to
the recording and improve rough spots.
■■ Begin memorizing the presentation, and practice in front of a
mirror until you feel confident.
*Source: Y&E: The Magazine for Teen Entrepreneurs, January/February 2001,
©2001 Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation and KidsWay Inc. Used with permission.
All rights reserved.


26 SALESMANSHIP
A Winning Sales Presentation.
The following tips for a successful sales presentation come
from C. J. Hayden, a business coach, speaker, and author.
Establish rapport. Whether you are presenting to one person
(your counselor) or a large group, introduce yourself and get
to know a little bit about the audience members. Chat about
things you have in common or about the sequence of events
that brought you together.
Determine the customer’s needs. Begin by repeating what
you already know about the customer’s needs and then start
asking questions. Your script should include all the questions
you must answer to write a proposal or close a sale on the
spot. Ask open-ended questions—those that require more
than a simple yes or no answer—to get more information
from your customer.
Explain how you can meet the customer’s needs. Using
the information you have just gathered, describe how you can
respond to each problem or goal. Use specific examples to
illustrate your explanation, such as the following: “My last cus-
tomer had exactly the same challenge. I was able to . . .”
■■ Try out your presentation on a family member. If possible,
have someone videotape your presentation.
■■ Have your family ask you questions that a customer might ask.
■■ Keep practicing until your presentation feels natural
and spontaneous.
STEP 4: Deliver the presentation.
■■ Make sure you have your props and visuals.
■■ Dress appropriately for the business.
■■ Be on time.
■■ Shake hands and smile when you meet your customer (counselor).
■■ Speak slowly and observe the customer to see if you
are communicating.
■■ Pause occasionally and ask if the customer has any questions.
■■ Don’t panic if you forget something. You can say it later.
■■ Give out your marketing materials and be prepared to take
the order.


SALESMANSHIP 27
.A Winning Sales Presentation
Answer questions. Find out how you are doing with the
sales presentation by asking, “What else do you need to
know?” Keep asking for and answering questions until the
customer seems satisfied. Address any concerns one by one.
Reassure the customer that you have the right solution by
stating specifically how you can help.
Ask for the business. Don’t leave out this step! Even if you
know the customer wants to see a proposal first, is talking
to other salespeople, or is not ready to make a decision, ask
anyway. It is the only way to find out how close you are to
making a sale. How the customer responds to this question
will tell you exactly what you need to resolve before the
person will buy from you.
Decide on a next step. Whether or not you closed the sale,
be absolutely certain that both you and the customer know
what happens next. Is the customer ready to get started?
When? Will there be a contract and/or purchase order?
Who has to sign it? Is a written proposal required? Does the
customer want to check your references? Can you call back in
a week? Be sure to ask if you can do anything to help move
things forward.
For one-on-one presentations, like the one you will give to
your merit badge counselor, work on your interviewing and
listening skills. When you present to a group of people, your
speaking skills become more important.
“It’s important for Scouts to remember selling isn’t
just in the business world,” said Justin Hitt, a sales
and marketing consultant and former member of
Boy Scout Troop 1785. “They have to sell them-
selves in job interviews, even in their Scouting
leadership roles.”





SALESMANSHIP 29
.Time to Sell
Time to Sell
It is now time to put your new skills to practical use. For
requirement 5, you can help your troop raise funds, sell
your own services, or find work in retail sales.
Help Your Unit Raise Funds
Let’s say you have decided to help your troop raise funds by
selling lawn fertilizer in the spring and fall. One Dallas, Texas,
Scout troop does this as its main fund-raiser each year. Here is
how they do it.
The troop starts by developing a business plan that will
ensure brisk sales of fertilizer. The Scouts research the product
and the market, identify a sales territory, decide the best time
to initiate sales and deliver the product, determine how they
will market the fertilizer to customers, and discuss how they
will deliver the product on time.
RESEARCH THE PRODUCT
The Scouts research the retail price of fertilizer in local stores
and compare that to the bulk wholesale price the Scouts will
pay to the manufacturer. From this, the Scouts can determine
how much each bag of fertilizer costs them and how much
they can charge customers per bag, thereby establishing the
troop’s gross profit for each bag sold.
For instance, if it costs $2 per 10-pound bag to buy the
fertilizer from the manufacturer, and the Scouts can sell the
fertilizer in the current market for $6 per bag, and they have
no other sales costs, the gross profit would be $4 per bag sold.
RESEARCH THE MARKET
The Scouts also research the benefits and selling points of the
brand of fertilizer they want to sell. In this example, benefits
could include lower nitrogen content, which is recommended
wholesale.
Products sold
in bulk to
industries, banks,
railroads, airlines,
governments,
retail stores,
and other large
institutions
such as schools
and hospitals.


30 SALESMANSHIP
Time to Sell.
for Texas lawns in April and October—exactly when Scouts
will deliver the fertilizer to customers. Selling points might
include telling customers that all proceeds will help the Scouts
raise money for their upcoming Appalachian Trail backpacking
trek, and that the fertilizer will be delivered to their doorstep.
The Scouts ask their parents to help identify potential cus-
tomers among neighbors, friends, relatives, and acquaintances.
IDENTIFY SALES TERRITORIES
The troop assigns sales territories where Scouts will try to sell
fertilizer. This way, the Scouts will not cover the same areas,
and customers will not receive calls from more than one
salesperson. The Scouts also develop a straightforward sales
presentation: They state their name and troop, the product
they are selling, and where the proceeds will go.
MARKET THE PRODUCT
One-page press releases are sent to local newspapers, radio
stations, and weekly advertisers, and posted
on community bulletin boards two weeks
before the fertilizer drive. The press releases
announce the sale and explain how it will
help fund the local Scout troop. Contact
information is prominently displayed at
the top of the notices.
In one day, the Scouts deliver fliers
all over their individual territories
(neighborhoods). The flier notifies
customers when Scouts will be in
their area to take orders and states
what troop is raising funds and for
what purpose. (Some Scouts add a
short handwritten note to the
bottom of the flier that tells the
customer when they will visit.)
At the appointed time and
day, the Scouts take orders
from the customers in their
sales territories. They make
notes of neighbors and contacts
who are not home and need to be contacted
again. When the deadline for taking orders arrives,
the overall order is sent to the fertilizer manufacturer.
Search for “teen
entrepreneurs”
on the internet—
with your parent
or guardian’s
permission—
and you will find
stories about young
people selling
everything from a
secret salsa recipe
to gift wrapping.


SALESMANSHIP 31
.Time to Sell
DELIVER THE PRODUCT
Scouts deliver the fertilizer on the
date promised. Within three days,
they follow up to thank custom-
ers for the sale and make sure they
are happy with the service and
product they received. At that time,
the Scouts address any concerns or
problems. The Scouts also politely
offer to contact each customer for
their fall fertilizer drive. The follow-
up ends with the Scout graciously
thanking the customer once again
for the business.
Sell Your Own
Product or Service
Many sales opportunities exist for
young people—lawn mowing and
pet sitting are just the tip of the ice-
berg. Crafts, gift baskets, website design, specialty foods, herb
or organic gardening, tree trimming, house sitting, and grocery
shopping are just some of the businesses teens have started
and successfully run on their own.
Following up with
customers shows
dedication and
professionalism.
If you enjoy young children, babysitting can be lucrative and
fun. Be sure you look into workshops on babysitting such as
those offered by the American Red Cross.


32 SALESMANSHIP
Time to Sell.
First, examine your marketable skills and interests. For
instance, Steven Crandall, an 18-year-old high school senior
in Grapevine, Texas, started a lawn-mowing business with
his younger brother by offering to tend three neighbors’
lawns. Today, the Crandall boys have expanded to 35 clients.
Steven is even creating jobs for his friends; he has signed on
six of his buddies at $15 an hour to help out, and another
six have applied. “One of the coolest things” about being an
entrepreneur, Steven says, “is the satisfaction of being able to
help out so many guys who need money. The business earned
Steven $14,000 in one year, enabling him to make payments to
his parents for the used truck they bought for him.*
Be sure to spread the word. Your goal is to have everyone
associate you with your product. Tell everyone you know and
meet who you are, what you do, and how your product can
benefit them.
Network
your way to
business success:
Volunteer and
become a member
of neighborhood
or community
organizations.
Show that you are
a hard worker and
a contributor to
your community.
It also helps you
meet more people,
communicate
better, become
more comfortable
dealing with
people, and it
increases word-of-
mouth business.
Check back with
your customers to
evaluate their level
of satisfaction.
Thank each
customer, solve
any problems or
outstanding issues,
and express
appreciation
for the client’s
feedback.
*“Cupcakes and Cattle Breeding: Teen Turn to Summer Start-ups,” The Wall
Street Journal, April 15, 2009.
Dog-walking could be a booming business
for you, especially if you live in an area
where there are dog owners who are
elderly or who vacation out-of-town.


SALESMANSHIP 33
.Time to Sell
Customer testimonials lend credibility. If customers rave
about your product or service, ask if you can quote them in
your sales materials.
By following sound strategies and carefully developing
your product or service, you can move quickly from market
research to successful sales.
Earn Money Through Retail Selling
Good retail salespeople are nearly always in demand, and
advancement to top-level positions can be more rapid than in
most other industries. The president and corporate executives
of almost all large stores started out selling.
Much more than meets the eye goes into retail selling.
Whether a business succeeds lies much in the hands of the
salespeople. They make the sale that brings in the money.
retail sales.
Products
purchased in bulk
from wholesalers
and resold to
consumers.
retail sales
representative.
A salesperson
who sells products
to consumers.
A good salesperson stays alert to the consumer’s
needs and uses imagination to fill them. The
salesperson also offers friendly, sincere, and above
all, honest advice.


34 SALESMANSHIP
Time to Sell.
CUSTOMER SERVICE
Merely waiting on a consumer and ringing up a sale is not
enough. A consumer might need detailed information before
making a purchase, or the consumer might want to know the
differences between products.
Service also consists of courtesy. A pleasant greeting—by
name for regular consumers—is a good start. Even if you
are busy with another consumer, a smile or nod will tell
consumers you will assist them as soon as possible.
Know the Merchandise
Salespeople must know their merchandise. This knowledge
promotes trust and makes selling easier and more successful.
A sales professional who can answer questions about the
product or service can feel confident, enjoy the work, and
make more sales.


SALESMANSHIP 35
.Time to Sell
First, get a general knowledge of the merchandise. Know
what items are for sale or new and what items sell best. Learn
where each item is located in the store. Know when store sales
are advertised and what the sale prices are. Finally, learn which
of the products are not available in other stores.
The Wizard of Watery Products
Richie Stachowski, who was 11
when he developed an under-
water walkie-talkie, sold his com-
pany, Short Stack, to Wild Planet
Toys for several million dollars.
Richie’s sales odyssey began
during a family vacation in Hawaii.
He was thrilled by the amazing
variety of fish he saw while
snorkeling and wished he could
talk about it right then with his
snorkeling partner—his dad.
When he learned that no simple
way existed for people to talk to
each other underwater, Richie
started drawing designs that
night in the hotel room. His goal
was to create a cheap way to
communicate underwater. He
researched underwater acoustics,
made prototypes, and eventually
built Water Talkies™.
Richie pitched Water Talkies™ to a major toy retailer. He ended the
presentation by using a fish tank to ask for the sale via his Water Talkie™.
The retailer bit like a shark, snatching up 50,000 units. Before long, Richie
sold his product to other toy stores.


36 SALESMANSHIP
Time to Sell.
Cost Sheets and Income Statements
A cost sheet helps you track customers, the service or product and
the quantity bought, the date the sale was made, when the product
or service was delivered, and when you followed up and thanked
customers for their business. To help improve the way you do business,
the cost sheet also should note any customer suggestions, comments,
and criticism you receive. Tailor the cost sheet to fit your specific
product or service. One example of a cost sheet is shown here.
An overall income statement can be used if you start a small
business, such as lawn mowing or computer repair, and you want to
get a broad perspective on how your business is doing. An income
statement reflects total sales revenue (income), total sales costs
(expenses), and the gross profit of the business minus operating
expenses, which equals the net profit. The example here shows an
income statement for a lawn care service.
Name Address Phone No.
Product
or Service
Purchased Quantity Total
Price
Expected
Delivery
Date
Actual
Delivery
Date Follow-Up
Date Customer
Comments
Ashby
312
Maple
555-
1211 Lawn mow-
ing, edging 1 $25.00 4/26 4/26 4/28 Good job.
Ashby
312
Maple
555-
1211
Hedge
trimming,
weeding 1 $40.00 5/3 5/3 5/5
Trim side yard
hedge 6 inches
shorter next
month.
Clayton
4215
Hudson
555-
4100 Lawn mow-
ing, edging 1 $35.00 4/27 4/27 4/28 Nice job, thanks
for being on time.
Jacoby
1920
Forest
555-
7908 Lawn mow-
ing, edging 1 $30.00 4/27 4/27 4/28
Good job, good
cleanup. Yard
looks good.
Watson
601
Sunset
555-
0404 Lawn mow-
ing, edging 1 $35.00 4/29 4/29 4/30
Cut grass a
little shorter next
time. Nice, neat
job, though.
Watson
601
Sunset
555-
0404
Hedge
trimming,
weeding 1 $55.00 5/4 5/4 5/5
Good job. Next
time throw bags
of weeds in large
trash can.
Lawns by Troop 456


SALESMANSHIP 37
Lawns by Troop 456
Revenue
Customer Name Type of Service Weekly Monthly
Ashby Lawn mowing and edging $25.00
Hedge trimming and weeding
flower beds $40.00
Clayton Lawn mowing and edging $35.00
Jacoby Lawn mowing and edging $30.00
Watson Lawn mowing and edging $35.00
Hedge trimming and weeding
flower beds $55.00
Total monthly income from weekly services: $125.00 X 4 = $500.00
Total income from monthly services: $95.00
Total monthly income (gross profit): $595.00
Operating Expenses
Item Weekly Monthly Seasonal Start-up
Lawn mower $350.00
Edger/trimmer $90.00
Electric hedge trimmer $50.00
Hedge clipper $30.00
Blower $75.00
Rake $12.00
Extension cords $25.00
Maintenance service
Lawn mower (two tune-ups) $70.00
Oil and fuel $5.00
Trimmer line $4.00
Gasoline $6.60
Promotional fliers (100) $15.00
Business cards (500) $20.00
Loan repayment (10 installments) $69.52
Total weekly operating expenses $5.00
Total monthly operating expenses $80.12
Total seasonal operating expenses $105.00
Subtotal of start-up expenses $632.00
One-time cost of interest @ 10%
for loan to cover start-up costs $63.20
Total start-up expenses $695.20
Total operating expenses,
first month of operation $190.12
Net profit, first month of operation
(gross profit minus operating
expenses) $404.88


38 SALESMANSHIP
Interview a Professional.
Interview a Professional
Talking directly to someone in the field of sales can tell you
more about selling than any pamphlet can. These questions
will give you an idea of what selling is all about.
Questions for Sales Professionals
1. How important are reports and record keeping, and how do they
help you? How much of your time does record keeping require?
2. What kind of education does sales require?
3. What kind of travel do sales positions require? In what other
ways does this work affect your family life?
4. How are salespeople paid? How much financial security is there
in this field?
5. What are the prospects of getting ahead quickly? How much
does the average experienced salesperson earn?
6. How might you ease a customer’s concerns about buying
your product?
7. How would you handle a customer who is upset with you about
an error your company made even when you are quite sure the
mistake was on the customer’s end?
8. How do you find customers? Does your sales manager tell you
whom to see, or do you find them yourself?
9. What specialized sales training did you receive from
your company?
10. How do you learn about the products you are selling?


SALESMANSHIP 39
.Interview a Professional
manufacturer’s
sales
representative.
Someone who
works for a
company that
manufactures
products
(a wholesaler)
and who sells
products in bulk
to businesses.
Questions for Retail
Store Owners
1. What is it like working with sales representatives
in your business?
2. Is the wholesale sale representative’s role in
retail changing?
3. Do the salespeople who service your store prac-
tice high business standards? Are they honest?
4. What do you do when products are not
delivered as promised?
5. What requirements must salespeople have to work
at your store? How do you pay your salespeople?
What are the prospects for getting ahead?
6. What do you rely upon most when making an
ordering decision?
7. Let’s say you are a good customer of and have
a good relationship with a particular sales rep-
resentative. What would you do if a competitor
approached you with a strong bid for your busi-
ness at a lower price?
8. When is the best time for
a sales representative to
contact you?
9. If something is wrong with
an order you received, do
you contact the company
or the sales representative
who took the order?
10. With what types of sales-
people—both those you
employ and those from
whom you buy—are you
most comfortable?





SALESMANSHIP 41
.Sales Career Opportunities
Summer sales
positions provide
valuable
experience that
many companies
seek when hiring
for career sales
positions. Many
firms offer special
summer programs
to introduce young
people to sales
and marketing.
Sales Career
Opportunities
As you research sales career opportunities, check the classified
ads in the newspaper. Notice how many positions are sales-
based and how many different types of products people sell.
In a free-enterprise society like the United States, selling is the
fundamental way business gets done.
Now think about your favorite products, such as a favorite
brand of athletic shoes or type of jeans. Pick a company
you particularly like or a brand name that you always buy.
Research that company on the internet (with your parent or
guardian’s permission) or at your local library. Find out what
you can about the company, its philosophy, and its products.
Focusing on a particular company or product line that you
like and researching sales career opportunities within that
business will make it easier for you to tailor a statement of
qualifications and experience.
Education and Training
Many high schools and junior colleges offer courses in
cooperation with local businesses. Under these programs, a
student attends school for half a day and spends the other half
working. Not only do students get on-the-job training, but they
also receive regular wages for their work.
Many professional salespeople have college degrees in
business. As sales techniques and the purchasing methods
of consumers become more sophisticated, a well-rounded
education in and knowledge of basic business practices gain
importance, too.


42 SALESMANSHIP
Sales Career Opportunities.
The best place to start researching college-level business
programs is one of the independently published college guides.
Numerous guides are published each year, and they are great
resources for researching colleges and finding specialized
degree programs within the field of business. Online degree
programs also offer an array of sales-related specialties.
U.S. News publishes America’s Best Colleges annually. It
ranks the country’s top undergraduate business programs by
asking deans and senior faculty members at business colleges
to rate the quality of all programs on a scale of 1 (marginal) to
5 (distinguished). All the schools have programs accredited by
the Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business.
Peterson’s Four-Year Colleges features an amazing range of
college programs, such as marketing operations and manage-
ment, business systems networking and telecommunications,
and business economics. A handful of the colleges listed offer
specialized sales operations degrees. Related career fields of
interest to Scouts might include advertising, communications,
and public relations.
Preparing a Written Statement
of Your Qualifications
A written statement of your qualifications and experience
should start like any good resume, with your name, address,
phone number, and email address at the top left. Type your
written statement to give it a professional look.
Then state your objective. Be only as specific as you
want here. If your goal or objective for the purpose of this
merit badge is “to secure a high-paying position as a sales
representative for GeeWhiz Cellular,” then state your specific
goal. If your objective is “to pursue a sales career,” then state
this as your broad goal.
With the list of marketable skills and your sales career
goal in mind, write down the relevant classes you have taken
and merit badges you have earned. For instance, if you have
taken math classes that taught you how to figure percentages,
multiply, subtract, add, and divide, jot them down. If you have
taken a class in public speaking or served on committees at
school or in your troop where speaking or leadership skills were
used, record that, too. Merit badges you could mention include
Personal Management, American Business, Entrepreneurship,
Public Speaking, Communications, and any other badges that
might help you pursue a sales career.
By looking at the
rankings and
then researching
the top schools
that offer
business degrees,
Scouts who
are considering
sales careers
can select the
right school
for them.





44 SALESMANSHIP
Sales Career Opportunities.
List organizations to which you belong (such as the
Boy Scouts of America) and any volunteer, committee, or
fund-raising work you have done. List your work history,
including odd jobs and even routine household chores you
perform for an allowance.
Last, discuss the college-level education or training you
will need to pursue a sales career. Select a college with a busi-
ness program to investigate further, and describe what you will
need to do to apply. Or, describe the training you will need to
serve in the position of your choice.
Look under “Objective” on the sample resume in this
chapter for an example of a written statement detailing
qualifications and experience.
Marketable Skills
The following are important basic skills for
sales professionals:
• Excellent listening skills and an ability to commu-
nicate effectively and positively in public, on the
phone, and in writing
• Organizational skills, such as the ability to
keep records, remember customer names,
and keep track of appointments and various
stages of selling
• Math and analytical skills for figuring percent-
ages, profits, and sales quotas, and for
solving problems
• Honesty, enthusiasm, reliability, and sound judg-
ment in financial dealings
• A positive attitude and the ability to take rejection
in stride
• Drive, energy, determination, and a strong
motivation to complete projects on time and
within budget
• An entrepreneurial spirit and willingness to take
calculated risks in pursuit of high earning potential


SALESMANSHIP 45





SALESMANSHIP 47
.Sales Career Opportunities
Salesmanship Resources
Scouting Literature
American Business, Communication,
Entrepreneurship, Inventing, Personal
Management, and Public Speaking
merit badge pamphlets
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.
Books
Adams, Rob, and Terry Adams.
Success for Less: 100 Low-Cost
Businesses You Can Start Today.
Entrepreneur Media, 1999.
Bochner, Arthur, and Rose Bochner.
The New Totally Awesome Business
Book for Kids, 3rd ed. Newmarket
Press, 2009.
Brescoll, James, and Ralph M. Dahm.
Opportunities in Sales Careers.
VGM Career Horizons, 2001.
Chatzky, Jean. Not Your Parents’
Money Book: Making, Saving,
and Spending Your Own Money.
Simon & Schuster Books for Young
Readers, 2010.
Girard, Joe, and Stanley H. Brown.
How to Sell Anything to Anybody.
Fireside, 2006.
Godfrey, Neale S. Neale S. Godfrey’s
Ultimate Kids’ Money Book. Simon
& Schuster Books for Young
Readers, 2002.
Joachim, Jean C. Beyond the Bake Sale:
The Ultimate School Fund-Raising
Book. St. Martin’s Griffin, 2003.
Schiffman, Stephan. 25 Sales Skills
They Don’t Teach at Business
School. Adams Media, 2002.
Organizations and Websites
The BizWorld Foundation
555 12th St., 5th floor
Oakland, CA 94607
Toll-free telephone: 888-424-9543
bizworld.org
Junior Achievement
One Education Way
Colorado Springs, CO 80906
Telephone: 719-540-8000
jausa.ja.org


48 SALESMANSHIP
Sales Career Opportunities.
Acknowledgments
Scouting America is grateful to Dr.
Gregory S. Black for his assistance with
this pamphlet. Dr. Black, an Eagle Scout
and former Scoutmaster, is the Chair
of the Department of Marketing at
Metropolitan State University of Denver
and is a past President of the Marketing
Educators’ Association.
Past Reviewers and Supporters
Thanks to Don Herman, founder and
president of Young Entrepreneur Inc.,
a nonprofit educational organization
“Helping Teens Turn Hobbies Into
Businesses Since 1997,” for background
information on salesmanship techniques.
Our appreciation to C.J. Hayden,
the author of Get Clients Now!, who
contributed tips on sales presentations.
(Useful sales and marketing techniques
can be found at Hayden’s website,
getclientsnow.com. Get your parent or
guardian’s permission to visit the site.)
Special thanks to Y&E: The
Magazine for Teen Entrepreneurs
(created by the Ewing Marion
Kauffman Foundation and YoungBiz
Inc.) for allowing Scouting America
to reprint the steps for planning
and delivering a winning sales
presentation.
Thanks to Justin Hitt, a former
Scout and Explorer who now works as
a sales and marketing consultant, for
his time and expertise.
Scouting America is grateful to
the men and women serving on the
National Merit Badge Subcommittee
for the improvements made in
updating this pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration Credits
Dell Computer Corporation, courtesy—
page 23
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property
of or are protected by Scouting
America.
Darrell Byers—page 8
Randy Piland—cover (yard worker,
lawn mower); pages 6, 20, 24, 34,
39, and 46