WOOD
CARVING


WOOD CARVING
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Wood-Carving or check Scoutbook
for the latest requirements.
35967
ISBN 978-0-8395-3309-2
©2025 Scouting America
2025 Printing FPO


Contents
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
Carving Safely . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Know Your Woods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
Know Your Tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
Basic Cuts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
Carving in the Round . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
Chip Carving . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
Relief Carving . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
Glossary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63





WOOD CARVING 5
.Introduction
Introduction
Wood carving can be an enjoyable hobby and lifetime
activity. Making things with your hands can be very
satisfying. If you like the idea of whittling and think
you would like to earn the Wood Carving merit badge,
you should know that there is more to wood carving
than being a fair-to-middling whittler.
What is the difference between
wood carving and whittling? The two
main distinctions are apparent in the
dictionary definitions of the two terms.
To whittle, Webster’s dictionary says,
is “to pare or cut off chips from the sur-
face of (wood) with a knife.” But wood
carving, it says, is “the art of fashion-
ing or ornamenting objects of wood by
cutting with a sharp implement.” Thus,
while whittling usually is limited to
the use of a knife, wood carving is not,
and wood carving is considered an art,
while whittling is not.
As with any art, wood carving
involves learning the basics of design and technique.
Design is what you want to do; technique is how you do
it. Another consideration in wood carving is your choice
of material. The wood you plan to carve must be com-
patible with the design and suitable for the technique
and tools you want to use. Once you learn the basics of
design, technique, and material selection, you should
become well-versed on wood-carving safety before start-
ing a project. At that point, you will be able to complete
the Wood Carving merit badge requirements.





WOOD CARVING 7
.Carving Safely
The Totin’ Chip
Begin learning the basics
of safety for wood
carving by completing
the requirements for the
Totin’ Chip. Scouts earn
the Totin’ Chip to get
good, basic information
on knife safety. The
Totin’ Chip is like a driver’s license
for carving. You need it at Scout activities and functions.
Carry it with you or tape it inside your Wood Carving merit
badge pamphlet.
Carving Safely
Before you begin carving, be sure to consider safety issues.
It’s more fun to make a project when you think “safety first.”
Wood carving involves the use of sharp carving tools
such as knives. Taking safety seriously is important to
avoiding injury and enjoying yourself as you carve. The
Safety Checklist for Carving pinpoints five areas of impor-
tance in keeping safety first when carving:
• Personal maturity and judgment
• Caring for carving tools
• Controlling the work environment
• Handling knives
• Making the right choices
My Responsibility
I will take this card to my Scout leader or someone designated by my leader. I
will demonstrate the following:
1. I have read and understand woods tools use and safety rules
from my handbook.
2. I can demonstrate proper handling, care, and use of the
pocketknife, ax, and saw.
3. I will use the knife, ax, and saw as tools, not playthings, and
only when I am willing to give them my full attention.
4. I will respect all safety rules to protect others.
5. I will not use or point a knife in a threatening manner.
6. I will not cut standing trees or shrubs without specific permission from the
landowner and good reason.
7. I subscribe to the Outdoor Code.
Scout’s signature 34397 300082428
©2024 Scouting America
7 301766 619462
SKU 661946This is to certify that the bearer
has read the woods tools use and safety rules from
the “Tools“ chapter of the Scouts BSA handbook.
This Scout knows that the ownership or use of
woods tools means responsibility, and accepts it.
In consideration of the above, this Scout is hereby
granted “Totin’ Rights.”
Scout leader _______________________________


8 WOOD CARVING
Carving Safely.
Personal Maturity and Judgment
Knives and other carving tools are not toys—they can be
dangerous if not used properly. Discuss with your parent
or guardian when and where you may carve at home.
Owning or handling a knife
comes with certain responsibilities.
Never bring a knife or carving tools
to school without permission.
In most cases, this is illegal.
Horseplay is not funny, either.
Engaging in horseplay will cause
you to lose the privilege of using
knives until you are more mature.
In addition, never throw carving
tools and other knives. Not only
is this hard on the tools, but more
importantly you could injure
others or damage property.
You also should exercise good
judgment while at the carving table. Too much visiting
while you are carving can be distracting. If you need to
take a break, stop and move away from the carving area
and continue your visiting in another place so you don’t
disturb other carvers. Also, remember that accidents are
more likely to occur when you are tired. If you are tired, or
if you are losing attention and are not alert, stop and rest.
Caring for Your Tools
Sharp is safe; dull is dangerous. There is no more
important wood-carving safety rule than this, for safety
is the result of using sharp tools and common sense.
This applies whether you are talking about a pocketknife,
gouge, or ax. Any dull cutting edge will skid off a piece of
wood, but it will have no difficulty at all digging into your
flesh. Keeping knives sharp is efficient, because the time
you spend sharpening will easily save time by allowing
you to cut faster and more accurately, as well as safely.


WOOD CARVING 9
.Carving Safely
Proper care of tools and knives requires a few basic
maintenance steps:
• Remember that tools are not toys and should not be
treated as such.
• Keep tools sharp and free from rust and dirt.
• Always store tools in a safe place and away
from children.
• Never use a knife as a screwdriver or as a lever to pry
something open.
If you are old enough to use power tools, visit with a
parent, guardian or shop teacher about proper use and
safety procedures. When using any tools, wear safety
glasses to protect your eyes and a dust mask to keep from
inhaling sawdust, especially if cutting out multiple pieces.
Controlling Your Work Environment
Just as important as maintaining the integrity of the tools
is keeping the work area conducive to wood carving. An
ideal carving station includes a safety table, an adequate
light source, and a sturdy chair. Covering the table with
plastic, cloth, or heavy paper can protect its surface. A
plastic mat or bench hook can provide extra control and
safety. Keep a clean work surface so debris and tools
don’t get in your way.
When choosing a place to locate a carving table, pick
one that has enough space so that no one is in danger of
bumping you. If you have difficulty seeing the details in
the carving, your light source may not be good enough.
Get more light or move the carving area.
Remember:
Sharp is safe;
dull is dangerous.


10 WOOD CARVING
Carving Safely.
Equip your carving station with a clamp or bench
hook to use for control when carving smaller or odd-
shaped projects. Use a clamp to secure wood if you are
cutting out your project by hand with a coping saw. As
you carve, keeping your elbows on the table will provide
more control so you will be less likely to get cut.
Handling Knives
Proper knife handling is important for safety. Follow
these guidelines whenever you handle any carving tool:
• Do not pass a knife across other people when sitting at
a table. Someone can jostle the knife from your hands,
and it could land in your lap or another Scout’s lap.
• When you set down a knife, turn the sharp edge to the
side so no one will put a hand on the sharp edge.
• Always carve at a table—never in your lap. Carving
in your lap poses physical danger if your knife slips
or the wood cracks and your tool continues in the
direction that you started it.
• Never carve near your face. If someone accidentally
bumps into you, you could be seriously injured.
This photo shows the proper way to pass a knife to your neighbor.


WOOD CARVING 11
.Carving Safely
• Avoid taking long strokes as you carve. Taking small,
well-placed carving strokes gives you more security
and control. Using long strokes makes carving more
dangerous and may mess up your project. Carefully
place each stroke so that every cut contributes to the
desired look of the piece.
• Never “muscle” a project when carving. If you find
yourself working hard to get a knife to cut through
wood, you are either trying to cut off too much wood
or the knife blade is dull. Trying to force the knife
could result in injury if the knife slips. Also, never
hammer the top of a knife to make a cut.
• Be sure to close the knife carefully when you are
finished carving, as shown here.
1 2
3 4


12 WOOD CARVING
Carving Safely.
Making the Right Choices
You have several decisions to make before beginning
a project. After you decide what your finished work
will be, you must choose the appropriate type of wood,
considering the desired qualities such as color, hardness,
and grain.
When selecting a project to carve, don’t try to carve
a project that exceeds your ability. Start with the simple
objects until your technique is good.
Safety Checklist for Carving*
Sit down with your parent or guardian and review
this checklist to help make safety rules at home.
1. Personal Maturity and Judgment
■■ Knives and other carving tools are not toys
and should never be thrown.
■■ At home, carve only with your parent or
guardian’s approval.
■■ Carve only when you can focus on your work
and are alert, and limit visiting while carving.
■■ Never bring a knife to school without
permission.
■■ Never engage in horseplay around knives.
2. Caring for Your Tools
■■ Keep your tools and knives sharp and free
from rust and dirt.
■■ If you are old enough to use power tools,
make sure you understand how to use
them properly.
■■ Wear protective gear such as safety glasses
and, when appropriate, a dust mask.


WOOD CARVING 13
.Carving Safely
■■ Store tools in a safe place and away
from children.
■■ Never use a knife to pry something open.
3. Controlling the Work Environment
■■ Use a clamp or bench hook for better control
when carving small or oddly shaped objects;
use a plastic mat or bench hook for extra
control and safety.
■■ Use a clamp to hold down wood when
using a coping saw.
■■ Use a safety table with a sturdy chair and
adequate lighting.
■■ Cover the table to protect its surface; keep
adequate space around you with no one
else close enough to bump you.
■■ Keep your elbows on the table for more
control so you will be less likely to get cut.
4. Handling Knives
■■ Never pass a knife across other people
at the table.
■■ Never carve in your lap or near your face.
■■ Take small, well-placed carving strokes that
give you more control over your work.
■■ Never “muscle” a project when carving.
■■ Always make sure your knife is sharp.
Dull knives are dangerous knives.
■■ Never hammer the top of a knife to make a cut.
5. Making the Right Choices
■■ Choose the right wood for the project.
■■ Start with simple projects.
■■ When laying out projects, have plenty of
space for cutting them out.


14 WOOD CARVING
Carving Safely.
First Aid
Prevention is the best way to avoid cuts, nicks, and
other injuries. Use the preventive measures discussed
in the Safety Checklist for Carving and in the Scouts BSA
Handbook for Boys and Scouts BSA Handbook for Girls,
and you should have a safe and enjoyable experience
with wood carving.
However, as a Scout working with wood and knives,
you should be prepared in the event of a cut or perhaps
a splinter. If you are injured, stay calm and let the adult
in charge know what has happened.
Treating Minor Cuts
Sometimes accidents happen even when all safety
precautions are taken. For a serious cut or gash, seek
medical help immediately. For minor cuts and scrapes,
follow these first aid steps:
Step 1—Stop the bleeding by applying pressure with
a clean, absorbent cloth; if cloth is unavailable, use
your fingers.
Step 2—If the blood soaks through, apply a second ban-
dage on top. Do not take off the first bandage because
that will disturb the clotting that has already taken place.
Step 3—If bleeding still does not stop, raise the wound
above the victim’s heart level.


WOOD CARVING 15
.Carving Safely
Step 4—Once the bleeding has stopped, clean the
wound gently with soap and water, or just water.
It is very important to remove all debris and dirt.
Step 5—Apply an antibiotic ointment, and cover with a
clean bandage. Remember, some people are allergic
to these ointments, so contact your doctor if you have
any doubts.
Removing Splinters
You can usually remove a splinter easily
with tweezers and a steady hand. If the
thought makes you uncomfortable, ask
an adult for help. Remember to wash the
area with soap and water both before and
after removing the splinter.
Step 1—Sterilize a needle or tweezers by passing the
end over a flame. Let the needle cool before using it.
Step 2—If the splinter is sticking out from the skin, grasp
the protruding end and pull it out at the same angle that it
entered. If it is just under the skin, gently loosen the skin
around the splinter with the sterile needle and remove it
with tweezers. You can also try using ordinary transparent
tape to gently remove the splinter.
Step 3—If a splinter is close to the surface and cannot
be removed gently with tweezers, try rubbing a pum-
ice stone along the direction of the splinter. If this fails,
speak with an adult. You may need to see a doctor to
prevent infection.
Prevention goes hand in hand with mitigation, which
means “to lessen in force or intensity” and “to make
less severe.” By taking precautions to manage risk
and the possibility of injury, you can be prepared to
anticipate, help prevent, mitigate, and respond to just
about any incident that might happen during wood
carving activities.





WOOD CARVING 17
.Know Your Woods
Know Your Woods
Picking the right wood can greatly enhance the look of
a project. Most Scouts will not have the choice of many
woods. The local lumber store usually carries a variety of
woods for buildings and a few other types for hobbyists or
furniture makers. If you must use something from the lum-
beryard, pick the softest piece with the least grain. Look
for a straight grain with little discoloration and few knots.
Composition
Most wood comes from the stem, or trunk, of a tree. The
stem supports the crown, or limbs and leaves, and must be
very strong. It also must be elastic to withstand wind pres-
sure. The stem carries nutrients from the roots to the leaves,
which make food for the tree and carry it back to the roots.
The ideal structure for this complex system would
be a series of layers surrounding a tough, flexible, solid
core. A tree trunk is like that. To grow, the tree adds new
layers around the old ones each year from the inside,
beneath the protective bark. It forms what are known as
annual rings, visible in a cross-section of a tree trunk—
for instance, a stump or the end of a plank. As growth
begins in early spring, the new cells are large and soft,
but as the summer gets hotter and drier, the new cells
get smaller, harder, and closer together.


18 WOOD CARVING
Know Your Woods.
Summerwood (the part of the annual ring that develops
late in the growing season) is harder and less porous
than springwood. Summerwood can be distinguished
from springwood because it tends to be much darker.
However, in birch, maple, gum, and some pine woods,
the distinction is hard to see.
The thickness of the annual ring depends on how
much the tree grew during the year. The appearance and
hardness of the wood depends on the individual tree’s
growing conditions as well as on the characteristics of
that kind of tree.
Seasoning
Another quality of wood that directly affects your work is
dryness. Seasoning wood gives it more stability. If wood
is seasoned, you can be more certain that it will maintain
its shape after it is carved and that it will not split or warp.
Most lumber is air-dried; that is, after it has been cut
into planks or timbers, it is left out to dry for as long as
several years. Much of the moisture in the wood evapo-
rates quickly. This type of drying is less desirable because
it leaves the lumber still able to absorb moisture from the
air and therefore prone to warping.
The preferred method of seasoning is kiln drying.
In kiln drying, most of the sap and water is forced out of
the lumber by heating the wood in an oven. This seems
to shrink the fibers so that they do not absorb the air’s
moisture as readily; thus, the wood is not liable to warp
or split. Kiln-dried wood is expensive but, for many uses,
worth the cost.


WOOD CARVING 19
.Know Your Woods
Hardwood or Softwood?
The terms “hardwood” and “softwood” have little to do
with hardness. In fact, some softwoods are much harder
than some hardwoods. Hardwood is a forester’s term for
a tree with broad leaves that fall each year. Softwoods
are trees that have narrow leaves or needles and bear
seed cones. The many differences between hardwoods
and softwoods are of relatively little importance to the
wood-carver.
Favorite Carving Woods
As you may expect, different
types of woods are valuable
for the different qualities they
exhibit in a finished piece. You
may choose a wood for its color,
grain, strength, texture, or ease of
carving, or for a combination of many
of its qualities.
White Pine
Pine ranges in color from creamy white
to yellow, tan, or pink, with occasional
blue stain imperfections. There is almost
no figure to the grain no matter how it is
cut, and there is only a slight difference between spring-
wood and summerwood. Pine usually is straight-grained
and even-textured. Small details might chip off if worked
with dull tools.
Grain of softwoodGrain of hardwood


Know Your Woods.
For whittling and some carving projects, eastern
white pine is best. For the small quantity needed, even
the best grades will be relatively inexpensive. You might
even find just the piece you need between the knots in
the less costly grades.
However, the choicest pieces of white pine might
not be available. You may have to settle for sugar pine,
which is nearly as good as the eastern white pine. More
alternative choices include ponderosa pine and Idaho
white pine.
Butternut
Butternut is yellowish and soft. Wood-carvers who use
this wood must be careful not to overcut.
Oak
American white oak and red oak may be used for carv-
ing. White oak is strong, very hard, and light in color,
and it has a fairly close grain. Red oak is softer, darker in
color, and more likely to splinter. Because of its hardness,
however, oak is not the best choice for the beginner.
Red oak
20 WOOD CARVING


WOOD CARVING 21
.Know Your Woods
Yellow Poplar (Tulip Tree)
Sometimes called whitewood, poplar is light, fine-textured,
and easy to work. The sapwood is white and thick, but the
heartwood can be yellow, green, olive, or brown—often
with purple, blue, or black streaks. Its annual rings are dis-
tinct. The cucumber tree, actually a magnolia, is also
called yellow poplar and has similar characteristics.
Basswood (Linden)
Basswood is a hardwood but is about as soft and work-
able as white pine. Because it is straight-grained and
even-textured, basswood makes an excellent wood for
whittlers and beginning carvers. Basswood has no pro-
nounced grain or color variations. It has a yellowish,
medium-light color.
Mahogany
A hardwood, mahogany is a noble wood for carvers
because of its beautiful color, its texture and grain, and
its ability to take a fine polish. Honduran and Cuban
mahoganies are best but are hard to get. Santo Domingo
mahogany is good, but the Mexican, Philippine, and
African varieties are not too suitable for carving.
Mahogany
.Know Your Woods


22 WOOD CARVING
Know Your Woods.
Walnut
American or black walnut is similar to mahogany but
usually is a yellowish brown color rather than red.
A fine carving wood, walnut is often used for gun
stocks, which are wood sculptures in themselves and
often ornamented with delicate carvings. Walnut is quite
hard, but not enough to dull tools too quickly. Walnut
usually has an interesting surface pattern and is effective
with a high polish.
Black Cherry
Black and wild cherry are widely available in the eastern
United States, often as weed trees. You might be able to
get bolts of this wood from a farm woodlot. Both types
of cherry are available commercially, but they might be
hard to find.
Cherry wood ranges from a light to dark reddish
brown. The sapwood is very light but also rather narrow.
A rare and beautiful native cabinet wood, cherry is easy
to carve, having an even texture and close grain. There is
enough difference between the summerwood and spring-
wood to show a figure, but not enough to make a big dif-
ference. Cherry must be seasoned slowly to avoid splitting.
American walnut Black cherry


WOOD CARVING 23
.Know Your Woods
Sweetgum
The durable, even-textured heartwood of the sweetgum
tree is known as red gum. Occasional dark streaks make
it resemble a figured walnut. Sweetgum lacks very dis-
tinct annual rings, but its radial lines show up well in
quarter-sawed stock. This feature and the red color have
led some to call it “American mahogany.” Sweetgum is
easy to work and takes a wide variety of finishes. It is
widely used for furniture.
Choosing a Type of Wood
As a wood carver, you will care about how easily an
object can be carved, its appearance, and whether it
will stand up under use. Many other factors play a role
in your choice of wood. When choosing a type of wood
for a project, ask yourself the following questions:
1. How much will I spend on the project? The monetary
restraints will help you determine the type of wood
and finish.
2. Do I want to paint or stain the project? If you
chose walnut, for example, you would choose to
stain the wood to show off the grain and color of
the natural walnut.
3. Has the wood been seasoned? It is important
to use wood that has been seasoned because
it is more stable and less likely to warp.
4. Will I use saws to cut out my project, or will
I use blanks or roughouts? Scouts may use
blanks or roughouts that have already been
sawn out for carving so that they do not have to cut
out the project, which can be much safer than using
hand saws or power saws. Many wood-carvers use
blanks or roughouts because they have no way to cut
out their project and the wood is usually of a better
quality than is found in lumberyards. (Most blanks
are of basswood, sugar pine, or butternut hickory.)


24 WOOD CARVING
Know Your Woods.
You may think a blank is expensive, but by
the time you go to the lumberyard, buy lumber by
the board foot, and get someone to cut out or help
you cut out your project, you may have a lot more
invested than you think. Whenever possible, a Scout
should find out the type wood in the blank and why
it was laid out and cut the way it was. Consider the
direction of the grain, for instance.
If you decide to cut out your project, keep this
in mind: Lay out projects so they are not so close
together they are difficult to saw out. Also, a good
layout on your block of wood may save you wood so
you could have enough left for a second project.
5. How dense is the wood? The more dense wood is,
the heavier it is. Oak, walnut, maple, and ash are
heavy woods. These woods are beautiful for the
right project but carving them is very hard on tools.
These woods are usually found in furniture or
projects turned on a lathe. They can be carved, but
the wood carver should be prepared to resharpen
the tools often.
6. Is the wood winter-cut? The better carving woods are
usually winter-cut because trees don’t have as much
sap in the winter. When wood is put in a drying kiln,
any sap in the wood becomes a hard yellow rosin
that is very difficult to put a knife through. Because
winter-cut wood has less sap, it will be easier to carve.
7. Is the board fairly straight? You can look down the
edge of the wood to see if the board is fairly straight
or if it is warped. If you are using small pieces, this
may not be important. If the board is not straight,
it could later twist, ruining the project with cracks
and splits.


WOOD CARVING 25
.Know Your Woods
8. Are the annual rings regularly spaced and even?
If you look at the cross-cut end of a piece of wood,
you may see one of two things: First, the wood may
have two sets of curves facing opposite directions.
Second, you may see a large space between the
annual rings where the cell development, called
pith, could be weak. When you try to carve
pith, it will not hold up to the pressure you are
using and that area may actually crush. Either of
these conditions can cause difficulty in carving.
9. What woods are available in my area? You may
have to use a lower-quality wood because that’s
what is available.
10. What if I want to get the wood for my project from
a tree? Use wood that has already been cut or that
has fallen naturally from the tree, such as after a
windy thunderstorm. If everyone cut down trees
for their projects, we could not enjoy the beauty
of the outdoors.
11. Am I making a walking stick? When picking a
limb or stick to carve a walking stick, you would
be smart to let it dry out—season—for four to six
months. This will help reduce cracking. If the
walking stick has many knots in it where limbs
once protruded, this is usually where cracking
might occur. Remember that it may be fun to
have the walking stick now to use, but if you let
it dry you are more likely to have a beauty for
years to come.
If you need to make one now, you may
want to leave 6 inches or more on the top
and bottom of the walking stick so if it
cracks while drying, you could cut the
extra length off.


Know Your Tools
Before beginning to work with wood, you
should know the basic types of tools and
how to keep them in top condition,
including how to keep knives sharp. You
also should pay special attention to creat-
ing a work area that will keep you safe
and help you concentrate. The first step in
learning about tools is picking a pocket-
knife that is right for you.
Pocketknives
There are many types of pocketknives. For
carving, your best bet is the whittler’s
knife, which has three blades. The largest
blade is an all-purpose blade, often called
a master blade. The small blade with
the flat carving edge is called a coping
blade. This narrow blade is used to cut
away the outside or profile and for carving
small inside cuts such as the inside of a
neckerchief slide back (slider). The other
small blade is usually a pen blade, which
comes to a point and is good for carving
small details. Many use this blade for most
of their carving.
The stockman’s knife is somewhat
similar to a whittler’s knife. In addition
to the master blade, there is a flat blade
called a sheepsfoot blade. It is wider and
is very good for removing wood from the


WOOD CARVING 27
.Know Your Tools
PEN BLADE
MASTER BLADE
SHEEPSFOOT BLADE
Some whittler’s
knives have two
pen blades for the
smaller blades.
outside of your carving. The other blade is usually a spey
blade. Because of its shape, it will not make detail cuts like
a pen blade. It can be used to make cuts in places that may
be awkward to reach with other blades.
The congress knife usually has a combination of two
to four blades. A four-blade congress knife can be an excel-
lent choice for carving. It usually has two large blades for
general use, plus two smaller blades. For carving, having
one small coping blade and one small pen blade is ideal.
Do more delicate finishing on curved or other
surfaces with a small wood-carver’s knife. This tool should
be used only when the carving has been finished as
much as possible with the chisel. Depending on the effect
desired, either the whole or the parts of a finished carving
are smoothed first with medium, then with fine, sandpaper.
Delicate details should not be sanded at all.
Before carving a project, practice using tools on a piece
of waste wood or on the
backside of the project. You
can use a cut stop, score the
line, then carve back to the line
with the gouge. This will help
you practice making pieces of
wood fall out in the places that
you desire.
The pocketknife is probably the most versatile tool
you will use for carving. If possible, you should have
a knife with three or four blades that should only be
used for wood carving. Choose a good quality knife
with the blades you want. If properly cared for, it will
last many years.


28 WOOD CARVING
Know Your Tools.
Other Carving Tools
You probably will want to use more tools than a pocket-
knife to complete a wood-carving project, but don’t buy
a set of carving tools with more than five tools. You may
never use all of them. You might want to start with a
straight carving knife, any V-tool, and a straight gouge.
You can buy more tools as you need them.
Carving tools
come in two types:
straight-handled
and palm tools.
Many new carvers
find palm tools
easy to grasp and
use. Carving tools
also come in
different cutting
edges, like
V-tools and
gouges.
Straight carving knives
Straight gouge, 1
⁄4-inch V-tool, 1
⁄4-inch
Although a pocketknife is an excellent portable tool,
you may sometimes need a knife that can give you
more flexibility with carving. Small cuts can often be
done better with a detailing knife. Some special cuts
may require a craft knife, which holds various special
shaped blades. For long carving sessions, you may
find that a bench carving knife is more comfortable
than a pocketknife. Using a chip carving knife makes
chip carving easier.


WOOD CARVING 29
.Know Your Tools
Coping saw good
for cutting angles
and curves
Thumb guard (or quilter’s thumb), available
at most sewing stores (Most carving supply
stores have wood-carver’s safety gloves.)
Craft knives Whittler’s knives with
carving blade
Chip carving knives
Back saw for
cutting wood in
straight cuts only


30 WOOD CARVING
Know Your Tools.
If you intend to
use a craft knife,
it is recommended
that you purchase
a storage box and
a special blade-
sharpening device
for it. Both items
are well worth
the investment.
Also consider other tools you may use with your
project, such as rulers, pencils, clamps, vises, bench
hooks, and rubber mats. Experience will teach you how
useful these items can be.
A carver also needs:
• A wooden mallet
• A flat wood file
• Medium and fine sandpaper
• Sharpening stones
• Slips for sharpening chisels and fine tools
The mallet is used when more force is needed on
the chisel than can be applied by hand. The flat wood
file is used to remove irregularities and departures from
the correct outline on workpieces.
Arranging the Work Space
It’s very important that you use a steady table and chair
and be sure you have a good light source so you can see
what you are doing. The table or workbench should be
away from distractions so you can concentrate.
Bench hook, for stabilityVises or clamps for safety, to keep
your project in place


WOOD CARVING 31
.Know Your Tools
Care of Tools
While you don’t need your own tools to earn this merit
badge, you should have a general knowledge of caring
for and sharpening the tools you use. Most knives must
be sharpened before use, and doing a good job could
take a couple of hours.
Check tools for dirt and rust on a regular basis. A
pocketknife that you carry in your pocket may also pick
up lint. Use a light coat of honing oil and let it set for
awhile. Then wipe off the excess oil before using.
Keep tools in the best possible condition by making
sure they are dry. Wipe off fingerprint marks and mois-
ture with a dry cloth. Apply a couple of drops of oil to
the blades and joints of a knife. Keep chisels, gouges,
and other tools wrapped in a soft cloth so they do
not damage each other while stored.
When Is a Tool Sharp?
Before sharpening knives and tools, check
first to see if they need sharpening. Stand
facing the sun or any strong source of
light, holding the knife or tool with the
cutting edge upward. Hold the tool in
front of your body at about chest height.
Any reflection from the light on the cutting
edge of the tool will indicate a dull spot that
requires sharpening.
The safest way to test the sharpness of an edge is
to use it on a piece of wood that is similar to the wood in
the project you will be carving. Practice some simple cuts
on a block of wood. This should tell you whether the
knife needs to be sharpened.
Most knives do not come presharpened for wood
carving. Blades usually come with an all-purpose edge
since the manufacturer does not know how you will use
the knife. Some knives may have a utility edge, which
lasts longer, especially if you are using it on rope or the
bark of a tree limb. Both of these are hard on a very
sharp knife.


32 WOOD CARVING
Know Your Tools.
The Carving Edge
Your knife will need a carving edge. Putting a carving
edge or wire edge on a knife takes away some of the
extra metal from the blade. This will make it thinner
(and easier) for passing through your wood.
To achieve a carving edge on your knife,
you will need a sharpening stone kit, which
most discount stores and sporting goods
stores sell. Some sharpening stone
kits come with a large stone and a
small stone. The large stone is used
to get the blade shaped the way you
want it—in this case, a carving edge.
Then it is time to use the smaller stone,
which is the honing stone.
Sharpening Stones
It is important to learn how to use any sharpening stone
the right way. There are a number of sharpening stones
on the market:
• Silicon carbide, or crystolon: Blue-black in color,
available in coarse, medium, and fine grits. Also avail-
able in sheet abrasives. Used with oil.
• Aluminum oxide, or India: Usually reddish-brown,
but can be gray or white. Available in coarse, medium,
and fine grits. Synthetic sapphires are aluminum oxide.
Used with oil.
• Arkansas, or novaculite: A natural stone (which
can be almost pure silicon) ranging in color from
white to black, and mined in Arkansas. The stone’s
hardness does not depend on color. Available in
coarse, medium, and fine grits. Most carvers use
oil on this stone, but some prefer water.
• Ouachita: Similar to Arkansas but coarser. Mined
near the Ouachita River in Arkansas. Used with water.
Sometimes called “Washita.”
• Japanese water stones: Can be either natural or
synthetic. Available in grits from coarse to very fine.


WOOD CARVING 33
.Know Your Tools
The fine polishing stones, called shiage toishi, contain
a polishing compound. Stones must be soaked in
water five to 10 minutes before use.
• Nagura: Synthetic stone from Japan. Nagura is rubbed
in a circular motion over a wet stone to reduce the
abrasive to a paste consistency, which saves time
and encourages even wear on the stone.
• Ceramic: Synthetic, from aluminum oxide. Used dry,
but must be washed often with water, a dish pad, and
a household cleaner. This new stone is highly praised
by wood carvers.
• Diamond: Fine monocrystalline diamond particles are
permanently fixed to a flat plastic base in a screen pat-
tern. Water is used as a lubricating wash. This stone is
cleaned with soap and water. You can use a diamond
stone to flatten worn Arkansas and Japanese stones.
HONING OIL
Using honing oil helps preserve the original quality
of the stones by filling their surface pores and
washing away metal particles during the sharpen-
ing process. Some wood-carvers use either oil or
water on Arkansas and Ouachita stones.
Honing oil can be made using a mixture of
half 30-weight oil and half kerosene. Do not use
an oil-impacted stone. These are for use with
larger tools such as axes and carpenter’s chisels,
not for fine wood-carving tools.
Care of Stones
New stones that are going to be used with oil should first
be lightly oiled, wrapped in aluminum foil, and stored
until the stone is completely saturated. Storage boxes
are essential to keep the stones from drying and free
from dust and dirt. Stones can be resurfaced with a dia-
mond stone or, if they are not too badly worn, by rub-
bing them over emery cloth or silicon carbide paper.
Carborundum powder spread on a piece of plate glass or
cast iron also works well. Use water as a lubricating
wash during this process.


34 WOOD CARVING
Know Your Tools.
Never use an
electric grindstone
on carving tools.
The speed of the
wheel can burn
up the carbon in
the steel, making
the tool nearly
worthless. If you
are using a buffing
wheel or leather
wheel, the same
thing can happen.
Also, pushing a
tool into the wheel
can actually
dull a tool.
Always use oil or water on stone. Most stones
require oil, but always follow the manufacturer’s instruc-
tions. Lubricating a stone with water or oil will help dis-
sipate heat on the blade from friction while you sharpen.
It will also help prevent metal debris from embedding in
the surface of the sharpening stone.
After you have finished sharpening, clean the stone
by lightly wiping off the excess oil. Do not use pressure,
since the oil has picked up some of the metal filings. You
don’t want to fill the pores on the surface of the stone.
It’s much safer to put the stone on the table instead
of in your hands because if your blade goes past the end
of the stone, your fingers may get in the way of the edge,
resulting in cuts. For increased safety, you can make a
cradle to hold your stone. Securing your cradle with a
clamp or laying it on a rubberized shelf liner will keep
it from sliding around.
Keeping little or no angle between your knife and the
stone that is being used, move the blade, starting closest
to the handle. The knife is always going down the stone
like you were trying to carve or cut it. After using the
coarse or medium stone, move to a finer stone.


WOOD CARVING 35
.Know Your Tools
Slipsticks and Leather Strops
A slipstick can be used in the same way as a
sharpening stone. Start by using paint mixing
sticks that are new and flat, or any flat stick of
a similar size. Glue a piece of rubber (such as
from an inner tube) across the top. Then glue
a medium-grade emery paper to one stick
and a finer emery paper to another. For hon-
ing, attach a piece of leather to the slipstick;
this will give your blade a razor-sharp edge.
Remember, you need to strap a slipstick just
as you do when using sharpening stones.
Leather strops are made
the same as slipsticks, but on
a piece of hardwood. A strop
made with leather on both sides
will enable various honing grits
to be used. Silicon carbide in 240
and 600 grit, with a little oil, is
used to charge the leather. Some
experts prefer chromium oxide
as a honing compound. You
might wish to make a stick cov-
ered with smooth hard leather,
dressed with real soap. Do not
allow your fingers to touch the
surfaces of the strops, which
contain metal particles and
stropping compound.
The most important part of sharpening takes place
when the knife is almost done. The edge will look sharp,
but you will see small burrs on the opposite side of which-
ever side was on the stone last. Strap the knife on a slip-
stick or a leather strop. You must pull the knife against
the strop, away from the cutting edge. This will take off
any burrs that were left from the stones.





WOOD CARVING 37
.Basic Cuts
Basic Cuts
In wood carving, there are five cuts
that you are most likely to use:
• Paring cut
• Basic cut
• Stop cut
• Score line
• V-cut
When practicing making these cuts, remember
to keep your elbows on the table as much as possible.
This keeps you from taking long, dangerous strokes.
Take your time and make short, shallow cuts.
Paring Cut
Take very small cuts toward you. This enables you to get
into spaces that another stroke cannot. (Note the thumb
guard the Scout is wearing for protection.)


38 WOOD CARVING
Basic Cuts.
Basic Cut
This cut is also known as the push cut. This cut is away
from you, taking small pieces of wood. By placing the
opposite thumb on the back of the blade, you are
creating a lever and making it easier to remove the
wood from your project.
Stop Cut
The stop cut helps prevent over-
cutting by giving you a place to
end the cut. The stop cut is usu-
ally 90 degrees from the main
cut. You can cut back to the stop
cut using knives or gouges. The
V-cut is an excellent example of
how to use a stop cut.
Score Line
A score line is a type of stop cut
that is often used with relief
carving. The outline is scored
and the background is relieved
using either a knife or gouge.


WOOD CARVING 39
.Basic Cuts
V-Cut
You can make a V-cut either with a knife or with a
V-tool. To use a knife, you will make three cuts:
1. Hold the knife straight up and down and make a
stop cut.
2. Put the knife in a pencil grip at a similar angle you
would use to write. A right-handed person, for exam-
ple, would do this on the right of the first cut. Remove
wood in a wedge shape down to the original cut.
3. When possible, turn the wood around to make a
similar cut on the other side. Or, repeat the cut on
the left side.
Using a V-tool involves fewer steps:
1. Make a little stop cut at the place where you want the
V-cut to end.
2. Guide the tool down to the stop cut, making the V-cut.
1
2
3





WOOD CARVING 41
.Carving in the Round
Carving in the Round
Making a three-dimensional carving is known as carving
in the round. These carvings include neckerchief slides,
small statues, and walking sticks. A slide does not have
to be carved on the back side.
Considerations When Choosing a Project
You may already know what you want to carve. But if
you do not, this section describes a few projects that you
might like to try.
Also, keep your project small; this will help keep
the cost low.
Before Beginning a Project
Once you have a project in mind, you may want to
first practice on a piece of scrap wood. If you are a real
beginner, you may get a good plastic picnic knife and
practice your cuts or designs on an apple. This can be
fun because the apple will shrink when it dries and may
look interesting the next day. It is very safe, because the
tools will not have to be very sharp.
The best projects are planned and thought through
before carving begins. Look at parts of the project to
see what is closer to you and what’s farther away. If you
are doing a side view, features such as a hat and an ear
would be closer, while a nose would be farther back.
Many wood-carvers will draw out on paper and some-
times in perspective, to get a picture in their mind
before taking a knife to their project.
Precut blanks
are a convenient
option. But make
sure you pick out
something that
matches your
ability and is not
just something
that looks cool.
For instance,
it may take you
years to develop
enough skill to
carve faces.


42 WOOD CARVING
Carving in the Round.
All slides need a
back. Cut a small
piece of plastic
plumbing pipe
with a 5
⁄8 -inch to
3
⁄4 -inch inside
hole. Glue this to
the back of the
slide using panel
construction
adhesive. Or, take
a small piece of
wood, drilling
a hole 5
⁄8 inch to
3
⁄4 inch. After the
glue dries, it may
be easier to hold
onto when you
paint your slide.
Before cutting the project, be sure to lay it out using
the grain to make it strong. For example, if your project
were a carving of a dog, you would lay out your design
so that the grain follows the same direction as a leg.
Before you start your first in-the-round project,
review the following for safety and better results:
• Draw the design as carefully and accurately as pos-
sible. Many young carvers will pick projects much too
hard for a beginner. The more complicated the draw-
ing on the slide, the more difficult it usually is to carve.
• Check that all tools needed for the project are sharp
and ready to use.
• Review the five types of cuts used in wood carving.
• Check the work area for lighting, clamps, and vises
as needed. Make sure you have a sturdy work table.
You can ask for help from your counselor, Scout leader,
or parent or guardian.
Finishing a Wood Carving Project
Most of the time, a carver does not sand a project. The
carver will want it to look like the hand-carved project it
is, not like a piece of store-bought plastic.
After carving the project, you may want to paint or
stain it. It is not a requirement of this merit badge to do
so. However, it will make a carving last many more years,
and a good paint job can make it look better. Don’t use too
many colors, because it can overwhelm the workmanship.
You can make small changes from an original design
that will make it appear different. Examples would be
such things as changing the eyes, using different hats,
and adding features such as a mustache on a figure.
Any carving project can be picked apart and planned
so you can do it step-by-step. Think about how you
would carve it. This will make a project easier to do.
Start off slowly, and have fun carving.


WOOD CARVING 43
.Carving in the Round
Painting Your Carving
A nice paint job can bring life to your finished project and can help the
carving last many years. As with the carving itself, planning is very
important when painting your project. Here are a few tips.
• Before you pick up a brush, ensure that your carving has clean cuts
between areas that will be different colors.
• To help bring out vivid colors and help the paint adhere better, start
with a coat of white gesso primer.
• Choose acrylic water-based paints, which dry quickly,
and apply thin coats.
• Brace your arms on the table so you paint with a
steady hand.
• Seal and protect the piece with a coat of clear varnish,
lacquer, or polyurethane, and let it dry overnight.
See the Art merit badge pamphlet for more on color
selection and technique.
First Project: Practice Stick
This project is a practice stick that can help you learn
how to use a knife.
Step 1—Get a piece of wood, 3
⁄4-by-3
⁄4-inch and
6 inches long.
Step 2—Come down the side of the stick 3
⁄4 inch, mak-
ing a box on all four sides. Repeat this three to four times,
creating 3
⁄4-inch squares down the stick. This will leave
you a portion of the stick to hold onto.
Step 3—In the top box, draw the same design on all four
sides of the stick. Pick a new shape and repeat this in
the next square down, then all around the stick. Repeat
again on the third set of drawn squares. (Shapes such
as diamond, square, house, and other geometric designs
work well.)
Step 4—Carve each individual box all the way around
before going to the next box. This repetition will give you
practice doing similar cuts over and over again.
Remember: The
neater the layout,
the easier it is to
carve the project.


44 WOOD CARVING
Carving in the Round.
Projects to Try*
You may choose projects that are not in this pamphlet.
But if you like, you may use one of these.
The Ax Neckerchief Slide©
Step 1—Draw the ax onto a block of wood 5 inches with
the grain and 2 3
⁄8 inches across the grain. Use basswood
if possible.
Step 2—Cut or carve the outside shape of the ax.
Score the line between the handle and the head of the
ax. Draw a line on the side of the handle and carve the
entire handle down to the line without rounding the
edge at this time.
Step 3—After carving the handle flat along the entire
front view, round off the two front edges of the ax handle.
If the knife blade starts taking off more and more wood,
stop and change the direction you are carving. You’re prob-
ably hitting a grain change in the wood, or you’re going
into the wood at too much of an angle. Flatten the knife
blade angle and take small, deliberate cuts.
You may be tempted to put a sharp edge on the ax,
but it only has to be tapered. You can make it look like a
sharp ax when you paint it.
Step 4—Glue on the slide back. Let the glue dry, and
then paint. The handle has been left natural. Use medium
gray (not silver) for most of the head. Add white to
medium gray and paint in the sharpened area.
* The projects in this section are the property of Jeff Springer,
Topeka, Kansas, and are reproduced here with his permission.
1
2 3 4


.Carving in the Round
The Eagle Neckerchief Slide©
Step 1—Transfer the eagle design onto a
block of wood 3 3
⁄8 inches with the grain and
2 1
⁄4 inches across the grain. Use basswood
if possible.
Step 2—Cut or carve out the outside profile
of the eagle.
Step 3—Score the line separating the beak and
forehead of the eagle. Then, carve back to your
score line, keeping the beak flat at this time.
Step 4—Score the line separating the upper and
lower parts off the beak. Carve on the lower part
of the beak so it is recessed from the top. Now,
you can round off and shape the top of the beak.
Step 5—Score the back part of the eagle head.
Carve back and use a stop cut to the line that
you have scored. Slightly round off the top and
bottom of this back portion of the eagle head,
making the top and bottom look like they go
around the neck of the eagle.
Step 6—Slightly carve the top and bottom and
edges on the middle portion of the eagle. To give
it a nicer look, carve a little off near where the
middle section meets the back part and the beak.
Step 7—Now, carve the details, including the eye
and air vent hole.
Step 8—Glue on slide back. Let the glue dry and
paint the slide. The eagle in the slide shown has a
yellow beak, white middle, and
brown end. The eye and
vent hole on the
beak are black.
Eagle
template
1
3
8
5
7
WOOD CARVING 45


46 WOOD CARVING
Carving in the Round.
Antelope Neckerchief Slide©
To carve an antelope slide, follow these directions,
which are similar to the eagle slide directions:
Step 1—Draw the design on a block of wood
(4 1
⁄4 -by-2 1
⁄4 inches).
Step 2—Cut or carve the outside profile of
the antelope.
Step 3—Score the line between the neck and jaw
bone so you can use it as a cut stop when you are
shaping the neck.
Step 4—Score a line below the ear and cut back to
it, shaping the back portion of the neck.
Step 5—Score a line above the ear and reduce
the antler.
Step 6—Using a combination of paring cut, basic
cut, and push cut, shape the antler, the front side
of the head, and the lower side of the head near
the neck. (Remember, the lower part of the head
will be slightly tapered into the nose.)
Step 7—To add details, score a line in the ear and
stop cut back to it, indicating a lower area in the
ear. Carve lines on the antler using V-cuts. Now,
score lines and shape the eye, then undercut the
mouth area. Take a little wood out of the nose area
for a nostril.
Step 8—Glue on slide back. Let the glue
dry and paint the slide. The slide as
pictured is clear stained and the
eye is painted black.
Antelope
template
1
2
8
5
7


WOOD CARVING 47
.Carving in the Round
Wizard or Saint Nick©
Use your imagination to give this little figure more
personality by changing a few details here and there.
By painting the figure in different color schemes, he
can resemble a wizard or jolly ole Saint Nick.
Step 1—Carefully draw the side view onto a piece of
wood 4 inches tall, 2 inches wide, and 15
⁄8 inch thick.
Then, draw the front view. Make sure you draw out
this project accurately.
You can change things on this little man,
such as having a foot stick out from his robe.
Or, you could make his beard longer by adding
a little on before cutting it out.
Step 2—Cut the front view first, saving both
pieces that you have cut away. Then, tape the
cut pieces back together to reform the block
as it was when you first started. After you
tape it, set it on the side with the side view
pencil lines showing, then cut out.
Pencil in a light center line on the front.
This will help you center the nose, hat, and any changes
you may have made from the project pictured. Use the
knife to shape the hat.
Step 3—Score in a pocket line on the front and
back of the arms, then cut back to your score lines.
This will make the arms pop out. Take a little off
the arm. This will make the sleeve look as if it is
going into the pocket. Repeat this on the other
side. Cut a little on the back inside of both arms.
At this time, you can rough out the hair on both
sides of the figure. (Don’t do individual hairs yet.)
Step 4—Cut around the nose. Leave it bigger
than you need it. You may like a rounder Saint
Nick with big, jolly cheeks and nose. You can
always take away more wood later. But once you
take the wood off, it may be too late to have jolly
cheeks and nose on this project. Take your time
and make very small, deliberate cuts.
1
2
3
4


48 WOOD CARVING
Carving in the Round.
Step 5—Rough in the mustache, lower
beard, and sideburns. Start shaping
the nose.
Step 6—Make small cuts near the
nose for the eyes in the figure. (See
“Carving Eyes.”)
Step 7—After carving Saint Nick’s eyes,
paint the figure. Take your time and do a
careful paint job. The Saint Nick pictured
has a red hat and robe. His face is light
pink with red added to the pink to give
him rosy cheeks. He has white hair.
Adding a splash
of color helps
bring the project
to life.
5
6
7


WOOD CARVING 49
.Carving in the Round
Carving Eyes
If you have practiced making V-cuts with the knife or a
V-tool, you are ready to carve an eye. Follow these steps:
Step 1—On both sides of the nose, cut a line across.
These lines should be a few degrees lower on the outside
edge. Take a second cut, carving from the top of where
the eye will start, down to the line. This will give you a
flat area on which to carve the eye later.
Step 2—Make the same cuts as you did in step 1, but
from the bottom of the eye. Cuts may be slightly smaller.
Step 3—On the outside edge of the wedge cuts you
made in steps 1 and 2, take a small gouge or knife and
remove about 1
⁄8 inch. (This is a good place to use a
small gouge on the outside of each eye.)
Step 4—On top of this gouge mark, cut three or four
tiny V-cuts. (This is on the outside of each eye to make
little squint lines.)
Step 5—Take a pencil and draw the top of the eyelid.
Do this for each eye. Deeply score the line that separates
the top and lower wedges of each eye. Now, on both
eyes, take a V-tool to cut an upside-down U that will
touch each end of the scored line. This represents the
upper part of the eyelid when closed.
Step 6—Carefully cut the line just above the eyelid
line. This line will become the eyebrows. It’s easy to
break this off if you push too hard. Take a little of the
wood away from above the eyebrow. Now, the eyebrows
appear to be raised on the forehead.
Step 7—Using a V-tool or a knife, make V-cuts just below
the center line you scored between the eye wedges earlier.
Step 8—Score a line just below and inside the upside-
down U shape you carved in step 5. At this time, lay
your knife as flat as you can and cut the corners out.
Step 9—Now, cut a little off between the two corners
of the eye and below the line you scored in step 8. This
gives you an eyeball. Repeat on the other side.
1
2
4
5
6
7
8
9
3


50 WOOD CARVING
Carving in the Round.
Walking Sticks
A walking stick can help when you are hiking over steep
hills and uneven trails. Try your hand at this example,
which features an eagle head as the hand grip.
Step 1—Looking down on the top end of the stick, turn
the stick so the square becomes a diamond shape. Draw
a straight line from the top of the diamond down to the
bottom. Then draw two other parallel lines, both 3
⁄16 inch
from each side of the center line.
Step 2—Keeping these lines vertical, make a small dot
9 inches down on one side edge of the stick. Repeat on
the opposite edge.
Step 3—Draw a line connecting the left dot with the top
of the left line you drew on the square. Then connect the
dot with the bottom of the line. Do the same on the right.
Step 4—Taper the stick by carefully removing these
outside corner wedges of wood from the dots forward.
This will give a fairly flat surface on both sides to help
you sketch the beak and head profile. Be sure to cut with
the grain, not against it.
1 2 3
3⁄16"
9"


WOOD CARVING 51
.Carving in the Round
5
6
7
Step 5—Draw the eagle
profile. Either sketch it on
paper and transfer it to the
flat surface of the wood, or
draw it directly on the wood.
To get the two eyes the same,
draw and cut one eye on an
index card. Use the card as a
template and trace it on both
sides of the head.
Step 6—Following the lines
of the pattern, carve away
wood from in front of the
forehead and from the top
and bottom of the beak.
Step 7—At the back of the
eagle’s head, cut away the
top and bottom edges of
the stick. This will form the
profile of the top feathers
and will give you a complete
silhouette of the
eagle’s head.


52 WOOD CARVING
Carving in the Round.
52 WOOD CARVING
Step 8—Carve away wood from the sides of the beak,
making it somewhat lower than the cheeks and slightly
tapered toward the end. Remove a little extra wood from
the sides of the bottom portion of the beak to make it
appear the top part is coming down over it. Now soften
the beak edges, rounding them out.
Step 9—Leaving the top and bottom edges of the head
area alone, shape and round the sides to form the front
part of the face, tapering it down to the beak.
Step 10—Score all the lines for feathers on one side
of the eagle. (To score, hold the knife in a pencil grip,
exerting force to make a cut 1
⁄8 inch in depth. When a
cut is made back to this line, it will act as a stop line
and the piece of wood will fall out.) Starting with the
layer farthest away from the beak, cut back to the score
line to form the feathers. Repeat on the other side.
8
10
9


WOOD CARVING 53
.Carving in the Round
11
WOOD CARVING 53
Step 11—Now that the eagle head is completely carved,
round out the staff. Do not try to remove all the knife
marks. The carvings will not only make the stick look
more natural, they will also improve your grip. Round
the edges of the bottom of the walking stick to help
prevent cracking and chipping.
Step 12—Using oil or enamel, paint the eagle head.
Paint the beak yellow, the eyes black, the back feathers
brown, and the rest white. The staff itself should not be
painted. After the paint is thoroughly dry, a coat of poly-
urethane, shellac, or varnish will help keep stains and
dirt from discoloring the stick.
12


54 WOOD CARVING
Chip Carving.
Chip Carving
Chip carving is a popular technique for decorating a flat
piece of wood, but it is hardly “carving” in the traditional
sense. Pacific Islanders use this centuries-old method to
decorate their work, and many carvers in Sweden and
Norway incorporate chip carving to make their wooden
plates and jewelry boxes more ornate. Very few tools are
needed to create beautiful designs, so almost anyone can
create a work of art after learning the basics.
The intricate designs of chip carving are created with
a combination of simple shapes like triangles, diamonds,
and squares. A triangle is formed with three cuts made
diagonally toward a central point, which creates an inside-
out pyramid. Adding two cuts from a point outside one flat
side creates a diamond. One cut from each side of a square
makes a square pyramid.
Any pattern that can be drawn with straight lines
can be made into a chip carving design. Once completed,
the intricate patterns of a chip carving can be painted or
filled with putty of a contrasting color, then finished with
stain or varnish like any other carving project.
Once you have
honed your chip
carving skills, you
can add beauty to
your hiking staff
with your own
designs. Be sure
to firmly secure
the staff with a
vise clamp before
you start to work.


WOOD CARVING 55
.Chip Carving
Carve your piece
while sitting at
a table, and
remember to use
a thumb guard.
Chip Carving Project
To complete your Wood Carving merit badge require-
ment, you carve a simple pattern to create a mounting
for a patch or a photo. You’ll start by learning to cut a
triangle—the starting block of all chip carving projects.
Make a few practice triangles on the back of the board
before starting the front.
Materials Needed
• 4-by-4-inch piece of wood, about 1⁄2" to 3⁄4" inch thick
• Sandpaper
• Ruler and pencil
• Thumb guard
• Chip carving knife
Several different knives can be used
in chip carving, including a skew
chisel and a gouge, but a regular
carving knife will work just fine.
Your finished project can be used as
a mounting board for a photo or a
Scout patch.


56 WOOD CARVING
Chip Carving.
Step 1—Sand the wood smooth before
drawing your design.
Step 2—Use a ruler and pencil to draw
two rows of quarter-inch squares on each
side of the board.
Step 3—Draw four triangles on each
side of the board using two squares for
each triangle.
Step 4—Number three sides of the board
and one of row of the triangles. Position
your chip carving board so that side 1 is
closest to you.
Step 5—Begin carving on side 1 of the tri-
angle by positioning the knife at a shallow
angle and inserting just the tip to help keep
the cut from going too deep. Slowly draw
the knife toward your body using the upper
arm, not the wrist. The thumb moves with
the knife as you cut, and the inside joint of
the thumb and the back of the knife blade
are always held together.
5
2
3
4


WOOD CARVING 57
.Chip Carving
Step 6—Turn the board so that side 2
is closest to you. Position the knife at
the top of the triangle, with the sharp
edge away from your body. Place your
thumb at the back of the knife blade,
and keep your elbow close to your
body. Make a shallow cut by carefully
pushing the knife along side 2.
Step 7—Turn your board so that
side 3 is closest to you, and carve side
3 using the same hand position you
used for the first cut. The triangle
chip should pop out as you finish
the third cut.
Step 8—Clean up any extra wood on the
bottom of the triangle by going over the
cuts one more time using the same angles.
Step 9—Finish the design by repeating
the steps for each triangle around the
block of wood.
6
7
8
9





Relief Carving
Relief carving is a type of woodworking in which the
forms and figures seem to be raised out of the surface of
the wood. Relief carving projects are usually done on a
flat area, but you can also carve on rounded surfaces
such as a walking stick.
To begin a relief carving project, make a simple line
drawing. This may be cut with gouges, or a knife cutting
away a wedge of wood, not just scratches or single cuts
with a knife. Any of the five basic cuts can be used in
relief carving, but the V-cut is the most efficient.
There is no set amount of wood to be taken off the
project. Your counselor should be able to see that you
have developed a plan and followed it.
Keep the project to the level of your
ability. If you try to get too fancy, you
may just waste the wood.
As with knives, do not “muscle”
gouges. You can hurt yourself or ruin
the project. If the tool is not cutting,
you may be taking off too much
wood with the cut, or you may need
to sharpen or touch up the edge
of the tool.





WOOD CARVING 61
.Glossary
Glossary
annual rings. A layer of wood
that is produced in a single year’s
growth, marked by springwood
and summerwood.
blank. A piece of wood that is precut
in the general shape of the desired
finished piece.
chip carving. A carving technique that
involves the use of a combination of
simple shapes like triangles, diamonds,
and squares.
congress knife. A pocketknife with
four blades: usually two pen blades,
one sheepsfoot blade, and one all-
purpose blade.
hardwood. A forester’s term for a tree
with broad leaves that fall each year.
The many differences between hard-
woods and softwoods are of relatively
little importance to the wood carver.
master blade. The largest blade on the
whittler’s knife; an all-purpose blade.
pen blade. A blade on a pocketknife
that usually is used for carving details
like eyes and other facial features.
pith. Soft or spongy tissue that makes
up part of a tree’s annual growth. The
pith is usually the light-colored band in
a tree’s annual growth ring.
radial lines. The lines of a tree’s
annual growth rings that are visible
when the wood is quartered.
relief carving. The art of carving
wood so that the figure looks to
be raised from the wood base.
roughout. A piece of wood that is
precut in the general shape of the
desired finished piece.
seasoning. To prepare wood for use,
usually by drying.
sheepsfoot blade. The blade on a
pocketknife that has a flat carving
edge; sometimes used as a coping
blade when cutting away the outside
or profile, to remove wood that is
not needed.
softwood. A tree that has narrow
leaves or needles and bears seed
cones. The many differences between
hardwoods and softwoods are of
relatively little importance to the
wood carver.
springwood. The part of a tree’s
annual ring that develops early in the
growing season.
summerwood. The part of a tree’s
annual ring that develops late in the
growing season.
whittle. To use a knife to pare chips
off a block of wood.
whittler’s knife. A three-blade pocket-
knife that is suitable for wood carving.
wood carving. The art of creating
ornamental objects of wood by
carving it with a sharp tool.


62 WOOD CARVING


WOOD CARVING 63
.Resources
Resources
Scouting Literature
Deck of First Aid; Emergency First Aid
pocket guide; Be Prepared First Aid
Book; Woodwork merit badge pamphlet
Books
Barton, Wayne. The Complete Guide to
Chip Carving. Sterling, 2007.
Beiderman, Charles, and William
Johnston. The Beginner’s
Handbook of Woodcarving.
Dover Publications, 1988.
Butz, Richard. How to Carve Wood.
Taunton Press, 1984.
Ellenwood, Everett. The Complete Book
of Woodcarving: Everything You Need
to Know to Master the Craft. Fox
Chapel Publishing, 2022.
Enlow, Harold L. Carving Faces
Workbook: Learn to Carve Facial
Expressions and Characteristics With
the Legendary Harold Enlow. Fox
Chapel Publishing, 2011.
Green, Larry. First Projects for Wood
Carvers: A Pictorial Introduction to
Wood Carving. Schiffler, 1997.
Hillyer, John. The Weekend Crafter:
Woodcarving: 20 Great Projects for
Beginners and Weekend Carvers. Lark
Books, 2002.
Johnson, Skylar. How to Carve a
Woodspirit in a Hiking Stick. Alpine
Views Publishing, 2004.
Lubkemann, Chris. The Little Book of
Whittling: Passing Time on the Trail,
on the Porch, and Under the Stars.
Fox Chapel Publishing, 2013.
Pye, Chris. Chris Pye’s Woodcarving
Course & Reference Manual: A
Beginner’s Guide to Traditional
Techniques. Fox Chapel Publishing,
2010.
Pye, Chris. Woodcarving: Tools, Materials
& Equipment, vol. 1. Guild of Master
Craftsman, 2020.
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


64 WOOD CARVING
Resources.
Tools and Supplies
If you have trouble finding supplies, try
some of the places below.
Moore Wood & Roughouts
roughouts.com
Mountain Woodcarvers Inc.
mountainwoodcarvers.com
Paul’s Supplies
paulssupplies.com
Woodcraft
woodcraft.com
Acknowledgments
Scouting America is indebted to the late
Jeff Springer, a devoted Scouter and
master wood-carver who provided the
Safety Checklist for Carving and the
plans reproduced in this book.
Scouting America also thanks
lifelong Scouter Paul McClain of
Boulder, Colorado, for his assistance,
in particular with the section on
chip carving. Thanks also to devoted
Scouter and master wood-carver David
Oakley, Lincoln Park, Michigan, for his
assistance and support.
Scouting America gratefully
acknowledges the assistance of the Circle
Ten Council, Dallas, Texas, the Jayhawk
Area Council, Topeka, Kansas, and long-
time Scouter George Bain, who has been
carving and whittling for more than
30 years.
Scouting America is grateful to
the men and women serving on the
National Merit Badge Committee for the
improvements made in updating this
pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration Credits
Dynamic Graphics Group—
page 59 (background)
Billy Humphries, Forest Resources
Consultants Inc., Bugwood.org,
courtesy—page 4 (inset)
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of
or are protected by Scouting America.
Gene Daniels—pages 4 (background),
58, and 60
Michael Griffin—pages 3, 6, 8, 9, 16
(inset), and 37
John McDearmon—all illustrations
on pages 19, 27, 35, 39, 45–46,
and 50–53
Brian Payne—cover (frame, carving
tools on left); pages 14 (both),
29 (chip carving knives), and
55–57 (all)