AMERICAN
HERITAGE

BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES

AMERICAN
HERITAGE

“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”

American Heritage
1. Read the Declaration of Independence. Pay close attention to the section
that begins with “We hold these truths to be self-evident” and ends with
“to provide new Guards for their future security.” Rewrite that section in your
own words, making it as easy to understand as possible. Then, share your
writing with your merit badge counselor and discuss the importance of the
Declaration to all Americans.
2. Do TWO of the following:
(a) Select two individuals from American history, one a political leader
(a president, senator, etc.) and the other a private citizen (a writer, religious
leader, etc.). Find out about each person’s accomplishments and compare
the contributions each has made to America’s heritage.
(b) With your counselor’s approval, choose an organization that has promoted some type of positive change in American society. Find out why
the organization believed this change was necessary and how it helped to
accomplish the change. Discuss how this organization is related to events
or situations from America’s past.
(c) With your counselor’s approval, interview two veterans of the U.S.
military. Find out what their experiences were like. Ask the veterans what they
believe they accomplished.
(d) With your counselor’s approval, interview three people in your community of different ages and occupations. Ask these people what America means
to them, what they think is special about this country, and what American
traditions they feel are important to preserve.
3. Do the following:
(a) Select a topic related to the United States that is currently in the news.
Describe to your counselor what is happening. Explain how today’s events are
related to or affected by the events and values of America’s past.

(b) For each of the following, describe its adoption, tell about any changes
since its adoption, and explain how each one continues to influence
Americans today: the flag, the Pledge of Allegiance, the Great Seal of the
United States, the motto, and the national anthem.
(c) Research your family’s history. Find out how various events and situations in American history affected your family. If your family immigrated to
America, tell the reasons why. Share what you find with your counselor.
4. Do TWO of the following:
(a) Explain the National Register of Historic Places and how a property
becomes eligible for listing in the National Register of Historic Places. Make a
map of your local area, marking the points of historical interest. Tell about any
National Register properties in your area. Share the map with your counselor,
and describe the historical points you have indicated.
(b) Research an event of historical importance that took place in or near your
area. If possible, visit the place. Tell your counselor about the event and how
it affected local history. Describe how the area looked then and what it now
looks like.
(c) Find out when, why, and how your town or neighborhood started, and
what ethnic, national, or racial groups played a part. Find out how the area
has changed over the past 50 years and try to explain why.
(d) Take an active part in a program about an event or person in American
history. Report to your counselor about the program, the part you took, and
the subject.
(e) Visit a historic trail or walk in your area. After your visit, share with your
counselor what you have learned. Discuss the importance of this location and
explain why you think it might qualify for National Register listing.
5. Do ONE of the following:
(a) Watch two motion pictures (with the approval and permission of your
counselor and parent) that are set in some period of American history.
Describe to your counselor how accurate each film is with regard to the
historical events depicted and also with regard to the way the characters
are portrayed.
(b) Read a biography (with your counselor’s approval) of someone who
has made a contribution to America’s heritage. Tell some things you admire
about this individual and some things you do not admire. Explain why
you think this person has made a positive or a negative contribution to
America’s heritage.
(c) Listen to recordings of popular songs from various periods of American
history. Share five of these songs with your counselor, and describe how each
song reflects the way people felt about the period in which it was popular.
If a recording is not available, have a copy of the lyrics available.
6. Discuss with your counselor the career opportunities in American heritage.
Pick one that interests you and explain how to prepare for this career. Discuss
what education and training are required for this career.

American Heritage Resources.

American Heritage Resources
Scouting Literature
American Business, American
Cultures, American Labor, Citizenship
in the Community, Citizenship in
the Nation, Citizenship in the World,
Genealogy, Journalism, Law, and
Scouting Heritage merit badge pamphlets
Visit the Boy Scouts of America’s
OFlCIAL RETAIL WEBSITE WITH YOUR
parent’s permission) at http://
www.scoutstuff.org for a complete
listing of all merit badge pamphlets and other helpful Scouting
materials and supplies.

Books
Bjornlund, Lydia. The U.S. Constitution:
Blueprint for Democracy. Lucent
Books Inc., 1999.
Carnes, Mark, ed. Past Imperfect:
History According to the Movies.
Holt and Company, 1995.
Finlayson, Reggie, ed. We Shall
Overcome: The History of the
American Civil Rights Movement.
Lerner Publishing Group, 2002.
Freedman, Russell. Give Me Liberty!
The Story of the Declaration of
Independence. Holiday House, 2002.

62

AMERICAN HERITAGE

Hoose, Phillip M. We Were There, Too!:
Young People in U.S. History. Farrar,
Straus, and Giroux, 2001.
Jaffe, Steven H. Who Were the
Founding Fathers? Two Hundred
Years of Reinventing American
History. Henry Holt and Co., 1996.
Kassinger, Ruth. U.S. Census: A Mirror
of America. Raintree Steck-Vaughn
Publishers, 2000.
McIntire, Suzanne, ed. American
Heritage Book of Great American
Speeches for Young People.
Wiley, 2001.
Panchyk, Richard. Keys to American
History: Understanding Our Most
Important Historic Documents.
Chicago Review Press, 2009.
Time Magazine editors. Time America:
An Illustrated History. Time, 2007.
Torricelli, Robert, and Andrew
Carroll, eds. In Our Own Words:
Extraordinary Speeches of the
American Century. Kodansha
International, 1999.
Wilson, Richard Guy, ed. A Guide to
Popular U.S. Landmarks as Listed
in the National Register of Historic
Places. Franklin Watts Inc., 2003.
Zeinert, Karen. Free Speech: From
Newspapers to Music Lyrics. Enslow
Publishers, 1995.

.American Heritage Resources

Periodicals
American History and
Civil War Times
Website: www.historynet.com
Early American Life
Telephone: 440-543-8566
Website: http://www.ealonline.com
Preservation
Telephone: 202-588-6388
Website: http://www.nationaltrust.org/
magazine

Organizations and Websites
Academy of Achievement
Website: http://www.achievement.org
America Singing: 19th Century
Song Sheets
Website: http://memory.loc.gov/
ammem/amsshtml/amsshome.html
America’s Library
Website:
http://www.americaslibrary.gov
The American Family Immigration
History Center
Telephone: 212-561-4588
Website: http://www.ellisisland.org
American Memory
Website: http://memory.loc.gov/
ammem/index.html
American Veterans (AMVETS)
Toll-free telephone: 877-726-8387
Website: http://www.amvets.org
Family Search Internet
Genealogy Service
Website: https://www.familysearch.org
Genealogy.com
Website: http://www.genealogy.com

HistoryNet.com
Telephone: 703-771-9400
Website: http://www.historynet.com
The Lester S. Levy Sheet
Music Collection
Johns Hopkins University
Website:
http://levysheetmusic.mse.jhu.edu
Library of Congress
Telephone: 202-707-5000
Website: http://www.loc.gov
National Constitution Center
Telephone: 215-409-6600
Website:
http://constitutioncenter.org
National Park Service
Telephone: 202-208-3818
Website: http://www.nps.gov
National Register of Historic Places
Telephone: 202-354-2211
Website: http://www.nps.gov/nr/
Smithsonian Institution
Telephone: 202-633-1000
Website: http://www.si.edu
U.S. Census Bureau
Telephone: 301-763-4636
Website: http://www.census.gov
U.S. Government Printing Office
Telephone: 202-512-0000
Website: http://www.gpoaccess.gov
U.S. History.org
Website: http://www.ushistory.org/us/
The White House
Telephone: 202-456-1414
Website: http://www.whitehouse.gov
Veterans of Foreign Wars (VFW)
Website: http://www.vfw.org

AMERICAN HERITAGE

63

