AMERICAN
LABOR


AMERICAN LABOR
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


33
American Labor
1. Using resources available to you, learn about working people and work-related
concerns. List and briefly describe or give examples of at least EIGHT concerns
of American workers. These may include, but are not limited to, working condi-
tions, workplace safety, hours, wages, seniority, job security, equal-opportunity
employment and discrimination, guest workers, automation and technologies
that replace workers, unemployment, layoffs, outsourcing, and employee benefits
such as health care, child care, profit sharing, continuing education, and
retirement benefits.
2. With your counselor’s and parent’s approval and permission, visit the office
or attend a meeting of a local union, a central labor council, or an employee
organization, or contact one of these organizations via the internet. Then do
EACH of the following:
(a) Find out what the organization does.
(b) Share the list of issues and concerns you made for requirement 1. Ask the
people you communicate with which issues are of greatest interest or concern
to them and why.
(c) Draw a diagram showing how the organization is structured, from the
local to the national level, if applicable.
3. Explain to your counselor what labor unions are, what they do, and what
services they provide to members. In your discussion, show that you under-
stand the concepts of labor, management, collective bargaining, negotiation,
union shops, open shops, grievance procedures, mediation, arbitration, work
stoppages, strikes, and lockouts.
4. Explain what is meant by the adversarial model of labor-management relations,
compared with a cooperative-bargaining style.
5. Do ONE of the following:
(a) Develop a time line of significant events in the history of the American
labor movement from the 1770s to the present.
(b) Prepare an exhibit, a scrapbook, or a computer presentation, such as
a slide show, illustrating three major achievements of the American labor
movement and how those achievements affect American workers.
(c) With your counselor’s and parent’s approval and permission, watch
a movie that addresses organized labor in the United States. Afterward,
discuss the movie with your counselor and explain what you learned.
(d) Read a biography (with your counselor’s approval) of someone who
has made a contribution to the American labor movement. Explain what
contribution this person has made to the American labor movement.


34
6. Explain the term globalization. Discuss with your counselor some effects of
globalization on the workforce in the United States. Explain how this global
workforce fits into the economic system of this country.
7. Choose a labor issue of widespread interest to American workers—an issue in
the news currently or known to you from your work on this merit badge.
Before your counselor, or in writing, argue both sides of the issue, first taking
management’s side, then presenting labor’s or the employee’s point of view.
In your presentation, summarize the basic rights and responsibilities of employ-
ers and employees, including union members and nonunion members.
8. Discuss with your counselor the different goals that may motivate the owners
of a business, its stockholders, its customers, its employees, the employees’
representatives, the community, and public officials. Explain why agreements
and compromises are made and how they affect each group in achieving
its goals.
9. Learn about opportunities in the field of labor relations. Choose one career in
which you are interested and discuss with your counselor the major responsi-
bilities of that position and the qualifications, education, and training such a
position requires.


62 AMERICAN LABOR
Labor-Related Resources.
Scouting Literature
American Business, Citizenship in
the Nation, Citizenship in the World,
Communication, Entrepreneurship,
Law, Public Speaking, and
Salesmanship merit badge pamphlets
Books
Bartoletti, Susan Campbell. Kids on
Strike. HMH Books for Young
Readers, 2003.
Dubofsky, Melvyn, and Foster R.
Dulles. Labor in America: A History.
Wiley-Blackwell, 2010.
Ewing, David W. Justice on the
Job: Resolving Grievances in the
Nonunion Workplace. Harvard
Business School Press, 1989.
Freedman, Russell. Kids at Work:
Lewis Hine and the Crusade
Against Child Labor. HMH Books
for Young Readers, 1998.
Le Blanc, Paul. A Short History of the
U.S. Working Class: From Colonial
Times to the Twenty-First Century.
Humanity Books, 1999.
Lichtenstein, Nelson. State of the
Union: A Century of American
Labor. Princeton University
Press, 2013.
Mills, D. Quinn. Labor Management
Relations. McGraw Hill/Irwin,
5th ed., 1993.
Murray, R. Emmett. Lexicon of
Labor: More Than 500 Key
Terms, Biographical Sketches,
and Historical Insights Concerning
Labor in America. The New
Press, 2010.
Nelson, Daniel. Shifting Fortunes:
The Rise and Decline of American
Labor, From the 1820s to the
Present. Ivan R. Dee Inc., 1998.
Ross, Stewart. The Industrial
Revolution: Documenting History.
Franklin Watts, 2001.
Sinclair, Upton. The Jungle.
CreateSpace Independent Publishing
Platform, 2014.
Stein, R. Conrad. The Pullman
Strike and the Labor Movement
in American History. Enslow
Publishers, 2001.
U.S. Department of Labor.
Occupational Outlook Handbook
(current year). Skyhorse
Publishing, 2014.
Labor-Related Resources
For more information about or to
order Scouting-related resources,
see http://www.scoutstuff.org
(with your parent’s permission).


AMERICAN LABOR 63
.Labor-Related Resources
Woodburn, Judith. A Multicultural
Portrait of Labor in America.
Benchmark Books, 1994.
Zaniello, Tom. Working Stiffs, Union
Maids, Reds, and Riffraff: An
Expanded Guide to Films About
Labor. ILR Press, 2003.
Biographies About American
Labor Leaders
Collins, David R. Farmworker’s
Friend: The Story of Cesar Chavez.
Carolrhoda Books, 1996.
Dubofsky, Melvyn, and Warren Van
Tine. John L. Lewis. University of
Illinois Press, 1986.
Josephson, Judith Pinkerton. Mother
Jones: Fierce Fighter for Workers’
Rights. Lerner Publications, 1996.
Lichtenstein, Nathan. Walter Reuther:
The Most Dangerous Man in Detroit.
University of Illinois Press, 1997.
Reef, Catherine. A. Philip Randolph:
Union Leader and Civil Rights
Crusader. Enslow Publishers, 2001.
Streissguth, Thomas. Legendary Labor
Leaders. Oliver Press Inc., 1998.
Organizations and Web Sites
American Arbitration Association
335 Madison Ave., Floor 10
New York, NY 10017-4605
Telephone: 212-716-5800
Web site: http://www.adr.org
American Federation of Labor and
Congress of Industrial Organizations
815 16th St. NW
Washington, DC 20006
Telephone: 202-637-5000
Web site: http://www.aflcio.org
Federal Mediation and
Conciliation Service
2100 K St. NW
Washington, DC 20427
Telephone: 202-606-8100
Web site: http://www.fmcs.gov
LaborStart
Web site: http://www.laborstart.org/usa
National Labor Relations Board
1099 14th St. NW
Washington, DC 20570-0001
Toll-free telephone: 866-667-6572
Web site: http://www.nlrb.gov
Occupational Safety and
Health Administration
200 Constitution Ave.
Washington, DC 20210
Toll-free telephone: 800-321-6742
Web site: http://www.osha.gov
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics
Postal Square Building
2 Massachusetts Ave. NE
Washington, DC 20212-0001
Telephone: 202-691-5200
Web site: http://www.bls.gov
U.S. Department of Labor
Frances Perkins Building
200 Constitution Ave. NW
Washington, DC 20210
Toll-free telephone: 866-487-2365
Web site: http://www.dol.gov