SWIMMING


SWIMMING
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


35957
ISBN 978-0-8395-3352-8
©2014 Boy Scouts of America
2023 Printing
Note to the Counselor
Merit badge counselors are responsible for following the
requirements, procedures, and techniques presented in this
pamphlet and ensuring that each Scout earning the merit
badge is able to demonstrate knowledge and skills at a level
consistent with the requirements. In addition, counselors must
ensure that all applicable BSA safety policies, including Safe
Swim Defense and Safety Afloat, are followed during training,
practice, and review.
Counselors for the Swimming merit badge must be registered
members of the Boy Scouts of America, have current training in
swimming (either Safe Swim Defense or Safety Afloat, or both),
and be approved by the local council advancement committee.
Councils with an aquatics committee should utilize that commit-
tee to coordinate with the advancement committee for approval
of qualified counselors.
All counselors should have formal training in the knowledge
and skills indicated by the requirements, experience in teaching
such skills to youth, and experience in identifying and managing
risks associated with the activities involved. This should include,
at minimum, current or previous certification as Aquatics
Instructor, BSA or instructor certification from the American Red
Cross or YMCA. The council advancement committee may
approve counselors with similar experience and training in
knowledge, skill, safety, and instruction.


SWIMMING 3
Demonstrations or activities in the water must be con-
ducted according to BSA Safe Swim Defense standards,
which appear in the “Safety and First Aid” section.


4 SWIMMING
Emphasis on Stroke Mechanics
With the revisions to the Swimming merit badge requirements, the goal
is to emphasize teaching Scouts correct stroke mechanics. It is critical for
them to learn these strokes correctly, in good form and with proper breath-
ing, so they can swim with greater ease and efficiency. Furthermore, the
ability to correctly perform these strokes will make Scouts safer in and
around the water as well as when they tackle advanced water activities
such as the Lifesaving merit badge and BSA Lifeguard.


SWIMMING 5


6 SWIMMING
Requirements
1. Do the following:
a. Explain to your counselor how Scouting’s Safe Swim
Defense plan anticipates, helps prevent and mitigate, and
provides responses to likely hazards you may encounter
during swimming activities.
b. Discuss the prevention and treatment of health concerns
that could occur while swimming, including hypothermia,
dehydration, sunburn, heat exhaustion, heatstroke, mus-
cle cramps, hyperventilation, spinal injury, stings and
bites, and cuts and scrapes.
2. Before doing the following requirements, successfully
complete the BSA swimmer test: Jump feetfirst into water
over the head in depth. Level off and swim 75 yards in a
strong manner using one or more of the following strokes:
sidestroke, breaststroke, trudgen, or crawl; then swim
25 yards using an easy, resting backstroke. The 100 yards
must be completed in one swim without stops and must
include at least one sharp turn. After completing the swim,
rest by floating.
3. Swim continuously for 150 yards using the following strokes
in good form and in a strong manner: front crawl or trudgen
for 25 yards, back crawl for 25 yards, sidestroke for 25 yards,
breaststroke for 25 yards, and elementary backstroke for
50 yards.
4. Do the following:
a. Demonstrate water rescue methods by reaching with
your arm or leg, by reaching with a suitable object, and
by throwing lines and objects. Explain why swimming
rescues should not be attempted when a reaching or
throwing rescue is possible, and explain why and how a
rescue swimmer should avoid contact with the victim.


SWIMMING 7
b. With a helper and a practice victim, show a line rescue
both as tender and as rescuer. The practice victim should
be approximately 30 feet from shore in deep water.
5. Do the following:
a. Float faceup in a resting position for at least
three minutes with minimal movement.
b. Demonstrate survival floating for at least
five minutes.
c. While wearing a properly fitted U.S.
Coast Guard–approved life jacket, dem-
onstrate the HELP and huddle positions.
Explain their purposes.
d. Explain why swimming or survival float-
ing will hasten the onset of hypothermia in
cold water.
6. In water over your head, but not to exceed 10 feet, do
each of the following:
a. Use the feetfirst method of surface diving and bring an
object up from the bottom.
b. Do a headfirst surface dive (pike or tuck), and bring the
object up again.
c. Do a headfirst surface dive to a depth of at least 5 feet
and swim underwater for three strokes. Come to the
surface, take a breath, and repeat the sequence twice.
7. Following the guidelines set in the BSA Safe Swim Defense,
in water at least 7 feet deep*, show a standing headfirst dive
from a dock or pool deck. Show a long shallow dive, also
from the dock or pool deck.
8. Explain the health benefits of regular aerobic exercise, and
discuss why swimming is favored as both fitness and thera-
peutic exercise.
*If your state, city, or local community requires a water depth greater
than 7 feet, it is important to abide by that mandate.


8 SWIMMING
Section 0.
Scouting Literature
Scouts BSA Handbook for Boys; Scouts
BSA Handbook for Girls; Deck of First
Aid; Emergency First Aid pocket guide;
Athletics, Emergency Preparedness, First
Aid, Lifesaving, Personal Fitness, Scuba
Diving, Sports, and Water Sports merit
badge pamphlets
Books
Barsky, Steven M. The Simple Guide to
Snorkeling Fun. Best Publishing
Company, 1999
Colwin, Cecil M. Breakthrough
Swimming. Human Kinetics, 2002.
Graver, Dennis K. Scuba Diving, 4th ed.
Human Kinetics, 2009.
Hines, Emmett W. Fitness Swimming,
2nd ed. Human Kinetics, 2008.
Laughlin, Terry. Extraordinary
Swimming for Every Body. Total
Immersion Swimming, 2006.
———. Total Immersion: The
Revolutionary Way to Swim Better,
Faster, and Easier. Touchstone, 2004.
Lenihan, Daniel J. Underwater Wonders
of the National Parks. Compass
America Guides, 1997.
Montgomery, Jim, and Mo Chambers.
Mastering Swimming. Human
Kinetics, 2008.
Orr, Dan, and Eric Douglas. Scuba
Diving Safety. Human Kinetics, 2007.
Salo, David, and Scott Riewald.
Complete Conditioning for Swimming.
Human Kinetics, 2008.
Thomas, David G. Swimming:
Steps to Success, 3rd ed. Human
Kinetics, 2012.
Organizations and
Websites
American Red Cross
Toll-free telephone: 800-733-2767
Website: http://www.redcross.org
USA Swimming
Website: http://www.usaswimming.org
YMCA of the USA
Telephone: 312-977-0031
Website: http://www.ymca.net
Swimming Resources
With your parent’s permission, visit
the Boy Scouts of America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org,
for a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.