ARCHERY
STEM-Based


ARCHERY
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


35856
ISBN 978-0-8395-3259-0
©2019 Boy Scouts of America
2023 Printing
Note to the Counselor
BSA Standards
The merit badge counselor must be sufficiently experienced
in archery activities to teach Scouts the necessary skills and
to respond effectively in the event of an emergency. We rec-
ommend the counselor use the most current printing of the
Archery merit badge pamphlet, No. 35856; the Guide to Safe
Scouting, No. 34416; and the BSA National Shooting Sports
Manual, No. 30931, for further details on shooting sports.
Archery Activities
Modern bows and arrows are potentially dangerous. As merit
badge counselor, you must take responsibility to comply with
all state and local laws. Additionally, you must ensure that all
shooting activities are conducted on established and clearly
marked target or field archery ranges with appropriate
supervision by a qualified archery range master.
The following are standards established for bows and
arrows used in Scouts BSA.
Safe Area or Course
A key part of the counselor’s responsibility is to know the range
or course for conducting archery activities and to determine
that it is well-suited and free of hazards. Safety procedures
include but are not limited to:
• Inspect the range before use for any conditions that might
pose a potential hazard to safe operation.
• Range flags must be flown while the range is in use.
• Range perimeter should be well-defined and the target line,
shooting line, and waiting line must be well-marked.
• All spectators and archers waiting to shoot must remain
behind the waiting line at all times.
• Bows and arrows should be used only in supervised places
set aside for their use.


ARCHERY 3
• On a field archery course or roving range, when searching for a
lost arrow, participants should leave their bow standing against
the target face and have a buddy standing by to intercept other
archers who may follow. Stay on marked paths. Travel the
direction in which targets are marked.
Equipment Selection and Maintenance
The counselor should inspect all equipment to ensure bows,
bowstrings, and arrows are in safe condition and appropriate for
the Scout’s height and maturity. Care should be taken to break
and discard all cracked or fractured arrows. Draw a bowstring
only with a nocked arrow of proper length. Failure to do this may
result in overdrawing and breaking the bow or in personal injury.
Personal Safety Equipment
The counselor must ensure that every participant always wear
an arm guard and either a finger tab or glove.
Safety Procedures and Policies
Adherence to archery safety procedures and standards can
greatly reduce risk. These should be known and understood
by all participants, and the counselor must ensure compliance.
Here are some commonsense safety rules:
• A bow, like a gun, must never be pointed at a person.
• Never release an arrow without being able to see its full,
clear path to the target.
• Before drawing a bow, make sure the range is clear of any
persons or animals and that the archer is straddling the
shooting line.
• Arrows should be nocked only on the shooting line at the
archery range master’s signal and pointed only in the direction
of the target.
• Stop shooting immediately on signal from the range master
or if anyone crosses in front of or behind the target.
• Never shoot an arrow up into the air.
• Broadhead arrows are for those who are licensed to hunt.
They are not permitted in Scouting target archery activities.
Discipline
Scouts must respect their counselor and range master at all
times and follow their direction. Participants should always
practice courtesy and good sportsmanship.


Requirements
1. Do the following:
(a) Explain the five range safety rules.
(b) Explain the four whistle commands used on the range.
(c) Explain how to safely remove arrows from the target and
return them to your quiver.
(d) Tell about your local and state laws for owning and using
archery equipment.
2. Do the following:
(a) Name and point to the parts of an arrow.
(b) Describe three or more different types of arrows.
(c) Name the four principal materials for making arrow
shafts.
(d) Do ONE of the following
(1) Make a complete arrow from a bare shaft using
appropriate equipment available to you.
OR
(2) To demonstrate arrow repair, inspect the shafts
and prepare and replace at least three vanes, one
point, and one nock. You may use as many arrows
as necessary to accomplish this. The repairs can be
done on wood, fiberglass, or aluminum arrows.
(e) Explain how to properly care for and store arrows.
3. Do the following:
(a) Explain the proper use, care, and storage of, as well as
the reasons for using tabs, arm guards, shooting gloves, and
quivers.
(b) Explain the following terms: draw length, draw weight,
mechanical release and barebow.
4 ARCHERY


ARCHERY 5
4. Explain the following:
(a) The difference between an end and a round
(b) The differences among field, target, and 3-D archery
(c) How the five-color World Archery Federation target is
scored
(d) How the National Field Archery Association (NFAA)
black-and-white field targets and blue indoor targets are
scored
5. Do ONE of the following options.
Option A—Using a Recurve Bow or Longbow
(a) Name and point to the parts of the recurve or longbow
you are shooting.
(b) Explain how to properly care for and store recurve bows
and longbows.
(c) Demonstrate and explain USA Archery’s “Steps of
Shooting” for the bow you are shooting.
(d) Demonstrate the proper way to string a recurve bow or
longbow.
(e) Using a bow square, locate and mark with dental floss,
crimp-on, or other method, the nocking point on the
bowstring of the bow that you are using.
(f) Do ONE of the following:
(1) Using a recurve or longbow and arrows with a finger
release, shoot a single round of one of the following
BSA, USA Archery, or NFAA rounds:
(a) An NFAA field round of 14 targets and make a score
of 60 points
(b) A BSA Scout field round of 14 targets and make a |
score of 80 points
(c) World Archery/USA Archery indoor* round and
make a score
of 80 points
(d) An NFAA indoor* round and make a score of 50
points
*The indoor rounds can be shot outdoors if this is more convenient.


6 ARCHERY
(2) Shooting 30 arrows in five-arrow ends at an
80-centimeter (32-inch five-color target at 10 yards and
using the 10 scoring regions, make a score of 150 points.
(3) As a member of the USA Archery Junior Olympic Archery
Development program (JOAD), earn your indoor or
outdoor green, purple, and gray achievement award pins
using a recurve bow or longbow.
(4) As a member of the NFAA’s Junior Division, earn a Cub
or Youth 100-score Progression Patch.
Option B—Using a Compound Bow
(a) Name and point to the parts of the compound bow you
are shooting.
(b) Explain how to properly care for and store compound
bows.
(c) Demonstrate and explain USA Archery’s “Steps of
Shooting” for the bow you are shooting.
(d) Explain why it is necessary to have the string or cable on
a compound bow replaced at an archery shop.
(e) Locate and mark with dental floss, crimp-on, or other |
method, the nocking point on the bowstring of the bow
that you are using.
(f) Do ONE of the following:
(1) Using a compound bow and arrows with a finger
release, shoot a single round of one of the following
BSA, USA Archery, or NFAA rounds:
(a) An NFAA field round of 14 targets and make a score
of 70 points
(b) A BSA Scout field round of 14 targets and make a
score of 90 points
(c) A World Archery/USA Archery indoor* round and
make a score of 90 points
(d) An NFAA indoor* round and make a score of 60
points
For more
information
about scoring for
JOAD, go to
www.teamusa.
org/USA-Archery/
Archers/Junior-
Olympic-Archery-
Development/
JOAD-
Achievement-
Program.


ARCHERY 7
(2) Shooting at an 80-centimeter (32-inch) five-color target
using the 10 scoring regions, make a minimum score of
160 points. Accomplish this in the following manner:
Shoot 15 arrows in five-arrow ends, at a distance of 10
yards
AND
Shoot 15 arrows in fve-arrow ends, at a distance of 15
yards.
(3) As a member of the USA Archery Junior Olympic Archery
Development program (JOAD), earn your indoor or
outdoor green, purple, and gray achievement award pins |
using a compound bow.
(4) As a member of the NFAA’s Junior Division, earn a Cub
or Youth 100-score Progression Patch.
*The indoor rounds can be shot outdoors if this is more convenient.


8 ARCHERY
Archery Resources.
Archery Resources
Scouting Literature
Basic Illustrated Archery; Rifle
Shooting and Shotgun Shooting merit
badge pamphlets
Books and Videos
Adams, John. Archery (Know the
Sport). Stackpole Books, 1996.
Boga, Steven. Archery (Backyard
Games). Stackpole Books, 1997.
Camera, Anthony. Shooting the
Stickbow, 2nd ed. Virtualbookworm.
com Publishing, 2010.
Fadala, Sam. Traditional Archery, 2nd
ed. Stackpole Books, 2011.
Hamlett-Wood, Michael. Field
Archery: A Complete Guide.
Robert Hale Ltd., 2002.
Haywood, Kathleen M., and Catherine
F. Lewis. Archery: Steps to Success,
4th ed. Human Kinetics, 2012.
Johnson, Teresa. Archery
Fundamentals, 2nd ed. Human
Kinetics, 2014.
Sapp, Richard. Archer’s Digest. 7th ed.
Krause Publications, 2003.
United States Olympic Committee. A
Basic Guide to Archery. Griffin, 1997.
USA Archery. Archery. Human
Kinetics, 2012.
Wallentine, Douglas. Making Indian
Bows and Arrows, The Old Way.
Eagle’s View, 1988.
Wise, Larry. Bow and Arrow: The
Comprehensive Guide to Equipment,
Technique, and Competition.
Stackpole Books, 1992.
The following books and videos
are available from Quintessential
Productions, website
http://qproductsarchery.com.
Rowe, Ruth. Archery: The Basics.
#053V (video).
______. Archery: Refining Your Form.
#033V (video).
______. Fundamentals of Compound
Target Archery. #030B (book).
Rowe, Ruth, and Alan Anderson.
Simple Maintenance for Archery.
#031B (book).
With your parent’s permission, visit
the Boy Scouts of America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org,
for a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


ARCHERY 9
.Archery Resources
Instructional archery videos, including
Larry Wise’s The Complete Guide to
Beginning Archery, are available from
Robinhood Video Productions Inc.,
1600 Reynoldsburg-New Albany Road,
Blacklick, OH 43004; telephone
614-322-1038; website www.
robinhoodvideos.com.
Periodicals
Archery Focus magazine
Telephone: 773-944-1186
Website:
https://archeryfocusmagazine.com
U.S. and International
Archer magazine
Telephone: 520-742-5846
Website: https://usarcher.com
Organizations and Websites
International Bowhunting
Organization
Telephone: 440-967-2137
Website: www.ibo.net
National Field Archery Association
Toll-free telephone: 800-811-2331
Website: www.nfaa-archery.org
USA Archery
One Olympic Plaza
Colorado Springs, CO 80909
Telephone: 719-866-4576
Website: https://www.teamusa.org/
USA-Archery
World Archery Federation
Maison du Sport International
Avenue de Rhodanie 54
1007 Lausanne
Switzerland
Website: https://worldarchery.org