BACKPACKING


BACKPACKING
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


BACKPACKING 3
Requirements
1. Discuss the prevention of and treatment for the health
concerns that could occur while backpacking, including
hypothermia, heat reactions, frostbite, dehydration, insect
stings, tick bites, snakebite, and blisters.
2. Do the following:
a. List 10 items that are essential to be carried on any
backpacking trek and explain why each item is necessary.
b. Describe 10 ways you can limit the weight and bulk to
be carried in your pack without jeopardizing your health
or safety.
3. Do the following:
a. Define limits on the number of backpackers appropriate
for a trek crew.
b. Describe how a trek crew should be organized.
c. Tell how you would minimize risk on a backpacking trek.
d. Explain the purpose of an emergency response plan.
4. Do the following:
a. Describe the importance of using Leave No Trace
principles while backpacking, and at least five ways
you can lessen the crew’s impact on the environment.
b. Describe proper methods of handling human and other
wastes while on a backpacking trek. Describe the impor-
tance of and means to assure personal cleanliness while
on a backpacking trek.
c. Tell what factors are important in choosing a campsite.


4 BACKPACKING
5. Do the following:
a. Demonstrate two ways to treat water and tell why water
treatment is essential.
b. Explain to your counselor the importance of staying well-
hydrated during a trek.
6. Do the following:
a. Demonstrate that you can read topographic maps.
b. While on a trek, use a map and compass to establish
your position on the ground at three different locations
OR use a GPS receiver to establish your position on
a topographic map and on the ground at three
different locations.
c. Explain how to stay found, and what to do if you get lost.
7. Tell how to properly prepare for and deal with
inclement weather.
8. Do the following:
a. Explain the advantages and disadvantages of the
different types of backpacking stoves using at least
three different types of fuel.
b. Demonstrate that you know how to operate a backpacking
stove safely and to handle fuel safely.
c. Prepare at least three meals using a stove and fuel you
can carry in a backpack.
d. Demonstrate that you know how to keep cooking
and eating gear clean and sanitary, and that you
practice proper methods for food storage while on
a backpacking trek.
9. Do the following:
a. Write a plan that includes a schedule for a patrol/crew
backpacking hike of at least 2 miles.
b. Conduct a prehike inspection of the patrol and
its equipment.
c. Show that you know how to properly pack your personal
gear and your share of the crew’s gear and food.
d. Show you can properly shoulder your pack and adjust it
for proper wear.


BACKPACKING 5
e. While using the plan you developed for requirement 9a,
carry your fully loaded pack to complete a hike of at least
2 miles.
10. Using Leave No Trace principles, participate in at least
three backpacking treks of at least three days each and
at least 15 miles each, and using at least two different
campsites on each trek. Carry everything you will need
throughout the trek.
11. Do the following:
a. Write a plan for a backpacking trek of at least five days
using at least three different campsites and covering at
least 30 miles. Your plan must include a description of
and route to the trek area, a schedule (including a daily
schedule), a list of food and equipment needs, a safety
and emergency plan, and a budget.
b. Using Leave No Trace principles, take the trek you have
planned and, while on the trek, complete at least one
service project approved by your merit badge counselor.
c. Keep a daily journal during the trek that includes a day-
by-day description of your activities, including notes
about what worked well and thoughts about improve-
ments that could be made for the next trek.


BACKPACKING 93
.Backpacking Resources
Backpacking Resources
Scouting Literature
Boy Scout Handbook; Basic Illustrated
Backpacking; Be Prepared Backpacking
and Hiking; Conservation Handbook;
Fieldbook; Bird Study, Camping,
Canoeing, Climbing, Cooking, Emergency
Preparedness, First Aid, Fish and Wildlife
Management, Fishing, Fly-Fishing,
Geocaching, Hiking, Kayaking, Mammal
Study, Nature, Orienteering, Personal
Fitness, Reptile and Amphibian Study,
Search and Rescue, Sustainability,
Weather, Whitewater, and Wilderness
Survival merit badge pamphlets
For more information about or to
order Scouting-related resources,
see http://www.scoutstuff.org
(with your parent’s permission).
Books
Berger, Karen. Backpacking and Hiking.
DK Adult, 2005.
———. Hiking Light Handbook. The
Mountaineers Books, 2004.
Birkby, Robert. Lightly on the Land:
The SCA Trail Building and
Maintenance Manual, 2nd ed.
The Mountaineers Books, 2006.
Bohmrich, Craig. The Adventurer’s
Guide to Enjoyable Backpacking.
Elevation Creations, 2015.
Conners, Christine, and Tim Conners.
Lipsmackin’ Backpackin’:
Lightweight Trail-Tested Recipes
for Backcountry Trips, 2nd ed.
Falcon, 2000.
Drury, Jack, and Eric Holmlund.
The Camper’s Guide to
Outdoor Pursuits: Finding Safe,
Nature-Friendly, and Comfortable
Passage Through Wild Places.
Sagamore Publishing, 2006.
Forgey, William. Basic Illustrated:
Wilderness First Aid.
Falcon Guides, 2008.
Foster, Steven, and Roger Caras.
A Field Guide to Venomous
Animals and Poisonous Plants.
Houghton Mifflin, 1998.
Grubbs, Bruce. Desert Sense. The
Mountaineers Books, 2005.
Hall, Adrienne. The Essential
Backpacker: A Complete Guide
for the Foot Traveler. Ragged
Mountain Press, 2000.
Hampton, Bruce, and David Cole.
NOLS Soft Paths: Enjoying the
Wilderness Without Harming It,
4th ed. Stackpole Books, 2011.


94 BACKPACKING
Backpacking Resources.
Logue, Victoria. Hiking and
Backpacking: Essential Skills,
Equipment, and Safety, 2nd ed.
Menasha Ridge Press, 2004.
Marsh, Laurie Ann. Fork in the Trail:
Mouthwatering Meals and Tempting
Treats for the Backcountry.
Wilderness Press, 2007.
McGivney, Annette. Leave No Trace:
A Guide to the New Wilderness
Etiquette, 2nd ed. The Mountaineers
Books, 2003.
O’Bannon, Allen. Allen and Mike’s
Really Cool Backpackin’ Book:
Traveling and Camping Skills
for a Wilderness Environment!
Falcon, 2001.
Pearson, Claudia, ed. NOLS Cookery,
6th ed. Stackpole Books, 2011.
Petzoldt, Paul. The New Wilderness
Handbook. Norton, 1984.
Robbins, Michael W. The Hiking
Companion. Storey Publishing,
LLC, 2003.
Schimelpfenig, Tod, and Linda Lindsey.
NOLS Wilderness First Aid.
Stackpole Books, 2000.
Shillington, Ben. Winter Backpacking.
Heliconia Press, 2009.
Skurka, Andrew. The Ultimate Hiker’s
Gear Guide: Tools and Techniques to
Hit the Trail. National Geographic
Society, 2012.
Tilton, Buck. Outdoor Safety Handbook.
Stackpole Books, 2005.
Townsend, Chris. The Backpacker’s
Handbook, 4th ed. Ragged Mountain
Press, 2011.
Organizations and Websites
American Hiking Society
Toll-free telephone: 800-972-8608
Website: http://www.americanhiking.org
Bureau of Land Management
Telephone: 202-208-3801
Website: http://www.blm.gov
Leave No Trace Center for
Outdoor Ethics
Toll-free telephone: 800-332-4100
Website: http://www.LNT.org
Local Hikes
http://www.localhikes.com
National Park Service
1849 C Street NW
Washington, DC 20240
Telephone: 202-208-6843
Website: http://www.nps.gov
Recreation.gov
Website: http://www.recreation.gov
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
1849 C St. NW
Washington, DC 20240-0001
Toll-free telephone: 800-344-9453
Website: http://www.fws.gov
U.S. Forest Service
1400 Independence Ave. SW
Washington, DC 20250-1111
Toll-free telephone: 800-832-1355
Website: http://www.fs.fed.us
U.S. Geological Survey
Telephone: 703-648-5953
Website: http://www.usgs.gov
Website for map store:
http://store.usgs.gov


BACKPACKING 95
.Backpacking Resources
Periodicals
Backpacker magazine
2520 55th St., Suite 210
Boulder, CO 80301
Toll-free telephone: 800-666-3434
Website: http://www.backpacker.com
The use of pack-it-out kits for human waste is becom-
ing more common at many outdoor recreational areas.
In fact, some areas require packing out human waste.
If the land management agency does not provide kits
for visitors and you must bring your own, you may
want to obtain a ready-made, commercial kit for ease
and sanitation purposes.
One popular brand that is readily available is the
Wag Bag®, manufactured by Cleanwaste. For more
information, visit http://www.cleanwaste.com (with
your parent’s permission). Another widely used line
of personal sanitation products is made by Restop®.
Visit http://www.restop.com for more
information about their products.
Restop® 1
®
Wag Bag®