LAW


LAW
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


35913
ISBN 978-0-8395-3389-4
©2023 Boy Scouts of America
2023 Printing
FPO
Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Law or check Scoutbook for
the latest requirements.


LAW 3





LAW 5
Contents
What Is Law? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Great Beginnings: Where Law Comes From . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
Civil and Criminal Law . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
Law Enforcement: More Than a Gun and a Badge . . . . . . . . 35
Organizations That Help Protect Consumers and Sellers . . . . 49
The Law in Action. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
Planning a Mock Trial . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
Emerging Law . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
Careers in the Legal Profession . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74
Resources About Law . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78


Please approve new FPO photo


LAW 7
.What Is Law?
What Is Law?
Camporees are great! There’s a lot to do: swimming, good
fishing, adventure trails, and hiking expeditions. There’s the
skill-o-rama, where you can see how troops do things like
specialty cooking and arts and crafts. And huge arena shows
draw audiences in the tens of thousands.
This is the story of some Scouts who met at a camporee
and how a bull session there got them interested in law. One of
them, named Jeff, a First Class Scout, went on to earn his Law
merit badge. How did he do it? Read on to find out.
Jeff is a lot like you. He likes sports. He’s got a good
record in Scouting. He’s pretty good in school—not great
maybe, but not bad. He likes to hike and go camping.
One afternoon at the camporee, Jeff was walking around
with Raul, an Eagle Scout from another troop. They found a
newspaper on a bench, so they sat down to check the sports
page. Jeff finished first and glanced at the front page.
“Hey, Raul,” Jeff said, “there’s a sports story on the front
page, too. This headline says, ‘Stephens Wins Court Battle.’ It
must be a story about a tennis match!” He laughed, enjoying
his joke.
Raul said, “Ha, ha,” and continued reading the sports page.
Jeff read the front-page story, which was about a long
trial in a Texas court. “This is a real interesting case. This guy
Stephens sued the city for polluting a river with sewage—and
won! It’s hard to believe one guy could beat city hall.”
Raul looked up from the sports pages. “Well,” he said,
“I guess there are lots of laws that we don’t know anything
about. And I guess you can get justice,” he said uncertainly.
Just then Marcus, a Scout whom Jeff and Raul had met
earlier, walked up. “Hey, what are you guys doing?”
Jeff laughed. “We started out reading the sports page. But
all of a sudden we are wondering about the law and courts
and stuff like that.”


8 LAW
What Is Law?.
“Yeah?” Marcus said. “My Scoutmaster, Ms. Roth, is a
lawyer. If you guys aren’t doing anything, let’s go down to the
waterfront and talk to her. She’s fishing down there, I think.”
The three Scouts found Ms. Roth on the dock with her
line in the water and three beautiful trout on a string. “Hi,
guys,” Ms. Roth said. “Want to try your luck?”
Marcus said: “Not right now, Ms. Roth. This is Jeff and
Raul. We wanted to talk to you about law. Jeff and Raul were
reading an article in the paper about a trial in Texas. One thing
led to another . . . and here we are with some questions.”
“Sure. Sit down, guys,” Ms. Roth said. She reeled in her
line as they plopped down next to her. Jeff began explaining
that the story about the Texas trial had raised questions in his
mind. “Where does law come from? What is it really?” Jeff
asked. Marcus wanted to know what’s special about lawyers
and how a young person becomes one. Raul wanted to know
how law affects his own life.
Law Is Different Things to Different People
“Whoa, guys!” said Ms. Roth. “One question at a time. Let’s
start with the first one: What is law? That may sound like
an easy question, but there are many ways to define law.
Every judge, every lawyer, every police officer—maybe every
American—has different ideas of what it is. Law serves many
purposes and means different things to different people.”
Marcus broke in. “To me, laws are rules. They say what
you can do and what you can’t do, like going through a red
light or stealing….”
Law is a system
of ideas and
actions, a way
to help society
keep order and
stay together.


LAW 9
.What Is Law?
“Or hurting someone on purpose,” Raul added.
“But laws often help people, too,” Ms. Roth said. “Law is
much more than just a set of rules.
“The ‘Rule of Law’ is meant to make our society fairer and
the consequences of our decisions more
predictable so we can make good decisions.”
A definition for Rule of Law:
1. A system of self-government in which all
persons, including the government, are
accountable under the law.
2. A system based on fair, publicized, broadly
understood, and stable laws.
3. A fair, robust, and accessible legal process in
which rights and responsibilities based in
law are evenly enforced.
4. Diverse, competent, and independent
lawyers and judges.
Some years ago, Ms. Roth recalled, President
Lyndon B. Johnson spoke to Scouts at a national
Scout jamboree. He told them that the American idea
of freedom allows all citizens to speak their view,
worship as they want to, and be safe from actions the
government has no right to take. “President Johnson
also said that the equality of the poorest people and
the richest, the rights to enjoy liberty and go as far as
your abilities will take you, are all upheld and backed
by the U.S. legal system.”
Raul said: “I guess that’s the way it’s supposed
to be. But does it always work that way? Sometimes
people’s legal rights are denied, aren’t they?”
“I’m sorry to say the answer is yes,” Ms. Roth said. “But good
lawyers, concerned judges, and responsible citizens are always try-
ing to improve the system and make justice equal for everybody.”
Jeff remembered reading the Boys’ Life reprint on “Law and
Justice.” “Even the Greeks and Romans had systems of law,” he
said. “They took some of their ideas from the ancient Egyptians
and Babylonians from thousands of years ago. Who knows,
maybe even cavemen had some sort of system of laws.”
“Cavemen! Aw, come on!” Marcus scoffed.
“Sure,” replied Jeff. “When cavemen formed groups to help
or protect each other, they made rules for behavior. The rules
worked so everyone was satisfied. They kept the rules, and as
At the 1964 National Scout
Jamboree, President Johnson
told Scouts that the equality
of all people—poor and rich—
gives us all the right to
enjoy liberty.


10 LAW
What Is Law?.
time passed it was sort of a custom or tradition to obey the
rules. So those could have been the first laws.”
“As societies changed, as ways of living changed, laws
also changed to meet new needs,” said Ms. Roth. “Even
today, new laws are needed and being made. That is one
of the most important things to remember about law—it
changes to develop effective solutions to new problems
and new solutions to old problems.”
“That must mean lawyers have to keep a sharp
lookout for new laws that they didn’t learn when they
were in school,” said Marcus.
“That’s absolutely right,” Ms. Roth said. “There are
a number of ways that new laws are made. Do any
of you think you can name some?”
“In Washington, D.C., Congress
passes bills that become law when
the president signs them. That’s
called legislation,” Marcus
answered.
Ms. Roth said that was correct. “States
also make laws. They have legislatures that make laws con-
cerning the state and its citizens. Anyone can find these laws,
called statutes, in large statute books. The statutes of the federal
government are found in a set of large books called the United
States Code.”
“What gives state legislatures
or the U.S. Congress the right
to make laws?” asked one
of the Scouts.
Sources of Law
“Our Constitution is the supreme law of the United States.
In that amazing document, the powers of Congress to make
laws are set forth. It also gives states the power to legislate,”
Ms. Roth said.
Dig a little further to find the sources of law. Ask lawyers,
judges, and your teachers. You will find many sources, such as
tribal, customs, statutory (by legislation), constitutional, case,
and common law.
During dinner, one of the Scouts brought up another
source of law. This Scout recalled learning about the Ten
Commandments and the various rules of behavior that


LAW 11
.What Is Law?
developed from what is called divine law, or law issued
directly from God.
“That’s right,” said Ms. Roth. “Every religion has some set
of rules that are supposed to guide the way people live.”
Marcus spoke up: “There are laws that punish a person who
kills another person without justification. I guess you could trace
the beginning of those laws all the way back to Moses and the
Ten Commandments—maybe even further back.”
Ms. Roth agreed: “Laws that are said to come from God
were made a part of the beliefs and practices of various reli-
gions. When people started to write down laws to keep track
of them, many religious laws were included.”
“As time went on, societies developed laws based on social
customs and religious and tribal laws,” Ms. Roth said. “The U.S.
legal system is a good example of a system that drew upon other
systems to become what it is today. American law has its origins
in English law, which in turn developed from certain concepts of
Roman, Norman, and Germanic laws.”
“Every society added something of its own to make the
law fit special needs,” said Raul.


12 LAW
What Is Law?.
The Patterns of Law
“Right,” Ms. Roth said. “All the changes, additions, and years of
development make the law work in a certain kind of way. Law
always follows a pattern in its workings.”
“I’m not sure I follow you, Ms. Roth,” said Marcus with a
puzzled look.
“Let me put it this way,” Ms. Roth said. “Law is a way that
helps people solve problems and disputes. Laws aren’t made or
decided just because somebody wants to do it his or her way.
Judges, lawyers, and lawmakers follow guidelines—sort of a
legal path or trail—to reach their decisions. This established
procedure is one big reason why law helps keep order in society.
Also, the decisions of a judge and the way a legislature works
are usually open to public view. You can watch a courtroom
trial and you can go to your state capitol, Washington, D.C.,
or even your local city or town council to observe how laws
are followed or made.”
“I’m still not sure what law means to me or my family,”
said Raul. “You’ve described what law is, but what does it do
for me?”
Ms. Roth laughed. “Law affects all sorts of things concern-
ing you and your family. For instance, a law in your state says
that you must go to school when you reach a certain age and
stay in school for a certain number of years. At the same time,
law requires that your parents provide you with adequate food,
clothing, and shelter up to a certain age.”
Raul then asked, “Does the law control everything?”
“That’s a good question,” said Ms. Roth. “Some
people think law should control more activities, and
other people think law should control fewer.”
Ms. Roth told the young men: “There is an old
saying that the ‘Law favors honor and order . . .
life and liberty . . . and justice.’ Finding out more
about the law, how it works and what it does, is a
real adventure. You should talk to your Scoutmaster
and earn the Law merit badge.”
“I know a lot more now than I did this morning,”
Jeff said. “You’ve gotten me interested in finding out
as much as I can. When I get home, I’ll talk to my
Scoutmaster and he’ll help me find a merit badge
counselor. Maybe someday I’ll be a lawyer, too!”
Earning the Law merit badge
will give you a good sense
of how the law protects the
rights of all citizens.


LAW 13
.What Is Law?





LAW 15
.Great Beginnings: Where Law Comes From
Great Beginnings:
Where Law Comes From
Back home, one of the first things Jeff did was talk to his
Scoutmaster about the Law merit badge. His Scoutmaster sent
Jeff to the Law merit badge counselor, Mr. Hernandez.
They talked over the requirements and Mr. Hernandez
promised to take Jeff to the courthouse to see the law in
action. Then he suggested that Jeff start finding out where law
comes from. “If you want to know where you are, you should
know how you got there,” Mr. Hernandez said.
He suggested that Jeff start his research at the public
library or his school library to find out about the Code of
Hammurabi, Justinian’s Code, and the Magna Carta. Then,
Mr. Hernandez said, Jeff should come back and tell him how
parts of them apply today and show that he understood their
main points.
Jeff told his parents at dinner that night: “It’s really
amazing that thousands of years ago the Babylonian people
had written laws. And those laws developed from the law that
other people lived under for centuries before that.”
Jeff’s mother suggested that he read what he’d written
down at the library about early codes and the Magna Carta to
practice what he would talk about with Mr. Hernandez.
Early Codes and the Magna Carta
Jeff thought that was a good idea. He gathered his notes after
dinner and read them to his parents. “Hammurabi was the
king of the first Babylonian Empire. Because he ruled a large
region with many kinds of people, he wanted to set up a sys-
tem of law to apply everywhere in his empire,” Jeff explained.
“The probability
that we may fail
in the struggle
ought not to
deter us from
the support of a
cause we believe
to be just.”
—Abraham
Lincoln, 16th
president of the
United States,
1861–1865


16 LAW
Great Beginnings: Where Law Comes From.
“The Code of Hammurabi regulated trade inside and out-
side the empire, and recognized private property ownership.
It divided the king’s subjects into three classes: free citizens
with full civil rights, ordinary citizens with fewer rights than
free citizens, and slaves.”
“The criminal law in the code made much use of the
death penalty and often used cruel and drastic methods of
punishment. If somebody hit and badly hurt another person,
the offender’s hand would be cut off!”
Jeff’s father nodded. “That part about cutting off a
person’s hand for stealing or hurting someone reminds me
of a Bible verse that talks about an eye for an eye and a tooth
for a tooth.”
The first thing Jeff found when he looked up Justinian’s
Code was another definition of law. In the sixth century, when
Justinian was emperor of Rome, he said that law was “a theory
of right and wrong” and “an art of the good and the equitable.”
Jeff thought that sounded very much like modern ideas of law.
The trouble in Rome more than 14 centuries ago was that
its laws were an incredible mess! Roman laws were unclear to
even the most intelligent people.
Jeff explained that the laws had to be untangled and col-
lected so that they could be easily looked up. This process of
collecting the laws and placing them in order by subject was
called codification, from which we get the term order of laws.
Justinian decided to form a committee of lawyers, judges, and
wise citizens to place the laws into books. The committee
arranged the laws into 50 books collectively called The Digest.
Because the laws were updated and made understandable,
people were more sure what the laws of their society were.
Most important, people had a better chance for justice.
Justinian also made certain that his new code of law would
not become old and useless. Periodically, new laws were pub-
lished in books called The Novels to keep the code up to date.
Together, The Digest and The Novels formed the basis of
civil law. Justinian’s Roman laws greatly influenced the way
law developed all over the Western world.
Jeff learned that one major contribution to the develop-
ment of today’s laws comes from England. In 1215, King John
signed the Magna Carta, which means “great charter.” It was a
big step toward establishing English liberties and constitutional
government. The Magna Carta in turn influenced American law
in important ways.
Even though the
Magna Carta
helped guarantee
the rights for only
a small number
of free men who
were lords,
barons, knights,
and rich land
owners, it marked
the beginning
of written
guarantees of
people’s rights.
At that time most
people were still
feudal serfs—
almost like slaves.


LAW 17
.Great Beginnings: Where Law Comes From
“At the start,” Jeff said, “not everyone was included in the
rights given by the U.S. Constitution. As time passed, more and
more people were included.”
“What do you mean by that?” asked Mr. Hernandez when
Jeff visited him.
“When the United States was founded, only free white
males who were property owners and at least 21 years old
could vote. Later, the property requirement was dropped and
all white adult males had the right to vote. In 1870, after the
Civil War, former slaves were given the right to vote by the 15th
Amendment to the Constitution,” Jeff said.
“What about women during all that time?” Mr.
Hernandez asked.
“Women finally could vote in 1920 when the 19th
Amendment to the Constitution was adopted. American
Indians were declared full citizens by law in 1924 and
granted the right to vote. When the
26th Amendment passed in 1971,
the vote was extended to anyone
age 18 and older. These rights for every-
one were a long time coming
but they gradually became part of
our law,” Jeff told his counselor.
“The Magna Carta also gave rights
only to free men at first, but when the
feudal system ended and the present
English system started to grow, more
and more people were included.”
Abolitionist Frederick Douglass was a man
ahead of his time. In addition to fighting
for the rights of blacks, he also fought for
the rights of women.


18 LAW
Great Beginnings: Where Law Comes From.
The Jury System
“You’ll want to find out about the jury system next. A jury’s
role in trial has its origins in older systems, too,” said Mr.
Hernandez. “Find out how the jury became what it is today
and explain what it does.”
Jeff discovered two kinds of juries: petit or petty jury,
which means small; and grand jury, which means large. A petit
jury deliberates, or decides, the majority of criminal and civil
cases. In most cases, 12 people are chosen to be members of a
jury. These 12 jurors sit together to decide on the facts in a case
and return a verdict—a decision about whether the person on
trial is innocent or guilty of the charges against him or her.
A grand jury usually has more people than a petit jury.
It also has a very different task. A grand jury meets privately to
decide whether the government’s lawyers can take an accused
person to trial. The grand jury must consider evidence the gov-
ernment has gathered and then decide whether to indict, which
means to accuse, a person. The government must offer proof to
the grand jurors that a person suspected of a crime ought to go
to trial.
“Justice delayed
is justice denied.”
—William
Gladstone
(1809–1898),
four-time prime
minister of
Great Britain


LAW 19
.Great Beginnings: Where Law Comes From
Jeff found out that the jury has been a part of English
and American law for hundreds of years. The jury system was
brought to England around 1066. The idea was to get ordinary
citizens who were not lawyers or judges involved in the legal
system. The English jury system grew from other jury systems
and took hundreds of years to evolve. There was a time, though,
when there were no juries.
Development of the Jury System
The first rather primitive jury system began in ancient Greece.
Before a trial, a large number of citizens was chosen; then,
just before a trial began, a smaller number was taken from the
larger group. This was done so that no one could know ahead
of time who would be a juror and try to influence the decision.
Very often, hundreds of citizens would be on the jury. The very
size of it made attempts to corrupt, bribe, or scare individual
jurors difficult.
Imagine the confusion and noise of hundreds of people
trying to decide important matters of property and even life
and death! There were definitely faults in that system—but
it was the first try.
The Romans gave the jury system a new shape. A judge
defined the issues of a dispute, and a group of private persons
called a judice made the decision on how to handle the prob-
lem. The judices (jurors) worked without a judge present. Their
decisions were final and often harsh.
“Poor people who couldn’t pay their debts were put in jail
or even killed,” Jeff told Mr. Hernandez.
The Romans decided that juries were too powerful and
developed a trial system somewhat like ours—a hearing before
a judge and a jury.
In early Germany, the head of the court would gather a
small group of landowners to help decide cases. There were
usually seven such helpers and sometimes 12. They could talk
about the case away from the judge—much like the closed-
door, secret discussions of American juries.
After many years, the jury became a group that decided
whether the facts of a case warranted an innocent or guilty
verdict. Life was sometimes rough on those jurors. They were
often locked in small rooms without food or drink until they
reached a decision.
“If we do not
maintain justice,
justice will not
maintain us.”
—Sir Francis
Bacon (1561–1626),
English philosopher


20 LAW
Great Beginnings: Where Law Comes From.
In the U.S., our jury system is modeled on the English
Jury; after the Pilgrims made use of juries the rule in 1623. The
actual origin of the jury is unclear. It might already have been
indigenous to England or have been taken there by the Norman
invaders in 1066. Jury trials replaced so-called “Irrational
Trials”—Trial by Ordeal, Trial by Combat, or even Trial of ani-
mal criminals.
Jeff also learned that when English colonists came to
America they brought the English system of law. The jury was
an important part of that system and remained important in
the colonies. It was seen as a way to keep the administration of
justice in the hands of ordinary citizens and to prevent powerful
or rich citizens from influencing the court.
The Jury and U.S. Law
Among the first 10 amendments to the Constitution, known
collectively as the Bill of Rights, are several that guarantee the
right to a jury trial in federal criminal cases and certain civil
cases. The Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, and Seventh Amendments are
a package of rights that include a fair and speedy trial, the
right to confront witnesses, the right to counsel (to have a
lawyer), and the right to trial by jury in specified cases. The
Fifth Amendment says that accused persons in criminal trials
do not have to testify. These amendments, combined with
statutes and case law—laws established by court decisions—
make up the rights and procedures guaranteed to all Americans
in court.


LAW 21
.Great Beginnings: Where Law Comes From
Rules for jury trials are often different from state to state.
Some states require unanimous verdicts or decisions. In other
states, in trials for certain types of crimes, a verdict can come
with 2⁄3, 3⁄4, or 5⁄6 of the jurors agreeing. Most states have juries
of 12 people; others allow juries of fewer than 12.
Minor crimes such as traffic violations often do not have
jury trials. “Just imagine the time it would take, the huge
workload upon the justice system, if every person accused of
speeding could have a jury trial,” said Mr. Hernandez. “Still,
any defendant going to trial may choose a jury trial.”
The Bill of Rights


22 LAW
Great Beginnings: Where Law Comes From.
Jeff wondered how juries were chosen. Mr. Hernandez
explained that jury selection is usually accomplished by choos-
ing names at random from voting lists. This method tends
to ensure a mixture of jurors—men and women, poor and
wealthy, people with different jobs and backgrounds. A juror
should live in the area in which the crime allegedly took place
and should have no criminal record. Lawyers for both sides
may question possible jurors about their background and atti-
tudes to see whether they should serve. Some possible jurors
may be excused before the trial by the judge, and the lawyers
can ask that certain jurors be excused if they display attitudes
that might be harmful to their side of the case.
“Lawyers like to choose a jury that will be sympathetic to
their side,” Mr. Hernandez told Jeff. He went on to say that a
possible juror must not know the people involved in the trial
or have special feelings about them or the issues in the case.
Some critics question the effectiveness of juries. They
say that jurors will not always follow a law they don’t like
or understand.
But those who favor the jury system praise its flexibility.
They say that the jury realizes the spirit of the law and can
shape true justice to a particular case. In reaching their deci-
sion, jurors try to apply a sense of fairness to the strict letter
of the law.
Location, Location, Location
If a defendant’s lawyer feels a client might not
receive a fair trial—because of pretrial publicity, for
instance—the lawyer may request a change of venue.
After reviewing the circumstances of the case, the
appointed judge may or may not grant the motion
to request a change of venue.


LAW 23
.Great Beginnings: Where Law Comes From
Famous Trials
Mr. Hernandez gave Jeff the names of books that describe
famous trials. (See the book list at the back of this pamphlet.)
“When you discover two trials that you would like to
discuss with me, research the facts and issues and then pre-
pare to tell me what was learned from each trial. Tell me what
effect each trial had on life, liberty, and law,” Mr. Hernandez
instructed Jeff.
On the following pages are the two trials Jeff studied—
the Trial of Socrates and the Nuremburg War Crimes Trials.
Other famous trials that you might want to look up
include: Gideon v. Wainwright, decided in 1963 by the U.S.
Supreme Court, which guaranteed a criminal defendant the
assistance of an attorney if he or she cannot afford one; and
Sheppard v. Maxwell, decided by the Supreme Court in 1966,
which involved a conflict between two of our most important
rights—freedom of the press and the right to a fair trial.
Prosecutor Ralph Albrecht addresses the Nuremberg court in 1945.


24 LAW
Great Beginnings: Where Law Comes From.
The Trial of Socrates:
The right to be different, to think freely, and
to speak your opinions.
Socrates was a philosopher—a thinker and teacher—who lived in
Athens in ancient Greece. His ideas were unpopular with the rulers
of Athens.
Socrates believed that goodness is based on knowledge, and
wickedness on ignorance. He tried to teach people the meaning of
his motto Know Thyself and to open their minds to new thoughts.
He always searched for truth and never hesitated to criticize the
government and its leaders. Because they feared and hated him,
the government leaders arrested Socrates and put him on trial for
“corruption of the young” and
“neglect of the gods whom the
city worships.”
Most of the jury of 500 men
disagreed with Socrates and his
defense of freedom of speech
and thought. He had no lawyer
to assist him.
Because the truth often hurts
when it uncovers dishonesty, evil
people sometimes want to stamp
out the free exchange of ideas.
Socrates did not convince the jury
of his innocence and was con-
demned to death by swallowing
poison. He spent his last hours
of life talking over his ideas with
friends. He took the poison and
died peacefully, with the knowl-
edge that the truth will never die.
Greek philosopher Socrates once
said, “Nothing is to be preferred
before justice.”


LAW 25
.Great Beginnings: Where Law Comes From
The Nuremberg War Crimes Trials:
Conscience, morality, and the state.
During World War II the Nazi government of Germany set out to
conquer Europe. In the process, millions of people were thrown into
the horrors of war. Huge numbers of soldiers on all sides died in the
long, bloody combat.
Millions of innocent civilians—men, women, and children—were
deliberately put to death by the Nazis. These deaths were not unavoid-
able, accidental, or battle-connected: They were planned mass murders
carried out as part of the Nazis’ insane quest to produce a “master
race.” The main group of civilian victims were 6 million European Jews,
who were starved, shot, or fed into gas chambers and fiery furnaces.
This number included more than 1 million children. Soldiers who
were prisoners of the Nazis also were executed. Millions of innocent
people died.
When the war ended in 1945, the victorious Allies—United States,
Britain, and Russia—were shocked at the Nazi crimes. Many nations
had long agreed to obey certain laws—rules of war—that would keep
civilians out of violence and danger as much as possible, and would
treat prisoners of war humanely.
The Nazis violated all such rules of war. Worse, they violated rules
of humanity, decency, and morality. The Allies put Nazi officials, gener-
als, admirals, and private citizens on trial in Nuremberg, Germany, for
their crimes against humanity.
A panel of judges from many nations decided that people could
not abandon their basic humanity even if the government says they
must. The court also ruled that a government that orders the killing and
torture of innocent people is acting outside the law and thereby loses
its right to govern.
The principles of decency and human rights for all were affirmed
by the Nuremberg War Crimes Trials. Many Nazi war criminals were
executed or imprisoned. Other Nazis killed themselves when they
realized their positions were indefensible in law or morality.





LAW 27
.Civil and Criminal Law
Civil and Criminal Law
Jeff learned that there are two separate systems of solving legal
disputes—civil law and criminal law. Disagreements between
two parties about their rights and responsibilities are handled
in civil actions. They involve the private and civil rights of
individuals, corporations, government bodies, and others.
Criminal law is concerned with harmful acts called crimes.
Crimes are forbidden by statute law, and if the person who
commits a crime is discovered, the state will take that person
to court and seek punishment in the name of the people.
To keep the basic concepts of civil and criminal law clear
in his mind, Jeff made the following chart:
CRIMINAL LAW CIVIL LAW
WHO IS INVOLVED The state prosecutes; it
goes to court against the
accused person.
Usually a person or
corporation goes to
court against another
person or corporation.
THE "BURDEN
OF PROOF"
The state must prove
the accused person is
guilty “beyond a reason-
able doubt.”
The plaintiff must
prove its position by
a “preponderance of
the evidence.”
PENALTIES Imprisonment and/or
a fine.
No imprisonment. An
award of money (called
“damages”) or an order to
perform or refrain from
performing an act
is issued.


28 LAW
Civil and Criminal Law.
What does Jeff’s chart tell us? You probably can think
of quite a few crimes. But did you know that civil law is the
“bigger” of the two kinds? More people are involved with
civil law than with criminal law, and more civil law cases are
decided in courts. But you probably have heard more about
criminal cases than you have heard about the thousands of
civil cases that wind their way through the courts each day.
Civil Law
Today’s civil law developed from Roman civil law. It is the
branch of the law that affects all citizens and a wide range
of rights and legal questions. While criminal law deals with
wrongs committed against the public, civil law deals with
wrongs committed against individuals.
A civil action may seek to recover money or property
that rightfully belongs to someone, or to correct a situation
a person thinks is wrong, unfair, or unjust.
Civil law remedies arguments over private rights. The peo-
ple seeking a remedy are adversary parties. That simply means
that one person is on one side of an argument and someone
else is on the other side. The one bringing the suit is called
the plaintiff. The one charged with doing something wrong
is the defendant.
Jeff made a list of things that civil law includes.
Civil law includes:
• Contracts
• Corporation law
• Marriage
• Divorce
• Trusts
• Wills
• Estates
• Patents
• Copyrights
• Trademarks
• Taxes
• Property (land, build-
ings, money, jewelry,
and so forth)
• Torts


LAW 29
From that long list, Jeff
discovered that most civil law
cases arise from contracts and
torts. But what are torts? A tort
is a wrong or an injury
committed against persons or
property other than a breach
of contract. Examples
include trespass, false arrest,
libel, slander, negligence,
nuisance, and assault and
battery. If people camp
on posted land without
permission, they may have
committed the tort of trespass.
The owner of the property might start a
civil action against the trespasser and ask for money,
which is referred to as “damages,” or other relief.
Criminal Law
Look at Jeff’s chart again as you make comparisons between
civil and criminal law. You will see that criminal law leaves
the responsibility of enforcing and prosecuting largely to
the government. The government will act as plaintiff and
prosecute the accused, asking for punishment in the name
of the people. The accused in this criminal action becomes
the defendant. Thus, while civil law protects private rights,
criminal law involves the protection of us all.
People who are accused of breaking criminal laws are pro-
tected by law, too. The U.S. Constitution and state constitutions
assure persons of many rights and safeguards in the criminal
law process. The right to a lawyer, even if the defendant cannot
pay for one, and the right to a fair and speedy trial (by jury if
the defendant wishes) are basic rights of accused persons.
Some crimes, of course, are far more serious than others.
Crimes are divided into two categories: felonies and misdemean-
ors. A misdemeanor is a crime that usually results in a fine or a
penalty of no more than one year’s imprisonment. Felonies carry
greater punishments, usually imprisonment in a state penitentiary.
A forcible felony, such as murder, rape, robbery, burglary, arson,
kidnapping, or any other felony that involves the use or threat of
physical violence, carries long jail terms.
.Civil and Criminal Law


30 LAW
Civil and Criminal Law.
Types of Crimes
Offenses Against a Person
1. Homicide (murder, manslaughter, and reckless homicide)
2. Assault and battery; aggravated assault (placing a person in
fear of bodily harm and causing bodily harm)
3. Kidnapping (confinement of another person against his or
her will)
4. Robbery (theft from a person by force or threat of force)
Offenses Against Property
1. Burglary (breaking and entering with intent to commit a felony
or theft)
2. Arson (damage done deliberately by fire or explosives)
3. Larceny (taking away property without the owner’s consent and
with the intent to permanently deprive the owner)
4. Embezzlement (fraudulent use and appropriation of property or
money entrusted to a person by others)
5. Theft (obtaining control of property by deception or threat)
6. Fraud (taking property by false pretenses)
7. Receiving, concealing, or selling stolen property
8. Forgery (making or altering any document or using such
document to knowingly defraud)
9. Counterfeiting (copying money or documents to deceive
or defraud)
10. Extortion (obtaining money or valuable property by threat
or force)
Other Crimes
1. Hijacking of boats, airplanes, trains, automobiles, and buses
2. Unlawful use of a weapon
3. Illegal eavesdropping


LAW 31
.Civil and Criminal Law
Within these two categories, criminal law has natural
divisions. Crimes can be committed against a person, against
property, and in other ways.
Jeff went to the law library at the county courthouse to
find out more. Mr. Hernandez had told Jeff to pick any state in
the whole country and any crime. Then he should look up that
state’s criminal code—its criminal laws—for that crime.
Jeff picked a thick, red book with gold letters. It was the
Illinois Revised Statutes. He checked the index and opened
the volume to the section on the Illinois Criminal Code. He
looked for the code on armed robbery, and made copies of a
few pages so he could take them with him. Later, after reading
those pages, he had a discussion with his counselor.
“Imagine this,” Mr. Hernandez said. “You are walking
down the street and suddenly a man points a gun at your head
and tells you to hand over your money fast. After handing over
your money, the gunman tries to get away as quickly as pos-
sible. If that happened, what laws would have been broken?”
State criminal
codes can also
be found online
by searching for
your state and
“criminal code.”


32 LAW
Civil and Criminal Law.
Jeff thought for a moment. “Stealing!
He stole my money.”
“The law is much more exact than that,”
Mr. Hernandez said. “Every crime has its proper
category. Look at sections 18.1 and 18.2 of the
Illinois Criminal Code. Read it to me.”
Jeff looked up the sections and read aloud.
“‘A person commits robbery when he or she takes
property . . . from the person or presence of another
by the use of force or by threatening the imminent use
of force.’ So that would have been a robbery, right?”
“Read on,” Mr. Hernandez said.
“‘A person commits armed robbery when he or she
violates section 18.1, and he or she carries on or about his or
her person or is otherwise armed with a firearm,’” Jeff read.
“There you have it,” said Mr. Hernandez. “Robbery is
what the law calls a Class 2 felony. Armed robbery is a far more
serious crime. The law says armed robbery ‘is a Class X felony
for which 15 years shall be added to the term of imprisonment
imposed by the court.’”
“What about this ‘burden of proof’ business?” asked Jeff.
“That means that in a criminal law case, the state can hope
to get a conviction—a finding of guilty—against the accused
only if guilt is proven ‘beyond a reasonable doubt.’”
“How is that different from ‘preponderance of the evi-
dence’ in civil law?”
“In civil law, your proof and evidence must be the most
believable and give more of a feeling of truth than the other
party can give. In criminal law, you are concerned with a
person’s liberty, not just money. ‘Beyond a reasonable doubt’
means that the state must fully satisfy the jury so that jurors are
entirely convinced of the defendant’s guilt. The evidence pre-
sented must be absolutely clear, precise, and certain. There just
cannot be any room for doubt when a person’s freedom
is at stake.”
“Do you think it’s always smart to put convicted criminals
in jail?” Jeff asked.
“Jail can be a very rough, horrible experience. Many
judges realize that the prison system needs a lot of attention
and reform, so they won’t put certain people in prison.”
“What else can they do?”


LAW 33
.Civil and Criminal Law
“They can place an offender on probation. Especially for
younger, first-time offenders, jail might do more harm than
good. Probation means that the offender will be under the
supervision of the court. A probation officer will meet with the
offender from time to time. The offender may be allowed to live
at home and lead a normal life, but with restrictions on where
he or she can go, what he or she can do, and whom he or she
can see. The offender must check in with the probation officer
and must stay out of trouble. At any sign or hint that the
offender is violating a law or restriction, the probation could be
ended and the supervising judge might send the person to jail.
Probation is a way of giving someone a second chance.”
“What about people
already in jail? Do they have
any chance to show the com-
munity that they will not
break the law again?”
“Yes, Jeff. The legal
system is based on the belief
that justice and mercy go
together. A person in jail
may be entitled to parole
after having served a certain
portion of the prison term.
If the offender behaves in
jail and shows that he or she
truly has changed, learned
from past mistakes (the crime
committed), and will not be
a danger to society, a group
of citizens called a parole
board may decide to release
him or her before the
sentence is completed.”





LAW 35
.Law Enforcement: More Than a Gun and a Badge
Law Enforcement:
More Than a Gun
and a Badge
Jeff was ready to begin requirement 4. He was eager to learn
about the responsibilities of local police or sheriff’s depart-
ments and the state and national law enforcement agencies.
Jeff was aware that police often are considered the first
line of defense in the legal system. Society would most likely
be chaotic without police protection and services.
“Even though the police serve necessary functions of
enforcing criminal laws, protecting lives and property, and
maintaining order, many people resent them,” Mr. Hernandez
said. “Some members of society view the police as a harsh tool
of a system that has deprived and hurt them. Police officers
sometimes find their own prejudices aroused and return that
distrust. As a result, the police and the people they are sup-
posed to serve sometimes don’t get along.”
“It must be very hard to be a police officer,” Jeff said
quietly. He knew about the mixed feelings toward police. He
knew that police do good things, too. (For help in getting
people’s views on law enforcement, see the questionnaire
later in this chapter.)
Jeff made an appointment and went to the district police
station near his home to talk to Corporal Deborah O’Brien.
“Hello, Jeff,” she said as they shook hands. “I’m the watch
commander this afternoon. That means I have to keep an eye
on all the patrols during this shift, so why don’t we sit in the
communications room.”


36 LAW
Law Enforcement: More Than a Gun and a Badge.
Corporal O’Brien and Jeff entered a large room full of
electronic equipment, lighted maps of the town, and other
devices. The lighted maps were “crime maps” and patrol area
maps showing where patrol cars were and where extra patrols
cars were needed to help prevent crimes.
Jeff watched the lighted panels and heard the crackling
of radio messages coming to the station from patrol officers.
He told Corporal O’Brien about his conversation with
Mr. Hernandez.
The Role of the Law
Enforcement Officer
The corporal looked serious and spoke slowly.
“It is almost impossible to take care of every
problem. But being a police officer means
handling problems. We have to protect lives
and property, of course, and we try to detect
crime and arrest offenders. Police officers
must also handle unruly crowds, patrol
streets, protect neglected or lost children,
give emergency first aid, step into family
arguments, among other things.


LAW 37
.Law Enforcement: More Than a Gun and a Badge
“Most police departments send their officers through some
sort of training institute. This is rarely enough to train officers
to cope with complex problems, different groups of people, and
various situations.”
“What does this department do to educate its police officers
better?” Jeff asked.
“Our officers take college courses on department time and
at the department’s expense. We hope our personnel can learn
as much as possible about people and problem solving. We
want to make this police force more professional. It is impor-
tant for an officer to understand people and society by learning
about sociology and psychology,” Corporal O’Brien said.
Another way to increase police professionalism is to elimi-
nate improper conduct. Jeff wondered what citizens can do if
they have complaints against a police officer or the department.
Corporal O’Brien explained: “Most departments have
either a civilian review board or an internal complaints section.
A group of citizens or the department itself may investigate if
a complaint has merit. If a police officer is found to be respon-
sible for the action charged in the complaint, he or she can
be fired or suspended for a period of time without pay. Of
course, if the officer committed a criminal act, he or she
can be prosecuted.”


38 LAW
Law Enforcement: More Than a Gun and a Badge.
She continued: “Police officers would like to see crime
reduced and prevented. A good place to start is with young
people. When young people get in trouble with the law, they
need special guidance. This department, like many others, has
special officers who work with young people only. They are
called juvenile officers. It is their duty to talk to young people
and try to help them stay out of trouble with the law. Prison
is no place for anyone to be. We try to see to it that as few
youths as possible end up in that miserable situation.”
“How do you become a police officer?” asked Jeff.
“We give interested applicants a written examination to
test their intelligence and mental alertness,” Corporal O’Brien
said. “They also get a physical agility test. The highest scoring
candidates will be the first ones asked to take further tests as
jobs open up in the department. Candidates must have good
character and no criminal convictions. We check their back-
grounds very carefully. They also must have at least a high
school diploma or the equivalent. After formal training at a
police institute, new officers spend time on patrol duty with
an experienced patrol officer. Only then do they become full-
fledged police officers.”


LAW 39
.Law Enforcement: More Than a Gun and a Badge
Problems of
Law Enforcement
Corporal O’Brien lifted a large book with
very wide pages and placed it on the
table in front of Jeff. “Now, you can take
a look at exactly what a law enforcement
officer does during a typical day. This is
called our log. The log tells what each
officer on patrol did while on duty.”
Jeff looked through the log and saw
many examples of police officers protect-
ing lives and property. One officer gave
first aid at a car crash, and another helped
settle a family argument.
As Jeff leafed through more pages in
the police log, he counted many citations
for speeding, failing to stop at a stop
sign, and other traffic violations.
Corporal O’Brien noted that many
policemen are bothered that they must
do certain tasks that people with less
training could probably do. “Desk and clerk work, minor
traffic violations, traffic control, and court appearances drain
time and personnel from the police force. Hundreds of hours are
lost by sitting in court or writing traffic tickets. ‘Para-police’ or
community service officers—civilians who provide assistance to
police but aren’t authorized to arrest people—could handle some
of these duties, freeing well-trained law enforcement officers
to spend more time patrolling, preventing crime, and working
with youth.”
Jeff thought that was a good idea. He thanked Corporal
O’Brien for her time and interest. “I really have a better idea
now of what law enforcement is all about.”
The following questionnaire will help you find out more about people’s
attitudes toward law enforcement officials and their work. The question-
naire does not reflect any views of the Boy Scouts of America. Rather,
it tries to raise issues so that a wide range of opinions and ideas can
be discussed.


40 LAW
Law Enforcement: More Than a Gun and a Badge.
Sample Questions to Ask the General
Public for Requirement 4
With these questions, interview people to find out their views. After they
answer these questions, discuss your views with them.
After they answer these questions, discuss their views with them.
1. What role do law enforcement officers play in protecting the citizens
and the property in your community?
2. What recommendations would you make for improving relations
between law enforcement officers and citizens in your community?
3. If you had an opportunity to speak to a law enforcement officer,
what questions would you ask?
4. In your opinion, how can we help law enforcement?


LAW 41
.Law Enforcement: More Than a Gun and a Badge
Sample Questions to Ask Law Enforcement
Officers for Requirement 4
Discuss the questions below with a law enforcement officer. Probe
the officer’s attitudes toward the job he or she holds and the public
he or she serves. Your conversation should cover a wide range of
topics, some of which might not be mentioned here.
1. In your opinion, what are your duties and responsibilities to
your community?
2. What training and education did you receive in order to be a law
enforcement officer?
3. How can we help you do a better job? Do you want the public’s
help? How can people and the police understand each other better?
4. What is being done in your community to help police officers
and people know each other better? How does diversity in your
community affect your job? What else can be done to help officers
know the community?
5. What are the biggest crime problems in our area? How do police
deal with these problems?


42 LAW
Law Enforcement: More Than a Gun and a Badge.
State and Federal Law Enforcement
Besides local law enforcement agencies such as the police, Jeff
learned about state and federal law enforcement agencies.
The enforcement of state laws is often the duty of the state
police. State troopers patrol state and interstate highways
for traffic violators and arrest criminal suspects within the
state. Large rural areas and many small towns often lack
effective police protection. Small forces are often under-
equipped, understaffed, and undertrained.
Federal government agencies such as the Federal
Bureau of Investigation have law enforcement respon-
sibilities. The FBI investigates violations of federal law.
Activities that threaten the peace and security of the United
States also are under FBI jurisdiction. The FBI is a branch of
the U.S. Department of Justice. FBI agents are college educated
and often have legal training. They receive special training in
law enforcement and crime detection at the FBI Academy. Jeff
also remembered Corporal O’Brien telling him that the FBI
helps local and state law enforcement agencies by maintaining
a central file of millions of fingerprints.
“Police work means more than I ever thought it did,”
Jeff told his parents. “Law enforcement deals with many
problems in our society, which is far from perfect and needs
everyone’s help.”


LAW 43
Laws That Help Protect
Consumers and Sellers
Jeff turned his attention to requirement 5. He wanted to
learn more about laws that help protect buyers and sellers.
He looked up the Federal Trade Commission on the internet
and found the Bureau of Consumer Protection’s Division of
Enforcement at www.ftc.gov/about-ftc/bureaus-offices.
He learned that the Bureau’s enforcement division conducts
a wide variety of law enforcement activities to protect consum-
ers. These include conducting investigations and prosecuting civil
actions to stop fraudulent, unfair, or deceptive marketing and
advertising practices; and enforcing consumer protection laws,
rules, and guidelines.
Jeff discovered that this important arm of law enforcement
has recently investigated e-commerce and the internet, including
online shopping and unfulfilled holiday delivery promises. It also
handles complaints about employment opportunities fraud. These
“consumer cops” often check into scholarship scams that falsely
guarantee scholarships.
The Bureau of Consumer Protection investigates questionable
claims about the safety and effectiveness of diet drugs, weight loss
aids, herbal remedies, and alternative treatments. Advertisers who
make false claims about these products may come under
the scrutiny of the Bureau’s officers, which could result in
action before federal administrative law judges or the U.S.
District Courts.
The Bureau enforces trade laws, rules, and guides through
administrative or federal court proceedings. Such rules include
the Mail or Telephone Order Merchandise Rule, which requires
regular and online companies to ship purchases to consumers
when promised (or within 30 days if no time is specified) or to
give consumers the option to cancel their order for a refund.
If a company sells a T-shirt with a “Made in U.S.A.” label,
it must comply with the Bureau’s guidelines for making that
claim. Another trade rule helps protect consumers from fraud by
requiring fiber content labeling of textile, wool, and fur products,
with care label instructions attached to clothing and fabrics.
Other energy rules require companies to disclose the
energy costs of home appliances, the octane ratings of
gasoline, and the efficiency rating of home insulation.
.Law Enforcement: More Than a Gun and a Badge


44 LAW
Law Enforcement: More Than a Gun and a Badge.
Fraud
When Jeff told his counselor what he had learned about
consumer protection laws, Mr. Hernandez nodded his
approval. “You know, Jeff, a major problem facing
Americans today is fraud,” Mr. Hernandez said.
“What exactly is fraud?” Jeff asked.
Jeff’s counselor explained that fraud means that a false
statement—a lie—must be spoken, acted, or written, and the
person making the false statement must know it is untrue when
it is made. This act of fraud can sometimes make a binding
contract between two people invalid or unenforceable. The
falsehood must have influenced the person who was deceived
and misled, so that money or other property was lost because
he or she believed and relied upon that statement.
Mr. Hernandez suggested that Jeff think about the
following examples: “If a real estate broker sells land to a buyer,
promising that this is the richest, most fertile farmland
in the region, but it turns out the land is sand and you can’t
grow a single potato on it, is the seller guilty of fraud? Or could
you say that the seller was only stating an opinion to help sell
that land?”
Jeff thought for a moment. “You know, the buyer doesn’t
have to take the broker’s word. The buyer can observe the land
and check things out.”
Mr. Hernandez agreed. “That’s what is meant by the old
saying Buyer Beware! But what if someone applied for a life
insurance policy and concealed past medical problems from the
insurance company? Is this concealment an effort to
obtain the policy by fraud? Do these examples fit into the
definition of fraud?”
“That’s a good question!” Jeff said. “I’ll think about it.”
Spirit of Fairness
The law recognizes that bargains made between buyers and
sellers must have a spirit of fairness and an element of basic
justice. Gross overreaching means taking obvious unfair advan-
tage of a weaker party in a contract. Such unethical practices
are not tolerated by some courts. Mr. Hernandez gave an exam-
ple of a situation in which a consumer agreed to a contract that
appeared to be unfair.


LAW 45
.Law Enforcement: More Than a Gun and a Badge
In a case titled Williams v. Walker-Thomas Furniture
Co., which was decided in the mid-60s, Ms. Williams
bought furniture and appliances over time from
the furniture company. She bought about $1,800
worth of goods and owed the company about
$200. “You might think she owned what she
had already paid for,” Mr. Hernandez said.
But she did not. Each time Ms. Williams
bought new items from the company, she
signed a complicated contract that said until
full payment was made for all the items she
had ever bought there, those items belonged
to the store. If she missed one of her payments,
the store would repossess, or take back, every
single piece. The store knew that she was out of
work and that she supported herself and her seven
children on a $218 monthly check from the government.
She bought another item and missed the first payment.
The store took everything back—more than $1,600 worth of
goods already paid for were gone because Ms. Williams had
signed a contract full of fine print and technical, hard-to-
understand language. She understood, however, that something
unfair was happening to her.
Ms. Williams went to court to challenge the legality of the
contract. The trial judge said that because she had signed the
contract, she was bound to responsibilities under the agree-
ment. If it was unfair, she should have refused to sign it.
Ms. Williams and her lawyer appealed to the U.S. Court
of Appeals. Judge J. Skelly Wright reviewed the case. He
reversed the decision of the trial judge and decided that there
are times when a contract’s terms are shocking to decency—
“unconscionable,” he called it. He said that Ms. Williams’s con-
tract was so full of unreasonable, deceptive, hidden language
that she had no idea what she was signing. The court, he went
on, should not allow such things by approving them as legal.
Jeff was impressed with Judge Wright’s logic and humane
attitude. “The law wouldn’t be respected by everybody if it
allowed such things to go on. I’m glad there are judges like
Judge Wright!”
Mr. Hernandez continued, “A good judge, no matter if he
or she presides over a local traffic court or the Supreme Court,
will always try to combine the strict letter of the law with the
spirit of the law.”


46 LAW
Law Enforcement: More Than a Gun and a Badge.
Consumer Protection
Mr. Hernandez also told Jeff about the Truth in Lending Act,
which was passed in 1968 as part of the Consumer Protection
Act. This set of laws requires the seller to inform the buyer
in clear terms exactly how much interest will be charged for
a loan or credit agreement. Laws that enforce truth in label-
ing, packaging, and advertising also help. The Federal Trade
Commission, the Food and Drug Administration, and even the
Federal Communications Commission have all taken steps to
help protect American consumers.
Mr. Hernandez said: “You can easily research these
agencies on the internet. Just access www.ftc.gov, www.fda.gov,
or www.fcc.gov and you will learn a great deal.”
Here are some of the ways consumers are protected at the
federal level:
• Anti-Spam Act
• Consumer Product Safety Act
• Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act
(FACTA)
• Fair Credit Billing Act
• Fair Credit Reporting Act
• Fair Debt Collection Practices Act
• Federal Trade Commission Act
• Food and Drug Administration Act
(labeling and disclosures)
When Jeff got home that night, he
read more about various acts on the Federal
Trade Commission’s website. Here is what
he learned about some other laws that were
passed to protect consumers.
The Children’s Online Privacy
Protection Act of 1998 protects young
people’s privacy by giving parents the tools
to control what information is collected from
their children online. Commercial website
and online services operators who knowingly
collect personal information from children under age 13 must
• Notify parents.
• Obtain parental consent before collecting data on the child.
• Give parents a choice as to whether their child’s information
will be disclosed to third parties.
Always have
a parent’s
permission
before using
the internet.


LAW 47
.Law Enforcement: More Than a Gun and a Badge
• Provide parents with access to their child’s information.
• Let parents prevent further use of collected information.
• Not require a child to provide more information than is
reasonably necessary to participate in an activity.
• Maintain the “confidentiality, security, and integrity of the
information.”
Another emerging area of consumer law deals with
identity theft. What is identity theft? It happens when someone
exploits the use of your name, Social Security number, credit
card number, or some other personal information without your
knowledge and with the intent to commit fraud or theft. One
way for someone to steal another’s identity is through a phishing
scam. This involves sending an email that claims to be from a
financial institution or a government agency asking you to verify
personal information. The message directs you to a website that
looks official but isn’t. To protect yourself, never email personal
or financial information. The Identity Theft and Assumption
Deterrence Act of 1998 makes the Federal Trade Commission
(FTC) a central clearinghouse for identity theft complaints. The
act requires the FTC to log and acknowledge such complaints,
provide victims with relevant information, and refer their
complaints to appropriate agencies and law enforcement.
The FTC, the Web, and You
One area that concerns the Federal Trade
Commission is the protection of children
who use the internet. The FTC’s Children’s
Online Privacy Protection Act of 1998 calls
for operators of commercial websites and
online services to “obtain verifiable consent
from a parent or guardian before they collect
personal information from children.”


There are laws that help protect consumers from being harassed by aggressive
telemarketers and other advertisers.


LAW 49
.Organizations That Help Protect Consumers and Sellers
Organizations That Help
Protect Consumers
and Sellers
When Jeff and Mr. Hernandez met again, Jeff told his coun-
selor about some of the acts he’d learned more about at the
Federal Trade Commission’s website.
Mr. Hernandez told Jeff it was important to remember
that state and local governments also have a department
of consumer affairs and laws to help victims of fraud and
dishonest business practices.
For example, the Illinois Consumer Fraud and Decep
tive Business Practices Act protects people who have been
talked into buying things they don’t need by high-pressure
door-to-door salespeople. The law says that a person can
cancel an order for an item he or she agreed to buy within
three days of the sale if the total cost is more than $25. Many
states have consumer fraud acts that regulate retail sales, and
make the consumer and seller share the cost of repairs for
certain parts on used cars.
Many local and county governments also have an office
which handles fraud, consumer complaints, fair business prac-
tices, and consumer protection. If people don’t report their
complaints to such agencies, however, the agencies can’t be
useful. Honest businesspeople benefit when dishonest ones
are taken to court. Everyone benefits when fraud is prosecuted
in court.
Small claims courts exist to settle legal disputes over
relatively small amounts of money or property. These courts
also help the consumer. Legal aid organizations and public
defender offices help people who cannot afford a lawyer.


Please approve new FPO photo


LAW 51
.The Law in Action
The Law in Action
Jeff was now ready to visit a courtroom so he could see the
law in action. He invited his friend Raul to join him and Mr.
Hernandez. Before they left, Mr. Hernandez thought it would
be a good idea to talk about what they would see and hear.
He, Jeff, and Raul decided to go first to a civil trial that involved
the tort of negligence. Negligence is a large area within the
law of torts and it accounts for many cases in civil courts across
the country.
“Just what is negligence?” Jeff asked.
“That’s a big question,” Mr. Hernandez said. “Negligence
can be confusing to some people—even lawyers. Let’s begin
by saying that negligence is a failure to do something that a
reasonable person, guided by ordinary considerations, would
do. Or, it’s doing something that a reasonable and prudent
person would not do.”
“I’m not sure I’m following you,” Jeff said.
“Look at it this way,” said his counselor. “Negligence
usually involves thoughtlessness, carelessness, and inattention
to the interests and safety of other people. You will see this
definition in action when you go to court.”
Mr. Hernandez explained to them that there are degrees
of negligence. If someone acts to put another person in fear or
actual danger, that willful kind of behavior is “wanton” and
“reckless” and is often called gross negligence. It is an act or
failure to act when one has the duty to act. The act can be
dangerous or careless. In some cases, what is not done can
be just as dangerous.
“Maybe if you could give us an example, it would help us
understand better,” Jeff said.


52 LAW
The Law in Action.
“Suppose a construction company makes a hole in a
public sidewalk to connect a new building to underground
pipes. The builder doesn’t cover the hole at night or put up
a warning sign. A person walking along in the dark could fall
into that hole and get seriously hurt. The law of negligence
asks if the builder is responsible to warn passersby of that
danger,” explained Mr. Hernandez.
“That seems careless to me,” Raul said.
“But what if the passerby knew it was a construction area
and knew such holes might exist? Isn’t that person assuming
the risk of walking in what is known to be a
dangerous area?”
“Hmmm . . . I didn’t think of that,” Raul admitted.
“In some states, tort law makes it clear that a duty
of care and protection is owed,” Mr. Hernandez said.
“In other states, the plaintiff’s lawyer must establish
the defendant’s duty.
“The question of duty in this construction hole case is
unclear. The plaintiff’s lawyer will try to prove that a duty was
owed to the person who fell into the hole.”
The rules of civil procedure see to it that each side has an
equal chance to present its case as fully and as well as possible.
Hopefully, this method is fair to weak and strong parties alike.
In addition, the contesting parties bear the burden of time,
effort, and energy to solve their controversy. Unlike criminal
cases, the state is not a party to a civil matter.
A Trial Involving Negligence
The next day Jeff and Raul went to the U.S. District Court to sit
in on the case of Tompkins v. Southern Airways. They learned
that Ms. Tompkins was a passenger on a Southern Airways
DC-9 jet flying from Nashville to Dallas. Near Dallas, the plane
was flying at about 4,000 feet when the pilot suddenly saw a
U.S. Air Force plane about a half mile away.
The planes were on a collision course. Without warning, the
pilot of the DC-9 pushed the plane into a steep, 500-foot
dive to pass under the Air Force plane. In the sudden dive,
Ms. Tompkins was thrown from her seat and injured. Ms.
Tompkins sued the airline for $25,000 in a negligence action.


LAW 53
.The Law in Action
As the lawyer for Ms. Tompkins explained, a negligence
tort has several elements that must be proven to win the
suit. First, the lawyer must prove that the defendant had a
duty to conform to reasonable standards of care and conduct
that would ensure the plaintiff, Ms. Tompkins, against injury.
Second, that duty had to be breached by the defendant airline.
Third, that breach of duty must have caused the plaintiff’s
injuries. Finally, there had to be actual harm to the plaintiff.
The defendant’s lawyer said that the airline breached no
duty to Ms. Tompkins because the pilot avoided the crash.
“Without the pilot’s quick dive, the planes would have crashed,
so how can the airline be at fault?” asked the defense lawyer.
Ms. Tompkins’s lawyer strongly disagreed. “It was a clear
day and visibility was at least 10 miles. Despite this, neither the
pilot nor any crew member spotted the oncoming plane until it
was five seconds away!” The lawyer’s voice was firm, and she
looked at each juror’s face. “The pilot knew there were other
planes in the area. He had flown that route many times before.
He had a duty to maintain a lookout, but he did not do so. He
failed in his duty and did not act properly under the condi-
tions until the other plane was about five seconds away. Then
the pilot made a steep dive without warning the passengers.
In every way, he acted carelessly and negligently. He and the
crew failed to keep a proper lookout and caused the situation
that injured Ms. Tompkins.”


54 LAW
The Law in Action.
After hearing the testimony and arguments, the jury was
given instructions by the judge. She explained that if jurors
decided from the facts that the defendant had indeed been
negligent, they ought to find for the plaintiff.
The jury deliberated for two hours and returned with
its verdict. They agreed with Ms. Tompkins’s lawyer that the
airline was negligent because the pilot and crew failed to
maintain a proper lookout.
A Trial Involving Burglary
Later Jeff and Raul saw a criminal trial at the County Court
Building. A man was charged with breaking and entering with
intent to commit larceny. The defendant allegedly broke into
a house late at night when the owner was away. A neighbor
phoned the police when she heard glass breaking next door.
When the police arrived, the accused was about to drive away
from the house with a portable television, a stereo, and the
homeowner’s coin collection.
Before the trial, the prosecution and defense had worked
hard to gather evidence and witnesses. The defendant had a
choice of entering one of three pleas: guilty, not guilty, or no
contest, which has the same legal effect as a guilty plea. He
had pleaded not guilty.
From the moment he was arrested by the police, the
rules of criminal procedure began to operate. It works in
ways unlike civil procedure. Jeff’s counselor explained
that criminal procedure protects the rights of the
accused, from arrest through trial, and tells how the
process by which guilt or innocence is determined
must operate.
“The main goal of criminal procedure,” Mr.
Hernandez said, “is to guarantee the individual’s
rights while protecting the rights of society, and
to ensure fairness and justice in the court process.
Somebody’s guilt or innocence must be established through
an orderly, precise, and uniform system in which constitutional
freedoms and liberties are respected.”


LAW 55
.The Law in Action
Jeff and Raul knew many of the
constitutional rights guaranteed to accused
persons. They knew that the reason for having
a jury in the courtroom was found in the
U.S. Constitution. They heard someone in the
spectator’s section say that the county provided
the accused with a defense lawyer because he
could not afford one. Jeff and Raul also knew
that the right to counsel—to be represented by a
lawyer—was found in the Constitution.
It was fascinating to watch the defense law-
yer cross-examine a witness for the prosecution.
The witness was asked to identify the man she
saw at the back door of the house the night of
the burglary.
“Him. It was him.” The witness pointed to
the accused.
“How late at night was it when you say
you saw the defendant at the back door of your
neighbor’s house?” the defense attorney asked.
“About 2 a.m.,” answered the witness.
“It’s usually rather dark at 2 a.m., isn’t it?” the defense
attorney asked.
“Well . . . uh . . . yes.”
“There were no lights on anywhere in the vicinity of your
house or your neighbor’s, isn’t that correct?”
“Yes.”
“But you have testified that a man with blond hair and
blue pants was at the back door of your neighbor’s house at
2 a.m. on the night of the burglary. How can you be sure?”
“I’m really sure, I guess,” the witness said.
“You were able to clearly tell and swear under oath that
you could see the man’s blond hair and blue pants.”
“Well, I . . . I was sure. . . . I am sure!”
“And you were also quite sure,” said the defense lawyer,
“that the ‘burglar,’ as you called him, was about 5 foot 7. Are
you still sure that the burglar was 5 foot 7?
“Well, it was dark . . . but, uh, yes. Yes, he was.”
“I will now ask the defendant to stand,” the lawyer said.
Jeff and Raul were surprised when the blond defendant
rose from his chair. He was as tall as a basketball player. The
people in the courtroom gasped.


56 LAW
The Law in Action.
“The defendant is almost 6 foot 5. You firmly claimed
that the burglar was much shorter. Are you still sure this is
the same person you saw outside your neighbor’s back door?”
asked the lawyer.
“No . . . no,” the witness mumbled.
Despite this testimony, the accused was found guilty.
The arresting police officer positively identified him, and his
fingerprints were on the door and stolen items. He was
sentenced to two years in the state penitentiary.
“Did you notice a court reporter toward
the front of the courtroom tapping keys on a
machine?” Mr. Hernandez asked Raul and Jeff.
“Yes, yes we did. Why is there a court
reporter?” asked Jeff.
“The court reporter takes down every
word said during the trial so that if any of the
defendant’s rights are denied or even partly
withheld, and the defendant loses the trial, the
record can be used as a basis for appeal. Often
a criminal case can be reversed or returned to the
court for a new trial if a right is denied. If a judge acts
unfairly or with prejudice, the record will help to prove it,
and it will help get a new trial for the defendant,”
Mr. Hernandez explained.
“And now that you have seen real trials,” Mr. Hernandez
continued, “you’ll be able to get more out of the mock trial in
which you will take part.”








LAW 59
.Planning a Mock Trial
Planning a Mock Trial
Jeff decided to plan and conduct a mock trial with members
of his troop. He asked Mr. Hernandez to be the judge. The
counselor agreed. After discussing with other Scouts what
kind of trial to hold, Jeff decided that a civil tort case would
be fun to do.
Mr. Hernandez explained that this type of case was com-
mon. The most common tort cases involve an injured person
seeking damages, for example, after an auto accident or slip-
ping and falling. “The issue,” he said, “is whether the injury
was caused by someone’s negligence, and, if so, what monetary
damages would be sufficient to compensate the victim.”
“How do we put on a case?” Jeff asked.
“Well,” said Mr. Hernandez, “you could adapt the case
that you and I witnessed, or just make up your own situation.
For example, you could imagine how a car collision happened.
Let’s say a driver in one car is rushing to make a light and
turns at the intersection, only to collide with a truck that may
have run the red light. The car’s driver is injured and has
medical expenses. The car is pretty well totaled.
“If the driver sues the truck driver, the truck driver must
be proven negligent. Could witnesses testify that the truck
went into the intersection before the light changed? What if
witnesses disagree with this point? What other factors might
have caused the accident? Can witnesses testify to how fast the
car was going? Do all the witnesses agree on this point? How
fast should the car have been going given the weather condi-
tions and time of day?
“You can make the case as simple or as complicated as
you want. You can have one witness for each side (the two
drivers), two witnesses, or more. You can even have an expert
police witness testify to what the skid marks prove.


60 LAW
Planning a Mock Trial.
“Or maybe,” Mr. Hernandez added, “you want to take
a fact situation from one of the hundreds of mock trials that
have already been done. The back of your Law merit badge
pamphlet lists sources for mock trials.”
Jeff made a list of the roles that had to be filled for the
mock trial, in addition to the role of judge.
“Each role is important,” Mr. Hernandez said. “The
lawyers for both sides must present their cases clearly and try
to persuade the jury. The witnesses must stick to the facts, and
the jury must pay close attention to everything that is said.
Each juror must make up his or her own mind about the
evidence presented.”
“What do the others do?” one Scout asked.
The counselor explained that the court clerk sets up the
courtroom and keeps track of the court’s records of the trial.
“The court reporter makes notes of the important things said
by the lawyers, witnesses, and judge. In a real trial, a word-for-
word record is made. In this mock trial, you can write down
important highlights. If you want to, you can tape-record the
whole trial.”
“That’s a good idea,” said Jeff. “Then we’ll be able to
review exactly what happened during the trial.”
“You have chosen to do a mock civil trial with a jury,”
Mr. Hernandez said. “The trial follows a certain order and rules
of procedure. After the jury is sworn in, the clerk will announce
the name of the case and the name of the judge. Then, the
plaintiff’s lawyer will make an opening statement to lay out the
charges and provide a summary of important facts. After that,
the defendant’s lawyer will make an opening statement. The
lawyer will state the facts from the defendant’s point of view
and show facts that might weaken the plaintiff’s case.”
Roles for mock trial:
• Plaintiff
• Defendant
• Plaintiff’s lawyer
• Defendant’s lawyer
• Court clerk
• Court reporter
• Bailiff
• Plaintiff’s witnesses
• Defendant’s witnesses
• Jurors


LAW 61
.Planning a Mock Trial
“Then the plaintiff’s side will present its witnesses. All
the witnesses will be sworn in by the clerk,” said a Scout.
“That’s correct,” said the counselor. “After the plaintiff’s
side presents its witnesses and evidence, the defense will do
the same. During cross-examination of each witness, the law-
yers will try to explain, modify, or challenge what was said
and presented by the opposing side.
“After witnesses have testified and cross-examination and
rebuttal have ended, the defendant’s lawyer makes a final
argument. This is followed by the plaintiff’s closing argument.
Both sides present a summary of facts and make points in their
favor in a way that clearly wraps up all the parts. They must
present a sharp picture to the jury and leave a good impression
with the jurors,” the counselor explained.
“When the plaintiff completes the closing argument, the
judge will give instructions to the jury that include the prin-
ciples of law concerning the case and how those principles can
be applied to the facts. The judge will then send the jury out
of the courtroom to deliberate in secret. The jury will return its
verdict and the judge will make a formal, official entry of the
judgment. That will end the mock trial.”
If your troop decided to hold a nonjury trial, the order
of the trial would be similar to the jury trial except that jury
selection, instructions to the jury, and fact-finding by the jury
would not occur. In a nonjury case, the judge rules on both
law and fact.
The key to a successful mock trial is careful preparation.
Every trial lawyer knows that success depends on being well
prepared to present the best possible case and to foresee what
the other side might do. For the mock trial, you should also
prepare for your role with care. When the trial is over, talk
about how you felt in the role you played. Ask the others for
their opinions.
Lawyers Outside of Court
In his talks with Mr. Hernandez, Jeff learned that many lawyers
seldom go into court. His counselor arranged for him to meet
a few of them to talk about what they do.
Because law is deeply involved in every aspect of life,
businesses, banks, government, real estate companies, and
many other concerns must employ men and women who
understand law. Lawyers also work in state and federal legisla-
tures, city and town councils, and other areas of government.
When you are
sworn in as
a witness, you
make a formal
pledge or promise
to tell the truth.
You take an oath
saying that what
you are about to
say is the truth.


62 LAW
Planning a Mock Trial.
Chances are good that at least one of the officers at your
local bank is a lawyer or has had some legal training. Title
companies that record and insure property transactions, such
as land and house sales, employ lawyers to make sure transac-
tions go smoothly and title transfers are proper in all respects.
Government departments, commissions, committees,
bureaus, and offices employ lawyers to ensure proper operation.
These lawyers rarely go to court. Instead, they keep aware of
new laws, rules, and regulations that concern their departments.
“I’m a full-time lawyer for the store,” Ms. Jackson told
Jeff. “My only client is the store. Because this is one of the
largest department stores in the country and is owned by a
company that has other stores like this one all over the United
States, the company employs a staff of lawyers.”
Jeff was visiting Ms. Jackson’s office on the top floor of
a large department store where his family often shopped.
Ms. Jackson was explaining what a corporation counsel,
a lawyer for a corporation, does.
“My responsibility is to keep the company out of court.
Going to court involves time, trouble, and money. The company
wants to avoid litigation or lawsuits. So what I do is research
the laws, carefully read contracts, and advise the owners
and managers of the company how to stay out of court,”
Ms. Jackson said.
“You must be busy,” Jeff said.


LAW 63
.Planning a Mock Trial
“Believe me, we are! But there is more! The U.S. govern-
ment makes rules and regulations concerning prices we can
charge our customers, wages we must pay store employees,
and many other things. The legal department must keep up
with those laws and guidelines, too. We also work closely
with the company accountants concerning taxes.”
Jeff rose to leave and extended his hand to shake
Ms. Jackson’s. “Thank you for taking the time to talk to
me about your duties and responsibilities,” Jeff said.
As Jeff left the store, he saw a familiar face. It was Mr.
Robertson, another counselor for the Law merit badge who
was a good friend of Mr. Hernandez.
“Hello, Jeff,” called Mr. Robertson. “What are you
doing downtown?”
“I’m working on my Law merit badge and just spoke to
Ms. Jackson about what lawyers who work for stores do.” Jeff
then had a great idea. Mr. Robertson is the city attorney—
a lawyer who works for the local government. What a chance
to find out what government lawyers do! “Do you happen to
have a spare minute or two, Mr. Robertson?” Jeff asked.
“Certainly. I was just going to see Mr. Harrington, the
lawyer at the bank, to talk about how to pay for the new
swimming pool at the park. That’s part of my responsibility.
I’m going to check on the loan agreement with the bank,”
explained Mr. Robertson.
Jeff told Mr. Robertson about requirement 7. Mr. Robertson
was happy to tell Jeff about some of the things the city
attorney does.
Mr. Robertson explained that laws passed by the city
council are called ordinances and that he writes such laws
in proper legal form. He also represents the city in court when
necessary, and he carefully reads and helps prepare contracts
for city purchases and services.
“The city prosecutor works for me,” Mr. Robertson said.
“When the police arrest a suspect who may have violated
a city ordinance, the city prosecutor represents the city in
court. He or she also gives advice to the police department in
many areas. While the prosecutor handles prosecutions and
police-related matters, I work on civil law matters. Because
my responsibility is to try to keep the city out of court, the
prosecutor is in court a lot more than I am.”
“How do you keep the city out of court?” Jeff asked.
Law Day, which
falls on May 1
each year, is a
major national
celebration of the
rule of law and
our heritage of
liberty under law.
Each year, the
American Bar
Association
conducts a
special program
to help celebrate
the day. You will
find plenty of
information about
law and Law Day
by visiting the
ABA’s website.
See the resources
section for
more information.


64 LAW
Planning a Mock Trial.
Finding a Lawyer
Mr. Hernandez gave Jeff an imaginary problem to
consider. “Let’s suppose that Mr. Jenkins bought
and paid for a refrigerator at a store. The salesperson
said the refrigerator was new, but when it arrived,
it was used and didn’t work properly. Mr. Jenkins
asked the store to take it back and refund
his money or replace it with a new refrigerator. The
store refused to do anything, and Mr. Jenkins seems
to be left with a useless refrigerator.
“Now Jeff, I’m not asking you to solve the
legal issues here,” Mr. Hernandez said. “Just
explain what you think Mr. Jenkins should do.
Remember that he doesn’t have enough money to
pay for a lawyer.”
In his research, Jeff learned a lot about how
to find a lawyer and legal assistance. Mr. Jenkins
should contact a consumer protection agency or go
to small claims court if the value of the refrigerator
is within a certain amount. Another thing he could
do is call a legal assistance service. If he cannot find
one, he should get in touch with the bar association.
Any local or state bar association can refer you
to a legal aid service. Legal aid services offer the
help of a lawyer for free, or, at most, for a small fee
to people who can’t afford a lawyer. Also, some
charitable organizations help people obtain legal
services when they cannot afford to pay.
One helpful agency is the Legal Services
Corporation, a private, nonprofit corporation estab-
lished by Congress in 1974 to ensure equal access
to justice under the law for all Americans. It offers
legal aid in every state. Bar associations and gov-
ernment public defender offices also offer free
legal advice and assistance.


LAW 65
.Planning a Mock Trial
Most legal assistance groups do not usually
become involved in criminal cases. In criminal
cases, a judge will appoint a public defender if
the accused person cannot afford a lawyer. Public
defenders handle the defense of criminally accused
people, and legal aid is available for those who
cannot afford to pay. Jeff found out that lawyers
have a professional responsibility to make the
legal system work for everybody—not just those
who can pay.
People who can afford to pay for legal services
can still contact the local or state bar association
and ask for the Lawyer Referral Service. The service
can help find a lawyer who can assist them in the
particular area of law in which they need help. The
service also can make an appointment with a
lawyer for a certain fee.
Jeff discovered that the internet is a great way
to find lawyers, too. The American Bar Association
has a website at www.findlegalhelp.org that
can help people find a lawyer referral service
near them. The ABA offers a number of public
services and can be found on the web at
www.americanbar.org.
“Well, as I said, by carefully reading contracts and giving
advice to the mayor, the city council, and the city manager on
how to avoid legal problems. I also make sure city ordinances
are fair and within the limits set by the state and federal
governments. You see, some areas are handled solely by the
federal and state governments. I have to make sure the city’s
ordinances do not exceed their authority,” Mr. Robertson said.
As Mr. Robertson left, Jeff decided to meet with his coun-
selor and report on what he learned.





LAW 67
.Emerging Law
Emerging Law
At Mr. Hernandez’s suggestion, Jeff turned his attention to
learning about emerging law. Jeff had been studying the envi-
ronment in his science class at school and was particularly
interested in finding out about environmental law. He found the
Environmental Protection Agency’s website to be very useful.
Environmental Law
Jeff read that the modern environmental movement began
with the passage of the National Environmental Policy Act
of 1969. This is the basic national charter for environmental
protection that establishes policy, sets goals, and provides
means for carrying out the policy.
More than a dozen major statutes, or laws, form the legal
basis for the programs of the Environmental Protection Agency.
One important law under this umbrella is the Clear Air Act,
passed in 1970, which regulates air emissions to protect public
health and the environment. In 1977, this act was amended
to address problems such as acid rain, ground-level ozone,
and air toxics.
The Clean Water Act came along in 1977
amidst growing public awareness and concern
for controlling water pollution. This act gives
the EPA the authority to regulate the discharge
of pollutants into America’s waterways, rivers,
lakes, and streams. It is now against the law
for any person to discharge any pollutant into
navigable waters without a permit.
Jeff also read about the Endangered
Species Act, which became law in 1973.
The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service under the
Department of the Interior maintains the list of
1,077 endangered species (644 are plants) and
317 threatened species (150 are plants).
The cheetah is
just one species
protected by
the Endangered
Species Act.


68 LAW
Emerging Law.
This act established a program for the conservation of
threatened and endangered plants and animals and the habi-
tats where they are found. Fish, birds, reptiles, mammals,
crustaceans, flowers, grasses, and trees can be found on this
list. Jeff was pleased to know anyone can petition the Fish
and Wildlife Service to include a species on the list.
Amendments to the law allow the EPA to ban certain
pesticides or restrict their use if an endangered species will
be negatively affected.
Jeff noticed that the EPA’s role expanded further in
1990, when the Pollution Prevention Act focused industry,
government, and public attention on reducing pollution
through cost-effective changes in production, operation,
and use of raw materials.
In other words, industries are now being challenged
to increase efficiency in their use of energy, water, and
other natural resources. They must protect our resources
through conservation.
Jeff learned that other acts passed in recent years cover
corporate responsibility for polluting the environment know-
ingly or through a tragic mishap, such as a chemical leak.
Copyright, Computers, and the Internet
Now that he had learned so much about emerging environ-
mental law, Jeff decided that for his next project he would look
up information on copyright, computers, and the internet. In
a telephone conversation, Mr. Hernandez told Jeff that copy-
right is so important it is covered in the U.S. Constitution.
“The Constitution states that Congress shall have the power
to promote the progress of science and useful arts by securing
for limited times to authors and inventors the exclusive right to
their respective writings and discoveries,” Mr. Hernandez told
Jeff. “Did you know whenever you write a story or create a
drawing, you automatically own the copyright?”
“No, I didn’t know that. You mean, even for a project
at school?” Jeff asked.
“Yes, even for a project at school! Copyright is a
form of protection given to authors or creators of ‘original
works of authorship’ including literary, dramatic, musical,
artistic, and other intellectual works. What that basically
means is, as the author of the work, you alone have the
rights to make and distribute copies of it, perform your work


LAW 69
.Emerging Law
publicly, or make derivative works, such as
modifications, adaptations, or translations of
the work into another medium. It is illegal
for anyone to do any of these things without
your permission.”
Mr. Hernandez added that there were
some exceptions and limitations to a
person’s rights as a copyright holder.
“One major limitation,” he said, “is the
doctrine of fair use.”
“You see, Jeff, the fair use doctrine
allows limited copying of copyrighted works
for educational and research purposes. The
copyright law allows reproduction for purposes of criticism,
news reporting, teaching, scholarship, or research. This allows
your teacher to hand out short excerpts from a book, or for
a reporter to quote from a particular work of art, writing, or
speech. If an author claims that his or her work has been
used without permission, courts must weigh the evidence to
determine whether a particular use of a copyrighted work is
permitted under fair use, or if it is, instead, an infringement
of copyright.”
“What about the internet? Is information on websites
protected by copyright law?”
“You bet,” said Mr. Hernandez. “Most webpages, including
the information on them and the computer code used to create
them, are protected by copyright law.”
“How is copyright protected if the internet is a worldwide
network?” Jeff asked.
“Good question, Jeff,” Mr. Hernandez said approvingly.
“Because the internet is a global resource, copyrighted work
on the web is governed by an international treaty, called the
Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and
Artistic Works. The convention, however, allows individual
countries to determine what is and isn’t protected.”
“What about computer software programs?” Jeff asked.
“Most software, including free software, is protected by
copyright; it is not in the public domain. This means it is
protected by law. All software is copyrighted on creation. No
piece of software has been in existence long enough to pass
into public domain. The only software currently available in
the public domain is there because the owner has expressly
allowed it to be. This kind of software is clearly labeled.”


70 LAW
Emerging Law.
“How long does copyright protection last?” Jeff asked.
“Copyrights do not last forever but they do last a long
time. Under current laws, copyright protection starts from the
moment of creation of the work and continues until 70 years
after the death of the author or artist.”
“What does public domain mean exactly?” Jeff asked.
“When a copyright expires, the work falls into the public
domain, meaning anyone can use it,” explained Mr. Hernandez.
“That’s why you can copy artists like Leonardo da Vinci and
writers like Shakespeare all you want. Because of changes to
the law in the 1970s, you cannot assume any work is in the
public domain unless it was first published before 1923.”
Mr. Hernandez said another thing to keep in mind when
looking at copyrighted works posted on the web is that just
because you are reading it there doesn’t mean it is there legally.
“A good rule of thumb,” he said, “is to always get permission
to use a copyrighted online work from the owner of that work,
not from a secondary source like the webmaster.”
Yours, Mine, and Ours
Public domain is described as a body of work—
books, songs, music, and software are examples—
that is not protected by copyright law and that, in
effect, belongs to the public at large, to be used
freely by the public. It could be that the copyright
has expired, or that the creation consists solely
of facts or ideas, or is printed by the Government
Printing Office.
Some authors and artists choose to make it clear
that other people can use their work. They may have
a Creative Commons license or other wording that
gives people permission to use or copy their work as
if it were in the public domain. Creative Commons
makes available art, music, and other works that
give permission for you to copy. See the resources
section for more information.


LAW 71
.Emerging Law
Immigration Law
We are a nation founded by immigrants. Yet disputes about who
is permitted to visit or live in the United States and what type of
immigration process should be put in place have existed since
its foundation. Immigration law determines who is permitted
to visit or live in the U.S. and what process they should follow
to do so. The goal of our immigration laws and the courts that
enforce these laws is, in part, to bring order and fairness to our
immigration system.
Patent Law
The patent laws in the United States are among the oldest of
our country’s laws, dating to 1790. Patent law protects the
inventor of a new product who has obtained a patent on that
product. Generally, patent owners can prevent others from
making, using, selling, or importing the patented invention for
20 years. If someone uses an invention without the inventor’s
permission, the inventor can sue for patent infringement.
The U.S. Patent and Trademark Office examines patent
applications that are filed by inventors. Patent examiners
must decide if the inventor’s claimed invention is sufficiently
different from technology that is already available to the public,
sufficiently described in the patent application so that it can be
readily put to some practical use by a skilled engineer reading
the patent, sufficiently definite so that it is reasonably clear what
technology the patent will and will not cover, and sufficiently
concrete. Mere ideas and concepts, for example, cannot be
patented because they are not sufficiently concrete. Once the
patent examiner is satisfied that a patent can be granted, the
examiner will identify the specific claims that were found to be
patentable and permit a patent to be issued to the inventor.
Biotechnology Law
Biotechnology is the use of living systems and organisms to
develop or make useful products, such as in forest products,
petroleum, agriculture, and medicine. Like some other high-
tech industries, it relies heavily on intellectual property for its
value, so patent filing is critical.
Biotechnology is a highly regulated industry, requiring filing
with federal organizations. Companies making pharmaceutical
products, for example, must file with the U.S. Food and Drug


72 LAW
Emerging Law.
Administration and the European Union’s European Medicines
Agency. This requires the companies to perform structured trials
of the product to measure safety and effectiveness. The time from
concept to market for most biotech products is very long and the
cost is high, in part because of the multiyear (in many cases)
regulatory process and in part because of the sheer technical
complexity of developing these products. It is common for a
biotech medical product to take more than 12 years to progress
from concept to market.
Biotechnology can also involve securities law, which is
important when seeking funding, and international law, in
order to market the product worldwide.
Privacy Law
Privacy has become a crucial concern in recent decades,
although some privacy laws date to the Bill of Rights. Privacy is
a broad concept that encompasses the rights of an individual
to be free from intrusion and interference from governments,
businesses, and other people.
Laws pertaining to freedom from government intrusion
include the Fourth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, which
protects people from unreasonable searches and seizures of
their homes, cars, documents, computers, and mobile devices.
Additionally, the federal Privacy Act of 1974 requires federal
agencies to safeguard their records containing people’s personal
information, such as educational, financial, medical, criminal,
or employment records. Agencies may not disclose this kind of
personal information without authorization.
Various laws impose privacy requirements on businesses
to notify consumers of what kinds of information they gather,
how they use the information, the conditions under which they
share or disclose information, how they safeguard information
from unauthorized disclosure or use, and how they manage and
update information. These are the typical topics covered by the
privacy policies of businesses and their websites.
Privacy law also allows people to bring lawsuits against
others for violating their privacy in various ways. Such laws
prohibit unreasonable intrusion into private areas, such as a
photographer standing right outside someone’s house taking
pictures of events inside through an open window. Other laws
focus on false light, which is publishing a highly offensive and


LAW 73
.Emerging Law
misleading story or information that distorts a person’s image.
Imagine that a newspaper published a picture of an ordinary
citizen who coincidentally happened to walk out of a building
next to a notorious criminal. The picture of them together
might suggest that the citizen is a friend or business partner of
the criminal.
International Law
International law is a set of rules and regulations by which coun-
tries, organizations, and people throughout the world interact
with each other and with citizens of different countries. There are
two general categories of international law: public and private.
Public international law deals with relationships between nations
or between a nation and organizations or people from other
countries. Private international law deals with disputes between
citizens of different countries or businesses from different
countries, especially when there is a question of which country’s
laws apply or where the dispute should be resolved. Certain
courts and bodies such as the United Nations Security Council
have the power to decide cases of international law.
The DoNotCall
Registry Act allows
consumers to
register their
phone numbers in
order to limit calls
from telemarketers.


74 LAW
Careers in the Legal Profession.
Careers in the
Legal Profession
Jeff reported his findings to Mr. Hernandez on the two areas of
emerging law he had selected for requirement 11.
“You’re almost finished with your Law merit badge
requirements,” Mr. Hernandez said. “All you need to do now
is study the requirements for becoming a lawyer, find out how
judges are selected in this state, and list 15 occupations that
deal with law or legal processes. Think you can do that?”
“Sure,” said Jeff. After talking to Mr. Hernandez and other
lawyers, Jeff knew it took a lot of training to become a lawyer.
First you have to go to college and then on to law school.
Becoming a Lawyer
Mr. Hernandez had told Jeff that good lawyers should be
naturally inquisitive, able to think logically, and able to
recognize the core issues of a problem. Because lawyers have
to deal with many different people, Jeff thought that patience,
integrity, determination, and a sense of humanity also were
important qualities for a lawyer to possess.
Jeff discovered that no special course of study is required
in college to prepare for law school. Many law students have
backgrounds in government, political science, sociology, and
psychology. Many business, accounting, and economics majors
go on to law school. Because law is related to nearly every
human activity, Jeff thought that the best background would
include a well-rounded, general knowledge of many subjects.
More than 125,000 law students in the United States are
in full-time courses of study, which take three years to com-
plete. A few thousand are in part-time or evening law school
programs, which usually take four years. Summertime positions
working for law firms, judges, courts, or in other law-related
areas provide firsthand knowledge of how the law operates.
To be admitted
to a law school,
a person should
have good grades
in college and
a good score
on the Law
School Admissions
Test (LSAT).


LAW 75
.Careers in the Legal Profession
In law school, moot court, or mock trial, competition
helps sharpen students’ courtroom skills. Many schools have
legal aid clinics and other programs in which students assist
citizens with actual legal problems.
Becoming a Judge
Justice Felix Frankfurter once said that judges should be a com-
bination of “the historian, the philosopher, and the prophet”
and have “something of the creative artist in them.” Justice
Frankfurter’s description makes sense, but how are the right
people chosen for this powerful, responsible role?
In more than half the states, trial court judges are selected
by elections—nonpartisan in 22 states, partisan in 12. In partisan
election states, Jeff noted, judges run in elections and are identi-
fied by political party label. In nonpartisan elections, judges are
not identified by party affiliation.
Your State’s Requirements
To find out the requirements for becoming a lawyer in your state, write
to the state bar admission agency, which is usually located in your state
capital. Or contact the National Conference of Bar Examiners. See the
resources section in this pamphlet.
State Bar Examinations
In general, nobody becomes a lawyer simply by graduating from law
school. Another step must be taken. Almost every law school graduate
who wishes to become a practicing lawyer must pass a state bar
examination. The bar examination is a written test administered by
the state’s bar admission agency, which is often titled the Board
of Bar Examiners. The exam is given over a period of several days
and demands preparation, concentration, and skill. It asks questions
about issues and subjects the applicant might face as a lawyer. It tests
knowledge of many legal areas, including trusts, wills, estates, and
civil and criminal law. The bar admission agency might also require
an oral examination.
The highest court of each state usually has jurisdiction over the bar
admission process for that state. But in some states, the responsibility
for investigating candidates is given to state and local bar associations.


76 LAW
Careers in the Legal Profession.
The candidate for the judgeship campaigns exactly like
another other candidate for political office. Jeff wondered
whether this was a good way to make sure the best people
become judges. He thought that some people might be elected
as judges just because they are active in politics and speak
well, while some good lawyers might be overlooked because
they were not seeking to get the attention of a political party.
Jeff also considered that elected judges might be partial to the
causes of their own political party.
In a few states, he discovered, all or some of the judges
are appointed to office by the governor with the consent and
confirmation of a legislative body or the state legislature.
This approach, called the Missouri Plan, works this way.
The state legislature chooses a panel of impartial and well-respected
lawyers and nonlawyers. An equal number is chosen from each
major political party. The panel searches for the finest candidates
for judicial office and submits their list, usually of three names,
to the governor. The governor must appoint one of these people.
The choices are not listed by political party and the governor
should not know the party labels. After the governor chooses,
the new judge serves for a period of time. After a certain term,
usually six years, the judge’s record goes before the people.
“How do the people make a choice?” Jeff asked
Mr. Hernandez.
“The only question on the ballot for judges will say,
‘Should Judge Smith be retained in office?’ No party identity
is listed on the ballot. The judge does not have to run against
other judges or candidates—only on his or her record. If the
people say yes, the judge stays on the bench for another term.”
“And what if the people say no?”
“Then the judge is no longer a judge and the governor
again appoints a person from a list submitted by the panel,”
Mr. Hernandez explained.
Jeff wondered if the Missouri Plan was the best way to
select judges. “They still have to sort of run for reelection.
I’m just not sure that judges should have that much to do
with elections and politics.”
“There is probably no perfect way to choose judges, Jeff.
People find positive and negative points with the election, appoint-
ment, and Missouri Plan methods. You can decide for yourself.”


LAW 77
.Careers in the Legal Profession
Other Occupations in the Legal Profession
By now Jeff had talked to a lot of lawyers. And in visiting lawyers’
offices, the courts, and the police, he had found plenty of other
occupations in law. As he handed his list of law-connected
careers to Mr. Hernandez, Jeff said, “There are lots of positions
that have to do with law, aren’t there?”
“Sure are,” Mr. Hernandez agreed.
He began reading: “Uniformed police officer or sheriff’s police
officer, police detective, prison official, parole officer, juvenile officer,
probation officer—Jeff, this list is really quite good.”
“Thank you,” Jeff smiled.
His counselor read more: “Court clerk, court bailiff—Say,
do you know what the bailiff does?”
“The bailiff acts as the courtroom police,” Jeff answered.
“The bailiff helps keep the courtroom spectators, and sometimes
the participants, orderly. The judge can sometimes have the bai-
liff serve subpoenas to witnesses, too.”
“Judge, court reporter, legal secretary,” Mr. Hernandez
continued. “Legal secretaries help lawyers prepare papers
and legal briefs for cases and write letters to clients and
other parties. They perform other office duties and must
understand the language of law.”
Jeff also listed paralegal. The paralegal takes on some of
the routine but important duties of a lawyer, such as researching,
interviewing clients, and preparing papers. Jeff added FBI agent,
state policeman, and private detective to his list. Private detectives
must know the legal limits of their work. State police officers
must know and enforce state laws while preserving the rights of
citizens. FBI agents often prepare for their work by taking law
and criminology courses.
Jeff also listed government officials who work for local, state,
or federal governments. They must be aware of the law and how it
affects their duties. “Elected legislators make laws, and nonelected
officials fulfill responsibilities within the framework of those laws.”
He also learned that business people, bankers, real estate
personnel, and accountants must be aware of the law in their
work. “When a real estate agent sells an interest in property,
like a farm, a house, or an apartment building, the agent deals
with property law,” Jeff explained to his counselor.
“You are certainly right, Jeff,” said Mr. Hernandez.
“The law is everybody’s business and concern.”
The court bailiff
helps keep order
in the court.
The paralegal
has some legal
education but
usually not as
much as lawyers.


78 LAW
Resources About Law.
Scouting Literature
Citizenship in the Nation, Citizenship in
the World, and Crime Prevention merit
badge pamphlets
Books
Aaseng, Nathan. You Are the Juror.
Oliver Press, 1997.
Abadinsky, Howard. Law, Courts, and
Justice in America, 7th ed. Waveland
Press, Inc., 2014.
Abramson, Jeffrey. We, the Jury:
The Jury System and the Ideal of
Democracy. Harvard University
Press, 2000.
Adler, Stephen J. Jury: Trial and Error
in the American Courtroom. Crown
Publishing, 1994.
American Bar Association Division for
Public Education. A Life in the Law.
American Bar Association, 2010.
Arbetman, Lee P., and Richard L. Roe.
Great Trials in American History:
Civil War to the Present. McGraw-
Hill, 1985.
Besenjak, Cheryl. Copyright Plain &
Simple. Career Press, 2000.
Bjornlund, Lydia D. The U.S.
Constitution: Blueprint for
Democracy. Lucent Books, 1999.
Bray, Ilona, J.D., U.S. Immigration Made
Easy, 18th edition. Nolo, 2017.
Carrel, Annette. It’s the Law: A Young
Person’s Guide to Our Legal System.
Volcano Press, 1994.
Emert, Phyllis Raybin. Top Lawyers
and Their Famous Cases. Oliver
Press, 1996.
Greenhaven Press. Civil Liberties:
Opposing Viewpoints. Greenhaven
Press, 2013.
Irons, Peter. The Courage of Their
Convictions. Free Press, 2015.
Knight, Alfred H. The Life of the Law:
The People and Cases That Have
Shaped Our Society From King Alfred
to Rodney King. Oxford University
Press, 1998.
Lee, Harper. To Kill a Mockingbird.
Harper Perennial Modern
Classics, 2002.
Resources About Law
With your parent’s permission, visit
the Boy Scouts of America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org,
for a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


LAW 79
.Resources About Law
Lipson, Eric B., and Greta B. Lipson.
Everyday Law for Young
Citizens. Teaching and Learning
Company, 2000.
McGraw-Hill Education. Street Law: A
Course in Practical Law, student edi-
tion. McGraw-Hill Education, 2016.
Monk, Linda R. The Bill of Rights:
A User’s Guide, 4th ed. Close Up
Foundation, 2004.
Morin, Isobel V. Our Changing Constitution:
How and Why We Have Amended It.
Millbrook Press, 1998.
National Crime Prevention Council Staff.
Community Works: Smart Teens
Make Safer Communities. National
Crime Prevention Council, 1999.
Phelan, Margaret and James Gillespie,
Immigration Law Handbook,
10th edition. Oxford University
Press, 2018.
Renstrom, Peter G. The American Law
Dictionary. A B C–CLIO, 1991.
Organizations and Websites
American Bar Association
Division for Public Education
321 N. Clark St.
Chicago, IL 60654
www.americanbar.org/groups/
public_education
Creative Commons
creativecommons.org
Environmental Protection Agency
1200 Pennsylvania Ave., NW
Washington, DC 20460
www.epa.gov/laws-regulations
National Association of Youth Courts
2700 University Blvd., #402
Tuscaloosa, AL 35401
youthcourt.net
National Conference of Bar Examiners
302 S. Bedford St.
Madison, WI 53703-3622
www.ncbex.org
Social Studies School Service
P.O. Box 802
Culver City, CA 90232
Toll-free telephone: 800-421-4246
www.socialstudies.com
Street Law
1010 Wayne Ave., Suite 870
Silver Spring, MD 20910
Telephone: 301-589-1130
streetlaw.org
Bar associations everywhere support
public legal education. To get an idea of
the range of activities and the resources
available, visit the following websites.
The New York State Bar
Association has a Law, Youth, and
Citizenship program that offers mock
trial tournaments, summer courses,
and programs that promote citizenship
and law-related education. Visit its website
at www.nysba.org. The Pennsylvania
Bar Association, at www.pabar.org,
provides information for all kinds of
youth-related programs and activities.
The State Bar of Texas can be found
on the web at www.texasbar.com. Its
Law-Related Education, an arm of
the association, sponsors an editorial
contest and offers teacher in-service
programs. The Washington State Bar
Association, at www.wsba.org, offers a
huge range of activities.


80 LAW
Resources About Law.
Acknowledgments
The Boy Scouts of America would like
to acknowledge Charles White of the
American Bar Association for his
expertise in developing and revising the
Law merit badge pamphlet, and Judge
Aymer L. “Buck” Curtin of the Alachua
County Court in Gainesville, Florida,
for his suggestions and advice on
emerging law.
Thanks also to the American Bar
Association; Special Committee on
Youth Education for Citizenship; Joel F.
Henning and Norman Gross (original
editors); and Michael Froman (author of
the 1975 edition) for their role with the
Law merit badge pamphlet.
Thanks to the Law Library at Texas
Wesleyan School of Law in Fort Worth
for allowing the use of facilities there for
a photo shoot. We are grateful to Robert
E. Corlew III, chancellor of the 16th
Judicial District, State of Tennessee, for
facilitating a photo shoot at the county
courthouse in Murfreesboro, Tennessee.
The Boy Scouts of America
would like to thank the Coppell Police
Department, Coppell, Texas, for its
community spirit in assisting with
a photo shoot for this Law merit
badge pamphlet.
The Boy Scouts of America is
grateful to the men and women
serving on the National Merit Badge
Subcommittee for the improvements
made in updating this pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration Credits
Federal Bureau of Investigation,
courtesy—page 42
Federal Trade Commission, courtesy—
page 47
National Park Service, Frederick
Douglass National Historic Site,
courtesy—page 17
Wikipedia.org, courtesy—pages 23
and 24
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property
of or are protected by the Boy Scouts
of America.
Jack Brown—page 66 (hikers)
John McDearmon—page 14 (illustrations)
Randy Piland—pages 45, 57 (court
reporter), and 58