POTTERY


POTTERY
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Pottery or check Scoutbook for
the latest requirements.
35934
ISBN 978-0-8395-3314-6
©2025 Scouting America/Boy Scouts of America
2025 Printing
FPO


POTTERY 3





POTTERY 5
Contents
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
All About Clay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
Equipment and Tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
Pottery Projects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
Decorating and Glazing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
Firing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
Opportunities in Ceramics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87
Glossary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91
Pottery Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 94





POTTERY 7
.Introduction
Introduction
Consider this Pottery merit badge pamphlet an introduction
to pottery making, a potter’s tool in its own right to help you
understand the process and learn some of the language. The
greater part of your new knowledge will come with experi-
ence—the skill and understanding you will gain from actually
creating pottery. You will be involved in hands-on production
of a work of art, from start to finish.
Before you discover the fun of sinking your hands into
a lump of clay, here is a little background about and history
of pottery.
The resources listed in the back of this pamphlet are
good materials to help you learn. The local library is a
good place to look for information. Many libraries have
magazines about pottery making and ceramics with
illustrated articles about techniques and design, tips for
professionals and beginners, and advertisements from
manufacturers and dealers of clay and supplies.
Pottery has a
language of its
own. All the
words you see in
boldface appear
in a glossary
at the back of
this pamphlet.


8 POTTERY
Introduction.
What Is Pottery?
Pottery can be defined simply as any item that is formed from
clay then hardened by heat, and a bit more specifically as the
baked-clay wares of the entire ceramic industry. As an art form,
pottery is one of the oldest and most widespread in the world.
In fact, archaeologists have uncovered pottery objects that have
been on Earth almost as long as the human race, which places
them among the oldest human-made artifacts ever found.
There are three broad categories of pottery: earthenware,
stoneware, and porcelain. Within each category are many
different styles of pottery, each one unique, according to the
type of clay used, the kind of glaze or decoration applied,
and the kiln temperature at which it is fired. We have only
enough space in this pamphlet to cover some of the most
famous and most popular styles of pottery, and expand on
the three main categories.
As you explore the world of pottery, you will discover
that pottery making is as much science as it is art.
The process is fun and challenging, and the end
product can be as useful as it is beautiful. With your
first pieces of pottery, be prepared to gain a greater
sense of self-confidence and accomplishment.


POTTERY 9
.Introduction
The Ceramic Industry
The term ceramic refers to any human-made solid produced
from nonmetallic mineral substances—such as clay—by firing
in a kiln. The ceramic industry provides much more
than just dinnerware and decorative articles. Many
manufacturing industries use or produce clay
products including brick, sewer pipe, floor and
wall tile, electrical porcelain, glass, abrasives,
engine components, superconductors, rocket nose
cones, and cements used in the construction of
concrete roads, bridges, buildings, and dams.
Ceramics and Our Environment. Ceramics play an important
role in our environment by helping to decrease pollution.
The catalytic converters in cars and trucks, which are made
of ceramics, help change harmful exhaust fumes into ordinary
carbon dioxide and water. Ceramic engine components are
lightweight and heat- and wear-resistant, which results in
significant fuel savings, more efficient combustion, and,
ultimately, cleaner air.
The word ceramic has been traced back to an early
Greek term, keramos, which means “pottery” or
“potter’s clay.” Keramos is related to an ancient
root word that means “to burn.” The Greeks used the
term to mean “burned stuff” or “burned earth” when
referring to articles they produced through the action
of fire upon materials they dug from the earth.
Absorbent
ceramics also
are used in
oil-spill cleanup
equipment to
help restore our
environment after
such a disaster.


10 POTTERY
Introduction.
Ceramics in Medicine. Ceramics are increasingly being used
in medicine and dentistry. Special ceramic materials can be
used for repairing and replacing human hips, knees, teeth,
and even heart valves. Ceramic materials that are used in the
human body, from replacement parts to coatings on metal
replacements, can stimulate bone growth, promote tissue
formation, and help protect the immune system. Modern
ceramic materials are also used in ultrasound and X-ray
computed tomography (CT) systems.
The History of Pottery
No one knows for sure how the process of making pottery was
invented, but for many years archaeologists throughout the
world have been uncovering pieces of pottery from as far back
as prehistoric times. Since the clay base of pottery does not
react to chemicals and does not corrode like metal, cloth, or
wood, these artifacts often are preserved nearly unchanged,
while other items of the same age are at least partially destroyed.
For this reason, pottery is used extensively by archaeologists to
determine how ancient peoples lived their daily lives.
Ceramics played a significant role in NASA’s
space shuttle program. Each shuttle had a
protective shield made up of about 34,000
lightweight, reusable ceramic tiles that protected
the astronauts and the shuttle’s aluminum frame from
the extreme temperatures generated as they passed
through Earth’s atmosphere.
Ceramics are
even used to
make musical
instruments—
ocarinas, whistles,
flutes, and
whistling jars.


POTTERY 11
.Introduction
The First Ceramics
Archaeologists in the Czech
Republic have uncovered human-
made ceramics that they believe
date to at least 24,000 B.C. These
artifacts are in the form of slabs,
balls, and animal- and human-shaped
figures, and are made of animal fat,
bone, bone ash, and a claylike material.
It is not clear what these articles were
used for, but they might have been used
for ritualistic or religious purposes.
The earliest clay vessels were sun-dried, not fired. They
probably were used to store only grain and other dry foods,
because filling them with water would have caused the clay to
absorb the liquid and soften. Not long after these first crude
clay vessels were made, people learned how to use fire to make
them stronger, harder, and more watertight.
Many scientists believe the discovery that fire could change
clay into a useful, beautiful, and more durable vessel occurred
independently among different cultures throughout the prehis-
toric world. This eventually led to the development of structural
clay products, including brick and tile.
Many scientists believe that the oldest known functional
pottery came from Neolithic cultures in Japan and Turkey. They
believe dirt-brown pot fragments, or
shards, unearthed from a cave in
Kyushu, Japan, date to around
10,500 B.C. and were made by a fish-
ing, hunting, and shellfish-gathering
culture. This pottery is called Jomon,
which means “cord markings,”
because much of it was decorated
with cord patterns. Pot shards found
in other Japanese sites are believed to
be even older—by about 500 years.
Pieces of crude, soft earthenware exca-
vated from a Neolithic settlement on
the Anatolian Plateau of Turkey are
thought to be 9,000 years old.
Scientists date this Chinese vessel to
the Western Han dynasty in the second
century B.C.
Neolithic means
“new stone”
and refers to the
last period of
the Stone Age,
when people
began to farm the
land and raise
livestock, and to
make pottery.
Scientists date this
example of Jomon
pottery to be circa
5,000 to 4,000 B.C.


12 POTTERY
Introduction.
How Was Pottery Discovered?
There are several theories about the long-ago discovery that fire
could change clay into a material that would not dissolve in
water. At least two of them involve the hunter-gatherers who
lived at the beginning of the Neolithic stage of cultural evolu-
tion. During this time, cultures around the world gradually were
changing from a nomadic lifestyle to a more settled one. The
people were learning to raise crops and keep livestock. This
new lifestyle not only created a necessity for food storage, but
it also gave the people more time to pursue handicrafts such as
weaving and pottery.
You might wonder how
these people came up with the
idea of making pottery. One
theory holds that these Neolithic
families would often camp
alongside rivers and build their
fires in pits that they had dug
into the clay banks. When the
fires burned down, the people
noticed that their pits had turned
into hard, sunken “bowls” that
could hold water.
Another theory involves
Jomon pottery. To begin with,
it is thought that Neolithic
people had learned from their
Stone Age ancestors to line their
baskets with clay and then leave
them to dry in the sun so that
they would hold water—at least
until the clay dissolved. Because
some of the Jomon pottery has a
basketlike texture, some scholars
believe that it might have originated when baskets lined with
clay either fell into a fire or were intentionally used for cooking.
The natural fibers of the basket would have burned away,
leaving behind a crude and more watertight pot.
People in ancient times discovered that the
intense heat from their fire pits caused the
clay in the ground to harden.


POTTERY 13
.Introduction
The Development of Glaze
The earliest pots were decorated with liquid clay slip, a mixture
of clay and water that had a practical use of holding pieces of
pots together. Another form of pottery decorating, glaze, was
discovered around 2700 B.C. in Egypt. At the time, Egyptians
found that the sand they used in making their pottery created a
colored glaze when overheated in a kiln. By 1500 B.C., potters
learned that by sprinkling their pots with powdered lead, they
could produce a glaze that covered the piece.
Around A.D. 1500, German potters found that salt made an
effective glaze. This was a major contribution to the evolution
of pottery and would later play an important role in English
and American ceramic industries.
The First Porcelain
Porcelain was developed and first produced in China between
A.D. 618 and 906 to withstand the extreme temperatures of
Chinese kilns. The ware was exported to Korea, Japan, and
the Middle East, where it became immensely popular.
The Chinese potters continued to refine their ware and
by the 13th century had learned how to use cobalt from the
Middle East to make beautiful blue-and-white ware. When
supplies from Persia were cut off by the
emperor’s ban on overseas travel, the pot-
ters began using copper in their glazes and
enamels, which gave them a range of
shades from blue to green. Eventually
the Chinese potters added colors such as
red, yellow, turquoise, deep violet, and
purple to their pottery.
The highly prized Chinese porcelain
had influenced Middle Eastern potters,
and their product in turn greatly influ-
enced European potters. Middle Eastern
and European potters tried to imitate the
blue-and-white porcelain, which had
been widely imported into Europe.
They developed a tin-based glaze
that was bright white on buff or
red clay bodies.
Ming porcelain from the
early 15th century


14 POTTERY
Introduction.
Japanese potters succeeded in producing true porcelain in
the 16th century, having been influenced by Chinese as well as
Korean ware. However, it was not until the 18th century that
true porcelain was produced in Europe—first in Germany, then
in England.
Pottery in North America
The first potters in North America were Pueblo Indians, who
made plain, undecorated pots. It is thought that the earliest
pots were baskets that had been smeared with clay and then
dried in the sun.
By about A.D. 1000, Mimbres potters used slips to decorate
their pottery with black-on-white designs of insects, animals,
birds, or geometric shapes. Over the next few hundred years,
they introduced black decorations on a red slip. After the 12th
century, they started replacing
these older styles with poly-
chrome ware decorated with
stylized birds, feathers,
animals, and human
figures along with the
geometric patterns.
Hard-paste, or true, porcelain was developed in China and gradually was
exported to many parts of the world. Made primarily of petuntse (china
stone) and kaolin (white china clay), the semitranslucent ware fired bright
white and quickly became the envy of the Western world.
During the 16th century, Italian potters tried to imitate the semitrans-
lucent Chinese porcelain and eventually developed soft-paste, or artificial,
porcelain from a mixture of white clay and frit. This ware required a lower,
or “softer,” firing than that required for hard-paste porcelain, which
resulted in a softer, warmer body.
The Mimbres
were a prehistoric
North American
people who lived
in the mountains
along the
Mimbres River,
in an area now
known as south-
western New
Mexico. They are
famous for their
beautiful black-
on-white pottery.
Mimbres pottery


POTTERY 15
.Introduction
When European settlers first came to North America, they
brought only woodenware and some pewter mugs and utensils.
They did not have china as we know it today. In fact, house-
hold pottery was not in common use among the colonists until
the late 17th century when a reddish slip-decorated earthen-
ware was imported from England.
As English, Dutch, and German immigrants came to the
New World, they brought their rich heritage of pottery making
with them. Soon the colonists were buying earthenwares from
local farmers who also worked as part-time potters. Only the
well-off had luxurious, decorative ceramics imported from
England, Germany, and China.
The first American potteries were established in Virginia,
Pennsylvania, and New York. The first whiteware was produced
in 1684. A stoneware factory opened in New York in 1730, and in
North Carolina, Jugtown pottery was first produced around 1750.
Soon after, terra-cotta works began operating in Massachusetts
and Pennsylvania. The first American porcelain was produced in
Philadelphia in 1769.
The first of several famous potteries in Bennington,
Vermont, opened in 1793. A pottery center in East Liverpool,
Ohio, became established as one of the foremost in the
industry by 1839. It was here that they produced
the first American Rockingham ware, famous for
its manganese-brown glazes.
Although there were potters in the colonies, they were
so busy making bricks and tiles to meet the urgent
need for building materials, they didn’t have time to
make pottery.
Terra-cotta pots


16 POTTERY
Introduction.
Modern Pottery
In the 1900s, art pottery
became very popular,
and the influence of
Oriental and European
potters revitalized the
studio pottery life begin-
ning in about 1950. The
20th-century develop-
ment of mass-production
techniques and the use
of synthetic materials did
not diminish the demand
for fine, handcrafted pot-
tery. Major artists of the
century, including Pablo Picasso and Henri-Émile-Benoît
Matisse, produced exquisite ceramic works.
Historical Pottery Styles
Throughout the history of pottery, different cultures have devel-
oped individual styles, and from those styles, others have evolved.
Chinese. The Chinese were the world leaders in the production
of beautifully glazed and decorated porcelain and stoneware.
Some very early styles of imperial ware (porcelain made for and
sponsored by the emperor’s court) included a buff stoneware
covered with a dense greenish-blue glaze, a stoneware washed
with brown slip and glazed in colors that varied from pale
green to lavender blue, and a dark stoneware with a
grayish-white glaze. Most of these styles also had a well-marked
crackle as a design element.
A style of imperial ware made during the Ming dynasty
was the fine white porcelain painted in blue underglaze
that made “china” a household word. Another very
famous and prized Chinese pottery is celadon ware,
which has a gray or grayish-white body with a
transparent sea-green glaze and usually a well-marked
crackle. Celadon ware was very important in China’s
trade with the Middle East because of the superstition
that a celadon dish would crack, break, or change color
if a poisoned food were served on it.


POTTERY 17
.Introduction
Chinese export porcelain includes most of
the porcelain shipped from China from the
17th through the 19th centuries. It was spe-
cifically designed to appeal to the
Western world; most of the styles were
based on European pottery or metal-
work designs or on a combination of
Western and Oriental motifs. Blue-and-
white decoration was the most com-
mon, but Chinese potters also were
influenced by the Japanese Imari ware,
imitating their blue, red, and gold
patterns, among others.
Greek. The pottery of early Greece was notable
for its graceful use of human and animal
figures. Commonly, the design was
painted in shiny black pigment
on the reddish clay body. The
design was sometimes left
unpainted on the red body
and the black pigment was
applied to the surface out-
side the design.
Ming porcelain
This Imari dish is estimated to have been made in the early 1700s.


18 POTTERY
Japanese. Japanese pottery was influ-
enced by Chinese and Korean pottery.
One style that became popular in the
West is called Imari, a generic term for
Japanese porcelain made in the Arita
kilns on the island of Kyushu and
shipped from the port of Imari. Imari
ware is believed to date from 1616,
when porcelain clays were discovered
in Arita by Korean craftsmen.
Most early Imari work was blue-
and-white only, but with the gaining
popularity of Chinese porcelain, the
Japanese potters began to add gold and color enamels to
porcelain decorated in underglaze blue. One common style
was produced in red with touches of gold in imitation of some
Chinese Ming porcelain. By the mid-17th century, native
Japanese designs were introduced, and during that century
Imari ware became so popular in Europe that even the Chinese,
the English, and the Dutch imitated it.
Raku is a traditional Japanese pottery that was developed
in the 16th century to replace the Chinese bowls that were
being used in the tea ceremony. Traditional raku is still made
today by the 15th-generation ancestors of the man who origi-
nated the technique. Potters throughout the world admire raku
ware for its rugged shapes and soft lead glazes.
Raku ware is molded entirely by hand, which makes each
piece a unique creation. The shape of traditional raku tea bowls
was very simple: a wide,
straight-sided yet irregular
form set on a narrow base.
Raku glaze colors included
dark brown, light orange-
red, straw, green, and
cream. The special firing
technique used for raku
ware produces unique
characteristics throughout
the glaze, and sometimes
in the pottery itself. This
technique sets it apart from
any other type of pottery.
Black raku tea bowl, 16th century
In 1592, during
the Japanese
invasion of Korea,
many Korean
potters were
taken back to
Japan and put to
work making
porcelain for the
traditional tea
ceremony. These
potters later
helped to establish
the Japanese
porcelain industry.
Imari ware is still made today.


.Introduction
The tin-glazing technique used in
majolica eventually spread to France,
where it was called faience, and to the
Netherlands, where it was called delft.
Majolica. Majolica pottery is bisque-fired
earthenware that is coated with an opaque
white tin-based glaze then decorated with
colorfully painted designs on the white surface
before firing. Majolica was first made in the
Middle East to emulate Chinese porcelain.
Later, the technique spread to Spain (where it
later came to be known as Talavera ware),
then to Italy from the island of Majorca,
Spain, where it got its name.
Delft. The potters of Delft, Holland, decorated their pottery in
imitation of Chinese porcelain and some Imari ware, usually in
blue and white. They used the majolica technique of applying a
white opaque tin-based glaze to earthenware, then painting and
firing the piece. But there was a difference between the two in
that cobalt was used as the main colorant in delftware.
From Holland, the art of tin-glazing earthenware was
introduced to England. Generally, the Dutch and the English
potters copied the Chinese motifs, but occasionally the Dutch
delftware was decorated with landscapes and seascapes of
windmills, dikes, and ships.
Della Robbia Ware. Luca della Robbia was a great Florentine
sculptor in the 1400s. His beautiful glazed terra-cotta sculptures
are most famous for the interesting effects he achieved from
layering glazes.
Majolica
Sculpture of Madonna
by Luca della Robbia


20 POTTERY
English. Staffordshire ware is a
famous English stoneware that
began production in the late
17th century in and around
Staffordshire, England. The local
abundance of coal and clay grad-
ually turned a small community
of farmer-potters into a substan-
tial industry by 1740, and the
area later became the center of
England’s pottery industry. The first
products were lead-glazed earthen-
ware and unglazed or salt-glazed
stoneware. Porcelain was first made in
Staffordshire around 1750.
English potter Josiah Wedgwood started his manufactory in
Staffordshire in the mid-18th century. By 1765, he was famous
for his version of creamware, a lead-glazed earthenware that
soon replaced tin-glazed ware in popularity. In 1775, he intro-
duced jasperware, a fine-grained, unglazed stoneware adorned
with white figures or Greek classical
scenes in relief on soft
or dark blue, sage
green, lilac, black, or
yellow backgrounds.
John Astbury was a pioneer of English pottery technol-
ogy and was one of the earliest great Staffordshire
potters. It is said that he pretended to be an idiot so
that he could learn the secrets of the craft from potters
who had emigrated from Holland in 1688.
Jasperware
was so named
because it
resembled the
natural stone
jasper in its
hardness.
Jasperware was
the result of a
long series of
experiments in
trying to discover
the techniques
of producing
porcelain.
Staffordshire
ware
Jasperware


POTTERY 21
.Introduction
Before 1800, Josiah Spode II, also of Staffordshire, intro-
duced bone china after successfully adding bone ash (ground
bone) to porcelain clay, which strengthened the porcelain and
gave it an ivory white look. Bone china is still one of the more
popular types of porcelain. Some say it is the most successful
English porcelain ever made.
Sèvres. In the mid-1700s, King Louis XV sponsored a famous
pottery in Sèvres, France, to produce extravagant dinner
services, urns, centerpieces, and serving ware. Made of the
highest quality soft-paste porcelain, Sèvres ware prospered
and became widely known for its superb glazes and richly
colored backgrounds in royal blue, turquoise, yellow, green,
and rose. It was decorated with floral patterns and birds,
often in white panels outlined in gold, and lavishly trimmed
in gold on the edges, handles, and bases.
American Indian. This pottery often was coil-built and
smooth, decorated with colored slips, and burnished
before being pit fired. Common designs were geometric
patterns or forms inspired by animals. Most American
Indian pottery has continued in this style.
English potters in the 17th century dug their clay from
the roads so they could conserve land for cultivation.
Eventually the roads became so dangerous that a law
was passed to forbid the potters from continuing the
practice. Many believe it was the potters’ unpopular
practice that gave us the term “pothole.”
American Indian
pottery


22 POTTERY
Introduction.
Pottery on Parade
To get a better feel for the long history of pottery making and
the great beauty of the wares produced, visit a museum, art gal-
lery, artist’s studio, or other place where pottery is made or dis-
played. Many museums have large collections of ceramic works.
Some exhibit modern ceramics; others specialize in early ceram-
ics or the pottery-making traditions of different cultures.
You may be able to locate an artisan or a pottery studio
or co-op in your community by searching for “pottery” or “art
galleries” on the internet (with your parent or guardian’s
permission). A gallery exhibits and sells artists’ creations.
Look for a gallery that offers ceramics and pottery. Some
represent only ceramic artists, while other galleries offer many
kinds of art, from paintings and sculptures to jewelry and
glass. Your counselor can help you arrange a visit.
Whether you see
contemporary
works of art or
pottery shards
from ancient
civilizations, a
museum visit is
worthwhile.
Search for
“museums” on
the internet (with
your parent or
guardian’s
permission) or
ask your
counselor for
advice.


POTTERY 23
.Introduction
Your community may have an art fair or festival; check
with your local or regional arts council or foundation. Such
organizations often publish calendars of events. You may
be able to find a local arts council by searching for “arts
organizations” on the internet (with permission).
No matter where you live, a festival or similar event is
likely to be within reach. To widen your search, try these:
• At the public library, ask for information on arts festivals or
organizations. The reference desk librarian may help you find
calendars of events.
• Be alert to radio, television, and newspaper announcements
about festivals, events, museum exhibits, and classes.
• Use the internet (with permission) to locate nearby festivals.
In a search engine, type in the city or state and the phrase
“art festivals” or “art fairs.”
If you cannot visit a museum or gallery or see hand-
made ceramics at a festival or studio, learn from other
sources about the historical and cultural importance
of pottery. The resources section at the end of this
pamphlet lists books, magazines, and websites that
are good sources of information.





POTTERY 25
.All About Clay
All About Clay
Clay is found almost everywhere, maybe
even in your own backyard. It can be
white, beige, buff, gray, green, red,
brown, or, in rare cases, black. When
moist, it is soft and malleable, which
means it can be molded or modeled.
Some potters get clay by digging it
out of the ground, or they buy it
from brickyards, potteries, ceramic
factories, trade and craft schools,
hobby shops, or other retailers
of clay and ceramic supplies.
Clay can be created from inexpensive dry clay powder. The
powder can cost a few cents per pound for common clay
to around a dollar a pound for imported English porcelain.
Many suppliers
advertise in
pottery-related
magazines; their
ads explain how
to contact them
for a catalog.


26 POTTERY
All About Clay.
Properties of Clay
Pure clay is made of chemically combined silica, alumina, and
water. In its natural state, it is rarely pure and usually contains
impurities such as sand, limestone, pebbles, iron oxide, and
traces of other elements it has accumulated over the long period
of time it has taken to become clay. These impurities—in any
combination—provide the clay with a unique set of properties
that make different types of clay useful for different purposes.
Pure clay, with few or no impurities, lacks some of the
properties that a potter needs. One of these properties is
plasticity, which refers to how well the clay holds a shape
when bent or molded. Clay that cracks when bent around an
object is called nonplastic or short.
Shrinkage is another property of clay. The process begins
naturally as water evaporates from air-drying clay. During
firing, further shrinkage occurs when the clay particles undergo
chemical changes that cause them to fuse into a solid material.
The hardness, or strength, of a particular clay is another
important property. It refers to how well the clay stays together
when it is leather hard, bone dry, and in the fired state.
Color and texture are two more properties of clay. When
planning pottery projects, you will want to know what color a
particular type of clay will be when fired and whether it is
coarse and rough or fine-grained and smooth.
One of the world’s
few natural
sources of pure
clay is in
Cornwall, England,
where there are
vast deposits of
kaolin, or china
clay. The mining
industry in that
area creates huge
heaps of mined
clay that cause
the local streams
to run milky white
in rainy weather.
The fired piece at left shows the effects of shrinkage when
compared with an identical piece, right, that has not yet
been fired.


POTTERY 27
.All About Clay
Kinds of Clay
Choosing the type of clay for the project is the first step in
making pottery. Choose from several types: kaolin, ball clay,
stoneware clay, fireclay, and earthenware clay.
Kaolin. Kaolin, or china clay, is a very pure form of clay, weath-
ered from granite rock by water, dissolved carbon dioxide, and
organic acids. It fires white in color and vitrifies, or becomes
glasslike, at very high temperatures. Kaolin is an essential ingre-
dient in high-fire whiteware and porcelain clay bodies.
Ball Clay. Ball clay, also weathered from granite rock, is a plas-
tic, fine-grained cream- or white-firing clay. It is deposited by
wind or water erosion in swampy areas where the organic acids
and gases have broken it down into fine particles. Ball clay pro-
vides plasticity and dry strength in clay bodies. It generally can
be fired to high temperatures, but it is rather sticky and shrinks
more than other kinds of clay. Ball clay is not useful alone and
is used only in combination with other clays.
The term “ball clay” has been traced to historic
mining methods in England. The clay was scooped and
rolled into balls of 30 to 50 pounds each and measuring
about 10 inches in diameter, then wrapped in burlap
for shipping.
A kaolin mineral mine in Bulgaria.


28 POTTERY
All About Clay.
Stoneware Clay. Stoneware clay is usable right from the
ground as a clay body. Other clays and chemicals often are
added to stoneware clay to introduce various properties such as
color and texture and to affect maturation temperature. This
clay will vitrify when fired at middle- to high-range
temperatures. Some stoneware clays are smooth like
ball clays; others are coarse like fireclay. Iron and
other impurities color stoneware clay, which
can be white, beige, buff, red, brown, gray,
or, in rare cases, black. It usually has an
attractive fired color.
Fireclay. Fireclay has a coarse texture, but some fireclays are
smoother than others. Fireclay can withstand high firing tem-
peratures without disintegrating or deforming. Fireclay also is
used in clay bodies to lend strength and decrease shrinkage.
Coarse fireclays often are used for the gritty texture they add
to clay bodies.
Earthenware Clay. Earthenware
clay is found in every part of the
United States and is often used
in its natural form. Earthenware
clays are usually full of iron impu-
rities, which give it color but also
cause it to melt at a low tempera-
ture. If left unglazed, earthenware
is porous after firing and is
useful for making flowerpots,
tile, and brick.
Fireclay is widely used in making brick.


POTTERY 29
.All About Clay
Clay Bodies
Nature is not always kind enough to combine the right kinds
of clay in just the right proportions for a specific ceramic pur-
pose. An experienced potter mixes several different kinds of
clay and other substances in specific proportions according to a
formula, or recipe, to get a certain result. This mixture is
called a clay body.
The terms “clay” and “clay body” do not have the
same meaning. Clay is a naturally occurring material, but a
clay body has been mixed from several clays and other
ingredients. The difference is similar to the difference
between flour and a cake mix. For your project, you can
use a premixed clay body or mix your own to suit your
needs, with guidance from your counselor or an
experienced potter.
The Qualities of a Clay Body
When mixing a clay body, you need the right clay for the job.
To do this, you must know which qualities the clay body must
have for a particular project. For instance, any clay body must
be plastic—it must hold together and bend and mold easily. In
a clay body, the clay provides the plasticity. Also, the clay must
be appropriate for the kiln. Some kilns will not produce the
high temperatures required for some clays to mature. It also is
wise to choose a clay that is easily available.
Next, a material must be added to help the clay melt into a
solid material when fired. This is the flux. Flux is like the glue
that holds the clay particles together when fired.
The final kind of material in any clay body is the filler.
Fillers lend fired strength, determine porosity, and affect
shrinkage. Very porous clay bodies usually contain sand or
grog, which creates more space between their clay particles
than between those of dense clay bodies that have no sand or
grog. Porous clay bodies can be used to make bigger, thicker
pots that will not crack, warp, or burst when dry or fired.
If you desire whiteness in your finished piece,
use kaolin clay; for plasticity, add ball clay;
for dry strength, fireclay; and for red color, earthen-
ware clay. Chemicals also can be added to a clay
body to make just about any color.


30 POTTERY
All About Clay.
Kinds of Clay Pottery and Their Clay Bodies
Each of the three major types of clay pottery—earthenware,
stoneware, and porcelain—are made by creating a unique mix,
or recipe, for their clay bodies. The ingredients in the recipes
are what give each type of pottery its distinguishing qualities.
Earthenware
Earthenware, the oldest and simplest form of pottery, usually
is full of impurities that, aside from giving it color in ranges of
buff to red and gray to black, cause it to mature at low temper-
atures. As a result, the clay does not completely solidify into a
watertight state. For this reason, depending on the intended
use, glaze can be applied inside and out.
Terra-cotta is a type of earthenware pottery. Common
orange clay flowerpots are made from terra-cotta clay. Because
of its attractive color, terra-cotta is often left unglazed.
Throughout history, beautiful glazed and heavily decorated pots
also have been made from terra-cotta. One example would be
majolica, which is first bisque-fired, then covered with an
opaque white tin glaze that is allowed to dry, and then over-
painted with colored oxides before being fired a second time.
Here is one recipe for a white-
colored earthenware clay body:
30 percent plastic kaolin
+ 30 percent ball clay (the clays)
+ 40 percent talc (the flux)
And here is a terra-cotta
earthenware recipe:
15 percent ball clay
+ 15 percent stoneware clay
+ 40 percent earthenware clay
(the clays)
+ 10 percent nepheline syenite
+ 10 percent talc
+ 10 percent borax frit (the fluxes)
Unglazed terra-cotta


POTTERY 31
.All About Clay
A good mix for whiteware
follows:
55 percent plastic kaolin
(the clay)
+ 25 percent potassium
feldspar (the flux)
+ 20 percent silica (the filler)
Stoneware
Stoneware fires to higher temperatures, which leaves the surface
very hard and nonporous. It is usually opaque, but when thinly
potted can be somewhat translucent. Stoneware is more plastic
than porcelain, which makes it much easier to use in throwing
on the wheel or in hand-building. Some natural clays are stone-
ware, but often several clays are combined to make a stoneware
clay body. Grog or sand can be added for wet strength.
Porcelain
Porcelain is known for its beautiful, smooth, white surface
when fired. Some kinds of porcelain objects are known as
whiteware, including some restaurant and hotel china, fine
china, and plumbing fixtures such as toilets and sinks. China
is a kind of porcelain that has special properties. It is usually
fired to a high maturing temperature before being glazed at a
lower temperature.
Here is a good recipe for
stoneware:
18 percent ball clay
+ 55 percent stoneware clay
+ 12 percent fireclay (the clays)
+ 10 percent potassium
feldspar (the flux)
+ 5 percent silica (the filler)
Unglazed stoneware
The name “china” was coined by the British,
who tried to imitate the porcelain made by
Chinese potters. This piece is unglazed.





POTTERY 33
.Equipment and Tools
Equipment and Tools
While your hands and fingers can be used to make almost any
kind of pottery, most potters also employ basic tools to create
their works.
The Potter’s Wheel
It is not known exactly when the potter’s wheel was invented,
but the earliest evidence of the device is shown in ancient
Egyptian paintings. It is known that the potter’s wheel was
widely used in Egypt and Mesopotamia before 3000 B.C.
Early potter’s wheels were just circular slabs of stone or
wood that pivoted on a wooden axle so that the wheel head
revolved freely in a horizontal plane. The wheel was hand-
turned either by an assistant or by the potter moving a stick
that fit into a notch on the wheel’s surface. These wheels
rotated very slowly and even wobbled a bit.
The wheel
remained
unknown in
North America
until the arrival
of Europeans,
although it is
thought that the
native peoples
of this country
might have used
a turntable
occasionally.


34 POTTERY
Equipment and Tools.
In contrast, modern potter’s wheels
are precise machines that turn quickly and
smoothly. Although there are many variations
of each kind of wheel, three types are now most
common: the kickwheel, the treadle wheel, and the
electric wheel.
The first potter’s wheel was turned by hand, which
made for slow, difficult work. Next came the kickwheel,
which was turned by foot. By the 18th century, the
wheel was no longer powered by the potter’s foot but
by small boys who worked as apprentices to learn the
pottery-making trade.
The power provided by electric wheels is
helpful when making objects that require
more than 15 pounds of clay.


POTTERY 35
.Equipment and Tools
Kickwheel
The modern kickwheel usually has a
heavy, round flywheel near the ground,
with a shaft that connects it to the wheel
head. The wheel head and shaft are
usually made of metal, and the flywheel,
either concrete or metal. Ball-bearing
attachments fasten the shaft to a frame,
which in most cases includes a seat.
To use a kickwheel, sit in the seat
and turn the flywheel with your right
foot, which turns the wheel in a counter-
clockwise direction. The faster the
flywheel is turned, the faster the wheel
head turns. This fast foot motion is
the “kicking.”
Treadle Wheel
A treadle wheel is similar to a kickwheel.
It also has a flywheel (usually lighter
weight), a shaft, and a wheel head.
A treadle bar—a straight bar attached
to a central point on the frame and to
a cog on the flywheel—is pushed with the
foot. It must be pedaled constantly,
usually with the left foot, to keep the
wheel rotating. The rhythm of the pedal-
ing controls the rhythm of the throwing.
Some treadle wheels have seats, while
others are used while standing.
Electric Wheel
The electric wheel is popular with potters
and is the type most commonly used
at colleges and craft schools. Electric
wheels can be small and portable, and
they usually have a foot pedal that allows
the potter to control the speed. Most elec-
tric wheels do not have an attached seat.
Kickwheel
Electric wheel
Treadle wheel


36 POTTERY
Equipment and Tools.
Tools
Potters use a variety of tools in their work. Perfectly wonderful
pots can be made using only the most important tools—hands
and fingers—but potters also enjoy using tools for various jobs.
Pottery tools can be sophisticated or simple. For example, to
score a clay surface, a serrated rib, a needle tool, a wire brush,
a cork with sewing needles sticking out of it, or a kitchen fork
could be used.
Ribs are tools used for shaping or for adding surface tex-
ture to clay articles. They can be made of wood, flexible steel,
rubber, or plastic. Some creative potters cut ribs out of expired
credit cards or from the sides of empty plastic detergent bottles.
Commercial
tools


POTTERY 37
.Equipment and Tools
Carving and modeling tools come in an amazing array,
and most are made of wood, metal, or plastic. Discarded
(and sterilized) steel dental tools are excellent for detailing,
as are wood-carving tools. Restaurant suppliers and hardware
and kitchenware stores are great sources for tools that can
be used in pottery making. Cookie cutters, molds, paddles,
cheese slicers, sandpaper, utility knives, rasps, chamois cloth,
wallpaper rollers, drill bits, soft paintbrushes, and sponges are
just a few worth mentioning.
An experienced potter probably has collected a variety of
tools, but beginners will do well with a basic tool set from a
clay supplier. These sets commonly contain a sponge, a metal
rib, a rubber rib, a metal loop tool, a wooden stick, a metal
needle tool, a fettling knife, and a cutoff wire. Pottery tools
should be kept handy and safe in a sturdy container.
Potters use
objects as tools in
unusual ways.
For instance, small,
very smooth river
stones are useful
for burnishing
and compressing
clay surfaces,
as are spoons.
Use seashells
or pinecones
to make interest-
ing textures
on pottery.
Handmade and improvised tools can be found just about anywhere.


38 POTTERY
Equipment and Tools.
Kilns
A kiln is a structure that generates and holds heat. The first
kilns were just open trenches covered with firewood and a
dome of broken pots to hold in the heat. Although today’s
kilns are more sophisticated, the principle is the same. Heat
is introduced into the space where the clay articles have been
placed. The temperature is raised and the amount of oxygen
around the ware is controlled according to the needs of the
clay and the glaze.
Electric Kiln
Electric kilns are popular and easy to use. Electricity generates
heat from wire elements attached to the brick walls of the kiln.
Because electricity generates the heat, the oxygen level in the
kiln remains the same as in the atmosphere outside the kiln.
This kind of atmosphere is referred to as neutral.
Electric kilns are commercially built of a soft brick
that enables them to heat up and cool down quicker than fuel-
burning kilns. It generally takes 10 to 20 hours for an electric
kiln to reach low-fire temperatures and another
12 to 15 hours to cool.


POTTERY 39
.Equipment and Tools
Fuel-Burning Kiln
Kilns also can be heated by burning oil,
wood, natural gas, propane, or coal as
fuel. Natural gas and propane are the
most common fuels for these types
of kilns. Fuel-burning kilns have in
common several construction features:
• Entry ports for the fuel
• Controlled air intakes
• Interior baffles to deflect and spread the flame from
its source
• Exit flues
• Dampers to control air flow
• Chimneys to draw air through the kiln
Mark Hewitt’s 900-cubic-foot kiln was
modeled after a 14th century kiln from
northern Thailand.


40 POTTERY
Equipment and Tools.
Wood is sometimes used as the primary fuel in a kiln.
Wood gives a particular quality to pottery. As the wood burns,
it creates ash that is so light it flows through the kiln and lands
on the pottery, creating a special glaze. Also, the variable flame
produced by the burning wood creates flashing marks on
the pottery.
Wood-burning kilns need more open space around them
than other fuel-burning kilns because the fire must be stoked
regularly. Such kilns can be fired continuously for days. They
also need larger fireboxes and chimneys and produce more
smoke and fumes than other kilns.
A typical fuel-burning kiln will take 12 to 24 hours to reach
high-fire temperatures and another 24 hours to cool.
A typical fuel-burning kiln will take 12 to 24 hours to reach
high-fire temperatures and another 24 hours to cool.
This loaded wood-burning kiln is ready to fire.


POTTERY 41
.Equipment and Tools
Kiln Furniture
Kiln furniture is the shelves, posts, or bricks used to support
clayware in the kiln. The items are made of ceramic refractory
materials, which means that they are heat-resistant and will
not melt. Kiln furniture is available in many shapes and sizes.
Potters also use kiln accessories like steel-pointed stilts to raise
pieces that have glazed bottoms.
Kiln shelves can be expensive, so it is wise to take care
of them properly. Before use, make sure the shelves are
dry and there are no cracks, and apply kiln wash to
shelves for protection against glaze drips. Kiln wash
is a thick solution of 2 parts kaolin and 1 part silica or
alumina mixed in a bucket of water. Apply kiln wash
with a brush or roller, to the tops of the shelves only,
and allow it to dry completely before using the shelves
in the kiln. Once the kiln shelves are protected, any
glaze drips can be easily scraped away.





POTTERY 43
.Pottery Projects
Pottery Projects
As with any project, you should know the general safety rules
and the basics of the craft before you begin.
Handling Clay Safely
Clay dust can be a serious health hazard. A deadly lung disease
called silicosis can be contracted from breathing in fine clay
particles. It is very important to protect yourself whenever you
are working with clay. Follow these guidelines at all times.
1. When using dry, bagged clay, wear a protective mask.
2. Do not sweep a dusty studio. Always wet-mop to prevent
clay dust from flying into the air.
3. Do not use sandpaper or other abrasive materials to refine a
pot unless you are wearing a protective mask.
4. Work outside when possible.
5. Do not eat or drink in an area where clay dust might be in
the air or might be contaminated with chemicals.


44 POTTERY
Pottery Projects.
In rare cases, a skin rash called dermatitis can develop
on the hands and arms from handling wet clay. This form of
dermatitis is an allergic reaction to the clay. If you notice any
redness, itching, tenderness, rash, swelling, or even a feeling of
warmth in the exposed area, wash the affected skin thoroughly
with lots of water, and avoid any further contact with the
suspected irritant until you have seen a health-care provider.
Do not try to treat the condition yourself; some remedies can
actually make the condition worse, especially if overused. It is
wisest to let a medical professional treat you.
You should learn and follow all pottery safety guidelines.
People of all ages all around the world have found that working
with clay is fun and rewarding—be sure to keep your pottery-
making experience a safe one.
Getting Started
Before starting each project, think about the desired look and
size of the finished piece. Sketch the design in actual size, and
remember to allow for shrinkage. Be sure to design the piece so
your fingers can reach inside.
Some potters like to use templates to help check their
work as they build. Templates are easy to make. When you are
satisfied with the shape and size of the piece, make a final
drawing of it on cardboard, then cut the template from it.
Take care when
using knives,
needles, carving
tools, scissors,
and other sharp
or pointed tools
to cut and
shape clay.


POTTERY 45
.Pottery Projects
Templates can be especially useful for geometric forms that
fit together at precise angles, such as squares or parallelograms.
If you decide to use templates, don’t be afraid to change the
design during the building process. In other words, don’t limit
your creativity just because you have made a sketch or a
template of your design.
Another step to be done before you begin the project is
to prepare the clay by thoroughly wedging and kneading it
so that the moisture is evenly distributed and there are no air
bubbles, lumps, or hard spots. The clay must have a consistent
texture for it to be suitable for working.
Wedging Clay. Wedging is the first phase in preparing clay for
pottery making.
Step 1—Use the cutoff wire to slice the block of clay into
several uniform slices.
Step 2—Lay the slices down, turning every other slice sideways.
Then, pick up the first slice and slam it down on top of the slice
next to it. Slam the next slice on top of those two and continue
until all of the slices have been slammed onto the stack.
1 2


46 POTTERY
Pottery Projects.
Step 3—Reform the clay into a block (with the slices still
alternately vertical and horizontal). Turn the block on its side
so that the slices are perpendicular to the work surface, then
repeat the slicing, turning, and slamming together until the
clay is well-mixed.


POTTERY 47
.Pottery Projects
Kneading Clay. One kind of kneading, known as “ox’s head,”
“ram’s head,” or “dog’s head” kneading, is accomplished
this way.
Step 1—Take a lump of clay the size of a grapefruit from its
container and form it into an oval ball.
Step 2—Grasp the oval ball with both hands, one on each end.
Press the heels of your hands downward and toward each other
at the same time, pushing the clay into itself.
Step 3—Rotate the top edges of the clay forward with your
fingertips and again press the heels of your hands downward
and toward each other, pushing the clay into itself.
To get the proper consistency, you should repeat steps
2 and 3 about 40 times.
1 2


48 POTTERY
Pottery Projects.
Slab Pottery
Clay slabs are simply sheets of clay; they can be of any size or
thickness. The slabs are pieced together to make forms.
When working with slabs, pay attention to the amount of
moisture in the clay. Low-moisture, stiff slabs will be difficult to
curve without breaking, but they are good to use for making
box-shaped forms. High-moisture, soft slabs will curve easily
but might not stand up without complete support.
Forming a Clay Slab
There are three basic ways to form a slab.
Rolling by Hand. Begin by preparing the working surface.
Spread out a piece of heavy fabric, such as canvas, to prevent
the slab from sticking and to make it easier to move the slab
to another working space. Flatten a ball of clay in the center of
the fabric.
Using a rolling pin or other long wooden cylinder, roll
along the surface of the ball to further flatten and smooth it
into a slab. Some potters place guides at the sides of the slab
to support the rolling pin and force the clay into a uniform
thickness. These guides are made from wooden or metal strips
that are at least 1
⁄4 inch thick.
Roll the slab on one side, then cover it with another piece
of heavy fabric, flip it over, and roll it again. This action com-
presses both sides of the slab and strengthens it.


POTTERY 49
.Pottery Projects
Throwing. This is just what it sounds like. Start by forming
the lump of clay into a fat, bunlike shape. Grasp the clay in
both hands, extend your arms out in front of you, then quickly
throw the clay down on the table at an angle toward your body.
This will cause the clay to spread in one direction and thin into
a slab.
Rotate the clay 180 degrees and repeat the process to
prevent the clay from becoming too thin in one direction.
Repeat the slamming and turning until the slab reaches the
desired thickness, commonly about 1
⁄4 inch.
Using a Mechanical Slab Roller. These
rolling machines have a series of gears or
cables and rollers that squeeze the clay
into a uniform slab. They are expensive
and difficult to repair, but they make
uniform slabs quickly and easily.
To use a mechanical slab roller,
prepare the clay by wedging it and flatten-
ing it into a thick pancake shape. Spread a
piece of heavy fabric on the bed of the slab
roller and place the clay pancake on top.
Place a similar piece of fabric on top of the
pancake, making sure that the fabric does
not overlap the slab roller bed. The fabric
will keep the clay from sticking to the bed
or the roller.
Turn the handle of the slab roller to
finish rolling the slab.
Generally, slabs
must be made
while the clay is
soft and then
allowed to dry out
a little before use.


50 POTTERY
Pottery Projects.
Building With Slabs
Slabs should be shaped when they are fairly soft. Building with
them should be done when the slabs have had time to set and
are fairly firm.
Building a Cylindrical Pot. Slabs can be used to make a
cylindrical pot.
Step 1—Think about the shape and size you want your pot
to be. Draw a picture of your idea, but don’t let that limit
your creativity.
Step 2—Use a cylindrical form like a coffee can, soft drink can,
or cardboard tube as a support for the pot. Measure the circum-
ference with a tape measure or piece of string.
Step 3—Make a slab several inches longer than the circumfer-
ence of the form. The width of the slab will be approximately
the height of your finished pot. Trim rough edges off all four
sides of the slab and reserve this excess for the bottom of the
pot. Make sure the edge that will be at the bottom of your pot
is trimmed straight with a ruler.
3


POTTERY 51
.Pottery Projects
Step 4—While the slab is resting and firming up a little, cover
the support form with newspaper, neatly folded and taped with
masking tape. The tape should be applied to the newspaper
only, not to the support form itself. This newspaper layer will
keep the clay from sticking to the form.
Step 5—Wrap the slab around the form. At the overlap,
cut through both layers of clay at a 45-degree angle so that
you have two mitered edges that will fit perfectly together.
Reserve the excess length of clay for the bottom. Slip and
score the mitered edges, and press them together to form a
smooth seam. Tap the form on the table to make sure the slab
is resting at the bottom of the form. The pot can rest like this
for a few minutes.
4 5


52 POTTERY
Pottery Projects.
Step 6—If none of the reserved pieces is large enough to use
for the bottom, knead them together and roll out a new slab.
Set the cylindrical form on the bottom slab and gently trace the
outline of the bottom with a needle tool. Remove the cylindrical
form; trim the excess clay from the traced outline of the bottom
piece. Slip and score the bottom piece and the bottom edge of
the pot. Attach the cylinder to the bottom and carefully remove
the form, leaving just the newspaper layer for support. At this
point, the newspaper will be sticking to the clay and the form
should pull out easily.
Step 7—Remove the newspaper when the pot is leather hard.
Refine the pot if necessary, and carve, stamp, or decorate
if desired.
In the “slip and score” method for joining pieces of
clay, the two surfaces are scratched up and slip is
added to create a strong, welded bond. Scoring or
texturing the surface makes the clay grip; the added
slip acts like glue.
6


POTTERY 53
.Pottery Projects
Building a Four-Walled Slab Pot. Using a template will help
ensure a uniform shape.
Step 1—Draw a template for each wall and for the bottom of
the pot. For a square pot, the walls and bottom will be the
same size. For a rectangular pot, two opposite walls will be the
same size, and the other two walls will be another size. The
bottom can be any size. Cut out the templates.
Step 2—Form five slabs, cutting one for each template. Let the
slabs rest until they are firm enough that they do not bend
when picked up.
Step 3—Attach the walls to each other using one of the
following methods:
• Slip and score the edges of two walls, then press them onto
a third wall that also has been slipped and scored. The two
outside walls are perpendicular to the third wall between
them, which is lying flat. Add the fourth wall to the top,
then stand the structure and add the bottom.
• Cut the edges of the slabs at 45-degree angles and make
mitered corners. Slip and score the edges, then press
them firmly together. The structure should be able to
stand unsupported.
1-2 3


54 POTTERY
Pottery Projects.
Step 4—Roll a thin rope of soft clay and press it with your
fingers into the joint where two walls come together inside
the pot. Repeat for the remaining inside joints.
Step 5—Refine the joints, carve or clean the rim, and trim the
base to be flush with the outside walls, if desired. Decorate the
piece when it is leather hard.
Pinch Pottery
Pinch building was probably the first method used to make a
pot from clay. It is almost instinctive when holding a ball of soft
clay in your hands to push your thumb into it and then turn it
around while pinching the sides, making a hollowed-out shape.
Although the method is simple, the result does not have to look
primitive or rough.
To begin pinch-building, thoroughly wedge and knead the
clay. Then make a test pinch. Your finger and thumb should
have no clay sticking to them. If any clay sticks, continue the
wedging and kneading process.
4 5


POTTERY 55
.Pottery Projects
Continue pinching the clay, turning the clay in one hand
and pinching with the other. The warmth of your hands will
dry out the pot. This natural drying of the clay as it is worked
can help the walls hold their shape as the pot becomes larger,
but it also can cause the rim to become crumbly. It is best not
to add water to the walls while they are being pinched out;
they can become slimy and tear easily if they get too wet.
Making a Pinch Pot. Use the pinch-building technique to
create a ceramic pot.
Step 1—Draw a picture of how you want the pot to look and
what size you would like to make it. If you have more design
ideas during the building process, don’t let the picture stop you
from using them.
Step 2—Hold a ball of prepared clay in one hand. Gently push
the thumb of your other hand, using the entire pad of the
thumb, into the center of the ball. Slowly rotate the clay and
continue pushing the pad of your thumb into the center while
rounding out the base of your pot. Work slowly and patiently,
using small body movements.
Step 3—With the base established, use a circling series of
pinches to raise the walls. Gently pinch the clay between your
finger and thumb while turning the pot, making a ring of
depressions, each slightly overlapping the ring before. It is
important to keep the pressure between your finger and thumb
even, and the distance between each squeeze equal.
2 3


56 POTTERY
Pottery Projects.
Step 4—If the pot is to curve inward, gently ease the top
inward between each row of pinching. Also, more pressure can
be applied from the outside while pinching. If an outward curve
is the goal, pinching with more pressure on the inside will
cause the pot to expand outward.
Step 5—Variations in the rim—such as bending, curling, or
splitting—are part of the pinching process. Sometimes this effect
can emphasize the look of the pot, and sometimes a more
refined rim is preferred. To refine the rim, cut off the ragged
edges with a sharp knife, a needle, or sharp scissors. Then,
using a tiny bit of water on your fingers, smooth out the
newly cut edge.
Coil Pottery
Coil building is an ancient method of forming pottery. It is
still the preferred method for many American Indian potters.
Modern potters use this method because coiling allows greater
freedom in constructing very large forms and forms that have
unusual profiles.
To form coils, first place a small lump of thoroughly
wedged and kneaded clay on the table. Place your hands next
to each other, with your palms facing down, gently touching
the lump of clay. Roll the lump forward and backward in a
smooth, even motion.
Cross-sectional view


POTTERY 57
.Pottery Projects
Rolling coils is not as easy as you might think. If the clay
is not soft or bendable, the resulting coil might have a rough,
cracked surface and will not be suitable for construction. The
coils must be round; making short, choppy movements with
your hands will result in a flat-sided coil. The coils must be of
an even thickness; coils that are irregular tend to break easily.
Try to relax your hand muscles, and roll the clay at least
10 to 12 inches forward and backward. Some potters roll coils
vertically between their palms instead of on a table.
Building With Coils
Coil-built pieces are always built on a slab- or pinch-formed
base, which serves as a strong foundation. If the base of a pot
were made only of coils, it would very likely crack open and
not be structurally sound. When the base is firm but not leather
hard, you can begin adding coils, working in a spiral. Each coil
layer must be firmly attached to the layer below it by slipping
and scoring. As you work, the bottom layers will start to firm
while the top layers are still soft.
Wet coils that are under the pressure of additional layers
sometimes sag and fall or collapse, so you might need to pause
after adding several layers to allow the wall to become firmer.
As you build, weld the coil layers together with your fingers or
a tool. This will help prevent cracks from developing in the
walls of your pot during firing.


58 POTTERY
Pottery Projects.
Coil-Building a Cylindrical Pot. Practice the coil-building
technique by creating a pot.
Step 1—It is always helpful to design a pot before you begin
building it. Draw a picture to help you plan the height and
width. Cut a template of the profile if you wish, and use it to
check your progress as you work.
Step 2—Ensure that the clay is properly prepared.
Step 3—Form a flat base in the shape of your cylinder.
Allow this base to become firm.
Step 4—Slip and score the top edge of the base. Place a coil on
this edge, working in a spiral and applying slip to the top edge
of each layer.
Step 5—After adding several coils, weld the walls together
inside and out. Allow the pot to become firm and strong; this
could take several hours. Keep the top layer soft by covering
it with plastic. This will allow you to add more coils later.
Step 6—When the pot has reached the desired height,
smooth the surface if desired. Add a final thick coil to the
rim for strength.
3 4
5 6


POTTERY 59
.Pottery Projects
Coil-Building a Spherical Pot. The same basic technique
can be applied to coil-building a spherical pot.
Step 1—Design your pot. Draw a picture to help you
visualize the curve. Cut a template of the profile to help
check your progress.
Step 2—Ensure that the clay is properly prepared.
Step 3—Form a rounded base by pinching a shallow bowl with
the bottom and sides of uniform thickness. For example, the
very bottom of your base might be 1
⁄2 inch thick and the side
would be 1
⁄2 inch thick and slightly taller than the bottom piece.
Some potters put this pinch-bowl base into a wooden or bisque-
fired clay dish for support, but the walls of the pinched base
must be a little higher than the support dish so that a coil can
be added when the base becomes firm.
Step 4—Slip and score the rim of the pinched base and apply a
coil to the top outer edge. Continue to apply slip to the rim of
the exposed coil, but apply the coil to the top outside edge of it.
This will make your pot expand outward in a ball shape.
3 4


60 POTTERY
Pottery Projects.
Step 5—Pause periodically to weld the coils together, inside
and out, and then let the walls become firm, leaving the very
top edge covered with plastic.
Step 6—Halfway through building, begin to curve inward
rather than outward. Now apply each coil to the inside edge
of the top coil instead of the outside edge. Continue to build
the walls, welding and allowing them to firm, until the pot
is complete.
Step 7—Smooth the surface with a rib
if necessary.
6 7


POTTERY 61
.Pottery Projects
Ceramic Sculpture
Most ceramic sculptors use common methods for forming
sculptures, but the best clay for sculpting might be different
from that used for other clay articles. Grog added to a clay
body makes the clay more porous and easier to form into
irregular shapes.
While you are preparing the clay, think about what kind
of sculpture you want to make. Size is one consideration:
A small-scale sculpture is generally one that will fit on a table;
anything bigger than that is considered large-scale and will
require very special treatment to survive the creating, drying,
and firing processes.
Making an Animal Sculpture. Follow these instructions to
create a ceramic animal sculpture.
Step 1—Draw a rough picture of the animal to help you
plan the body parts.
Step 2—Roll out a ball of clay for the body and
a smaller one for the head. Score and slip both
surfaces to weld the head to the body. Use
your fingers to shape the body and head.
Step 3—Roll out coils or cut slab pieces for
legs, ears, paws, etc. Attach these parts to
the body—from largest to smallest—scoring
and slipping the surfaces that will touch;
weld them together.
2
3


62 POTTERY
Pottery Projects.
Step 4—Add details, such as eyes, hair, fur, whiskers, etc.,
using a toothpick, needle tool, paper clip, or other sharp tool.
Step 5—When the piece is complete in the rough,
you can smooth it, then add details and deco-
ration. Do not worry about tool marks and
fingernail marks that show at this time.
Step 6—Any piece more than 1
⁄2 inch
thick must be hollow so that it will
not explode when heated in the kiln.
To hollow out a completed sculp-
ture, first wait until the clay is firm
enough to stand without support.
Carefully cut the sculpture in half.
Use a loop tool to hollow out the
walls to less than 1
⁄2 inch thick.
Score and slip the walls, and weld
the sculpture back together. Use soft
clay to repair any seam that shows.
Step 7—Carefully wrap the sculpture
in a plastic bag and let it rest for 24
hours, then dry completely and fire.
4
5


POTTERY 63
.Pottery Projects
Thrown Pottery
Making pots on a potter’s wheel is known as throwing.
Throwing pottery on the wheel takes a lot of practice. A skilled
potter working at the wheel makes the process look easy, but
first-timers nearly always are surprised at how awkward and
difficult it can be. Most beginners do not produce an acceptable
pot the first few tries. Don’t get discouraged; with persistence,
you will develop the skill.
The process of throwing
a pot can be divided into
six steps:
1. Prepare the clay.
2. Center the clay into a
cylindrical shape.
3. Open the clay.
4. Pull up the walls into a
hollow cylinder.
5. Shape the form.
6. Finish the form.
To accomplish these steps,
you will need the following:
• An area for wedging and
kneading the clay
• A bowl of water near the wheel to keep your hands and the
clay wet while throwing
• Tools—sponge, needle tool, wooden knife, cutoff wire, and
shaping rib made of wood, metal, plastic, or rubber
Centering the Clay. Because the wheel travels in a circle,
pushing the clay into center is simply a mechanical process.
For a beginner, soft clay is much easier to center than stiff clay.
Save stiff clay for slab projects.
Step 1—Place a prepared ball of clay as close to the center of
the wheel head as possible. Give it a little slap to push it down
solidly onto the wheel. Dip your hands in the water bowl and
turn the wheel to a high speed.


64 POTTERY
Pottery Projects.
Step 2—Gradually press your hands onto the clay parallel with
the wheel head. Then, using your whole body, brace your arms
firmly against your hips or legs and stiffen your hands and
fingers. Surround the clay on the top and sides with your hands
and press toward the center of the wheel with your body
weight leaning into it. If your body is braced and stiff, the clay
has nowhere to go but into the center. Usually, your left hand
controls the side of the clay and your right hand controls the
top. Rewet your hands often to keep the clay gliding easily.
Step 3—When the clay feels centered, gradually lighten your
pressure on the clay and gently, slowly remove your hands. Any
quick moves—either putting your hands onto the clay
or taking them off suddenly—will move the clay off center.
2
3


POTTERY 65
.Pottery Projects
Opening the Clay. There are many ways to open a hole in
the center of a clay ball. The following is one effective way.
Step 1—With the wheel still spinning at a high speed,
wet your left hand and brace the clay around the side.
Then place the thumb of your right hand onto your left
hand for further bracing.
Step 2—Using a strong finger from your right hand, slowly
push that finger into the middle of the clay ball.
Step 3—When your finger gets near the bottom of the clay
ball, stiffen your finger and slowly pull your right arm back
toward your body. This should open up a hole in the clay.
Step 4—When the hole is large enough, slow down the wheel
and, using the pad rather than the tip of your finger, compress
the bottom you have just made.
2


66 POTTERY
Pottery Projects.
Pulling Up the Walls. Pulling up the walls of a pot is somewhat
similar to pinching a wall. The difference is that one hand
works on the inside of the pot and the other hand works on
the outside, rather than just one hand pinching with the thumb
and fingers.
Step 1—Thoroughly wet your hands. Place your fingers at the
bottom of the pot, one hand inside and one outside. Your hands
will be right next to each other with the wall in between, and
your fingertips will do the work. Keep your elbows braced
against your hips, your arms stiff, and your hands well-lubricated
with water. Press or pinch your hands slightly together, and
very slowly, keeping that pinched distance the same, raise your
arms to bring your fingers up the wall of the pot.
Step 2—The wall will rise as your fingers distribute the clay
upward. As you get to the top, gently release the pressure so
that the walls will stay a uniform thickness.
Step 3—As the wheel is going around, support the wall with
the thumb and fingers of your outside hand and press down
gently on the top rim with the index finger of your other hand.
This is called “setting the rim.”
Step 4—Repeat this procedure three or four times, or until
the pot reaches the desired height and the walls are of the
desired thickness.
3


.Pottery Projects
Shaping the Form. You may notice that pressure from your
fingers makes the clay move. If your hands are lined up
together, but you press harder with your inside finger than with
your outside finger, the wall of the pot will swell outward.
Similarly, if you press harder with your outside finger than with
your inside finger, the pot will curve inward.
Once the wall of the pot has been moved outward, it is
difficult to get it to go back in. However, a narrow pot can
easily be made more spherical. Practice using your inside and
outside fingers to make gradually curving walls.
Use a sponge to drip water on the walls of the pot to keep
them slippery. But be careful; too much water can cause the
walls of the pot to collapse. Use just enough to keep the walls
well-lubricated.
You also can use a rib to shape the walls. Hold the edge of
the rib against a uniformly wet wall. As the wheel goes around,
support the wall with one hand and press the rib to move the
wall in or out.
Finishing the Form. Use a
wooden knife to trim extra
clay off the outside bottom of
the pot. Then use the cutoff
wire to free the pot from the
wheel head.
Step 1—Holding the wire at
both ends, place it firmly
down on the edge of the
wheel head that is farthest
away from your body.
Step 2—Firmly hold the
wire down with your fingers
and slowly rotate the wheel,
pulling the wire toward
your body.
Step 3—When the wire has
passed completely under the
bottom of the pot, wipe your
hands dry. Gently pick up the
pot with both hands and
place it on a board to dry.
POTTERY 67





POTTERY 69
Decorating and Glazing
Many techniques can be used to turn a simple piece of pottery
into a uniquely decorated work of art. Experiment with each
one to discover how the techniques affect the pottery.
Textured Decoration
Pottery can be decorated in many ways. Some
decorating techniques originally had practical
purposes. When primitive potters formed wet
pots, their fingers left indentations in the sides.
The potters noticed after firing that these dents
made the pots easier to handle. Some potters
pressed rope into the sides of pots they were
forming, making the pots less slippery when
wet. As the potters experimented with other
objects and tools in their clay work, they noticed
that adding these practical features made the
pots more interesting to look at, too.
Use your imagination to design
pottery projects that will make
distinctive textured or indented
decorations on the surface.


70 POTTERY
Decorating and Glazing.
Decorating With Slip
Another ancient technique that you might consider is slip paint-
ing, which simply is painting colored slip onto the surface of
an unfired pot. Using several fairly thin coats, you can cover
the entire pot, or paint a specific design onto it, or you can
paint a base coat and then paint a design of a different color on
top of that. Once the pot is painted with slip, use a sharp tool
to scratch or carve a design through the slip, down to the sur-
face of the clay. This technique is called sgraffito.


POTTERY 71
.Decorating and Glazing
Slip also can be trailed onto the clay surface of the pot or
onto a slip-painted surface for a raised effect. Put some thick
slip into an applicator bottle (basically a rubber bulb with a
removable nozzle, available from clay suppliers) or any clean
squeeze bottle with a narrow, tapered tip (such as a mustard
squeeze bottle). While applying constant pressure and working
at a constant speed, squeeze out a line of slip in a unique
pattern or design.
If several colors of slip trails are placed close together on
a pot, the lines can be combed with a feather or a comb from
which several teeth have been removed. A marbled effect can
be created on the inside of the piece by pouring several colors
of slip into a pot and swirling them around slightly. Keep in
mind that pots with very thick layers of slip must dry very
slowly to prevent cracks.
Most of the time, slips are used on clay that is still wet,
and glaze is used on clay that has been bisque-fired. There are
exceptions: Some potters glaze their greenware and fire it only
once, but they must use specially formulated glazes. Some pot-
ters apply slip to their bisque ware, but again, this slip must
be specially formulated.


72 POTTERY
Decorating and Glazing.
Applied Decoration
Another attractive way to decorate a clay article is to attach
damp pieces of clay in various shapes. This is called sprigging.
Sprigs are made by pressing soft clay into a small, decorative
plaster mold. The clay hardens quickly and is easily removed
with a needle. Paint the edges with a little water, then press the
sprig onto the pot.
Decorating With Glaze
Glaze is a combination of several substances: alumina, which
keeps the glaze from running too much; a flux, which helps the
glaze melt into a glass at a safe temperature for the clay; silica
to give it shine; and, often, chemicals to add color.
Although much useful and attractive pottery is made
without glaze, potters also like to use glaze because it gives
functional ware a sanitary, nonporous surface and serves as
decoration. To begin experimenting with this type of decoration,
first get advice from your counselor or an experienced potter.
Decorating with glaze is a fairly complicated technique, but the
sense of accomplishment after a successful glaze firing can be
well worth the effort.
A Caution About Lead
Lead is a toxic material. If handled improperly in glazes
applied to ceramic ware made for drinking or eating,
small amounts can leach into a person’s system and
over time will accumulate to a dangerous level.
The Food and Drug Administration allows the use of lead glazes
because of their durability but closely regulates their use with strict
controls and guidelines to ensure consumer safety.
For individual potters, using lead in glazes, particularly low-fired
glazes such as for raku pottery, can be dangerous to the potter as well
as the user of the pottery. Exercise extreme caution when using lead.
Check with your counselor or an experienced potter for guidance on how
to safely use lead in glazes.
It is best to play it safe and avoid the use of lead glazes. There are
many alternatives available. Using “unleaded” glazes will ensure the
safe enjoyment of your piece when it has been fired.


POTTERY 73
.Decorating and Glazing
Glaze is nearly always applied to bisque-fired ware. You
can use a paintbrush, but it is more effective to dip the pot into
the glaze or pour the glaze onto the pot. The inside is glazed
first. Pour the glaze into the pot, roll it around to cover the
entire inside, and carefully pour it out. After the inside has
dried (usually in less than a minute), you can glaze the outside.
Either dip the piece into the glaze, or hold
the pot over the glaze bucket while pouring glaze
over the outside. Be sure to wipe the glaze from the
foot of the piece to keep it from sticking to the kiln
shelf when the glaze melts during firing.
Many potters use tongs or gloves when applying glaze to
prevent it from getting on their skin. Some chemicals in the
glaze can irritate or be absorbed by the skin. If you do get any
glaze on you, rinse off immediately with plenty of water.
Commercially prepared glazes, especially those
manufactured for low-fire clays, are easily applied with a
paintbrush. Follow the instructions on the label. Wash your
hands immediately and thoroughly after handling glazes.
Dipping, above, is the most effective way to glaze
clayware, but pouring the glaze onto the piece,
right, also is effective.





POTTERY 75
.Firing
Firing
Firing the kiln is undoubtedly one of the
most exciting and challenging steps in
pottery making. The process can be
quite technical. There are several
things you will need to know before
you begin.
General Rules for Firing
The following safety rules must be
followed when firing pottery.
Wear full, sturdy shoes that won’t
easily melt or catch fire. Open foot-
wear, such as sandals, is inadequate
protection for your feet.
All work must be bone dry before bisque firing.
This will prevent cracking and possibly exploding.
Hold the bottom of the clay article against your cheek.
If it feels cold, there is still moisture in it and it is not
safe to bisque-fire.
Before loading the kiln, vacuum it out completely.
Doing so will prevent bits of kiln dust or brick from
landing on your work during firing and spoiling it.
Never brush a kiln shelf with your bare hand. Jagged,
razor-sharp pieces of glaze can be stuck to the shelf.
Clayware must be stacked in the kiln skillfully.
All pieces should stand level. Unglazed ware can
be stacked or packed closely, but glazed ware must
stand alone so that melted glaze will not stick or drip
onto another piece.


76 POTTERY
Firing.
Assessing the Heatwork
Before you begin firing, you must know the proper firing
temperature for clay (and glaze if you are using it). If you don’t
fire high enough to mature the clay, the surface will be soft and
porous; if you fire too high, the piece will melt out of shape.
You also will need to know how to measure the temperature
in the kiln to determine whether the proper heatwork has
been reached.
Before the development of modern aids to measure and
control kiln temperatures, potters had to read the heat in a
kiln by the color of the flame and the opaqueness of the kiln
atmosphere. Today there are various instruments and tools to
help potters track the progress inside the kiln.
To prevent the piece from sticking to kiln shelves
when the glaze melts, make sure the undersides are
not glazed. If the bottom of a piece is glazed, be sure to
use steel-pointed stilts where it would touch the shelf.
Always keep the room in which you are firing
well-ventilated. Clay and glazes give off vapors that
can be poisonous. Do not stay in the room with a
kiln that is firing, even if the room is well-ventilated.
Fire the kiln slowly. An average bisque firing should
take no less than eight hours.
Once the kiln has risen to 200 degrees, do not open
the kiln door. This would be risky for you as well as
the pieces. Do not touch the sides of the kiln or the
door handle.
Wear protective insulating gloves and safety glasses
or welding goggles when checking the cones through
the peephole. Doing so will protect your hands and
eyes from the intense heat.
Do not try to open the kiln or remove pieces from
the kiln when it is still hot. Wait until everything has
cooled enough to handle with bare hands.


POTTERY 77
.Firing
Pyrometer
There is a special process for measuring kiln temperature.
No regular thermometer could withstand the extreme heat in
a kiln, but many types of firing require the potter to know the
actual temperature in the kiln. A pyrometer, a high-temperature
thermometer, is used for this. But the pyrometer alone is not
always sufficient for indicating shutoff time. It reads the actual
temperature but does not indicate the amount of work done
by the heat.
Pyrometric Cones
Pyrometric cones are little pyramids made of clay and glaze
that melt and bend, each at its own specific temperature, to
signal the end of a firing or, in some electric kilns, to trigger a
kiln shutoff. Cones respond to time and heat and are reliable for
assessing heatwork. For this reason, many potters use cones in
addition to the pyrometer.
Cones are available in a wide range of temperatures.
Once you know the temperature at which the clay you are
using matures, you would use the cone that corresponds to
that temperature, as well as the next lowest and the next
highest cones.
Pyrometric cones are numbered in a peculiar way.
The lowest temperatures start with a zero; for example,
cone 018 corresponds to a common temperature for certain
low-fire glazes called lusters. Also, the cones are numbered
in reverse order, with 018 representing a lower temperature
than 015, which represents a lower temperature than 012,
and so forth through 01. Then the numbering picks up at 1, and
continues in regular numerical order, from the coolest to the
hottest temperatures.
For instance, if a potter should say, “This clay matures at
cone 06,” this means that the firing will be finished and the
clay will have become dense and reached its optimum strength
when an 06 cone melts in the kiln.
Potters typically do not use cones higher than 15.
Earthenware and terra-cotta usually fire to maturity at cone 04.
A common high-fire porcelain and stoneware temperature is
cone 10. Raku is usually low-fire—cone 06—and salt or soda
can create a glaze from cone 7 and up. Wood-burning kilns
usually reach very hot temperatures, above cone 10.
Temperature is
not the potter’s
sole concern.
A potter needs to
know how much
work has been
accomplished
by the heat in
combination with
how much time
has elapsed.
This is known as
the heatwork.


78 POTTERY
Firing.
Cone Pack
To make a cone pack, you will need the cone that
corresponds to the maturing temperature of the clay,
as well as the next highest and the next lowest cones.
For instance, if you will be firing to cone 4, you would
use cones 3, 4, and 5.
Line up the cones in a pad of clay. Slant them
slightly so that as they melt they will bend over in
a direction that will allow you to see them. It works
well to slant the lowest cone (which will melt first)
away from the other two, and slant those two toward
the first one.
When the cone closest to the bottom melts, this is
a warning signal. When the middle cone melts—the one
that corresponds to the maturing temperature of your
clay—it is time to shut off the kiln. This must be done
quickly before the third cone begins to melt.
For some larger
kilns, it is common
practice to place
several cone
packs in different
areas throughout
the kiln.
Cones are lined up
in the cone pack,
all slightly slanting
in the same direction.
A cone pack looks like this
after it has been used in firing.


POTTERY 79
.Firing
Packing the Kiln
When you consider the time and fuel spent in a single firing,
you will understand why it is important to pack the kiln effi-
ciently. Not only is it more economical, but it also ensures a
more even firing and a good atmosphere in the chamber.
Make full use of the kiln’s capacity by grouping similar
sizes of ware together. Begin with short or flat pieces on the
bottom; save the taller pots for the higher levels. Keep in mind
that unglazed ware can be packed so that pieces touch each
other; glazed pieces must not touch. Leave ample room for air
to circulate around their bases. Keep ware at least 1 inch away
from the kiln walls.
Support each shelf with three posts. Some electric kiln
shelves require four posts, but an arrangement of three posts
usually provides the most stable support, depending on the
shape of the shelves. Posts should be at least 1 inch taller
than the pots.
Before putting any clayware on
the first shelf, place the posts that
will support the shelf above. Then,
when the first shelf is packed, lower
the next shelf carefully into the kiln
without touching the side walls or
jarring the kiln. Carefully position
the shelf and lower it onto the posts.
It should be stable enough that it
doesn’t move when lightly touched.
Position the next set of posts
directly over the base posts. It is
important for the posts to be stacked
directly in line with each other verti-
cally. If posts are stacked vertically
offset from each other, the shelves
will not be as stable.
Clay articles should be fired in
the position in which they will be
used when finished. For example,
a box, jar, or teapot should be fired
with its lid in place. However, clock
faces should be fired lying flat to
prevent warping.


80 POTTERY
Firing.
Make sure cone packs are clearly visible through the
peepholes in the door or sides of the kiln. Do not place them
too close to the peephole or it might be hard to tell which cone
is which. If placed too far away among other vague outlines, it
might be difficult to tell what is a cone and what is not. Cones
are most easily seen against a plain, solid background, whether
in front of a large pot or with nothing just behind them.
Average Bisque-Firing Schedule (Cone 06)
Once the work is properly loaded and you have ensured that
the cones are easily visible through the peepholes, turn the
bottom control on the lowest setting and prop the lid or door
slightly open with a soft brick or post; this will allow steam to
escape. It is extremely important to ensure that no one—a small
child or a pet, for instance—will interfere with the kiln in any
way during this preheating phase of the firing.


POTTERY 81
.Firing
The kiln can stay in this position for two hours or over-
night, if necessary, depending on the thickness of the pots.
From this point on, turn up the kiln once every hour as follows:
Watch the cones carefully, checking every 30 minutes,
until the appropriate cone has melted. Turn off the kiln and let
it cool completely.
Firing Schedule for Low-Fire Glaze (Cone 04)
The following is a commonly used schedule for firing low-fire
glaze in an electric kiln.
First, preheat by turning the bottom control on low for
one hour with the lid or door propped open; this will allow
any remaining moisture to escape as steam. Then, turn up the
kiln as follows:
The kiln will be ready to shut off within three to five hours
after the last controls are turned up. Watch the cones carefully
after about two hours.
Hour 1—bottom control on low
Hour 2—middle control on low
Hour 3—top control on low (Close the door or lid
before turning the top control on low.)
Hour 4—bottom control on medium
Hour 5—middle control on medium (At this point, if
color is visible through the peepholes you can also
turn the top control on medium. If the kiln is still dark,
wait until hour 6 to turn up the top control.)
Hour 6—top control on medium, or bottom control
on high
Hour 7—bottom control on high, or middle and top
controls on high
Hour 8—middle and top controls on high if needed
Hours 1 and 2—all controls on low
Hours 3 and 4—all controls on medium
Hour 5—all controls on high


82 POTTERY
Firing.
High-Fire Schedule
Because many high-fire kilns are built by individuals, each
kiln follows a unique schedule. Do not attempt to fire any
fuel-burning kiln without close supervision from the owner.
Most firings are documented by keeping logbooks. It is pos-
sible to follow another potter’s log, but commonly the
notes about temperature and atmosphere are subjective, and a
beginner should never attempt this type of firing unsupervised.
Reduction and Oxidation Firings
Fuel must have a sufficient amount of oxygen to burn. The
dampers in fuel-burning kilns enable the potter to adjust the
amount of oxygen inside the kiln. When the kiln contains more
than enough oxygen needed to completely burn the amount of
fuel being used, the atmosphere inside the kiln is oxidized.
However, if the dampers are adjusted so that not enough
oxygen is available inside the kiln to burn the fuel, then the
air inside the kiln looks smoky and hazy and the atmosphere
is reduced.
In a reduction firing, the flame is seeking oxygen inside the
kiln, and because there isn’t enough, it “steals” oxygen from
the clay and glazes. This chemical reaction darkens the clay
and changes the look and texture of some glazes. For example,
a celadon glaze works only in a reduction firing; it would turn
yellowish if fired in an oxidizing atmosphere.
Copper oxide can
produce a brilliant
red in a reduction
firing, but it would
produce greens in
an oxidation firing.
Visit a Kiln Yard
To see firsthand how different kinds of kilns work, visit
the kiln yard at a local college or craft school. Many
colleges and universities have ceramics programs,
often as a part of their art departments or schools of
ceramic engineering. Their kiln yards or kiln rooms
house various kinds and sizes of kilns. Work with your
counselor to locate and arrange a visit to such a school
or facility. You should be able to find one nearby.


POTTERY 83
.Firing
Special Firings
Raku firing and salt or soda firing can be done in any of the
fuel-burning kilns, although salt or soda firing should be done
in a dedicated kiln because, over time, a thick layer of salt
glaze will form on the kiln’s inner surface. Electric kilns are
not very suitable for salt, soda, or raku, because the heating
elements in electric kilns are easily damaged when exposed to
high levels of sodium or extreme temperature changes.
Raku Firing
Raku firing is a special process invented hundreds of years ago
for the traditional Japanese tea ceremony. Raku tea bowls were
actually made and used during the tea ceremony. Today, the raku
technique is popular with many potters because it enables them
to produce unique pottery in a relatively short period of time.
An American version of the raku technique involves first
firing glazed pottery at a low temperature in a fuel-burning kiln
until the glaze melts, often for only a few hours. Then, when
the glaze is molten, the pieces are removed from the kiln with
long metal tongs and placed into a fireproof container with
sawdust, newspaper, or other combustibles, and covered. The
combustible materials catch on fire, but the fire is immediately
smothered and the smoke penetrates the surface of the
pots. This action creates black areas where there is no
glaze (such as on pieces that are partially glazed as a
design element), or a smoky crackle induced by the
thermal shock, or other unique effects in the glaze.


84 POTTERY
Firing.
Also, since the fire is trying to burn, it needs oxygen and
takes it from the molten glaze. This reducing activity gives
some raku glazes flashes of metallic gold, copper, blue, or
green. Raku pottery made with this technique is usually
crazed, very porous, and not very strong, which makes it
suitable only as decorative ware.
Salt or Soda Firing
In salt firing, the firing proceeds as usual until near the end of
the firing, just before the peak temperature has been reached,
when sodium is introduced into the kiln. Because the kiln is so
hot, the salt immediately volatilizes—the sodium chloride splits
into sodium and chlorine gas. The chlorine combines with
moisture and forms hydrochloric acid, which eventually escapes
from the kiln through the flue; the sodium chemically reacts
with the surface of the clay to form a glaze that often has an
“orange peel” texture.
Sodium can be put into the kiln in many ways. You can
use regular salt, rock salt, baking soda, washing soda, or any
combination of these. Roll it up in sheets of newspaper and
throw them in; blow the powder into the kiln with a compres-
sor; or dissolve the sodium in hot water and spray it into the
kiln with a garden-type pump sprayer with a metal nozzle.
The fumes produced by salt firing are toxic, and safety
procedures must be followed during the firing. Follow the
instructions from your counselor or an experienced potter
whenever you are participating in a salt firing.
Removing pots from the kiln is a
hazardous process that requires
the potter to wear a special fire
suit, protective face shield, and
insulating gloves.
If you decide to try the raku technique, you must
have the supervision of a knowledgeable adult, you
must wear the protective clothing, and you must wear
shoes that will not easily melt or catch fire if a pot were
to accidentally fall on your foot while being removed
from the kiln.


POTTERY 85
.Firing
Peep!
Generally you can tell if the kiln is still hot by touching
the outside or by opening the peephole. If heat comes
out of the peephole, it is probably still too hot to open
the kiln. If it feels warm, but you aren’t sure if it is really
hot, try this test: Stick some paper into the peephole for
about 30 seconds. If it comes back charred or has actu-
ally caught on fire, then you know the kiln chamber is
still at least 451 degrees, the combustion point of
paper, and is much too hot to open.
Baking soda (sodium bicarbonate) and washing soda
(soda ash or sodium carbonate) do not change from
powder to gas as readily as salt does. Put these sub-
stances into the kiln in a dissolved form or mixed with
lots of salt.





POTTERY 87
.Opportunities in Ceramics
Opportunities
in Ceramics
The ceramics industry is one of the largest industries in the
United States. Ceramics are useful because of their chemical,
electrical, mechanical, thermal, magnetic, and structural
properties. The ceramics industry is vital to the successful
operation of other industries.
For example, kiln furniture and firebrick refractories are a
basic component of the steel industry. Abrasive materials made
from silica are essential to the machine-tool and automotive
industry. Glass products are essential to the automobile industry
and to architectural, electronic, medical, and agricultural indus-
tries. Uranium oxide fuels are packaged in ceramic rods for use
by nuclear power plants. The chips in every computer are
ceramic, as are the tiles that covered NASA’s space shuttles.
Even the coating
on paper used for
magazines and
books is ceramic.


88 POTTERY
Opportunities in Ceramics.
The field of ceramics is extremely diverse, offering many
possibilities for employment. You might have an interest in the
technical fields—chemical, mechanical, or ceramic engineering.
Or maybe you prefer the executive side, such as managing
ceramic manufacturing operations. You might be more inter-
ested in selling and distributing ceramic products, or you might
want to specialize in ceramic art.
Be Prepared
High school courses that will help you gain knowledge impor-
tant in the ceramic industry include chemistry, physics, math,
and shopwork. Give special attention to art because it is closely
allied with ceramic design and decoration. Also, a knowledge of
machinery and drafting would be of great help. Check with
your school guidance counselor.
If you are studying ceramics in school, some practical
experience under actual working conditions would be of value.
Try to locate a pottery studio in your community, then apply for
part-time or summer work there. No matter what task you are
assigned to do, you will learn something just from working in
the environment and absorbing information.
A college
education is very
helpful to gain
a thorough
understanding
of the technical
aspects of this
rapidly expanding
industry. Many
universities and
colleges offer
courses in
ceramics, the
graduates of
which are
qualified to work
as ceramists
or ceramic
engineers.


POTTERY 89
.Opportunities in Ceramics
After Graduation
Ceramists and ceramic engineers are concerned with the mining
and processing of clay and other nonmetallic minerals and
all the products manufactured from these raw materials. Many
of them work in research, design, manufacturing, or sales.
Some might specialize in such materials as brick, tile, pottery,
glass, sanitary ware, enameled metals, abrasives, jet motors,
refractories, cements, electronics, and more.
A large percentage of graduates of ceramic coursework
are employed in the stone, clay, and glass industries. Other
opportunities are in steel, electrical machinery, aircraft, or
chemical industries, as well as in education. Professional
pottery artisans
also are often
good resources
and may be
willing to share
their expertise.
Let’s not forget the artisan potter, some well-known for
their masterful work. Fine examples of pottery are now
displayed in world-famous museums; others command
high prices at exclusive antiques and art auctions.
The most popular designs and styles created by these
potters are being reproduced by the world’s most
respected makers of fine porcelain and stoneware.
Not everyone can create a masterpiece, but that
doesn’t mean they don’t enjoy working with clay and
making useful, attractive objects. It never hurts to try,
and trying can be a reward in itself. You just might find
that you have the creativity and natural ability to
become a successful studio or artist potter.


Potter Mark Hewitt with Scouts inside his massive kiln. It takes six days to load, three
and a half days to fire, and seven days to cool. He and his staff fill and fire the kiln
three times a year; each firing turns out about 2,000 pieces.


POTTERY 91
.Glossary
Glossary
Pottery has a language of its own.
To know what a potter is talking about,
you will need to know the language.
Here is a short glossary of some
important terms.
bat. A disk or slab of wood, plaster,
hardboard, or plastic on which clay-
ware is produced or allowed to dry
out. Slightly porous materials make
the best bats for pots because they
allow the bottoms of the pots to dry.
Bats are used on the potter’s wheel
for large pots that cannot be easily
removed after throwing.
bisque or biscuit ware. Unglazed
clayware that has been fired once to
a low temperature and is still porous.
bisque firing. The first firing, without
glaze, to drive off the water chemically
combined in the clay, thus making a
clay article easier to handle for further
work, such as decorating and glazing.
(Slips can be used in a bisque firing.)
bone dry. Completely air-dried and not
yet fired in a kiln.
burnishing. A finishing technique in
which the surface of a clay article is
smoothed and polished by rubbing it
with a hard object, such as a stone or
the back of a spoon.
centering. The process of moving the
clay into a symmetrical, spinning axis
in the middle of a wheel head so it can
be thrown.
clay body. A combination of different
types of clay and other substances,
mixed according to a formula for a
specific ceramic purpose.
clean. To scrape clay with a rib or
wipe it with a sponge.
coil-build. To make pottery using
pieces of clay rolled like rope.
compressing. The process of pushing
the clay down, forcing the clay particles
closer together.
crackle. Cracks in a glazed
surface, intentionally induced as
a decorative element.
crazing. A fine network of hairline
cracks in the glaze usually caused by
uneven contraction and expansion
of the clay article during changes in
kiln temperature or during cooling;
sometimes intentionally induced as
a decorative element.
cutoff wire. A length of wire, usually
with a handle at each end, used for
cutting clay when wedging or to release
the bottom of a clay article from the
wheel head.
earthenware. Opaque, porous pottery
made from a clay that matures at a low
firing temperature; coarser in texture
than porcelain.


92 POTTERY
Glossary.
feldspar. A crystalline mineral used as
a fluxing agent in clay bodies and some
glaze recipes.
fettling. The removal or correction of
blemishes, seams, or other imperfec-
tions before bisque firing.
filler. A material added to a clay body
to lend strength, determine porosity,
and affect shrinkage.
firing. The process of heating clay
articles, usually in a kiln, to a
specific temperature for a specific
time until mature.
flashing mark. An effect on glazed
pottery caused by uneven heat
during firing.
flux. A melting agent added to a clay
body to help the clay particles melt
together, or fuse, into a solid material
when fired.
foot. The base of a ceramic form.
frit. Ground glass used to make lead
salts nontoxic to the skin or certain
fluxes insoluble.
glaze. A coating of a glasslike sub-
stance that is fired onto a clay surface
for decorative purposes or to seal a
porous pottery body.
greenware. Formed pottery articles
that are not yet bisque-fired.
grog. Unglazed, fired clay that has
been ground up and added to a
clay body to provide texture, increase
porosity, lend strength and stability,
or reduce shrinkage.
hand-build. To construct a piece of
pottery from parts that might be
pinched, coiled, slabbed, press-molded,
extruded, or fashioned by hand.
heatwork. The combined measure of
time and temperature.
kaolin. China clay.
kiln. A special oven used for firing clay.
kneading. The process of working
and pressing plastic clay with the
hands to help eliminate air bubbles,
hard spots, and lumps; to distribute
the moisture evenly; and to give the
clay a consistent texture.
leather hard. A stage that clayware
reaches during drying, when it is
stiff enough to be picked up without
distortion, yet soft enough to respond
to pressure.
luster. A thin film of a metallic oxide
applied to a fired, glazed surface, then
fired at a low temperature to produce
an iridescent effect.
mature. When ware and glazes have
reached their proper heatwork—ware
has reached its optimum strength and
glaze has fully fused.
nonporous. Having no pores or
openings to allow liquid to seep
through; watertight.
oxide. One of various metal
compounds used as colorants in
glazes and clay bodies.
peephole. An opening in the side of
a kiln for monitoring the pyrometric
cones and the chamber during firing.
pinch-build. To manipulate clay by
pushing the thumb into it and pressing
with the fingers on the outside while
turning the clay, creating a hollowed-
out form.


POTTERY 93
.Glossary
porcelain. A high-fired, vitrified
pottery with a white, fine-grained
body that is usually translucent.
porosity. The degree to which fired
clay can absorb water; also, the degree
to which liquid can seep through fired
or unfired clay.
porous. Having pores or tiny openings
that allow liquid to seep through.
pyrometric cones. Little pyramids
made of clay and glaze that are formu-
lated to melt and bend as indicators of
the temperature reached in the kiln.
refractory. Capable of being fired at
high temperatures without deforming; a
heat-resisting ceramic material.
salt glaze. A thin glaze produced by
throwing salt into the kiln just before
it has reached peak temperature.
score. To scrape a series of crisscross
lines—using a needle tool, serrated rib,
needle, paper clip, or other tool—onto
a clay surface that has been brushed
with slip. Two clay surfaces that have
been slipped and scored can then be
welded together.
sgraffito. Decoration by cutting or
scratching away parts of a surface
layer to reveal the different colored
clay underneath.
slip. A creamy mixture of water and
clay that is used to weld pieces of clay
together or as a decorative element.
stamping. A decorating technique
employing a recessed or raised design
pressed into the clay.
stoneware. A strong and usually
opaque ceramic ware that is well-
vitrified and nonporous when fired
to a high temperature.
template. A pattern for shaping the
profile of a piece.
terra-cotta. A low-fired earthenware
that fires to an orange, red, or
brown color.
throwing. The process of shaping
clay on the potter’s wheel.
vitrify. To become glasslike
and nonporous.
wedging. The process of mixing plastic
clay by cutting it in half and slamming
the halves back together to eliminate
air bubbles, hard spots, and lumps; to
distribute the moisture evenly; and to
give the clay a consistent texture.


94 POTTERY
Pottery Resources.
Scouting Literature
Archaeology, Art, and Sculpture merit
badge pamphlets
Books
Andrews, Tim. Raku. KP Books, 2005.
Atkin, Jacqui. Pottery Basics: Everything
You Need to Know to Start Making
Beautiful Ceramics. Barron’s, 2005.
Birks, Tony. The Complete Potter’s
Companion. Bulfinch, 1998.
Brommer, Gerald F., and Joseph A.
Gatto. Careers in Art: An Illustrated
Guide, 2nd ed. Sterling, 1999.
Burleson, Mark. The Ceramic Glaze
Handbook: Materials, Techniques,
Formulas. Sterling, 2003.
Cooney, Nicky. Decorating Ceramics:
Over 300 Easy-to-Paint Patterns.
Sterling, 1999.
Cosentino, Peter. The Encyclopedia of
Pottery Techniques: A Comprehensive
Visual Guide to Traditional
and Contemporary Techniques.
Sterling, 2002.
Daly, Greg. Glazes and Glazing
Techniques. Gentle Breeze
Publishing, 1996.
Gibson, John. Pottery Decoration:
Contemporary Approaches.
Overlook, 1997.
Hamer, Frank, and Janet Hamer.
The Potter’s Dictionary of Materials
and Techniques. University of
Pennsylvania Press, 2004.
Hopper, Robin. Functional Pottery: Form
and Aesthetic in Pots of Purpose.
KP Books, 2000.
Hopper, Robin. Making Marks:
Discovering the Ceramic Surface. KP
Books, 2004.
Illian, Clary. A Potter’s Workbook.
University of Iowa Press, 2003.
Mattison, Steve. The Complete Potter.
Barron’s, 2003.
Nelson, Glenn C. Ceramics: A Potter’s
Handbook. Wadsworth, 2001.
Peterson, Susan. The Craft and Art of
Clay: A Complete Potter’s Handbook.
Overlook, 2003.
Speight, Charlotte, and John Toki.
Hands in Clay. McGraw-Hill, 2003.
Pottery Resources
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


POTTERY 95
.Pottery Resources
Triplett, Kathy. Handbuilt Ceramics:
Pinching, Coiling, Extruding,
Molding, Slip Casting, Slab Work.
Lark, 2000.
Van Gilder, Bill. Wheel-Thrown Pottery:
An Illustrated Guide of Basic
Techniques. Lark Books, 2006.
Warshaw, Josie. Handbuilding Pottery:
Practical Art Handbook. Anness
Publishing, 2005.
Wensley, Doug. Pottery: The Essential
Manual. Crowood, 2002.
Zakin, Richard. Ceramics: Mastering the
Craft. KP Books, 2001.
Zakin, Richard. Electric Kiln Ceramics.
KP Books, 2004.
Zamek, Jeff. Safety in the Ceramics
Studio. KP Books, 2002.
Organizations and Associations
American Art Pottery Association
P.O. Box 834
Westport, MA 02790-0697
aapa.org
The American Ceramic Society
P.O. Box 6136
Westerville, OH 43086-6136
ceramics.org
Ceramics Monthly
Toll-free telephone: 800-342-3594
ceramicsmonthly.org
National Council on Education for
the Ceramic Arts (NCECA)
4845 Pearl East Circle, Ste. 101
Boulder, CO 80301
Toll-free telephone: 866-CO-NCECA
nceca.net
The Pottery Studio
thepotterystudio.com
Acknowledgments
Scouting America gives special thanks to
pottery expert Louise Rosenfield for her
gracious and enthusiastic gift of time,
expertise, and resources for the
production of the Pottery merit badge
pamphlet.
Scouting America is grateful to
artisan potter Mark Hewitt of W.M.
Hewitt Pottery, Pittsboro, North
Carolina, for hosting a photo shoot at
his fascinating studio. Some of the
photos in this pamphlet feature his
immense, 900-cubic-foot kiln, which he
describes as “the size of a school bus.”
This renowned potter specializes in very
large vessels, many of which are
exhibited around the world.
Thanks also to the Craft Guild of
Dallas and its staff for so generously
allowing us the use of their facilities for
a photo shoot. For more than 50 years
the Craft Guild has served as a meeting
place for hobbyists and artists, and as a
showplace for their works of art.
Scouting America is grateful to the
men and women serving on the
National Merit Badge Subcommittee for
the improvements made in updating
this pamphlet.


96 POTTERY
Pottery Resources.
Photo and Illustration Credits
Dave and Keiko Hergesheimer,
courtesy—page 5
W.M. Hewitt Pottery, courtesy—pages
39 (both), 40 (wood-burning kiln),
86, and 88
Library of Congress, Prints &
Photographs Division, Edward S.
Curtis Collection, courtesy—page 21
(pottery making)
NASA, courtesy—page 10
(space shuttle)
Wikipedia.org, courtesy—cover
(Staffordshire ware, Chinese vessel,
Ming vase); pages 11 (both), 13, 14,
17 (all), 18 (raku bowl), 19 (both),
20 (both), and 27
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of
or protected by Scouting America.
James Brown—page 3
Dan Bryant—cover (cone pack); pages
7, 18 (Imari ware), 25 (multiple
bags of clay), 26, 38, 43–57 (all),
59–62 (all), 64–66 (all), 70–71 (all),
73 (both), 78–79 (all), 83, and 85
John McDearmon—all illustrations on
pages 12, 35, and 67
Randy Piland—page 89 (vase)