FORESTRY

STEM-Based

BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES

FORESTRY

“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”

Forestry
1. Prepare a field notebook, make a collection, and identify 15 species of trees,
wild shrubs, or vines in a local forested area. Write a description in which
you identify and discuss the following:
(a) The characteristics of leaf, twig, cone, or fruiting bodies
(b) The habitat in which these trees, shrubs, or vines are found
(c) The important ways each tree, shrub, or vine is used by humans or wildlife and whether the species is native or was introduced to the area. If it
is not native, explain whether it is considered invasive or potentially invasive.
2. Do ONE of the following:
(a) Collect and identify wood samples of 10 species of trees. List several ways
the wood of each species can be used.
(b) Find and examine three stumps, logs, or core samples that show
variations in the growth rate of their ring patterns. In the field notebook
you prepared for requirement 1, describe the location or origin of each
example (including elevation, aspect, slope, and the position on the slope),
and discuss possible reasons for the variations in growth rate. Photograph
or sketch each example.
(c) Find and examine two types of animal, insect, or disease damage to trees.
In the field notebook you prepared for requirement 1, identify the damage,
explain how the damage was caused, and describe the effects of the damage
on the trees. Photograph or sketch each example.
3. Do the following:
(a) Describe the contributions forests make to:
(1) Our economy in the form of products
(2) Our social well-being, including recreation
(3) Soil protection and increased fertility
(4) Clean water
(5) Clean air (carbon cycling, sequestration)
(6) Wildlife habitat
(7) Fisheries habitat
(8) Threatened and endangered species of plants and animals
(b) Tell which watershed or other source your community relies on for its
water supply.

121

4. Describe what forest management means, including the following:
(a) Multiple-use management
(b) Sustainable forest management
(c) Even-aged and uneven-aged management and the silvicultural systems
associated with each
(d) Intermediate cuttings
(e) The role of prescribed burning and related forest-management practices
5. With your parent’s and counselor’s approval, do ONE of the following:
(a) Visit a managed public or private forest area with the manager or a
forester who is familiar with it. Write a brief report describing the type of
forest, the management objectives, and the forestry techniques used to
achieve the objectives.
(b) With a knowledgeable individual, visit a logging operation or wood-using
manufacturing plant. Write a brief report describing the following:
(1) The species and size of trees being harvested or used and the location
of the harvest area or manufacturer
(2) The origin of the forest or stands of trees being utilized (e.g., planted
or natural)
(3) The forest’s successional stage. What is its future?
(4) Where the trees are coming from (land ownership) or where they are
going (type of mill or processing plant)
(5) The products that are made from the trees
(6) How the products are made and used
(7) How waste materials from the logging operation or manufacturing
plant are disposed of or utilized
(c) Take part in a forest-fire prevention campaign in cooperation with your local
fire warden, state wildfire agency, forester, or counselor. Write a brief report
describing the campaign, how it will help prevent wildfires, and your part in it.
6. In your camp, local recreation area (park or equivalent), or neighborhood,
inventory the trees that may be a hazard to structures or people. Make a list
by area (campsite, road, trail, street, etc.). Note the species and hazardous
condition, and suggest a remedy (removal or trimming). Make your list
available to the proper authority or agency.
7. Do the following:
(a) Describe the consequences to forests that result from FIVE of the following
elements: wildfire, absence of fire, destructive insects, loss of pollinating insect
population, tree diseases, air pollution, overgrazing, deer or other wildlife overpopulation, improper harvest, and urbanization.
(b) Explain what can be done to reduce the consequences you discussed in 7a.
(c) Describe what you should do if you discover a forest fire and how a professional
firefighting crew might control it. Name your state or local wildfire control agency.
8. Visit one or more local foresters and write a brief report about the person (or
persons). Or, write about a forester’s occupation including the education,
qualifications, career opportunities, and duties related to forestry.
122

Forestry Resources.

Forestry Resources
Scouting Literature
Trees pocket guide; Environmental
Science, Fire Safety, Fish and Wildlife
Management, Gardening, Insect Study,
Mammal Study, Nature, Plant Science,
Soil and Water Conservation, and
Sustainability merit badge pamphlets

Visit the Boy Scouts of America’s
official retail website at http://
www.scoutstuff.org.

Books
Burton, Lawrence D. Introduction
to Forestry Science. Delmar
Learning, 1998.
Cassie, Brian, and Marjorie Burns.
National Audubon Society First Field
Guide: Trees. Scholastic Inc., 1999.
Day, Trevor. Taiga. Raintree
Publishers, 2003.
Edlin, Herbert L. What Wood Is That:
A Manual of Wood Identification.
Viking Books, 1998.
Little, Elbert Luther. National Audubon
Society Field Guide to Trees: Eastern
Region. Knopf, 1980.
———. National Audubon Society Field
Guide to Trees: Western Region.
Knopf, 1980.
Perry, David A. Forest Ecosystems. Johns
Hopkins University Press, 2008.

78

35901.indd 78

Petrides, George A. A Field Guide to
Eastern Trees. Houghton Mifflin, 1998.
———. A Field Guide to Trees and Shrubs:
Field Marks of All Trees, Shrubs, and
Woody Vines that Grow Wild in the
Northeastern and North-Central United
States.Houghton Mifflin, 1973.
Raphael, Ray. More Tree Talk: The People,
Politics, and Economics of Timber.
Island Press, 1994.
Raven, Catherine L. Forestry (The Green
World Series). Chelsea House, 2006.
True, Alianor. Wildfire: A Reader. Island
Press. 2001.
Willie, Christopher M. Opportunities in
Forestry Careers. McGraw-Hill, 2003.

Organizations and Websites
Alliance for Community Trees
Telephone: 202-291-8733
Website: http://actrees.org

American Forest and Paper Association
Toll-free telephone: 800-878-8878
Website: http://www.afandpa.org
Arbor Day Foundation
Toll-free telephone: 888-448-7337
Website: http://www.arborday.org
eNature.com
Website: http://www.enature.com
Environmental Protection Agency
Telephone: 202-260-2090
Website: http://www.epa.gov
Identification Keys
Website:
http://www.backyardnature.net/keys.htm

FORESTRY

3/11/15 7:20 PM

.Forestry Resources

National Association of
State Foresters
Telephone: 202-624-5415
Website: http://www.stateforesters.org
Natural Resources
Conservation Service
Website: http://www.nrcs.usda.gov
Society of American Foresters
Telephone: 301-897-8720
Website: http://www.safnet.org
U.S. Department of Agriculture
Forest Service
Telephone: 202-205-8333
Website: http://www.fs.fed.us

Acknowledgments
The Boy Scouts of America thanks
Jim James, director of Weyerhaeuser
Company’s Environmental Affairs,
Sustainable Forestry, for his assistance
with the 2005 edition of the Forestry merit
badge pamphlet.
The Boy Scouts of America is
grateful to the men and women serving
on the Merit Badge Maintenance Task
Force for the improvements made in
updating this pamphlet.

Photo and Illustration Credits
Fred Baker, Utah State University,
Bugwood.org, courtesy—page 33
(Dutch elm disease)
Scott Bauer, USDA Agricultural Research
Service, courtesy—page 50 (bee)

Peggy Greb, USDA Agricultural Resource
Service, Bugwood.org, courtesy—
page 25 (star thistle)
Ken Hammond, USDA, courtesy—
page 13 (leaves)
Stanislaw Kinelski, Bugwood.org,
courtesy—page 31 (bark)
Library of Congress Prints and Photographs
Division, courtesy—page 47
Ron Long, Simon Fraser University,
Bugwood.org, courtesy—
page 31 (beetle)
Brian Lockhart, USDA Forest Service,
Bugwood.org, courtesy—page 16
Louisiana State University Archive,
Louisiana State University, Bugwood.org,
courtesy—page 22 (acorn)
Philip McDonald, USDA Forest Service,
Bugwood.org, courtesy—page 51
Minnesota Department of Natural
Resources Archive, Minnesota
Department of Natural Resources,
Bugwood.org, courtesy—page 32
(caterpillar, ash tree)
National Interagency Fire Center Archive,
Bugwood.org, courtesy—page 66 (fire)
Joseph O’Brien, USDA Forest Service,
Bugwood.org, courtesy—
page 33 (blister rust)
Dave Powell, USDA Forest Service,
Bugwood.org, courtesy—
page 15 (Douglas fir)

T.W. Bretz, USDA Forest Service,
Bugwood.org, courtesy—page 34

RealWorld Imagery Inc., courtesy—
page 14 (Ponderosa pine, lodgepole
pine, Colorado blue spruce)

Bill Cook, Michigan State University,
Bugwood.org, courtesy—pages 15
(larch, tamarack, eastern hemlock),
and 22 (bark)

R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company Slide
Set, R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company,
Bugwood.org, courtesy—cover
(diseased leaves)

Carl Dennis, Auburn University,
courtesy—page 20 (magnolia)

Howard Russell, Michigan State
University, Bugwood.org, courtesy—
page 32 (emerald ash borer)

FORESTRY

35901.indd 79

79

3/11/15 7:20 PM

