FORESTRY
STEM-Based


FORESTRY
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Forestry or check Scoutbook for the
latest requirements.
35901
ISBN 978-0-8395-3302-3
©2024 Scouting America/Boy Scouts of America
2024 Printing FPO


FORESTRY 3


4 FORESTRY


FORESTRY 5
Contents
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
Understanding Forests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
Trees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
Identifying and Collecting Plant Species . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
Animal, Insect, and Disease Damage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
Using Forest Resources Responsibly . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
Why Manage Forests? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
Fire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
Careers in Forestry. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
Forestry Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78


6 FORESTRY
Introduction
Humans have always depended upon forests. Forests have
provided food, fuel, shelter, and many other resources. They
have been worshipped, feared, bought and sold, protected,
destroyed, and restored. Forested lands are deeply woven into
our myths and legends, music, literature, and art. Without
forests, our existence would be far less rich. In fact, without
forests, we would find it difficult to survive at all.
Today, the forests of the world continue to be among
the most interesting and important natural resources on the
planet. Nearly 30 percent of the world’s land is forested, and
a third of the acreage of North America is covered with forests.
These great stands of vegetation shield Earth from the forces
of wind, rain, and sunlight. They slow erosion, enrich the
soil, protect bodies of water, and provide shelter for wildlife.
From the equator to near the polar regions, forests are home
to plant and animal species that, in many cases, we have yet to
fully understand.
Perhaps you have hiked with your
troop into a forest and camped under
the shade of big hardwoods or in
deep stands of pine and fir. You may
have seen wildlife among the trees
and in nearby meadows. Perhaps
you have cast a line into a stream or
a lake and had the thrill of catching
a couple of fish. When you are in
the middle of a forest having such a
good time, it is easy to understand the
value of the recreational opportunities
that forests offer.


.Introduction
You might not spend much time thinking about the prod-
ucts that come from forests, but they are vital to our way of life.
Your home probably has lumber in it that was milled from trees
harvested hundreds of miles away. Much of the furniture in
your house is made of wood, and so is the paper used to print
this merit badge pamphlet. Many of the foods we put on our
tables and the drugs in our medicine cabinets have forest ori-
gins. In fact, if you wrote down all the forest products you and
your family use, the list would be very long.
Forests provide jobs, too. Some people manage timberlands
and harvest trees and other forest resources. The wood-products
industry is a key industry in many states and the primary
economic engine in many rural communities. The outdoor-
recreation industry creates tens of thousands of positions
as well. Managing trees in the urban landscape is also an
important part of forestry. This includes not only the selection
of suitable species, but the tending and caring for their health
and noting their hazards with respect to people and structures.
The very land on which forests grow is in demand, too.
Forests are still being cleared to make way for homes, farms,
and cities.
In studying this pamphlet and working through the
Forestry merit badge requirements with your counselor, you will
explore the remarkable complexity of a forest and identify many
species of trees and plants and the roles they play in a forest’s
life cycle. You will find that forests change. You will discover
some of the resources forests provide to humans and come to
understand that people have a very large part to play in sustain-
ing the health of forests.
We have the responsibility to be good stewards to
ensure that forests are healthy today and that we can
pass them on to future generations in as good or
better condition than we found them. That is the
goal of modern forestry. To accomplish it, we need
to understand as much as we can about forests and
how to use and enjoy them without causing harm.
FORESTRY 7
Forest vegetation
helps clean the
air by absorbing
carbon dioxide and
releasing oxygen.


8 FORESTRY
Understanding Forests.
Understanding Forests
Ask a dozen people to define a forest
and many will probably give a defini-
tion along the lines of “a bunch of
trees.” While trees are important mem-
bers of a forest, they are only part of
a biological community of thousands
of species of plants and animals,
extending from deep within the soil
to the tips of the loftiest branches.
SHRUB LAYER
UNDERSTORY LAYER
LITTER LAYER
HERB LAYER


FORESTRY 9
.Understanding Forests
Forest Strata
A mature forest consists of levels, or strata. Typical forest
strata are the canopy, understory, shrub layer, herb layer,
and litter layer. All the strata are essential to the health of a
forest ecosystem.
Canopy. Branches and leaves that form the highest reaches
of a forest are positioned to capture sunlight and to provide
shelter and shade for the strata below. Formed by the largest
and oldest trees, the canopy is home to birds, climbing
mammals, and insects.
Understory. Smaller and younger trees growing in the broken
shade and lower light levels beneath the canopy layer form the
understory. As canopy trees die and light levels increase, some
of the understory trees will grow to take their place.
Shrub layer. Bushes and thickets of plants with woody stems
form the stratum that rises above the ground up to about
15 feet. It is the shrub layer that can pose a serious challenge
to cross-country travelers when dense vegetation makes
hiking difficult.
Herb layer. A forest’s herb layer is composed of the ground
cover of grasses, flowers, ferns, and other soft-stemmed vegeta-
tion. Depending on light levels, elevation, and other variations
in the environment, this layer may be sparse or dense.
Litter. What foresters call litter is as important to a forest as
any of its other layers. Made up of organic material including
decomposing leaves, needles, branches, tree trunks, and other
dead vegetation, litter is home to microorganisms and to bee-
tles, snails, millipedes, and hundreds of other animal species.
It protects the soil and provides a moist bed for new plants to
take root. As litter decays, phosphorus, potassium, magnesium,
calcium, nitrogen, and other nutrients return to the soil where
they can be absorbed by living plants.
To plant scientists,
forest generally
refers to land with
a tree canopy that
covers at least
10 percent of the
area. With some
species of trees,
this percentage
may be as low
as 5 percent.
Included in this
definition of a
forest are lands
that have been
recently planted
with trees or that
are temporarily
understocked
(recently harvested
tree farms, for
example) but are
not dedicated to
another land use.


10 FORESTRY
Understanding Forests.
Nurse Logs
Long after their deaths, fallen trees and their stumps continue
to play an important role in the life of a forest. Termites, beetles,
worms, and other creatures burrow into the wood, allowing
moisture to seep in. Fungi and mosses take hold, softening the
wood and creating an inviting germination bed for larger plant
species. As these old trees, or nurse logs, slowly decompose,
they return nutrients to the forest floor and become host to
young plants that sprout from their surface, thus ensuring the
health of future generations of vegetation. They also provide
important cover for small mammals, reptiles, and amphibians.


FORESTRY 11
.Understanding Forests
Forests as Ecosystems
A forest is an ecosystem, that is, a group of living organisms liv-
ing in a particular environment that are dependent upon each
other and their environment. No two forest ecosystems are
alike. Many, however, share general similarities based on their
location, elevation, and other factors. Those similarities provide
a way of comparing one area with another.
Types of Forests
Broad-leaved forests dominate the eastern United States
and Canada, while conifer forests dominate western North
America. Forests in the eastern or southern part of the United
States include oak-hickory, oak-pine, longleaf pine–slash
pine, and spruce-fir forests. Western forests include Douglas
fir, western hemlock, Sitka spruce, redwood, ponderosa pine,
piñon-juniper, and lodgepole pine forests. There are many
hemlock-spruce forests in Oregon and Washington. Hemlock-
spruce forests also are the predominant forest type in
southern Alaska.
A population is a group of the same animal or plant
species living together. A community consists of all
the populations of plants and animals in an area.
An ecosystem is made up of those communities
plus their physical surroundings—the land, weather,
water, amount of sunlight, and everything else that
affects it.
White pine
Douglas fir
Hemlock
Oak
Sugar maple Elm


Trees.
Trees
Although a forest is an ecosystem composed of many species,
trees are the dominant form of forest life. Trees are characterized
by their size (usually taller than a person) and by the fact that
each usually has a single woody stem, or trunk. Shrubs, on
the other hand, have multiple woody stems and seldom grow
much beyond 8 to 15 feet high.
Roots
Much of a tree lies beneath the ground’s surface. Tiny root
hairs absorb moisture from the soil that is pulled up into the
tree by a process known as transpiration. The water then
evaporates from the leaf surfaces through pores called stomates.
A root system is also the anchor that holds a tree upright, even
in high winds. Some trees have tap roots that extend deep into
the ground. Others, especially those growing
in thin or rocky soils, may have roots
that spread outward just below the
surface, sometimes achieving a
radius as wide as the tree is tall.
Trunk and Bark
Bark is the nonliving outer armor
of a tree’s trunk and branches.
Under the bark is a thin layer
of dividing tissue called the
cambium layer, which produces
two distinct types of cells: the
phloem on its outside and the
xylem on its inside. The phloem
cells form a virtual sheath under
the bark, which channels food
(sugars) produced by the leaves
ROOTS
TRUNK
SAPWOOD
PHLOEM
INNER BARK
OUTER BARK
LEAVES
Anatomy
of a tree
ANNUAL
RINGS
MEDULLARY
RAYS
HEARTWOOD
Cross-section
of the trunk
CROWN
More than 1,000
species of trees
grow in North
America, and
thousands more
flourish in other
parts of the world.


FORESTRY 13
.Trees
into the trunk branches, twigs, and roots. The phloem cells
later become new bark. The xylem cells make up the sapwood
that transports the moisture and nutrients from the roots to the
crown of the tree. Sapwood eventually forms the heartwood in
the center of the trunk that gives the tree much of its structural
strength. The yearly growth of xylem cells forms the “annual
rings” that tell the tree’s age.
Leaves
Chlorophyll, a chemical compound in leaves, absorbs energy
from sunlight to convert carbon dioxide, water, and soil nutri-
ents into plant food. This process, called
photosynthesis, also returns oxygen to the
atmosphere. Green plants produce the
oxygen that supports all of Earth’s animal
life, humans included.
Each fall, the foliage of many broad-
leaved trees turns from green to brilliant
red, orange, and brown. In fact, yellow
hues were in the leaves all summer, hid-
den beneath the green of the chlorophyll,
while the red hues form when days get
shorter and temperatures fall. As the
growing season comes to an end, a tree’s
food production drops and so does the
amount of chlorophyll in the leaves. The
green fades, allowing the fiery colors to
show through.
All trees are either conifer trees or broad-leaved trees.
Conifers, also known as evergreens, are cone-bearing trees with
needlelike or scalelike leaves that may stay on the trees for
several years. Broad-leaved trees are flowering trees. They are
mostly deciduous—they generally lose their leaves in the fall.
There are exceptions, like the American holly, which retains its
leaves for more than one year.
Conifers
Conifers are gymnosperms, that is, plants with naked (uncov-
ered) seeds tucked inside of cones. Exposed to the elements,
conifer seeds are fertilized directly by windblown pollen when
their cones open slightly in the spring. Rather than relying
The cambium
grows a new layer
of sapwood and
bark around the
trunk each year.
Another change causes a layer of cells at
the base of the leafstalk to cut tissues
holding the leaf on the tree. The leaf falls
to the ground where it will decompose,
returning nutrients to the soil.


14 FORESTRY
Trees.
Several deciduous
conifers, including
cypress, dawn
redwood, and
larch, do lose
their leaves in
the fall.
Ponderosa
pine
Colorado
blue spruce
Lodgepole
pine
on insects to aid in fertilization, conifers release pollen that
is carried by the wind from tree to tree. This makes an ideal
means of transportation in alpine regions and other environ-
ments where there are plenty of breezes but perhaps not many
insects. The pyramid shape of pines, firs, spruces, and other
conifers helps them shed rain, snow, and wind.
The needlelike leaves of most conifers do not fall off at the
end of summer, allowing those trees to spur growth as soon
as the days begin to warm in the spring. Although conifers are
well-suited to high elevations and northern latitudes where
growing seasons are short, there are exceptions. For example,
many species of pines—loblolly, longleaf, slash, shortleaf, and
Virginia pines—grow well in the South. Also, the coast redwood
grows at low elevations near the Pacific Ocean. The fact that
redwoods can thrive most of the year helps them attain their
great height.
Pines
The white pine is found throughout the Northeast and is the
tree shown on the state flag of Maine. It has smooth, tight bark
and leaf clusters of five needles each. Other pines common
in the eastern states include the pitch pine with three needles
per cluster and the jack and red pines with two needles. In the
Southeast, the longleaf and loblolly pines have three needles to
a cluster, while slash and shortleaf pines display two or three
needles and Virginia pine always two.
The largest pines grow in the mountains of the West. Sugar
pines can reach a height of 200 feet. Look for five needles in
each of its leaf clusters. The heavy cones of sugar pines can be
up to 18 inches long.


FORESTRY 15
.Trees
Ponderosa pines have long needles in groups of three.
Get close to the bark of a ponderosa and you may smell a
pleasant vanillalike aroma. Jeffery and knobcone are other
western pines with three-needle clusters. Lodgepole pines,
named for the straight, clean trunks once used by some
American Indian tribes for constructing tepees and lodges,
feature pairs of two needles each.
Spruces
The needles of spruce trees are four-sided. The Engelmann
spruce of the Cascade Mountains and Rocky Mountains has
soft needles with a blue-green hue. The blue spruce, which
has its natural home in the Rocky Mountain region, grows stiff
needles and is widely planted as an ornamental. The tallest
American spruce is the Sitka spruce of the rain-drenched Pacific
Northwest coastal forests.
Firs
Fir needles are flat, flexible, and appear to be arranged in
orderly rows along the sides of branches. The needles are dark
green on top, while the undersides show two white lines. Fir
cones grow upright on the upper branches of the trees. The
balsam fir of the East and the white fir of the West are stately,
fragrant representatives of these evergreens.
Larches and Tamaracks
The soft needles of the larch and tamarack grow in tufts out of
bumps on the branches. Unlike those of most other conifers,
the leaves fall off in the winter. Larches and tamaracks are tall,
slender trees with small cones.
Hemlocks
Hemlocks are large evergreens distinguished by short, flat needles
with dark green tops and silvery undersides. The small cones hang
from branches that can droop in the shape of a graceful pyramid.
Douglas Firs
A close relative of the hemlock is the Douglas fir, a tree found
primarily in the western United States. Also known as the
Douglas spruce, red fir, and Oregon pine, it is actually not a
spruce, fir, or pine but rather a pseudotsuga, or false hemlock.
Its flat needlelike leaves spiral around the branches, giving
branch ends the appearance of bottle brushes or squirrels’ tails.
Balsam fir
Larch
Tamarack
Eastern hemlock
Douglas fir


16 FORESTRY
Trees.
Sequoias and Redwoods
The world’s largest trees are the redwoods and giant sequoias
of California. Redwoods can grow to more than 300 feet in
height, and sequoias can reach a diameter of more than 25 feet.
Some of these trees are several thousand years old.
Cedars, Junipers, and Cypresses
The leaves of cedars are tiny, bright-green scales arranged like
small shingles on flattened twigs. Eastern red cedar is, in fact,
a juniper. Junipers have two kinds of leaves. Some are scaly
and flat like a cedar, while others are prickly. Juniper cones
look like moldy blueberries. The bald cypress of the South
drops its needles each winter.
Identifying Firs, Spruces,
and Pines
As a quick rule of thumb to determine some of the
larger families of evergreen trees, examine their
needles and note their shape.
Flat = Fir Needles in 2s, 3s, or 5s = Pine
Square = Spruce Shingled, scaly needles = Cedar
Some species of cypress grow in swamps. The portions of their
roots exposed above the water are called knees.


FORESTRY 17
.Trees
Broad-Leaved Trees
Broad-leaved trees are angiosperms, or flowering plants. They
make ovules, or eggs, that develop into seeds after fertilization.
Unlike the cones protecting the seeds of conifers, seeds of
broad-leaved trees are enclosed in nuts, fruits, or some other
form of seed case.
As you may have guessed, most broad-leaved trees have
wide, flat leaves. The trunks of many broad-leaved trees branch
out into round, airy shapes. Broad-leaved trees do well where
conditions during the growing season are not harsh, but they
also are found in areas with cold winters and deep snows.
Everything about broad-leaved trees, from leaf shape to
the orientation of branches, influences their survival and their
ability to adapt to their environments. Losing their leaves in the
fall, for example, protects branches from breaking under the
weight of winter snows.
Types of Leaves
Is it a simple leaf or a com-
pound leaf? A simple leaf is
a single blade attached by its
stem to a branch. A compound
leaf is a number of leaflets
connected to a central stem
attached to the branch.
Is the simple leaf lobed or
unlobed? A lobed leaf has
deep notches around its edge.
An unlobed leaf does not.
Does the unlobed leaf have a
toothed edge or an untoothed
edge? A toothed leaf has an
edge that looks a bit like a
saw. An untoothed leaf has
a smooth edge.
Simple
Smooth edge
Lobed
Toothed edge
Unlobed
Compound


18 FORESTRY
Trees.
Willows and Aspens
The pussy willow takes its name from its furry flower clusters
that resemble tiny kittens clinging to the willow’s long, straight
branches. The sandbar willow is often one of the first plants to
grow on newly exposed ground when a river changes course.
Aspens thrive on sunlight. They take root quickly on
mountain slopes burned by fire, protecting the soil from ero-
sion and providing browse for deer, elk, moose, and other ani-
mals. As slower-growing conifers mature, they tower above the
aspens and eventually create so much shade that they replace
the aspens.
Nut Trees
Walnuts and hickories have compound
leaves, each made up of a number of leaflets.
A hickory leaf has three to nine leaflets, while
the leaf of a walnut tree may have more than
a dozen. Walnuts and hickory nuts are the
seeds of their trees. Both are good to eat, as
are the nuts of the pecan tree, which is a type
of hickory. Mockernut, bitternut, and pignut
have small, bitter kernels. Wood from the
walnut is prized for furniture and gun stocks,
while hickory wood is used for short-handled
tools such as hammers and hatchets.
The Birch Family
This family of broad-leaved trees includes birches,
hornbeams, and alders, which are commonly found
in the East and Northeast, while the western red
alder is a prominent broad-leaved tree found in
the West. The oval leaves have jagged edges and
shiny surfaces.
American Indians used sheets of white bark
from the paper birch to build their canoes. The bark
of yellow birch peels away from the trunk in curls.
Gray and black birches have much tighter bark.
The wood of the smooth-barked American
hornbeam is so tough that the tree is sometimes
called an ironwood. The appearance of the trunk
and bark of an ironwood tree remind some people
of a person’s muscular arm.
Birch
Pussy willows
Bitternut
hickory
Walnut


FORESTRY 19
.Trees
Alders grow in moist ground throughout the country. They
have broad leaves, stalked buds, and small, conelike fruits.
Found along the Pacific Coast, red alder is a tremendous source
of lumber and other wood products.
Beeches and Chestnuts
You can identify a beech tree by its
smooth, pale gray bark. Beech leaves
have a strong midvein and parallel
side veins. The beech’s burrlike fruit
contains two triangular nuts.
The chestnut was once common
in forests of the eastern United States
until the appearance of chestnut
blight, a fungus that killed so many of
the trees that you will probably have
a hard time locating a chestnut today.
Oaks
Carpenters and cabinetmakers have long prized wood from
American oak trees. Oak timbers are slow to rot, even if they get
wet. The Revolutionary War ship USS Constitution (nicknamed
“Old Ironsides”) was made of live oak, a species common to
the coastal South, and hand-hewn oak beams were used in
many Colonial homes.
The acorn is the fruit of an oak. Most oaks have notched
leaves. The lobes on the leaves of some oaks are rounded,
while those of others come to sharp points. The live oak is an
exception. Its evergreen leaves have smooth edges and no lobes
at all, but its acorns help identify it as an oak.
American beech
Although the edible acorns of American oaks have a bitter taste to
humans, squirrels and a number of other animals find them irresistible.


20 FORESTRY
Trees.
Elms
Elms are large, graceful shade trees once found in towns and
cities throughout the nation. Dutch elm disease has killed
most large elms in the eastern United States. The leaves of
American elms and slippery elms are egg-shaped and lopsided
with sawtoothed edges. Leaves of American elms are shiny and
smooth. Despite the name, the leaves of the slippery elm have
dull, rough surfaces.
Papaws and Sassafras
The common papaw belongs to the custard apple family. It is
found in forests of the East and Midwest. The fruit of the papaw
looks and tastes like a chubby, overripe banana. On a single
sassafras tree you can find leaves of many shapes—some oval,
some like three-fingered mittens.
Magnolias
Magnolia trees are found in the southeastern United States.
Their large, distinctive leaves are shiny dark green on top and
pale underneath, and the blooms can fill summer evenings with
wonderful aromas. One magnolia, the cucumber tree, bears a
mass of many small, elongated pods.
Another member of the magnolia family is the tulip tree,
named for the tuliplike appearance of its flowers. A very tall
tree, it thrives in Southern states but is seldom found where
winters are severe.
Gums and Sycamores
The sweet gum tree has
star-shaped leaves that turn
brilliant colors in fall. Its
fruits look like spiny balls.
The fruit of the
sycamore has a similar
shape but is without the
spines. The bark of a
sycamore gives the trunk
a distinctive patchwork
of large white, green,
and yellow blotches.
American sycamore
The magnolia
is known for its
large blooms,
which have
a pleasantly
sweet fragrance.
American elm


FORESTRY 21
.Trees
Plums and Cherries
A dozen varieties of wild plum tree grow in the eastern United
States. They are small trees with shiny oval leaves and purple
or reddish fruits. The hard pit inside each fruit contains the
seed of a new tree.
Wild bird cherries or pin cherries are small trees with tiny
red fruits in clusters of two or three. Other wild cherries have
fruits arranged in bunches like grapes. The wood of the black
cherry is one of the most valuable in the United States, prized
for its beautiful color and grain in fine furniture.
Ashes
Ax handles and baseball bats are often made from the hard,
smooth wood of the ash tree. Each ash leaf is made up of many
leaflets that grow in pairs on either side of the stalk. The leaves
are in pairs, as are the branches of the tree.
Maples
The leaves of maples are arranged in pairs opposite each other
on the branch. Their main veins jut out like fingers from the
base of the leaf. Fruits of maple trees, called keys, each have
a “wing” attached that causes them to twirl through the air.
Maple wood is used for furniture. Especially valued is bird’s-eye
maple, named for the circular and dotted patterns of its grain.
Buckeyes
Inside a tough, spiny burr is the fruit of the buckeye. Its size
and shiny brown surface make it look something like the eye
of a deer, and thus its name. Leaves of the buckeye have five
long leaflets.
Fruit of the
plum tree
Wild cherries
BuckeyeMaple syrup is made from sugar maple sap.
Ash tree leaves


A plant key can guide you step-by-step to the identity of a plant species.


FORESTRY 23
.Identifying and Collecting Plant Species
Scientific
nomenclature, or
naming, uses Latin
terms to describe
each tree species.
This system
allows botanists
and others who
study plants to
share accurate
information with
one another
about particular
plant species.
Identifying and
Collecting Plant Species
Identifying trees, shrubs, and vines can be a great deal of fun.
It is a tremendous tool for learning about a forest.
The most useful tools for discovering the scientific names
of plants and learning something about their range, uses, and
growing habits are plant keys, available both as books and
as interactive websites. Each plant key may address specific
kinds of vegetation (trees, for example, or mushrooms or wild-
flowers), and focus on a specific region (the trees of North
America, for instance).
Using a Plant Key
Most plant keys are constructed with an either/or
format, asking you to make a series of yes-or-no
decisions that will steadily narrow your choices until
you come upon the specific description of the plant
you want to identify. A typical sequence might lead
you this way:
• Needlelike leaves or broad-leaf leaves?
If broad-leaf, then ...
• Compound leaves or simple leaves?
If compound, then ...
• Thorns or spines present or absent?
If without thorns or spines, then ...
• Leaves smooth, toothed, or lobed? If lobed, then ...
• Are the leaves arranged opposite each other on
the twigs, or do they alternate? If opposite, then ...
• Are leaves heart-shaped or oval? If oval, then ...


24 FORESTRY
Identifying and Collecting Plant Species.
Plant identification is most effective when it is done in a
plant’s natural setting. There you may have a wide range of
clues present such as appearance, aromas, and evidence of the
interaction a particular plant has with other species of plants
and animals. You can also observe the full array of leaves and
notice whether they are in clusters, opposed, or staggered.
Leaves are only one part of a plant. The context of the
plant—the surroundings in which you find it—is vital to
understanding it, too. The following questions can help you
begin your exploration of a tree, shrub, or vine and its role
in its ecosystem.
• How is it similar to and different from nearby plants?
• How are the leaves or needles shaped?
• Does it bear flowers or fruiting bodies?
• What kind of soil is it growing in? For example, is the soil
sandy, wet, dry, or rocky?
• What animals visit the plant? Do any creatures use it for food
or as shelter?
• How does the environment influence the plant? For example,
does it grow in sunshine or shade?
• How does the plant affect the environment around it?
Native, Exotic, and Invasive Species
Native species of plants are those that are the natural inhabitants
of an area. The fact that they have evolved over many generations
in a forest means that each species has a clear niche in the
ecosystem. A native plant species interacts with other native
species of plants and animals in balanced ways that help an
ecosystem maintain a high degree of stability.
A nonnative species, also known as an exotic, is a species
that has been introduced to a forest from somewhere else. Some
exotic species have little impact on other species. The ginkgo
tree, for example, is a native of China. Imported into the United
States more than 100 years ago, it grows well without seriously
challenging native plants. Some nonnative species spread
aggressively, though. Nonnatives that push out or kill native
species are known as invasive species.
Noxious weeds are invasive species designated by law as
undesirable and requiring control. These plants are usually
exotics. Invasive species include the passion flower, Scotch
Weeds that
crowd out native
vegetation can
create a
monoculture, an
area dominated
by a single
species. When
that happens,
plant diversity
is lost.


FORESTRY 25
.
broom, purple fringe, yellow star thistle, and spot-
ted knapweed. The U.S. Department of Agriculture
maintains the Federal Noxious Weed List.
Many native plants have fibrous root
systems that provide soil cover, stability, and water
infiltration, while many exotics have narrow tap-
roots that leave bare soil exposed to erosion. Other
weeds have roots more aggressive than those
of native plants, allowing them to access more water
and thus crowd out native vegetation.
Making Collections
A fun way to increase your ability to identify trees, shrubs, vines,
and other forest vegetation is by making collections of leaves and
wood samples. For a leaf collection, select small branches that
show leaf arrangement and twig traits. You might also gather
flowers, fruits, and winter twigs for each tree, shrub, or vine.
Wind, water, livestock, wildlife, vehicles, and people and their pets can
spread weed seeds. Backcountry users traveling with horses, mules,
or other livestock often carry hay that is specially treated to prevent
the weed seeds it may contain from taking root and competing with
native vegetation.
Yellow
star thistle


26 FORESTRY
Identifying and Collecting Plant Species.
In the field, you can store collected leaves and small
branches between the pages of a thick, heavy book, such as a
phone book, and make notes on the tree’s name (if you know
it), the date, where you found it, and other information about
the plant. Use a belt or strap to keep the book pressed shut so
the leaves stay flat and do not fall out as you carry it.
When you get home, put each leaf between two sheets
of paper, lay the sheets on a board or other flat surface, and
then place heavy books or some other weight on top. Allow
several days for the leaves to flatten and dry, then mount them
in a notebook along with the details of where and when you
found them, the identity of each plant, and information you
have learned about its natural history and uses.
Leave what you find is among the principles of Leave No Trace, adopted
by Scouting America as a means for enjoying the outdoors responsibly.
• Allow others a sense of discovery, and preserve what you find.
• Leave rocks, plants, animals, archaeological artifacts, and other
objects as you find them.
• Observe, but do not touch, cultural or historical structures and artifacts.
Before you
begin, get
permission from
the landowners
or land managers
of the area where
you want to do
your collecting.


.Identifying and Collecting Plant Species
Wood Samples
Pieces of wood are valuable in identifying and understanding
the trees from which they came. Appearance, color, grain,
texture, weight, general feel, and sometimes even the aroma
of a wood all are clues to its growing patterns, strengths,
weaknesses, and uses.
Learning About a Tree’s History
Each year during the spring and summer, most trees increase
their diameter by adding two new layers of wood. The layer
formed by the cambium in the spring grows quickly. Because
the cells are large, this springwood looks light in color. During
the summer, the wood grows more slowly. Because the cells
are smaller, this summerwood appears darker.
When a tree is cut or a core sample taken, the light and
dark layers show as alternating rings of light and dark wood.
Count the rings of dark wood and you can estimate the
age of the tree. Aspects such as soil moisture and fertil-
ity, weather, fire, overcrowding, insect attacks, and
the ability of the tree’s leaves to capture sunlight
influence the size and shape of the rings.
As the influencing factors change from
year to year, the shape, thickness, color,
and evenness of the annual rings also will
change. Dendrochronologists (scientists
who study tree rings) use tree rings
to determine past patterns of drought
and gather data to predict future
periods of dry and wet weather.
Your merit badge counselor can provide guidance
on where and how you can collect wood samples,
leaves, and other items from a forest in ways that
will leave no trace and do no harm. For example,
your counselor may suggest that, rather than cutting
branches in a forest for wood samples, you gather
samples of different species of wood from lumber-
yards and home improvement stores.


28 FORESTRY
Identifying and Collecting Plant Species.
Core Samples
Counting the annual rings on the stump of a tree that has been
cut down is relatively easy. In order to study the rings of a living
tree, foresters rely on a method called coring. They begin by
using an increment borer to drill a hole into the center of the
tree trunk. The borer is a hollow tube that, when drawn out of
the hole, takes with it a core sample. The light and dark bands
in the core sample show how many rings the tree has grown.
Their distance from one another can indicate years of rapid
growth and seasons when growth was sluggish.
The hole made by an increment
borer will heal over with next
year’s growth, but the small
(1
⁄4 inch) hole in the heartwood
remains. Foresters usually core
a tree no more than once, thus
minimizing injury to the tree.
For optional requirement 2b,
you are asked to sketch or
photograph three stumps, logs,
or core samples.


The tree—a loblolly pine—is born.
1904
The tree grows rapidly, with no disturbance.
There is abundant rainfall and sunshine in
spring and summer. The rings are relatively
broad and are evenly spaced.
1909
The surrounding trees are harvested. The larger
trees are removed and there is once again
ample nourishment and sunlight. The tree can
now grow rapidly again.
1927
A fire sweeps through the forest. Fortunately,
the tree is only scarred, and year by year more
and more of the scar is covered over by newly
formed wood.
1930
These narrow rings may have been caused by
a prolonged dry spell. One or two summers
would not have dried the ground enough to
slow the tree’s growth this much.
1942
Another series of narrow rings may have been
caused by an insect like the larva of the
sawfly. It eats the leaves and leafbuds of
many kinds of coniferous trees.
1957
The tree is growing straight again, but its
neighbors are growing, too. Their crowns
and root systems take much of the water
and sunshine the tree needs.
1924
When the tree was 6 years old, something
pushed against it, making it lean. The rings
are now wider on the lower side as the tree
builds “reaction wood” to help support it.
1914
A Tree’s Life


30 FORESTRY
Animal, Insect, and Disease Damage.
Animal, Insect, and
Disease Damage
The relationships of species in a forest ecosystem are very
complex. Various species depend upon one another for shelter
and food. Most interactions are harmless or beneficial. Insects
that take nourishment from the flowers and fruits of trees may
help the trees pollinate. Birds building nests in the branches of
trees may eat insects that might otherwise be a threat to forests.
Organisms that live in the soil break down dead vegetation so
that it can enrich the soil.
Animals
The actions of some species
can be damaging to a forest, at
least from a human’s point of
view. During a hard winter, for
example, deer and rabbits might
survive by stripping and eating
the bark of young trees. That
can keep the animals alive until
spring, but it can kill the trees a
forester had hoped would grow
large enough to harvest.
As you identify trees, vines,
and shrubs in the field,
make it a point to look
for any damage caused
by wildlife, insects, or
disease in order to fulfill
requirement 2c and/or 7a.


FORESTRY 31
.Animal, Insect, and Disease Damage
Insects
Forest insects and diseases destroy more trees every year than
are consumed by wildfires. Most insects attack only certain tree
species or only trees of a certain age. White grubs, for example,
eat the roots of young nursery and forest seedlings, making
growing trees in nurseries costly. The white pine weevil attacks
young white pines in the Northeast, causing them to grow
crooked and reducing the amount of lumber that can be made
from them.
Insects such as the spruce budworm and larvae of the
gypsy moth defoliate trees by eating many of the leaves. The
spruce budworm damages spruce and fir forests throughout New
England, eastern Canada, and Minnesota. In the West, this pest
has weakened some forests and left them open to catastrophic
wildfires. The gypsy moth larvae attack hardwoods in the eastern
states. Fortunately, foresters that take quick action often are
successful in stopping the spread of gypsy moths.
The pinecone beetle can destroy almost the entire yearly
seed crop of some western pines. Emerald ash borers, introduced
to the United States in shipping pallets coming from China,
attack ash trees that have no natural defenses against them.
Epidemics of bark beetles periodically kill tens of thousands
of acres of pine in the Southern, Southwestern, and Rocky
Mountain regions of the United States. These pests generally
attack mature trees.


32 FORESTRY
Animal, Insect, and Disease Damage.
One of the reasons the gypsy moth has spread is that gypsy moths often lay their
eggs on cars and other vehicles, which are then transported across the country by
unsuspecting motorists.
The emerald ash borer causes
extensive damage to ash trees by
destroying their water-supply system.


FORESTRY 33
.Animal, Insect, and Disease Damage
Diseases
Trees are also subject to many diseases. Leaf spots, rusts, wilts,
blights, and cankers can weaken or kill forest trees. Some tree
diseases affect the leaves; others attack the main woody parts
(trunk, branches, twigs). Still others damage only the roots.
Here are some examples of common tree diseases.
Dutch elm disease is caused by a fungus carried from tree to
tree by the elm bark beetle. It is one of the most devastating
diseases ever to attack trees and led to the disappearance
of most of the elms that once graced streets of U.S. cities
and towns.
White pine blister rust kills white pines. Discovered in New
York state in 1903, it spread widely among the eastern white
pines, and by 1921 was affecting white pines in western states.
White pine blister rust cannot spread from pine to pine but
must spend part of its life on currant or gooseberry bushes.
Chestnut blight was brought into the United States from Asia
about 1900. The blight destroyed nearly all the native chestnut
trees in the United States.
Wilting in the upper branches of this tree
is a telltale sign of Dutch elm disease.
This tree is infected with white pine
blister rust.


34 FORESTRY
Animal, Insect, and Disease Damage.
Oak wilt attacks oaks, developing most
rapidly in red oaks and black oaks.
Many infected trees die within a few
weeks or months.
Many insects and diseases with
the potential of damaging trees in the
United States and Canada are native
to the forests they inhabit. Because
they are a part of the forest ecology
and have a niche, they often can be
controlled through adjustments of their
habitat. Insects and diseases brought
to North America from other parts of
the world, such as the gypsy moth, the
emerald ash borer, and Dutch elm dis-
ease, can pose more serious problems
because they have no natural controls.
In commercial forests where trees
are raised as a crop, insect infestations
are sometimes suppressed with pesti-
cides (chemicals for controlling insects
and disease). Pesticides also are used in other forests to stop the
spread of undesirable insects such as the gypsy moth, which
is prevalent in the East but, because of effective control, has
not become established in the West. The expense of chemical
agents depends largely on the size of the area treated, the cost
of the pesticide, the type of equipment used, and the accessibil-
ity of the area.
Forest researchers continue to search for alternative methods
of minimizing insects and disease outbreaks. For example, artificial
scents can be used to confuse the mating habits of certain insects
and thus reduce their numbers. In some forests, scientists promote
the populations of insects that feed on disease-bearing insects.
A healthy forest with many species of plants and animals can withstand
attacks of insects and diseases better than one already under stress.
A vigorous forest has the greatest variety of natural defenses. For
example, birds, rodents, and other small animals attracted to the lower
strata of a forest can control insect populations that could otherwise
pose problems for trees.
Tree infected with oak wilt


FORESTRY 35
.Animal, Insect, and Disease Damage
Protecting Forests From Threats
Whatever its origins, damage from certain insects, diseases, fires,
and invasive species often can be reduced if the forest is healthy.
Some additional preventive actions that encourage healthy forests
might include the following.
• Protecting against wildfire
• Fencing woodlands to keep out excessive numbers of cattle,
sheep, and other domestic animals
• Making cuttings to promote stands with mixed species of
robust trees
• Thinning trees to prevent overcrowding
Other Dangers to Forests
Trees may be sick because of one of the following reasons.
• The area suffers from insufficient light, inadequate drainage,
or poor soil.
• The trees are not the right species for the site.
• The trees are too crowded.
• The trees have been damaged by drought, flooding, frost, or ice.
• The habitat has been changed by raising or lowering of the water
table or by a change in exposure to light.
• Fire, excessive grazing, or pesticides have caused destruction.
• Improper harvesting or an absence of fires has broken the natural
cycle of renewal.
• The population of pollinating insects has declined due to environ-
mental changes.
• Urbanization has brought adverse effects—automobile exhaust, acid
rain, or other pollutants.





FORESTRY 37
.Using Forest Resources Responsibly
Using Forest Resources
Responsibly
Forest resources are materials people use. People use forests
for many things, such as wood, water, food, and recreation.
As providers of raw materials, forests are vital to our economy.
Trees
The forest resources you probably know the best are trees and
the products made from them. We use wood from trees to make
furniture and to build homes. Wood also can be used as a fuel.
Other products made from wood include paper, pencils, bats,
telephone poles, and bowling pins.
Many building materials, including dimensional lumber,
plywood, laminated veneer lumber, and I-joists, come from
softwood trees. Softwood trees also are used for making paper.
Softwood trees include fir, Douglas fir, redwood, white pine,
ponderosa pine, hemlock, cedar, and southern pines such as
shortleaf, loblolly, and slash. Chips and sawdust left over from
the manufacture of wood products are used for making paper,
particleboard, and medium-density fiberboard.


38 FORESTRY
Using Forest Resources Responsibly.
Hardwoods are used to make furniture, flooring, paneling,
and many other construction materials and certain engineered
wood products. Some of the more economically important hard-
wood species are oak, maple, ash, walnut, cherry, gum, and
yellow poplar.
Recreation
People have long enjoyed visiting forests. Camping, hiking,
picnicking, swimming, boating, and winter sports grow in
popularity every year. Forest recreation is also an important
source of jobs. Businesses near forests can provide food,
lodging, and supplies to visitors.
Companies offering instruction in outdoor skills and orga-
nized opportunities to enjoy forests hire many seasonal and
full-time employees to meet their demands. The manufacture
and marketing of outdoor equipment—everything from bird-
watching binoculars to camping gear—is a multimillion-dollar
business. All this could not exist without healthy forests
accessible to the public.
Forest products are essential for tires, aspirin, tooth-
paste, and the manufacture of clothing, fuels, paints,
and many other goods.


FORESTRY 39
.Using Forest Resources Responsibly
Those who manage public and private lands must balance
the needs of the environment with the wishes of its users. To
that end, agencies and landowners develop management plans
that identify how and when various areas may be used. Their
goal is to encourage people to have fun in the outdoors in ways
that have little negative impact upon the land.
Protecting forest ecosystems used for recreation is a
cooperative effort involving those who enjoy the outdoors
and those who manage it. Most forest visitors want to take
good care of the areas where they travel and camp, and will
gladly do so if they know how that can be done.
Leave No Trace, a set of principles familiar to outdoor
enthusiasts and to the managers of forested areas, provides
understandable, effective ways for everyone to be good stewards
of forests while enjoying them. The reward for everyone is
a healthy environment that can be used for recreation today
and enjoyed by generations to come.
Leave No Trace Outdoor Ethics
Plan Ahead and Prepare
Travel and Camp on Durable Surfaces
Dispose of Waste Properly
Leave What You Find
Minimize Campfire Impacts
Respect Wildlife
Be Considerate of Other Visitors


40 FORESTRY
Forests Are Important
Most of the products shown on this chart come from trees that
grow on commercial forest land. This land—514 million acres
in the United States—is the land we depend on for our timber
supplies. More than three-quarters of all commercial forest land
is privately owned. The remaining 22 percent is owned by the
federal government, states, counties, cities, and towns.
If forest land (both private and public) is well-managed, it
can provide continuous crops of raw materials for industries and
steady jobs for our increasing population. However, forests are
needed for other purposes, too—to protect watersheds, to supply
forage for livestock, to furnish a home for fish and wildlife, to
provide sites for recreation. Forests are important to us all.
What We Get From Trees


FORESTRY 41


42 FORESTRY
Using Forest Resources Responsibly.
The Water Cycle
As important as forests are in providing us with raw materials
and opportunities for recreation, they also are vital as watersheds.
Forest lands are primary sources of water for most people in this
country. In some areas, the amount of water coming from the
forest for drinking, irrigation, power, recreation, and navigation
is far more important than any other forest resource.
Water circulates through the environment in a cycle that is
energized by the sun. Heat from the sun evaporates water from
forests, oceans, lakes, and streams. The vapors form clouds that
can be carried long distances by the wind. When the air cools
or becomes loaded with moisture, the vapor can fall as rain,
snow, sleet, or hail.
Much of the precipitation percolates into the soil, where it
can be absorbed by the roots of plants. Some of that precipita-
tion finds its way into underground aquifers and other natural
reservoirs, then rises again to flow from springs or wells. Small
streams join together to form rivers that return water to lakes and
oceans and, through evaporation, once again to the atmosphere.
CLOUD
FORMATION
TRANSPIRATION
EVAPORATION
STREAM TO OCEAN
PRECIPITATION (RAIN)
SURFACE RUNOFF
PERCOLATION (SOAK-IN)
GROUND WATER


FORESTRY 43
.Using Forest Resources Responsibly
Forest cover is important, too, in determining how much
water infiltrates the forest soil and how much runs off the
surface to nearby streams. Wise watershed management can
help ensure adequate quantities of water at the right times
and guarantee that water quality is good.
Finding Your Watershed
To find your watershed, locate the stream nearest your home.
Follow it uphill (against the current). Notice the other streams
joining it. All of those streams and the land feeding water into
them form your watershed.
In some cases, water comes to a community through
pipelines, aqueducts, or canals. If you consider those to be
artificial streams and follow them against their flows, you will
eventually find the open country where terrain, moisture, and
vegetation meet to create the watershed upon which you and
your neighbors depend.
Trees extract water from the soil and transpire, or
give off water vapor, through their leaves. This water
becomes part of our atmosphere and may later fall
as rain or snow. The amount of water released into
the air through transpiration depends on factors
including soil moisture, air temperature, and the
speed and direction of the wind.
Watershed dam surrounded by homes


44 FORESTRY
Using Forest Resources Responsibly.
Clean Air
Forests are among Earth’s great filters for cleansing the atmo-
sphere and replenishing it with oxygen. Animals absorb oxygen
and exhale carbon dioxide. Carbon dioxide is also produced
when plants and animals decay and when wood, coal, gasoline,
and other carbon-based materials burn.
Plants must absorb carbon dioxide in order to survive. In a
chemical reaction charged with sunlight, chlorophyll allows plants
to combine water with carbon dioxide to produce the simple
sugars plants use for food. The process is called photosynthesis—
making something with the aid of light. A by-product of
photosynthesis is the oxygen animals need for survival.
Wildlife Habitat
Forests are home to a tremendous
range of animals, including large for-
est animals such as bear, deer, and
elk and smaller creatures such as
birds, squirrels, salamanders, frogs,
and fish. These animals inhabit the
forest; that is, they use it as a home.
The four essentials for an animal’s
habitat—the area where a particular
species prefers to live—are food,
water, space, and shelter. Through
careful management, foresters can
help the woods provide habitat for
a large number of wildlife species
in the same forest.
Plants absorbing carbon dioxide can store it—a process called
sequestration—and slow its return to the atmosphere. Carbon is stored
in a tree’s trunk and roots, and in the soil of a forest. Wood eventually
will decay and release the carbon back into the atmosphere, but it can
be stored in wood products and the forest floor for long periods of time.
Many scientists believe sequestration might play a role in reducing
the effects of carbon dioxide as a factor in changing the climate of
the planet.


FORESTRY 45
.Using Forest Resources Responsibly
Fisheries Habitat
Forests can be critical to the survival of fish. Trees
and shrubs shade streams, keeping water at a
temperature inviting to fish. Insects that make their
homes in streamside vegetation provide food for
fish. Leaves, branches, and other vegetation that
drop into the water form pools and other places for
aquatic life to rest, feed, hide, and spawn. Forest
managers make provisions to protect water quality
and fisheries habitat in forests.
Threatened and
Endangered Species
Changes that affect forest ecosystems cause animals and
plants to adapt to new conditions, migrate to more hospitable
locations, or suffer reductions in population. For example,
fires moving across woodlands and prairies alter the habitats
of many creatures. An early winter storm might catch many
animals unprepared for migration or hibernation. Floods can
wash away the homes of beavers and alter the spawning
grounds of fish. Drought can reduce sources of nutrition for
grazing animals and, in turn, for species that depend on
those animals for food.
While naturally occurring changes affect many plants and
animals, those changes often play important roles in maintain-
ing a healthy balance of species populations. Unfortunately, the
same cannot always be said for the disruptions caused
by humans. People have not always been aware of the conse-
quences of their decisions that involve the uses of forests. As
a result, some animals and plants have become so reduced in
number that their very survival is endangered.
Laws today help protect many of these threatened species.
Generations of Americans have also had the wisdom to set
aside tracts of unspoiled forest, protecting them in the forms of
parks, wilderness areas, and wildlife refuges. Managed forests
also play an important role in providing habitat for threatened
species. Some threatened and endangered species, including the
northern spotted owl, grizzly bear, and California condor, are
well-known to much of the public. There are hundreds of
other endangered species that depend upon forests for survival,
and although people seldom see them, their protection is
important for maintaining a rich ecosystem diversity.
Once a species
dies out, it is
gone forever.


46 FORESTRY
Why Manage Forests?.
Why Manage
Forests?
A forest left entirely to itself would, over
the centuries, remain in balance. There
would be changes, certainly, but on the
whole it would remain diverse and
vibrant. When humans make changes in
forests, though, that might not always
be the case. Everything is connected to
everything else. Forest managers need
to make wise choices about how we use
and change forests so that we do not
damage them.
A Brief History of Humans’
Relationships With North
American Forests
American Indians used forests for centuries
before European settlers arrived on the conti-
nent. Many tribes used forest materials. In the
Pacific Northwest, tribes used forest materials
to build cedar houses and boats, and to make
clothing. Forests also were tremendous sources
of food, both from plants and from wildlife.
At times, tribes overused certain forested areas.
Sometimes they intentionally burned forests to clear
land for cultivation or to make it easier to pursue
game. If a forest became overused or too heavily
damaged to support a tribe, the group would move
on and the forest, left alone, would recover.
Long ago,
American
Indians of the
Northeast and
Upper Midwest
built canoes
using the birch
bark tree.


FORESTRY 47
.Why Manage Forests?
European settlers who came to North America realized from
the beginning the value of forests as sources of raw materials.
Ships that brought settlers to the Americas often returned to
Europe with a cargo of North American lumber. For example,
when the Mayflower returned to Europe, it carried back
clapboards and other forest products. Many settlers saw the
forests as a force to be pushed back. Forested land in the
Midwest and West could be obtained from the government to
homestead. Railroad companies were given millions of acres of
forested land as incentives to construct the rail lines that would
span the continent.
Forested land seemed so plentiful that it was too often
harvested without concern for its future. During the late 1800s
and early 1900s, poor harvesting practices in many areas of the
country led the government to establish agencies to manage the
public lands. These agencies brought more balance to the use
and protection of forests.


48 FORESTRY
Why Manage Forests?.
Government management of special areas can be traced
back to the creation of the first national park—Yellowstone—set
aside in 1872. In 1916, Congress established the National Park
Service. Its mission is to preserve natural and cultural resources
for the enjoyment, education, and inspiration of current and
future generations.
Congress passed the Creative Act in 1891, designating much
of the nation’s publicly owned forests as protected forest reserves.
The Forest Reserves Act followed in 1897, changing the forest
reserves to national forests and charging their managers with
improving and protecting the nation’s long-term supply of wood
and water. The Bureau of Forestry became the Forest Service in
1905 when control of the forest reserves was transferred to the
Department of Agriculture.
In the decades that followed, forward-thinking agency
personnel and a conservation movement made up of dedi-
cated citizens established the idea of balancing the needs of
Americans eager to use public lands for recreation, and as a
source of lumber, a repository of biological resources, and
protected reminders of the forests as they were before humans
intervened. The Multiple-Use Sustained-Yield Act of 1960
officially established multiple-use management of the forests.
The Bureau of Land Management, the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers, the Fish and Wildlife Service, the Natural Resources
Conservation Service, and other public agencies also strive to
manage forested public lands that fall within their administrative
boundaries. State and local agencies oversee smaller acreages
of public lands. Private landowners with forested properties—
from large forest-product companies to families with a few
acres of trees around their homes—have a stake in the proper
management of forest resources, too. Their involvement in wise,
sustainable management is extremely important, since
privately owned forests account for many more acres in the
United States than do publicly held forests.


FORESTRY 49
.Why Manage Forests?
How Forests Change
A fact of life (and death) in every ecosystem is that change hap-
pens. Nothing ever stays the same. Plants and animals must
adapt to meet changes in the environment or they will not
survive. Take, for example, a forest that has recently burned in
a wildfire. Over several growing seasons, grasses, shrubs, vines,
and small trees will take root in the soil made fertile by the ash
of the burned forest. These sun-loving pioneer plants will thrive
for a few years, while slower-growing trees establish themselves
in the shade of faster-growing trees. Gradually, slower-growing
trees rise above the first generation of vegetation. Shaded out,
the pioneer trees will die and again renew the soil. The larger
trees and the other strata will continue to grow and change
until there is a stable, diverse stand of many species called
a climax forest.
The goals of private forest
owners vary widely. Small
tracts may be owned for
many reasons, including
timber production, family
recreation, and the protection
of wildlife habitat. While
public forests are usually
managed for a variety of
reasons and uses, many
large private tracts are
owned primarily for timber
production. However, forests
can be managed for timber
production while at the
same time protecting other
important forest features.


50 FORESTRY
Why Manage Forests?.
The climax forest might stand for
many years, but change will continue
to happen. Fire might again sweep
through the trees, an insect epidemic
could dramatically alter the forest’s
composition and appearance, or a
number of the trees might be harvest-
ed. Whatever happens, a new phase
of the cycle of change will begin.
Change and Diversity
From microscopic bacteria to eagles, wolves, and other predators
at the top of a food web, an ecosystem is healthiest when rich in
the variety and numbers of species thriving within it. This envi-
ronment provides flexibility for the ecosystem as a whole. Plants
and animals will be more adaptive to change. This diversity of
species (that is, many plants and animals that are unlike one
another) offers a storehouse of environmental possibilities, the
raw material for adaptation and survival.
For instance, when bees harvest
nectar from tree blossoms to make
honey, pollen sticks to their legs and
they carry it from one tree to another.
This relationship benefits both species;
the trees provide nourishment for the
bees, and the bees play a vital role
in the pollination of the trees. If bee
populations do not survive a harsh
winter, though, or die from pesticides
sprayed too near their nests, the trees
will have lost a reliable means of
spreading pollen and might not be
able to reproduce.
On the other hand, a diverse eco-
system might include hummingbirds
and insects that pollinate plants. A
diversity of vegetation can ensure that
plant species that do not rely on bees
for pollination will move into the eco-
system niche that had been occupied
by the bee-dependent trees.


FORESTRY 51
.Why Manage Forests?
Human-Caused Change
Healthy, diverse ecosystems tend to be stable and to change
slowly. Normally, the forces of nature take decades or centuries
to create perceivable change in forests and other ecosystems.
However, natural events such as hurricanes, wildfires, or
volcanoes can affect tens of thousands of acres in a matter
of days or even minutes.
Humans also can cause rapid ecosystem change. People
pave open land for highways, parking lots, and developments,
and clear timbered areas to make way for agricultural crops and
cities. Cars and trucks, factories, and power plants can pump
exhaust into the atmosphere that can have a direct impact on
forests near and far.
Our ability to cause dramatic change in forests carries with
it the responsibility to make wise decisions on issues that can
affect forest health. While humans are capable of activities that
are destructive to ecosystems, we also can do much to protect
and heal the environment.
Proper forestry techniques can be applied when forests are harvested for lumber and
other products. Doing so will result in a new forest being established more quickly
than in the aftermath of natural events.
Small actions matter, and personal choices are important. As a group,
everyone can work toward creating communities that exist in harmony
with the environment. As concerned citizens, each person can learn
about environmental issues and the roles that forests play in environ-
mental, economic, and social well-being.


52 FORESTRY
Why Manage Forests?.
Sustainable Forest Management
Our forests face tremendous challenges. The loss of open space,
the potential for wildfire from the buildup of fuels, the devastating
effects of invasive species, and the impacts of unregulated
recreational choices such as using off-road vehicles in fragile
areas are significant threats to our forests. In addition, demands
for forest products grow every year.
Sustainable forest management takes forest planning a step
further by emphasizing the importance of considering the needs
of today’s forest users while also ensuring that future generations
will be able to enjoy healthy forests. Accomplishing that goal
requires a management approach that looks at forests as ecosys-
tems, not just as stands of trees. While sustainable management
views forests as sources of raw materials and recreation, it also
involves stewardship that gives full attention to caring for wildlife
habitat, increasing the diversity of species, and protecting the
quality of the air, water, and soil.
Multiple-use management addresses the desires of a broad range of forest users.
Harvesting, recreation, wildlife, and other interests are all considered in multiple-use
forest plans.


FORESTRY 53
.Why Manage Forests?
Silvicultural Systems
Among the many tools of forest management are silvicultural
systems. (Silva means “forest” in Latin.) Silviculture is the
science of planting, growing, and harvesting stands of trees
to meet the objectives of the land manager or forest owner.
Foresters can use silvicultural systems to improve the health of
forests and to accelerate the production of timber for harvest.
The choice of a management system further depends on the
characteristics of the tree species that make up the forest type
and the features of the terrain where the trees are growing.
Trained foresters
can determine
how best
to develop
a silvicultural
system that
provides for
the best mix
of benefits to
humans and
protection of
the ecosystem.
The value of a stand of trees as
wildlife habitat is influenced not
only by the tree species but also
by their age, size, form, and health.
Old trees have stout limbs on
which heavy birds can nest. Bare
branches provide roosts. Rotten
spots can be hollowed into nests.
Large dead trees are particularly
important. These snags should be
left standing whenever possible
to provide habitat for hole-nesting
wildlife and insect-eating wildlife.
Studies by the U.S. Department of Agriculture Forest
Service indicate that at the time of European settle-
ment, forests covered a billion acres of what was to
become the United States. Today, there are 751 million
forested acres. Most of the loss came in the northeast-
ern and southeastern regions of the country during
the years between 1850 and 1900. The total forest area
of the nation has been relatively stable for more than
a hundred years even as the population of the United
States has more than doubled.


54 FORESTRY
Why Manage Forests?.
The main treatments making up silvicultural systems
involve the felling of trees and the regeneration of a new forest
for the future. Systems that result in trees of approximately the
same age are called even-aged systems. The trees may or may
not be equal in size. Systems that result in trees of many ages
are termed uneven-aged systems. Each system includes steps
to establish seedlings and actions to encourage the health and
productivity of a developing stand. Some tree species grow best
in an even-aged forest, while others grow best in uneven-aged
stands. Cuttings in forests are further classed as regeneration
harvest cuttings that help reproduce or create new forest stands
and intermediate cuttings intended to improve the health and
quality of an existing stand.
Regeneration Cutting Systems
Depending on the larger management plans of foresters, stands
of trees may be cut using systems that lead to appropriate
harvesting of timber and to the reproduction of tree stands.
Clear-Cutting Systems. Clear-cutting is the harvesting of all
trees in an area except those that are necessary to maintain
water quality, fish habitat, and other healthy ecosystem consid-
erations. The clear-cut can then be regenerated by broadcasting
seeds, from sprouts, or by planting seedlings. The new stand
may also be allowed to develop naturally from seeds dropped
by trees bordering the clear-cut, from seeds already on the for-
est floor, or from stump sprouts and root sprouts of cut trees.
The new trees will have equal access to sunlight. The strongest
will grow relatively quickly and will be straight and tall.
Clear-cutting
system


FORESTRY 55
.Why Manage Forests?
Clear-cutting can be controversial, in large part because
of the changes in appearance it creates on the land but also
because clear-cutting can have a large impact on many species.
Animals such as rabbits, moles, and gophers that depend on
shade and dense vegetation will be forced to migrate to other
areas in order to survive. On the other hand, forest openings
created by clear-cutting can increase the habitat for deer, bears,
certain birds, and other species that get part or all of their food
and shelter from low vegetation and brush with little or no
overhead shade. Additionally, certain species of trees require
full sunlight to thrive and will not grow well under the shade
of other trees.
In certain situations, clear-cutting is the best silvicultural
tool available to a forest manager. Clear-cutting is often used
in forests that have been damaged by fire or that have been
poorly harvested over the decades. Clear-cutting also can be
used effectively to maximize the production of trees grown for
pulpwood and of other sun-loving species that will not grow
well in the shade of other trees.
Clear-cutting should be done only when carefully planned
by professional foresters and carried out using proper harvesting
techniques. Foresters must consider the effects clear-cutting will
have on wildlife, the land, and the surrounding forest. For
example, streams can be polluted by silt or dirt if forest roads
and logging trails are not properly designed. Buffer zones com-
posed of trees that are left uncut must be established along
streams to provide continued shade and nourishment for fish.
Seed-Tree System. Foresters using the seed-
tree system to harvest a mature stand of trees
leave a few healthy seed-producing trees on
each acre. These trees provide the seeds needed
to regenerate a new even-aged stand. After
the fresh crop of young trees has become estab-
lished, the seed trees themselves may be har-
vested. This system is more effective when used
with evergreens than with hardwoods.
Even-aged
management:
Clear-cutting,
seed-tree,
shelterwood
Uneven-aged
management:
Single-tree
selection,
group selection
Seed-tree system


56 FORESTRY
Why Manage Forests?.
Shelterwood System. The shelterwood system involves a
series of partial cuttings in the mature stand over a period of
years. Early cuttings improve the vigor and seed production of
the remaining trees and help prepare the site for new seedlings
to take root. The trees that are retained produce shade—the
shelterwood—for seedlings and young trees. As the new trees
gain viability, the shelterwood trees can be harvested and the
new crop of trees allowed to develop as an even-aged stand.
Single-Tree Selection System. The single-tree
selection system differs from other systems in
that it creates and maintains an uneven-aged
stand. Foresters examine a stand and judge each
tree on its individual merits, harvesting a tree as
it matures. Seedlings or sprouts can then grow
in the spaces created by tree removals. Periodic
thinning, harvesting, and regeneration result in a
stand made up of trees of many ages and sizes.
Because relatively few trees are harvested at one
time and because the forest floor is generally
shaded, this system favors species that thrive
in low light.
Shelterwood
system
Single-tree selection system


FORESTRY 57
.Why Manage Forests?
Group Selection System. The group selection
system requires the harvesting of small groups
of trees. The openings created by this method
resemble miniature clear-cuts, although the
resulting regeneration occupies too small an
area to be considered an even-aged stand. As
in the single-tree system, thinning and harvest
cuttings are done at the same time. The new
trees that grow in these small openings are
regarded as part of a larger stand that contains
trees of many ages. In either selection system,
frequent harvests will maintain a balance of
tree ages and sizes.
Intermediate Cuttings
Intermediate cuttings, such as improvement cuttings, salvage
cuttings, and sanitation cuttings, can be distinguished from
regeneration cuttings by their purpose. Regeneration cuttings
create a new stand of trees; intermediate cuttings improve an
existing stand or maintain the vigor, the desired composition,
and the structure of the stands in terms of tree species, ages,
and size classes.
A tree needs a place in the sun, soil of its own, and room
to expand if it is to thrive. When a stand of trees is too dense, a
professional forester may prescribe thinning to ease the competi-
tion and to accelerate growth of the trees that remain. The trees
that are removed might be sold as posts, poles, or pulpwood (for
use in making paper). If they are too small to have market value,
the thinning is called precommercial. These trees are cut and left
to decay, returning nutrients to the soil.
All silvicultural systems require loggers to go into
forests. Whether it is a large operation involving
trucks and heavy machinery or a selective cut made
using draft horses or helicopters, there will be some
impact on small trees and other vegetation and on
the soil. In choosing a forest-management system,
silviculturalists must consider the full impact on the
land, not just a system’s effect on trees.
Group selection system


58 FORESTRY
Why Manage Forests?.
Improvement Cuttings. In a stand containing a mixture
of desirable and undesirable trees, an improvement cutting
may be made to favor the desirable ones. Undesirable trees
can include undersized trees or ones that are crowding larger
trees. Determining which trees to remove depends on a larger
sustainable forest management plan to balance the desire for
timber with the need for wildlife habitat, aesthetic appeal,
or recreation.
Salvage Cuttings. Natural catastrophes, such as windstorms,
ice storms, and fires, sometimes cause great destruction in forest
stands. Salvage cuttings are prescribed to manage economic
loss by harvesting damaged trees, to reduce the risk of fire by
removing dead material before it falls to the forest floor and
becomes potential fuel, and to clear the way for new growth
that will keep a forest healthy.
Sanitation Cuttings. If some trees in a stand are harmed by
insects or disease, the forester may recommend a sanitation
cutting to remove infested or infected trees that pose a threat
to neighboring healthy trees.
Intermediate cutting


FORESTRY 59
.Why Manage Forests?
Replanting a Forest
After a wildfire or the harvest of a stand of trees, reseeding
will occur naturally, but it can take several years. Foresters
may decide to control and hasten the process by planting
seedlings or by sowing seeds.
Seeding has several advantages over planting. It is faster
and less expensive, and it can be done in places where planting
is difficult or impossible. Aircraft can sometimes be used to
sow seed. Seeding has some disadvantages because spacing is
uncontrolled, and birds or rodents may eat the seed before it
germinates. In general, it is less certain that a good stand will
be established.
Because certain species of trees are adapted to certain
soils, foresters select and plant those that will grow best on
a particular site. They consider which species will make the
best timber or pulpwood, protect watersheds, favor recreation,
improve wildlife habitat, or meet the land manager’s long-term
sustainable forest objectives.
An area to be planted may be prepared in advance by
prescribed burning or by other means of baring the soil such
as using a bulldozer or a cultivating machine. Planting
machines can be used where large areas are to be reforested
and the site is level and free of large stones. In more rugged
terrain, planting must be done by hand.
Timber-Stand Improvement
Improvement, salvage, and sanitation cuttings are methods used for
timber-stand improvement. As with all approaches to managing forests,
the goal of timber-stand improvement is to encourage stands of trees to
thrive, to resist disease, and to fulfill the goals of an overall forest plan
that protects ecosystem viability.


60 FORESTRY
Why Manage Forests?.
Planting Seedlings
By planting seedlings, foresters can space the plants for
good growth and vigor. Seedlings must be carefully
handled and the roots kept moist at all times. Planters
use a mattock or a special planting hoe called a
hoedad to create a hole of proper depth. They then
set a seedling at about the depth it was growing in
the nursery. A slight “collar” on its stem usually
marks this depth. The planter spreads the roots to as
natural a position as possible and then tamps the soil
firmly around the roots and the stem to get rid of air
pockets that might allow the plant to dry out and die.
Sowing Seeds
Foresters may sow seed rather than plant seedlings.
This method is mainly used for pine. Pine seeds can
germinate, or sprout, on bare soil surfaces with little
moisture. Pine trees grow in most regions of the United
States. Pinecones, which contain the seed, ripen in the
fall and are gathered when they have turned brown but
are not so ripe that they have opened. After four to five
days in a storage area heated to 90 F, the cones will
open and the seeds will drop out.
Seeds must go through dormancy (rest) before
germination. Winter does this naturally for them. Seeds
gathered for seeding usually are kept cold over winter
and sown in the spring. Foresters run tests on the seeds
to learn their germination rate, the percentage expected
to grow. The germination rate for properly handled
seeds often exceeds 90 percent.
Improving Trees
The growth rate, appearance, and other qualities of
trees depend greatly on genes, the codes that tell cells
how to grow. Foresters use genetic improvement to
get better trees. One way to do this is to gather seeds
from superior trees that grow straight at a rapid rate,
stand firm against winds, produce large amounts of
seeds and quality wood, and resist insects and diseases.
These seeds are used to replant stands. To increase the
supply of improved seeds, foresters may artificially pol-
linate trees to develop seed orchards of superior trees.
RIGHT
Right and wrong methods
for side-hole planting
WRONG


FORESTRY 61
.Why Manage Forests?
Center-Hole Method
Step 1—Drive the mat-
tock blade straight down.
Step 3—Open the top of
the slit by pulling back on
the mattock. Insert the tree.
Step 4—Close the
slit using the
mattock blade.
Step 5—Tamp the
soil with your heel.
Step 2—Open a slit
by raising the handle.
Fertilizers
Foresters use fertilizer in some stands to improve the growth
of trees and other plants. Added to the forest soil, fertilizers
may be especially helpful to trees growing on poor ground and
may increase the number of seedlings that survive on the forest
floor. Although expensive, fertilized trees and other plants may
grow healthier and faster and be ready for harvesting sooner.
Young stands
of true fir trees
in the Pacific
Northwest are
sometimes
fertilized to
encourage
development of
boughs that
can be harvested
to make
holiday wreaths.


62 FORESTRY
Why Manage Forests?.
The full-page illustration shown here reviews some of the factors that
must be considered in forest management and some of the practices
used in managing a forest in Montana.
1. The slope and aspect (the direction the slope faces) help determine
what to grow. On a north-facing slope, Douglas fir or larch will grow
well. On a south slope, ponderosa pine is a good choice.
2. Elevation is just as important as slope and aspect. Seeds from trees
that grow at 5,000 feet often will not grow well at 1,000 feet, and
vice versa.
3. Seeds sown from a helicopter must have their “wings” removed first.
Otherwise the seeds float to the wrong area.
4. Seeds should be dyed an unappetizing color, such as blue-green or
silver, to keep birds from eating them.
5. Nature itself often will seed the forest if the very best trees are left
standing about 50 feet apart.
6. Hand-planted seedlings need shade to help them survive better.
Rocks situated on the south side of the seedlings will provide shade.
7. Rodent populations should be assessed before seeding. Rodents
might eat the seeds.
8. Seeds should be coated with a fungicide to prevent fungi from
attacking the seedlings.
9. Seeds scattered on snow will be carried into the soil and kept moist
as the snow melts.
10. The ground cover should be burned or scarified to create bare soil
where seeds can germinate.
11. Seeds from trees that have straight trunks, dense crowns, and few
low branches will produce the best seedlings. Seed from superior
trees can grow into superior forests.
12. Thin the trees when they are about 10 years old to give those that
remain plenty of room to grow.
13. To get seeds from cones, wait until the cones ripen and brown on the
trees but are not so ripe that they open themselves. Gather the cones
and place them in a room heated to 90 degrees for four or five days.
The cones will open and the seeds will drop out.


1
5
6
8
9
10
13
11
12
7
2
3
4


64 FORESTRY
Why Manage Forests?.
Managing the Urban Forest
The trees you see in places where people live, work, and play
make up the urban forest. Some of these trees were planted,
and others grew on their own. Trees in our towns and cities
enliven our downtown areas and soften the hard outlines of
masonry, metal, and glass. Trees absorb carbon dioxide and
replenish the environment with oxygen.
These trees are an important part of our communities and
recreation areas. They enrich the settings around our homes
and recreation sites with the seasonal beauty of their leaves
and flowers, and their attractive bark and branch architecture.
They offer privacy and, sometimes, they can block unsightly
views. Trees and shrubs provide food, shelter, and nesting for
wildlife. Pollen and nectar for hummingbirds, butterflies, and
bees are additional bonuses. Their roots keep soil in place and
increase water movement into soil to help reduce surface runoff
from storms.
Money and energy can be saved by planting trees. The
shade provided by deciduous trees on the southern and western
sides of your home can reduce indoor temperatures by 8 to 10
degrees during the summer and cut air conditioning costs up to
30 percent. In the winter, their leafless branches allow the sun
to warm our homes. When trees are used as a windbreak on
the north side of a home to intercept cold winter winds, they
can help save 10 to 50 percent in heating costs.
To keep our urban forests healthy and able to provide
all these benefits, we must give their trees regular care. This
includes planting, maintenance, and protection. Professional
urban foresters plant and care for trees in a diverse range of
landscapes and neighborhoods.
As trees age, they need to be examined for structural
defects that may make them hazardous to people or property if
they fall or break apart. While some tree failures are unpredict-
able, many can be prevented if we learn how to recognize com-
mon structural defects in trees. With proper care, trees in our
urban forest become living investments that increase in value
with each passing year.
As you conduct
your inspection,
stay safe and out
of harm’s way. Do
not disturb any
trees; stand back
to get a good view
from afar of the
canopy and trunk
of the trees you
inspect. Be aware
of your surround-
ings and what is
hanging overhead.


FORESTRY 65
.Why Manage Forests?
Identifying Hazardous Trees
These steps can help you list trees in your neighborhood, camp, or rec-
reation area that may be hazardous to safety or surrounding property.
Systematically inspect each tree from top to bottom for the following:
• Broken, rotting, hanging, or dead branches and twigs, in particular
those large enough to cause injury or damage. Check for branches
that have already fallen and leaves of an unusual color or size.
• Anything interfering with a tree’s growth (e.g., electrical lines overhead).
• Whether the tree has been heavily pruned.
• Cracks or splits in the trunk (especially where branches are attached),
open cavities, and rotting—all compromise a tree’s ability to
weather storms.
• If the tree is leaning or has any exposed roots, wet areas, or a shallow
mound of soil near the base; cracks that extend beyond the bark and
into the wood—all are signs of a weakened tree.
• Human activity, such as movement of sidewalks, pavement, or soil
surrounding the tree; nearby construction; and change in the sur-
rounding landscape can affect a tree’s health.
• Root problems at the base—damage from rodents, a soil mound, soil
cracking near the root collar, mushrooms growing.
• If nearby trees are leaning, look diseased, or have fallen over and died.
You may be able to help save an ailing tree or help prevent a tree hazard.
• Remove the target (furniture, automobile, etc.) from the tree’s path.
• Don’t overprune; hire an arborist if you have never pruned a tree.
• If necessary, support the tree with cables and braces to increase
its stability.
• Provide routine care (water, mulch, prune; fertilize if recommended by
an arborist) and regularly inspect your trees.
• Remove any tree that cannot be saved or may cause a hazard that
cannot be otherwise prevented. To encourage sustainability, plant a
new tree in a good spot.





FORESTRY 67
.Fire
Fire
Fire can be useful in forest management when it is prescribed
(planned ahead of time to attain a certain goal), but fire that is
not prescribed—a wildfire—can damage whole forests.
Wildfire
Nearly 9 out of 10 forest fires are caused by people who have
been careless. Only one wildfire out of 10 is caused by lightning.
Regardless of what causes them, wildfires can leave great scars
on the countryside by destroying trees, brush, grass, and even
the fertile top layers of the soil.
Once a fire starts, the rate at which it spreads depends on
the type of fuel, the weather, and the topography of the land.
Flash fuels such as dry grass, leaves, and twigs burn easily and
quickly. Green and wet fuels burn more slowly. The more dry
fuel there is in the forest, the faster a fire will spread.
Weather conditions also affect how fast and how far a fire
spreads. Sunshine dries fuels. On the other hand, rain dampens
fuels and makes them burn more slowly if they burn at all.
Perhaps the most critical weather factor, though, is wind. Wind
can dry out fuels, fan a fire so that it burns faster, blow flames
toward more fuel, and carry sparks that set new fires. Air tem-
perature and humidity also are important. If the air is hot and
the amount of moisture in the air is low, fuels can dry out and
burn more quickly.
The shape of the land also affects the movement of a fire.
The steeper a hill, for instance, the faster a fire will move up it.
Fires burn more slowly downhill, though burning pinecones or
logs can roll downward and ignite new fires at the bottom of
the slope. Fuels on south-facing slopes might burn faster than
those on north-facing slopes, because they have been exposed
to more sunlight, which has dried them. Firebreaks such as
roads, streams, rock cliffs, and bare earth can slow or stop the
spread of fire.


68 FORESTRY
Fire.
The worst wildfires usually occur when flames climb into
the forest canopy. These crown fires can spread quickly and,
if not contained, might damage thousands of acres of forest.
Wildfires can destroy the ground litter, which acts as a protective
soil covering.
Intense fires can change the composition of soil, causing
it to repel water. Water rapidly runs off this soil into streams
and reservoirs and may cause floods. It also washes sediment,
ashes, and debris from the burned areas into watersheds.
Most fish cannot live in waters that become polluted with ash.
Woodland fire temporarily destroys food supplies that animals
and birds depend on, and it often makes an area unsuitable
for outdoor recreation.
Less harmful are surface fires that stay in the lower strata of
a forest. Moving more slowly and at lower overall temperatures
than crown fires, surface fires can clear out brush, small trees,
and deadwood without killing large trees or sterilizing the soil.
A surface fire might allow the forest to recover and become
even more vigorous the following spring or summer.
Surface fires caused by lightning have a natural role to play
in many forests by consuming much of the brush and deadwood
that choke a forest’s understory. Nutrients are released in the soil,
providing a fertile bed for new growth. Mature trees can often
withstand the heat of occasional fires, because their bark is dense
enough to prevent them from being seriously damaged.


FORESTRY 69
.Fire
Fire does have some beneficial aspects for forests. The cones
of some pines open only after they have been exposed to the
heat of a fire. The cones germinate in the ashes and send up
saplings as a new forest begins. In addition, animals can move
more freely through land opened by fire and can graze on the
newly sprouted vegetation. Even when large trees are completely
burned, the land is left ready for the process of forest succession
to begin once more.
Much modern concern about fires results from past
management practices that sought to eliminate all fires. That
approach often allowed deadwood to build up on forest floors.
When a fire does break out and burns into that deadwood, it
may be hotter and more destructive than if the natural cycles of
fire and regeneration had been allowed to play themselves out.
Fire sometimes can creep into the roots of a tree, where it can smolder
underground for long periods of time before resurfacing and blazing
again. This is more common in species of trees with high levels of pitch
(a flammable secretion) such as Douglas fir and ponderosa pine.
This prescribed forest fire helped clear the forest’s understory to provide room for
new growth.


70 FORESTRY
Fire.
Prescribed Fire
To lessen the danger of devastating fires, foresters might inten-
tionally set fire to an area. This prescribed burning is carefully
planned, and the fire is set according to a prescription written
for the conditions that exist and the objectives to be achieved.
The fire exposes the soil, releases
nutrients into the soil, eliminates
some insects and diseases, and
removes undesirable trees or
brush. The heat also can open up
fallen cones.
Prescribed burns made on
a regular basis—every three to
five years, for example—can
reduce dried leaves and brush
that, if allowed to accumulate,
could eventually feed a very
damaging wildfire. Wildfires are
uncontrolled fires, and they can
be avoided or made less severe by
prescribed burning.
Preventing Wildfires
The easiest fire to fight is the one
that does not start. You can help
educate the public about wildfire
prevention by taking part in fire-
prevention campaigns conducted
by wood-products companies,
professional foresters, fire wardens, and others. The Leave No
Trace principle of minimizing the impact of campfires also is
an important guideline for preventing fires that would pose a
threat to a forest.
In addition to following the Leave No Trace principles, use
care in burning anything. Know your state laws about burning
brush and debris. If your state requires a permit, you can get
one from your local fire warden or ranger. Have plenty of help,
tools, and water near the fire, and never burn anything outside
on hot, dry, or windy days.


FORESTRY 71
.Fire
If you discover a fire, do not put yourself in danger. Notify
the fire department, the police, or a ranger district office.
Firefighters know that to control any fire, it must be stopped
from spreading and then put out completely. Since fuel, air, and
heat must be present before a fire will burn, trained firefighters
will attack a fire in one or all of the following ways.
• Remove the fuel supply. Using rakes, shovels, or heavy
equipment, firefighters create a trench of bare earth around
the fire. If bushes are nearby, they clear them away so the
bushes will not burn or fall across the trench.
• Cut off the air to smother the fire. Firefighters working on the
ground can throw dirt on the fire. Aircraft can spread chemi-
cal fire retardants or water on the flames.
• Lower the heat. Fires near roads can be fought using water
sprayed from fire trucks. A helicopter slinging a 200-gallon
bucket from a cable is sometimes brought in to dump water
on the flames of more remote fires. The pilot can refill the
bucket from the air by lowering it into a lake. Firefighters on
the ground can cool burning fuel by scattering shovelfuls of
dirt and mixing it well with the embers.
Leave No Trace:
Minimize Campfire Impacts
• Use a lightweight camp stove for cooking, and
enjoy a candle lantern for light.
• Where fires are permitted, use established fire rings.
• Keep fires small. Only use sticks from the ground
that can be broken by hand.
• Burn all wood to ash, and make sure all campfires
are cold out.





FORESTRY 73
.Careers in Forestry
Careers in Forestry
Forestry is the science, art, and practice of managing and using
for human benefit the natural resources that occur in association
with forests. Ensuring that our forests are nurtured and used in
sustainable ways that will keep them healthy requires knowledge
of many disciplines, including economics, biology, chemistry,
physics, engineering, and even psychology.
Foresters are trained in recognizing the interrelationships of
soil, air, water, trees and other plants, wild and domestic animals,
and humans. They direct land surveys, road construction, and the
planting and harvesting of trees. They help prevent damage from
insects, wildlife, diseases, and fires. They might plan recreational
uses of forest lands or supervise timber-harvesting crews, firefight-
ers, and tree planters. Many foresters are employed by private
landowners, government agencies, and forest-products companies.
Others are researchers and educators.
Those who manage timberlands must be skilled in balancing
the needs of humans with those of forest ecosystems. They know
how to encourage the growth of trees, and they understand how
harvesting, fire, urban development, and other influences can
change a forest. They also realize the importance of good
communication skills.
Training
Most foresters have at least a bachelor’s degree in forestry.
Many have master’s and doctorate degrees. Forestry students
take biology and physical and social science classes. Then
comes intensive study of ecology, forest economics, forest
protection, silviculture, resources management and use,
dendrology (classification of trees), and forest measurement,
policy, and administration.


74 FORESTRY
Careers in Forestry.
Opportunities
Thousands of professional foresters are employed in the United
States, and about half of them work for public agencies.
Another third work for industrial concerns. Most of the others
are educators, researchers, and private consultants.
Federal Agencies. The USDA Forest Service employs more
foresters than the other federal branches. Natural Resources
Conservation Service of the U.S. Department of Agriculture,
Bureau of Land Management, National Park Service, Bureau
of Indian Affairs, and the Fish and Wildlife Service of the U.S.
Department of the Interior all employ foresters. The departments
of Defense, State, and Commerce, the Internal Revenue Service,
the Environmental Protection Agency, and other government
agencies also rely on foresters.
Beginning foresters are often assigned to ranger districts in
national forests. They enforce the law; conduct timber inventories
and boundary surveys; help control damage by fire, insects, and
diseases; conduct reforestation, timber marking, log scaling, and
range-forage surveys; and assist with recreational development.
They may eventually supervise crews, administer programs, and
oversee ranger districts and entire forests. Research foresters can
rise to the top of the federal scale through work in regional forest
and range experiment stations.
State, County, and City Governments. Being a forester for state
government can include fire protection on public and private
forests, management of publicly owned forests, management
and marketing assistance to private landowners, conservation
education, public relations, and implementation of state forest
practice acts. Urban foresters protect and improve the vegetation
in and around populated areas.
The professional foresters you meet as you earn
the Forestry merit badge will be excellent sources
of information about forestry careers. They can help
you learn about the education that is needed and the
experience you must have.


FORESTRY 75
.Careers in Forestry
Private Industry. Industrial foresters work for corporations.
They plan and direct tree planting, determine timber-harvesting
schedules, supervise operations, and help protect the timber
from fire, insects, disease, and theft. They must balance the
growing of trees for harvest while protecting other important
forest values.
Education. Foresters also work as educators at the nation’s
colleges and universities. They frequently conduct research in
conjunction with teaching. Extension foresters work with U.S.
land-grant universities to provide information and guidance to
private forest owners and the general public.
Consultants. Consulting foresters advise public and private
forest owners about timber-management plans and practices.
They appraise and market timber, and advise on forestland
investments, among other services.
Other Opportunities. Other opportunities for foresters include
work in wildlife, range, and watershed management; in some
types of engineering; in park planning, development, and
administration; in economics, landscape architecture, public
relations, and real estate development; in equipment sales;
and in law.
Foresters in
industry also fill
positions indirectly
related to
technical forestry.
They may be in
sales; they may
procure wood
from landowners
and farmers;
or they may be
involved in the
manufacturing of
wood products.
You and the Future
of Our Forests
As you complete the requirements for the Forestry
merit badge, you will discover that the primary goal
of forestry is to ensure the sustainability of forest
ecosystems. You can think of forest resources as
being on loan to those who are alive today. Citizens
have the responsibility of using and caring for these
magnificent resources in ways that will sustain their
vitality. In the decisions you make today as a hiker
and camper and, perhaps, in a future career as a
forester, you can have a tremendous influence on
protecting and using forests wisely.


76 FORESTRY
Careers in Forestry.
Visiting a Managed
Forestry Operation
Your merit badge counselor and parents can help
you arrange a visit to a managed forest, a logging
operation, or a manufacturing plant that uses
wood products. You can see for yourself how the
work of forestry is carried out. You also will have
opportunities to visit with forestry professionals and
learn more about their backgrounds, training, and
responsibilities. Plan the trip well in advance so that
the forestry professionals will have time to prepare
for your visit. Get permission in advance if you want
to take photographs during your visit.
Do some research on the forest, logging
operation, or manufacturing plant you plan to visit,
and think about some of the questions you want
answered. In a managed forest, for example, you
can find out about the management objectives
and the forestry techniques used to achieve those
objectives. You might also research or ask about
the species of trees grown, the silvicultural system
used, or whether replanting is done with seedlings
or seeds.


FORESTRY 77
.Careers in Forestry
Write down your
observations
about your visit
while they are
still fresh in your
mind. That way
you will have the
information you
need to write a
report about your
findings. Be sure
to write and send
a letter thanking
those you visited
for taking the
time to show
you around.
In a manufacturing plant you can discover what
products are being made that include raw materials
from forests. Where did the raw materials originate?
How are the materials transported to the plant?
What is the process for turning them into finished
products? What is done with the by-products of the
manufacturing process?
At a logging operation, you can ask where the trees being
harvested are going and how they will be used. Explore the
ways a harvest is being conducted and what the future holds
for that portion of the forest.


78 FORESTRY
Forestry Resources.
Forestry Resources
Scouting Literature
Trees pocket guide; Environmental
Science, Fire Safety, Fish and Wildlife
Management, Gardening, Insect Study,
Mammal Study, Nature, Plant Science,
Soil and Water Conservation, and
Sustainability merit badge pamphlets
Books
Burton, L. DeVere. Introduction to
Forestry Science, 3rd ed. Cengage
Learning, 2012.
Cassie, Brian, and Marjorie Burns.
National Audubon Society First Field
Guide: Trees. Scholastic Inc., 1999.
Day, Trevor. Taiga, 2nd ed. Raintree
Publishers, 2010.
Edlin, Herbert L. What Wood Is That:
A Manual of Wood Identification.
Viking Books, 1998.
Little, Elbert Luther. National Audubon
Society Field Guide to Trees: Eastern
Region. Knopf, 1980.
———. National Audubon Society Field
Guide to Trees: Western Region.
Knopf, 1980.
Perry, David A. Forest Ecosystems, 2nd
ed. Johns Hopkins University Press,
2008.
Petrides, George A. A Field Guide
to Eastern Trees. Houghton
Mifflin, 1998.
———. A Field Guide to Trees
and Shrubs, 2nd ed. Houghton
Mifflin, 1973.
———. A Field Guide to Western Trees.
Houghton Mifflin, 1998.
Raphael, Ray. More Tree Talk: The
People, Politics, and Economics of
Timber. Island Press, 1994.
Raven, Catherine L. Forestry (The Green
World Series). Chelsea House, 2006.
True, Alianor, ed. Wildfire: A Reader.
Island Press. 2001.
Willie, Christopher M. Opportunities in
Forestry Careers, rev. ed. VGM Career
Books, 2004.
Organizations and Websites
Alliance for Community Trees
actrees.org
American Forest and Paper Association
Telephone: 202-463-2700
www.afandpa.org
Arbor Day Foundation
Toll-free telephone: 888-448-7337
www.arborday.org
Environmental Protection Agency
www.epa.gov
With your parent’s permission,
visit Scouting America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org,
for a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


FORESTRY 79
.Forestry Resources
Identification Keys
www.backyardnature.net/keys.htm
National Association of
State Foresters
Telephone: 202-624-5415
www.stateforesters.org
Natural Resources
Conservation Service
www.nrcs.usda.gov
Society of American Foresters
Telephone: 301-897-8720
www.eforester.org
U.S. Department of Agriculture
Forest Service
www.fs.fed.us
Acknowledgments
Scouting America thanks Jim James,
director of Weyerhaeuser Company’s
Environmental Affairs, Sustainable
Forestry, for his assistance with the
2005 edition of the Forestry merit badge
pamphlet.
Scouting America is grateful to
the men and women serving on the
National Merit Badge Subcommittee for
the improvements made in updating
this pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration Credits
Fred Baker, Utah State University,
Bugwood.org, courtesy—page 33
(Dutch elm disease)
Scott Bauer, USDA Agricultural
Research Service, courtesy—
page 50 (bee)
T.W. Bretz, USDA Forest Service,
Bugwood.org, courtesy—page 34
Bill Cook, Michigan State University,
Bugwood.org, courtesy—page 15
(larch, tamarack, eastern hemlock)
Carl Dennis, Auburn University,
courtesy—page 20 (magnolia)
Peggy Greb, USDA Agricultural
Resource Service, Bugwood.org,
courtesy—page 25 (star thistle)
Ken Hammond, USDA, courtesy—
page 13 (leaves)
Stanislaw Kinelski, Bugwood.org,
courtesy—page 31 (bark)
Library of Congress Prints and
Photographs Division, courtesy—
page 47
Brian Lockhart, USDA Forest Service,
Bugwood.org, courtesy—page 16
Ron Long, Simon Fraser University,
Bugwood.org, courtesy—
page 31 (beetle)
Philip McDonald, USDA Forest Service,
Bugwood.org, courtesy—page 51
Minnesota Department of Natural
Resources Archive, Minnesota
Department of Natural Resources,
Bugwood.org, courtesy—page 32
(caterpillar, ash tree)
National Interagency Fire Center
Archive, Bugwood.org, courtesy—
page 66 (fire)
Joseph O’Brien, USDA Forest Service,
Bugwood.org, courtesy—
page 33 (blister rust)
Dave Powell, USDA Forest Service,
Bugwood.org, courtesy—
page 15 (Douglas fir)
RealWorld Imagery Inc., courtesy—
page 14 (Ponderosa pine, lodgepole
pine, Colorado blue spruce)
R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company
Slide Set, R.J. Reynolds Tobacco
Company, Bugwood.org, courtesy—
cover (diseased leaves)
Howard Russell, Michigan State
University, Bugwood.org, courtesy—
page 32 (emerald ash borer)


Forestry Resources.
USDA APHIS PPQ Archive, USDA
APHIS PPQ, Bugwood.org,
courtesy—page 32 (gypsy moth–
diseased tree)
USDA Forest Service/Ogden Archive,
USDA Forest Service, Bugwood.org,
courtesy—page 70
USDA Forest Service—Region 8
Archive, USDA Forest Service,
Bugwood.org, courtesy—page 32
(gypsy moth)
USDA Natural Resources Conservation
Service, courtesy—pages 20 and 43
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service,
courtesy—pages 49, 53, 54
(harvested forest), and 72 (all)
Dale Wade, Rx Fire Doctor, Bugwood.
org, courtesy—page 69
Wikipedia.org/Matt Lavin—page 20
(American elm)
Wikipedia.org/Bruce Marlin—page 19
(American beech)
Paul Wray, Iowa State University,
Bugwood.org, courtesy—pages 15
(balsam), 18 (bitternut hickory),
and 21 (sugar maple, buckeye)
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned are the property of or are
protected by the Scouting America.
Daniel Giles—page 13 (conifer)
John McDearmon—all illustrations on
pages 29, 40–42, 54–57, 60–61,
and 63
John McDearmon and Julie Moore—
page 12
Brian Payne—pages 6 (Scouts),
25 (horseback riders), 28 (all), and 30
Randy Piland—pages 26 and 44
Subscribe today at go.scoutlife.org/subscribe
Use promo code SLMBP15 to get a special
print + digital bundle offer priced just for Scouts!