REPTILE AND
AMPHIBIAN STUDY

STEM-Based

BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES

REPTILE AND
AMPHIBIAN STUDY

“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”

Reptile and Amphibian Study
1. Describe the identifying characteristics of six species of reptiles and four
species of amphibians found in the United States. For any four of these, make
sketches from your own observations or take photographs. Show markings,
color patterns, or other characteristics that are important in the identification
of each of the four species. Discuss the habits and habitats of all 10 species.
2. Discuss with your merit badge counselor the approximate number of species and
general geographic distribution of reptiles and amphibians in the United States.
Prepare a list of the most common species found in your local area or state.
3. Describe the main differences between
(a) Amphibians and reptiles
(b) Alligators and crocodiles
(c) Toads and frogs
(d) Salamanders and lizards
(e) Snakes and lizards
4. Explain how reptiles and amphibians are an important component of the
natural environment. List four species that are officially protected by the
federal government or by the state you live in, and tell why each is protected.
List three species of reptiles and three species of amphibians found in your
local area that are not protected. Discuss the food habits of all 10 species.
5. Describe how reptiles and amphibians reproduce.
6. From observation, describe how snakes move forward. Describe the functions
of the muscles, ribs, and belly plates.
7. Describe in detail six venomous snakes and the one venomous lizard found in
the United States. Describe their habits and geographic range. Tell what you
should do in case of a bite by a venomous species.
8. Do ONE of the following:
(a) Maintain one or more reptiles or amphibians for at least a month. Record
food accepted, eating methods, changes in coloration, shedding of skins,
and general habits; or keep the eggs of a reptile from the time of laying until
hatching; or keep the eggs of an amphibian from the time of laying until their
transformation into tadpoles (frogs) or larvae (salamanders). Whichever you
chose, keep records of and report to your counselor how you cared for your
animal/eggs/larvae to include lighting, habitat, temperature and humidity
maintenance, and any veterinary care requirements.
(b) Choose a reptile or amphibian that you can observe at a local zoo,
aquarium, nature center, or other such exhibit (such as your classroom
or school). Study the specimen weekly for a period of three months. At
each visit, sketch the specimen in its captive habitat and note any changes
202

in its coloration, shedding of skins, and general habits and behavior. Discuss
with your counselor how the animal you observed was cared for to include
its housing and habitat, how the lighting, temperature, and humidity were
maintained, and any veterinary care requirements.
Find out, either from information you locate on your own or by talking to the
caretaker, what this species eats and what are its native habitat and home
range, preferred climate, average life expectancy, and natural predators.
Also identify any human-caused threats to its population and any laws that
protect the species and its habitat. After the observation period, share what
you have learned with your counselor.
9. Do TWO of the following:
(a) Identify at night three kinds of toads or frogs by their voices. Imitate the
song of each for your counselor. Stalk each with a flashlight and discover
how each sings and from where.
(b) Identify by sight eight species of reptiles or amphibians.
(c) Using visual aids, give a brief talk to a small group on three different
reptiles and amphibians.
10. Tell five superstitions or false beliefs about reptiles and amphibians and give
a correct explanation for each. Give seven examples of unusual behavior or
other true facts about reptiles and amphibians.
NOTE: Scouts must not use venomous reptiles in fulfilling requirement 8a. Species listed by federal or state law as
endangered, protected, or threatened must not be used as live specimens in completing requirement 8a. When you
decide keeping your specimen is no longer possible or desired, be sure to find another appropriate home for it or
return it to the wild at the location of capture. Check with your merit badge counselor for those instances where the
return of these specimens would not be appropriate.
Under the Endangered Species Act of 1973, some plants and animals are, or may be, protected by federal law. The
same ones and/or others may be protected by state law. Be sure that you do not collect protected species.
Your state may require that you purchase and carry a license to collect certain species. Check with the wildlife and fish
and game officials in your state regarding species regulations before you begin to collect.

203

.Reptile and Amphibian Study Resources

Reptile and Amphibian
Study Resources
Scouting Literature
Reptiles and Amphibians pocket
guide; Bird Study, Fish and Wildlife
Management, Fishing, Fly-Fishing,
Hiking, Insect Study, Mammal Study,
and Nature merit badge pamphlets
Visit the Boy Scouts of America’s
official retail website at http://
www.scoutstuff.org for a complete
listing of all merit badge pamphlets
and other helpful Scouting
materials and supplies.

Field Guides to North American
Reptiles and Amphibians
Behler, John L., and F. Wayne King.
The Audubon Society Field Guide
to North American Reptiles and
Amphibians. Knopf, 1988.
Conant, Roger, and Joseph T. Collins.
A Field Guide to Reptiles and
Amphibians of Eastern and
Central North America, 4th ed.
Houghton Mifflin, 1998.
Smith, Hobart M., and Edmund
D. Brodie Jr. A Guide to Field
Identification: Reptiles of North
America. Golden Guides from St.
Martin's Press, 2014.

Stebbins, Robert C. A Field Guide to
Western Reptiles and Amphibians,
3rd ed. Houghton Mifflin, 2003.
Tyning, Thomas F. Stokes Guide to
Amphibians and Reptiles. Little,
Brown, 1990.

Natural History Guides
Ernst, Carl H. Venomous Reptiles of the
United States, Canada, and Northern
Mexico: Crotalus (Volume 2). Johns
Hopkins University Press, 2011.
Ernst, Carl H., and Roger W. Barbour.
Snakes of Eastern North America.
George Mason University, 1989.
Ernst, Carl H., Roger W. Barbour, and
Jeffery E. Lovich. Turtles of the
United States and Canada, 2nd ed.
Smithsonian, 2009.
Greene, Harry W. Snakes: The Evolution
of Mystery in Nature. University of
California Press, 2000.
Hofrichter, Robert. Amphibians: The
World of Frogs, Toads, Salamanders
and Newts. Firefly Books, 2000.
Petranka, James W. Salamanders of
the United States and Canada.
Smithsonian, 2010.

REPTILE AND AMPHIBIAN STUDY

77

Reptile and Amphibian Study Resources.

Ross, Charles A. Crocodiles and Alligators.
Facts on File, 1989.

Organizations and Websites

Zug, George R., Carl H. Ernst, et al.
Smithsonian Answer Book: Snakes, 2nd
ed. Smithsonian Books, 2015.

American Museum of Natural History
Central Park West at 79th Street
New York, NY 10024-5192
Website: http://www.amnh.org

Caring for Reptiles and Amphibians
in Captivity

American Society of Ichthyologists and
Herpetologists
Website: http://www.asih.org/jobs

Bartlett, R.D. The 25 Best Reptile and
Amphibian Pets. Barron’s Educational
Series, 2006.
Frye, Fredric L. A Practical Guide for
Feeding Captive Reptiles. Krieger
Publishing, 1991.
Mattison, Christopher. The Care of Reptiles
and Amphibians in Captivity. Blandford
Press, 1987.
Rossi, John V. Snakes of the United States
and Canada: Keeping Them Healthy in
Captivity. Krieger, 1992.

Sounds of Frogs and Toads
These are records or tapes of the calls of a
great many of our native frogs and toads.
Bogert, Charles M. Sounds of North
American Frogs: The Biological
Significance of Voice in Frogs. CD or
download. Smithsonian Folkways
Recordings, 1998. Website: http://www.
folkways.si.edu.

AZA FrogWatch USA Program
Association of Zoos and Aquariums
8403 Colesville Road, Suite 710
Silver Spring, MD 20910
Website: http://www.aza.org/frogwatch
National Fish and Wildlife Foundation
1133 15th St. NW, Suite 1100
Washington, DC 20005
Website: http://www.nfwf.org
National Geographic Society
P.O. Box 98199
Washington, DC 20090-8199
Website:
http://www.nationalgeographic.com
National Wildlife Federation
11100 Wildlife Center Drive
Reston, VA 20190
Website: http://www.nwf.org
North American Amphibian Monitoring
Program
Website: http://www.pwrc.usgs.gov/
naamp

Elliott, Lang. The Frogs and Toads of North
America: A Comprehensive Guide to
Their Identification, Behavior, and
Calls. Book and CD. Houghton Mifflin
Harcourt, 2009.

Smithsonian National Zoological Park
Website: http://nationalzoo.si.edu

Kellogg, Peter P., and Arthur A. Allen.
Voices of the Night. CD. Library of
Natural Sounds, 1982. Cornell Lab of
Ornithology, 159 Sapsucker Woods
Road, Ithaca, NY 14850. Website: http://
www.birds.cornell.edu.

U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
1849 C St., NW
Washington, DC 20240
Website: http://www.fws.gov

78

REPTILE AND AMPHIBIAN STUDY

Society for the Study of
Amphibians and Reptiles
Website: http://www.ssarherps.org

