Dr. Bernard Harris
Supernova Award Requirements
1. Complete any three of the Scouts BSA Nova awards. (Note: These may be done at any time after
becoming a Scouts BSA member.)
2. Earn the Scholarship merit badge.
3. Earn four of the Supernova approved merit badges from the list below. (Note: These may be
earned at any time after becoming a member of Scouts BSA.)
4. Complete TWO Supernova activity topics, one each in two different STEM areas.
5. Participate in a local, state, or national science fair or mathematics competition OR in any
equally challenging STEM-oriented competition or workshop approved by your mentor. An
example of this would be an X-Prize type competition.
Animal Science Environmental Science Plant Science
Archaeology Farm Mechanics Programming
Architecture Fish and Wildlife Management Pulp and Paper
Astronomy Forestry Radio
Automotive Maintenance Game Design Reptile and Amphibian Study
Aviation Gardening Robotics
Bird Study Geocaching Scuba Diving
Chemistry Geology Signs, Signals, and Codes
Composite Materials Insect Study Soil and Water Conservation
Dentistry Inventing Space Exploration
Digital Technology Mammal Study Surveying
Drafting Medicine Sustainability
Electricity Mining in Society Veterinary Medicine
Electronics Nature Weather
Energy Nuclear Science Welding
Engineering Oceanography


6. Do ONE of the following:
A. With your parent’s permission and your mentor’s approval, spend at least one day
“shadowing” a local scientist or engineer and report on your experience and what you
learned about STEM careers to your mentor.
B. Learn about a career that is heavily involved with STEM. Make a presentation to your
mentor about what you learned.
7. Working with your mentor, organize and present a Nova award or other STEM-related program
to a Cub Scout den or pack meeting. Be sure to receive approval from the appropriate unit
leader and agree on a time and place for the presentation. If a Cub Scout den or pack is not
available, your presentation may be given to another youth group, such as your troop or at your
place of worship.
8. Review the scientific method (you may know this as the scientific process) and note how
scientists establish hypotheses, theories, and laws. Compare how the establishment of “facts” or
“rules” using the scientific method differs from the establishment of “facts” or “rules” in other
environments, such as legal, cultural, religious, military, mathematical, or social environments.
Then do the following:
A. Choose a modern scientific subject with at least two competing theories on the subject and
learn as much as possible about each theory.
B. Analyze the competing theories, decide which one is most convincing to you, and explain
why to your mentor.
C. Make a presentation to your mentor that describes the controversy, the competing
theories, and your conclusions about how the scientific method can or cannot contribute to
the resolution of the controversy.
9. Submit your Supernova Award application to the district or council Nova or advancement
committee for approval.