TRAFFIC
SAFETY

BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES

TR AFFIC SAFETY

“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”

Traffic Safety
1. Do the following:
(a) Describe the top 10 mistakes new drivers frequently make. Name the two
items you are required by law to carry with you whenever you operate a
motor vehicle.
(b) Describe how alcohol and other drugs affect the human body and why a
person should never drink and drive, or drive while under the influence of
any mind-altering substances including prescription drugs, cold medications,
and illicit drugs. For the state where you live, find out what is the legal blood
alcohol concentration and the consequences for driving while intoxicated or
driving under the influence. Find out what the open-container law is in
your state.
(c) Describe at least four factors to be considered in the design of a road or
highway. Explain how roadside hazards and road conditions contribute to the
occurrence and seriousness of traffic crashes.
(d) Explain why a driver who is fatigued or distracted should not operate a
motor vehicle. List five common distractions, explain how driver distractions
contribute to traffic accidents, and tell how drivers can minimize distractions.
Describe how volunteer drivers can plan to be alert when transporting
Scouting participants.
2. Do the following:
(a) Demonstrate how to properly wear a lap or shoulder belt. Explain why it
is important for drivers and passengers to wear safety belts at all times.

(b) List five safety features found in motor vehicles besides occupant restraint
systems. Describe each safety feature, how each works, and how each contributes to safety.
3. Do the following:
(a) Using your family car or another vehicle, demonstrate that all lights and
lighting systems in the vehicle are working. Describe the function and explain
why each type of light is important to safe driving.
(b) Using your family car or another vehicle, demonstrate how to check tire
pressure and identify the correct tire pressure for the vehicle. Explain why
proper tire pressure is important to safe driving.
(c) Demonstrate a method to check for adequate tire tread. Explain why
proper tire tread is important to safe driving.
(d) Demonstrate with a smear-and-clear test if the windshield wiper blades
will clear the windshield completely or need to be replaced. Describe
instances in good and bad weather when windshield washers are important to
safe driving.
4. Do the following:
(a) In a location away from traffic hazards, measure with a tape measure—
not in a car—and mark off with stakes the distance that a car will travel during the time needed for decision and reaction, and the braking distances
necessary to stop a car traveling 30, 50, and 70 miles per hour on dry, level
pavement. Discuss how environmental factors such as bad weather and road
conditions will affect the distance.
(b) Describe the difference in nighttime visibility between a properly lit bicycle and rider (or a pedestrian) wearing reflective material and a bicycle and
rider with no lights (or a pedestrian) dressed in dark clothing, without
reflective material.
(c) Explain how color and shape are used to help road users recognize and
understand the information presented on traffic and roadway signs. Explain
the purpose of different types of signs, signals, and pavement markings.
(d) Describe at least three examples of traffic laws that apply to drivers of
motor vehicles and that bicyclists must also obey.
5. Do ONE of the following:
(a) Interview a traffic law enforcement officer in your community to identify
what three traffic safety problems the officer is most concerned about. Discuss
with your merit badge counselor possible ways to solve one of
those problems.
(b) Using the internet (with your parent’s permission), visit five websites that
cover safe driving for teenagers. Then, in a group session with at least three
teenagers and your counselor, discuss what you have learned.
(c) Initiate and organize an activity or event to demonstrate the importance of
traffic safety.

(d) Accompanied by an adult and a buddy, pick a safe place to observe traffic
at a controlled intersection (traffic signal or stop sign) on three separate days
and at three different times of the day, for 30 minutes on each visit. At this
intersection, survey violations that might occur. These violations might
include (but are not limited to) running a red light or stop sign, speeding,
using a cell phone while driving, or occupants not wearing their seat belts.
Count the number of violations. Record in general terms the approximate
age of the people you observed. Keep track of the total number of vehicles
observed so that you can determine the percentage of compliance vs.
violations. Discuss your findings with your merit badge counselor.

.Traffic Safety Resources

Traffic Safety Resources
Scouting Literature
Automotive Maintenance, Citizenship in
the Community, Cycling, Emergency
Preparedness, Engineering, First Aid,
Railroading, Safety, and Truck
Transportation merit badge pamphlets
Visit the Boy Scouts of America’s
official retail website at http://
www.scoutstuff.org for a complete listing of all merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.

Goodman, Karen, and Kirk Simon. Safe
Road Home: Stop Your Teen From
Drinking and Driving. Sterling, 2005.
Hewitt, Ben. New Cyclist’s Handbook.
Rodale Inc., 2005.
James, Leon, and Diane Nahl. Road
Rage and Aggressive Driving:
Steering Clear of Highway Warfare.
Prometheus Books, 2000.
Johnson, Margaret, Owen Crabb,
Arthur Opfer, and Randal Thiel.
Drive Right, updated 10th ed.
Pearson Learning, 2007.

Aaseng, Nathan. Teens and Drunk
Driving. Lucent Books, 2000.

Pavelka, Ed, and Editors of Bicycling
Magazine. Bicycling Magazine’s
Complete Book of Road Cycling
Skills. Rodale Inc., 1998.

Alliance for Safe Driving.
License to Drive, 2nd ed. Cengage
Learning, 2005.

Pease, Robert A. How to Drive Into
Accidents and How Not To.
Pease Publishing, 1998.

Berardelli, Phil. Safe Young Drivers:
A Guide for Parents and Teens, 4th
ed. Mountain Lake Press, 2008.

Scotti, Anthony J. Professional Driving
Techniques: The Essential Guide to
Operating a Motor Vehicle With
Confidence and Skill, 4th ed.
PhotoGraphics Publishing, 2007.

Books

Booley, Theresa Anne. Alcohol
and Your Liver: The Incredibly
Disgusting Story. Rosen, 2000.
Burke, Edmund R. Serious Cycling, 2nd
ed. Human Kinetics, 2002.
Elkins, Brett, and Bruce Elkins. Teach
Your Teen to Drive . . . and Stay
Alive. CreateSpace Independent
Publishing Platform, 2012.

Smith, Timothy C. Crash-Proof Your
Kids: Make Your Teen a Safer,
Smarter Driver. Touchstone, 2008.
Wallack, Roy M., and Bill Katovsky.
Bike for Life. Marlowe & Co., 2015.

TRAFFIC SAFETY

77

Traffic Safety Resources.

Organizations and Websites
Information is also available from your
local police department (traffic division),
sheriff’s department (traffic division),
state police or highway patrol, city or
county prosecutor’s office, traffic court,
emergency medical services (EMS), and
state highway safety office. Check your
local telephone directory for nonemergency phone numbers and addresses.
Allstate Foundation Teen Safe
Driving Program
Website:
http://www.allstatefoundation.org/
teen-driving
American Automobile Association
Foundation for Traffic Safety
607 14th St. NW, Suite 201
Washington, DC 20005
Telephone: 202-638-5944
Website: http://www.aaafoundation.org
National Highway Traffic
Safety Administration
1200 New Jersey Ave. SE
Washington, DC 20590
Toll-free telephone: 888-327-4236
Website: http://www.nhtsa.gov

78

TRAFFIC SAFETY

National Safety Council
1121 Spring Lake Drive
Itasca, IL 60143-3201
Telephone: 630-285-1121
Website:
http://www.nsc.org/safety_road
Online Study Guide for
Student Drivers
Website:
http://www.golocalnet.net/drive/
Road Ready Teens
Website: http://www.roadreadyteens.org
Safe Kids Worldwide
1301 Pennsylvania Ave. NW, Suite 1000
Washington, DC 20004-1707
Telephone: 202-662-0600
Website: http://www.safekids.org
Teendriving.com
Website: http://www.teendriving.com
Texting & Driving . . . It Can Wait
Website: http://www.itcanwait.com
Your state department of motor
vehicles will also be a good
resource. Look in the telephone
book or, with your parent’s
permission, search the Internet.

