PAINTING

BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES

PAINTING

“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”

Painting
1. Explain the proper safety procedures to follow when preparing surfaces and
applying coatings.
2. Do the following:
(a) Explain three ways that coatings can improve a surface.
(b) Explain where you would apply enamel paint, flat paint, wood stain, and
varnish, and explain the importance of sheen.
(c) Tell why each is best for these uses.
3. Prepare and paint two different surfaces using patching materials or caulking
and the proper primers and topcoats. Suggested projects include an interior or
exterior wall, a door, a piece of furniture, a concrete wall or floor, a porch rail,
or a fence. Your counselor must preapprove the projects.
4. Prepare and paint an item using harmonizing colors that you have selected
using the color wheel in the Painting merit badge pamphlet.
5. Show the right way to use, clean, maintain, and store painting equipment.
6. Explain the importance of ladder safety, personal hygiene, and the use of personal protective equipment when painting.
7. Explain some of the environmental and health issues concerning removing
paint, applying paint, and discarding old paint.
8. Find out about career opportunities in the painting craft. Discuss the training
and experience required, and explain why this profession might interest you.

.Painting Resources

Painting Resources
Scouting Literature
Home Repairs and Safety merit
badge pamphlets
Visit the Boy Scouts of
America’s official retail website
(with your parent’s permission)
at http://www.scoutstuff.org for
a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other
helpful Scouting materials
and supplies.

Books
Becker, Holly, and Joanna Copestick.
Decorate: 1,000 Professional Design
Ideas for Every Room in Your Home.
Chronicle Books, 2011.
Better Homes and Gardens. Decorative
Paint Techniques and Ideas, 2nd ed.
Better Homes and Gardens, 2009.
Donegan, Francis. Paint Your Home:
Skills, Techniques, and Tricks of the
Trade for Professional Looking
Interior Painting. Reader’s Digest
Association Inc., 1997.

Essential Paint Techniques: Improving
Your Home With Paint Inside and
Out. This Old House Books, 2000.
McElroy, William. Painter’s Handbook.
Craftsman Book Company, 1988.
Painting and Decorating Craftsman’s
Manual and Textbook. Painting
and Decorating Contractors of
America, 1995.
Sloan, Annie. Quick and Easy Paint
Transformations: 50 Step-by-Step
Ways to Makeover Your Home for
Next to Nothing. CICO Books, 2015.
Starmer, Anna. The Color Scheme Bible:
Inspirational Palettes for Designing
Home Interiors. Firefly Books, 2012.
Travis, Debbie, and Barbara Dingle.
Debbie Travis’ Decorating Solutions:
More Than 65 Paint and Plaster
Finishes for Every Room in Your
Home. Clarkson Potter, 1999.
Wilbur, C. Keith. Homebuilding and
Woodworking in Colonial America.
Chelsea House Publishers, 1997.

Eiseman, Leatrice. Colors for Your Every
Mood: Discover Your True Decorating
Colors. Capital Books, 2000.

PAINTING

77

Painting Resources.

Organizations and Websites
American Coatings Association
Website: http://www.paint.org
The ACA is a nonprofit organization
“working to advance the needs of the
paint and coatings industry and the
professionals who work in it.” Its website
provides information about proper
paint disposal, as well as technical and
educational materials.
BEHR
Website: http://www.behr.com
This paint company’s Internet site provides helpful links that offer such things
as how-to questions and answers and a
calculator that estimates the amount of
paint needed for a particular project.
Better Homes and Gardens
Website: http://www.bhg.com/
decorating/paint/decorative-painting/
This site provides tips and techniques
for creating decorative wall patterns
and murals.
Environmental Protection Agency
Website: http://www.epa.gov/lead/
pubs/renovation.htm
This site explains the EPA’s Renovation,
Repair, and Painting rule that applies to
companies working on certain projects
that disturb lead-based paint.
Handyman Wire
Website:
http://www.handymanwire.com
This site offers “expert advice and help
for do-it-yourselfers” and allows users to
post questions to experts.
International Union of Painters
and Allied Trades
Website: http://www.iupat.org

78

PAINTING

The IUPAT is a labor union that helps
ensure safe working conditions and good
wages and benefits for its more than
160,000 members. The website provides
an extensive history of the union, union
news and events, information on training
and education in the trades, updates on
current political and community affairs,
and links to district and regional offices
across the country.
Kelly-Moore Paints
Website: http://www.kellymoore.com
National Center for Construction
Education and Research
Website: http://www.nccer.org
The NCCER develops and publishes standardized construction and maintenance
curricula, safety programs, management
education, industry image materials, and
craft skill assessments.
National Lead Information Center
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Website: http://www.epa.gov/lead/
forms/lead-hotline-national-leadinformation-center
This arm of the Environmental Protection
Agency provides painting professionals
and the general public with information
about lead hazards and their prevention.
The Old House Web
Website: http://www.oldhouseweb.com
This site gives “old-house enthusiasts”
ideas and advice on many home
improvement tasks, products,
and suppliers.

.Painting Resources

The Paint Quality Institute
Website: http://www.paintquality.com
The Paint Quality Institute was founded
to educate “consumers, contractors, and
retailers on the advantages of using the
highest quality paints and coatings.” The
website contains a wealth of information
on safety, paint ingredients, and decorative techniques.
Painting and Decorating Contractors
of America
Website: http://www.pdca.org
The official website of the Painting and
Decorating Contractors of America is a
resource for the professional painting
contractor and the home do-it-yourselfer
as well.

Acknowledgments
Thanks to Barbara Richardson and
Jerry Glica of Glidden Professional
(formerly known as ICI Dulux Paints),
Cleveland, Ohio, for their assistance
with the traditional color wheel found
in this pamphlet.
Thanks to The Sherwin-Williams
Company for use of its safety data
sheet on page 25.
The Boy Scouts of America is grateful to the men and women serving on
the Merit Badge Maintenance Task Force
for the improvements made in updating
this pamphlet.

This Old House
Website: http://www.thisoldhouse.com
The Boy Scouts of America is grateful to Charles
“Chuck” Mann IV, Chas. F. Mann Painting
Company, Toledo, Ohio, for his assistance with
revising the Painting merit badge pamphlet. This
dedicated Scouter is a former president of the
Painting and Decorating Contractors of America.
The BSA also is thankful to PDCA members Paul
Corey, Mike Sanford, Mike Ausherman, and Ken Anderson.

PAINTING

79

