SURVEYING


SURVEYING
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES


35956
ISBN 978-0-8395-3327-6
©2025 Scouting America
2025 Printing FPO
Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Surveying or check Scoutbook
for the latest requirements.


SURVEYING 3





SURVEYING 5
Contents
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Safety . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
Measurements and Instruments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
Global Positioning System Surveying . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
How Land Is Described . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
Measuring True Azimuth or Bearing. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
Surveying a Lot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
Drawing Your Map . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
Leveling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
Careers in Surveying . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
Surveying Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63


Mount Rushmore


SURVEYING 7
.Introduction
Introduction
What You Can Get From This Merit Badge
Did you know that three of the four presidents carved on
Mount Rushmore were surveyors? George Washington, Thomas
Jefferson, and Abraham Lincoln all worked as surveyors at
some point in their lives. This shows how vital landownership
has been to the development of this country.
As a landowner, you will need to know the boundary lines
of your land so that someone else does not encroach or trespass
on your property, and so you do not encroach on land that is
not yours. While earning this merit badge, you will discover
how land is measured and how it is described so that others
can know where boundary lines are. You will have a chance
to use some fine measuring instruments, apply advanced
mathematics, operate computing equipment, and create a
survey map.
For thousands
of years,
surveyors have
used certain
principles
to mark and
define property
boundaries
to coincide
with written
documents
that describe
the limits of
landownership.


8 SURVEYING
Introduction.
Surveying principles are used in mapping land features
and to lay out the positions for what is to be built on land
(buildings, parking lots, houses, etc.). Applying these principles
of measurement, mathematics, and law, along with the
professional expertise of retracing and reproducing recorded
written descriptions of land, is the responsibility of the surveyor.
While earning this badge, you will barely scratch the
surface of surveying. Becoming a surveyor generally takes
several years of study in college and even more years of
training and experience. Furthermore, surveying involves
extensive knowledge of law as well as measurements and
mathematics. Your experience might, however, entice you to
learn more about it in college or at a summer job. You also
will learn about other fields that use surveying instruments
and methods. Best of all, earning the Surveying merit badge
will expose you to hand’s-on use of surveying instruments
and methods.
Should You Earn This Badge?
If you like mathematics, you will enjoy working on this merit
badge. You will learn how to apply geometry and trigonometry
in the field. If you have not yet studied geometry in school,
you can learn how to solve surveying problems graphically.
You might also be able to learn the necessary mathematics
from your merit badge counselor. Discuss your math back-
ground with your counselor before you begin studying for
this badge.
If you like outdoor work, fine instruments, computers,
and mathematics, this badge is for you.
This badge might open doors to a summer job or
a career in surveying or related field. Years from
now, you might use surveying to lay out your
home or a campsite for your local council.
You might survey parts of the ocean floor or map
a city from space. Your counselor can tell you
more about areas of surveying that appeal to your
particular interests.


SURVEYING 9
.Introduction
Research
What do surveyors do? If your answer is, “Measure things,”
you are only partly correct. In many ways, surveyors are a
lot like detectives. When they make measurements in the
field, they are gathering evidence for the survey that they are
preparing. Most surveys require more evidence than just the
field measurements. Surveyors also gather documents such
as deeds, wills, easements, right-of-way maps, flood maps,
utility maps, and old surveys that provide information about
the land that they are surveying.
Deeds, wills, and easements describe the land and give
information about who owns it and who has rights to it. These
documents usually are found at the records office in the county
where the land is located. Sometimes, the landowner or a local
title attorney will provide these documents.
Right-of-way maps, flood maps, and utility maps help to
show what things affect the land. Right-of-way maps show any
roads on the land. Flood maps show how much of the land
lies within flood hazard areas, which can affect what you are
allowed to build on the land. Utility maps show where various
utilities are supposed to be, including those buried underground.
Surveyors gather
many documents
and talk with
several people to
understand the
character of the
land before they
begin their field
measurements.
Some of the documents surveyors gather include old surveys, deeds, and maps.


10 SURVEYING
Introduction.
Old surveys are very helpful because they show what
other surveyors have found in past years. Many states require
that surveyors file copies of their boundary surveys with the
county recorder. In states that do not have this requirement,
surveyors can find copies of old surveys by contacting
landowners and other surveyors.
Finding a Surveying Merit Badge Counselor
Your Scoutmaster can help you find a counselor for the
Surveying merit badge by contacting your local council. If no
counselor is available, your Scout leader should contact a local
surveying company or a civil engineering firm that specializes
in surveying and ask whether they can refer you to a licensed
professional surveyor to serve as a merit badge counselor.
If that doesn’t work, your leader may contact the American
Congress on Surveying and Mapping at the address listed in
the resources section at the back of this pamphlet.
At least three people—including yourself (but not your counselor,
who must be free to coach other Scouts)—are needed to complete
the requirements for this badge. Each will take a turn operating the
instruments, holding the prism pole and the leveling rod, and
recording field notes.


SURVEYING 11
.Introduction
A Word About This Pamphlet
This pamphlet is not a self-teaching course in
surveying or the Surveying merit badge—the vast
amount of information on surveying cannot fit
into a book of this size. Also, so many different
models of surveying instruments exist, and
surveying is changing so fast that a merit badge
pamphlet cannot always keep up with the latest
developments. Therefore, you must rely heavily
on your counselor to show you how to use the
instruments available, make the measurements,
and plot the results. This merit badge pamphlet
will show you the basic principles of surveying,
whet your surveying “appetite,” and expose you
to the sort of work that surveyors do.


12 SURVEYING
Safety.
Safety
In the field, surveyors work in all kinds of weather and envi-
ronments for long periods and sometimes in remote places or
high-traffic areas. Surveyors must be aware of their surround-
ings so that they can conduct their work safely and apply the
appropriate first aid when necessary.
First, know the weather and environ-
mental conditions where you will be working.
Dress appropriately and bring extra clothing
in case the weather changes. Some impor-
tant items to remember include sunglasses
and sunscreen, long pants and long-sleeved
shirts, and a hooded jacket. It is a good
idea to wear reflective vests to make
yourself visible at all times. Protective
helmets are necessary when surveying
near roadways of any kind. Remember
to bring plenty of food and water.
While surveying
in the field, you
must take great
precautions
regarding traffic
safety. A bright,
fluorescent
reflective vest is
a must so that
you remain visible
to vehicular traffic
at all times.


SURVEYING 13
.Safety
Heat-Related Injuries
Common heat-related injuries include dehydration, heat
exhaustion, heatstroke, and sunburn. Preventing heat-related
injuries begins with drinking enough water, up to 2 cups every
15 to 20 minutes. Do not wait until you feel thirsty. Thirst is an
early sign of dehydration. Once the body becomes dehydrated,
it cannot cool itself as well. This could lead to heat exhaustion
or heatstroke.
Heat Exhaustion
As a result of dehydration, the body overheats because its
cooling methods fail. Watch for these signs: elevated body
temperature (between 98.6 and 102 degrees); pale and clammy
skin that may be cool to the touch; heavy sweating; nausea,
dizziness, and fainting; pronounced weakness and tiredness;
headache, muscle cramps. To treat heat exhaustion, have the
victim lie down in a shady, cool spot with the feet raised.
Loosen the clothing. Apply cool damp cloths to the skin or
use a fan. Have the victim sip water.
Heatstroke
Heatstroke (sunstroke) is far more serious but less common
than heat exhaustion. It is life-threatening because the body’s
heat-control system has failed. Watch for these signs: body
temperature above 102 degrees; red, hot, and dry skin; no
sweating; extremely rapid pulse; confusion, disorientation;
fainting or unconsciousness; convulsions. The victim must
be cooled immediately. Place the victim in a cool, shady
spot face-up with head and shoulders raised. Remove outer
clothing, sponge the bare skin with cool water, and soak
underclothing with cool water. Apply cold packs, use a fan,
or place the victim in a tub of cool water. Dry the skin after
the body temperature drops to 101 degrees. Seek medical
help immediately.
Hypothermia
Hypothermia occurs when the body’s core temperature drops
so low that it cannot stay warm. Cool, windy, and rainy weather
are particularly dangerous, but hypothermia can happen in
relatively mild weather, too. To prevent hypothermia, keep
warm and stay dry, and eat plenty of energy foods.
Prevent sunburn
by wearing
loose-fitting
clothes that
completely cover
the arms and legs.
Remember to
apply sunscreen
to exposed areas,
including your
neck and ears.


14 SURVEYING
Safety.
Snakebite,
venomous spider
bites, and
venomous
scorpion stings
are serious, but
not common.
If stung or
bitten by one of
these creatures,
seek medical
help immediately.
Early signs of hypothermia include shivering. As the
victim becomes colder, however, the shivering will stop. Other
symptoms may include irritability, disorientation, sleepiness,
incoherence, and the inability to think clearly or rationally.
Rewarm the victim and prevent further heat loss by moving
the victim to a shelter, removing damp clothing, and warming
the person with blankets until body temperature returns to
normal. Cover the head with a warm hat or other covering,
and offer hot drinks.
Cuts and Scratches
Minor injuries usually require little attention other than cleans-
ing with soap, water, and disinfectant. Leave them to heal in
the air, or cover them lightly with a dry, sterile dressing. Unless
a cut is serious, bleeding probably will stop on its own or with
slight pressure on the wound. If the bleeding does not stop
immediately, apply direct and firm pressure to the wound with
a sterile dressing or compress; raise the injured limb above
heart-level. Clean and disinfect the wound, then cover with
a sterile bandage.
Poisonous Plants and Venomous Animals
Surveyors come in contact with a wide variety of plants and
domestic and wild animals while working in the field. For this
reason, surveyors must be familiar with the poisonous plants
and venomous animals in the area and should know and carry
the appropriate first-aid treatments. Because surveyors also
sometimes work in locations where larger predatory animals
(bears, mountain lions) exist, they must be aware of the
possible dangers in those areas.
Stings and Bites
The best prevention is to pay attention where you walk and
step, but despite all precautions you might get stung or bit by
a bee, wasp, fire ant, scorpion, or spider. Treat ordinary insect
stings by scraping out the stinger with the blade of a knife.
Do not squeeze it; that will force more venom into the skin.
Elevate the affected part, gently wash the area, and apply
hydrocortisone cream. Bee and scorpion stings and spider
bites can be treated with ice to help reduce swelling.


SURVEYING 15
.Safety
Ticks can carry diseases such as Lyme
disease and Rocky Mountain spotted
fever. Remove a tick as soon as it
is discovered by grasping its head as
close to the skin as possible with tweezers
or gloved fingertips. Gently tease the tick
from the wound. If you squeeze, twist,
or jerk the tick, it could break off mouth
parts, which would remain in the skin.
Wash the wound carefully with soap
and water. Apply antiseptic. Wash your hands thoroughly, to
prevent disease.
Poisonous Plants
You can prevent most problems with
poisonous plants by being able to
identify them and by being careful.
Poison ivy, poison oak, and poison
sumac are the three most common
troublemakers; learn how to identify
and avoid these plants.
If you have touched or just brushed
against one of these plants, immediately
wash the skin thoroughly with soap and
water to help prevent the rash from devel-
oping; the sap must be on your skin for
10 to 20 minutes before it starts causing
problems. Further cleanse the area with
rubbing alcohol. If a rash develops,
apply a 0.5 percent hydrocortisone
cream. Scratching the area will cause
the irritation to spread.
Poison oak
Poison ivy
Poison sumac
The foliage of poison
sumac stays green from
spring through summer
(left), then turns red in
the fall (above).
Black-legged tick





SURVEYING 17
.Measurements and Instruments
Measurements
and Instruments
Surveying involves measuring horizontal and vertical distances
and angles. It also involves extensive computation (much of
which is done with a computer) and map drawing (much of
which is done with a computer-controlled printer or plotter).
The Global Positioning System (GPS) uses artificial Earth
satellites and portable computers equipped with receivers. GPS
receivers process signals from the satellites to calculate location.
This allows you to find your position (latitude, longitude, and
elevation) almost anywhere on Earth, quickly and accurately,
in almost any weather. Using GPS, latitude and longitude can
be measured directly, without having to measure distances
and angles between points. This is especially useful when the
nearest survey monuments are far away. Your merit badge
counselor might be able to demonstrate surveying using GPS.
Horizontal Distances
Property boundaries are described using horizontal distances,
even on sloping land. The illustrations here show how hori-
zontal distance is described on sloping ground. Surveyors’
instruments may measure the horizontal distance directly, or
they may measure the slope angle and distance, and convert
the slope distance mathematically to horizontal and
vertical distances.
Surveying
instruments are
expensive and
delicate. Listen
carefully to your
merit badge
counselor’s
instructions for
handling these
instruments.
Work slowly and
carefully, even if
it takes extra time.


18 SURVEYING
Measurements and Instruments.
Before modern instruments and computers made it possible to
measure distances electronically, surveyors measured distances with
flexible steel tapes. Before the flexible steel tapes, surveyors used
steel chains, called Gunter’s chains. Such chains were expensive, and
the links deteriorated, thus altering the length of the chain. When
steel band tapes became available, they replaced these chains. By
tradition, though, surveyors still called length-measuring devices
“chains,” and many land descriptions still list distances in “chains.”
A Gunter’s chain measured the wilder-
ness of the United States. Chainmen laid
out the chain and pulled on the handles
to measure 66 feet.
High-quality surveyor’s tape


SURVEYING 19
.Measurements and Instruments
Horizontal distances generally are measured with an elec-
tronic distance meter (EDM) or by GPS. The EDM measures
distance by measuring the time needed for a light beam to
travel between two points. The EDM is placed at one of the
two points between which the distance is to be measured.
The meter generates a light or infrared beam that travels across
the distance to a prism (reflector) and back to the EDM, which
then measures the length of time it took the beam to travel
that distance.
The time depends both on the distance between the two
points and on the speed of light. The speed of light in air is
almost constant, although it depends slightly on atmospheric
pressure, temperature, and humidity (the amount of water
vapor in the air). Some EDMs automatically measure these
quantities and use the measured values to compute the dis-
tance precisely. With an EDM, distance measurement usually
is more accurate and faster than with a chain. Most modern
EDM’s are incorporated into the surveyor’s total station.
Measuring horizontal distance on sloping ground
SLOPING GROUND
READ DISTANCE ON TAPE
BETWEEN PLUMB STRINGS
SURVEYOR’S TAPE HELD HORIZONTAL
PLUMB STRINGS
PLUMB BOBS
SLOPING GROUND
HORIZONTAL DISTANCE
VERTICAL
DISTANCE
SURVEY
MEASUREMENTS
Horizontal and vertical distances on sloping ground


20 SURVEYING
Measurements and Instruments.
Total stations are instruments
that have an onboard EDM to mea-
sure the distance to the prism and
a telescope for sighting the prism.
Total stations also can electroni-
cally measure the vertical angle to
the prism. Most total stations have
onboard computers to record all of
the survey measures taken during
the day. This function is called the
data collector.
Horizontal distances also can
be measured using GPS. To do this,
a surveyor sets up a GPS receiver at one point and records the
satellite data for that position. Then, the surveyor sets up the
GPS receiver at the next point and records the satellite
data for that position. After data has been recorded for all
points, it is downloaded into a computer. GPS software uses
the data to compute distances between all points measured.
GPS equipment quickly is becoming a more economical
and affordable method for measuring distances, and it is
simpler to use than the expensive and delicate total station.
However, its use is limited because a GPS receiver cannot
receive data when something stands between the receiver
and the satellites. Surveying using GPS will not work
indoors or under trees.
Horizontal and vertical distances also can be mea-
sured from aerial photographs (taken from an airplane)
and satellite photographs taken from space. Before air-
borne GPS, aerial photography required that some points
be surveyed on the ground;
these were called ground
control points. This method
involved adjusting the aerial
photographs to fit the
surveys done on the ground.
However, using airborne
GPS, no adjustments
are needed.
An EDM, or electronic distance meter,
measures horizontal distance.


SURVEYING 21
.Measurements and Instruments
Aerial photography allows large
areas to be mapped rapidly and accu-
rately. The United States Geological
Survey (USGS) maps, which are used
extensively in Scouting, are made
using aerial photography.
Vertical Distances
Vertical distances generally are mea-
sured in one of two ways: by sighting
along a horizontal line toward a
leveling rod, or by measuring slope
angle and distance with an EDM and
then converting the slope distance
mathematically to vertical distance.
We will use the first method to measure the elevations in
requirement 5. If you enjoy math, your counselor can show
you how to use the second method.
For rough mapping of large areas, approximate land
elevations sometimes are measured by special barometers.
These barometers measure atmospheric pressure, which in
turn depends on the elevation and the weather. For most mea-
surements, however, GPS technology has replaced
barometric pressure measurements.
Sample
Survey
Lot
Use this example
to help you
understand how
surveyors calcu-
late measurements
when surveying a
lot. It will help guide
you as you work on
requirement 3.
Aerial photography allows professionals
to survey large sections of land, like
metropolitan areas.


22 SURVEYING
Measurements and Instruments.
Distance Units
In surveying, distances are expressed either in meters or feet.
To simplify the arithmetic, decimal fractions are used. (Inches
normally are not used in surveying.) In the United States, most
surveying measurements are expressed in feet.
In surveying, the meter is defined by law in terms of the
wavelength of a particular form of light that can be generated in
a laboratory. This is safer than defining the meter by a physical
ruler that might be accidentally destroyed. In the United States,
for long-distance control surveys, the foot is defined as exactly
0.3048 meters. This measurement is known as the international
foot because it is used by countries in which survey systems
are based on meters. For modern surveying to be consistent
with old measurements, however, a survey foot is defined as
exactly 1200/3937 meters. This measurement is called the
United States survey foot. For the purposes of earning the
Surveying merit badge, the difference between the United
States survey foot and the international foot does not matter.
An old unit of length is the chain, which is 66 feet or 1/80 mile. This
was the length of the old-fashioned Gunter’s chain. A chain had 100
links of equal length. Some old land records and even a few modern
deeds state distances in numbers of chains and links. If such units
are used in your area, your merit badge counselor can tell you how
modern surveyors handle them.
Distance Units Comparison Chart (Table of equivalents)
1 U.S. survey foot = 0.304806 meters
1 international foot = 0.3048000 meters
1 mile = 5,280 U.S. survey feet
1 mile = 80 Gunter’s chains
1 mile = 1.609344 kilometers
1 Gunter’s chain = 66 U.S. survey feet
1 Gunter’s chain = 100 links
1 Gunter’s chain = 4 poles/rods
1 Gunter’s chain = 22 yards
1 link = 0.66 U.S. survey foot
1 pole/perch/rod = 16.5 U.S. survey feet
1 yard = 3 U.S. survey feet
1 acre = 43,560 square feet
1 square mile = 640 acres


SURVEYING 23
.Measurements and Instruments
Horizontal and Vertical Angles
A horizontal angle is simply the
difference between two bearings, or
azimuths, which you can measure
with a compass. While earning this
merit badge, you will measure this
difference much more accurately
than you can with a compass.
A vertical angle is a measure of
how far an object is above the
horizon (the elevation angle)
or how far an object is below
the point directly overhead
(the zenith angle).
Measuring Horizontal and Vertical Angles
In surveying, angles are measured directly with a total station,
which measures the angles and distances automatically. This
information is stored automatically in the total station or in an
external data collector, or the surveyor writes it in a notebook.
The readings are then loaded, sometimes electronically, into
a computer for later use. Older surveying equipment such as
transits and theodolites require surveyors to read and record
the measurements manually.
Horizontal angles at the corners of a lot
HORIZONTAL
ANGLES
HOUSE
Vertical angles
HORIZONTAL LINE
ELEVATION
ANGLE
ZENITH
ANGLE
VERTICAL LINE


24 SURVEYING
Measurements and Instruments.
A good total station is a delicate and
complex instrument, and many controls
must be operated on the total station to
obtain accurate angle readings. All models
are slightly different. Your merit badge
counselor will show you how to use the
total station that is available to you for this
badge. There is a lot to it, but it is not hard
to learn. This is your chance to use a very
fine instrument, and you have a counselor
to show you how. Make the most of
this opportunity.
When using a total station, the surveyor
reads the horizontal and vertical angles by
pointing a telescope at the object from
which a measurement is to be taken. The
angle-indicating mechanism indicates the
horizontal and vertical angles of the telescope. The telescope
provides a magnified view of the object being sighted to allow
the telescope to be pointed more accurately.
When you look through the telescope, you will see not
only the distant object but also a crosshair pattern. To read the
horizontal angle between two objects:
• Point the telescope so that the vertical crosshair appears on
one object and read the horizontal angle.
Total stations almost
eliminate the danger of
human error in reading
and writing numbers,
although surveyors
must still use the
instrument correctly
to have it read the
proper angles.
Surveyors today use a total station to measure
horizontal and vertical angles automatically.
Surveyors once used transits like
this one to measure horizontal
and vertical angles using a
magnifying glass.


SURVEYING 25
.Measurements and Instruments
• Move the telescope so that the vertical crosshair appears on
the other object and read that horizontal angle.
• Subtract one horizontal angle from the other.
Total stations can do the subtraction for you and read the hori-
zontal angle directly.
To read the vertical angle of an object, simply point the
telescope so that the horizontal crosshair is on the object, and
read the angle. Total stations can indicate the vertical angle as
either the elevation angle or the zenith angle.
Total stations have a pendulum (back-and-forth) mecha-
nism, called a vertical compensator, which automatically gives
the correct vertical angle even if the total station is slightly
tilted (not leveled on its tripod). In other words, the vertical
compensator “corrects” the vertical angle even when the total
station is not level. Tilt also causes slight errors in measuring
horizontal angles and a total station’s built-in compensator
can correct this, too. However, if the total station is tilted too
far, the compensator will not function, and the vertical angles
must be remeasured. Total stations provide a way to check
the compensator, which should be done every time you set
up the instrument.
Your merit badge
counselor will
show you how
to check the
compensator on
the particular total
station you use.


26 SURVEYING
Measurements and Instruments.
When looking through the eyepiece, usually one or
both crosshairs will be double (bifilar). A small object can
be centered more accurately between two closely spaced cross-
hairs than behind a single crosshair.
Total stations and levels, and older surveying equipment
such as transits and theodolites, have two focusing adjust-
ments—one for the crosshairs and one for the distant object.
First, focus the eyepiece, or ocular, so that you see the crosshairs
clearly. Disregard the distant object completely during this
adjustment; it may help to defocus the distant object or point
the telescope at the sky, away from the sun. After the ocular
is focused on the crosshairs, point the telescope at the distant
object, and use the object-focusing adjustment to focus on the
distant object. The crosshairs should remain in focus as you
If you focus incorrectly, you may get incorrect
readings without noticing that anything is wrong.
Your merit badge counselor will show you how
to focus the telescope on the particular instrument
that you use and explain why that method is nec-
essary. Generally, the ocular needs to be focused
only once for your own eyes, but you might need
to focus separately on each distant object. When
another person looks through the telescope, it
might need to be refocused completely.
Simple crosshair pattern as
seen through a telescope
Bifilar crosshairs


SURVEYING 27
.Measurements and Instruments
focus on the distant object. Then, move your head slightly
sideways while looking through the telescope, and verify that
the crosshair pattern does not appear to move across the
distant object. If the crosshair pattern does move, the telescope
is not focused properly.
Total stations, transits, and theodolites vary greatly in
the way their scales are marked, numbered, and read; in the
basic methods of reading horizontal and vertical angles; and
even in the methods of carrying and setting up the instruments.
A few transits—and most total stations and theodolites—have
optical plummets, which greatly simplify the task of placing
the instrument directly over the point from which you want
to measure.
Angle Units
In surveying in the United States, horizontal and vertical angles
almost always are measured and recorded in degrees, minutes,
and seconds. You already know about degrees from measuring
azimuths with a compass: 360 degrees make a
circle, 60 minutes make a degree, and 60 seconds make a
minute. Although decimal divisions (tenths, hundredths,
thousandths, etc.) are much easier to use, we are limited to
degrees, minutes, and seconds. Fortunately, computers and
handheld scientific calculators easily handle these units
of measurement.
In some parts of Europe, angles are measured in grads
(also called gons). It takes 400 grads to make a circle. The
grads are divided decimally for ease in computation. Total
stations generally can indicate and record grads (gons) or
degrees, minutes, and seconds. Computers and versatile
scientific calculators can work with either type of unit.
On some transits and theodolites, the telescope
inverts the image, so the view is upside down. For
the particular instrument that you use, your merit
badge counselor will show you how to carry it, set
it up precisely, and operate it.


28 SURVEYING
Measurements and Instruments.
How Horizontal Angles Are Recorded
In Scouting and in most other fields, azimuth is measured as the
horizontal angle from north, clockwise (looking down on earth), from
0 degrees to 360 degrees. But, in some types of surveying, azimuth is
measured from south.
To avoid confusion, maps usually show bearing rather than
azimuth. It looks complicated at first, but actually it is quite simple.
Bearing is measured from either north or south, toward either east
or west. (It always is written to show how it is measured.) The dia-
grams here show how it is done. Notice that the bearing angle never
exceeds 90 degrees. Computers and scientific calculators can easily
convert between bearing and azimuth. If it gives you trouble, ask
your merit badge counselor for help.
The bearing of a line
N 30º W N 30º E
S 30º ES 30º W
30º
S S
SS
N N
NN
W W
WW
E E
EE
30º
30º30º


SURVEYING 29
.Measurements and Instruments
Levels
Requirement 3 involves using a level and a
leveling rod to determine the elevations of points
on the ground. To do this, you generally do not
need to measure vertical angles; you just want
to be able to look along a level line at a leveling
rod and use the leveling rod to measure vertical
distances. You can do this with a total station by
setting the telescope level. For leveling, however,
a special-purpose instrument called a level is more
accurate, easier to use, and less expensive.
Optical levels have telescopes and crosshairs,
but the crosshair patterns vary between levels and are
designed for precise leveling rather than for measuring
horizontal and vertical angles. Some levels can measure
approximate horizontal angle.
Automatic optical levels have a vertical compensator,
somewhat like those discussed earlier. In this case, the
compensator slightly adjusts the telescope’s line of sight so
that the horizontal crosshair indicates a level line. As with
total stations, the compensator does not function if the level
is tilted too far. Make it a practice to check the compensator
every time you set up the level. Your merit badge counselor
will show you how to check the compensator, as well as how
to set up and use the particular level you are using.
Digital levels do not use crosshairs
to view the leveling rod. Instead they
use a scanner to read a bar code on the
leveling rod. The scanner reads the bar
code on a level line from the instrument
and records the information in the data
collector. Digital levels also have a vertical
compensator to adjust for slight errors in
instrument setup. Digital levels are faster
and more accurate than optical levels.
Surveyor’s optical level
Surveyor’s digital level





SURVEYING 31
.Global Positioning System Surveying
Global Positioning
System Surveying
You probably have seen a GPS receiver in use, either one
mounted in a car or a handheld model. Handheld GPS receiv-
ers tell you where you are and can be programmed to tell you
how far and which direction to go to reach your destination.
GPS receivers in cars and boats have a screen with a map that
traces your progress and shows the distance to your destination.
Some of these receivers can even tell you when to turn onto a
particular street.
Satellite and receiver triangulation


32 SURVEYING
Global Positioning System Surveying.
GPS receivers use NAVSTAR (navigation system with tim-
ing and ranging) satellites, which were launched by NASA.
The receiver processes a radio signal from the satellite that tells
the position of the satellite and the time that the satellite was
in that position. Using this information, the receiver calculates
its distance from the satellite. Using the distance measurements
from four or more satellites, the receiver can calculate its
position on Earth.
Kinematic GPS surveying uses a receiver positioned at a
known position to broadcast the correction factor to other GPS
receivers, called rovers, at unknown points. Rovers determine
their positions from the GPS satellites and apply the broadcast
correction factor to calculate their actual positions. To do this,
the rovers must occupy a position for a period of a few seconds
to a few minutes, depending on the number of satellites used
to make the calculation. This method is commonly used in
mapping surveys and can produce measurements accurate to
within a meter or centimeter.
Static GPS surveying does not use a broadcaster. Instead,
the receiver and the rovers simply record data from the satel-
lites for several minutes to several hours. Then, all of the data
from the receiver and rovers are downloaded to a computer.
GPS software compares all the data and uses that information
to determine positions for all unknown points. This method is
used when a high degree of accuracy is desired because it can
produce measurements accurate to a millimeter.
Handheld GPS receivers are accurate to within
3 meters, but this is not accurate enough for
most surveying tasks. To make their systems more
accurate, surveyors place a receiver on a point
for which the position is known. This receiver
compares the known position to the position
it computes from the satellites. The difference
between the positions becomes the correction
factor, or error of closure. Surveyors employ
this correction method for two types of GPS
surveying: kinematic and static.








SURVEYING 35
.How Land Is Described
How Land Is Described
When someone purchases land, the seller gives the buyer a
deed. The deed, which includes a description of the land, is
recorded in the county recorder’s office. In this way, other
people can know who owns the land and where its
boundaries are.
In the United States, there are two primary ways to describe
land: the rectangular survey system of the public lands, and
metes and bounds. The public lands of much of the Southern,
Western, and Midwestern United States is laid out and described
by the rectangular survey system. The metes and bounds
system is used in the United States on the East Coast and in
some other states. Wherever you live, you should understand
both methods of describing land.
A few other methods are used to describe land boundaries.
Examples are rivers, divides between watersheds, lines of
latitude and longitude, and various artificial grid systems
defined by law. Your merit badge counselor may show you
examples of such boundary descriptions in your area.
Metes and Bounds
Using measurements along boundaries, a metes and bounds
description begins at some specific point such as a durable
surveyor’s monument (a metal marker set firmly in concrete
or stone is a good example) that can be located easily. If that
point is not on the boundary of the property being described,
the description directs you in some bearing (for example,
N12° 34' 56" E) for some distance (for example, 123.45 feet)
to a point of beginning on the boundary. Then, the description
directs you around the boundary, one side at a time, back
to the starting point. The boundary description may include
descriptions of surveyors’ monuments at the corners of the
property and other information to avoid or minimize confusion
in locating the property later.


36 SURVEYING
How Land Is Described.
A deed may simply refer to a lot on a subdivision map
filed in the county recorder’s office, which shows all of the
metes and bounds information for the whole subdivision. On
the subdivision map, each block is numbered; within each
block, each lot is numbered. Thus, a particular lot is described
by the name of the subdivision map (and usually the deed
book and page number where the map is filed in the county
recorder’s office), the block number, and the lot number. This
method of description shows clearly the location of the lot in
the subdivision, and avoids excessive copying and errors.
Just for fun,
your merit badge
counselor may be
able to show you
the subdivision
map that includes
your home.
Boundary map with metes and bounds description


SURVEYING 37
.How Land Is Described
The Rectangular Survey System
of the Public Lands
In the early days of America, a settler chose the land desired,
marked the boundaries (by making piles of stone or blazing
trees), hired a surveyor to measure the land, and bought the
land from the government. Over the years, confusion arose
over irregular shapes of land, gaps between adjoining lands,
and lost or destroyed monuments (such as when a blazed tree
fell or burned).
When the United States government opened its western
land (the “public domain”) for sale to settlers and for lease for
grazing and timbering, the government used the rectangular
system of land surveys. The land was surveyed and marked by
durable monuments into an orderly arrangement of squares, all
according to rigidly standardized directions from the government.
Various starting points were established throughout the
western land. Through each point, an east-west line, called
a baseline, was marked on the ground, usually for many tens
or hundreds of miles in both directions. A north-south line,
called a meridian or range, was similarly marked.
From the intersection of the baseline and the meridian,
or range, six-mile squares, called townships, were laid out and
monumented. Each township is identified by a “township”
or “T” number according to how far north or south it is of the
baseline, and by a “range” or “R” number according to how
far east or west it is of the meridian. The terminology is a bit
confusing, but the diagram here shows how it is done.
This diagram shows a township grid. These
six-mile squares are identified by distance from
the initial point. For instance, the shaded
township is Township 2 South, Range 3 West.


38 SURVEYING
How Land Is Described.
Each township is divided into 36 one-mile squares,
called sections, which are numbered as shown in the diagram
shown here.
Each section may be divided into halves, quarters, and
smaller subdivisions, all according to rigidly standardized
directions from the government. Irregularly shaped subdivisions
may be called lots. The following diagram shows how one
particular section was divided according to the needs of
the landowners.
This particular section
is divided into eight
approximately 40-acre
16th sections, three
approximately 80-acre
eighth sections, and two
lake lots of less than
40 acres each.
This diagram shows the
numbering of a township’s
36 sections. Except in a few
special cases, each section is
approximately one mile square
and contains approximately
640 acres.


SURVEYING 39
.How Land Is Described
This system works well but is by no means perfect, and the
imperfections can be troublesome unless you are aware of them.
First, square townships and sections do not fit perfectly on the
surface of our round planet. Second, in some places, surveys
from different baselines and meridians meet and overlap. Third,
when most of the public lands were surveyed into townships
and sections, surveying instruments were primitive, and elec-
tronic instruments (calculators, computers, electronic distance
meters, and satellites) were nonexistent. Much of the land was
rugged and isolated. Therefore, a surveyor’s errors tended to be
large by modern standards. Fourth, some of the early surveyors
were not fully competent, or, in a few cases, some were
dishonest. Fifth, some of the monuments have disappeared.
These imperfections result in township and section
boundary lines that are not quite north-south or east-west,
township corners that do not fit together perfectly, sections
that are not 1-mile squares, and monuments that are difficult
to find or nonexistent. Your merit badge counselor can tell
you how today’s surveyors deal with these problems.
Public domain lands were parceled out by government surveys. Each shaded area has
its own base and meridian lines, and all surveys in the area must be based on them.
Where the lines cross is the initial point. (Not to scale)





SURVEYING 41
.Measuring True Azimuth or Bearing
Measuring True
Azimuth or Bearing
For requirement 2, you need to lay out lines on the ground in
the proper azimuths or bearings. This can be done in several
ways. You and your merit badge counselor should select a
method according to the accuracy requirements of the particu-
lar survey, your interest and mathematical background,
and the capabilities of your counselor’s instruments. Several
methods are discussed briefly below. State which method you
used on the map you draw for requirement 3; your counselor
will suggest the appropriate wording for your type of map.
The simplest method is to use a magnetic compass and
take into account the local magnetic declination. This method,
while simple, is not sufficiently accurate for most modern
surveying. Much of early America was surveyed in this man-
ner. Before better methods were available, and when land was
cheap, surveys did not need to be as accurate as they do now.
Surveyors often use or extend lines that were surveyed
previously, and use the bearings that were assumed for those
lines by the previous surveyors, even if those bearings were
wrong. This method helps to ensure consistency between old
and new surveys. The surveyor must always state clearly the
basis of the bearings.
Celestial (heavenly body) observations generally are the
most accurate. Polaris (the North Star) works well from northern
tropical and middle northern latitudes. (Note that Polaris is
not quite at true north; it moves around the north point in
the sky, but true north can be computed from the direction
of Polaris.) At far northern latitudes, Polaris is too high in the


42 SURVEYING
Measuring True Azimuth or Bearing.
sky for convenient observation with a total station, and the
measurement accuracy tends to be poor. Near the equator,
Polaris is not always visible; and Polaris is not visible at all
from the southern hemisphere. Other stars can be used
almost as easily, without the latitude restrictions of Polaris.
Obviously, stars can be used only at night.
While the sun is a convenient azimuth reference from
most latitudes, you must be careful of your instruments. Most
important, you must be extremely careful to properly protect
your eyes and never look directly at the sun. For safety reasons,
this method is not recommended.
Measuring true azimuth by celestial observations generally
requires some elementary astronomy and some spherical trigo-
nometry. If you like mathematics and you have had trigonom-
etry, here is your chance to use it. Otherwise, you may want to
use another method.
A gyroscopic compass, or gyrocompass, can indicate
direction quite accurately without the need to observe the
sun or stars. It is useful in cloudy weather, and is particularly
useful in mines and tunnels. The main disadvantages of a
gyrocompass are its high cost and heavy weight.
GPS also can be used to establish a true azimuth. GPS
data are gathered at each end of an azimuth line and then the
true azimuth and length of the line can be computed using
GPS software.
WARNING: Never look directly at the sun. Never,
absolutely NEVER, look at the sun through a
telescope, except through a proper sun filter. Doing
so will cause permanent and severe eye damage.
Prolonged direct viewing of the sun, even through
a filter made for that purpose, can cause eye
damage. If you do look directly at the sun through a telescope with
a proper filter, be absolutely sure that the filter is in place before
you point the telescope at the sun. Have your merit badge counselor
supervise you directly and carefully at all times when you are making
sun observations.








SURVEYING 45
.Surveying a Lot
Surveying a Lot
Requirement 2 requires you to perform a survey of a lot. This
type of survey describes property in terms of metes (the bearings
and distances or physical features that describe each line of the
property’s boundary) and bounds (the monuments that mark
the corners of the property or points where the property line
changes direction). Bounds can be iron pipes or stakes driven
into the ground, trees, concrete monuments, fence posts, etc.
Throughout history, the metes and bounds system has been
used to describe property. In the United States today, all of
the states that made up the original 13 colonies (as well as a
few other states) use this system. All of the other states used
this system to describe smaller tracts of land that were divided
from the original rectangular survey system.
Here are two examples of metes and bounds descriptions:
• Along the east edge of Crooked Creek to a 24-inch sycamore
tree at the end of a fence, then in an easterly direction, with
the fence, to a stone on top of a ridge.
• N 44° 10' 33" E 400.76 feet to an iron pipe at the southwest
corner of property owned by Jones.
To fulfill requirement 2, your merit badge counselor will estab-
lish the points between which you will survey to describe the
lot. Your counselor also will determine the meridian base for
your survey, either by assuming a bearing or azimuth for the
beginning line, or by establishing its bearing or azimuth by
some other means. Along with the others in your group, you
will take turns operating the survey instruments (total sta-
tion), recording notes, giving backsights, and measuring the
distances between the established points. When the work is
completed, your counselor will show you how to check your
precision by calculating the error of closure.
The error of
closure is
the difference
between the
measured location
of a known point
and the actual
location of the
known point.


46 SURVEYING
Surveying a Lot.
The object of this exercise is to gather and record the
data necessary to draw a map of the lot. Along with gathering
the data for describing the boundaries of the lot, you will
also record angles and distances measured to certain physical
features (such as trees) to be shown on the map.
This procedure will be followed at each corner point of
the lot until you have recorded angles and distances measured
between every line of the lot boundary. Using the notes your
team recorded, you will be able to check that your work was
done properly and to draw a map of your survey. Your merit
badge counselor will help you to accomplish this graphically or
by using mathematics, depending on your level of knowledge.


SURVEYING 47
.Surveying a Lot
Sample Set-up Procedure
1. Position the tripod over the point.
2. Place the instrument on the tripod, and level it so that it is directly
over the point. Your merit badge counselor will show you how to
do this with the particular instrument you are using.
3. Observe the backsight being given by the person in charge of
the rod.
4. Set the instrument’s horizontal angle plate to zero (unless this is
required before observing the backsight—your counselor will
know this).
5. Measure the distance between the point where you are and
the backsight point. This measurement should be made with
a total station or an EDM, depending on the type of equipment
used. Record this measurement in the notebook or call it out
to the recorder.
6. Turn the total station or theodolite to the next corner point.
(The procedure will be determined by the instrument used.
Your counselor will show you what to do.)
7. Read the horizontal angle. (Most instruments display the angle as
turned to the right of the backsight point.) Record this angle in the
notebook or call it out to the recorder. To provide greater precision,
you may wish to “double” the angle; your counselor will explain
how this is done, and why.
8. In the notebook, record the distance measured between the
point you are occupying and the next corner point, or call out
the distance to the recorder.
9. If you can observe any of the physical features that need to be
located, you will want to record angles turned to them from this
point and the backsight point, and from the distances measured.
You can measure the distances with tape or an EDM as directed
by your counselor. To avoid confusion when compiling the data in
your notebook, be sure to note which setup and backsight points
are used. Record these angles and distances in the notebook, or
call them out to the recorder.


48 SURVEYING
Drawing Your Map.
Drawing Your Map
In requirement 2, you laid out a five-
sided lot. You recorded field notes that
show what you measured and the mea-
surement results (distances, angles, and
features like trees, shrubs, and rocks).
You can now use those field notes to
draw your map for requirement 3.
Never discard your field notes after the
map is finished; your notes are your original and most accu-
rate record. If you find a mistake on your map, you will need
to review your original notes to determine the source of the
error and the correct measurement data. Or, you might have
recorded things which may become important later. Field
notes, which surveyors generally keep on file, might also
become important evidence in court.
Work closely with your merit badge counselor as you draw your
map. While you work, your merit badge counselor may point out
errors that, if not caught in time, would require you to start over.


SURVEYING 49
.Drawing Your Map
You will need to
know what scale
to use to fit your
map to the paper
size. Used here,
the word scale
means how a
certain distance
on your map
corresponds
to that same
distance on
the ground.
For your map, choose a paper size large enough (at least 11
by 17 inches) to allow you to show all of the necessary detail.
If you use trigonometry to plot your map, grid-ruled paper is
helpful. If you do not want the grid lines to show on your fin-
ished map, use drafting tracing paper with light blue grid lines,
which do not reproduce in most industrial photographic pro-
cesses, blueprints, and copiers.
If you have studied trigonometry, you can use it to draw
your map quite easily. (If you have studied geometry
but not trigonometry, get some help from your merit badge
counselor. This method is so much easier that it is worth some
extra effort.) With a scientific calculator, compute the north and
east coordinates of each point (for example, the lot corners and
the features on the ground), and plot them on grid-ruled paper.
On maps, the north direction usually is up. Your merit badge
counselor can show you how to do this if you have not done
it in trigonometry class. You might be able to use a computer-
aided drafting (CAD) system to draw the whole map, but you
should understand the principles of drawing the map, rather
than merely learning which buttons to push to make the
computer draw the map for you.


Map was drafted by Rich Wendling in 1998 and redone in 2002 by Tatyana and Sergey Svistun.


SURVEYING 51
.Drawing Your Map
To draw a map graphically, use a protractor to mark the bearing of
each line, use a straightedge to draw the line in that bearing, and use
a scale to determine the length of the line. Follow these steps to draw
your map.
1. Put the protractor over the starting point
with its zero mark aligned to the closest
north-south grid line.
2. Mark the bearing of the line.
3. Use a straightedge to draw a
line through the point at the
required bearing.
4. Use a drafting scale to mark the
right length on the line, and
erase the rest of the line.
1 4


52 SURVEYING
Drawing Your Map.
If you are not quite ready for trigonometry, you will need to
draw your map geographically. Use grid-ruled paper if possible,
and a separate straightedge, drafting scale, and protractor. So
many versions of drafting scales and protractors are available
that your counselor might need to show you how to use the
particular instruments available to you.
If you did the lot survey for requirement 2, and you use
trigonometry, you can use coordinates (which you need to com-
pute for plotting) to calculate the maximum north-south extent
and the maximum east-west extent of your lot. You can figure
what scale to use to make the lot fit on your paper. Position
the lot so that it fits nicely onto your paper, and leave room for
a title block, preferably in the lower right corner of your map.
You might want some help from your merit badge counselor the
first time you do this.
If you did not use trigonometry to survey the lot for require-
ment 2, you might need to experiment with scales to fit your
map to the paper. Your counselor can help you. Regardless of
how you draw the map, show your counselor your proposed
layout before you invest a lot of work in drawing the details.
Use symbols, preferably like those on the USGS maps, to
show the features you plotted on your map. If you surveyed a
lot, write the bearing and distance of each side of the lot beside
its boundary line on your map.
Draw a title block on your map, preferably near the lower
right corner. Experiment first on scrap paper so you do not ruin
your good map with excessive erasure. Include the name of the
property (in this case, the land you surveyed for your Surveying
merit badge), the location of the property (for example, the city
or county, and state), a north arrow (usually in the upper left
corner), a scale, the basis of the bearings (for example, celestial
observations, a previous surveyor’s bearing, or magnetic com-
pass), your name and Scout troop number, and the date. Work
closely with your merit badge counselor, as a beautifully drawn
map is nearly worthless if essential information is missing.








SURVEYING 55
.Leveling
Leveling
In requirement 5, an elevation of 100 feet is assumed for
one point measured in requirement 2. The elevations of the
other four corners you measured in requirement 2 are then
determined. We have already seen what levels are, and
generally how they work; we will now use one.
If you used a leveling rod when you took measurements
for requirement 2, and if you are using the same rod for
this leveling requirement, you already know how to use it.
Otherwise, take a close look at the leveling rod. It probably
has more than one section and may have a movable target for
reading the scale at great distances.
Examine the scale on the leveling rod you are using. There
are many different types of scales, and you might ask your
merit badge counselor to help you understand the scale on the
particular rod you are using. If you are using a digital level, the
leveling rod will have a series of bar codes.
To measure the elevation difference between two points,
set up the level approximately halfway between them. If you
cannot see both points from your observation point (view
obstructed by a tree, for example), move to one side. The level
should still be set up at a point approximately equidistant from
the two points that you
want to measure. That way,
if the level is slightly out of
adjustment, so that the line
of sight (past the horizontal
crosshair) is not quite level,
the error is virtually canceled
because the sight distances
are approximately equal.
On long sights, equidistant
sights also cancel the effect
of the Earth’s curvature. Your
merit badge counselor will
Select a starting
point for leveling.
Your counselor
should approve
your starting
point before you
begin measuring.


56 SURVEYING
Leveling.
show you how to remove your level from its case, secure it to
the tripod, level it, adjust the bubble-level or check the vertical
compensator, and focus the telescope on the crosshairs and
the object.
Have the person in charge of the leveling rod hold it
vertically over the starting point, which has an assumed
elevation of 100 feet. To hold the rod truly vertical, a device
called a rod level might be necessary. A rod level is held
against the rod or is attached permanently to it. If the person
in charge of the rod will be hundreds of feet away, the two
of you might not be able to communicate. Two-way radios or
mobile telephones are helpful. If you do not have either one
of these, your merit badge counselor will show you and your
crew how to signal to each other. Remember that you can
see your rod helper through the telescope much more clearly
than that person can see you.
Rotate the level to face the leveling rod, which is positioned
at the first point. This sight is called the backsight. Focus the
telescope ocular on the crosshairs, and then adjust the object
focus on the leveling rod. Read the leveling rod’s scale where
the telescope’s horizontal crosshair appears on the scale. Record
the reading or have your recorder do it.
The person in charge of the leveling rod should then move
to the second point and hold the rod vertical. Rotate the level
to face the leveling rod. This sight is called the foresight. Read
the rod and record the reading. If you have the luxury of two
leveling rods and two rod helpers, then you can save time by
leapfrogging the rods and the level between two points; your
counselor will show you how.
For requirement 5, an elevation of 100 feet is assumed for
the backsighted point. The elevation of the leveling instrument
is 100 feet plus the backsight rod reading.
The elevation of the foresighted point
is the elevation of the leveling instru-
ment minus the foresight rod reading.
Thus the second point’s elevation is 100
feet (the assumed elevation of the first
point), plus the backsight rod reading,
minus the foresight rod reading. This
method is called differential leveling
because you use the difference between
rod readings to determine the elevation
difference between two points.
If you are using
a digital level,
once the level
is pointed at the
leveling rod, it will
read the bar code
on the level line
and record the
data automatically.
Your merit badge
counselor will
show you how to
keep good notes
for leveling.


SURVEYING 57
.Leveling
If the two points being measured are on a steep slope
or are separated by a hill, you might need to measure one or
more intermediate points in stair-step fashion on the slope or
over the hill, as in the diagram shown here.
Move the leveling instrument to a point between the
second and third points for which you are finding elevations.
Measure the elevation difference between the second and third
points, just as you measured the elevation difference between
the first and second points. Continue in that way around the
lot until you have made a complete circuit back to the starting
point. Verify that you measured the starting point’s elevation
to be very close to 100 feet. If it is not 100 feet, there is an
error, which you must find. If that happens, your merit badge
counselor can show you how to locate the error without
repeating all of your measurements.
STARTING
POINT
END
POINT
FIRST
BACK-
SIGHT
FIRST
FORE-
SIGHT
BACKSIGHT
ROD READING
FORESIGHT
ROD READING
LEVELING ROD AT
FIRST POSITION LEVELING
INSTRUMENT
BACKSIGHT
STARTING
POINT ELEVATION
DIFFERENCE
SECOND
POINT
LEVEL LINE OF SIGHT
FORESIGHT
LEVELING ROD AT
SECOND POSITION
Principle of differential leveling
Principle of differential
leveling over a hill





SURVEYING 59
.Careers in Surveying
Careers in Surveying
In this pamphlet, we have concentrated mostly on surveying
small parcels of land—locating their boundaries on the
ground, measuring their height (topography), and mapping
their features. Some surveyors specialize in surveying land
parcels ranging in size from small lots to entire cities to huge
tracts of forest land. Such surveying is not all outdoor work;
surveyors spend much of their time researching records of old
surveys and deeds. Even much of the outdoor work may consist
of searching for traces of old surveyor’s monuments.
To know what to measure, boundary surveyors must have
extensive legal knowledge and often must work closely with
attorneys. Surveyors work in organizations ranging in size
from very small companies to large organizations like the
United States government.
Engineering and construction surveyors locate buildings
and other structures on the land and ensure that they are built
in the right shape. Geodetic surveyors specialize in the detailed
shape of Earth and in the precise measurement of widely
separated points, so that the local surveys can be connected to
each other. Hydrographic surveyors measure rivers, lakes, ship
channels, and ocean bottoms. Mine and tunnel surveyors make
sure that tunnel crews boring toward each other from oppo-
site ends, possibly many miles apart and deep underground,
actually meet in the middle. Route surveyors lay out highways,
railroads, and pipelines over long distances, sometimes under
difficult terrain and weather conditions.
If you are considering surveying as a career, you should enjoy:
• Working with precise instruments and computers.
• All of your high school mathematics courses and take as
much mathematics and physical science as your high
school offers.
• Both physically demanding outdoor work as well as
work done in an office environment.


60 SURVEYING
Careers in Surveying.
Surveying generally requires at least four years of college
education. But, a surveyor’s education does not end upon
graduation from college. To stay current in new instruments
and methods, a surveyor is always learning.
Other career fields related to surveying also might be
considered. These areas also use surveying instruments and
methods, or perhaps work with the measurement of land.
For example, surveying draftsmen use sophisticated computer
systems to convey surveyors’ work into the detailed maps
that surveyors use to present work to clients (somewhat
like the maps that you made for this badge). Cartographers
convert survey and other data into maps of all sizes and
scales. Photogrammetrists use aerial photography for mapping.
Graphic information systems specialists collect and process
enormous amounts of survey and map data to coordinate
landownership, taxation, roads, and utilities. Some attorneys
work closely with surveyors on land and water rights. Title
insurance specialists use surveyors’ data and other information
as a basis for insuring their clients’ land. Optical tooling is a
very precise and specialized form of surveying that engineers
use to align large machinery like rolling mills, large structures
like ships, and large scientific instruments. Other engineers
design and build mechanical, optical, and electronic instruments
for surveying and related fields, and develop computer hardware
and software for automating data collection and processing, and
for drawing maps.








SURVEYING 63
.Surveying Resources
Scouting Literature
Architecture, Computers, Drafting,
Engineering, Landscape Architecture,
and Orienteering merit badge pamphlets.
This merit badge pamphlet touches
only briefly on a very complex subject.
Most of the details of instruments and
methods are left to your merit badge
counselor. If you have further interest
in surveying, ask your counselor to help
you learn more about it or to refer you
to books that match your interest and
background in mathematics.
Surveying changes so rapidly that
most books soon become obsolete. If
you borrow a surveying book from a
library, check the date of publication.
If the book is more than a few years
old, portions of it probably are obsolete.
After your counselor, other sources of
information include your local or state
library, college or university department
of surveying or civil engineering, a local
professional surveyor, or a technical or
college bookstore.
National Society of
Professional Surveyors
21 Byte Court, Suite H
Frederick, MD 21702
240-439-4615
nsps.us.com
TopoZone.com
73 Princeton St., Suite 305
North Chelmsford, MA 01863
topozone.com
U.S. Geological Survey
USGS National Center
12201 Sunrise Valley Drive
Reston, VA 20192
888-392-8545
usgs.gov
Surveying Resources
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


64 SURVEYING
Surveying Resources.
Acknowledgments
For his time and assistance in the
revision of this edition of the Surveying
merit badge pamphlet, Scouting
America thanks dedicated Scouter and
professional surveyor Thomas Brooks.
His commitment and professional
expertise contributed greatly to this
pamphlet.
Scouting America is grateful to
the following members of the Scout
Committee of the National Society
of Professional Surveyors and the
American Congress on Surveying and
Mapping who contributed to the 1992
edition of the Surveying merit badge
pamphlet, upon which this new edition
is based: Curtis Sumner, chairman;
longtime Scouter Murray Manley
(the 1992 edition is dedicated in his
memory); and Scouter Richard Alvarez,
who served as the primary author
of the 1992 edition. Thanks also to
Daniel Dewey of Trimble Navigation for
assisting with the diagrams.
We appreciate the Quicklist
Consulting Committee of the
Association for Library Service to
Children, a division of the American
Library Association, for its assistance
with updating the resources section of
this merit badge pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration Credits
Scott Bauer, USDA Agricultural
Resource Service, Bugwood.org,
courtesy—page 15 (top)
Bureau of Land Management,
courtesy—page 39
HAAP Media Ltd., courtesy—cover
(total station)
Kitty Kohout/The Morton Arboretum,
Lisle, Illinois, courtesy—page 15
(bottom left)
Library of Congress Prints and
Photographs Division,
courtesy—page 7
Longhorn Council, Scouting America,
courtesy—page 50
The Morton Arboretum, Lisle, Illinois,
courtesy—page 15 (bottom right)
©Photos.com—cover (level bob)
Trimble Navigation Limited and
California Surveying and Drafting
Supply Inc., courtesy—pages 24
(bottom), 29 (both), and 56
U.S. Geological Survey, courtesy—
page 21 (top)
All other photos and illustrations
not mentioned above are the
property of or are protected by
Scouting America.
Tim Brox—page 3
Daniel Giles—cover (GPS receiver,
optical level); pages 9, 12 (top), 16,
20 (GPS receiver), 25, 30, 33, 40,
43–44 (all), 46, 48, 51 (all), 53–55
(all), and 62
Roy Jansen—cover (compass)
John McDearmon—page 31
Randy Piland—pages 10 and
15 (poison ivy)