ENVIRONMENTAL
SCIENCE
STEM-Based


ENVIRONMENTAL
SCIENCE
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


35892
ISBN 978-0-8395-3363-4
©2022 Boy Scouts of America
2023 Printing
Note to the Counselor
This edition of the Environmental Science merit badge pamphlet
emphasizes a heightened awareness on the importance of bees,
beekeeping, and pollination. As a result, there are some hazards
that may be associated with the new pollination category for
working close to a beehive or colony.
Scouts choosing to pursue requirement 3G(3)
should first find out whether they are allergic to
bee stings. This can be determined by a visit to an
allergist or family physician. If it turns out a Scout
is allergic to bee stings, the Scout should choose
another option within requirement 3. If a Scout
visits a beekeeper with a buddy, that buddy should
also be sure that there are no allergies to bee stings
prior to the visit.
Prior to counseling Scouts, Environmental Science merit
badge counselors are strongly encouraged to become familiar
with the Guide to Safe Scouting, a helpful planning tool for all
Scouting volunteers. This resource provides an overview of
Scouting policies and procedures rather than comprehensive,
standalone documentation. For some items, the policy state-
ments are complete. However, unit leaders are expected to
review the additional reference materials cited (such as the
First Aid merit badge pamphlet) prior to conducting certain
activities. Counselors can access the Guide to Safe Scouting
online at www.scouting.org/HealthandSafety/GSS.aspx.
To help keep participants safe during Scouting activities,
the National Council has an established set of procedures
called the “Sweet 16 of BSA Safety.” In an effort to assist


ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE 3
Environmental Science merit badge counselors whose Scouts
choose requirement 3G(3), the following considerations provide
guidance of special interest to them.
Qualified Supervision. The Environmental Science merit
badge counselor assisting Scouts who choose requirement
3G(3) should have knowledge of applicable state USDA
regulations for handling bees and beekeeping equipment.
Physical Fitness. Counselors should be aware of youth
participants who may be allergic to bee stings.
Safe Area or Course. Counselors should take reasonable
measures to provide participants with a safe environment and
ensure the proper equipment will be used for handling bees,
as well as well-constructed hives that pass USDA inspection.
Equipment Selection and Maintenance. Counselors should
confirm beekeeping tools and equipment are well-maintained
and hives follow USDA guidelines.
Personal Safety Equipment. Counselors should ensure all
participants will wear proper protective clothing and gear for
beekeeping, including a hat, veil, coveralls, gloves, long sleeves,
pants, and other protective devices.
Applicable Laws. Counselors assisting Scouts with requirement
3G(3) for this merit badge must have experience with
beekeeping tasks and tools and be recruited to do the work
involved.
Discipline. Counselors should take reasonable measures to
ensure all participants understand they are to follow the
instructions of the beekeeper they are working with, including
how to use beekeeping tools and equipment properly.
The “Sweet 16 of BSA Safety” procedures are available
online by visiting www.scouting.org/HealthandSafety/sweet16.
aspx.


4 ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE
1. Make a time line of the history of environmental science in
America. Identify the contribution made by the Boy Scouts
of America to environmental science. Include dates, names
of people or organizations, and important events.
2. Define the following terms: population, community, eco-
system, biosphere, symbiosis, niche, habitat, conservation,
threatened species, endangered species, extinction, pollution
prevention, brownfield, ozone, watershed, airshed, nonpoint
source, hybrid vehicle, fuel cell.
3. Do ONE activity from EACH of the following categories
(using the activities in this pamphlet as the basis for planning
and projects):
A. Ecology
(1) Conduct an experiment to find out how living things
respond to changes in their environments. Discuss
your observations with your counselor.
(2) Conduct an experiment illustrating the greenhouse
effect. Keep a journal of your data and observations.
Discuss your conclusions with your counselor.
(3) Discuss what is an ecosystem. Tell how it is
maintained in nature and how it survives.
B. Air Pollution
(1) Perform an experiment to test for particulates that
contribute to air pollution. Discuss your findings
with your counselor.
Requirements
Always check www.scouting.org for the latest requirements.


ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE 5
(2) Record the trips taken, mileage, and fuel consumption
of a family car for seven days, and calculate how
many miles per gallon the car gets. Determine whether
any trips could have been combined (“chained”)
rather than taken out and back. Using the idea of trip
chaining, determine how many miles and gallons of
gas could have been saved in those seven days.
(3) Explain what is acid rain. In your explanation, tell
how it affects plants and the environment and the
steps society can take to help reduce its effects.
C. Water Pollution
(1) Conduct an experiment to show how living things
react to thermal pollution. Discuss your observations
with your counselor.
(2) Conduct an experiment to identify the methods that
could be used to mediate (reduce) the effects of an
oil spill on waterfowl. Discuss your results with
your counselor.
(3) Describe the impact of a waterborne pollutant
on an aquatic community. Write a 100-word report
on how that pollutant affected aquatic life, what
the effect was, and whether the effect is linked
to biomagnification.
D. Land Pollution
(1) Conduct an experiment to illustrate soil erosion by
water. Take photographs or make a drawing of the
soil before and after your experiment, and make a
poster showing your results. Present your poster to
your counselor.
(2) Perform an experiment to determine the effect of
an oil spill on land. Discuss your conclusions with
your counselor.
(3) Photograph an area affected by erosion. Share your
photographs with your counselor and discuss why
the area has eroded and what might be done to help
alleviate the erosion.


6 ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE
E. Endangered Species
(1) Do research on one endangered species found in
your state. Find out what its natural habitat is, why
it is endangered, what is being done to preserve it,
and how many individual organisms are left in the
wild. Prepare a 100-word report about the organism,
including a drawing. Present your report to your
patrol or troop.
(2) Do research on one species that was endangered or
threatened but that has now recovered. Find out how
the organism recovered, and what its new status is.
Write a 100-word report on the species and discuss it
with your counselor.
(3) With your parent’s and counselor’s approval, work
with a natural resource professional to identify two
projects that have been approved to improve the
habitat for a threatened or endangered species in
your area. Visit the site of one of these projects and
report on what you saw.
F. Pollution Prevention, Resource Recovery, and Conservation
(1) Look around your home and determine 10 ways your
family can help reduce pollution. Practice at least
two of these methods for seven days and discuss
with your counselor what you have learned.
(2) Determine 10 ways to conserve resources or use
resources more efficiently in your home, at school, or
at camp. Practice at least two of these methods for
seven days and discuss with your counselor what you
have learned.
(3) Perform an experiment on packaging materials to
find out which ones are biodegradable. Discuss your
conclusion with your counselor.
G. Pollination
(1) Using photographs or illustrations, point out the
differences between a drone and a worker bee. Discuss
the stages of bee development (eggs, larvae, pupae).
Explain the pollination process, and what propolis is
and how it is used by honey bees. Tell how bees make
honey and beeswax, and how both are harvested.


ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE 7
Explain the part played in the life of the hive by the
queen, the drones, and the workers.
(2) Present to your counselor a one-page report on how
and why honey bees are used in pollinating food
crops. In your report, discuss the problems faced by
the bee population today, and the impact to
humanity if there were no pollinators. Share your
report with your troop or patrol, your class at school,
or another group approved by your counselor.
(3) Hive a swarm OR divide at least one colony of honey
bees. Explain how a hive is constructed.
Before you choose requirement 3G(3), you will need to first
find out whether you are allergic to bee stings. Visit an allergist
or your family physician to find out. If you are allergic to bee
stings, you should choose another option within requirement 3.
In completing requirement 3G(3), your counselor can help you
find an established beekeeper to meet with you and your buddy. Ask
whether you can help hive a swarm or divide a colony of honey bees.
Before your visit, be sure your buddy is not allergic to bee stings.
For help with locating a beekeeper in your state, visit
www.beeculture.com and click on “Bee Resources,” then “Find a
Local Beekeeper.”
H. Invasive Species
(1) Learn to identify the major invasive plant species in
your community or camp and explain to your counselor
what can be done to either eradicate or control their
spread.
(2) Do research on two invasive plant or animal species in
your community or camp. Find out where the species
originated, how they were transported to the United
States, their life history, how they are spread, and the
recommended means to eradicate or control their
spread. Report your research orally or in writing to your
counselor.
(3) Take part in a project of at least one hour to eradicate or
control the spread of an invasive plant species in your
community or camp.


8 ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE
4. Choose two outdoor study areas that are very different from
one another (e.g., hilltop vs. bottom of a hill; field vs. forest;
swamp vs. dry land). For BOTH study areas, do ONE of the
following:
A. Mark off a plot of 4 square yards in each study area, and
count the number of species found there. Estimate how
much space is occupied by each plant species and the
type and number of nonplant species you find. Write
a report that adequately discusses the biodiversity and
population density of these study areas. Discuss your
report with your counselor.
B. Make at least three visits to each of the two study areas
(for a total of six visits), staying for at least 20 minutes
each time, to observe the living and nonliving parts of
the ecosystem. Space each visit far enough apart that
there are readily apparent differences in the observations.
Keep a journal that includes the differences you observe.
Then, write a short report that adequately addresses your
observations, including how the differences of the study
areas might relate to the differences noted, and discuss
this with your counselor.
5. Using the construction project provided or a plan you create
on your own, identify the items that would need to be
included in an environmental impact statement for the project
planned.
6. Find out about three career opportunities in environmental
science. Pick one and find out the education, training, and
experience required for this profession. Discuss this with
your counselor, and explain why this profession might
interest you.


ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE 9
.Environmental Science Resources
Scouting Literature
Conservation Handbook; Fieldbook;
Animal Science, Chemistry, Citizenship
in the Community, Citizenship in the
Nation, Citizenship in the World,
Energy, Engineering, Fish and Wildlife
Management, Fishing, Forestry,
Gardening, Landscape Architecture,
Mammal Study, Nature, Oceanography,
Plant Science, Pulp and Paper, Soil and
Water Conservation, Sustainability, and
Weather merit badge pamphlets
With your parent’s permission, visit
the Boy Scouts of America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org,
for a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.
Adams, Douglas, and Mark Carwardine.
Last Chance to See. Harmony
Books, 1990.
Bickerstaff, Linda. Oil Power of the
Future: New Ways of Turning
Petroleum Into Energy. The Rosen
Publishing Group Inc., 2003.
Bowden, Rob. Waste, Recycling, and
Reuse. Raintree Steck-Vaughn, 2002.
Carson, Rachel. Silent Spring.
Houghton Mifflin, 2002.
Earthworks Group. 50 Simple Things
Kids Can Do to Recycle. Earthworks
Press, 1994.
Fasulo, Mike, and Jane Kinney.
Careers for Environmental Types
and Others Who Respect the Earth.
McGraw-Hill, 2001.
Hall, Eleanor J. Garbage.
Gale Group, 1997.
Koebner, Linda. For Kids Who Love
Animals: A Guide to Sharing the
Planet. American Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals.
Living Planet Press, 1991.
MacEachern, Diane. Save Our Planet.
Bantam Doubleday Dell, 1995.
O’Connor, Rebecca K. Acid Rain.
Lucent Books, 2004.
Patent, Dorothy Hinshaw. Biodiversity.
Houghton Mifflin, 2003.
Pringle, Laurence. Global Warming.
Sea Star Books, 2001
———. The Environmental Movement.
HarperCollins, 2000.
Rathje, William. Rubbish! The
Archaeology of Garbage.
HarperCollins, 1993.
Rybolt, Thomas R., and Robert C.
Mebane. Environmental
Experiments About Land.
Enslow Publishers Inc., 1993.
Wilson, Edward O. The Diversity
of Life. Norton, 1992.
Organizations and Websites
Earth 911
Telephone: 480-889-2650
www.earth911.com
Environmental Protection Agency
Telephone: 202-272-0167
www.epa.gov
Keep America Beautiful
Telephone: 203-323-8987
www.kab.org
Environmental Science
Resources


10 ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE
Environmental Science Resources.
Natural Resources
Conservation Service
Telephone: 202-720-3210
www.nrcs.usda.gov
Save Our Environment
www.saveourenvironment.org
Sierra Club
Telephone: 415-977-5500
www.sierraclub.org
Society of American Foresters
Telephone: 301-897-8720
www.eforester.org
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
Toll-free telephone: 800-344-9453
www.fws.gov
Endangered species website:
fws.gov/endangered/
USDA Forest Service
Telephone: 202-205-8333
www.fs.fed.us
World Wildlife Fund
Telephone: 202-293-4800
www.worldwildlife.org