BIRD STUDY
STEM-Based


BIRD STUDY
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


35865
ISBN 978-0-8395-3300-9
©2025 Scouting America/Boy Scouts of America
2025 Printing
Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Bird-Study or check Scoutbook
for the latest requirements.


BIRD STUDY 3


4 BIRD STUDY


BIRD STUDY 5
Contents
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
North America’s Birds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
What Makes a Bird a Bird? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .18
How Birds Live . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .28
Observing Birds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .40
Bird Study and Science . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .58
Bird Conservation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .64
Creating a Backyard Bird Sanctuary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .74
Careers in Bird Study. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .91
Bird Study Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .92
The Outdoor Code
As an American, I will do my best to –
Be clean in my outdoor manners.
Be careful with fire.
Be considerate in the outdoors.
Be conservation-minded.


6 BIRD STUDY
Introduction.
Introduction
The scientific name for bird study is ornithology. Bird study is
not just a science; it is also a fascinating hobby for millions of
people around the world.
The first birds were descendants of the dinosaurs.
Approximately 65 million years ago, scientists say a large
asteroid struck Earth off the Yucatan Peninsula in the Gulf of
Mexico. The asteroid strike caused the destruction of almost all
living plants for a few years because the large amount dust in
the atmosphere prevented much of the sun’s light from
reaching the planet. But smaller animals, such as lizards,
insects, and small mammals, were able to survive off of other
small animals, seeds, dried fruits, and vegetation. Birds also
were among the survivors of this natural
catastrophe.
Birds have long been fascinating
subjects for study. In 1836 Charles
Darwin traveled to the Galapagos
Islands, near Ecuador in South
America, to explore. He
observed that the finches on
the different islands had bills
of different shapes and sizes.
It would take him more than
20 years to finally solve this
riddle and propose the then-
existing theory of evolution
by usage was wrong. In 1859
he published On the Origin of
Species, in which he proved that
the distinctive bill of each finch
species was specifically modified to
improve the bird’s ability to eat specific
plants, seeds, insects, and fruits that were


BIRD STUDY 7
.Introduction
available on its particular island. He called this evolution
“natural selection,” a process that favors individual animals that
are best adapted to their specific environment. His observations
about birds changed the entire world of biology.
Today every person that watches birds as a hobby can
contribute to science by reporting their observations on the
internet to science academies such as the Cornell University
School of Ornithology at the website eBird.org. Through this
collected data, scientists can more accurately plot birds’
activities and habitats over time. This input by hobbyists has
given us all a greater understanding of bird migration and how
its timing is dependent on different variables like temperature,
daylight, insect hatches and plant growth. More than 45 million
Americans like to feed and watch birds in their backyards; more
than 18 million consider themselves active birders.
You can see how bird study is important, fun and
fascinating in so many ways.
You can start a
life list—a tally of
all the species of
birds you see—
including the date
and place where
you saw each
one. Years from
now, a life list can
help you relive the
exciting moment
when you saw a
new species—
a life bird. Most
birders now
use eBird.org to
keep their life
lists, which also
helps contribute
to citizen
science and bird
conservation.
Birds are found almost everywhere, from the middle
of large cities to the most remote wilderness areas and
far out on the open oceans. You can go birding in your
backyard and on vacation, spotting exciting species
whenever you travel to new areas. With more than
9,000 species of birds in the world, birding is a hobby
that can last a lifetime.


8 BIRD STUDY
North America’s Birds.
North America’s Birds
More than 800 species of birds breed in North America or
appear here regularly in migration. The list ranges from the
enormous (and critically endangered) California condor, with a
wingspan of more than 9 feet, to the tiny calliope hummingbird
of the West, which is just a bit longer than 3 inches and weighs
less than a 10th of an ounce. Some species are found almost
everywhere, such as the American robin, which occurs in every
state except Hawaii. Others have extremely small ranges. If
you want to see a Colima warbler, for example, you will have
to climb high into the Chisos Mountains of southwest Texas.
The only place in the United States where you can see a white-
crowned pigeon is the Florida Keys.
One reason North America has so many species of birds is
that the continent has many different habitats, each of which
can support a different community of plants and animals. The
kinds of birds that can survive on the edge of the Arctic
Ocean in Alaska, where the sun barely shines all
winter, will be much different from those found
in a cypress swamp in the Southeast, on a
prairie in the Great Plains, or in a redwood
forest along the Pacific Coast. You can
learn more about which birds are
found in different habitats in the
section titled “Where to Find Birds”
later in this chapter.
Birds come in a
variety of shapes and
sizes, such as in the
California condor, left, and
calliope hummingbird.
To find out more
about habitats,
communities, and
ecosystems, see
the Environmental
Science merit
badge pamphlet.


BIRD STUDY 9
.North America’s Birds
Birds lend life, color, and music to the outdoors, and
they are an important part of the ecosystems that keep this
planet healthy. Because they are sensitive to changes in the
environment, birds are valuable indicators of trouble, including
pollution and habitat loss. It was the near-disappearance of bald
eagles, peregrine falcons, and brown pelicans decades ago that
alerted people to the dangers of many pesticides. Major, rapid
declines in the number of songbirds have shown that we must
preserve large areas for wildlife habitat.
How Birds Are Classified
Scientists group living things by how closely they are related to
one another. Each species is lumped with its closest relatives
to form a genus, usually on the basis of physical characteristics
like the shapes of certain bones. Closely related genera (the
plural of “genus”) are grouped together to form a family.
Similar families make up the 20 orders of birds in North
America, all of which belong to the class Aves, from the
Latin word meaning “birds.”
As you learn about birds, knowing how they are classified
will help you in many ways. Most field guides are arranged in
this taxonomic order. Because related birds often act and look
somewhat the same, knowing these relationships
can help you identify a new, puzzling species.
Increasingly, scientists have been using
molecular genetics to classify birds. It’s a very
complicated process that involves the use of
genetic information to help determine a spe-
cies’ or group’s place in the overall taxonomic
order. Thanks to molecular genetics, the New
World vultures are now considered close
relatives of the storks. (See the box titled
“American Bird Orders.”)
Mallard
In years past,
coal miners took
caged canaries
underground
because invisible
poisonous gases
would kill the
birds first, warning
the miners and
allowing them
to escape. In a
sense, wild birds
are often our
“canaries in
the mine.”


10 BIRD STUDY
North America’s Birds.
American Bird Orders
The bird orders found in North America are
shown below, with some of the common
families listed in the order. Some orders, like
the Gaviiformes (loons) and Podicipediformes
(grebes), have only one family, whereas the
order Passeriformes, the perching birds, has
dozens of families.
1. Gaviiformes. Loons: Goose-like waterbirds
that dive for fish.
2. Podicipediformes. Grebes: Duck-like
waterbirds with lobed toes.
3. Procellariiformes. Albatrosses, petrels, shear-
waters: These sea birds have tube-like nostrils.
4. Pelecaniformes. Pelicans, frigatebirds,
cormorants: Fish-eating birds with all four
toes webbed.
5. Anseriformes. Ducks, geese, swans, and
other waterfowl.
6. Ciconiiformes. Herons, storks: Long-legged
wading birds.
7. Falconiformes. Falcons: small to medium
sized, agile day-hunting birds of prey.
8. Accipitriformes. Hawks, eagles, osprey,
kites, vultures: most other day-hunting
birds of prey.
9. Galliformes. Grouse, quail, pheasants,
turkeys: Gallinaceous (chicken-like), ground-
dwelling birds.
10. Gruiformes. Cranes, rails, coots: A varied
group of land and marsh birds.
11. Charadriiformes. Gulls, terns, auks,
sandpipers: A large order of waterbirds
and shorebirds.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11


BIRD STUDY 11
.North America’s Birds
12. Columbiformes. Doves, pigeons: Plump,
small-headed, powerful fliers.
13. Psittaciformes. Parrots: Rare in the United
States, except as escapees from captivity.
14. Cuculiformes. Cuckoos, roadrunners: Long,
slender birds with two toes that point
forward and two that point backward.
15. Strigiformes. Owls: Night-hunting
birds of prey.
16. Caprimulgiformes. Nightjars, frogmouths:
These birds have tiny feet, small bills, and
huge, gaping mouths.
17. Apodiformes. Swifts, hummingbirds:
Small, strong-winged, spectacular fliers
with small feet.
18. Trogoniformes. Trogons: Tropical birds rare
in the United States.
19. Coraciiformes. Kingfishers: Short-tailed
birds with long, stout, sharp bills.
20. Piciformes. Woodpeckers: Tree-climbers that
drill into trees with long, chisel-like bills.
21. Passeriformes. Perching birds: The largest
order of birds in the world, including more
than half of all living bird species. Perching
birds (also called passerines) include
flycatchers, shrikes, vireos, crows and jays,
waxwings, dippers, thrushes, thrashers,
nuthatches, creepers, wrens, gnatcatchers,
titmice and chickadees, swallows, kinglets,
wood warblers, longspurs, sparrows,
towhees, tanagers, grosbeaks, orioles,
robins, and blackbirds.
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21


12 BIRD STUDY
North America’s Birds.
Where to Find Birds
Bird species are found in their favorite habitat—the mix of
terrain and plants in which they prefer to live. The terrain
and plant life of this habitat in turn support the preferred food
sources and hiding and nesting surroundings the bird needs.
Some birds need a marshy habitat; others inhabit conifer forests
or grasslands. By knowing where to look, you will increase your
odds of having an exciting day of birding. Eventually, you should
be able to look at a particular habitat and make an accurate
guess as to what kinds of birds you are likely to see there.


BIRD STUDY 13
.North America’s Birds
Certain habitats are especially good for many species.
Wetlands are near the top of the list. Marshes, swamps, prairie
potholes, bogs, and other damp places attract many bird types
found nowhere else. But every habitat has its particular kinds of
birds, and often the best birding is where two or more habitats
meet—what ecologists call an ecotone.
Listed below are some of the most common species of
birds in each habitat. These lists are far from complete. You
may find many species that are not listed here. Also remember
that birds often use more than one kind of habitat. An adapt-
able species like the mourning dove may be found in back-
yards, city parks, farmlands, or prairies, and gulls are often
found far from lakes or oceans.


14 BIRD STUDY
North America’s Birds.
Backyards and Parks
Canada goose, mallard, mourning dove, common
nighthawk, chimney swift, American crow, blue jay,
northern flicker, black-capped and Carolina chickadees,
American robin, eastern bluebird, northern mockingbird,
European starling, house sparrow, northern cardinal,
chipping sparrow, house finch, Brewer’s blackbird (West),
common grackle (East)
Roadsides, Thickets, and Brushy Areas
Cooper’s hawk, northern bobwhite, California quail
(West), yellow-billed cuckoo, mourning dove, willow
flycatcher, black-billed magpie (West), house wren, brown
thrasher, gray catbird, Bell’s vireo, white-eyed vireo,
orange-crowned warbler (West), yellow warbler, common
yellowthroat, northern cardinal, pyrrhuloxia (Southwest),
spotted towhee (West), eastern towhee, song sparrow,
white-throated sparrow
Fields, Meadows, and Prairies
Killdeer, upland sandpiper, turkey vulture, northern harrier,
red-tailed hawk, Swainson’s hawk (West), American
kestrel, sharp-tailed grouse, ring-necked pheasant,
mourning dove, short-eared owl, eastern kingbird, western
kingbird, scissor-tailed flycatcher (Great Plains), American
crow, horned lark, barn swallow, loggerhead shrike,
mountain bluebird (West), grasshopper sparrow, vesper
sparrow, Savannah sparrow, lark sparrow, dickcissel,
eastern and western meadowlarks, American goldfinch
Western Mountains
Harlequin duck, golden eagle, blue grouse, white-
tailed ptarmigan, spotted owl, calliope hummingbird,
broad-tailed hummingbird, Williamson’s and red-naped
sapsuckers, Clark’s nutcracker, northern raven, mountain
chickadee, pygmy nuthatch, American pipit, American
dipper, Townsend’s warbler, white-crowned sparrow,
western tanager, gray-crowned rosy finch, black rosy finch
Deciduous Eastern Hardwood Forests
Red-shouldered hawk, broad-winged hawk, ruffed grouse,
wild turkey, great horned owl, eastern screech owl, ruby-
throated hummingbird, downy woodpecker, pileated
American robin
Clark’s nutcracker
Common yellowthroat
Western meadowlark
Ruffed grouse


BIRD STUDY 15
.North America’s Birds
woodpecker, eastern phoebe, great-crested flycatcher,
blue jay, tufted titmouse, white-breasted nuthatch, wood
thrush, red-eyed vireo, black-and-white warbler, ovenbird,
American redstart, rose-breasted grosbeak, dark-eyed junco,
Baltimore oriole, scarlet tanager
Conifer Forests
Northern goshawk, spruce grouse, northern saw-whet owl,
great gray owl, red-cockaded woodpecker (Southeast), olive-
sided flycatcher, Hammond’s flycatcher (West), Steller’s jay
(West), gray jay (North and the Rockies), northern raven,
red-breasted nuthatch, brown-headed nuthatch (Southeast),
winter wren, golden-crowned kinglet, hermit thrush, varied
thrush (West), Cape May warbler, pine warbler, pine siskin,
red crossbill, white-winged crossbill, purple finch
Deserts and Arid Scrub
Turkey vulture, red-tailed hawk, Harris’ hawk, scaled quail,
Gambel’s quail, white-winged dove, greater roadrunner,
elf owl, burrowing owl, common poorwill, Costa’s
hummingbird, Gila woodpecker, ladder-backed woodpecker,
cactus wren, rock wren, canyon wren, curve-billed thrasher,
gray vireo, black-throated sparrow, sage sparrow, rufous-
crowned sparrow
Freshwater Wetlands and Lakes
Common loon, pied-billed grebe, white pelican, double-
crested cormorant, American bittern, green heron, great
blue heron, white-faced ibis (West), sandhill crane, Canada
goose, mallard, northern pintail, blue-winged teal, sora,
American coot, American avocet, killdeer, greater and lesser
yellowlegs, spotted sandpiper, ring-billed gull, Forster’s tern,
black tern, osprey, bald eagle, belted kingfisher, tree
swallow, marsh wren, red-winged blackbird, yellow-headed
blackbird (West)
Coastal Wetlands and Seashores
Brown pelican, tricolored heron, reddish egret (South), white
ibis, clapper rail, American oystercatcher, semipalmated
plover, black-bellied plover, willet, short-billed and long-billed
dowitchers, sanderling, laughing gull (East and South),
herring gull, western gull, common tern, black skimmer,
fish crow (East), seaside sparrow, boat-tailed grackle
Saw-whet owl
Harris’ hawk
Great blue heron
Common tern


16 BIRD STUDY
North America’s Birds.
Nonnative Birds
Some of North America’s most common birds were brought to
this continent by humans. Over the years, and for a variety of
reasons, people have released dozens of different bird species
in the United States. Some have escaped from captivity—ducks,
pheasants, quail, parrots, songbirds, and even emus (relatives
of the ostrich), which have escaped from ranches, especially in
Texas. Most of these introductions have failed, but a few species
have become widespread.
Mute swan. Often released in parks and on private lakes, these
huge European birds can have a nasty temper. They are known
to drive away—even kill—native waterfowl, and they occasion-
ally attack people. Mute swans, which destroy aquatic vegeta-
tion, are becoming common in the East and the Great Lakes
states. Conservationists are trying to control their numbers.
Ring-necked pheasant. Originally from Asia, the ring-
necked pheasant was introduced to Europe. As early as the
1700s, European colonists were releasing them in America.
These attempts were unsuccessful until the 1880s in Oregon.
Pheasants are now common in farmland across much of the
country and are a popular game bird. Other game birds that
have been introduced include the chukar and gray partridges.
European starling. In the 1800s, many “acclimatization
societies” sprang up in the United States, dedicated to intro-
ducing European birds to North America. One society in New
York released the European starling, for no better reason than
because it is mentioned in one of William Shakespeare’s plays.
It was a disastrous decision. Starlings are now found every-
where in North America except the Arctic. They compete with
cavity-nesting birds such as flickers, bluebirds, and purple
martins, contributing to their decline.
Nonnative birds can cause big trouble for native species. European
starlings and house sparrows, for example, compete with native cavity-
nesting birds for nesting holes in trees and are a major reason that
bluebirds have become rare in many areas. A large percentage of the
birds in Hawaii have been introduced, with terrible consequences for
some native species. Conservationists now oppose introductions of new
species, fearing more unforeseen problems.


BIRD STUDY 17
.North America’s Birds
House sparrow. In an attempt to control insects that damage
crops, people released house sparrows from Europe in many
parts of the United States between 1850 and 1900. Instead of
controlling insect pests, these small, drab birds made life
difficult for native cavity-nesting species. Like starlings, they
do best around humans and are not found in deep forest or
wilderness areas. A close relative, the Eurasian tree sparrow,
was introduced in 1870; because of competition with house
sparrows, this species has remained in a fairly small area
around St. Louis, Missouri, where it was first released.
House finch. These birds are native to the western United
States and Mexico. In the 1940s, pet stores in New York illegally
sold them as “Hollywood finches.” According to one story,
when federal agents tried to intercept a shipment at an airport,
smugglers released the birds. However they were first intro-
duced, house finches rapidly spread across the East, South, and
Midwest; today the species is found throughout the country.
Parrots. Escaped parrots, parakeets, cockatiels, and even
macaws now thrive in many urban areas, particularly southern
Florida, southern Texas, and southern California. Monk para-
keets, potentially destructive agricultural pests from Argentina,
survive winters in the Northeast and upper Midwest by
roosting in huge, communal nests.
Rock pigeon. This common pigeon, also
called “rock dove,” is frequently seen
in cities and farmland, living in close
proximity to people. Rock pigeons were
naturally found on cliffs in Europe
and Northern Africa but have been
domesticated for thousands of years,
both as a food source and for carrying
messages. Pigeons have an amazing
homing ability and were used to
transport secret messages during the
world wars. Feral rock pigeons, which
have descended from the many breeds
of domestic birds, now live in practically
every city and are considered an exotic
invasive species. Most are gray with colorful
iridescent necks and dark wing-bars, but you
might seen many different colors and patterns of
pigeons in a flock. House finch


18 BIRD STUDY
What Makes a Bird a Bird?.
Primary
wing
What Makes a
Bird a Bird?
Feathers are a bird’s defining characteristic. No other living crea-
ture has them, although recent fossil discoveries show that some
dinosaurs were also feathered. Feathers, which are related to the
hair found on mammals, are extremely specialized structures.
Feathers are among the most remarkable components in nature—
light, tough, flexible, and colorful. Feathers provide insulation
and waterproofing. And, of course, they permit birds to fly.
Feather Types
Feathers come in many different sizes and shapes, depending
on their purpose. Flight feathers, found on the wings and tail,
are long and stiff to provide lift for flight. Contour feathers
cover the body like shingles, giving the bird a sleek
shape and enhancing smooth air flow (minimizing
wind resistance).
Body
Down
Tail
Feathers of a mockingbird


BIRD STUDY 19
.What Makes a Bird a Bird?
Beneath the contour feathers are the soft and fluffy down
feathers, which trap heat and keep the bird warm. Scattered over
the bird’s body, mixed in with the flight and contour feathers, are
slender bristles known as filoplumes, which are attached to nerve
bundles under the skin. Scientists think that filoplumes help
the bird control the movements of the rest of its feathers. Taken
together, all of a bird’s feathers are known as its plumage.
Look at a feather under a magnifying glass. You will see
that it has many thin strands, called barbs. After pulling them
gently apart, you can use your finger to smooth them together
again because each barb is covered with microscopic hooks, or
barbules, that act like tiny zippers. Several times a day, a bird
grooms its plumage with its beak in an act called preening, to
neatly rearrange any messed-up feathers.
Like human hair, feathers grow from follicles in the skin.
Each feather is replaced every year or so. The growing feather
is encased in a sheath like a soda straw, which is full of blood
to nourish the new feather. Once the feather reaches full size
in several weeks, the blood is cut off, the sheath splits and is
pulled away, and the new plume emerges.
Tip: Your
binoculars can
double as a
handy magnifying
glass. Reverse
them and look
through one side
of the “wrong”
end. Move the
binoculars close
to the object
you want to
see—a feather,
perhaps—and it
will be magnified
many times.
Close-up of a feather
SHAFT
BARBS
SHAFT
BARBULE
BARBICELS
BARB


20 BIRD STUDY
What Makes a Bird a Bird?.
Feathers are not distributed randomly
on a bird’s body. Instead, they grow in
areas called feather tracts, which cover certain
parts of the body but leave bare other areas, like
the middle of the belly and the sides of the neck.
You usually do not see these bare patches, because
the surrounding feathers overlap and cover them.
Feather tracts are noticeable when a bird is wet,
such as when it is bathing.
A tiny set of muscles controls each feather on a
bird’s body, so a bird can raise or lower its feathers as it
wants. Watch a wild bird on a cold day—see it fluff its
feathers, trapping more air between them for warmth.
When it is ready to fly, the bird will flatten its feathers
against its body so it is more streamlined.
Parts of a Bird
Birders and ornithologists use special terms to describe the
various parts of a bird’s body and its different kinds of flight
feathers, as shown in these illustrations.
How Many Feathers?
The number of feathers a bird has depends on its size.
While bigger birds obviously have room for more
feathers, birds also grow more feathers in winter, for
insulation, than in summer. Scientists have carefully
plucked and counted the feathers on dead specimens
and found that most songbirds have between 2,000
and 2,600 feathers. Tiny hummingbirds have fewer than
1,000 feathers, while large swans may have more than
25,000, tightly packed to keep the bird warm and dry
while it swims in cold water.
This 15-day-old American robin shows areas of bare skin,
called apteria, that will be covered by feathers as they
grow from the feather tracts (pterylae).


BIRD STUDY 21
.What Makes a Bird a Bird?
On a wing, the feathers are arranged in layers, with the
largest, stiffest feathers—the flight feathers—near the tip and
rear of the wing. The outermost flight feathers are known as
primaries. The feathers from the bend of the wing to the body
are called secondaries. A group of smaller flight feathers—
tertials—lie where the wing and body meet. Just in front of
the flight feathers is a row of smaller feathers, the primary
and secondary coverts. Arranged like shingles in front of
them are the lesser coverts. At the bend
of the wing, the alula, or false
primary (made up of 3 alula
feathers), acts as a trim tab,
keeping the bird trim
(balanced) in flight,
much as a pilot uses
trim tabs to keep an
airplane balanced.
CROWN
EYEBROW
(SUPERCILIUM)
BILL
EYE RING
THROAT
BREAST
TOE TIBIOTARSUS
FLANK
WINGBARS
UNDERTAIL
COVERTS
SECONDARIES
PRIMARIES
TERTIALS
TAIL
RUMP
SCAPULARS
BACKCHEEK PATCH
(AURICULAR
PATCH)
Parts of a yellow-rumped warbler
PRIMARY
COVERTS
ALULA
PRIMARY FLIGHT
FEATHERS
LESSER COVERTS SECONDARY
COVERTS
SECONDARY FLIGHT
FEATHERS
Wing of a northern cardinal


22 BIRD STUDY
What Makes a Bird a Bird?.
Bird Adaptations
Like its feathers, almost everything about a bird is designed
to help it fly. Most birds have thin, hollow bones to save on
weight. Instead of a mouthful of heavy teeth, a bird has a light-
weight beak made of the same material as your fingernails.
Most of a bird’s chest is taken up by enormous flight muscles
that are anchored to a breastbone, or keel. The wishbone, or
furcula, lies in front of the chest, linking the two wings and the
breastbone. It acts like a spring, adding force to each wingbeat.
A bird’s legs might seem backward when compared to
your own. A bird’s knee bends to the rear, not to the front
like a human’s. But that is because a bird’s “knee” is really its
ankle, and what we call its “foot” are really its toes. Look at the
illustration to see how a bird’s leg works.
Perching mechanism of a
pigeon. When the leg bends,
tendons running to the toes
are pulled shorter, causing
toes to lock around a perch,
which prevents a sleeping
bird from falling off its perch.
KEEL MAJOR PECTORAL
MUSCLE
FURCULA
BICEPS
THUMB
(ALULA)
Rock pigeon


BIRD STUDY 23
.What Makes a Bird a Bird?
Most birds share the same general adapta-
tions for flight, but each species has its own
unique adaptations for the specialized life it
leads. Soaring birds, such as vultures, cranes,
and hawks, have wide wings, for example. Fast
species, such as swifts and falcons, have long,
pointed wings.
Beaks are especially good examples of
specialized adaptation. A red-tailed hawk’s
beak is hooked and sharp for tearing meat. A
duck, such as a pintail or shoveler, has a wide,
flat bill that is lined along the inner edge with
tiny, comb-like teeth for filtering seeds and
minute animals from the water. Woodpeckers
have chisel-like bills for hammering through
wood for insects, which they spear with their
long, barbed tongues. Long-billed curlews
have thin, curved beaks for plucking insects
from deep underground.
Bills, from top: northern cardinal, American
woodcock, hairy woodpecker, peregrine falcon,
prairie warbler, great blue heron, mallard
CHISEL—
WOODPECKER
TWEEZERS—
WARBLER
SIEVE—
DUCK
FORCEPS/PROBE—
WOODCOCK
ANVIL—
CARDINAL
SCISSORS/KNIFE—
FALCON
SPEAR—
HERON


24 BIRD STUDY
What Makes a Bird a Bird?.
A hummingbird’s needle-like beak is
perfect for slipping deep into a flower so the
bird can lap up nectar. Seedeaters, such as
cardinals, sparrows, and grosbeaks, have thick,
crushing beaks for cracking heavy shells.
Common nighthawks have tiny bills but huge
mouths that open like funnels to catch flying
insects. The pelican’s famous bill has a flexible
pouch of skin between the beak and neck for
catching fish.
There is plenty of variation in birds’ feet
and legs. Most songbirds have slender feet
with short, curved nails for grasping twigs.
A hummingbird’s feet are so small that it
cannot walk, only perch. To move even a little,
a hummingbird must take off and land again.
Raptors, such as hawks and owls, have
strong feet with long, sharp claws called talons,
which they use to catch and kill their food.
Woodpecker claws are strong and sharp, too,
so the bird can cling to the side of a tree, using
its tail as a brace.
TREE-CLINGING—
WOODPECKER
PERCHING—
GROSBEAK
WALKING
(SNOWSHOE)—
RUFFED GROUSE
WADING—
NIGHT-HERON
SWIMMING—
DUCK
GRASPING—
HAWK
Feet, from top: yellow-crowned night-heron,
evening grosbeak, mallard, downy woodpecker,
sharp-shinned hawk, ruffed grouse


BIRD STUDY 25
.What Makes a Bird a Bird?
Wading birds, such as herons, egrets, storks, and rails, have
long, thin legs so they can move through shallow water with-
out getting their feathers wet. Ducks, geese, and swans have
webbed feet for swimming, while grebes have folding flaps
along the sides of their toes that accomplish the same thing.
Some birds have more unusual adaptations. Vultures have
bare heads because feathers would become fouled and matted
when the birds fed inside a carcass. All birds have ears—holes
on the sides of their heads beneath the feathers—but some
owls have one ear hole that points slightly up and another that
points slightly down. This helps them to locate small animals
when it is almost too dark to see.
The black-crested titmouse inhabits parts of central Texas.


26 BIRD STUDY
What Makes a Bird a Bird?.
Birds have excellent vision. Unlike most mammals,
they can see color very well. Hawks, eagles, owls, and other
predatory birds have binocular vision—eyes that face forward,
so both eyes can focus on an object at the same time. This
makes it easier for the bird to judge how far away something
is. (You can see this for yourself by holding a hand over one
eye while you reach for an object.) Most other birds have
monocular vision—eyes placed on the sides of the head so they
can watch a wider area for danger.
B
I
N
O
C
U
L
A
R
V
I
S
I
ON
B I N
O
C
U
L
A
R
V
I
S
I
O
N
M
O
N
O
C
U
L
A
R
V
I
S
I
O
N
M
O
N
O
C
U
L
A
R
V
I
S
I
O
N
B
I
N
O
C
U
L
A
R
VISI
O
N
The American woodcock, a shorebird that lives in damp
woods, has eyes so far back that it actually sees slightly
better behind it than in front.
The tufts of
feathers on top
of some owls’
heads break up
the silhouette,
thus helping to
camouflage the
owl, and have
nothing to do
with hearing.
Great horned owl, left, showing field of binocular vision; American
woodcock, right, showing wide field of monocular vision, reduced
field of binocular vision


BIRD STUDY 27
.What Makes a Bird a Bird?
Bird Origins
Many characteristics of birds are similar to those of reptiles.
Both lay eggs and have scales on the legs and feet. As early as
the mid-1800s, scientists suspected that reptiles and birds were
related. The proof came in the 1860s, when a spectacular fossil
known as Archaeopteryx (meaning “ancient wing”) was found
in Germany.
Archaeopteryx, which scientists speculate lived millions of
years ago, had many reptilian features, including teeth, clawed
fingers, and a long, bony tail. As the fine-grained rock in which
it was fossilized clearly showed, it also had wings and tail feath-
ers, as well as many bones that were similar in shape to a bird’s.
Over the years, six other Archaeopteryx fossils have been found.
One of the biggest remaining mysteries about bird evolution
is whether birds came directly from dinosaurs or from a more
ancient kind of reptile that was also the ancestor of dinosaurs.
For many years, ornithologists thought birds descended from
small dinosaur ancestors that lived in trees and developed
feathers to help them glide. But in recent years, paleontologists
(scientists who study extinct animals) have uncovered several
kinds of ground-dwelling dinosaurs that are similar in body
shape to Archaeopteryx, including the fast predator Velociraptor.
They have also found the fossils of dinosaurs in China that
clearly had wing and tail feathers. Now, most scientists have
concluded that birds evolved from ground-dwelling dinosaurs
that developed feathers for insulation, and only later took to
the air.
Archaeopteryx
in cycad swamp
(Jurassic period)


28 BIRD STUDY
How Birds Live.
How Birds Live
From bugs to fish, seeds to mice, and fruit to carrion, it is hard
to find a food that some kind of bird does not eat. What a bird
eats, and how it obtains its food, has much to do with its physi-
cal adaptations, like the shape of its bill and feet, as well as the
kind of habitat in which you are likely to find it.
Food and Feeding
Most birds eat a variety of certain kinds of foods—mostly
insects, for example, or mostly seeds. Many songbirds switch
from an insect diet in summer to one that includes fruit, berries,
seeds, or nuts in autumn and winter when cold weather drives
insects into hibernation. Others stick to bugs year-round, prying
them out of their winter hiding places or even old spiderwebs.
Some birds have highly specialized diets. The most extreme
example may be the snail kite, an endangered hawk that, in the
United States, is found only in the Everglades of south Florida.
The snail kite feeds only on the large apple snail, which it
plucks from shallow, weedy marshes; carries to a perch; and
pries open with its unusually thin, curved bill. The ground
beneath a kite’s favorite perch is often littered with
dozens of empty snail shells.
People who are finicky about their food or do not eat much are often said
to “eat like a bird.” Nothing could be further from the truth. A bird’s body
operates at high gear and requires great amounts of food—at least in
comparison to the size of its body. Some warblers eat more than three-
quarters their weight in insects every day. That is the same as a 100-
pound youth eating 75 pounds of food! The ratio drops in larger birds, but
even a brown pelican eats half its weight in fish daily, and a golden eagle
eats 15 percent of its weight in meat.


BIRD STUDY 29
.How Birds Live
Every kind of bird has its own unique approach to finding
food. There can be great differences in technique, even among
closely related species. Watch a group of shorebirds along the
beach, and you can see this for yourself. Sanderlings chase
the waves in and out, picking up tiny animals tumbling in the
water. Ruddy turnstones use their short, stubby bills to patiently
flip bits of shell and seaweed above the high-
tide line, looking for invertebrates underneath.
Oystercatchers use their thin, knife-shaped
bills to pry apart mussels and other
shellfish. Phalaropes (small shore-
birds the size of sparrows) spin in
tight, fast circles while swimming,
creating miniature whirlpools that
concentrate food near
the surface.
Clockwise from top left:
American oystercatcher
prying mussel open;
Wilson’s phalarope
spinning on water’s
surface; ruddy turnstone
flipping rock; sanderling
probing in wet sand
Feeding behavior—eastern towhee
1. STANDING.
2. TAKING FORWARD HOP.
3. BEGINNING BACKWARD
KICK-SCRATCH.
4. COMPLETING
BACKWARD KICK.
1
2
34


30 BIRD STUDY
How Birds Live.
Some birds join forces to catch their food. As a group,
white pelicans may swim in a huge circle in shallow water,
corralling fish where they can easily be caught. Harris’ hawks in
the Southwest hunt in packs and share the jackrabbits that they
kill. In the past, gulls dropped clams on rocks to break open
their shells. Now gulls use roads for the same purpose, and also
benefit from cars that run over and break the clams open.
The most unusual hunting technique may be bait fishing.
Green herons in the United States, and closely related species
elsewhere in the world, drop bits of food, flower petals, or
other small objects on the water and then nab fish that come
to investigate.
Some birds store food when it is abundant to get them
through leaner times. In late summer, the Clark’s nutcracker of
the western mountains gathers tens of thousands of seeds from
coniferous trees, stashing the seeds in the ground in as many
as a thousand different places. This bird’s remarkable memory
allows it to remember where each cache is, even months later.
Acorn woodpeckers, which live in family groups of up to 16
birds, drill holes in dead trees (and often telephone poles) and
hammer acorns into them. A single tree might have as many as
50,000 embedded acorns.
In other parts of the world, the Egyptian vulture drops
rocks on eggs to break open a feast. The Galapagos woodpecker
finch uses thorns or twigs to pull insects from rotting wood.


BIRD STUDY 31
.How Birds Live
Courtship and Nesting
Before a bird can breed, it must first establish a territory—a
piece of its habitat that will supply all the things it, its mate,
and its chicks will need, such as food, cover, water, and safety.
Generally it is the male that claims a territory, singing and
displaying both to warn away rivals and to attract a mate.
Territories may be small (those of some songbirds are less than
an acre) or huge. Golden eagles sometimes have territories that
cover hundreds of square miles.
Birds have many strategies for attracting mates, but they
usually come down to one thing—advertisement. Each species
has its own advertising style. Males may dance, soar, sing,
croak, drum, or run across the water to try to catch a
female’s attention. Birds’ courtship rituals, like the
evening flights of male woodcocks, are often
amazing to watch. These little shorebirds gather
in weedy fields and open woods at dusk, making
frog-like peent calls for several minutes before
taking off. Each male flies in a rising circle, his
wings making a whistling noise, until he is almost
out of sight in the dark sky. Then he stops flying
and begins tumbling to the ground, gurgling as
he drops. At the last moment, he swoops down
for a landing and starts over again.
Many North American birds engage in some
sort of courtship dance. Sandhill and whooping
cranes leap and spin in the air together, almost
like human dancers. Male prairie-chickens and
sharp-tailed grouse gather in groups to dance
and patter, their heads lowered and brightly
colored air sacs inflated on their necks.
Behavior Tip
If you have a bird feeder, watch to see whether any of the birds coming
for your seed are storing food. Jays, chickadees, titmice, and nuthatches
often cache, or store, food by tucking seeds behind flakes of bark, among
the needles of pine trees, or between cracks in the walls of buildings.
Although harder to observe, hawks and owls often do the same thing
with excess prey.
Prairie warbler
Cover is natural
shelter or
protection.


32 BIRD STUDY
How Birds Live.
Other species do not dance but have
specialized courtship actions. Many ducks
bob or shake their heads, and shake their
tails—a signal that human observers often
miss but that is instantly apparent to a
female duck. Music, however, is the most
important tool for many courting birds,
especially the large group known as song-
birds. Each species has its own character-
istic song, but individual males may have
slight variations that allow their mates
and neighbors to recognize them. The
song acts as both a “no trespassing” sign
to other males and a “Here I am!” call to
females. Males sing chiefly in spring and
early summer, and less as the breeding
season wanes. Females rarely sing — a
song is mostly a series of sounds made
by male songbirds during the breeding
season. A call is a shorter communication
sound (like a chirp) that male and female
birds can make at any time.
Once a pair has formed, the birds
must build a nest. In some species, only
one sex (usually the female) builds the
nest. In other species, including wood-
peckers, both sexes work together. How
long it takes to build the nest depends on
its complexity. A mourning dove nest—
a rickety collection of twigs and grass
so thin that the eggs can be seen from
below—may be finished in a day. An
oriole’s deep, woven-bag nest may take
the female two weeks to complete.
The female usually lays one egg per
day. Most species wait until the whole
clutch, or set of eggs, is laid before they
start incubating (sitting on the eggs). That
way, all the young birds hatch at about
the same time. As with nest building, in
some species only the female incubates;
in others, males and females take turns.
Among phalaropes, the female lays the
eggs and then abandons them to the male,
Sandhill cranes dancing
Orchard orioles at
nest in an apple tree


BIRD STUDY 33
.How Birds Live
who incubates them and raises the chicks. (Female
phalaropes are also the more colorful of the pair.)
Most songbird eggs hatch about two weeks
after they are laid. The babies are almost naked
and completely blind. Their parents must protect
them from cold, sun, and rain and feed them
every few minutes.
Not all chicks are so helpless, or altricial.
Baby waterfowl, shorebirds, and game birds (even
chicks of the domestic chicken), among others, are
precocial—meaning that they hatch with a thick coat
of downy feathers and with their eyes open—able to
follow their parents and feed themselves from birth.
Young birds grow quickly. Within 12 or 14 days, most
songbird chicks are ready to leave the nest—even though they
are not very good fliers. Known as fledglings, these youngsters
spend several days flapping and crash-landing as they practice
flying, while their parents continue to feed and watch over
them. The family will stay together for a few more weeks, until
the chicks have learned enough to care for themselves.
Precocial (piping plover, left)
vs. altricial (eastern bluebird,
right) chicks
Some birds build
no nest at all.
Peregrine falcons,
nighthawks, and
many shorebirds
simply scrape a
depression in the
ground to hold
the eggs.
To learn what
to do if you find
a baby bird,
turn to the end
of the section
called “Creating
a Backyard Bird
Sanctuary.”
Cowbird Con Artist
One North American bird lets someone else raise its
chicks. The brown-headed cowbird is a nest parasite,
laying its eggs in the nests
of other species and often
throwing out the host’s
eggs. The unsuspecting
family raises the cowbird
chick, which may quickly
grow bigger than its foster
parents. Some species
recognize the intruder’s
eggs and throw them out.
The yellow warbler will
build a whole new nest on
top of the eggs, burying
them inside.
Brown-headed cowbird egg,
left, in a host nest of the
black-capped vireo.


34 BIRD STUDY
How Birds Live.
Bird Behavior
Part of the fun of birding is studying the behavior of birds.
Much of a bird’s behavior is instinctive, meaning the bird is
born with the urge to behave in certain ways. Some behavior
is learned, something that the individual bird discovered on its
own or copied from others.
Described here are some common forms of bird behavior,
which you might be able to observe for yourself in birds you
see all the time.
Feeding
Stalking. A common tactic used by herons and egrets, stalk-
ing involves slowly creeping up on prey until the bird is close
enough for a quick, stabbing strike.
Hawking. This hunting behavior is rarely per-
formed by hawks, but rather by agile birds such
as swifts, swallows, and nightjars that catch flying
insects on the wing.
Pouncing. Many birds take a wait-and-see approach to
hunting, sitting on a perch until something edible comes
along, and then dropping down on it. Pouncing is common
among hawks and owls, but some songbirds, including the
bluebirds, also practice it.
Flycatching. A specialized way of catching insects, flycatch-
ing involves flying out from a perch, snapping up a passing
bug, and then flitting back to the perch to wait for another.
Flycatchers are good at this, naturally, but so are waxwings,
warblers, and many other songbirds, as well as hummingbirds,
which eat many small insects.
Probing. Birds with long bills often use them to poke for
food in hidden places. Brown creepers use their curved beaks
to check behind flakes of tree bark. Ibises probe into mud
for crayfish.
Scratching. Many ground-dwelling birds scratch with their feet
to uncover food. Turkeys and other game birds use one foot,
whereas sparrows, towhees, and buntings kick back with both,
making more noise in dead leaves than you might think a small
bird could make.
Crows, ravens,
and jays, which
are among the
most intelligent
birds, often
learn new
behavior through
observation.
Dusky flycatcher
chasing crane fly


BIRD STUDY 35
.How Birds Live
Cleaning
Preening. Several times a day, a bird will carefully groom its
feathers, nibbling at them with its bill to smooth and clean
them. Birds also take oil from a tiny gland at the base of the tail
and spread it over their feathers to help make them waterproof.
Bathing. Birds will bathe in shallow water when they can,
splashing it over and through their feathers before preening.
They will also “bathe” in dust, often along the edges of roads.
Scientists think dust baths kill parasites that live in their feathers.
Stretching. Birds often stretch, opening first one wing, and
then the other, fanning the same side of the tail as they do.
Anting. This strange behavior still puzzles scientists. Birds will
sometimes rub ants into their feathers with their beaks or stand
on a swarming anthill, allowing the insects to run through their
feathers. It is thought that the ants may kill tiny parasites on
the bird’s skin, or that chemicals the ants give off may drive
away such pests.
Social Behavior
Flocking. The most obvious bird behavior is flocking—gather-
ing in large groups to feed, sleep, or migrate. Birds gain safety
by flocking because it is harder for a predator to approach
the group without one of the birds seeing it and sounding
the alarm.
Mobbing. The appearance of a predator like a hawk or cat
will draw many smaller birds together to scold and dive at it.
Mobs sometimes follow a predator for long periods of time,
foiling its chances of surprising a meal. Mobbers themselves
are sometimes mobbed. Crows will harass hawks and owls, but
they are mobbed by smaller birds because crows eat their
eggs and chicks.
Distraction displays. If you get too close to the
nest of many species of birds, the mother may
pretend to be injured, fluttering and calling
to lure you away from her chicks or eggs.
Preening eastern
bluebird
Birds sometimes
“ant” with such
objects as
cigarette butts
or mothballs.
Piping plover—distraction display at nest


36 BIRD STUDY
How Birds Live.
Migration
Of all the amazing things about birds, migration is one of the
most astounding. Flying on instinct—that is, with an inborn
urge that is not learned or reasoned—a tiny warbler only a few
months old, for instance, can leave the northern United States
and travel without error to its ancestral wintering grounds
in places like Central America or the Caribbean. Some small
birds take shortcuts across the Gulf of Mexico and the western
Atlantic Ocean to reach Mexico or South America. Many shore-
birds fly from Alaska to the islands of the South Pacific, a jour-
ney of four or five days without rest, food, or water.
Scientists are beginning to understand how birds can navi-
gate across such vast distances. Many birds migrate at night and
can use the stars as a map. By day they track the sun’s position
in the sky. Most birds do not learn the way south and north
from their parents. They sense Earth’s magnetic field almost
like a compass, and they learn and remember landmarks. Young
birds usually travel alone or with others of their age, going
strictly on instincts that tell them which way to fly.
Not all birds
migrate. Species
that remain
in one area
year-round,
called permanent
residents, include
such common birds
as chickadees,
titmice, and downy
woodpeckers.
In other species,
some individuals
migrate while
others remain
behind.


BIRD STUDY 37
.How Birds Live
Scientists use many different
methods to learn about bird
migration. Among the most important is
bird banding, in which a researcher places
a light metal ring around a bird’s leg. On the
band is a series of four numbers that identify
the scientist who banded it, and another series
of five numbers that is unique to the bird. By
reporting where and when they find banded birds,
people across the country help scientists track birds’
migration. Banding also tells us how long birds live and
a great deal more about their lives.
If You Find a Banded Bird
If you find a dead bird that is wearing a band, write
down all the numbers, exactly where and when you
found the bird, and how it died, if you can tell—hit by
a car or killed by a cat, for instance. You do not have to
remove the band from the bird. Then, with your parent
or guardian’s permission, go to pwrc.usgs.gov/bbl/
bblretrv (or search the internet for “report a bird band”)
and follow the online prompts to report the band.
You will receive a certificate of appreciation
telling you where, when, and by whom the
bird was originally banded. (Do not
report banded pigeons to the Bird
Banding Laboratory. People who
raise pigeons for racing or for show
place bands on them, and the lab
does not track these pigeons.)
Birds that migrate don’t usually do so in winter
because it gets cold; birds can tolerate extremely
cold weather, but their food is hard to find then. Most
migrants eat insects, fruit, flower nectar, reptiles and
amphibians, or other food that disappears when it gets
cold. Waterbirds must migrate because lakes, ponds,
and wetlands freeze.
Migratory
routes


38 BIRD STUDY
How Birds Live.
Migration doesn’t always
take a bird to warm, tropi-
cal places. Rough-legged
hawks, which nest in the
Arctic, migrate south
each winter. They make
their destination the cold,
snowy prairies of the
West and Great Plains,
or open farmlands in the
Midwest and Northeast.
Bar-tailed godwits, dove-
sized shorebirds that nest
in western Alaska, migrate
nearly 7,000 miles nonstop
across the widest part of the
Pacific Ocean to their winter-
ing grounds in New Zealand
and Australia. Before they
begin the trip, they eat so
much that they double their
weight. Then their digestive
tract shrinks in size, even as
their heart and flight muscles
expand to give them extra
stamina. Once they arrive in
the south, the changes
reverse themselves.


BIRD STUDY 39
.How Birds Live
Unlike many birds
that live in the moun-
tains of the West
and that move to
lower, milder eleva-
tions in the winter,
blue grouse actually
migrate high into the
mountains. These
hardy birds travel on
foot and feed on the
buds of conifer trees
until spring arrives.
Eastern kingbirds,
which during the
breeding season
feed exclusively on
insects, switch diets
once they migrate to
South America. Once
there, these hand-
some birds—which
are agile and bold
enough to catch bees
and hornets—form
huge flocks and feed
on little except
tropical fruit.


Observing Birds.
Observing Birds
You do not need much equipment to go birding. Binoculars, a
field notebook, a field guide, and a pencil, or even an app on
your phone will get you started.
Binoculars
The most important gear for birders is a good pair of binocu-
lars—field glasses for using both eyes. You may also hear bin-
oculars referred to as “bins” or “binocs.” (A monocular, a field
glass for using one eye, is another option.) These field glasses
bridge the distance between you and a skittish wild bird, allow-
ing you to see the details that help you to identify it while you
avoid disturbing the bird. They also open up a world of fasci-
nating behavior that you might otherwise miss.
Choosing the right binoculars takes a little homework and
some thinking about the kind of birding you will be doing most
often. Some styles are better for watching songbirds in the
woods, where you will need to focus on nearby objects. Others
are best for watching distant hawks or shorebirds, where greater
magnification is needed.
Choosing binoculars is also a balancing act
between what you want and what you can
afford. Extremely cheap models may frustrate
you during birding because the fuzzy, mis-
aligned images they produce make it difficult to
see the bird clearly. On the other hand, some top-
of-the-line binoculars that are armor-coated and
waterproof cost more than $1,000. The secret is
finding a good, relatively inexpensive model
that meets your birding needs.


BIRD STUDY 41
.Observing Birds
What Do the Numbers Mean?
Every pair of binoculars has a set of numbered specifications on it, like
7X35, 8X40, or 10X50. The first number refers to the magnification—how
large the binoculars make an object appear when you look through them.
The larger the number, the greater the magnification. But as the magni-
fication increases, the field of view—the area you see when you actually
look through the binocs—gets smaller. A small field of view makes it
harder to find a bird in the glasses.
Higher magnification also increases the minimum focusing distance—
how close to you the binoculars can be focused. That means that while a
pair of 10-power binoculars makes a bird look larger than a 7-power pair
will, you might not be able to focus on it if the bird is fairly close to you,
say, 15 feet away—a common distance when watching songbirds. It is
frustrating to have to back up to watch a bird, but it will happen if your
binoculars are too powerful.
The second number of the specification shows, in millimeters, the
width of the large objective lenses at the front of the binoculars. The
larger the number (and the lens), the more light the binoculars take in
and the brighter the image you see. Most birding experts recommend
7X35 binoculars as the best choice for beginners, combining reasonable
magnification with sufficient field of view, although 8X40 is also
a good choice.
Generally speaking, avoid binoculars with less
than 7X magnification. Avoid compact binoculars
with an objective lens size of less than
35mm—the field of view is so small it
can be frustrating to find the bird, and
the image tends to be dark and
murky. Ten-power binoculars are
often used by birders who specialize
in watching hawks, shorebirds, and
waterfowl, but these are more
expensive and can be tough to hold
steadily. Do not use binoculars greater
than 10X, such as maritime glasses;
they are too heavy and bulky
for birding.


42 BIRD STUDY
Observing Birds.
Choosing Binoculars
There are two main styles of binoculars—Porro prism and roof
prism. The older, less common Porro prism style has objective
lenses set farther apart than the ocular lenses that you look
through. Roof prism binocs, which have all the glass elements
lined up inside the lens barrel, look like two straight tubes
joined in the middle, and are the more common style today.
Whenever possible, try binoculars before buying them.
Make sure they feel comfortable in your hands and around your
neck. If they are too big, you will have trouble holding them
steadily. If they are too heavy, your neck and arms will ache
after several hours of birding.
All good binoculars have a hinge in the middle, so you can
push the sides closer together or pull them apart to match the
distance between your eyes. When you look through them, you
should see a single, circular image. The binoculars should also
have a single focus knob or lever in the middle. Avoid models
that require you to focus the eyepieces individually. If you wear
eyeglasses, be sure you can roll down the rubber cups around
the ocular lenses, a trick that increases the field of view.
Roof prism binocs
tend to be more
rugged but also
more expensive.
Binoculars
ROOF
PRISM
PORRO
PRISM
EYE-
PIECE
EYE CUP
(FOLDED BACK) EYE CUP
(UP)
DIOPTER
ADJUSTMENT
CENTER
FOCUS WHEEL
OBJECTIVE
LENS


BIRD STUDY 43
.Observing Birds
Look through the binoculars, adjusting them to fit your
eyes (the salesperson will help). A good pair will have a bright
image, with no blurring around the edges or bands of color sur-
rounding bright objects. Turn the binoculars over and look at
the objective lens; when the light hits it at an angle, it should
reflect a color like green or purple, a sign that the lenses are
coated for maximum light transmission. Check to see how close
the binoculars will focus (15 feet is a good distance), and make
sure you can spin the focus knob easily while using them.
If possible, go outside and look at an object roughly a
block away. If the image jumps and jiggles, the binoculars may
be too heavy or too powerful; try a pair with lower magnifica-
tion. Pick a brick or stone wall—something wide enough to fill
the whole field of view—with a noticeable pattern and make
sure that the image is crisp and clear from edge to edge, with
no blurring. You should be able to read small text on a sign far
away. This is a good test that the binoculars will allow you to
see fine plumage details on birds.
Some binoculars come with zoom magnification—the
ability to change from, say, 7 to 10 power by turning a
dial or pushing a lever. Zoom mechanisms, which con-
tain more elements than fixed-magnification eyepieces,
are often fragile. Because you will be using your binocu-
lars a lot, you will want a pair that is rugged. For this
reason, most experts say, avoid zoom lenses.


44 BIRD STUDY
Observing Birds.
Using Binoculars
Most binoculars come with a strap that should be long enough
to allow you to sling the binoculars over your head and one
arm—a good way to carry them while hiking so they do not
bounce.
Because each eye differs in its strength, you can adjust one
of the ocular lenses (usually the right one) to match. This is
known as the diopter adjustment. Here is how: Hold the bin-
oculars to your eyes, but use one hand to cover the side with
the adjustable lens. Then use the center focus knob to make the
view through the other side clear. Take away your hand, and
slowly turn the ring around the adjustable lens until there is no
more blurriness and your eyes feel comfortable, with no strain.
Once you have adjusted the eyepiece, you will do all your
focusing with the center focus knob.
Learning to use binoculars well, especially finding birds
quickly and easily, takes time. The trick is to raise the glasses
smoothly without taking your eyes off the bird. It also helps to
notice a landmark close to the bird, such as a clump of leaves
or the shape of the branch the bird is perching on, so you can
find it again in the binoculars. Practice when you are not bird-
ing by picking out objects and finding them in the binoculars.
That way, when you spot an exciting bird in the field, you will
not waste precious seconds trying to locate it in your glasses.
Caring for Binoculars
Unfortunately, it is easy to ruin a pair of binoculars. With
proper care, a pair will last many years. When buying
binoculars, ask if the manufacturer has an unlimited warranty.
If so, it might be possible to repair the binoculars free of charge.
One of the most important rules is to avoid bumping or banging
your binocs against hard objects, which could jar the glass
lenses and prisms out of alignment. If this happens, you will
see two overlapping images instead of one. Using misaligned
binoculars may give you headaches and strain your eyes.
While most newer binoculars are waterproof, you should
still try to keep your binoculars dry. If it starts raining, use the
rain-guard that comes with most pairs to cover the eyepiece
and prevent water spots. For heavy rain, put them inside a
waterproof bag or carry them beneath your raincoat or poncho.


BIRD STUDY 45
.Observing Birds
When you are not using them, keep your binoculars in
their case. Clean the lenses regularly to remove dust and dirt.
Do not use your shirttail or handkerchief or a paper towel to
clean the lenses, which are easily scratched. Instead, blow
sharply on the lenses to dislodge dust and grit, and then brush
them lightly with a microfiber cloth. Use a circular motion to
gently clean the lenses.


46 BIRD STUDY
Observing Birds.
Spotting Scopes
For birds that are too far away even for binocu-
lars, birders often use spotting scopes—essen-
tially low-power telescopes mounted on tripods
or wooden gunstocks. Most scopes have zoom
eyepieces ranging from 15 to 60 power, although
the high magnifications are usually too dark and
fuzzy to be of much use. Scopes are generally
much more expensive than binoculars, but there
are times when you may need a scope to iden-
tify a distant bird. Scopes should be used with a
sturdy, lightweight tripod.
Field Guides
An indispensable piece of birding equipment, along with bin-
oculars, is a good field guide. This handy reference book allows
you to quickly identify birds you may never have seen before.
Most field-guide authors also have apps that have convenient
high-tech features, allowing you to keep online checklists and
to identify birds with photos and audio recordings.
In recent years, the number of field guides has exploded.
There are guides covering the entire continent or just parts of
it; guides to particular groups of birds, such as hawks or war-
blers; guides illustrated with photographs or paintings; and
guides designed for begin-
ners or expert birders. You
will find several excellent
field guides listed in the
resources section at the
back of this pamphlet.
Generally speaking,
you will do best to pick
a guide that covers the
entire country, especially
if you live in the Midwest
or Great Plains, where
eastern and western birds
mix. Although it is more
confusing in the beginning,
pick one that illustrates all
the birds, not just the com-
mon species. Otherwise,
Spotting scope


BIRD STUDY 47
.Observing Birds
you will eventually find yourself unable to identify some of the
birds you see.
Traditionally, most birders preferred guides illustrated with
drawings and paintings instead of photographs, because the
artist can show exactly the colors and characteristics, known as
field marks, that allow you to identify a new species. But there
are new guides that use digitally enhanced photos, which do a
much better job of showing how a bird looks in the field.
Be sure the field guide you pick has range maps, which
show where the bird is found. This is an important clue as you
try to figure out what kind of bird you are watching. Range
maps use different colors to indicate the bird’s breeding range
in summer and its winter range, and yet another color if the
bird stays in the same area year-round. Some guides also show
the areas where the bird is found during migration.
A good field guide will show the different plumages of each
bird, because the males, females, and immature individuals of
many species wear different colors and patterns. Some species
also change their appearance from sea-
son to season. There will be a short
description of the bird, and a list of field
marks that set it apart from all other
species; this is usually where the songs
and calls are described. When you are
trying to identify a bird, these written
descriptions are just as helpful as the
pictures, so be sure to read them.
Many beginning birders are
puzzled and confused by the order in
which the birds are listed. Most field
guides arrange the birds by taxonomic
order, putting those that are closely
related together, as explained in “Using
a Checklist” at the end of this section.
(One time-saving trick is to make tiny
labels for each group—loons, ducks
and geese, hawks, woodpeckers, and
so forth—and attach them to the edges
of the field-guide pages with folds of
transparent tape. That way, to find a
bird, all you have to do is thumb to the
correct group tab.)
A field guide will describe a bird’s
field marks and ranges, which
will give you clues to identify it
in the wild.
Swainson’s hawk
A smartphone with
internet access
can provide
invaluable visual,
auditory, and
factual information
while in the field.


48 BIRD STUDY
Observing Birds.
How to Identify Birds
When you see a new bird, you will be tempted to grab your
field guide immediately and start paging through it, trying to
find a picture that matches what you see. Don’t. The best thing
to do is study the bird a while, carefully looking for field marks.
What is a field mark? Anything unusual or distinctive
about the bird—its color, the pattern of its feathers, eye-catching
markings, even the way it moves or flies. Some field marks
are unmistakable, like the white head and tail of an adult bald
eagle, or the red body and crest of a male northern cardinal.
Others are more subtle. Shorebirds and fall warblers are notori-
ous for having similar field marks that make it hard to tell one
from the other.
Common Field Marks
Wing bars are the bands (usually white or a pale color)
across the upper part of the folded wing.
Eye rings are thin circles of pale feathers or colored skin
around each eye, common on many types of birds. Rings can
be heavy and wide, like a pair of spectacles, or broken into
two halves.
Crests are upright tufts of feathers on the heads of birds
such as cardinals, titmice, and waxwings. Some owls have two
feather tufts that look like ears.
Flash marks are areas of color, usually on the wings or
tail, that are normally hidden but are visible in flight or during
displays by the bird. The northern mockingbird has flash marks
of white on its wings and tail that make this otherwise gray
The eastern
phoebe and
Say’s phoebe in
the West both
pump their tails
up and down
when perched, a
great behavioral
field mark.
WING BARS
COLOR PATCH
EYE RING
(BROKEN)
BREASTBAND
Northern parula, showing field marks—broken eye ring, wing
bars, breastband (faint or absent in females), color patch


BIRD STUDY 49
.Observing Birds
bird easy to identify from a distance. Juncos have white flash
marks on the sides of their tails.
A bird doesn’t really have a mustache—that’s just the nick-
name for dark markings that extend back from the base of the bill.
Rump patches are white or colorful feathers just above
the tail, found on species such as northern flickers and yellow-
rumped warblers.
Bird Identity Clues
Important clues for bird identification start with the size and
overall shape of the bird’s body. Common birds such as sparrows,
robins, or crows can be used for size references, while shape can
distinguish birds with similar markings. A wood thrush and a
brown thrasher, for instance, are colored much the same—rusty
brown on top, with a white breast spotted in black. But the thrush
is plump, with a fairly short tail and a short beak. The thrasher is
slender and slinky, with a long tail and a long, pointed beak.
Another important clue to a bird’s identity is how it
behaves. Turkey vultures and young bald eagles are both big
and mostly black, making them easy to mix up. But the vulture
holds its wings in a shallow V when it flies, and the eagle holds
its wings flat.
Colors and Patterns
Obviously, colors can be an important clue to a bird’s iden-
tity. But you must be careful—colors on a live bird don’t
always look the same as those in a photograph or painting.
Hummingbirds have brilliant, metallic colors, but only if the
sun hits them just right. Otherwise, they can look black. The
same can happen with many dark blue birds, such as
indigo buntings. You should also remember that as a
bird’s feathers get old and worn through the year,
they often become less colorful. Do not expect every
bird you find to exactly match its picture in your
field guide.
Birdsongs and Bird Calls
It’s often said that good birders actually see only a small per-
centage of the birds they identify. The rest they recognize from
songs and calls. Birds are amazingly vocal creatures. Virtually
every species makes a distinctive song, call, squeak, buzz,
chirp, or rattle.
White-throated
sparrow, singing
There are four
keys to provide
quick visual
identification of a
bird species: Size
and shape, color
patterns, behavior,
and habitat.


50 BIRD STUDY
Observing Birds.
Of course, you can’t learn all those calls immediately. Start
by learning a dozen or two of the most common birdsongs in
your area. You can do this by listening to one of the CDs or
DVDs recommended in the resources section or by downloading
the Merlin Bird ID from the Cornell Laboratory of Ornithology
website, with your parent or guardian’s permission, and by
keeping your eyes and ears open when you are outside.
When you hear a song you do not recognize, try to track
down the singer. While you are listening to the song, try to
remember how it sounds (this is where your field notebook is
handy), perhaps by putting words to it—an old and effective
trick that birders use. To many people, the song of the white-
throated sparrow sounds like Oh, SWEET Canada Canada
Canada, while the red-winged blackbird sings Ok-a-LEEEE!
Common yellowthroats sing Whichity-whichity-which, and the
yellow warbler sings a hurried Sweet-sweet-sweet I’m so sweet.
Taking Good Field Notes
“There is a third species of brant [goose] in the neighborhood of
this place. A little distance around the base of the beak is white
and is suddenly succeeded by a narrow line of dark brown. The
balance of the head, back, wings and tail, all except the tips of
the feathers, are of the bluish brown of the common wild goose.
The breast and belly are white with an irregular mixture of black
feathers which give that part a pied [blotched] appearance.”
Captain Meriwether Lewis wrote that excellent description
of a greater white-fronted goose—one of the first ever seen by
an American explorer—in 1806, when the Lewis and Clark
expedition spent the winter by the Pacific Ocean in what is
now Oregon. Even though they were crossing thousands of
miles of unexplored country, Lewis and Clark often took time
to write detailed notes about the wildlife they saw, including
11 species of birds that were entirely new to science. (Two of
Not all birds sing lovely songs, of course, and not
all of their noises are vocal. The ruffed grouse makes
an extremely loud drumming noise with its wings.
Mourning dove wings make a distinctive whistling
flutter when the bird takes off. Woodpeckers drum on
hollow tree branches, making a clatter like a machine
gun as a way of attracting mates.


BIRD STUDY 51
.Observing Birds
them, Lewis’ woodpecker and Clark’s nutcracker, were later
named for the explorers.)
Field notes are an important tool for anyone from a casual
birder to a serious ornithologist. Whether you are trying to
identify a species you have not seen before, hoping to docu-
ment a rare bird, or recording aspects of behavior, a notebook
and pencil are as important as your binoculars and field guide.
Use a field notebook small enough to fit easily in a shirt
pocket or outside compartment of a pack. Always carry several
sharp pencils, with erasers. (Ballpoint pens won’t write on wet
paper, and markers smear in the rain and don’t work in the
cold.) A notebook with a waterproof cover helps, but also carry
a heavy plastic bag in your pack, in case it rains.
There are many ways to organize a notebook. You might
decide to devote an entire page to one species of bird, noting its
color, pattern, song, or behavior. Or, you might keep lists of all
the species of birds you encounter on your field trips. Perhaps
you will make a series of notes, over the course of several
weeks, as you watch a nest, observing how the parents care for
the eggs and chicks. No matter how you organize your note-
book, be sure to include such basic information as the date and
time, the weather, and the habitat in which you found the bird.
Field sketch for identification—white-crowned sparrow
pink legs & feet
underparts even, cool gray,
palest on throat
whitish
throat
pink
bill
crown stripes
meet over bill
tan
whitish
longish tail,
brown
2 white
wing bars
bright white
back streaked gray,
brown, and black
I could see the brilliant
white & black crown from
the window
A large sparrow in the garden, eating
crabgrass seeds with the house spar-
rows. It scratched on the ground, then
sat on a post for 10 min. Whipple, Ohio.
Cool & clear. Oct. 14, 2004


52 BIRD STUDY
Observing Birds.
Field Notes
Here’s an example of field notes.
Ruby Lake National Wildlife Refuge, Nevada
July 19, 6:10–9:15 a.m.
Weather: Sunny, temp. at dawn 55˚, rising to 80˚. Light wind.
Birds seen while canoeing South Marsh:
Pied-billed grebe
Eared grebe
Double-crested cormorant
American bittern (one heard calling)
Great blue heron
Black-crowned night-heron
Cinnamon teal
Northern shoveler
Canvasback (female with chicks)
Lesser scaup
Turkey vulture
Northern harrier
American kestrel
*Sage grouse (6 on road leading to boat launch)
American coot (some still with very small chicks, other chicks almost grown)
Sandhill crane (one pair with fledgling)
Forster’s tern
Caspian tern (3)
Black-billed magpie
Common raven
Marsh wren (many feeding fledged chicks)
Sage thrasher (on island)
Brewer’s sparrow (on island)
Yellow-headed blackbird
*life bird
Comments: Coots were calling constantly, and we were able to drift very
close to several of the youngsters. Saw an eared grebe surface with a fish
that was almost too big for it to swallow, but somehow it managed. Sage
grouse were the highlight of the trip!


BIRD STUDY 53
.Observing Birds
Good notes can be a big help in identifying a new bird,
or helping to document a rare species. Even if you have a field
guide handy, it is a good idea to jot down quick notes about
a bird you can’t identify. That way, you won’t have to rely on
your memory later, when you try to find the bird in a guide. It
is also a good idea to make a little drawing of the bird, showing
the field marks you observed (you do not have to be a good
artist to do this).
Identification Notes
Here’s an example of identification notes.
From these notes, it is easy to identify the mystery bird
as a blue-gray gnatcatcher.
May 25, 10:17 a.m.
Moyer’s Woods Sanctuary, along
upper path through oak forest
Bird smaller and slimmer than
chickadee, pale gray but a bit darker
on back and wings. Tail long and
narrow, with white feathers on outer
edges, and white underneath. Thin
white eye ring. Bill short and thin.
No wing bars. Very active—flycatch-
es, hovers while feeding. Stays high in
tree, giving high pweeee calls.
Greater white-fronted goose
If you are lucky
enough to spot
a really unusual
species, good field
and identification
notes will help
confirm your find
with those birders
and ornithologists
who keep the
official records
of bird sightings
for your state
or county.


54 BIRD STUDY
Observing Birds.
Getting Close to Birds
Move slowly and quietly when you are birding, using your ears
as well as your eyes. Cotton, wool, or pile jackets are better
than nylon, which swishes and makes a lot of noise. If possible,
keep the sun at your back instead of in your eyes. Train your-
self to notice small movements, especially out of the corners of
your eyes. Stop frequently to look and listen.
Birders often use two tricks, squeaking and “pishing,”
to lure shy songbirds out in the open. To squeak, purse your
lips and kiss the back of your hand or the side of your fist;
try to get a series of short, high-pitched squeaks like a mouse
in distress. To “pish,” make a hissing, whispering sound with
your lips—pish-pish-pish-pish-pish. No one is exactly sure why
squeaking and pishing work, but they often attract curious
songbirds. How successful you will be depends on the season
and the bird. Both tricks work best during the breeding season,
when birds are eager to defend their territories. And they work
better on some birds, like chickadees and kinglets,
while hardly at all on others.
While it is possible to use recordings of
their songs to attract birds, conservationists
frown on this practice. A recording lures
a singing male away from his territory
to chase what he thinks is an intruder,
perhaps taking him away from caring
for his chicks. Repeated use of record-
ings can actually drive birds away.
It is sometimes permissible to use
a recording to locate owls, which are
difficult to find. If you use a recording
to go “owling,” observe these rules: Do
not use a recording during the court-
ship and nesting season (which extends
from midwinter to early summer for most
species). Regulations in many protected
wildlife areas prohibit recordings. Do not use
If you dress in dull-colored clothing, you will blend in
with the surroundings and be less likely to scare away
birds, which (like humans) have color vision.
A screech owl, lured in by a recording
of its call, arrives unnoticed by birders.


BIRD STUDY 55
.Observing Birds
them at all in parks, refuges, and other heavily birded areas. Do
not overuse them. Play a recording only for a short time, and
stop once you get a response. For real fun, learn to imitate owl
calls with your own voice instead of using a recording. It is pos-
sible to hold a conversation of sorts with a wild owl.
Birding Dos and Don’ts
Do
• Move slowly and quietly.
• Use your ears as much as your eyes.
• Respect private property. Always ask permission
before birding on someone else’s land.
• Stay on paths and trails when birding in parks
and refuges.
• Look for birds early in the morning and late in the
afternoon, when they are most active.
Don’t
• Disturb birds any more than necessary, especially
those that are courting or nesting.
• Approach or touch nests. You might scare away the
parents or lead predators to it. Watch through
binoculars from a distance.
• Collect feathers, eggs, or nests—it is against the law.
(See “Creating a Backyard Bird Sanctuary” to learn
what to do with dead or injured wild birds.)
Follow the Leave No Trace Seven Principles and the
Outdoor Code (page 5) to ensure ethical and responsible
behavior toward the environment and wildlife.
1. Plan ahead and prepare
2. Travel and camp on durable surfaces
3. Dispose of waste properly
4. Leave what you find
5. Minimize campfire impacts
6. Respect wildlife
7. Be considerate of others
© Leave No Trace: LNT.org


56 BIRD STUDY
Observing Birds.
The Sport of Birding
Birding can be many things—a hobby, a form of science, or a
sport, in competition with yourself or with others.
Keeping Lists
Almost all birders keep a life list—a tally of all the species of
birds they have seen in their life, including the date and place
where they saw each one. A life list can take you back to the
moment when you saw a species new to you—a life bird—and
help you to relive the excitement.
You can keep your life list in your field notebook. Or, you
can record it in your field guide, either by jotting down the
date and place on the page next to the bird, or by making tiny
check marks next to each bird’s name in the index. (Some
guides provide small boxes for that purpose.) It’s a good idea to
keep two copies of your list, in case you lose your field guide
or notebook. There are even a few commercially printed life
list books available. Also, several websites, like eBird.org, and
smartphone apps track of all of your bird sightings and compile
a life list for you.
Most birders keep a life list for their own pleasure. Others
view it as a form of competition, trying to exceed
other people or their own personal record. The
American Birding Association has rules for its
members about where and how they can count
birds for their official ABA lists, and the competi-
tion leaders—those with the most species on their
life lists—are recognized every year in ABA publi-
cations.
People keep “yard lists” of all the birds they
have seen at their homes. Also popular are county
lists, state lists, and trip lists. Sometimes they will
tackle a “Big Day,” trying to see as many species
as they can in 24 hours (often starting long before
daybreak to find owls and other night birds), or
a “Big Year,” hoping to find as many birds as pos-
sible within 12 months.
The ultimate in listing is the World Series of
Birding, a version of the Big Day held every year in
New Jersey. Teams from around the world (includ-
ing some youth teams) compete to see how many
Not every birder keeps lists.
Some think that by focusing
on finding and listing lots of
species, birders miss out on the
fun of observing and studying
the more common birds.
Fortunately, there is no right
or wrong about it. You can list
or not, as you like.
It is considered a
real accomplish-
ment to have a life
list of more than
600 or 700
species, out of
the more than
800 found in
North America.
Achieving such
a goal can
take decades.


BIRD STUDY 57
.Observing Birds
species they can find in 24 hours. Teams often map out
elaborate, precisely timed routes across the state to
locate the maximum number of birds in the mini-
mum amount of time. Many teams are sponsored
by conservation organizations, which solicit pledges
from their members—a certain amount of money per
species—as a way to raise money. The winners of the
World Series receive a trophy, but no cash prizes.
Using a Checklist
Many parks, national wildlife refuges, and nature sanc-
tuaries provide small, printed checklists of the birds found on
their property. This is a handy way of recording what you have
seen and an excellent way to learn more about the kinds of
birds found locally. Checklists are arranged in taxonomic order,
just like most field guides. They will usually tell you what
species breed there, what kinds of habitat they use, and their
abundance in spring, summer, fall, and winter, using codes
such as C for “common” and R for “rare.”
Joining a Bird Club
One of the best ways to learn more about birds and birding is
to join a bird club or natural history society. Most communities
have such organizations. Clubs usually offer regular evening
meetings, and guided field trips to local birding hot spots where
you will see new and exciting species. Besides sharpening your
birding skills, participating in a club is a good way to meet
other birders, to take part in activities like annual Big Days or
Christmas Bird Counts, and to learn more about
environmental issues of concern to birders.
Rare Bird Alerts
Birders often learn about unusual species of birds
through rare bird alerts, known as RBAs, which
list many of the interesting sightings and rare
birds seen in the past week or so, with directions.
RBAs often also include details about local bird
club meetings and field trips. With your parent or
guaardian’s permission, you can sign up for eBird
Rare Bird Alerts and subscribe to their region’s
social-media rare-bird pages. The American Birding
Association maintains a list of all rare bird alerts in
the United States and Canada at birding.aba.org.
Before going
online, be sure
you have
permission.
Northern hawk owl


58 BIRD STUDY
Bird Study and Science.
Bird Study and Science
As a birder, you can make valuable contributions to science,
especially if you work with one of the many research programs—
run by universities, conservation groups, and government
agencies—that use volunteers. Some projects demand a high
degree of experience, while others accept beginners by pairing
them with more skilled birders.
Christmas Bird Count
Every winter, tens of thousands of birders head for the outdoors
to conduct the annual Christmas Bird Count, coordinated by
the National Audubon Society. Begun in 1900 by Massachusetts
ornithologist Frank Chapman and a few friends, the CBC has
grown into the largest and longest-running wildlife survey in
the world. This event attracts more than 50,000 volunteers
and provides conservationists with valuable information about
bird populations.
Nearly 2,000 CBCs are held every year during the last two
weeks of December and the first week of January. Most are in
North America, but in recent years CBCs have begun in Central
and South America and in parts of the Pacific. Each count cov-
ers a circle of land 15 miles wide, across which teams of birders
try to count all the species and individual birds they find dur-
ing a 24-hour period. They also record information on weather,
snow cover, and how many hours each observer searched for
birds. Some people also keep an eye on feeders, to record the
birds seen there.
At the end of the day, everyone gets together to compile
the results of the count, usually over a hot meal. Counts may
range from only a few dozen species in Alaska to several hun-
dred in places like Texas and California.


BIRD STUDY 59
.Bird Study and Science
CBC results have been a bonanza for scientists because
the count provides a detailed census of winter bird populations
every year. The Christmas Bird Count has shown some species,
like house finches, expanding their range, whereas others, like
loggerhead shrikes, have become much scarcer in some regions.
Although the National Audubon Society coordinates the
overall Christmas Bird Count, each local count may be run by
a bird club, conservation organization, or just a group of inter-
ested birders. There is a small fee to take part. To find out
about counts in your area, check with birders you know, ask
at a nearby nature center, or contact the National Audubon
Society. You can also find out more about
the Christmas Bird Count online with
BirdSource, a cooperative project of
the National Audubon Society and
the Cornell University Laboratory
of Ornithology.
North American
Migration Count
Every spring and fall, birders across
North America record the migrating birds
they see. The North American Migration
Count is a warm-weather version of the
Christmas Bird Count and is designed to provide a kind of
snapshot of bird migration across the continent. Unlike the
CBC, however, the NAMC covers entire counties, and
participation is free. For more information on local
counts, contact your local birding group.
Project FeederWatch and the
Great Backyard Bird Count
Project FeederWatch enlists people all
around North America to watch their bird feeders, record-
ing the species and numbers of individual birds they see.
Participants are asked to watch their feeders for part or all
of a two-day period every two weeks, from late autumn until
early spring. The information from Project FeederWatch helps
scientists track bird movements and see whether some species
are increasing or decreasing. There is a fee to take part.
Hopper feeder with
squirrel baffle


60 BIRD STUDY
Bird Study and Science.
The Great Backyard Bird Count takes place over a one-
week period every February, with participants across the
country submitting online checklists totaling 4.3 million back-
yard birds of more than 550 species. Like FeederWatch, this
project gives scientists a snapshot of winter bird populations.
Participation is free.
Project FeederWatch and the Great Backyard Bird Count
are jointly run by the Cornell Laboratory of Ornithology and the
National Audubon Society. For information, visit the BirdSource
website, or contact the Cornell Laboratory of Ornithology or the
National Audubon Society.
North American Breeding Bird Survey
Every summer since 1965, volunteers have surveyed singing birds
along thousands of 25-mile routes throughout North America,
recording how many of each species they hear. Over the years, the
Breeding Bird Survey, which is coordinated by the U.S. Department
of the Interior, has allowed scientists to monitor rising and falling
bird populations, making it one of the most important bird surveys.
Participants must be able to identify all common birds by song and
must be able to drive the survey route. For more information on
the BBS, visit the Patuxent Wildlife Research Center’s website.
EBird Database
The Cornell Lab of Ornithology maintains a massive, global bird
observation database called eBird, which is used by birders around
the world to track their bird sightings and by scientists
to support conservation research. Most birders log their
sightings on eBird.org, and you can too. This not only
contributes to one of the world’s largest citizen-science
projects; it’s a fun way to see how you stack up against
other birders in your hometown, favorite park, or
across the globe. With your parent or guardian’s
permission, sign up for free at eBird.org and
follow prompts to submit high-quality bird
observation checklists and field notes. EBird has
many interesting and useful features that allow
you to explore where species have been seen,
photos and audio recordings, and many other
pieces of ornithological data.
For more
information
about any of the
organizations
or events
mentioned in this
chapter, see the
resources section
at the back of
this pamphlet.
Also, before
going online, be
sure you have
permission.
Western meadowlark


BIRD STUDY 61
.Bird Study and Science
Songbirds western tanager,
above, and ruby-crowned
kinglet, right.


62 BIRD STUDY
Bird Study and Science.
Bird Banding
Although federal law requires that you have a special license
to band birds, banders are permitted to use volunteers who
have been properly trained. Learning to band birds takes much
time, patience, and maturity. Ask your local bird club, wildlife
sanctuary, or merit badge counselor for recommendations of
banders working in your area.


Swan


64 BIRD STUDY
Bird Conservation.
Bird Conservation
Scientists estimate that there are more than 5 billion wild birds
in North America. To survive, each bird requires a special habi-
tat for nesting, feeding, and migration.
Human activities have changed much of the country—
by draining wetlands, polluting waterways, and converting
forests and prairies into towns and farmland. Some birds,
like American robins, adapt well to people. Others, however,
are now rare, and a few have disappeared entirely.
Some birds have suffered from direct persecution by
humans. Hawks and owls were once often shot by farmers who
thought they were a danger to farm animals. Many groups of
birds, including shorebirds, terns, and herons, were hunted
nearly to extinction in the 1800s, when there were
few game laws to protect them.
Sheer numbers can’t always protect
a species. One of the most abundant
land birds in the world was the
passenger pigeon, a wild dove
that once numbered in the
billions. So many of these birds
migrated across eastern North
America that their flocks blocked
out the sun. When they roosted
for the night in trees, the branches
cracked under their weight. But in
the 1800s passenger pigeons were
shot constantly for food and sport
and to feed livestock. There was
little or no legal protection to stop
the slaughter (mostly by market
hunters), and by 1914 the passen-
ger pigeon was extinct—every last
one had been killed.
Passenger pigeon


BIRD STUDY 65
.Bird Conservation
For more about extinction, see the Environmental Science
and Fish and Wildlife Management merit badge pamphlets.
Today, all wild birds are protected by laws like the
federal Migratory Bird Treaty Act, passed by Congress in 1918.
Strict hunting seasons and bag limits safeguard game species
such as ducks, quail, and grouse. The biggest dangers today
usually come from the many ways people have changed
the environment, altering bird habitat or polluting it with
chemicals. For instance, in the 1950s and ’60s, pesticides like
DDT almost wiped out some predatory birds, such as bald
eagles, ospreys, peregrine falcons, and brown pelicans. After
these chemicals were banned, the birds began a slow recovery
that continues today. However, these destructive chemicals are
still used in other parts of the world.
Hundreds of millions of birds are killed every year
in collisions with glass windows, tall buildings,
communication towers, wind turbines, and other
structures. Towers and buildings lit up at night,
when most birds migrate (and when the lights
can disorient them), are especially dangerous.
Finding ways to make these modern obstacles
safer for birds will be critical to their long-term
well-being. For more information on bird-
glass collisions and how to prevent them, see
“Backyard Hazards” on page 88 of this pamphlet.
Conservationists now worry about population
declines in some of the country’s prettiest and most
popular birds, such as bobolinks, meadowlarks, and
upland sandpipers. These species breed in grasslands like
meadows and prairies, most of which have been plowed up for
farming. Nests of grassland birds are often destroyed by farm
machinery or trampled by livestock.
Forest songbirds such as tanagers, thrushes, and some
warblers have also declined over wide areas, especially in the
eastern United States. Many of these birds migrate in winter to
Mexico, Central and South America, or islands in the Caribbean,
where much of the native forest has been destroyed. Upon their
return to the United States and Canada to nest, they find that
forests here have been chopped into smaller and smaller pieces,
making it easier for predators, such as raccoons, crows, house
cats, and the parasitic brown-headed cowbird, to find and
destroy their nests.


Bird Conservation.
Migratory birds may cover thousands of miles each
year, crossing a dozen countries as they travel, so
conservationists have started an international
program to protect them, known as Partners in
Flight—Aves de las Americas. Through this
program, scientists, birders, land managers,
landowners, and others throughout the
Western Hemisphere can work together
to save migratory birds. For more infor-
mation, contact the National Fish
and Wildlife Foundation,
or visit the Partners in
Flight website.
Extinct Birds
Since 1800, four species and five subspecies of North
American birds have become extinct. In addition to the
birds on this list, Bachman’s warbler hasn’t been seen
in decades and is probably extinct. In the 20th century
alone, 23 species of birds native to Hawaii have become
extinct. Once thought extinct, the ivory-billed woodpecker
was rediscovered by video in 2005 in the Big Woods
region of eastern Arkansas. The U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service has confirmed its existence by additional
evidence collected in the field since 2005.
Species Year Extinct
Labrador duck approximately 1875
Great auk 1844
Passenger pigeon 1914
Carolina parakeet 1914
Heath hen* 1932
San Clemente Bewick’s wren* approximately 1941
Santa Barbara song sparrow* 1967
Texas Henslow’s sparrow* 1980s
Dusky seaside sparrow* 1987
Po’ouli (Hawaii) 2004
*Subspecies
Heath hen


BIRD STUDY 67
.Bird Conservation
Endangered and Threatened Birds
In the United States, the federal Endangered Species Act pro-
tects animals and plants that have become so rare that they
may become extinct. There are two classifications: Endangered
means the animal is in immediate danger of becoming extinct;
threatened means that it may eventually become endangered if
something is not done to help it.
The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, which administers
the Endangered Species Act, lists these species and subspecies
of birds as endangered or threatened. The following list does
not include birds from Hawaii, where 33 of 37 existing native
bird species are threatened or endangered.
Endangered
Endangered Birds
California condor, Gymnogyps californianus
Everglade snail kite, Rostrhamus sociabilis plumbeus
Northern aplomado falcon, Falco femoralis septentrionalis
Masked bobwhite, Colinus virginianus ridgwayi
Attwater’s greater prairie-chicken, Tympanuchus cupido attwateri
Light-footed clapper rail, Rallus longirostris levipes
Yuma clapper rail, Rallus longirostris yumanensis
California clapper rail, Rallus longirostris obsoletus
Mississippi sandhill crane, Grus canadensis pulla
Whooping crane, Grus americana
Attwater's greater prairie-chicken California condor


68 BIRD STUDY
Piping plover, Charadrius melodus (Great Lakes
region only)
Eskimo curlew*, Numenius borealis
California least tern, Sterna antillarum browni
Least tern, Sterna antillarum (except for coastal populations)
Roseate tern, Sterna dougallii (Northeast U.S. only)
Ivory-billed woodpecker*, Campephilus principalis
Red-cockaded woodpecker, Picoides borealis
Southwestern willow flycatcher, Empidonax traillii extimus
San Clemente loggerhead shrike, Lanius ludovicianus mearnsi
Black-capped vireo, Vireo atricapillus
Least Bell’s vireo, Vireo bellii pusillus
Bachman’s warbler*, Vermivora bachmanii
Golden-cheeked warbler, Dendroica chrysoparia
Kirtland’s warbler, Dendroica kirtlandii
Cape Sable seaside sparrow, Ammodramus maritimus mirabilis
Florida grasshopper sparrow, Ammodramus savannarum floridanus
*Possibly extinct
An animal or plant
can sometimes
be classified as
endangered or
threatened in one
part of the country
and safe in
another region.
Whooping crane
Least tern


BIRD STUDY 69
.Bird Conservation
Threatened Birds
Steller’s eider, Polysticta stelleri
Spectacled eider, Somateria fischeri
Audubon’s crested caracara, Polyborus plancus audubonii
Piping plover, Charadrius melodus (all except Great
Lakes region)
Western snowy plover, Charadrius alexandrinus nivosus
Roseate tern, Sterna dougallii (all except
Northeast U.S.)
Marbled murrelet, Brachyramphus marmoratus marmoratus
Mexican spotted owl, Strix occidentalis lucida
Northern spotted owl, Strix occidentalis caurina
Florida scrub-jay, Aphelocoma coerulescens
Coastal California gnatcatcher, Polioptila californica californica
Inyo California towhee, Pipilo crissalis eremophilus
San Clemente sage sparrow, Amphispiza belli clementeae
Wood stork, Mycteria americana
To receive a complete, updated
list of threatened and endangered
animals and plants, write to the U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service, Endangered
Species, 5275 Leesburg Pike, Falls
Church, VA 22041. Or, visit the
agency’s endangered species website
(see the resources section).
The Florida scrub-jay is
threatened primarily due
to loss of habitat.


Northern spotted owl. This predatory bird prefers old-growth coniferous forests.


BIRD STUDY 71
.Bird Conservation
Conservation Success Stories
While North America has lost a number of bird species since
European settlement, we have also managed to save some that
were once near the brink of extinction.
Uncontrolled hunting and habitat loss almost doomed
the wild turkey during the 19th century. Thanks to protection
and maturing forests in the East, coupled with aggressive
management techniques like trapping and moving wild flocks,
turkeys are now back in large numbers across almost their
entire range. (Wild turkeys also have been introduced to places
in the West and Hawaii, where they never originally lived,
sometimes causing conflicts with native wildlife.)
In the 1960s and ’70s, several predatory birds almost
disappeared as a result of dangerous pesticides. One of those
pesticides, DDT, interfered with their ability to lay eggs and
caused the birds to lay eggs with very thin shells that were
likely to break before hatching. After the chemicals were
banned, the birds began a slow recovery, which continues to
this day. DDT completely eliminated peregrine falcons in the
East, where conservationists adapted an old falconry technique
called hacking in order to reintroduce captive-bred falcon chicks
into the wild. It worked so well that there are now several
hundred pairs breeding in the East. Because of this recovery,
the peregrine falcon was removed from the federal Endangered
Species List in 1999.
The Aleutian Canada goose was removed from the Endangered
Species List in 2004.


72 BIRD STUDY
Bird Conservation.
Another remarkable comeback was that of the Aleutian
Canada goose, a small subspecies found in the Aleutian Islands
of Alaska, but which was killed off by introduced foxes and
was considered extinct for more than 25 years. Then in 1962,
300 were rediscovered on a remote island. Biologists began a
long process that included removing foxes from some Aleutian
Islands to create safe havens for the geese, giving them better
protection on their wintering grounds in the Pacific Northwest.
There are now more than 111,000 of the Aleutian Canada geese.
Declining Birds
With protection and management, some birds have returned
to abundance. However, many common species have suffered
steep declines. The Cornell Lab of Ornithology found that
nearly a third of all birds in North America have been lost since
1970, mostly due to human actions.
One of these is the loggerhead shrike, a gray and black
songbird that acts like a hawk, catching and killing insects
as well as prey as large as mice, small birds, and frogs. Once
abundant in farms and grasslands across the United States,
shrikes began declining in the 1940s. Today they have vanished
from much of their former range in New England and the mid-
Atlantic region, and are rare in all but a
few parts of the South, Great Plains, and
Southwest. No one is sure why shrikes are
in such trouble, but habitat loss and pesti-
cide use are among the suspects.
Another grassland bird showing
signs of serious trouble is the burrowing
owl, which inhabits the Great Plains and
deserts of the West, as well as a separate
population in Florida. Burrowing owls,
which are often active by day, use holes
dug by prairie dogs, gopher tortoises,
and other animals, and they can be quite
tolerant of humans. Unfortunately, the loss
of habitat to agriculture (and in Florida,
to development) and the destruction of
prairie dog colonies have taken a harsh
toll on burrowing owls.
Burrowing owl





74 BIRD STUDY
Creating a Backyard Bird Sanctuary.
Creating a Backyard
Bird Sanctuary
Bird conservation is a global undertaking, but you can do much
to help birds in your own neighborhood—by maintaining feed-
ers, furnishing water, building nest boxes, and growing plants
that provide birds with food and cover.
Feeders
There is nothing quite as cheerful on a cold winter’s day as
a cloud of birds flocking to a sunflower seed feeder—jays,
colorful finches, noisy chickadees, and others. A summer day
is enriched by the whirring wings and flashing colors of hum-
mingbirds drawn to a nectar feeder. The easiest way to bring
birds to your backyard is by giving them something to eat. You
do not need a fancy feeder, but you do need to carefully choose
what foods to provide.
Seeds
The single best bird food, eaten by the greatest number of
species, is sunflower seed. It is accepted by everything from
doves and jays to finches and sparrows. Striped seed (dark gray
with white stripes) is less expensive, less nutritious, creates
more waste from empty shells, and is harder for smaller birds
to eat than the black-oil type.
To prevent the
spread of disease,
it is important
that you keep
your feeding
station clean.


BIRD STUDY 75
.Creating a Backyard Bird Sanctuary
Other seeds and nuts are good, however, for attracting
particular species.
• White proso millet: mourning doves, sparrows, juncos
• Thistle seed: goldfinches, pine siskins
• Whole raw peanuts: jays
• Peanut kernels: titmice and chickadees
• Cracked corn: grackles, juncos, quail
Suet and Peanut Butter
Suet is hard beef fat. You can find packaged suet cakes at many
grocery or hardware stores. Hang the suet in a tree in a plastic
mesh bag (like one that onions came in) or a wire basket.
Woodpeckers, nuthatches, chickadees, titmice, and wrens, among
others, like suet. These same birds also enjoy peanut butter, which
has fat to keep them warm during the winter. You can make a
special peanut butter feeder by drilling holes in a section of a tree
branch or log, or you can smear the paste on a pinecone and hang
it, from its tip, in a tree. Peanut butter also can be mixed with
sunflower and millet seed, rolled oats, or crushed berries.
There are several kinds of seeds and grains that birds
don’t often eat: barley, red milo, and wheat kernels.
Unfortunately, the bargain seed mixes often sold in
grocery and department stores have lots of these
seeds, and not many of the good varieties. Check the
label. If it contains a lot of junk seeds, do not buy it.
If you provide
nothing but
sunflower seeds,
you will attract
many birds. There
are two varieties:
striped sunflower
seed, left, and
the smaller, black
oil–type sunflower
seed, right.


76 BIRD STUDY
Choosing a Feeder
Feeders come in a bewildering variety of sizes, shapes, and
styles, but you need to know only two basic kinds. A platform
feeder has a flat tray for the seed, often with a roof and a cen-
tral storage compartment known as a hopper, which lets more
seed dribble out as the birds feed. Platform feeders can be
mounted on poles that are hung from trees or positioned from
the ground.
Tube feeders are long plastic cylinders with small holes
in the side and perches for the birds to sit on. They are made
to hang from trees or poles. Not all birds can use tube feed-
ers. They are fine for small, agile species such as chickadees,
but not for larger birds such as jays or doves. This fact can be
useful if you want to provide food for smaller species that are
sometimes crowded out by their bigger neighbors.
You also can make simple feeders.
• Cut away part of the side of a one-gallon plastic beverage
jug, leaving a 2-inch-deep shelf along the bottom. Fill the
basin with seed and hang it from a tree branch.
• Make a homemade feeder from half a coconut shell. Drill
four small holes around the rim for wire or monofilament
hangers, and drill several drainage holes in the bottom.
• The easiest feeder is none at all. Simply scatter seed on the
ground near trees, bushes, or other cover. This is best for
ground-feeding birds, such as doves, sparrows, and cardinals,
but makes it harder to keep the feeding area clean.
Upside-down suet feeder. Woodpeckers, chickadees, titmice, and
nuthatches—all expert clingers—will freely use this homemade
log suet feeder. Larger, heavier starlings, jays, and crows will be
unable to steal the suet. Peanut butter may be smeared in the
holes instead of suet.


BIRD STUDY 77
.Creating a Backyard Bird Sanctuary
Where to Place Your Feeder
Whether or not you get lots of birds at your feeder will partly
depend on where you put it. Birds need to feel secure while
they are eating, in a place where a predator will not surprise
them, and with thick cover nearby for them to escape to if dan-
ger appears. Look around your home. If you can, pick a place
near trees or bushes but close enough to a window from which
you can easily see the birds. Do not locate your feeder low to
the ground or where household cats can ambush the birds.
Try not to place
your feeder
too close to a
large window,
because birds
may be confused
by the reflection
and hit the
window, hurting
themselves. If this
happens, see the
end of this section
on what to do with
injured birds.
Cleaning Up
It is important, both for the birds and for yourself, that
you keep your feeders and the area around them clean.
Birds can contract diseases from a messy feeding sta-
tion, and old, fallen seed can attract rats and other
pests. Rake up and discard old seed hulls once a week.
Periodically empty feeders and wash them with a solu-
tion of 1 part chlorine bleach to 9 parts water. Air dry,
and then refill.


78 BIRD STUDY
Caution: Use
only white table
sugar to make
hummingbird
nectar. Honey,
molasses, or other
sweeteners are
prone to a fungus
that can sicken or
kill hummingbirds.
Do not try to
make the nectar
sweeter by using
more sugar than
the recipe calls for
because this can
also sicken the
birds. Be sure to
change the nectar
and clean the
feeders every few
days, especially
in hot weather, so
the sugar-water
doesn’t spoil.
Nectar Feeders
Hummingbirds feed largely on plant nectar, a natural form of
sugar-water that they find in flowers. You can lure them to your
yard by providing homemade sugar-water in a special nectar
feeder. Be sure you buy a feeder that comes apart easily so
you can scrub all the parts with hot water (no soap) and a
bottle brush.
To make the nectar, mix 1 part plain white table sugar
with 4 parts boiling water (1 cup of sugar mixed with 4 cups
of water). Then let the mixture cool while covered so the water
doesn’t evaporate. Refrigerate any leftover nectar. You do not
have to add red food coloring to the mix—hummingbird feeders
usually have red plastic around the feeder ports, which attracts
the birds.
Ruby-throated hummingbird at feeder
Eggshells
During spring and summer, female birds need to
replenish the calcium that they use to make the shells
of the eggs they lay. You can help them by saving
the shells of chicken eggs your family uses. Wash the
shells, break them into large pieces, and place them
on a cookie tray under the broiler of your oven (ask an
adult for help) until they start to turn golden brown. This
sterilizes them to eliminate germs. Then break the shells
into small pieces and place them on the ground near a
feeder or water source, where birds will find them.


BIRD STUDY 79
.Creating a Backyard Bird Sanctuary
Nest Boxes
Many birds—among them bluebirds, wrens, tree swallows,
titmice, chickadees, and some ducks, hawks, and owls—nest
in holes in hollow trees, known as cavities. Unfortunately, nest
cavities are hard to find in many areas or have been taken over
by starlings and house sparrows. By building nest boxes with
properly sized holes, you can increase the populations of native
cavity-nesting birds.
The most effective nest box design is an upright rectangle
with an overhanging roof and one hinged side for easy cleaning
(see nest box plan). The size of the entrance hole and overall
dimensions of the box vary, depending on what species you
want to attract, although a box with a 11
⁄2-inch hole is ideal for
a wide variety of birds, including bluebirds. Fancy or unusual
designs, like those that imitate human houses, are generally
not very effective or safe for the birds. There are a number
of websites that provide plans to build a nest box, such as
Nestwatch.org.
Nest Box Dimensions Hole Box Inside
Species diameter height floor size
Chickadees, titmice, nuthatches, wrens 11
⁄4" 8" 4" X 51
⁄2"
Bluebirds, tree swallows, 11
⁄2" 93
⁄8" 4" X 51
⁄2"
great-crested flycatchers
Northern flickers 21
⁄2" 24" 71
⁄4" X 41
⁄4"
(The box must be tightly packed
full of sawdust so the flicker can
“excavate” the hole.)
American kestrels, screech owls, 3" 14" 113
⁄4" X 10"
northern saw-whet owls
(Cover the floor with 2 inches of
coarse wood shavings, not sawdust.)
Wood ducks, hooded mergansers Oval 4" wide 24" 111
⁄4" X 93
⁄4"
X 3" high
Common mergansers 5" 24" 111
⁄4" X 93
⁄4"


80 BIRD STUDY
Creating a Backyard Bird Sanctuary.
These nest box plans have been provided by the North American Bluebird
Society. For more information about bluebirds and their conservation,
visit the NABS at nabluebirdsociety.org.
PIVOT
SCREWS
RECESSED BOTTOM 1
⁄4"
PIVOT
SCREWS
VENT
DOUBLE-
HEADED NAIL DRILL HOLE THROUGH
“FRONT” AND SIDE OF
DOOR TO HOLD DOOR
CLOSED WITH NAIL.
FRONT
FRONT
ROOF
SIDE SIDE
SIDEFLOOR
FLOOR BACK
DRAINAGE
CORNER CUTS
USE THE REMAINDER
OF THE BOARD
FOR THE BACK.
6 1
⁄2"
4"
4"
4"
ABOUT 1'13
⁄4"
9 1
⁄4"
9 1
⁄4" 9 3
⁄8"
9 1
⁄4"
9 3
⁄8"
101
⁄4"
101
⁄4"
101
⁄2"
51
⁄2"
19
⁄16"80º
80º
1
⁄ 4"
8"
Eastern Bluebird
Nest Box
Materials List
• Standard board 1" × 6",
4 feet long
• Standard board 1" × 10",
101
⁄2" long
• 13
⁄4" galvanized nails,
approximately 20
• Two 13
⁄4" galvanized screws
for pivot point
• One double-headed nail for
holding door closed
SIDE


BIRD STUDY 81
.Creating a Backyard Bird Sanctuary
Use 3
⁄4-inch, untreated lumber. (See the Woodwork
merit badge pamphlet.) Assemble the box using galva-
nized screws, which hold tighter and longer than nails.
Be sure to drill several 1
⁄4-inch ventilation holes around
the top of the side and back walls, and several more
in the floor for drainage. It is not necessary to paint
the finished box, although a coat of stain or clear
waterproof sealer will help preserve the wood.
Do not paint the entrance hole or inside of the
box. Do not put a perch below the hole. Native birds
do not need one, and a perch makes it easier for
house sparrows, starlings, and other predators to
attack the birds nesting inside.
Bluebirds like nest boxes placed in open country
with low-cut grass and widely spaced trees and shrubs.
Chickadees, wrens, and titmice prefer woodlands.
Mount the box on a steel pole 6 feet off the ground.
Wrap a 24-inch-wide metal cone around the pole, or
cover the pole with grease to discourage cats, raccoons,
and other predators. Face the box away from the
prevailing wind and rain.
Clean out boxes in late winter, removing old
nesting materials, mouse nests, and other debris.
During the nesting season, do weekly checks. Quickly
open the hinged side, count the eggs or chicks, note anything
unusual about the nest materials, and record the results in your
field notebook. Then leave the area so the parents can return.
Most songbird eggs hatch two weeks after the last egg is
laid, and the chicks are ready to leave the nest in 14 to 21 days.
Do not disturb the nest during the last four or five days of this
period, or the young birds might leave before they are ready.
Bluebird nest box


82 BIRD STUDY
Creating a Backyard Bird Sanctuary.
Points to Remember
• Use only untreated lumber; chemicals from treated wood
may harm birds. Other materials like particle board are less
durable, and metal does not insulate enough against the
extremes of heat and cold. Thick lumber provides the
best insulation.
• It is not necessary to stain nest boxes. If you do, use dull
colors like gray or light brown. Avoid dark colors, which will
make the box too hot in the sun.
• Clean out boxes after each nesting, and then inspect again
in early spring prior to the nesting season. Wear gloves when
removing old nesting material, and wash your hands
when finished.
• Space boxes about 300 feet or more apart. If they are too
close, birds of the same species will fight over territory.
Where tree swallows or violet-green swallows are prevalent,
try placing two boxes 10 to 30 feet apart, then 300 feet or
more between the next pair of boxes. This may enable swal-
lows and bluebirds to nest peaceably together.
• If the lumber is smooth, use a sharp nail, rasp, or file to
roughen the inside of the front of the box so the fledglings
can easily climb to the hole. Saw kerfs may also be etched
on the inside of the front panel.
• Do not build apartment boxes, except for martins.


BIRD STUDY 83
.Creating a Backyard Bird Sanctuary
Other Nest Structures
Not all birds nest in tree cavities, but some of these species
can also benefit from human assistance. Robins, phoebes, and
barn swallows will nest on square wooden platforms mounted
beneath the eaves of barns, sheds, or buildings, out of the wind
and rain. Mourning doves, which build flimsy nests, will fledge
more babies if you provide them with shallow cones of metal
hardware “cloth,” about 10 inches in diameter and wired into a
crotch in the branches of a dense tree like a pine.
Purple martins nest in colonies, usually in special
“apartment house” nest boxes, or in hollow gourds. For more
information on attracting martins, visit the Purple Martin
Conservation Association's website.
Starting a Bluebird Trail
Bluebirds, once rare in many parts of the country, have
recovered to a remarkable degree because people
build and maintain nest boxes for them. But they still
need help. The best way is to set up a bluebird trail, a
series of boxes placed roughly 300 feet apart across the
landscape. Some bluebird trails are short, involving a
few dozen boxes. Others, maintained by large groups
of people, stretch across entire states and consist of
thousands of boxes.
Some Scouts have organized bluebird trails for
their service projects. Your local bird club or nature
sanctuary can tell you whether there is a bluebird trail
in your area. If there isn’t a trail, consider organizing
one. For more information about building, placing, and
maintaining bluebird boxes, visit the North American
Bluebird Society's website.
For more
information
about any of the
organizations or
events mentioned
in this section,
see the resources
section at the end
of this pamphlet.
If you have robins or swallows in the neighborhood, try
making a small mud hole. These species need mud to
cement their nests together.


84 BIRD STUDY
Creating a Backyard Bird Sanctuary.
Nesting Materials
Birds collect a wide variety of natural materials—grass, plant
fibers, weed stems, animal hair—from which to build their
nests. They will often accept synthetic yarn or string. Be
careful, though—pieces that are too long may entangle
or kill the bird. Cut twine, string, yarn, or narrow
strips of cloth (never use fishing line or thread) into
pieces no more than 5 or 6 inches long. In spring
and summer, when birds are nesting, you can simply
drape these over branches where they can be found,
but it’s better to use a holder of some sort. An empty
wire suet basket is a good choice, as are two plastic berry
baskets held together with twist ties. Be sure to pull some of
the strings or strips of cloth through the holes so they dangle and
flap in the breeze to attract the birds’ attention.
You can also add loose cotton or cotton balls. Many birds,
such as goldfinches, line their nests with soft plant down and
will use the cotton instead. Clean out your family’s hairbrushes,
or brushes used on dogs and cats, for species such as chipping
sparrows, which like to line their nests with hair.
BACK ROOF SIDE FLOOR7"
7"
1
⁄2" PLYWOOD 41
⁄2"
11
⁄2"
1
⁄2" ALLOWANCE
FOR SAWCUTS
81
⁄2"
281
⁄2"
61
⁄2" 6"
Robins will nest in shelters made with one or more sides open.
Robin Nesting Shelter
NOTES:
1. THERE IS ONLY ONE SIDE.
2. ROOF HANGS OVER SIDES AND FRONT.
3. TO ASSEMBLE:
A. NAIL THROUGH BACK INTO FLOOR
B. NAIL THROUGH SIDE INTO FLOOR
AND BACK
C. NAIL THROUGH ROOF INTO SIDE AND BACK.
7"


BIRD STUDY 85
.Creating a Backyard Bird Sanctuary
Water
One of the best ways to attract birds to your backyard is to
provide water. You do not need an elaborate garden pond. A
simple, old-fashioned birdbath works well, as long as you keep
it clean by scrubbing it every day or two with hot water and
adding fresh water with a hose.
What works even better is just the bowl from a birdbath,
or a shallow plastic dish like the kind that go under potted
plants, placed directly on the ground near escape cover such as
trees or bushes. Put a flat rock as big as your hand in the mid-
dle so there is only an inch or so of water over it. Some birds
do not like to wade into deep water to bathe.
You can also make a temporary birdbath by digging a shal-
low hole in the ground, removing any sharp stones or sticks,
and then lining it with heavy plastic. Place gravel on the bot-
tom, put rocks around the edge to hide the plastic, and fill it
with water.
Be sure to keep the basin clean, and change the water
regularly; stagnant water may spread disease and will be a
breeding place for mosquitoes that spread West Nile virus
and other diseases that affect both humans and birds. For the
same reason, remove old tires and other objects that collect
stagnant water.
The sound of running or dripping water
will bring birds from far away. An easy way
to accomplish this is to fill a clean, one-
gallon plastic milk jug with water. Hang it
several feet above a birdbath bowl or plas-
tic dish on the ground. Put a flat rock in the
bowl, and fill the bowl with water. Unscrew
the cap of the jug slightly to allow air
inside. Make a tiny hole with a needle or
pin in the bottom of the jug so the water
drips very slowly into the basin.


86 BIRD STUDY
Creating a Backyard Bird Sanctuary.
Landscaping for Birds
The worst yard for birds is an empty yard, with no trees or
shrubs for shelter and no berries or seeds for food. To make
your yard a bird sanctuary, try to provide cover, food, and
nesting spots. Keep bird feeders and birdbaths clean and
well-maintained.
What kinds of plants you use will depend on where you
live. Plants that grow in the hot Southwestern deserts might
not tolerate a cold New England winter, for instance. Whenever
possible, use flowers, shrubs, and trees that are native to your
part of the country. They are best adapted to your climate, and
they are the ones the local birds already use. A good place to
start looking for suggestions is your county extension agent or
soil conservation district. Also ask local nurseries, greenhouses,
and Audubon chapters and bird clubs, since many birders also
enjoy gardening for wildlife.


BIRD STUDY 87
Keep these ideas in mind when
planning a backyard sanctuary.
• Evergreen trees and shrubs, which
keep their needles or leaves all year,
are excellent cover for birds, especially
in winter when most other plants
are bare.
• Berry-producing shrubs
provide cover and food for birds.
The best species are those like
dogwoods, spicebush, sassafras, and
mulberries that produce lots of berries in
summer and early autumn. Shrubs like firethorn,
mountain ash, and holly are poor choices because their fruit
usually has little nutritional value for birds.
• Hummingbirds are attracted to plants with long, tubular
flowers, like trumpet-creeper, penstemon, bee balm
(monarda), cardinalflower, and columbines. They
also enjoy impatiens, salvia, and coral bells.
• Don’t trim back flowerbeds after plants have died for the
winter; dead stems provide cover for birds. Many native
wildflowers (coneflowers, sunflowers, coreopsis) produce
lots of seeds that attract goldfinches, sparrows, and other
winter birds.
• Consider “planting” or leaving a dead snag—a thin, dead tree
trunk 10 or 15 feet high, with a few branches still clinging to
it. Many birds, including flycatchers, bluebirds, hawks, and
owls, use snags for hunting perches, and woodpeckers will
drill nest holes in them. A snag often attracts species you
would otherwise never see in your yard.
.Creating a Backyard Bird Sanctuary


88 BIRD STUDY
Creating a Backyard Bird Sanctuary.
Backyard Hazards
Make your yard attractive to birds, and make it safe, too. House
cats—even those that are well-fed or have had their claws
removed—will hunt birds and should be kept indoors. Each
year, many millions of birds die after flying into windows.
Pesticides and other chemicals in your yard can be harmful
to wild birds, especially if your yard attracts hummingbirds.
Remember, birds eat many harmful insects, helping to control
pests without chemicals.
The most common injury for backyard birds comes from
a collision with a window or plexiglass. Birds can see the
reflection of habitat (trees, shrubs, sky, etc.) in the glass and
attempt to fly to it. Many birds die on impact, although most
appear to be temporarily stunned and later fly off, seemingly
unharmed. Unfortunately, many of these “stunned birds” that
appear to recover die within a few days because of internal
bleeding. If you find a bird that has struck a window but is
still alive, do not attempt to care for it on your own. Locate a
wildlife rehabilitator in your area. Contact them, follow
their instructions, and if you can, get the bird to the
wildlife rehabilitator immediately.
Luckily, it is easy to prevent birds
from colliding with glass. Any visible
object or substance applied to your
windows will break up the reflection in
a way that prevents birds from striking the
window. This can be vertically hanging
strings, stickers, marker, etc. For more
information on ways to deter window strikes,
with your parent or guardian’s permission visit
abcbirds.org/glass-collisions/.
Keep Cats Indoors
Experts estimate that domestic cats kill
hundreds of millions of birds (and many
mammals, reptiles, amphibians, and other
animals) each year in the United States,
making them one of the biggest hazards to
wild birds. The solution is simple: Keep all
pets indoors, which is better for them, and for wildlife.
A bell on a
cat’s collar, an
old method of
warning birds,
does little or no
good. Birds do
not associate
the tinkling with
danger. For more
information, visit
the American Bird
Conservancy’s
webpage called
“Cats Indoors!”


BIRD STUDY 89
.Creating a Backyard Bird Sanctuary
What to Do With Injured or
“Orphaned” Birds
On occasion, you may encounter an injured wild bird or a
baby bird that cannot fly well and appears to be orphaned.
Federal and state laws prohibit anyone without a special license
from keeping wild birds, but here are some things you can do
to help.
First, remember that orphaned baby birds almost never
need your help. Most birds leave the nest before they are able
to fly well, and the babies scatter in all directions. The parents
must move among them, feeding them in turn. It is not unusual
to watch a baby bird for a long time and not see the parents,
but they will be back eventually to check on their chick. If you
find a baby bird like this, simply leave it alone. If it is in a dan-
gerous place—on a busy street, or where dogs or cats will soon
find it—you can move it to a nearby bush or tree.
If you find a bird with a more serious injury, call your
local wildlife department or a nearby sanctuary or refuge and
take it to a wildlife rehabilitator, someone specially trained
and licensed to care for wild animals. If the bird is large, drop
a bath towel over it to capture it. Then place it and the towel
in a large cardboard box with the top closed. The darkness
inside the box will calm the bird. Do not try to feed it or give it
anything to drink. Do not put the bird in a wire cage. It might
break its feathers as it struggles.
Birds, like all living things, are susceptible to
diseases and parasites, most of which do not affect
humans. However, always wash your hands with
soap and hot water after handling a wild bird. If
you find a dead bird in your yard, use a plastic
bag to remove it or bury it with a shovel.


90 BIRD STUDY
Creating a Backyard Bird Sanctuary.
It is against the law to collect wild birds, their feathers,
eggs, or nests. However, some educational institutions such as
museums, schools, and nature sanctuaries have special permits
allowing them to keep such items. If you find an unusual dead
bird, check with such an organization to see whether it can use
the specimen for its collection.
In the bander’s hold, the bird’s head is cradled
between the first two fingers, gently confining
it against the palm.
Caution: Be extremely careful around
hawks, owls, or other birds of prey,
which can hurt you badly with their
claws. Loons, herons, and egrets may
stab toward your eyes with their sharp
bills. Leave the handling of these birds
to the experts.
Do not worry
about human odor
frightening off
the parents. Most
birds have little or
no sense of smell.


BIRD STUDY 91
.Careers in Bird Study
Careers in Bird Study
Millions of bird study enthusiasts around the world enjoy
spotting birds and identifying bird species for fun. But beyond
the pleasure of bird watching, there are paid and unpaid careers
in bird study.
Famous scientists such as David Sibley are well known for their
work in the field of ornithology. Professional careers utilizing
bird study skills also include positions
with the federal Fish and Wildlife
Service of the Department of the
Interior, as well as state and local
fish and game departments, zoos,
and bird sanctuaries. Some people
turn an initial hobby of bird study
into becoming specialists in bird
health and management with career
opportunities in commercial parks
and tourist attractions where
various species of birds are trained
and maintained.
Veterinarians and veterinary
technicians can serve in the specialized
field of avian medicine and surgery.
Their skills are used in providing
medical care to birds, in the research
and development of medical advances that benefit humans and
birds, and in the commercial world (poultry industry).
Volunteer activities may include bird census counting,
monitoring the nesting sites of endangered species, and
reporting hatchling survival rates. Many of these activities are
managed by governmental agencies such as state and federal
wildlife departments.


92 BIRD STUDY
Bird Study Resources.
Scouting Literature
Fieldbook; Environmental Science, Fish
and Wildlife Management, Forestry,
Gardening, Landscape Architecture,
Mammal Study, Nature, Pets,
Photography, Reptile and Amphibian
Study, Soil and Water Conservation,
Sustainability, and Woodwork merit
badge pamphlets
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.
Field Guides
Brinkley, Edward S. National Wildlife
Federation Field Guide to Birds of
North America. Sterling, 2007.
Dunn, Jon L., and Jonathan Alderfer.
Field Guide to the Birds of
North America, 7th ed. National
Geographic Society, 2017.
Griggs, Jack, ed. All the Birds of
North America: American Bird
Conservancy’s Field Guide. Collins
Reference, 2002.
Kaufman, Kenn. Kaufman Field Guide
to Advanced Birding. Houghton
Mifflin Harcourt, 2011.
Kaufman, Kenn. Kaufman Field Guide
to Birds of North America. Houghton
Mifflin Harcourt, 2005.
Peterson, Roger Tory. Peterson Field
Guide to Birds of North America, 6th
ed. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2020.
Peterson, Roger Tory. Peterson Field
Guide to Birds of Western North
America, 4th ed. Houghton Mifflin
Harcourt, 2010.
Peterson, Roger Tory. Peterson First
Guide to Birds of North America, 2nd
ed. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 1998.
Robbins, Chandler, Bertel Bruun,
Herbert Zim, and Jonathan Latimer.
Birds of North America. St. Martin’s
Press, 2001.
Sibley, David Allen. The Sibley Guide
to Birds, 2nd ed. Knopf, 2014.
Stokes, Donald, and Lillian Stokes. The
New Stokes Field Guide to Birds:
Eastern Region. Little, Brown and
Co., 2013.
Stokes, Donald, and Lillian Stokes .
The New Stokes Field Guide to Birds:
Western Region. Little, Brown and
Co., 2013.
Thompson III, Bill. The Young Birder’s
Guide to Birds of North America.
Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2012.
Bird Study Resources


BIRD STUDY 93
.Bird Study Resources
Other Books About Birds
Able, Kenneth, editor. Gatherings of
Angels: Migrating Birds and Their
Ecology. Comstock Publishing, 2003.
Choate, Ernest, and R.A. Paynter Jr.
The Dictionary of American Bird
Names. Harvard Common
Press, 1985.
Dennis, John. A Complete Guide to
Bird Feeding. Chartwell Books, 2002.
Ehrlich, Paul, David Dobkin, and Darryl
Wheye. The Birder’s Handbook.
Fireside, 1988.
Elbroch, Mark. Bird Tracks & Sign:
A Guide to North American Species.
Stackpole Books, 2001.
Greenberg, Russell, and Jamie Reaser.
Bring Back the Birds. Stackpole
Books, 1995.
Holloway, Joel E. Dictionary of Birds
of the United States: Scientific and
Common Names. Timber Press,
2009.
Hoose, Phillip. Moonbird: A Year on the
Wind with the Great Survivor B95.
Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2012.
Kaufman, Ken. Lives of North American
Birds. Houghton Mifflin
Harcourt, 2001.
Leahy, Christopher. The Birdwatcher’s
Companion to North American
Birdlife. Princeton University
Press, 2006.
Sibley, David Allen, illustrator. The
Sibley Guide to Bird Life and
Behavior. Knopf, 2009.
Sibley, David Allen, illustrator. Sibley’s
Birding Basics. Knopf, 2002.
Thompson III, Bill. Bird Watching for
Dummies. IDG Books, 1997.
Other Media
Birder’s Diary. Jones Technologies.
Software for tracking bird sightings.
Download.
Birds of North America. Thayer Birding
Software, 2015. Photographs and
songs of all North American birds,
state checklists, bird club listings,
electronic version of The Birder’s
Handbook, and more. Download/
USB flash drive.
Cornell Laboratory of Ornithology. The
Cornell Guide to Bird Sounds. 2021.
Download/USB flash drive.
Dunn, Jon, Sheri Williamson, and John
Vanderpoel. Hummingbirds of North
America. 2004. 180 minutes. DVD.
Male, Michael, and Judy Fieth. Watching
Sparrows. 2010. 75 minutes. DVD.
Male, Michael, and Judy Fieth. Watching
Warblers. 2003. 60 minutes. DVD.
Male, Michael, and Judy Fieth.
Watching Warblers West. 2009. 60
minutes. DVD.
Peterson, Roger Tory. Field Guide to Bird
Songs: Eastern/Central North
America. 2002. Audio CD.
Peterson, Roger Tory. Field Guide to
Western Bird Songs, 3rd ed. 2002.
Audio CD.
Porter, Diane. How to Start Watching
Birds. 2006. 79 minutes. DVD.
Stokes, Donald. The Stokes Field Guide
to Bird Songs: Eastern Region. 2010.
Audio CD.
Stokes, Donald. The Stokes Field Guide
to Bird Songs: Western Region. 2010.
Audio CD.


94 BIRD STUDY
Bird Study Resources.
The Audubon Bird Guide App. iOS and
Android.
The Sibley eGuide to Birds App. iOS and
Android.
Walton, Richard, and Greg Dodge.
Shorebirds: A Guide to Shorebirds of
Eastern North America. 2005. 60
minutes. DVD.
Walton, Richard, and Robert Lawson.
Birding by Ear: Eastern/Central. 2002.
Audio CD.
Walton, Richard, and Robert Lawson.
Birding by Ear: Western. 1999.
Audio CD.
Organizations and Websites
American Bird Conservancy
Toll-free telephone: 888-247-3624
abcbirds.org
American Birding Association
Toll-free telephone: 800-850-2473
aba.org
Cornell Laboratory of Ornithology
birds.cornell.edu
eBird
ebird.org
The Great Backyard Bird Count
birdcount.org
Hawk Migration Association of
North America
hmana.org
Journey North
journeynorth.org
National Audubon Society
Toll-free telephone: 844-428-3826
audubon.org
North American Bluebird Society
Telephone: 513-300-8714
nabluebirdsociety.org
Partners in Flight
partnersinflight.org
Patuxent Wildlife Research Center
U.S. Geological Survey
Toll-free telephone: 888-275-8747
usgs.gov/centers/pwrc
Purple Martin
Conservation Association
Telephone: 814-833-7656
purplemartin.org
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
Telephone: 800-344-9453
fws.gov
Acknowledgments
Scouting America thanks Eagle Scout
Scott Weidensaul, who wrote this
edition of the Bird Study merit badge
pamphlet. Weidensaul is a natural
history writer, birder, and bird-bander
who has written more than two dozen
books on nature. His book Living
on the Wind, about bird migration,
received a Pulitzer Prize nomination.
Special thanks to artist Julie
Zickefoose, whose illustrations
throughout this pamphlet captured the
nature and details of birds so precisely.
Scouting America is grateful to
the men and women serving on the
National Merit Badge Subcommittee for
the improvements made in updating
this pamphlet.
For their review and comments
for this edition of the Bird Study merit
badge pamphlet, we are grateful
to Suse Bell, Scouting America
Outdoor Ethics & Conservation
Committee; William Bowerman, PhD.,
Ornithologist, University of Maryland;
Kevin Holcomb, Wildlife Biologist with
USFWS; and Michael Huneke, National
Program Manager–Forest Service USDA.


BIRD STUDY 95
.Bird Study Resources
Scouting America appreciates the
North American Bluebird Society for
permitting us to reprint its plans for
a nest box design, and for technical
support with text that explains the
fabrication and care of the nest box.
For their hospitality, expertise, and
use of park facilities for photography,
we appreciate the staff members of
the Arthur R. Marshall Loxahatchee
National Wildlife Refuge, Boynton
Beach, Florida, and Huntley Meadows
Park, Fairfax County, Virginia.
Thanks to the following Scout
units for their involvement with the
photography needs of this book: Troop
105 of West Palm Beach, Florida.; Troop
759 of New York, New York; troops 285
and 398 of San Antonio, Texas; troops
761, 950, 956, and 970 of Sterling,
Virginia; Troop 254 of Bedford, Texas;
and Venturing Crew 717 of Euless,
Texas.
Photo and Illustration Credits
Anahuac National Wildlife Refuge,
courtesy—page 53 (greater white-
fronted geese)
Paul Bolstad, University of Minnesota,
Bugwood.org, courtesy—
page 57 (northern hawk owl)
Getty Images—page 30
Mark Lockwood, courtesy—
page 33 (nest)
Terry Spivey, USDA Forest Service,
Bugwood.org, courtesy—pages 17
and 39 (blue grouse)
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service,
courtesy—pages 68 (whooping
crane), and 71
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service/Tim
Bowman, courtesy—page 38
(bar-tailed godwit)
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service/Donna
Dewhurst, courtesy—page 61
(ruby-crowned kinglet)
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service/Scott
Frier, courtesy—page 67
(California condor)
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service/Luther
C. Goldman, courtesy—page 66
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service/John and
Karen Hollingsworth, courtesy—
page 70
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service/Gary
Kramer, courtesy—page 61 (western
tanager)
Wikipedia.org, courtesy—pages 38
(rough-legged hawk), 39 (eastern
kingbird), 47, and 72
Wikipedia.org/Dan Pancamo,
courtesy—page 25
Julie Zickefoose—all illustrations on
pages 8-9, 10 (except bald eagle), 11,
14–15, 18–24, 26–27, 29, 31–36, 42,
46, 48–49, 51, 54, 59-60, 64, 68–69,
76, 78, 81, 85, and 89–90
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of
or are protected by Scouting America.
John McDearmon—all illustrations on
pages 80 and 84
Michael Goldman—page 88
Brian Payne—pages 73 and 86


Get ahead in Scouting with Scout Life magazine. It’s loaded with the
latest news on merit badges and other advancement tools. Plus, it’s got
outdoor adventure, games and comics, leadership tips, life skills, stories
about other Scouts and more. It’s just what you need to succeed.
Subscribe today at go.scoutlife.org/subscribe
Use promo code SLMBP15 to get a special
print + digital bundle offer priced just for Scouts.