R AILROADING
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


35939
ISBN 978-0-8395-3292-7
©2023 Boy Scouts of America
2023 Printing
Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Railroading or check
Scoutbook for the latest requirements.


RAILROADING 3


4 RAILROADING


RAILROADING 5
Contents
A Brief History of American Railroading. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Modern Railroads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
Signals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
Safety First . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
Railfanning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
Careers in Railroading . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
Model Railroading . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
Resources About Railroading . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65





RAILROADING 7
.A Brief History of American Railroading
A Brief History of
American Railroading
At the turn of the 19th century, travel over land in the United
States was slower than it had been in ancient Rome. The
Romans had surfaced most of their roads with stone and other
hard materials to make travel by horse-drawn wagon and
chariots much easier. The dirt roads of Colonial America were
far more primitive and filled with mud each time it rained. The
lack of bridges forced people to go out of their way to cross
rivers. Vehicles drawn by animals traveled about as fast as a
human could walk. But the coming of the railroad changed
all this.
On July 4, 1828, Charles Carroll—the last surviving signer
of the Declaration of Independence—laid the foundation
for what would become the Baltimore and Ohio Rail Road.
Passengers could ride a horse-drawn railcar for 13 miles to
Ellicott’s Mills, Maryland. This
was the nation’s first common
carrier, or public transporta-
tion, of freight and passengers
by rail on a regular schedule.
Soon it became evident
that steam was a more
practical form of power than
animals. Economics and the
Industrial Revolution triggered
and quickly stimulated the
infant railroading industry.
From the mines, forests, and
farms to factories and markets,
railroads hauled all kinds
of products: coal, iron ore,
timber, cattle, grain, and
finished goods.
By 1830, Peter Cooper, an inventor from New York,
completed work on his revolutionary invention
for replacing horsepower with steam. The Tom
Thumb, an experimental steam locomotive, never
got beyond the test stage, but it paved the way for
more advanced locomotives.


8 RAILROADING
A Brief History of American Railroading.
By 1836, the Baltimore and Ohio Rail Road had reached
Harper’s Ferry, Virginia (there was no West Virginia until
1863), with a 37-mile line into Washington, D.C. Sixteen years
later, these rails had extended to the Ohio River at Wheeling,
Virginia, opening up what would soon become a trade route to
the West.
During these early years the nation’s rail system expanded
along the Atlantic Coast from Portsmouth, New Hampshire,
to the Carolina states. But it wasn’t possible to ride a train or
ship goods all that distance by rail. People still relied on stage-
coaches, freight wagons, and coastal steamships. However,
within six years of the founding of the Baltimore and Ohio Rail
Road, 200 rail lines formed in America.
The California
gold rush of 1849
increased public
demand for
coast-to-coast
rail connections.
Previously, railroad
construction
averaged 316
miles of track per
year. But in the
1850s, the average
jumped to 2,000
miles per year. By
the time the U.S.
Civil War started
in 1861, more than
30,000 miles of
track had been
laid, almost as
much as in all the
rest of the world.
Industrialization swept through England in the 18th
century. However, the Industrial Revolution did
not occur in the United States until the early 19th
century. This is when people began to invent and use
machines to do work that previously had been done
by hand, increasing productivity and efficiency.
Some railroad companies established different
gauges (distances between the inside edges of the
rails) for their own tracks, making it impossible for
railcars to pass from one railroad to another. People
soon recognized the need for a uniform gauge. In
preparation for the building of the Transcontinental
Railroad, President Abraham Lincoln ordered that
standard gauge should be 4 feet, 81/2 inches. Many
think this unusual measurement, still used today, is
a throwback to the width of Roman chariot wheels.
Britain ultimately adopted the same measurement
as its own standard gauge for wagon and carriage
wheels, and later railroad equipment. Many early
locomotives in America were British-built, so it
made sense to accommodate this wheel width in
the United States.


RAILROADING 9
.A Brief History of American Railroading
The Transcontinental Railroad
Unites a Young Nation
In an effort to bring the nation together by connecting the
East to the West, President Abraham Lincoln, on July 1, 1862,
commissioned the Union Pacific Rail Road to start laying
tracks westward from Omaha, Nebraska. He also commis-
sioned the Central Pacific Railroad to lay tracks eastward from
Sacramento, California. The two railroad tracks were to meet
somewhere in between at an undecided location. The track
would cover a total distance of 1,780 miles.
After three years, only 40 miles of track had been laid.
Even though Congress had allocated $48,000 per completed
mile of track as an incentive to each railroad, fighting between
the North and South diverted attention. The U.S. Civil War
of 1861–65 became the world’s first armed conflict to use
railroads, which underscored the growing importance of this
new mode of transportation.


10 RAILROADING
A Brief History of American Railroading.
Transcontinental Railroad workers received from two to
four dollars per day for backbreaking 12-hour shifts, an excel-
lent wage for that time. Laborers’ pay depended on the kind
of work they were hired to do. Laborers from all over came
here for the high wages, the prospect of steady work, and a
chance to stay after the rail line was completed. Most came
from Ireland (where the potato famine had forced many fami-
lies to the edge of starvation), Germany, Great Britain, Central
America, and especially China, where as many as 7,000 labor-
ers were recruited by the Central Pacific Railroad. Many second
and third generation Americans laid track as well: Mormons,
Civil War soldiers returning home, freed blacks who had been
slaves, and American Indians.
The construction crews worked so hard near the end of
the lines that they actually bypassed each other in their haste
to outperform their rival crew. During one astounding day,
almost two weeks before the two crews met, the workers laid
more than 10 miles of track, a record that stands to this day.
After the tracks from east and west were joined at Promontory
Summit, Utah, on May 10, 1869, a golden spike was driven to
symbolize the now correctly named United States of America.
While the location of the Golden Spike ceremony is no longer
on the transcontinental route, a national park with operating
locomotives is located at the site.
The Trans-
continental
Railroad was the
most massive civil
works project
in history since
the Great Wall of
China. It would
remain so until
the digging of
the Panama
Canal early in
the 20th century.


RAILROADING 11
.A Brief History of American Railroading
By the 1800s, with the introduction of the steam locomotive and rapid growth of
railways, travel by train became more accessible to the general population.
We’ve Come a Long Way, Baby!
Railroad safety has come a long way since the early days of using
a mounted flagman, hand and arm signaling, flags, and lanterns to
direct trains. Messages for directing trains were once transmitted via
telegraph and later by telephone to train operators, who wrote them
on documents. At one point in history, these messages were tied
with string and fastened to a stanchion or pole. The operator would
then hold the pole out, and the message would be grabbed by some-
one from the moving train as it passed by. Today, trains have very
sophisticated communication and safety systems that utilize modern
technology like GPS.





RAILROADING 13
.Modern Railroads
Modern Railroads
Railroads, with their low rolling resistance, offer the most
efficient and cost-effective way to haul passengers and heavy
freight long distances over land. It takes far less energy and
fewer workers to operate a multicar train than the equivalent
number of highway trucks. The high labor efficiency comes
from the fact that numerous carloads traveling along a guideway
in close order need only one “driver.”
Railroads transport freight and passengers over land in
steel-wheeled cars directed along fixed-guide paths. The rails,
made up of two long, heavy bars of steel, each shaped like an
inverted “T,” may be set upon wood, concrete, steel, or com-
position crossties embedded in crushed stone called ballast. Or
their guideways may be elevated above or buried below ground.
8' 6"
STEEL RAIL ANCHORS
(four per tie, two
on each side)
WOOD CROSSTIES
(3,000 used per
mile of track)
STEEL RAIL
Most crossties are 81/2'
long, 7" wide, and
5" high.
SUB-BALLAST (gravel)
TOP BALLAST (crushed rock)
SUBGRADE
GAUGE SIDEFIELD SIDE FIELD SIDE
STEEL TIE PLATE
(two per tie)
STEEL CUT SPIKES
(two per tie plate,
one on each side
of the rail; extra
tie plate holes used
on curves and for respiking
in different locations)
21" TIE SPACING
4' 81/2"
The roadbed depth
ranges between
6 and 30 inches,
depending upon
use. Heavy train
traffic requires a
deeper roadbed.
The standard
gauge distance
between inner
sides of railheads
is 4' 81/2".
Structure of a railroad track


14 RAILROADING
Modern Railroads.
Various track configura-
tions give flexibility to train
movement. The most com-
mon include the turnout.
At the turnout switch is
a steel frog, a channeled
device at the intersection of
two tracks that allows the
wheel flanges of a railcar
to cross over from one
track to another. For more
information about track
configurations, refer to the
“Model Railroading” section
in this pamphlet.
A simple physics principle, known as rolling resistance, establishes
that hard wheels roll with less effort over hard surfaces than soft
wheels do over softer surfaces. To test this principle, roll a golf ball
over a hardwood floor. Then roll a foam rubber ball of the same
size with the same
force over carpeting.
Which rolls easier
and goes farther?
Parts of a turnout
The switch diverts wheels
from one track to the
other when switch points
are shifted.
The frog allows
wheel flanges to
cross running rail.
SWITCH POINTS
SWITCH RODS
OPERATING ROD
(TO SWITCH MACHINE)
GUARDRAIL
LEAD
CURVED STOCK RAIL
STRAIGHT
CLOSURE RAIL
CURVED
CLOSURE RAIL
TOE
The guardrail prevents wheels from taking
the wrong path through the frog.
HEELFLANGEWAYWING RAIL
POINT
LEAD


RAILROADING 15
.Modern Railroads
Freight Trains
Trains are categorized according to the
freight they haul and the cars they operate.
Unit trains haul a single freight or
commodity such as coal, automobiles,
gravel, or grain. They use the same type
of car to run between two points—with
no loading or unloading stops in between.
These trains usually deliver their freight
to one destination, saving a lot of time
because they don’t have to be sorted in a
classification yard and redirected.
Mixed trains, or general merchandise trains, carry a variety
of freight in different types of railcars. The individual cars are
ultimately headed for different destinations, so the mixed train
usually goes through a classification yard.
Intermodal trains haul standardized, space-saving
containers and trailers that are also carried on trucks and ships.
This method of shipping saves shippers considerable time and
handling expense while protecting the cargo from the weather,
damage, and theft. Intermodal containers can move as singles
loaded on flatcars, or as double-stacks with containers stacked
two-high.
Every day a
unit train of
refrigerated
boxcars leaves
Florida, headed
for New Jersey
with thousands
of gallons of fruit
juice on board.
Nearly all modern freight railroads are privately owned and operated.
Unlike other transportation companies and industries, railroads must
build, maintain, monitor, and pay property taxes and associated operat-
ing costs on their rights-of-way. Unlike highways and other roadways,
railroad tracks and rights-of-way are not publicly funded or maintained.
Railroads that lease their rolling stock, operate over another company’s
track, share loading facilities with another carrier, or contract with
employees of another company to run their own trains may not have
all these costs.
Refer to the timesaver switching game in the
“Model Railroading” section to see how freight
trains are sorted in a classification yard.


16 RAILROADING
Modern Railroads.
Highway truck trailers are carried in piggyback formation on flatcars, much like the
way circus and farm wagon trains had traveled in earlier years.
Greenbrier Maxi-Stack
AP®, an all-purpose
double-stack car
For containerized cargo, flatcars are
frequently loaded and unloaded by
an intermodal crane, which straddles
the train.


RAILROADING 17
.Modern Railroads
Specialized Freight Cars
Shippers use different kinds of railroad cars depending on the
type of cargo, or lading, to be delivered and the loading/
unloading facilities available. Flatcars are platforms used for
carrying intermodal containers and piggyback trailers. They
also carry other freight, including large electrical generators
and transformers, bulky pipe sections, and even military
weapons. Flatcars can be
unloaded by intermodal
cranes or from the side by a
large overhead container
forklift. They come in several
variations: all-purpose, which
is flat (flush) all the way
across; centerbeam bulkhead,
with a supporting bulkhead
that runs down the center from
end to end; bulkhead, with
sturdy walls at either end; and
depressed-center, with a depres-
sion in the platform
for lowering oversize loads
enough to clear bridges,
overpasses, and tunnels.
Centerbeam flatcar
Flush deck heavy-duty flatcar


18 RAILROADING
Modern Railroads.
Enclosed railcars called boxcars range from 50
to 90 feet long and carry general freight in plain
cars or products requiring special equipment
or handling.
Refrigerated boxcars (nicknamed reefers) haul perish-
ables such as fruit, beef, cheese, poultry, fruit juices,
and frozen foods maintained at minus 10 degrees F.
Covered hoppers, the most
common kind of freight car
in North America, transport
loads—such as grain and
sugar—that also require
protection from contamina-
tion and the weather.
These cars empty through
the bottom.
In 1857 a Chicago
meat-packer shipped
the first refrigerated
car, which was cooled
by placing chunks of
ice at each end of the
car. Today’s refrigerator
cars have high-tech
mechanical or chemical
cooling machinery.
Railcars with valu-
able perishable cargo
often run in express
lanes, which are
given priority over
other rail traffic.


RAILROADING 19
.Modern Railroads
Tank cars carry liquids, mostly
petroleum products such as
fuel oil and petrochemicals,
and liquids like vegetable
oil, and are sometimes
pressurized. Some tank
cars have special linings to
contain hazardous chemicals.
Open-top hoppers are used for freight like coal, mineral ores,
sand, gravel, and crushed stone for track ballast.
Mill gondolas provide the maximum open carrying capacity for
exposed loads. For protected loads such as steel coils, gondolas
are equipped with removable covers. Side-dump gondolas can
unload by tilting to either side; coal-carrying gondolas unload by
turning upside down.


20 RAILROADING
Modern Railroads.
Starting a Train
Two main factors determine a locomotive’s ability to move a
train: the relationship of its horsepower to tractive force, or the
amount of power produced to the amount of force exerted.
Two other factors also are important: the rails’ angle of incline
and the adhesion (grip of the wheels to the rails). Although a
single locomotive exerting a weight of as much as 70,000
pounds per axle can pull many cars, two or more locomotives—
distributed throughout the train and remotely controlled from
the lead locomotive—may be required to pull very long and
heavy trains.
Many modern
freight cars have
a gross rail
weight (GRL) of
286,000 pounds,
which includes
the weight of the
car when empty
(light weight or
LT WT) plus the
maximum weight,
in pounds, of
freight the car
can carry (load
limit or LD LMT).
Today’s railroads
test railcars
with a GRL of
315,000 pounds.
Some specialized railcars haul cargo such as livestock,
industrial and nuclear waste, and automobiles.
This Trinity Railcar Q2 carries automobiles
and light trucks.
Reporting Marks
Each freight car carries on its sides a variety of
stenciled letters and numbers that reveal a great
deal of information about the railcar. Letters (and
logos) indicate the name of the railroad or leasing
company moving the freight, such as “NS” for
Norfolk Southern Corporation. Each car carries
a unique number so it can be identified in rail yards
and directed appropriately. Another number, often
preceded with “BLT,” shows the date each car was
built. Other numbers give you the inside dimensions
of the car, its weight without load, or tare, and fully
loaded (gross weight). The maximum capacity
(CAPY) in cubic feet also is stenciled on the car.


RAILROADING 21
.Modern Railroads
Most of today’s railroad locomotives are “fired” by diesel
fuel. A diesel-electric locomotive, the most common locomotive
in service today, has a main diesel engine, which runs a large
electric motor called a traction alternator. The generator pro-
duces electricity to power the electric traction motors, which
are mounted—one per axle—on the power trucks.
Radial Steering Trucks
A locomotive’s “trucks” are the complete assemblies of driving
wheels, axles, gearboxes, brakes, coil springs, and other parts—
mounted in a frame. Radial steering trucks are hinged to flex and
steer the wheels smoothly through curves. These trucks reduce wheel
and track wear and provide better adhesion.
Diesel-electric locomotive with AC (alternating current) traction motors
AC TRACTION MOTOR
WHEELSET
MAIN DIESEL ENGINE
(THE PRIME MOVER) MAIN
GENERATOR
INVERTER
DC ELECTRICITY
THREE-PHASE
AC ELECTRICITY
DC ELECTRICITY
Diesel-electric locomotive with DC (direct current) traction motors
WHEELSET
DC TRACTION MOTOR
MAIN
GENERATOR
MAIN DIESEL ENGINE
(THE PRIME MOVER)


22 RAILROADING
Modern Railroads.
Locomotives, especially
on passenger commuter
trains, often push as well as
pull their trains. The train has
a locomotive on one end and
a passenger car equipped
with an engineer’s cab and
duplicate controls on the
other end. It can be operated
from either end, so it doesn’t
have to be turned around to
make a return trip.
Stopping a Train
A train stops by using an air brake system, which allows
the engineer to apply the brakes to all cars at once. An air
compressor fills a main air reservoir, located in the locomotive,
with compressed air. Then the air is piped through the brake
pipe, which is connected from the locomotive and car to car by
hoses. When the train is in motion, air passes through control
valves on the brake pipe to an auxiliary reservoir in each car.
When the engineer applies the brakes—releasing air from the
brake pipe—the components within the brake valve change
position and let pressurized air from the auxiliary reservoirs
flow into the brake cylinders. The increased air pressure in
the brake cylinders causes them to push against the pistons,
and, through the levers and rods of the brake rigging, force the
brake shoes against the wheels.
The engineer releases the brake by increasing the air pres-
sure in the brake pipe. The increased pressure pushes the com-
Electric
multiple-unit
(EMU) commuter
trains are
self-propelled;
all cars (from
eight to 12) can
be controlled
from one cab.
Electric locomotives (without
a diesel engine) collect current
from overhead wires, or
catenary, through metal arms
called pantographs mounted
on the roof. Others use a pick-
up shoe to collect current from
an electrified third rail placed
next to the running rails. The
locomotive’s internal equipment
converts high-voltage current
to lower voltage current.


RAILROADING 23
.Modern Railroads
ponents in the brake valves in a different position, allowing the
pressurized air to recharge the auxiliary reservoir. At the same
time, the air brake valves allow the pressurized air in the brake
cylinders to escape to the atmosphere, thus releasing the brakes.
On locomotives with electric drive motors (traction
motors) and most subway and other rapid transit cars, an
electromagnetic system allows the motors to act as temporary
generators during deceleration. The electrical current produced
during braking is directed to large resistors, converted to heat,
and then released into the atmosphere. This is known as
dynamic braking.
In some electric
locomotives,
the electricity
generated by
traction motors
for braking is
fed back into the
catenary or third
rail. This is called
regenerative
braking.
The railway air brake system is fail-safe because any air loss, either from manual
release or an emergency such as a car becoming detached, automatically applies
the brakes.
CLOSED
FLEXIBLE
AIR HOSE
BLEED ROD
(MANUALLY DRAINS
AIR FROM THE
BRAKE CYLINDER)
EMERGENCY AIR RESERVOIR
“GLADHAND”
HOSE COUPLING
(TO THE NEXT CAR)
TO LOCOMOTIVE
TO REAR OF TRAIN
AUXILIARY AIR RESERVOIR
RETAINER VALVE
ANGLE COCK OPEN
TO BRAKE
RIGGING AND
BRAKE SHOES
PULL ROD FROM THE
HANDBRAKE WHEEL
CONTROL
VALVE
BRAKE CYLINDER PISTON ROD
BRAKE PIPE
BRANCH PIPE
At one time all freight trains had cabooses. But these
special cars have been replaced with end-of-train
devices (EOTDs) equipped with a bright flashing
red warning light, also called flashing rear end
devices (FREDs). These devices—always placed on
the last car of a train—alert train crews by radio
signal to problems detected in the air brake system.
An engineer can also apply brakes from the rear of
the train through radio contact with the EOTD.


North American Network, Class I Railroad Routes (Not all routes are shown; the ones
depicted are noted in the lower left-hand box.)


RAILROADING 25
.Modern Railroads
Railroad Classifications
Railroads in North America (including Canada and Mexico) run
on approximately 200,000 miles of track and are classified by
the route-miles on which they operate and on the amount of
revenue (for hauling freight) they generate within one year. The
nation’s largest freight haulers, with revenues of approximately
$490 million per year, are classified as Class I railroads. Although
there are fewer than 10 Class I railroads, they own and maintain
more than 76 percent of the track on this continent.
Next are the smaller regional carriers, followed by the
short lines. These frequently handle Class I railroad trains once
they leave the main lines. Lastly, there are the terminal rail-
roads, which typically switch and shunt cars around rail yards
or in and out of factories and terminals.
Passenger railroads are classified by their ridership
(numbers of passengers) or by the regions they serve. They
operate by what is sometimes referred to as a fixed-guide
path, traveling along an established route.
At first, rail
passenger cars
were little more
than stagecoaches
on steel rails.
Today we still
refer to passenger
railcars—even
highway buses—
as “coaches.”
Dallas Area Rapid Transit (DART) operates a light rail system
along 44 miles of rail and serves an average of more than 59,000
passengers weekly.


26 RAILROADING
Modern Railroads.
Intercity passenger trains connect major cities, with
stops in between at smaller towns. An example of such a
system is Amtrak, which operates rail lines in 45 states.
Commuter trains travel within a metropolitan region.
The Metropolitan Transportation Authority in New York serves
more than 1.3 billion riders annually in an area encompassing
New York City and surrounding counties.
Rapid transit (fast public transportation, also called heavy
rail or metro) serves passengers within and around the edges
of cities. They usually are configured as subways that run
on underground or elevated guideways. In Georgia, the
Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority (MARTA) operates
248 railcars over 48 miles of track. San Francisco’s Bay Area
Rapid Transit (BART) system has a unique feature—an
underwater tube that links communities surrounding the San
Francisco Bay area. The largest system is New York City Transit,
which carries more than 4 million riders per day over more
than 700 miles of track and uses more than 6,000 cars.
Light rail transit systems—with their light rail vehicles
(LRVs), the modern version of trolley cars—are generally
powered by catenary and travel on smaller track. Buffalo, New
York’s Metrorail, which has 6.2 miles of track, is one such
example. In Oregon, the Metropolitan Area Express (MAX)
serves the greater Portland metropolitan area along more than
35 miles of track.
Monorail trains, also classified as rapid transit, are sus-
pended from an overhead track or set on a single rail. They
generally are used for short runs such as at airports or between
other close transportation points, in amusement parks, or at
other attractions.
America’s Passenger Rail Service
In 1971, the U.S. Congress created the National Railroad
Passenger Corporation—called Amtrak—to take over and
operate the nation’s intercity passenger rail service. This
national service was established to relieve the nation’s
private railroads of all passenger service, which had become
unprofitable because of competition from automobiles and
airplanes. Amtrak operates some commuter lines under
contract to local transportation authorities.
Amtrak also
operates the Auto
Train from Lorton,
Virginia (south of
Washington, D.C.),
to Sanford,
Florida. If you are
going on vacation,
you can bring
your vehicle,
too. For shorter
distances,
Amtrak provides
comfortable
coaches, often
with food
service cars.


RAILROADING 27
.Modern Railroads
Today Amtrak carries more than 31 million passengers a
year over more than 22,000 miles of track, almost all of it owned
by the Class I freight railroads. The exception is the Northeast
Corridor (NEC), where Amtrak owns and maintains most of this
high-speed electrified rail line between Boston, Massachusetts,
and Washington, D.C. Long-term plans are underway to extend
this rail corridor south to Richmond, Virginia, and add other
high-speed lines in California, the upper Midwest, and Southeast.
On long-distance routes, Amtrak is replacing older diesel locomotives with fuel-
efficient and cleaner-burning ALC-42 locomotives from Siemens Mobility. These engines
emit 89% less nitrogen oxide and 95% less particulate matter than the old diesels.
Standard Time
Before this nation’s “iron network” connected communities across
North America, each town set its clocks by the sun. So time varied
from place to place, with the time in towns to the west running
minutes behind the time in towns to the east. As travel increased on
the railroads, it became obvious that passengers could no longer rely
on scheduled service based upon published timetables. To make the
coordination of train arrival and departure times easier, the rail industry
agreed to set all its clocks along a line to one operating time. It was
called railroad standard time, later shortened to standard time.


28 RAILROADING
Modern Railroads.
High-Speed Trains
High-speed (normally 125 mph and over) passenger rail service
is common throughout the world. The best known are the
Japanese Shinkansen bullet train, the German InterCityExpress
(ICE), and the French TGV (Train à Grande Vitesse, or “train
of great speed”). These trains can reach speeds of 200 mph
because they run on their own right-of-way. In the United States,
however, Amtrak’s high-speed Acela Express (combination
of acceleration and excellence) shares its track with slower
commuter and freight trains. It operates in the Northeast
Corridor and attains speeds up to 150 mph from Boston to
New York, and up to 135 mph from New York to Washington,
D.C. Its high-speed train cars tilt, or lean in, toward the inside
of curves, allowing the trains to negotiate the bends quickly
and as smoothly as if the tracks were straight.
The fastest
timetabled start-
to-stop in the
world are trains
G17/G39 on the
Beijing–Shanghai
high-speed
railway, averaging
197.4 mph.
The Acela Express is called a trainset because the
cars—electric locomotives at each end and six
coaches in between—operate as one unit.


RAILROADING 29
.Modern Railroads
Railroad of the Future?
Today there is a kind of experimental railroad that doesn’t
actually touch its guideway once under power. It is called
maglev, short for magnetic levitation. An electromagnetic field
suspends the lightweight vehicles, which look like wingless
airplanes, from three-eighths of an inch to as high as six inches
off the rails. The guideway is called a magway. It can be con-
structed along the median center strip of a divided highway or
alongside other roads much like monorail, separate from motor
vehicle traffic. As with regular electric trains, there is no fuel
carried on board a maglev train—and no motor. Magports
provide the driving force for this “floating train” by means
of what is called magnetic repulsion.
The Hyperloop is currently being developed in California
and could cover the distance between Los Angeles and San
Francisco in 35 minutes and cost a proposed $20 per ride. It
would consist of capsules transported at high speeds through the
length of low-pressure tubes that are elevated off the ground. To
simplify the science, reports suggest the pods would work
similarly to an air hockey table. The capsules are supported on a
cushion of air and travel at average speeds of 600 mph, reaching
a top speed of 760 mph. With tubes departing every 30 seconds
and carrying 28 passengers each, a single tube would be able to
transport 7.4 million people per year.
Under
experimental
conditions in
Germany and
Japan, maglev
vehicles have
traveled as fast
as 375 miles
per hour.Maglevs are quiet, produce no pollution along the
guideway, and can climb steeper grades and turn
tighter corners than conventional trains. The only
friction encountered once underway is wind resis-
tance. Maglev trains require only one-tenth of the
power needed to move a regular train. Some people
think that once the high costs are resolved, maglev
will replace conventional passenger railroading.


30 RAILROADING
Signals.
Signals
The safety of passenger and freight train operations requires
constant communication among train crews, employees who
maintain the track and equipment, and those who control
train traffic. Over the years railroads have used many methods:
hand signals, flag signals, flares, whistle signals, lighted signals
called block signals and interlocking signals, and telegraph,
telephone, telefax, radiophone, walkie-talkies, microwave
systems, cell telephones, and satellites. All employees involved
with train operations must learn the signal techniques defined
in their railroad’s operating rules book and carry the book
while at work.
Since the early days of railroading, train crew members
have used hand signals. At night they signaled with lighted
lanterns. The old oil- or kerosene-powered lanterns have
become collectibles. Today’s train crews carry battery-powered
railroad lanterns as part of their standard equipment. Railroad
employees rarely use hand signals and now use walkie-talkies
to communicate directly with each other.
The train’s engineer uses horn signals to respond to the
hand signals or radio commands from train crew members,
track workers, and other trains, and to make other employees
aware of the train’s movement. Horn signals also are used to
alert the public when a train is nearing a highway-rail grade
crossing as well as approaching or departing from a train
station. The chart shown here summarizes the commonly
used horn signals heard around a railroad.
In the past, trains left stations—one after another—on a
paced schedule. Each train was expected to travel a certain
distance in a certain time period before the next train was
allowed to leave. But spacing the trains by time did not take
into account weather conditions or other physical issues such
as mechanical breakdowns. The only way to prevent a rear-end
collision was to send a crew member down the track to warn
an approaching train of the stopped train ahead.
There is one
signal that
anyone, including
members of the
public, can use
in an emergency
to communicate
with a railroad
crew to stop the
train: Wave any
object—an arm,
flag, T-shirt, etc.—
back and forth
when standing
near the track.


RAILROADING 31
.Signals
To improve train control, railroads divided the tracks
into sections called blocks. A block operator stationed at the
entrance to each block would allow one train into the section.
No other train could enter that block until the first train had
left. Block operators communicated by telegraph and telephone
to inform other operators of each train’s movement in and out
of the blocks. This way of separating trains by space was better
than separating them by time, but it still depended too much
on human intervention.
At junctions and terminals where trains may change
tracks, interlocking signals give lighted commands to the
trains. Originally a worker in a signal tower or a station build-
ing would set the routes and signal displays to permit the
Horn Signals
Engine Horn Meaning
“O” is a short blast;
“~” is a long blast.
O Apply brakes. Stop.
OO Engineer’s answer to any signal unless
otherwise specified.
OOO When standing, back up; when running,
stop at next station.
OOOO Engineer’s request for signals.
OOOOOOOOOO, etc. Person or livestock on track (series of short blasts).
~~~~~~~~~~~~, etc. Approaching stations, junctions, or railroad crossings
at grade (series of long blasts) without stopping.
~OO A second section is following; call for
other trains to signal.
~OOO Flagman to go out to protect rear of train.
~~ Release brakes. Proceed.
~~O~ Train is approaching public crossing at grade.
~~~~ Flagman may return from west or south.*
~~~~~ Flagman may return from east or north.*
*These horn signals may be followed by “O” or “OO” or
“OOO” when several tracks are in use. The number of short
blasts corresponds to the track number.


32 RAILROADING
Signals.
trains to enter the interlocking area. Complex sets of lighted
signals with many aspects conveyed commands so that the
train engineer would know what speed was permitted within
the interlocking and what type of track change to expect.
With the invention of Centralized Traffic Control (CTC) in
1927, remote operators called dispatchers were able to control
interlockings by working with lighted track diagram panels
called CTC machines. Nowadays, dispatchers—hundreds or
even thousands of miles away from the actual track site—
control these interlockings with computer graphics displays.
In the 1870s, thanks to the invention of the closed-track circuit and
track relay, railroad employees could detect the presence of a train
on the rails and know whether it was occupying a block. Later, in
1911, the railroads developed a system of electromechanical devices
and circuitry called Absolute Permissive Block (APB) signaling. With
APB signaling, the trains themselves control the signals. As a train
enters a block, which is an electrical circuit, it shorts out the circuit
and activates a STOP signal, which warns other trains not to enter the
block. As the train moves ahead, a signal at the entrance to the next
block gives a lighted command (called a signal aspect) to the train
indicating whether it may enter.
Automatic Block Systems (ABS), of which APB is a special type,
advise an approaching train if the track ahead is clear of another train,
a misaligned switch or other issues. The ABS system only informs the
train of conditions ahead, but operating rules still require the train to
receive permission from the dispatcher for authority to proceed from
its origin to a specified location. The signals then inform the train that
all is in order ahead.
2-block, 3-aspect signaling
In this basic block layout, each signal is spaced a safe braking distance
apart based on the maximum permissible speed for that section of railroad.
The signals (1, 2, 3, and 4) can display three colors, called aspects, and are
defined as follows: Green means “proceed at up to maximum permissible
speed.” Yellow means “proceed at reduced speed; be prepared to stop at
next signal.” Red means “stop.”


RAILROADING 33
.Signals
Semaphore and Signal Lights
Over the years, railroads developed various styles of lighted
signals. Originally, semaphore signals extended like arms over
the tracks. In the vertical position, the signal meant “proceed
at maximum permissible speed”; in the diagonal position,
“restricted speed”; and in the horizontal position, “stop.”
Eventually, colored lights were combined with the
semaphore signals for better visibility. The searchlight signal,
which passes a light through a moveable colored lens and then
through an optical magnifying lens, is bright enough for both
daytime and nighttime operations. A position light signals with
three fog-penetrating yellow lamps in the same positions (with
the same meanings) as semaphore signals. Color light signals
use one bulb with one color lens. Locomotive engineers and
other railroad workers must memorize these signals to safely
operate the trains.
Trains that operate faster than 79 mph must use cab
signals. Electronic messages transmitted through the rails are
picked up by a receiver in the locomotive and displayed inside
the engine cab. The engineer gets information such as speed
limits along specific sections of track, rail conditions, and
wayside warnings—even when the train can’t be seen.
In the near future, railroads may stop using track circuits
or block signals. Today, rail companies are working with the
signal supply companies to develop and test two-way radio
and satellite-based location determination systems such as
Global Positioning System (GPS) to create safer and more
effective train control systems.
How automatic block signaling works
As a moving
train enters
a “block”
or specified
length of
track, it shorts
out the track
circuit and
triggers a
“stop” signal
for the train
behind it.
The next
block displays
a yellow
“caution”
signal, telling
the following
train it can
enter this
block only at
a reduced
speed. It must
be prepared
to stop.
The next block
displays a
green “clear”
signal, telling
the following
train it
may enter
this block
at normal
track speed.
The signaling sequence begins over again for the
following train. This is a very simple version of how
automatic block signaling works; others are much
more complex.
Trains are moving in this direction
STOP (RED)
SIGNAL
APPROACH
(YELLOW) SIGNAL
CLEAR (GREEN)
SIGNAL
STOP (RED)
SIGNAL
APPROACH
(YELLOW) SIGNAL
CLEAR (GREEN)
SIGNAL


34 RAILROADING
Signals.
Positive Train Control
Railway companies are now widely implementing the Positive
Train Control (PTC) system in their trains. PTC is a safety
system that tracks the speed and movement of trains and can
automatically stop a train to prevent specific human-error
accidents. In 2008, Congress passed legislation requiring that
PTC be installed on tracks that carry passengers and certain
hazardous materials. The law requires that the technology
prevent four specific types of accidents:
• Train-to-train collisions
• Derailments caused by excessive speed
• Accidents that can occur if trains are routed down the
incorrect track
• Unauthorized train movements on tracks undergoing
maintenance
In order to work safely and be fail-safe, PTC systems must
be able to determine the precise location, direction and speed
of trains, warn train operators of potential problems and bring
the train to a stop if the operator does not act.


RAILROADING 35
.SAFETY FIRST
Safety First
Railroads take extreme precautions to operate trains safely.
However, the best signaling systems and state-of-the-art
technology cannot prevent most of the accidents that occur
on the tracks. Impatient, inattentive, or daring drivers and
trespasser-pedestrians cause most railroad-related deaths.
Track Safety Basics
Be aware when you are near a railroad track:
• Freight trains don’t travel at fixed times, and schedules for
passenger trains often change. Always expect a train at each
highway-rail intersection at any time.
• Train tracks are private property. Never walk on tracks; it’s
illegal trespass and highly dangerous. It takes the average
freight train traveling at 55 mph more than a mile to stop.
Trains cannot stop quickly enough to avoid a collision.
• The average locomotive weighs about 400,000 pounds or 200
tons; one can weigh up to 6,000 tons. This makes the weight
ratio of a car to a train proportional to that of a soda can to a
car. What happens when a soda can is hit by a car?
• Trains always have the right of way—over emergency
vehicles, cars, the police, and pedestrians.
• A train can extend three feet or more beyond the steel rail,
putting the safety zone for pedestrians well beyond that
three-foot mark. If there are rails on the railroad ties, always
assume the track is in use, even if there are weeds or the
track looks unused.
• Trains can move in either direction at any time. Sometimes its
cars are pushed by locomotives instead of being pulled. This
is especially true in commuter and light rail passenger service.


36 RAILROADING
Safety First.
Operation Lifesaver, Inc (OLI)
Operation Lifesaver Inc. is a non-profit organization and nationally
recognized leader of rail safety education. OLI’s mission is to provide
rail safety education and public awareness materials and campaigns
dedicated to saving lives. OLI is a recognized leader in providing the
public with rail safety
education and ending
death and injuries due
to trespassing and
collisions on or near the
tracks.
Since 1972, OLI has
remained committed to
preventing collisions,
injuries and fatalities
on and around railroad
tracks and highway-rail
grade crossings, with
the support of public
education programs
in states across the
U.S. Today, Operation
Lifesaver offers free
rail safety education
programs across
the U.S. They speak to school groups, driver education classes,
community members, professional drivers, law enforcement officers,
and emergency responders. OLI promotes the three E’s—Education,
Enforcement and Engineering—to keep people safe around the tracks
and railway crossings all across the country.
• Today’s trains are quieter than ever, producing no telltale
“clackety-clack.” Any approaching train is always closer and
faster-moving than you think.
• Remember to cross train tracks ONLY at designated pedestrian
or roadway crossings, and obey all warning signs and signals
posted there.


RAILROADING 37
.Safety First
• Stay alert around railroad tracks. Refrain from texting,
headphones or other distractions that would prevent you from
hearing an approaching train; never mix rails and recreation.
Walking Safely Near Tracks
Rail safety is for everyone, not just drivers. Pedestrians who
choose to walk or play around railroad tracks are trespassing
on private property and
could be fined, seriously
injured or killed. Consider
the following safety
considerations when walking
on or near railroad tracks:
• The only safe place to
cross is at a designated
public crossing with either
a crossbuck, flashing red
lights or a gate. If you
cross at any other place,
you are trespassing and
can be ticketed or fined.
Cross tracks ONLY at
designated pedestrian or
roadway crossings.
• Railroad tracks, trestles,
yards and equipment
are private property and
trespassers are subject
to arrest and fine. If you are in a rail yard uninvited by a
railroad official you are trespassing and subject to criminal
prosecution; you could be injured or killed in a busy rail yard.
• It can take a mile or more to stop a train, so a locomotive
engineer who suddenly sees someone on the tracks will
likely be unable to stop in time. Railroad property is private
property. For your safety, it is illegal to be there unless you
are at a designated public crossing.
• Trains overhang the tracks by at least three feet in both
directions; loose straps hanging from rail cars may extend
even further. If you are in the right-of-way next to the tracks,
you can be hit by the train.


38 RAILROADING
Safety First.
• Do not cross the tracks immediately after a train passes. A
second train might be blocked by the first. Trains can come
from either direction. Wait until you can see clearly around
the first train in both directions.
• Flashing red lights indicate a train is approaching from either
direction. You can be fined for failure to obey these signals.
Never walk around or behind lowered gates at a crossing, and
DO NOT cross the tracks until the lights have stopped flashing
and it’s safe to do so.
• Do not hunt, fish or bungee jump from railroad trestles. There
is only enough clearance on the tracks for a train to pass.
Trestles are not meant to be sidewalks or pedestrian bridges!
Never walk, run, cycle or operate all-terrain vehicles (ATVs)
on railroad tracks, rights-of-way or through tunnels.
• Do not attempt to hop aboard railroad equipment at any time.
A slip of the foot can cost you a limb or your life.
• Be aware trains do not follow set schedules.
Driving Safely Near Tracks
Trains and cars don’t mix. When driving near tracks, keep these
tips in mind:
• Be aware that trains
cannot stop quickly.
• Never drive around
lowered gates—it’s illegal
and deadly.
• Do not get trapped on the
tracks; proceed through a
highway-rail grade crossing
only if you are sure you can
completely clear the crossing
without stopping. Before
crossing, be sure there is
space on the other side to
completely clear the tracks.
Trains overhang tracks by
at least 3 feet on each side.
Leave at least 15 feet between the front or rear of your vehicle
and the nearest rail. Do not shift gears while crossing.


RAILROADING 39
.Safety First
• If your vehicle gets stuck at a crossing, get everyone out
and far away immediately, even if you do not see a train.
If a train is approaching, move away from the tracks at a
45-degree angle in the direction the train is approaching
to avoid debris. Call the number on the Blue and White
Emergency Notification System (ENS) sign and share the
crossing identification number with the dispatcher. Using the
information on the ENS sign is the quickest way to notify the
railroad. No sign? Dial 911. You can also use these numbers
to report any problem on the tracks including vehicles on
the tracks, damaged signs or signals, obstructed views, signal
malfunctions and individuals or debris.
• At a multiple-track crossing
waiting for a train to pass,
watch out for a second
train on the other tracks,
approaching from either
direction.
• When you need to cross
train tracks, go to a
designated crossing, look
both ways, and cross the
tracks quickly, without
stopping. Remember it
isn’t safe to stop closer
than 15 feet from a rail.
Only cross at designated
public crossings with
crossbuck signs. Never
walk past flashing lights or lowered gates at crossings. Wait
until the lights have stopped flashing and the gate is up
before crossing. The only safe and legal place to cross railroad
tracks is at a designated public crossing with a crossbuck,
flashing red lights, or a gate. Crossing at any other location
is dangerous. Always assume train tracks are in use, even if
there are weeds or the tracks look unused.
• Always expect a train.


40 RAILROADING
Safety First.
Passenger Rail Safety Tips
In America’s cities and beyond, nothing connects us to work,
play and each other like public transit, today’s safest, most
reliable way to travel. The American Public Transportation
Association (APTA) estimates that 34 million times each
weekday, people use public transportation. Six things to know
about light rail and commuter train safety:
1. Stay alert. Trains can come from either direction at any
time and can be very quiet. Obey all warning signs and
signals and use caution when using headsets or cellphones.
2. Watch the overhang. Trains are wider than the tracks;
never sit on the edge of a station platform.
3. Stand away from the platform edge. Pay attention to
painted or raised markings at the platform edge, and stay
at least three feet from the train while it is coming in or
out of the station.
4. When on board, hold on. Hold on tight to poles or
seats, and listen carefully to directions from the train
operator or conductor.
5. Watch your step. Be careful getting on and off the
train—there may be a gap between the train and
platform or steps.
6. Don’t take shortcuts with your life! Follow directional
signs and markings that let you know where it is safe
to cross the tracks. Crossing the tracks anywhere else is
dangerous and illegal.
Rail Signs and Signals
Passive signs and active traffic control devices are installed along
roads that cross railroad tracks both on the approach and at the
highway-rail grade crossing to regulate, warn or guide traffic.
Passive signs alert motorists that they are approaching a
highway-rail grade crossing. Active signs are electronic devices
that warn the motorist of the approach, or presence, of rail
traffic at grade crossings.
They alert drivers to the presence of railroad tracks and to
the possibility of an approaching train. These signs and devices
also provide a safety message and remind the driver of the laws
regarding highway-rail grade crossings. The chart that follows
shows some of the various signs and devices you will see.


RAILROADING 41
.Safety First
Rail Signs and Signals At A Glance
SAFETY DEVICES AT THE RAILROAD CROSSING
Flashing red
lights (with or
without bells)
Warns of an
approaching train.
When the red lights
are flashing, a train
is approaching. Stop
and wait for the train
to pass and the lights
to stop flashing, then
proceed when it is
clearly safe to do so.
Flashing red
lights and
gates
Warns of an
approaching train
and used to close the
road when a train
approaches. It is only
legal to drive around
lowered gates if the
crossing is flagged
by a law officer or
railroad employee.
Lowering gates
and flashing
red lights
A train is approaching
(even if you don’t see
it yet). Do not proceed
until the gates go
completely up and
the lights turn off. It is
illegal and dangerous
to go around lowered
crossing gates.
Cantilever
flashing lights
Warns of an
approaching train.
Designed to cover all
the traffic lanes so the
crossing warning is
visible to all drivers on
multi-lane roads.
SAFETY SIGNALS ON THE ROADWAY
Pavement
marking and
stop bars
On paved roads, these
markings alert drivers
that the road crosses
railroad tracks ahead
and identifies the safe
place to stop and look
for an approaching
train. On gravel roads
there are no pavement
markings or stop lines,
and the driver must
stop no closer than
15 feet.


42 RAILROADING
Safety First.
SAFETY SIGNALS BEFORE THE RAILROAD CROSSING
Advance
warning
Typically the first
sign you see when
approaching a
highway-rail grade
crossing, this sign
alerts drivers that the
road crosses railroad
tracks ahead. Reminds
the driver to slow
down, look and listen
for a train.
No train horn
A Quiet Zone has
been established and
normally the train
will not sound the
horn. The locomotive
engineer can still
sound the horn in
emergency situations
or if workers are near
the tracks.
Low ground
clearance
grade crossing
Raised crossing
ahead. If you drive a
low-clearance vehicle
(lowboy), trailer or
anything else low to
the ground, you are at
risk of getting hung up
on the tracks. Do not
proceed. All drivers
need to make sure
that their vehicle has
cleared the tracks once
they cross over.
Advance
warning for
side streets
Warns that a highway-
rail intersection will
appear immediately
after making either
a right or left turn.
Reminds the driver to
be prepared to stop if
a train is approaching.
SIGNS ALONG RAILROAD PROPERTY
No
trespassing
If you attempt to
ride an ATV or a
snowmobile, or hike
on the tracks, a bridge,
or a trestle or even
walk near the tracks,
you can be arrested
and fined. Most of all it
is dangerous, because
you never know
when a train may be
approaching.


RAILROADING 43
.Safety First
SIGNS AT THE RAILROAD CROSSING
Crossbuck
Marks the crossing
and should be
considered the same
as a yield sign. Most
common sign at
public highway-rail
intersections.
Emergency
notification
system
Shows the railroad’s
emergency phone
number and U.S.
Department of
Transportation
(USDOT) Crossing
Number, both of which
are different at each
crossing. This is the
first phone number to
call if your car is stuck
on the tracks; if it is
missing call 911. Each
crossing in the US
has a unique phone
number and USDOT
Crossing Number.
Multiple tracks
Indicates the number
of tracks present. After
one train has passed,
look and listen for
another train coming
from either direction.
Stop
A driver must always
stop at the stop sign in
advance of the railroad
tracks. The stop signs
mean the same as
they do at highway
intersections.
Yield
Every driver must
yield the right of way
to a train. Yield signs
mean the same as
they do at highway
intersections.





RAILROADING 45
.Railfanning
Railfanning
Many people believe there is no experience more exhilarating
than standing trackside and clicking a camera as a restored
steam locomotive rushes by, or flying down the rails on a
high-speed train. Railfans love the history of railroading, the
thrill of traveling “on the iron road,” or the fun of reading
the marks on freight trains. So visit a railroad museum, learn
about rail preservation, attend a prototype-train event, or take
a train trip and become a railfan yourself.
Planning a Rail Trip
The first question you need to ask when planning a rail trip is
Can I get to my departure point from here? If passenger trains
don’t stop in your town, you will have to make arrangements
to get to a station. Once you know
where your starting point is, you can
plan a destination point.
Consider these questions before
you finalize your trip itinerary:
• What is the purpose of the trip?
To ride a historic train?
Visit a particular city?
Photograph scenery?
• How much time do you have?
A day? A week?
• How much do you want to spend?
Food on board? Sleeper car?
• What kinds of trains depart
from your starting point?
Commuter? Intercity?


46 RAILROADING
Railfanning.
Now you can shape your trip. You may buy vacation plan-
ners and local sightseeing guides, but you must get a railroad
timetable for the train you wish to take. You can pick one up
at the train station or print one from the internet (with your
parent’s permission). Or you can request one by mail. Study
the timetable carefully. It is full of information that you must
understand if you want to have a good trip.
From the timetable shown on the next page, you can see
that Amtrak’s Crescent, Train No. 19, makes a daily departure
“(Dp)” from New York, NY (designated “Mile 0”) at 2:15 p.m.
with an arrival “(Ar)” time of 7:32 p.m. the following evening
in New Orleans, LA (designated “Mile 1377”). Reservations are
required for coaches and sleeping cars. Other services available
on the Crescent include flexible dining service, café service,
Wi-Fi, on-board bicycle racks and checked baggage at select
stations.
Most Amtrak
station stops last only
for the time it takes for
passengers to board
or debark—as little as
two or three minutes.
For longer stops of
five minutes or more,
separate arrival “(Ar)”
and departure “(Dp)”
times are listed.
Now that you
know how to read a
timetable and have
decided where to go,
are you ready to buy a
ticket? You can make
a reservation and pur-
chase your ticket in
person at the train station, by telephone, or on the internet (an
adult must do this for you).
Once on board, you will give your ticket or show your
boarding pass to a conductor, who will punch out your
destination station on a seat check and give that to you. Your
name is not on the seat check, so take it with you when you
move about the train.
Westbound and
southbound
trains carry
odd numbers;
eastbound and
northbound
trains carry
even numbers.





48 RAILROADING
Railfanning.
Remember that
your behavior
reflects on
yourself—and
all Scouts—so
be a courteous
traveler.
Remember to bring a map and timetable along so
you can figure out where you are and recognize
prominent geographical landmarks along the
way. Amtrak partners with the National Park
Service for a “Trails and Rails” program. During
certain months, interpretative guides talk to the
passengers about the areas through which the
train passes.


RAILROADING 49
.Railfanning
Railroad Expressions
If you are a true railfan, you will want to know the history of some
of the railroad expressions used today.
Full steam ahead—Go forward at the greatest speed possible, or with
as much energy and enthusiasm as possible. The expression comes
from an instruction to the engineer to power up a steam locomotive.
Highball—A signal for a train to proceed. This term comes from an
antique signal design that had a large ball on a rope, which hung
from the top of a pole by a pulley. When positioned at the top of the
pole, the ball was an indication to proceed.
Jerkwater town or one-jerk town—Insignificant or out-of-the way.
Often along main lines but where train crews gave only one jerk on
the tower spout to top off locomotive tender water tanks.
On the right track—Going the right way, following the right
assumptions. This phrase comes from a train ready to go on
its assigned track.
One-track mind—A mind that thinks about only one subject, like
a train that follows one track and never switches to other tracks.
Railroaded—Pushed through hastily (as a law) so there is no time
to consider objections. This dates back to a time when farmers and
other rail shippers felt they were being taken advantage of by high
railroad freight rates.
Sidetracked—Distracted from the main subject or forced off one’s
intended course. In railroading, it means a car moved off the main
track to an auxiliary track.


• Executive and management
• Operations, which manages
the trains, other rolling stock,
and roadbed
• Transportation, which
schedules trains
• Mechanical, for repairs
and inspections
• Engineering, for planning,
layout of tracks and other
facilities, and signaling
• Sales, to market and sell the
railroad’s services
• Legal, to handle all
such matters
• Finance, to track revenue
and expenses and the
purchase of needed supplies
and equipment
• Human resources, to handle
employment and benefits
• Public relations
Some of the departments within a typical railroad include:
Engineer
DispatcherSignal maintainer


RAILROADING 51
.Careers in Railroading
Careers in Railroading
If you want to be a railroader, you can follow many
career tracks. It is much like entering a classification yard,
with certain rails leading to railroad operations, others to
management, purchasing, engineering specialties, even public
relations and corporate communications. Most Class I railroads
have more than 100 classifications for positions including
mechanic, signal and communications worker, marketing
and sales representative, lawyer, accountant, surveyor, track
foreman, and transportation supervisor. All are important for
the smooth operation of the railroad.
To work for the railroad, you must be in good physical
shape and have a high school diploma (at the minimum,
although a college diploma is preferred). You will have an edge
if you have work experience in railroading or other related
fields of transportation, mechanical talent, and the ability to
think straight in an emergency situation.
Railroad Organization
Railroad companies have five basic components.
1. Fixed plant—track, track bed, supporting structures like
bridges and trestles
2. Rights-of-way—strips of land for track, stations, and
other buildings
3. Rolling stock—locomotives, freight cars and passenger
coaches, sleeper and dining cars, work trains, and track
inspection equipment
4. Financial structure—capital funds for the purchases of large
items as well as operating funds for day-to-day expenses
5. Human resources—employees in the ranks of labor and
management who make it all work
All these different components give any individual who is
interested in the railroad industry a variety of career opportuni-
ties from which to choose.
The Association
of American
Railroads
maintains a
webpage that
hosts links to
other pages
where career
information can
be found. Go to
www.aar.org/
about-us/careers.





RAILROADING 53
.Model Railroading
Model Railroading
Model railroading is an educational hobby whose popularity is
growing. Model railroad clubs exist worldwide and the number
of individuals operating their own model railroads is increasing.
Model railroads often have amazingly realistic scenery and
frequently these modeled scenes represent portions of actual
railroads. Many are now operated in the same way that real-
life railroads are run.
Your local model railroad clubs and hobby shops can help
you plan your layout. As you proceed, you may find that you
are more interested in operations, in building cars or structures,
in building scenery—or all of these. Attend public train shows
in your area or conduct research on the Internet. Often, you
will be able to buy secondhand items and sometimes complete
layouts to save money. Model railroading has so many options
that it is easy to learn about those areas that interest you most.
Scales and Gauges
Scale, in model railroading, refers to the proportion of a model
as it relates to the size of the real object. For example, a 1:48
proportion means the model is 1⁄48th the size of an actual train.
Scale may also be expressed as a length measurement on the
model (in fractional inches or millimeters) that represents one
foot of length on a life-size (or prototype) train. While model
trains come in many scales and gauges (some are large enough
You can begin as
a model railroader
with a small
layout. Expand it
as your time and
money permit. Be
patient and do
your best on each
model so that it
will give you a
lifetime of service.As your interest in this hobby grows, consider joining
the National Model Railroad Association. Currently,
there are more than 25,000 members worldwide. Your
BSA local council can put you in touch with qualified
NMRA members who are willing to serve as counsel-
ors for the Railroading merit badge.


54 RAILROADING
Model Railroading.
to carry passengers!) the most common sizes are referred to as
No. 1 (G), O, S, HO, N, and Z.
• The G scale, or No. 1, is the largest scale and is most often
used in garden or outdoor model railroads.
• The O scale dates back to the 1920s when mechanical
or windup toy trains were common. Each ¼-inch on an
O scale model represents one foot on a full-size train, so
the model for an 80-foot passenger car will be about
20 inches long.
• The S scale is about halfway between the O and HO scales.
• The HO scale is currently the choice of the majority of mod-
elers. This scale takes about half as much space as O scale.
• N scale equipment is made to accurate scale, yet its small
size takes only about half the space required for the HO
scale. Reducing the space requirement allows modelers to
use broader, more realistic-looking curves.
• The Z scale is the newest and smallest scale and was
made possible by the development of precision submin-
iature motors.
North America’s railroads operate on standard gauge track
with rails spaced 4', 8½" apart. Some tourist railroads in
places such as scenic areas or at amusement parks operate on
narrow gauge track with rails spaced only 3 feet apart. Model
railroaders add a letter “n” and the track gauge to the scale
name (On3, Sn3, or HOn3) when they refer to narrow gauge
models. ome rideable outdoor models with locomotives actu-
ally operated by steam have gages ranging from 2½" (64 mm)
to 15" (381 mm).
Gauge is the
distance
measured
between rails.
The terms scale
and gauge are
often confused.
Toy or “tinplate”
trains are not
true 1⁄4-inch scale
because they are
shortened to run
on sharp curves; a
tinplate passenger
car may be only
6 inches long.
Tinplate trains
also run on
three-rail track. Scale and Gauge Chart
Name Scale
(In inches)
Relationship
(To actual size)
Gauge
(In inches)
G (No. 1) .375 1/32 1.766
O .250 1/48 1.250
S .188 1/64 .875
HO .138 1/87 .649
N .075 1/160 .353
Z .055 1/220 .250


RAILROADING 55
.Model Railroading
Layouts
Folded dog bone
(More folds are possible.)
Oval with return cutoff;
favoring clockwise operation
Dog bone
Return loops
Figure eight
Two-track
(or double-track) oval
Water wings
Oval with two return
cutoffs; favoring
either direction
Out and back with
stub terminal
Oval
Loop to loop
Two-lap oval
Point to point with
stub terminals
Point to loop
Layout Design
Planning a layout is a lot of fun, but you need to think about
how much space you have before you choose your scale.
Modelers build layouts in basements, attics, and garages. If you
don’t have much space, consider building a layout design on a
low folding table with casters so it can be stored under a bed.
Although a smaller scale allows you to build more railroad, it
might be wise to select the scale you like the most.
Use a pencil to sketch your layout on graph paper, roughly
to scale. As you draw your layout, consider several points:
What kind of railroad do you like? What sorts of things will
the cars haul? How much money can you spend?
If possible, try to design a layout that you can expand on
later. The drawings shown here depict some common track
planning ideas you may want to try.


56 RAILROADING
Model Railroading.
Local freight trains deliver cars to customers along their
route. Suppose your train is traveling north on the main line at
A. How can you deliver the cattle car on siding B and the flat-
car on spur C? Now, suppose your train were traveling south.
This would make it necessary to use siding B as a runaround
track to get the engine to the other end of the flatcar. You will
find at least one runaround track in most industrial areas.
Much of the fun in operating model trains comes from
solving switching problems as the freight cars are delivered
or picked up at points around the layout.
Layout Construction
To ensure reliable operation, build your layout on a solid
structure or table called benchwork. With your layout off the
floor, you will keep the tracks and motors cleaner and avoid
accidental damage. You also will find working on benchwork
is easier than working on the floor.
Many layouts begin on 1⁄2"-thick plywood fastened to a
1"-by-4" framework. Using plywood thinner than 1⁄2" is not
wise as it tends to sag between the supports, creating problems
with your trackwork.
Ready-to-use track comes in standard straight, curved, and
flexible sections with a variety of switches, crossings, and other
components. Sectional track offers a lot of advantages for the
first layout. If you change your mind, you can easily change
your trackwork before fastening it to the plywood with scale
spikes. You could use white glue for permanent fastening, but
it is difficult to change track later. To make your trackwork
more realistic, add finely graded gravel (scale ballast).
When you are ready to test the layout, watch how a
train passes over every inch of the track. Fix any bumps or
rough spots until the train runs smoothly. Now you are ready
to add scenery.
SPUR C
SIDING B
A
MAIN LINE
ENGINE
CATTLE CAR
BOXCAR
FLATCAR
CABOOSEN
Local switching


RAILROADING 57
.Model Railroading
Scenery
Building scenery provides a setting for your trains. For a good
starting point, assemble a few of the simple plastic building
kits and set them in appropriate places on the benchwork. Use
a pencil to sketch in roads, rivers, and other landscape features.
Add a bi-level track to lengthen the run and allow for more bridges and
mountainous scenery. However, you will have to test your locomotive
to see how many cars it can pull up the grade, or ramp, between the
levels. As a general rule, a grade should not exceed 3 percent (the track
rises 3 inches in height per 100 inches of length).
Use a concealed-from-view track to hide the train in a tunnel beneath
a mountain or behind a backdrop. This lets you stop the train for a few
moments to give the effect of a longer trip and a larger layout.
Install a crossover, made up of two facing track switches, to allow a
train to leave one track and move onto a parallel line. The term
“crossover” is sometimes confused with a crossing, where one track
crosses another at an angle.
Incorporate a wye (pronounced “Y”), an
interesting track arrangement made up
of three turnouts (see the wye diagram).
It is used to turn a train or locomotive.
Throw switch A and proceed through
one leg of the wye until the train is clear
(or past) switch B. Throw switch B
behind the train and then reverse direc-
tion to back through the adjoining leg of
the wye to clear switch C. Throw switch
C in front of the locomotive so you can
return to the starting point (switch A)
heading in the opposite direction. A wye
arrangement often needs special wiring,
so be sure to get advice from an expert.
Add a group of switch tracks to make a classification yard where freight
cars are sorted and connected to form trains. Arriving trains often have
cars for several destinations mixed together. The yard crew sorts these
cars into groups headed for one destination and then puts the groups
in order for delivery.
WYE
B
C
A


58 RAILROADING
Model Railroading.
You can create a rolling landscape by taping crumpled
newspapers, paper towels, or bags to the plywood. Dip strips
of paper toweling in soupy plaster and drape them over the
newspapers in several layers. After the plaster sets, paint your
landscape and add details.
You can buy model trees, or you can make your own
from dried weeds, twigs, and fibers from old furnace or air
conditioner filters. For extra texture, use commercial products
such as ground-up foam rubber or dyed lichen.
Notice details in your neighborhood like signs, sheds,
people, telephone poles, and animals. Think about how adding
similar items to your scenery will make your layout come alive.
While you are looking around, pay attention to how nature has
weathered buildings, cars, fences, and equipment. If you want
your models to look more realistic, “weather” them yourself.
Tone down bright plastic buildings by spraying them with a
light coat of clear dull finish, or apply a wash of thinly diluted
India ink.
A good-looking layout doesn’t have to be big to be fun to build and operate.
This HO layout is built on a 4'-by-8' sheet of plywood.


RAILROADING 59
.Model Railroading
Benchwork plan
Figure 1
L-GIRDER
WILL GO HERE
33"
2" X 2"
2" X 2"
1" X 2"
ABOUT 6"
BRACES
DON’T
TOUCH.
1" X 4"
JOIST
38"
L-GIRDER
FLANGE
WHITE GLUE
Figure 2
MAKE TWO 96" LONG WEB
18"
L-GIRDER
LEG FRAME
Figure 3 3 SCREWS
GUSSET, 4 SCREWS
Figure 4
L-GIRDER
LEG
2 SCREWS FROM
EITHER SIDE
LONG BRACE
1" X 2"


60 RAILROADING
Model Railroading.
Sometimes it’s fun to build models of historic trains that ran in
the western mountains.
Figure 6
JOIST
SCREW
Figure 7
TOP
1" X 1" CLEATJOIST
SCREW
SCREW
Figure 5
8' OR 9'
4' OR 5'
33" 60" OR
66"
No screws should ever be driven down
through the top. See figure 7.


RAILROADING 61
.Model Railroading
Rolling Stock
You can buy locomotives and rolling stock for your railroad
“ready-to-run.” Or you can buy kits, which come in various
levels of difficulty and detail, from easy-to-assemble with
simple details to difficult with elaborate features. Some people
like kit-bashing, or combining parts from two or more kits
(along with items found around the house) to build
an item that is hard to find, unavailable, or original.
Kit-bashing allows you to use your imagination and take
advantage of premade parts.
You can build rolling stock from plans, parts, and
materials—a practice called scratch building. This requires
following well-detailed plans and studying prototype photos to
make the needed parts. Many model railroad magazines feature
such plans and make parts available for cars and locomotives.
Here is a layout built to look like it’s in the north woods, with
trees made out of weeds.


62 RAILROADING
Model Railroading.
Power and Control
For many years, two-rail scale layouts have been run by
DC (direct current) power packs plugged into a wall outlet.
Power packs include a transformer to reduce the 110-volt
AC (alternating current) house voltage to about 18 volts before
a rectifier in the circuit converts it to 12 volts DC. A rheostat
adds variable resistance to the circuit to control the voltage
(speed) while the DC polarity determines the train’s direc-
tion. Many accessories operate on AC, so most power packs
have extra wiring terminals labeled for this purpose. With DC
power, depending on the arrangement of the layout, you might
want to break the track into more than one segment to allow
the operation of more than one train.
Digital Command Control (DCC) is a new system for
controlling two-rail layouts with simplified wiring. Each
locomotive contains a decoder that can be linked to a specific
throttle control or cab through the system’s minicomputer.
Throttle settings and other commands from the cab are
broadcast as high-speed digital signals that travel through
the entire layout. The locomotive’s decoder responds only to
signals from its assigned cab to operate the locomotive. Thus,
DCC allows many locomotives to operate under individual
control at the same time on a layout.
Because tinplate
trains operate on
AC current, they
use a transformer
that has variable
speed control.
Some modelers build urban structures to create a city scene.


RAILROADING 63
.Model Railroading
Care of Equipment
You may need to clean your equipment occasionally. Use a
clean, dry paintbrush to remove dust and any hair or lint that
is caught in the moving parts. Clean the track with a dry
abrasive block, which works better than applying cleaning
fluids to a cloth pad.
The instruction sheet that accompanies most model
locomotives explains how and where to lubricate the train
cars. Be sure to get plastic-compatible lubricants and use them
sparingly as too much oil is worse than too little. Rolling
stock axles seldom need lubrication unless they are actually
squeaking. Many good lubricants are available, so seek
recommendations from a friend who has a model railroad
or from someone at your local hobby shop.
Cars that frequently derail may need minor adjustments.
You can buy a gauge to check wheel spacing and other standard
dimensions from the National Model Railroad Association or
a hobby shop. You may need to add weight to certain cars to
improve performance. Consult printed guides (such as those
published by NMRA) for correct car weight based on car
length and scale.
The Timesaver
The timesaver is a switching game that tests your problem-
solving skills to see who can deliver all of the freight cars to
their proper destinations in the shortest time. It is played on
the standard HO layout shown in the drawing. Here is the list
of the sectional track and other components it takes to build
a timesaver using Atlas parts, which are widely available at
hobby shops and online (only with your parent’s assistance).
4 Atlas left-hand manual Snap-Switches®
3 Atlas 9" straights
1 Atlas 9" terminal section
6 Atlas 3" straights
1 Atlas short section assortment
11 Kadee No. 321 uncoupling magnets
1 power pack
5 40-foot freight cars: boxcar, gondola, hopper, refrigerated
boxcar, and tank
2 Atlas right-hand manual Snap-Switches®
1 Atlas 9" rerailer
Timesaver hint:
Think ahead and
carefully plan your
switching moves
to avoid extra
moves that take
more time.


64 RAILROADING
Model Railroading.
2 Atlas 6" straights
2 Atlas 1 1⁄2" straights
5 Atlas bumpers
1 3⁄4" x 12" x 68" plywood board
1 diesel switcher (40-foot or smaller)
The game begins with the cars and locomotive positioned
as shown in the diagram labeled “starting car positions.” Set
the throttle to a slow speed and then use the power pack’s
reversing switch to change direction as you switch the cars.
The game ends when all of the cars have been delivered to
the positions shown in the diagram labeled “finished car posi-
tions.” The elapsed time is your score and the best time wins.
The Timesaver 3/4" X 12" X 68" PLYWOOD BOARD
1
1/4"
1"
1 1/2" 9" RERAILER RIGHT-HAND
6"
9"
3" 9" 6" 1
1/4"
9" 3"
3" 2" 2 1/2" 3" 1"RIGHT-HAND LEFT-HAND 9" TERMINALLEFT-HAND
3"
1 1/2"
1 1/2"
1 1/2"
3" 2" 1/3 18" radius
3/4" POWER PACK
CONNECTIONS
2 1/2"
BUMPER BUMPER
BUMPER
LEFT-HAND LEFT-HAND
BUMPER
BUMPER
2 1/2"
2 1/2"
2 1/2"
OPTIONAL CONNECTION TO ANOTHER TIMESAVER
Uncoupling
magnet location
Scale: 1 inch = 1 foot
Three cars at labeled destinations.
Two cars are marked with tags for removal.
Add destination labels on the layout for each car type.Starting car positions
INBOUND/OUTBOUND LOCOMOTIVE
BOX
HOPPER
GONDOLA
TANK
REFRIGERATOR
Finished car positions
INBOUND/OUTBOUND LOCOMOTIVE
BOX
HOPPER GONDOLA
TANK
REFRIGERATOR


RAILROADING 65
.Resources About Railroading
Resources About Railroading
Scouting Literature
Engineering and Model Design and
Building merit badge pamphlets
Books
Ambrose, Stephen E. Nothing Like It
in the World: The Men Who Built
the Transcontinental Railroad 1863–
1869. Simon & Schuster, 2000.
Armstrong, John H. The Railroad: What
It Is, What It Does, The Introduction
to Railroading, 5th ed. Simmons-
Boardman Books, 2008.
Blumberg, Rhoda. Full Steam Ahead:
The Race to Build a Transcontinental
Railroad. National Geographic
Society, 1996.
Drury, George H., and Bob Hayden.
Guide to Tourist Railroads and
Railroad Museums 2002,
37th ed. Kalmbach Publishing
Company, 2002.
Frary, Dave. How to Build Realistic
Model Railroad Scenery, 3rd ed.
Kalmbach Publishing Company, 2005.
Hubbard, Freeman. Encyclopedia of
North American Railroading: 150
Years of Railroading in the United
States and Canada. McGraw-Hill
Book Company, 1981.
Kelly, Jim, and Michael Emmerich.
HO Railroad From Start to Finish
(Model Railroad Handbook, No. 36).
Kalmbach Publishing Company, 1993.
Miller, Allan W., ed. Model Railroad
Resources: A Where-to-Find-It
Guide for the Hobbyist. Krause
Publications, 2000.
Schleicher, Robert. The HO Model
Railroading Handbook: Build
an Exciting HO Layout the Easy,
Inexpensive Way, 3rd ed. Krause
Publications, 1998.
Solomon, Brian. The Heritage of North
American Steam Railroads: From
the First Days of Steam Power to the
Present. Reader’s Digest, 2001.
Stover, John F. The Routledge Historical
Atlas of the American Railroads.
Routledge, 1999.
Vantuono, William C. All About
Railroading, 2nd ed. Simmons-
Boardman Books, 2006.
With your parent’s permission, visit
the Boy Scouts of America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org,
for a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


66 RAILROADING
Resources About Railroading.
Magazines
Classic Trains
Model Railroader
Trains
Kalmbach Publishing Company
P.O. Box 1612
Waukesha, WI 53187-1612
Toll-free telephone: 800-533-6644
www.trains.com
Model Railroad News
Telephone: 877-787-2467
modelrailroadnews.com
Passenger Train Journal
Toll-free telephone: 877-787-2467
passengertrainjournal.com
Railfan & Railroad
White River Productions
Toll-free telephone: 877-787-2467
railfan.com
Railroad Model Craftsman
White River Productions
Toll-free telephone: 877-787-2467
rrmodelcraftsman.com
Railway Age
345 Hudson St.
New York, NY 10014
www.railwayage.com
Trains & Railroads of the Past
Toll-free telephone: 877-787-2467
trpmagazine.com
Organizations and Websites
Amtrak
Toll-free telephone: 800-872-7245
www.amtrak.com
Association of American Railroads
425 Third Street SW
Washington, DC 20024
Telephone: 202-639-2100
www.aar.org
Federal Railroad Administration
1200 New Jersey Ave. SE
Washington, DC 20590
railroads.dot.gov
National Model Railroad Association
P.O. Box 1328
Soddy Daisy, TN 37384
Telephone: 423-892-2846
www.nmra.org
National Railway Historical Society
505 South Lenola Road, Suite 226
Moorestown, NJ 08057
Telephone: 215-557-6606
www.nrhs.com
Operation Lifesaver
425 Third St. SW, Suite 915
Washington, DC 20024
Toll-free telephone: 800-537-6224
oli.org


RAILROADING 67
.Resources About Railroading
Acknowledgments
The Boy Scouts of America is extremely
grateful to Jeff Moller and Bill Pzedpelski
of the Association of American
Railroads; Wende Corcoran of Operation
Lifesaver Inc.; and Randall Cookus
for their assistance with updating the
Railroading merit badge pamphlet.
Thanks also to the following for
their assistance with past editions:
Charles and Kathy Anderson of Rail
Awareness for Youth; Jim Hediger,
senior editor of Model Railroader
magazine, Kalmbach Publishing
Company; Peter Hart, staff engineer,
Alstom Signaling; William L. Withuhn,
senior curator for transportation,
National Museum of American History,
Smithsonian Institution; the National
Railroad Passenger Corporation
(Amtrak); and William C. Vantuono,
editor, Railway Age.
The Boy Scouts of America
is grateful to the men and women
serving on the National Merit Badge
Subcommittee for the improvements
made in updating this pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration Credits
Amtrak, courtesy—pages 27 and 46
BNSF Railway, courtesy—page 5
Dallas Area Rapid Transit, courtesy—
page 25
Getty Images—pages 41-43 (all)
Kalmbach Publishing Company,
courtesy—pages 18 (red boxcar,
hopper), 19 (gondola), 50 (signal
maintainer, engineer, dispatcher),
58, 60 (model train), 61, 62, and 64
(timesaver illustrations)
Library of Congress; Brady National
Photographic Art Gallery (Washington
D.C.), photographer; “Abraham
Lincoln, three-quarter length portrait,
standing, facing left,” January 8,
1864; Selected Civil War Photographs,
1861–65—page 9 (Lincoln)
Library of Congress Prints and
Photographs Division; Jack Delano,
photographer—page 6
Library of Congress, Geography and
Map Division—page 9 (map)
Library of Congress, Prints and
Photographs Division; “Peter
Cooper’s Tom Thumb”; Bureau
of Public Roads, Department of
Commerce, between 1900 and
1950—page 7
National Archives and Records
Administration—page 10
Dean Sauvola, courtesy—page 24
William C. Vantuono, courtesy—pages
13, 14 (parts of a turnout), 16 (dou-
ble-stack car), 17 (bulkhead and
heavy-duty flatcars), 18 (refrigerated
boxcar), 19 (open-top hopper), 20,
21, 22, 23, 33, 34, and 39 (warning
system)
Wikimedia Commons/Xnatedawgx,
courtesy—page 34
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of
or are protected by the BSA.
Tom Copeland—pages 14 (tracks), 15,
16 (piggyback, crane), 19 (tank
car), and 45
John McDearmon—illustrations on
pages 32, 55-57, and 59-60
Steve Seeger—page 52


Notes