CITIZENSHIP
IN THE COMMUNITY


CITIZENSHIP IN
THE COMMUNITY
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Citizenship-In-The-
Community or check Scoutbook for the latest requirements.
FPO
35870
ISBN 978-0-8395-3249-1
©2024 Scouting America/Boy Scouts of America
2024 Printing


CITIZENSHIP IN THE COMMUNITY 3





Contents
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Citizenship: The Value of Belonging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
Seats of Power. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Public Meetings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
Local Issues: What’s on the Public’s Mind? . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
Making a Difference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
CITIZENSHIP IN THE COMMUNITY 5





.Introduction
Introduction
A community is a group of people living in a particular area
who share common characteristics, interests, activities, or
purposes. That group could be as small as a family living
together in an apartment or as large as the population of a
sprawling metropolitan area. You can belong to communities
within communities: family, neighborhood, school, Scout troop,
club, team, worship group, and city. The United States is a
patchwork of communities.
Local communities are the building blocks of government.
They differ from each other and may be governed differently.
The makeup of a particular local government depends on its
history, population, size, geography, and various laws. But
regardless of how local communities differ, they all have one
point in common: In the United States, local government means
self-government. Here, citizens help to make decisions about
their community through their elected local officials.
Every community has a history. Some are centuries old
and full of hope or despair; others are beginning right now, as
carpenters nail shingles on the last house in a new neighbor-
hood. While you are earning this merit badge, you will discover
ways you can help your community, old or new, by participat-
ing as a good, active citizen.
Top-Down Government
In many countries outside the United States, the
national government controls and directs what
happens in local communities.
CITIZENSHIP IN THE COMMUNITY 7
.Introduction


Citizenship: The Value of Belonging.
Citizenship: The Value
of Belonging
Every time an American family adds a child, the United States
adds another citizen. Citizens are people who either were
born in this country or were born elsewhere and have been
naturalized, or granted citizenship by the government.
The Rights, Duties, and Obligations
of Community
Being a member of a community—your family or your Scout
troop, for example—gives you rights, privileges, and protection.
You may express your opinions, try new skills, hang out with
friends, and be safe. In return, you should honor your parents,
respect adult leaders and fellow Scouts, help one another, and
follow the rules.
As an American citizen, you are entitled to the freedoms
guaranteed by the U.S. Constitution and to the full protection of
federal, state, and local laws. You also can count on the support
of local service departments like fire and sanitation. But these
rights of citizenship come with a price.
Some obligations are required by law, including
paying taxes and obeying the law. Other obligations,
such as valuing others’ opinions, staying informed
about candidates and issues, and respecting elected
officials, might not be written laws, but they may be
considered instructions for good conduct.
Just as you are loyal to your family and troop
members—even if you do not always agree with
them—you should show allegiance to your local gov-
ernment. If you disagree with what is happening in
your community, you have the right to try to change
local public policies.
If you are a
U.S. citizen,
you also are a
citizen of your
state and local
community.
8 CITIZENSHIP IN THE COMMUNITY


.Citizenship: The Value of Belonging
Participation: The Antidote to Apathy
Many citizens take their rights for granted. Some citizens do not
vote, voluntarily giving up their voice in the government. Other
citizens do not know or care about what is going on in their
community—until a prison is built in their neighborhood, or
the crime rate grows. Unless they are upset about a particular
issue, most citizens leave the decisions to elected representa-
tives and local activists.
People who feel connected to their community tend to
participate. The more active citizens are in their community, with
ties to a school, youth groups, businesses, and service clubs,
the more interest they will have in the local government. That
is why longtime residents often hold local offices.
You have a chance now to build connections in your
own community. Look for opportunities to get involved with
charities, local companies, your place of worship, and your
school. Help people understand the issues in your community
and you will develop a respect for the opinions of others and
a compassion for those in need. You will appreciate the efforts
that your elected officials make on your behalf.
Good citizenship goes beyond feeling loyal to your
community. It is how you conduct yourself as a citizen, being
constantly alert to ways you can improve the lives of your
family, friends, neighbors, and your community as a whole.
Public policy includes the goals the government sets as well as the
actions required to achieve those goals. For example, a city council
might set a goal to build the local economy by giving tax breaks to
new businesses.
CITIZENSHIP IN THE COMMUNITY 9





.Seats of Power
Seats of Power
The U.S. Constitution outlines a federal system in which the
powers of the people’s government are divided between the
national government and the 50 states. State constitutions
create unitary systems in which all powers are centralized in
the state governments. Nowhere in the Constitution are local
governments mentioned.
The Relationship Between State and
Local Governments
Each state has complete authority over all the local governments
within its borders. The local governments borrow their powers
from state governments and can exercise only those powers
specifically given to them by the state.
State governments are patterned after the three branches
of the federal government: executive, legislative, and judicial.
The governor heads the executive branch, which includes
other elected officers such as the lieutenant governor,
attorney general, secretary of state, and treasurer. Elected
representatives from districts throughout the state make
laws in a two-house legislature. Most states have what
they call the upper house, or Senate, and the lower house,
or House of Representatives. (Nebraska calls its one house
the Legislature.) The judiciary is the system of courts
headed by elected or appointed judges.
Citizens vote for many state officials, but the governor
and Senate share appointive powers and choose officials to
run certain state boards and commissions.
At the federal and state levels, separation of powers
is very important and helps ensure that no one branch
of government becomes too powerful. It is not as critical
at the local level where most governing bodies perform
administrative and legislative duties.
We Can Do
It Ourselves
In recent years,
many states have
added home-rule
amendments to
their constitutions.
These amendments
give local govern-
ments the author-
ity to handle their
own internal affairs
without interference
from the state.
CITIZENSHIP IN THE COMMUNITY 11


Seats of Power.
Structure of Local Governments
No matter where you live, you probably are touched by several
layers of local government: city, county, school district, special
district, and region. Your family might pay taxes to one or
more of these government entities.
Counties
All U.S. states are divided into counties (called parishes in
Louisiana and boroughs in Alaska), which are further divided
into townships or districts. In 48 states, the county is the larg-
est unit of local government. Connecticut and Rhode Island do
not have county governments. In Connecticut, counties exist
only for the purposes of elections; in Rhode Island, counties
are divisions of the state court system.
The main functions of county government are law
enforcement; property assessment and tax collection; highway
construction and maintenance; recording of important public
documents such as deeds, mortgages, and death certificates;
issuing licenses for hunting, fishing, and marriage; and provid-
ing public welfare.
When state and local government budgets are cut, counties
in large urban areas assume more responsibility in providing
services such as transportation, water and sewer operations,
With your parent
or guardian’s
permission, visit
your state’s
website on
the internet.
Organization of a typical state government
12 CITIZENSHIP IN THE COMMUNITY


.Seats of Power
emergency medical services, and land-use planning. Regions
made up of multiple counties often regulate air quality
control and mass transit networks, and coordinate natural
disaster planning.
County governments can be structured several ways. The
most common form is the county board, in which citizens
elect officials from their township or district to represent them
on a board of commissioners (usually with three to seven or
more members) or a board of supervisors (typically with 15
to 80 or more members). Board members share authority with
other elected officials such as the sheriff, district attorney,
county clerk, and coroner, and they appoint people to commit-
tees and lesser commissions.
Another type of county government is the council-admin-
istrator form, in which an elected county council passes laws
and appoints an administrator to execute the council’s policies.
The third and least-used form has an elected county adminis-
trator who serves as chief executive and an elected council that
determines legislative policy.
Whenever a call
is made to 911,
you should know
that it is recorded
and documented
and can never be
“canceled.” If this
number is dialed
accidentally or if
it is a prank call,
someone (such as
a police officer or
sheriff) will show
up at the door to
make sure every-
thing is all right.
Farm to Market
The county has its roots in rural life. Boundary
lines that were drawn in the days of the horse and
buggy were laid out so that everyone living within
a given county could travel in one day to and from
the center of local government and commerce.
CITIZENSHIP IN THE COMMUNITY 13


Seats of Power.
Municipalities
Unlike counties, which primarily exist to carry out broad
local functions on behalf of the state, municipalities exist at
the request of their residents who want more public services.
Municipalities (cities, towns, villages, and boroughs) are
densely populated urban areas with local governments. The
state creates them by charters or other legislation, which then
serve as local constitutions.
Municipal governments are organized according to their
charters. The most widely used form of city government is the
mayor-council charter. Voters elect a mayor as the chief execu-
tive and a council as its legislature. For cities larger than 5,000
people, the average size of a city council is seven members, but
huge cities like New York City may have as many as 50 council
members. Depending on how many formal powers are given
to the mayor, the mayor-council form of government often is
described as a “strong-mayor” or “weak-mayor” type.
Another form of city government that is gaining wide sup-
port is the council-manager government, also called the city
manager plan, in which citizens vote for council members in
a nonpartisan, at-large election and elect a mayor with limited
authority. The council then hires a city manager, often a profes-
sionally trained career administrator who is given the authority
A charter is a
formal, legal
document that
defines the
boundaries of a
city and creates
its government.
Organization of one typical county government
14 CITIZENSHIP IN THE COMMUNITY


.Seats of Power
Organization of strong-mayor council and weak-mayor council forms of government
Organization of the council-manager form of government
CITIZENSHIP IN THE COMMUNITY 15


Seats of Power.
Organization of the commission form of government
Bath, Population 248
A state establishes a community as a
legal entity through a process called
incorporation. Each state constitution
defines the conditions and procedures
for a local area to become an incorpo-
rated municipality. States generally require that a minimum number
of people live in that particular area so that providing services makes
financial sense.
to appoint all department heads. Under this arrangement, the
council makes policies to be carried out by the city manager. The
city council retains the right to dismiss the manager at any time.
The third and least-used type of municipal government is the
commission form. Voters elect three to nine commissioners who
act together as a council to pass ordinances and control finances,
and individually to head the different departments of city govern-
ment. The voters or the commissioners may choose one of the
commissioners to be mayor. The mayor, who also heads a city
department, leads meetings and represents the city at ceremonies,
but has no more authority than the other commissioners.
16 CITIZENSHIP IN THE COMMUNITY


.Seats of Power
In at-large (or citywide) elections without political party affiliations, the
majority of voters tend to elect well-known candidates. Some citizens in
neighborhoods with a high concentration of one ethnic minority might
think they are not adequately represented on the city council. They may
protest that elections should be based on single-member districts so that
racial and ethnic groups can have stronger voices in local government.
What do you think?
A school district’s
name may include
“ISD” for
“independent
school district.”
Special Districts
The fastest growing form of local government is the special
district run by an elected board. This separate legal unit pro-
vides a single service—such as flood or mosquito control—to
a particular area, and often overlaps other local jurisdictions.
These special districts range in size from neighborhood blocks
concerned with historic preservation to the mammoth Port
Authority of New York and New Jersey, which operates tunnels,
bridges, and airports.
School districts are by far the most common kind of special
district. Voters in most districts elect a board of education whose
policies are carried out by an appointed school superintendent.
The board sets school tax rates, hires teachers, and runs all the
public elementary and secondary schools under its authority. The
board of education is one of the most important official groups
of citizens and is generally independent of the city council.
Responsibilities of Local Government
The state entrusts the local government to protect and
provide services to its citizens. Cities differ in the number and
kinds of services they provide. In the nation’s snowbelt, local
governments spend huge sums of money on snow removal.
Communities in America’s tornado alley have to pay for sophis-
ticated early-warning systems. Most cities provide roughly the
same services to meet a community’s basic needs.
By the Numbers
State and local governments use the latest U.S. Census Bureau data to
project population growth and determine the need for new schools and
additional public services.
CITIZENSHIP IN THE COMMUNITY 17


Seats of Power.
Mandates funded by taxpayers are the responsibility of
local governments.
• To protect life and property, the local government provides
public safety and fire departments, and a municipal
court system.
• To guard the health of its citizens, the city or county runs
hospitals and clinics, manages sanitation services, and
handles animal control.
• To provide education, the city supports libraries and the
school district maintains schools for students in grades
K through 12.
• To care for those in need, local government may offer
social services such as foster home care and mental
health facilities.
• To make the community a good place to live, local
government builds and maintains streets, provides public
transportation, creates parks and recreational facilities,
and attracts new businesses.
For a quick overview of the variety of services provided by your
community, look under “Government and Community Services”
(the blue pages) in your local telephone book. Or, search the
internet with your parent or guardian’s permission.
18 CITIZENSHIP IN THE COMMUNITY


.Public Meetings
Public Meetings
More than 300 years ago, American colonists regularly met to
decide how best to manage and protect their communities. At
those gatherings, people discussed and argued and finally voted
for their convictions. This is the purest form of democracy—
when voters participate directly in making laws, levying taxes,
and spending money.
Today, the New England town meeting still exists in
many small towns. But because of population growth, time
constraints, and modern-day complexities, it has given way
to a modified form in which citizens elect representatives
to attend the meetings and vote on their behalf.
Local government—regardless of its structure—is the
level of government most directly accountable to the public.
Citizens meet face-to-face with their representatives at public
meetings. If you do not know what local voting district you live
in or who represents you, call the city, town, or county council
or school board. Then attend one of those meetings and watch
how elected representatives participate and vote. If you get the
opportunity, introduce yourself to local council members or
school board representatives.
Attending a city, town, or county council or school
board meeting or a court session is a major step
toward becoming an informed citizen. Imagine what it
would be like to live in a community where all public
meetings were held in private. However, some execu-
tive meetings are closed sessions and are not open to
the public. Generally in those cases, the actions taken
will be announced after the closed session.
CITIZENSHIP IN THE COMMUNITY 19


Public Meetings.
Charters require that city councils publish proposed
ordinances, or municipal laws, in local newspapers. That
way, interested citizens can voice their concerns at scheduled
hearings before the laws are enacted. This prevents the
council members from legislating in secret and acting out
of self-interest.
Public meeting agendas are posted in advance in the news-
paper and on the city, town, county, or school board or district’s
website, if it has one. In most places, a citizen must register to
speak at the meeting about an item on the agenda. Topics at a
council meeting might include architectural requirements for new
commercial buildings, a proposal for a multilane highway
through a residential neighborhood, the sale of municipal
bonds, and the best use of a vacant parcel of land.
At a school board meeting, you might hear about the cost
of buying band instruments, the need to reduce expenses, the
value of block schedules compared to six-period days, whether
to award physical education credit for off-campus sports, and
other similar issues.
Be Aware
How can you know how the council or board members voted on a motion?
Do certain representatives seem more knowledgeable about the issues
than others? Some people at the meeting do not vote. What are their
roles? Are you surprised at how many citizens attend these meetings?
20 CITIZENSHIP IN THE COMMUNITY


.Public Meetings
The Court System
Municipal courts have citywide authority and are organized
in divisions: civil, criminal, domestic relations, small claims,
traffic, and probate courts. If you sit in on a session of one
of these courts, you will hear cases involving misdemeanors
(less serious crimes) and matters involving small amounts of
money. County and state courts (known as general trial courts)
handle more serious civil and criminal cases, which are tried
before a judge.
If a dispute arises about how the law has been applied
in one of these trial courts, a judge in an appellate court
(often called a court of appeals) reviews the case and makes
a decision.
In some instances, a case is appealed to the state’s
Supreme Court, which is the court of last resort in the state’s
judicial system. Five to seven justices sit on the high bench
and have the final say about all cases relating to state law. On
rare occasions, when a question of federal law is involved, a
case may be appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court.
CITIZENSHIP IN THE COMMUNITY 21


Local Issues: What’s on the Public’s Mind?.
Local Issues: What’s on
the Public’s Mind?
You can learn a lot about your community just by paying
attention to what is going on around you. You might hear
people talking in the grocery store, in the post office, in
restaurants, or in the stands at athletic events. Listen closely,
read the newspaper, watch the local news on television, and
you will find out what issues concern the public.
For example, you might hear a mother expressing worry
that her child’s frequent asthma attacks may be caused by air
pollution in the community. Or you might hear that many car
accidents have occurred at a particular intersection. You might
see news coverage on television about how graffiti has been a
problem in a particular community.
Read the editorials in your local newspaper. If you have
attended a court session, you might have discovered con-
nections between cases in the courtroom and articles in the
paper. Consider the subjects you heard discussed at the city
council or school board meeting. Think about the hot topics.
Pick an issue that interests you and find out how to help.
An editorial is a
piece of writing
that expresses the
writer’s opinions.
Editorials usually
are separated
from regular
news stories in
the newspaper.
22 CITIZENSHIP IN THE COMMUNITY


.Local Issues: What’s on the Public’s Mind?
Getting to the Bottom of an Issue
You can easily figure out which branch of local government is
responsible for resolving the problem by calling the city council
office or school board, or asking the reference librarian at your
local library. If you read about the problem in the newspaper, look
for names in the article or contact the newspaper for a lead.
Once you know which branch, board, or committee is
responsible, find out who might be willing to discuss the issue
with you and how to reach that person. Then request an
interview (by telephone probably is the most convenient).
Allow yourself enough time before the interview to thoroughly
prepare. Try to find out as much as you can about all sides
of the issue. What is currently being done to address it? How
can young people help?
In many cities, young people serve as representatives on
advisory boards for the library, city, town, or county council,
school board, and parent/teacher association, and as members
of teen court. Citizens 18 or older usually are eligible to run for
local office.
Before you
contact an official
to interview, be
sure you have
permission from
your counselor
and a parent or
guardian.
Tips for Interviewing
• Do your research. Understand the issue and different points of view.
• Prepare a list of questions. Include questions about how young
people can help.
• Allow the person time to think and reply to your questions.
Do not interrupt.
• Thank the interviewee for his or her time.
Do not show up
to an interview
unannounced. Call
first to set up an
appointment or a
time when you
can call back and
talk at length
by telephone.
CITIZENSHIP IN THE COMMUNITY 23





.Making a Difference
Making a Difference
A good citizen looks for opportunities to help improve the com-
munity. Small efforts make a difference, and you also can join
forces with others to benefit many people.
Matching Your Interests to Volunteer Work
You know how much more you enjoy doing something if you
are good at it or if it really interests you. So keep that in mind
as you consider volunteer opportunities. List your skills and
talents. Think about whether you are willing to teach those
skills to other people. Consider your personal goals and what
you want to learn, too. List the issues that are most important
to you.
Think of the merit badges you have earned and how you
might use those skills to be a valued volunteer. Perhaps you
like to play an instrument. Maybe you can repair electronic
equipment. If you are bilingual or computer savvy, there are
many opportunities to put those skills into practical and fulfill-
ing experiences. Having a good sense of humor is a valuable
skill, too.
Many people volunteer because they care about social
problems like illiteracy and poverty, or environmental issues,
or finding cures for specific diseases. Others take pleasure in
helping elderly people, animals, or children. There are endless
opportunities to volunteer, so pick one that suits you. That way,
you will make a bigger difference.
Young citizens who participate in Scouting, school activities, and religious
organizations tend to volunteer far more often than students who do not
participate in those groups. This willingness to help continues into adult-
hood. By fulfilling requirement 7, you will make a real contribution to your
community and open the door to a lifetime of rewarding experiences.
CITIZENSHIP IN THE COMMUNITY 25


Making a Difference.
Choosing a Charity
Once you decide what cause interests you, it is time to find out
which charitable organizations in your community address the
issue. You can start by looking at the community services pages
in your telephone book. Call the local Better Business Bureau.
Pick up fliers about charities at the local chamber of commerce.
With your parent or guardian’s permission, visit the websites
listed in the resources section of this merit badge pamphlet.
Find out if the group is a not-for-profit organization. Read
its mission statement and decide if you agree with its goals.
If you want to volunteer for that organization, call to discuss
possible responsibilities or suggest what you would like to do.
Even though you are giving your time and effort for free, you
may have to interview for the position. Most organizations
want the best people working for their cause. They also know
volunteers can make big contributions of time and other
resources, and many are needed.
26 CITIZENSHIP IN THE COMMUNITY


.Making a Difference
At the Movies: Activists, Whistle-Blowers,
and Ordinary People
Individuals sometimes make great personal sacrifices to tackle problems
that threaten a community or to stand up for what is just. Filmmakers
love to turn these bigger-than-life stories into movies. You can find docu-
mentary films (factual or objective films) and blockbusters about people
who acted alone or with others to have a positive effect on society.
Examples include true stories of people exposing a cover-up about a con-
taminated water supply, leading a country to freedom through passive
resistance, publicly disclosing a company’s strategy to profit by harming
consumers, and creating an inspiring program of musical instruction for
urban children. Also look for movies about people who played a powerful
role in business or government to benefit society.
Shining a Light on Your Community
When you aim a spotlight at something, your focus is narrow.
You have chosen one perspective to highlight and ignored the
rest. But by learning more about your community, you shine
a floodlight. Suddenly, you see lots of different kinds of people
and places with varying world views. Good government
officials and good citizens always try to understand different
points of view.
The Hometown Tourist
There are people who have lived in New York City all their
lives and never been to the top of the Empire State Building.
Have you been to the tourist attractions in your hometown?
You probably remember driving in your community with fam-
ily or friends when someone looked out the car window and
said, “I’ve never noticed that before.” Ride through your com-
munity with your parent or guardian (or with their permission)
and explore streets you have never traveled. You will discover
unfamiliar and interesting neighborhoods, businesses, historical
places, elementary schools, parks, and more.
To fulfill requirement 2, you must map out your community.
If you go to the building where the local government board or
council meets, you likely will find a map of your community
As you become
familiar with your
community, it is
important to know
the major streets
in your area.
CITIZENSHIP IN THE COMMUNITY 27


Making a Difference.
marked with the chief government buildings
and public service facilities. Read the govern-
ment and community services pages in your
local telephone book to learn the addresses
of the hospital, fire, and police stations near-
est your home. Call or visit the local historical
society to know where to find historic sites in
your community.
Regardless of whether you live in a city
with a mass transit system and a take-it-for-
granted clean water supply or in a rural area
with unpaved roads and well water, you live in
a unique community with its own history and
special places.
If your community has a tourist center,
go there to collect information about local attractions. You can
gather all sorts of information about local demographics, parks,
lakes, and recreational facilities, museums, public gardens, sports
attractions, and cultural events. You can pick up similar fliers at
the local chamber of commerce. With your parent or guardian’s
permission, check out the internet. Most towns and cities regu-
larly update their own websites with helpful information.
While walking or riding through your community, pay
attention to the names of schools, community centers, and
streets. These are clues to the history of your community and
to the people who played
active roles. Notice how
many signs on businesses
and religious buildings are
posted in different lan-
guages. Take a tour of the
produce section in your
grocery store. How do the
varieties of fruits and
vegetables reflect the
ethnic influences in
your community?
Think about what
makes a neighborhood.
How is one neighborhood
different from another? Isn’t
your community a cluster
of all these local groups?
Community map
28 CITIZENSHIP IN THE COMMUNITY


.Making a Difference
The Informed Booster
Every community needs an enthusiastic supporter who will
promote it as a great place to live. You can be a booster for
your community when you make your public presentation for
requirement 8. To make a fair and balanced speech or exhibit,
be sure to also point out the challenges your community faces
and what the community is doing to address the challenges.
When you interview someone in the local government (for
requirement 4b), use that opportunity to discuss community
challenges. Consider contacting your elected officials to discuss
those problems, too. Include something about your commu-
nity’s geography.
Think about the geography of your community. How
do the physical features contribute to the local lifestyle or
attract industries?
Use your talents to shape your presentation. If you enjoy
talking in front of a group of people, make a speech. If you love
to take photos, then create a photographic exhibit. Keep in
mind, however, that people in your audience respond differently
to information. Some like to hear it presented; others prefer
to see it. Combine aural and visual elements so that your
presentation interests everyone.
Demographics are statistical characteristics of human populations that
reflect the composition of a group of people (community, state, or
country). Commonly tracked characteristics include ethnicity, age, income,
religious preference, and level of education. People use these statistics to
determine who might buy certain products, whether to build more apart-
ments or houses, or if a community will be best served by an extreme
sports park for teenagers instead of a traditional recreation center.
For tips about
making speeches
and multimedia
presentations,
refer to the
Public Speaking,
Communication,
and Photography
merit badge
pamphlets.
CITIZENSHIP IN THE COMMUNITY 29


Making a Difference.
Consider any of these possibilities as
a starting point for your presentation:
oral history, timeline, photographic
exhibit, collage, mural, plasticine
model, or multimedia show.
STAGING YOUR PRESENTATION
Reach out to your community when you make your presenta-
tion. Consider staging it at a nursing home, senior citizens
center, Rotary Club meeting, YMCA or YWCA after-school pro-
gram, or volunteer group.
Invite people who helped you with your presentation, such
as residents and officials you interviewed. You might include
elected officials or members of the volunteer organization you
assisted for requirement 7c.
Have fun doing this project as well as the other require-
ments. As you learn more about your community and make
more of an effort to get involved, you will develop a greater
sense of belonging, a stronger pride in your hometown, and
a better understanding of what it means to be a good citizen
in your community.
30 CITIZENSHIP IN THE COMMUNITY


.Resources
Resources
Scouting Literature
Scouts BSA Handbook for Boys; Scouts
BSA Handbook for Girls; American
Business, American Cultures, American
Heritage, Citizenship in the Nation,
Citizenship in the World, Communication,
Crime Prevention, Photography, Public
Speaking, and Scouting Heritage merit
badge pamphlets
Books
Abress, Monica Dwyer. Quietly at Work:
Township Government in America.
Specialty Press Publishers, 2000.
Bankston, John. Careers in Community
Service. Mitchell Lane Publishers, 2001.
Bowman, Ann, and Richard C. Kearney.
State and Local Government.
Houghton Mifflin Company, College
Division, 2001.
Brownlie, Alison. Charities: Do They
Work? Raintree Publishers, 1999.
Burns, James M., and others. State &
Local Politics: Government by the
People. Prentice Hall, 2001.
Coplin, William D. How You Can Help:
An Easy Guide to Doing Good Deeds
in Your Everyday Life. Routledge, 2000.
Gary, Lawrence. How to Win a Local
Election: A Complete Step-by-Step
Guide. M. Evans, 1999.
Isler, Claudia. Volunteering to Help
in Your Neighborhood. Scholastic
Library Publishing, 2000.
Jungreis, Abigail. Know Your
Hometown History: Projects and
Activities. Franklin Watts, 1992.
Lewis, Barbara A., Pamela Espeland,
and Caryn Pernu. Kids’ Guide to
Social Action: How to Solve the
Social Problems You Choose—
and Turn Creative Thinking
Into Positive Action. Free
Spirit Publishing Inc., 1998.
Kielburger, Marc, and Craig
Kielburger. Take Action! A Guide
to Active Citizenship. John Wiley
& Sons Inc., 2002.
Perry, Susan K. Catch the Spirit: Teen
Volunteers Tell How They Made
a Difference. Scholastic Library
Publishing, 2000.
Ryan Jr., Bernard. Community Service
for Teens 8-Volume Set. Facts on
File, 1998.
Rusch, Elizabeth. Generation Fix:
Young Ideas for a Better World.
Beyond Words Publishing Inc., 2002.
CITIZENSHIP IN THE COMMUNITY 31
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


Resources.
Organizations and Websites
GovSpot
www.govspot.com
Kids Care Clubs
975 Boston Post Road
Darien, CT 06820
www.kidscare.org
National Constitution Center
Independence Mall
525 Arch St.
Philadelphia, PA 19106
www.constitutioncenter.org
National Crime Prevention Council
2345 Crystal Drive, Suite 500
Arlington, VA 22202
www.ncpc.org
USA.gov
Office of Citizen Services
and Communications
U.S. General Services Administration
1800 F St. NW
Washington, DC 20405
www.usa.gov
U.S. Census Bureau
www.census.gov
VolunteerMatch
www.volunteermatch.org
Youth Activism Project
www.youthactivism.com
Youth Service America
ysa.org
Acknowledgments
Scouting America is grateful to Harry
C. Boyte, Ph.D., codirector, Center for
Democracy and Citizenship, for his
assistance with developing the revised
requirements. The center, which seeks
to “address the growing gap between
citizens and government,” also aims
to “develop citizenship initiatives and
the concept of public work.” Thanks to
Robert Hildreth, also of the center, for
his contribution.
Scouting America is grateful to the men
and women serving on the National
Merit Badge Subcommittee for the
improvements made in updating
this pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration Credits
Adam Prince, www.gribblenation.com,
courtesy—page 16
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of or
are protected by the Scouting America.
Daniel Giles—page 29
Roy Jansen—page 8
Brian Payne—pages 10, 13, and 23–24
Randy Piland—page 21
32 CITIZENSHIP IN THE COMMUNITY