PAINTING


PAINTING
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Section 0.
35926
ISBN 978-0-8395-3372-6
©2025 Scouting America
2025 Printing


PAINTING 3
Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Painting
or check Scoutbook for the latest requirements.





PAINTING 5
Contents
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Safety and Environmental Responsibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
Color . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
All About Paint . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
Surface Preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
Application Equipment and Procedures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
Opportunities in the Painting Craft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
Glossary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
Painting Resources. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77





PAINTING 7
.Introduction
Introduction
Human beings everywhere have always decorated their shelter,
no matter how crude or humble that dwelling was. Some
scientists believe that murals in caves in Altamira, Spain, and
Lascaux Grotto, France, date to 30,000 b.c. Prehistoric painters
were limited to colors made from pigments found in natural
materials such as minerals. For example, the pigment called
ochre—from iron ore—made paints that were yellow, red,
brown, and black.
Although the Egyptians are credited with the discovery of
varnish, the Asian cultures were among the first to develop
paints, using pigmented—colored—crayons with clay as a
binder. The use of lacquers and varnishes in China dates back
to prehistoric times.
While protective painting was not done in Europe until the
12th century, Egyptians, Greeks, Romans, Asians, and Incas
were painting buildings as early as the second century b.c.
The Greeks and Romans added a greater range of colors to
their paints and varnishes and began applying paints to house
exteriors, ships, sculptures, decorations, and wall paintings.
Although the Romans first introduced paints into Europe,
European artists in search of new colors and more versatile
types of paints were largely responsible for the evolution of
paint up to the 17th century.
In Colonial America, the oil-based paints that were avail-
able were difficult to level and required as many as nine coats.
These layers of paint were topped with a hard, glossy coat,
which produced a rich finish. “Rich” is the key word because
this process was very expensive. As a result, the home of the
average colonial was not painted at all. However, such a compli-
cated treatment made for a finish that would last for decades.
Terms shown in
italics can be
found in the
glossary at the
back of this
pamphlet.


Introduction.
The result of this wealth can be seen in early American
houses today throughout New England and the original
Colonies. These dwellings were homes of wealthy Americans.
The fact that, more than 200 years later, many of these homes
have remained standing has a lot to do with those nine coats
of paint.
After the mid-1700s, “barn red” became a popular and
widely used paint color because of its warmth and low-cost
iron-oxide pigment. Other popular colors were pumpkin,
yellow, cream, and white. Paint also was used for interior
woodwork to complement expensive imported wallpaper
that the average citizen could not afford.
After 1875, factory-made paints were available at a
reasonable cost. As a result, greater numbers of people painted
and decorated more of their buildings, and more frequently.
As a less expensive
alternative to
paint, many people
used whitewash,
made from
quicklime (calcium
oxide) mixed
with water.
Have you ever noticed that you do not see many
250-year-old cottages or cabins? Very few, if any,
buildings owned by people who didn’t have money
for paint are still standing. Because they were left
unprotected from the elements, most of those
houses have not survived.


PAINTING 9
.Introduction
Recent Developments
Since the end of the 19th century, technology has changed the
craft of painting. Advances have been made in paint materials,
surface preparation, paint application, and quality control.
Increased attention to environmental and safety regulations
has hastened these improvements.
During the 19th and 20th centuries, extensive research
efforts uncovered new materials for use in pigments, binders,
and solvents. Some of these materials are organic, which
means they originated from a plant or animal. Some are
inorganic, which means they originated from a mineral.
Some are synthetic, or made by humans. Since World War II,
new resins have improved general-purpose paints and have
allowed manufacturers to tailor coatings to specific materials,
purposes, and environmental conditions.
In the 20th century, the most significant change was
the development of water-based latex and acrylic paints,
which replaced many oil-based coverings. Alkyd paints were
developed in the 1920s. These paints are made of a synthetic
resin—alkyd—that is derived from a specific kind of acid in
reaction with a specific kind of alcohol. The properties of
alkyds are similar to oils, and the two materials can be mixed.
Alkyd-modified resins, however, dry faster than natural oils.
Despite these advances in technology, the need for crafts-
manship remains. The craftsperson must choose appropriate
colors and tools and apply the paint effectively. Technology
will never replace art and old-fashioned craftsmanship.
Reasons for Painting
There are two basic reasons to
paint a surface: to protect it or
to decorate it. Often, a painter
wants to do both. For projects
with certain requirements, a
special-purpose paint may be
necessary. For example, paint
used on a boat bottom contains
specific agents to fight the growth
of organisms on the hull.


10 PAINTING
Introduction.
Protection From Natural Elements
Most outside surfaces break down when exposed to nature’s
elements—sun, heat, rain, ice, cold, wind, snow. Paint adheres
to the surfaces and helps protect them from brutal effects—
particularly damage from moisture, which makes wood swell,
warp, and rot, and metals rust and corrode. The more vulnerable
interior wall surfaces, such as drywall and plaster, also can be
damaged when exterior surfaces have been neglected.
Decoration for Living Areas
Paint has always been used primarily for decoration. The need
to make our surroundings more attractive and uplifting is usually
the main reason we decide to paint. Whether you are painting
your home or Fido’s home, part of the satisfaction you get from
the finished job is its pleasant appearance.
How Paint Can Improve
a Surface
New technology and materials
used in paint today increase
the ways paint and other
coatings can improve a
surface. From water-based
acrylics to oil-based alkyds,
the choices available offer
a variety of benefits.
Paint can improve
the appearance of an old
structure, protect the surface
from harmful elements, and
help prevent it from aging
further. Paints made for
marine or swimming pool
use can even make vessels
and pools resistant to organisms and harsh chemicals. Many
paints, such as automobile paints, are specially designed to
provide a hard, protective barrier against the environment
and the hundreds of washings a car must withstand. Paints
designed with special reflective properties are used to stripe
roads and make highways safer.
Lastly, paint improves a surface and enhances the entire
structure, which increases its financial value.
This fine example of a mural can be found at
Sundance Square in downtown Fort Worth, Texas.


PAINTING 11
.Introduction
A decorative paint
job sometimes has
surprising effects.
For example, one
rarely sees graffiti
on an urban mural
brightening a
parking lot.
The Forum Shops at Caesars, in Las Vegas, Nevada, uses trompe l’oeil throughout to
create special effects.
Painting for Special Effects
Faux (pronounced “foe,” and meaning false) finishes play tricks
on your eyes and can make a surface look as if it is made of
marble, parchment, or leather, for instance. Wood can be
painted to look like stone, and metal can look like wood. Faux
finishing is used to make smaller rooms look larger and flat
surfaces appear three-dimensional.
Special painting techniques, including glazing, marbling,
graining, antiquing, stippling, texturing, and gilding can be used
to make an otherwise plain room or piece of furniture appear
fancy. Trompe l’oeil (pronounced “tromp loy”), meaning “trick
the eye,” is a way of painting a surface to give the illusion that
something is real—like a sky on a ceiling.
Another special painting technique is stenciling. Even a
person with no artistic talent can paint virtually any design
with a stencil pattern. The painter uses a stencil brush to paint
the design through the perforated pattern.





.Safety and Environmental Responsibility
Safety and Environmental
Responsibility
Using painting products and equipment requires some basic
knowledge to stay safe and help protect the environment.
Putting Safety First
Using painting materials and tools carries a degree of risk.
Ingredients in paint can cause simple allergic reactions or
chronic, long-term ill health effects. Misusing hand and
power tools and ladders can cause injuries ranging from
minor to life-threatening.
Setting up a painting project also can involve risk.
The most important tool for improving safety
is attitude. Promote an attitude of safety
as you learn about painting and earn
the Painting merit badge, and the fun
will follow.
Planning and Training
Planning a painting job is critical to
safety. Accidents usually can be prevented
with proper planning. Anticipate dangers
and plan ways to avoid them. Learning
how to use tools and materials
properly is important. Make sure
to read and understand proper
operating instructions before
using any equipment. Read
the label and manual.
Be committed to
safety by keeping
informed about
safe practices.
Review tasks
before beginning
them, and maintain
high standards
of safety.


14 PAINTING
Safety and Environmental Responsibility.
Alertness
It is easy to be distracted when you are tired or bored. To keep
safe while painting, stay alert to what is going on so you can
recognize dangers and take steps to eliminate or avoid them.
Personal Protective Equipment
The best way to keep safe from toxins is to make sure the
materials are completely toxin-free. Many paint materials do
contain toxic chemicals, however, so take other measures to
control the environment.
The main factor you control in any task is yourself.
Whether preparing the surface for painting or applying paint,
wear the appropriate personal protective equipment. Remember,
previously applied paint might also contain dangerous contami-
nants from which you should protect yourself.
Let the professionals do the dirty work.
Never attempt to remove lead-based paint.
Only qualified professional painting con-
tractors should take on this dangerous task.
The Environmental Protection Agency
outlines requirements that contractors must follow.
See the resources section for more information.
If you must listen
to the radio or
music while you
work, keep the
volume low.
Accidents can
occur when music
is playing too
loudly because
you aren’t
paying enough
attention to your
work environment.


PAINTING 15
Appropriate Clothing. Many professional painters wear suits
specially designed to protect them from toxic materials. While
you may not have or require this kind of suit, you still should
wear protective, long-sleeved clothing made of a heavy fabric
such as canvas or denim. Protect your feet by wearing heavy
work shoes or boots.
Eye Protection. It is very easy to get something in your eyes
while painting, especially when you are removing paint and
preparing surfaces. Wear safety glasses or goggles to keep
paint and debris out of your eyes.
Respirator. Many paint materials contain chemicals that are
dangerous to inhale. And when you remove old paint, dust
can sometimes be harmful. To protect yourself, always wear
the appropriate respirator. Consult the safety data sheet, or SDS,
which is discussed later in this section.
Respirators range from inexpensive dust masks available
at most home improvement or discount stores to sophisticated
air-supply hoods. Keep the respirator clean and in good repair.
Gloves. When selecting gloves, make certain they offer protection
from the chemical to which you will be exposed. The safety data
sheet or the label on the paint container should have guidelines
about appropriate protective equipment. (See more about the
safety data sheet later in this section.)
Hard Hat. At times during the project, you may need to wear
a hard hat for protection from any falling items or to keep from
hitting your head on different surfaces.
Personal Hygiene
While working, painters constantly have contact with chemicals—
in paints, solvents, strippers, or other materials. Washing your
skin frequently can reduce exposure to toxins that could cause
irritation, and it can prevent accidental ingestion of the toxin.
When you are through with a job, shower as soon as possible
and launder the dirty clothing. The dust in clothing may make
a person ill, so keep the clothing away from people, pets, and
clean clothing until you are ready to wash it.
Wash thoroughly before eating or drinking. Never eat or
drink in the work area. A painter practicing poor hygiene risks
getting contaminants in the mouth or inhaling them.
You will get paint
and other stains
on your clothes,
so be sure not to
wear street
clothing that
you don’t want
to damage.


16 PAINTING
Safety and Environmental Responsibility.
Tool Safety
Whether you are using sophisticated power tools or simply a
bucket of paint and a brush, you must practice tool safety.
Some tools, called airless sprayers, pump paint at high
pressure and may be powered by hazardous fuels. Other
tools produce hazards such as noise, dust, and dangerous
debris or particles.
HAND TOOLS
Take care of hand tools and they will last for many years.
PUTTY KNIFE
SCRAPER
CAULKING GUN
BRUSHES
CLEANING
BRUSH
STEEL WOOL


PAINTING 17
.Safety and Environmental Responsibility
POWER TOOLS
Take the following precautions when using power tools
(such as sanders) to prepare surfaces for paint:
• Follow the manufacturer’s instructions for proper and
safe operation.
• Guard against injury by using recommended tool guards
and wearing protective gear such as goggles and earplugs
or earmuffs.
• Use a respirator when dust and vapor hazards are present.
• To avoid shock, make sure that electric tools are adequately
grounded; use them only in a dry environment. For added
protection, use tools that are double-insulated and are plugged
into circuits protected by ground fault circuit interrupters.
• Make sure an abrasive attachment is securely tightened
before using a power tool. Disconnect the power before
changing or adjusting attachments.
• Run power tools only when they are in contact with the
surface to be prepared.
• Inspect equipment regularly, and repair or replace parts on
the tool as necessary.
• Do not use power tools in confined spaces where sparks
could cause explosions.
Ladder Safety
Think of safety all the time while using a ladder. Take the
time to properly set up the ladder and to use it properly.
Taking these precautions can help prevent injury.
The types of ladders most commonly used are the
stepladder, which is used to reach just-above-the-head
heights, and the extension ladder, which is used for
reaching greater heights.
Other types of ladders and climbing equipment
include scaffolding, personnel lifts, and suspended work
platforms. Professionals use these climbing devices. While
it is helpful to know this special equipment exists, you are not
required to use any of it to earn the Painting merit badge.


18 PAINTING
Safety and Environmental Responsibility.
SETUP SAFETY
• Check ladders for wear, damage, and loose or missing parts.
• Place extension ladders at a safe angle firmly against the
wall. For every 4 feet of working height, set the ladder 1 foot
away from the base of the structure. If the distance between
the bottom and top supports of the ladder is 8 feet, for
instance, the ladder should be 2 feet away from the base of
the structure, as shown in the illustration.
• Do not set up a ladder in front
of a door.
• Make sure that people entering the
area can see and avoid the ladder.
• Make sure the ladder is on solid
ground; never set a ladder on soft
or uneven ground.
• Use caution when working with
ladders around electricity. Never
use or carry a ladder near power
lines or electrical currents.
• On a stepladder, make sure the
spreaders between the front and
back sections are fully extended
and locked into position.
• On an extension ladder, make sure
locking devices in the upper section
of the ladder securely engage the
rungs in the lower section.
2 FEET
8 FEET


.
PAINTING 19
CLIMBING SAFETY
• Always face the ladder when climbing
or descending, and grasp it firmly.
• Test each rung before putting any weight on it.
• Before climbing, wipe any mud, oil, or wet paint from ladder
rungs or steps and from the soles of work shoes. Be sure to
wear slip-resistant shoes.
• Never climb higher than the highest standing level marked
on a ladder.
• Never rush or skip steps or rungs on a ladder.
• Never allow more than one person on a ladder at a time.
• Never stand or sit on the top, or on the shelf, of a stepladder.
Scouting America safety guidelines require Scouts to wear a
helmet and other safety gear when climbing higher than
shoulder height. When a job calls for the painter to climb a ladder
higher than shoulder height, it is best left to a professional.


20 PAINTING
Safety and Environmental Responsibility.
LADDER USE
• Always follow the three-point rule:
Keep three parts of your body (two feet
and a hand, or two hands and a foot)
in contact with the ladder at all times.
• Keep the area around the ladder free
from clutter and debris.
• Use ladders as they were intended—
don’t use a stepladder as a straight
ladder, for example.
• Don’t use ladders upside down.
• Remove ladders in windy or
stormy weather.
• Keep within the ladder’s “working
load,” or weight capacity, including the
worker and all equipment. All new
ladders have a label stating the weight
capacity and other safety information.
• Never leave a ladder unattended,
especially around children.
• Keep a safe attitude—never act up or
take risks around ladders.
Whenever using a ladder, follow the three-
point rule: Keep three parts of your body
(two feet and a hand, or two hands and a
foot) in contact with the ladder at all times.
Select ladders within the following:
Type Duty Rating Working Load
IAA Special duty 375 lbs.
IA Industrial—extra heavy 300 lbs.
I Industrial—heavy 250 lbs.
II Commercial—medium 225 lbs.
III Household—light 200 lbs.


PAINTING 21
.Safety and Environmental Responsibility
Materials Safety
Handle painting materials safely. Solvents, paints, paint chips,
and dust that may contain lead must be disposed of properly.
Paint ingredients, when mishandled, can be dangerous.
Solvents. Solvents, such as mineral spirits, xylol, and naphtha,
are present in some paints and are used to reduce or thin the
paint and during cleanup. Solvents are particularly hazardous to
the painter and others who may be exposed to them. Follow the
same safety guidelines for solvents and solvent-based paints.
Most solvents are toxic when inhaled. Inhaling too
many solvent vapors can make breathing difficult, lowering
the oxygen level in the body. Always keep the work area
well-ventilated by opening all the windows. Keep the air
moving by using a fan.
If part of your body comes in contact with a solvent, the
result could be harmful. The solvent may leave skin dry and
scaly or burn it, leaving it raw and irritated. Wear gloves and
keep your hands away from your mouth, eyes, and nose to
avoid ingesting solvents or irritating soft body tissues.
Safe Removal of Paint. Removing paint is tricky. Once you
begin to remove paint, the particles become very small and
very easy to ingest by breathing or by talking while your mouth
is unprotected. Especially if you are not sure about the origin of
the paint that must be removed, it is best to leave this messy
and dangerous job to professionals.
Is Your House Lead-Free?
Lead-based paint can cause serious health problems.
Removing it is such a high-risk job that it is best left to
a professional. Structures built prior to 1978 are likely
to have been painted with lead-based paint. Ask your
parent or guardian when your house was built. If it was
before 1978, or if they are not certain when it was built,
do not attempt to use your house as a project. Find
something else.
Never attempt to remove lead-based paint yourself.
All solvent vapors
are flammable—
some are very
quick to ignite.
Keep solvents
away from power
equipment,
because a single
spark from a
machine can
cause an
explosion or fire.


22 PAINTING
Safety and Environmental Responsibility.
Fire Safety
The most important point to remember about fire safety is
prevention. The best way to prevent fire is to be alert and
keep safety in mind when using flammable materials, following
the rules described throughout this chapter.
Proper Storage. It is best to
limit the storage of flammable
materials. Purchase only the
amount needed for a job. If
you must store paints and
solvents, keep them in a well-
ventilated area to avoid buildup
of flammable vapors. Never
store these materials near a furnace, stove, water heater, or other
source of heat. Make sure lids and caps on paint and solvent
containers are tightly in place.
Immediately remove clothing that has been soaked with
flammable liquid. Keep this clothing separate from other laundry
and in a well-ventilated area until you are ready to clean them.
Fire Extinguishers. Always keep fire extinguishers near the
work area, ready for use at any time.
Just as there is more than one kind of fire, there is more
than one kind of fire extinguisher. Multipurpose dry chemical
fire extinguishers and carbon dioxide fire extinguishers are the
two most common types of fire extinguisher.
C Live electrical equipment
requires the use of a class C
multipurpose or carbon dioxide
fire extinguisher.
A Use the class A multipurpose
fire extinguisher on ordinary
combustible materials such as
paper and wood.
B For gasoline, grease, paint, and
other flammable liquids, use a
class B multipurpose or carbon
dioxide fire extinguisher.
When you finish a
job, clean the
equipment
thoroughly before
storing. Never
store rags soaked
in paint or solvent.
Properly dispose
of them in a
covered metal
waste container.


PAINTING 23
.Safety and Environmental Responsibility
Ignition Sources. Any spark can cause a fire around combusti-
ble materials. Never use paints or solvents near an open flame
or ignition point. Be cautious when using power tools or when
working while someone is cutting or welding nearby. Never
spray any combustible liquid onto a hot surface.
Improper Ventilation. To avoid a dangerous buildup of com-
bustible vapors, always keep the work area well-ventilated.
Understanding Labels and Safety Data Sheets
To work safely with paint materials, read the safety data sheet
(SDS) provided by the manufacturer. This document sets forth
in great detail how to safely handle the product.
Make every effort to obtain the SDS for the materials you
are using, as you will learn a great deal about the makeup of
these materials. Ask a local paint supplier for the SDS on a
product. You can also get the SDS for a specific product by
contacting the manufacturer (look for a phone number
on the product label) or by searching the internet (with your
parent or guardian’s approval).
Paint and solvent cans typically have a lot of detailed
information about safe and effective usage and disposal of the
product. Although the label on a paint can won’t provide the
level of detail that an SDS will, read the label carefully, too.
All paint manufacturers are required by law to provide
an SDS so workers will be aware of safety measures to
take when working with any particular product.


24 PAINTING
Safety and Environmental Responsibility.
A safety data sheet (SDS) contains 16 sections. While all sections must be
included to comply with international regulations, the Occupational Safety and
Health Administration will not enforce the content of sections 12 through 15.
Sections 1 through 11 and 16 are described below:
Section 1: Identification. This section identifies the chemical on the SDS, lists
its recommended uses, and provides the manufacturer’s name, address, and
emergency telephone contact information.
Section 2: Hazard(s) Identification. This section identifies the hazards of the
chemical and provides appropriate warning information.
Section 3: Composition/Information on Ingredients. This section identifies
the ingredients in the product.
Section 4: First-Aid Measures. This section describes the initial care that
should be given by untrained responders to someone who has been exposed
to the chemical.
Section 5: Fire-Fighting Measures. This section provides recommendations
for fighting a fire caused by the chemical.
Section 6: Accidental Release Measures. This section provides recommen-
dations on the appropriate response to spills, leaks, or releases.
Section 7: Handling and Storage. This section provides guidance on safe
handling and storage practices.
Section 8: Exposure Controls/Personal Protection. This section
identifies exposure limits and indicates personal protective measures to
minimize exposure.
Section 9: Physical and Chemical Properties. This section identifies physical
and chemical properties associated with the material.
Section 10: Stability and Reactivity. This section describes the reactivity
hazards of the material and chemical stability information.
Section 11: Toxicological Information. This section identifies the toxicological
and health effects information or states that such information is not available.
Section 16: Other Information. This section includes other information
not covered in previous sections, including when the SDS was prepared or
last revised.


PAINTING 25
.Safety and Environmental Responsibility
FIRETEX M71V2
Conforms to Regulation (EC) No. 1907/2006 (REACH), Annex II, as amended by Regulation (EU) No. 453/2010
M71V2
FIRETEX M71V2
SAFETY DATA SHEET
Product name :
1.1 Product identifier
1.3 Details of the supplier of the safety data
sheet
e-mail address of person
responsible for this SDS
: hse.pm.emea@sherwin.com
1.2 Relevant identified uses of the substance or mixture and uses advised against
SECTION 1: Identification of the substance/mixture and of the company/undertaking
Product code :
1.4 Emergency telephone number
National advisory body/Poison Centre
Sherwin-Williams Protective & Marine
Tower Works
Kestor Street
Bolton
BL2 2AL
United Kingdom
+44 (0) 1204 521771
Material uses Paint or paint related material.:
: Industrial use only.
M71V2
Telephone number :
Supplier
Telephone number :
Hours of operation :
+(44)-870-8200 418
Emergency contact available 24 hours a day
0844 892 0111
Classification according to Regulation (EC) No. 1272/2008 [CLP/GHS]
SECTION 2: Hazards identification
2.1 Classification of the substance or mixture
Product definition : Mixture
Classification according to Directive 1999/45/EC [DPD]
Flam. Liq. 3, H226
STOT SE 3, H335 and H336 (Respiratory tract irritation and Narcotic effects)
Asp. Tox. 1, H304
Aquatic Chronic 2, H411
Classification R10
Xi; R37
R66, R67
N; R51/53
:
Physical/chemical
hazards
: Flammable.
The product is classified as dangerous according to Directive 1999/45/EC and its amendments.
The product is classified as hazardous according to Regulation (EC) 1272/2008 as amended.
Date of issue/Date of revision : 29, May, 2015. Date of previous issue : 29, Apr, 2015. Version : 1.01 1/15
FIRETEX M71V2
Conforms to Regulation (EC) No. 1907/2006 (REACH), Annex II, as amended by Regulation (EU) No. 453/2010
M71V2
SECTION 2: Hazards identification
Hazardous ingredients : Solvent naphtha (petroleum), light arom.
See Section 11 for more detailed information on health effects and symptoms.
See Section 16 for the full text of the R phrases or H statements declared above.
2.2 Label elements
Hazard pictograms :
Signal word :
Hazard statements :
Prevention :
Precautionary statements
Response :
Storage :
Disposal :
Danger
Flammable liquid and vapour.
May be fatal if swallowed and enters airways.
May cause respiratory irritation.
May cause drowsiness or dizziness.
Toxic to aquatic life with long lasting effects.
Wear protective gloves. Wear eye or face protection. Keep away from heat, hot
surfaces, sparks, open flames and other ignition sources. No smoking. Use
explosion-proof electrical, ventilating, lighting and all material-handling equipment.
Avoid release to the environment.
IF INHALED: Remove person to fresh air and keep comfortable for breathing. IF
SWALLOWED: Immediately call a POISON CENTER or physician. Do NOT
induce vomiting. IF ON SKIN (or hair): Take off immediately all contaminated
clothing. Rinse skin with water or shower.
Keep cool.
Dispose of contents and container in accordance with all local, regional, national
and international regulations.
Supplemental label
elements
:
Annex XVII - Restrictions
on the manufacture,
: Not applicable.
:Human health hazards Irritating to respiratory system. Repeated exposure may cause skin dryness or
cracking. Vapours may cause drowsiness and dizziness.
Environmental hazards : Toxic to aquatic organisms, may cause long-term adverse effects in the aquatic
environment.
FOR INDUSTRIAL USE ONLY


26 PAINTING
Safety and Environmental Responsibility.
Environmental Responsibility
Any activity using chemicals comes with a great risk for
polluting the environment, so take great care in all steps of
painting and handling materials.
Air and Water Pollution
Local, state, and federal regulations apply to hazardous material
disposal, so ask your merit badge counselor about regulations
that might affect your project. The local Environmental
Protection Agency office (look in the government section of
the phone book) can tell you more about environmental
regulations in your area.
Always dispose
of any chemical
material according
to the manufactur-
er’s instructions
and local laws.


PAINTING 27
.Safety and Environmental Responsibility
Do not sand or remove old
paint that may contain lead, as
such efforts may damage the
environment and put yourself
and others at risk. Particles can
disperse into the air or settle on
the ground, threatening the health
of anyone nearby. Lead contami-
nation can be lethal. Contact a
qualified professional painting
contractor for projects where lead-
based paint may be present.
Proper Disposal Procedures
Sweep or vacuum any particles of old paint, and properly
dispose of this waste. If you do not have enough leftover paint
to store, leave the lid off the can and allow the paint to dry out
and completely harden before replacing the lid and throwing
the can in the trash. This way, the paint will not escape the can
and contaminate the environment.





PAINTING 29
.Color
Color
Color is the result of three
factors: a source of light, an
object that has color, and the
response of the human eye.
The distribution of colors pro-
duced when sunlight is dis-
persed by a prism is known as
the color spectrum. The color spec-
trum was discovered by Sir Isaac
Newton, the 18th-century English
scientist who defined the laws of
gravity and motion. Later, scientists in
France and Germany discovered they
could combine pairs of the primary
colors—red, yellow, and blue—
to create other colors.
Our color spectrum today includes the primary colors as
well as orange, green, and purple, known as secondary colors
(two primary colors mixed together). If you mix a primary color
with a secondary color, you get an intermediate color such as
yellow-green or red-orange. Intermediate color is sometimes
called tertiary color.
Secondary color: green Intermediate color: yellow-greenPrimary color: yellow
Visible light
contains all the
colors of the
color spectrum.


30 PAINTING
Color.
Color Wheel
The color wheel illustrates how colors blend together. On the tra-
ditional color wheel shown here, you can see that the primary
colors form a triangle. The three secondary colors form a second
triangle. An intermediate color falls between each primary and
secondary color.
When you are ready to paint, use the color wheel to
choose a harmonious color scheme. This basic wheel has
12 colors—a combination of primary colors (red, yellow,
blue), secondary colors (green, orange, purple), and six
tertiary (or “mixed”) colors.
The warm colors of the wheel include the reds, oranges,
and yellows. The cool colors include the greens, blues, and pur-
ples. All the colors on the wheel are positioned in a specific
place to help anyone create a pretty failsafe color scheme.
Traditional color wheel


PAINTING 31
.Color
When you are ready to create your own color scheme,
play around with mixing complementary colors (those that
are directly across from each other on the color wheel) and
adding tertiary colors for a more interesting and pleasing
effect. Once you get the hang of it, you will find mixing
colors intriguing and fun.
RED
YELLOW
ORANGE
BLUE YELLOW
RED
ORANGE
ORANGE
RED
PURPLE
PURPLE
BLUE
PURPLE
BLUE
GREEN
GREEN
YELLOW
GREEN
SPLIT COMPLEMENT
TRUE
COMPLEMENT
SCHEME
SPLIT
COMPLEMENT
SCHEME
Black, white,
and gray are
called neutral
colors, which are
neither “warm”
nor “cold.”


32 PAINTING
Color.
During the
Colonial era, the
use of bold colors
in a home was a
sign of affluence.
The pigments
used to achieve
these bright
colors were
costly, and only
wealthy families
could afford such
a luxury.
George Washington had the “small dining room” in his Mount
Vernon residence painted a striking verdigris green. He believed
the color to be “grateful to the eye” and less likely than other
colors to fade.
The “south square room” of Thomas Jefferson’s Monticello is
painted a bright shade of blue that dates to the late 1800s.
During Jefferson’s time, however, this room, which served as the
family sitting room, was unpainted plaster.
Thomas Jefferson Foundation Inc./Robert C. Lautman, courtesy


PAINTING 33
.Color
In contrast to the bolder colors of the Colonial era, these modern
homes use muted colors for a more neutral background.


34 PAINTING
Color.
Color Psychology
Color can alter the appearance of a room by making it appear
smaller or larger, newer or brighter. It can also affect a person’s
mood. Research has shown that in a factory setting, a properly
chosen color can make a more pleasant work environment,
improve morale, increase production, and even help reduce
accidents. Warm colors, such as red and yellow, can make a
person feel physically warmer; cooler colors, like blue, make a
person feel colder.
Effect
WARM
COOL
NEUTRAL
Color
Yellow
Orange
Red
Blue
Green
Violet
Brown
Gray
White
Black
Usage
Warm and welcoming, but also can heighten
anxiety. Works well in narrow hallways and small
entrance halls. Not for small bathrooms, as it
gives your skin a yellowish cast—not too appealing
when you look in the mirror!
Cheerful and friendly; informal. Good in
family rooms.
Stimulating; encourages action. Often used
in restaurants.
Cool and calming. Used in bedrooms.
Relaxing and restful. Good for work and
study environments.
Power color, “royal” color. Found most often in
places of worship.
Beiges coordinate easily with other colors.
Good color in both work and living environments.
Encourages creativity. Grays are more often used
with other, brighter colors because when used
alone it can impart a depressing tone (especially
in northern climates).
Reflects sophistication and cleanliness. Good
around food and work environments such as the
kitchen or sterile environments like hospitals.
Dignified, sleek, and sophisticated. It is usually
used as an accent to enhance other colors.


PAINTING 35
.Color
Effects of Light
Consider the amount of daylight a room
receives when selecting a color. Using
warmer, brighter, lighter colors in rooms
with less sunlight may improve their
appearance. Cooler, darker colors can
balance the warmth of a well-lit room
facing southwest.
Also, consider the function of the
room and how light changes during the
day. The bedroom with windows facing
east may benefit from a warm color like
yellow. This would stimulate a person in
the morning wakeup hour and be inviting
and cheerful later on and into the evening
when the light is fading.
Natural Light Versus Electric Light
Natural light, or sunlight, contains all colors. When a surface
reflects sunlight and does not absorb any of its colors, it is
called “white.” When a surface absorbs all of its colors, it is
called “black.” An object that appears red will absorb all the
colors of natural light except red. By contrast, electric light is
artificial light that does not contain all colors. When it shines
on an object, that object will reflect its own color and absorb
all others. If the object’s color is not present in the electric
light, then the object cannot reflect it and will appear a
different color.
Studies have revealed much about the influence color can have
on one’s mood, as well as good places to use certain colors.


36 PAINTING
Color.
Warm and Cool Lighting
Warm or cool lights affect people in the same way that warm
or cool colors do. Use warm (incandescent) lighting to create a
cozy effect. Use cooler lighting (fluorescent) to create a clean,
bright, or orderly effect such as in a kitchen or office area.
Balance Lighting and Color
Remember not to overdo it on one side or the other when
matching color with lighting. If a very warm color is used
with warm lighting, the result may be too “warm”—creating
a sense of being cramped and stifled. Cooler whites used with
fluorescent lighting, on the other hand, will create a very stark
atmosphere that may seem cold and uninviting.
Harmony
Combining colors also has special effect on a room. To make a
small room seem larger, use one light color applied to walls,
ceiling, and cabinets. To highlight a room, area, or cabinetry in a
larger room, however, use a combination of light and dark colors.
Several color scheme types are available. Analogous colors,
for example, are adjacent on the color wheel: green and yellow-
green, for instance; or yellow-green and yellow.
Complementary colors are directly across from each other
on the color wheel. These colors, together, form “completeness”
of color, as they are always the sum of all three primary colors.
Red and green (which is made of yellow and blue), for instance,
are complementary colors. Use these colors in lighter or darker
values for a pleasing, balanced effect.
There are two types of electric light—incandescent
and fluorescent. Incandescent lighting is softer and
has a yellow cast, whereas fluorescent lighting is
much brighter and whiter. This is why the color a
person likes so well in the local paint store often
will look different on the wall at home. The best
way to tell how a color will look
is to review paint charts or chips
(samples) in the room to be
painted, and under different
lighting conditions.
Always balance
warmth with
coolness to create
a pleasing effect.


PAINTING 37
.Color
Imagine a line connecting complementary colors on the
color wheel. If you split one end of that line in two as shown
on page 31, you have a combination of three colors known as a
split complementary scheme. Imagine those same three arrows,
except pointing to colors equal distances from each other.
Using a triad scheme can create some of the most beautiful
color harmonies.
See the true complement and split complement schemes
shown earlier in this chapter.
How to Develop a Harmonious
Color Scheme
1. Select a main color, which will be the dominant color.
2. Use lesser, unequal amounts of secondary or accent colors.
3. Create an overall color scheme for the entire house and inte-
grate each room into it.
4. Match colors to the use of each room.
5. If you create a focal point with a dramatic accent color,
carefully coordinate the other colors with it.
6. Remember that lighter colors tend to “open up” rooms
visually, making them seem larger and brighter, and darker
colors have the opposite effect.
Color Matching
Most paint stores have sophisticated color-matching computer
equipment for matching colors. Take a sample (paint chip or
any solid, opaque material, such as a small piece of fabric,
carpeting, upholstery, wallcovering, or even ceramic tile)
of the desired color to the store.
The computer “reads” and
“measures” the color
components of the sample
and compares it with
formulas for colors.
It then matches this
with a “recipe” for
mixing the paint.
If the job is so big
that you must
order more paint,
make sure the
color in each
can matches
the sample.
Paint chips and
fabric swatches





PAINTING 39
.All About Paint
All About Paint
Paint is made of four ingredients: pigment, resin, solvent,
and additives.
• Pigment is finely ground color particles that, when mixed
with a liquid, or vehicle, will provide—in addition to color—
opacity, hardness, durability, and corrosion resistance.
• Resin is a natural or synthetic, transparent substance that
attaches or “binds” to the pigment. Resins are also known as
binders. Common natural resins come from trees and insects.
Synthetic resins include alkyds, epoxies, silicones, vinyls,
acrylics, polyurethanes, and polyesters. Most coatings are
known by their resin type, such as alkyd, acrylic, epoxy, or
coal tar epoxy.
• Solvent, often also known as thinner, is a liquid that dissolves
paint for good spreading. Some classes of solvents include
hydrocarbons, turpentines, ketones, esters, and glycol esters.
Solvent also is used to clean painting equipment.
• Additives have many purposes. They help make the paint
easier to apply. They enhance appearance. They improve
durability and weathering. (See the introductory chapter for
more information about the purposes for additives.)
Oil-Based and Water-Based Paints
An oil-based paint contains drying oil, oil varnish, or oil-modified
resin as the binder. Oil-based paints generally dry slower than
water-based paints and have a strong odor. The final paint
film—the topcoat—is formed by oxidation, the chemical process
by which oxygen combines with the oil and hardens the paint.
Most oil-based paints contain alkyds and epoxies, which allow
the paint to dry harder and faster and to adhere better.


40 PAINTING
All About Paint.
Since water-based paints contain no oil, they generally
dry quickly and have less odor. The final paint film is formed
through evaporation of the water. Water-based paints include
latex and acrylic.
Both oil-based and water-based paints are used on indoor
and outdoor surfaces.
Ingredients and Functions
of Solvent-Based Paints
Alkyds are synthetic resins used in paints and other protective
coatings. Alkyd paint is oil-based, and its drying time depends
on the type of oil used. Alkyds have a high durability for with-
standing weathering and work well for exterior painting.
Polyurethane paints contain polyurethane resin. These
durable paints adhere very well. Some polyurethanes are
mixed with acrylic. These coatings are excellent for exterior
use because of their durability, color retention, and resistance
to abrasion.
Ingredients and Functions of
Water-Based Paints
Latex paint generally is made of water-based pigments,
synthetic polymers like vinyl acrylics, and other chemicals.
Latex paints are suitable for indoor and outdoor use, and
cleanup is easy with soap and water.
Acrylic is a water-based paint popular for its excellent
ability to retain color, for its durability and ease of application,
and for its ease of cleanup with soap and water. Acrylics are
appropriate for interior and exterior surfaces.


PAINTING 41
.All About Paint
Varnish
Polyurethane varnish is best used on everyday pieces that
take a real beating. Drying time is fast. Polyurethane more
closely resembles paint than wood.
Oil-based varnish is made with alkyd or phenolic resin.
Phenolic varnishes yellow faster. Use oil varnish where resis-
tance to weather is critical, such as on exterior floors, doors,
and boat decks.
Acrylic varnish, a water-based varnish, does not penetrate
wood as deeply as oil-based varnish. As a result, it is not
as hard or as moisture-resistant, and it can appear dull and
whitish when exposed to moisture. It may require more coats
to achieve the same luster as solvent-based varnishes. While
acrylic varnish can be more expensive than the oil-based type,
it is more environmentally friendly. Cleanup is easier, too.
Tinting
For your painting project, you probably purchased paint already
mixed to the color you wanted. Tinting is the act of adding color
to paint to produce a shade of that color. Colorants are pigments
used to tint paint. Universal colorants can be used in oil-based
or water-based paints. Tinted paint should have a uniform
consistency and texture and produce a uniform color.


42 PAINTING
All About Paint.
The Importance of Sheen
Sheen is a critical characteristic that refers to the degree of
shine or gloss of any coating or surface. The sheen currently on
the surface can determine the amount of surface preparation
required. Sheen affects the performance of the finish coat: the
abrasion resistance, chemical resistance, and overall beauty of
the painted area.
The typical full sheen range, from lowest to highest,
includes flat or matte, eggshell or low luster, satin or pearl,
semigloss, and high or full gloss. Because there are no industry-
wide standard definitions of these terms, gloss levels may vary
from one manufacturer to another.
The type of sheen you choose will depend on what you are
painting. A flat finish is most often used for ceilings and on
interior walls. It is not as “washable” as paints with more
sheen. It works well for hiding imperfections on the surface
being painted and for places where touch-ups may be necessary.
The eggshell finish has a slight sheen and is a popular
choice for interior walls. Because it provides a good base for
glazing and other special treatments, it is the ideal paint for
decorative painting.


PAINTING 43
.All About Paint
Semigloss finish has a less porous surface and is perfect for
trim, molding, doors, and windows. It is also used widely in
kitchens and bathrooms—where easy cleanup is necessary—
because this finish allows for easy cleanup. However, glossy
finishes make touch-up marks and imperfections on the painted
surface more visible.
A coating’s sheen is determined by its makeup. Full-gloss
coatings with a smooth, highly reflective finish have a high
ratio of resin to pigment. Less resin results in lower sheen.
Flat finish coats contain much more pigment than resin.
Material Reducing
Always use the correct thinner, in the correct amount, mixed
correctly with the paint. You can ruin paint by adding the
wrong thinner or too much of it. Paint with too much thinner
will not cover the surface.
Where thinning is concerned, never try to mix oil with
water. Always refer to the product label if in doubt about the
kind of thinner to use. With water-based paints, use plain tap
water, and only in the amounts recommended on the label.
Besides environmental resistance, the other purpose
of a finish coat is to provide a pleasing appearance—
including the desired sheen. Since high-gloss coatings
contain more resin, and more resistance to the effects
of the elements, most exterior trim finish coats are
made to have a gloss or semigloss appearance. Interior
coatings use less resistant resins and, often, more
pigment. These coatings can have a variety of
sheens, from flat to glossy.
Before thinning, mix the paint well. Paint that is too
cold will thicken temporarily, so allow the paint to sit in
a warm room to make it easier to spread. Cold paint
may not need thinning, just warming.
Flat finish
Glossy finish





PAINTING 45
.Surface Preparation
Surface Preparation
Surface preparation is the most important—and often the most
difficult and tedious—part of a painting job. The purpose is to
create a clean, dry, sound surface to which paint can properly
adhere. If this step isn’t performed correctly, the paint will fail
and your work will have to be redone. However, if the surface
is prepared well, you will have the satisfaction of having
painted something attractive that will last for years.
Consider the following factors when selecting a method
of preparation:
• Type of surface and its condition
• Location and environment
• Coating to be used and manufacturer recommendations
• Any type of contamination on the surface
• Safety, health, and environmental regulations
Cleaning the Surface
To begin, wash the area well with detergent to remove dirt,
grime, oil, and grease. Use a household cleaner and an abrasive
pad to remove any stubborn stains. Then rinse the surface with
fresh water to remove residue. Never mix solvents or house-
hold cleaners. Doing so can produce hazardous gases.
Remove mildew with a 3-to-1 solution of water and
bleach or a commercial fungicide; let it dry thoroughly.
Contact a local paint store for advice.


46 PAINTING
Surface Preparation.
Wood
Before you paint, inspect the area to be painted and determine
the condition of the wood. It should be dry, clean, sanded
smooth, and dust-free. Remove all loose fibers, splinters, and
rough spots by sanding. Always sand in the direction of the
grain. New wood and bare wood should be primed to protect
against weathering. This means to apply a coat of primer,
which is a first coat that helps adhesion of additional coats.
For exterior wood in good condition, wash with soap and
water to remove dirt, then rinse and let air dry. Washing with
detergent effectively cleans very dirty exterior surfaces that are
otherwise in good shape. Detergent must be thoroughly rinsed
off and the surface allowed to thoroughly dry before proceeding.
Sand or scrape any areas of loose or cracked paint. Smooth
the area until it blends with the surrounding area. Always
remove all dust from the surface and surrounding area
with a dry brush and tack cloth or (with interior jobs) a
vacuum cleaner.
Scraping Sanding
Scraped and sanded surface


PAINTING 47
.Surface Preparation
Concrete
Concrete can be cleaned with a broom, wire brush, vacuum,
hand and power tools, and many other ways. Remove any oil or
grease with a detergent or chemical cleaner; rinse thoroughly.
After washing and rinsing, let the concrete dry completely
before painting.
Fill holes with concrete or patching compound. Allow
the patch to cure, or harden, properly. Use a wire brush to
remove mortar spatter and other minor imperfections from
new concrete surfaces.
Other methods that professionals use for treating concrete
surfaces are abrasive blasting and acid etching, using a diluted
acid to clean the surface.
Metal
If the metal is rusting, use a wire brush or sandpaper to remove
rust and particles. Wash metal surfaces (rusting or nonrusting)
with an industrial-strength detergent. New factory-primed metal
can be washed with an all-purpose detergent. Rinse thoroughly
and dry with an absorbent cloth.


48 PAINTING
Surface Preparation.
Masking
Masking means protecting the areas surrounding your painting
job using painter’s tape and, if necessary, paper. Low-tack
painter’s tape is helpful around trim and doorways and works
better than ordinary masking tape because it will not ruin the
existing surface. For larger areas where protecting the existing
surface is not a problem, it’s OK to use masking tape. Apply the
tape from the bottom up—work your way up from the floor—
and then tape vertical areas. When the paint has dried, slowly
peel away the tape at a 90-degree angle.
Patching and Repairing
Step 1—Before starting to paint you must fill any hairline
cracks on porous surfaces. Dig out loose plaster with a putty
knife or sharp scraper.
Step 2—Wipe the surface clean with a sponge.
Once the paint has dried, you can slowly peel away
painter’s tape at a 90-degree angle.
1 2


PAINTING 49
.Surface Preparation
Step 3—Fill the hole with surfacing or patching compound
and let dry.
Step 4—Lightly sand the surface smooth and wash or wipe
with a tack cloth to remove dust.
For cracks in concrete, use commercial filler made for
concrete. After allowing it to dry, seal with a concrete sealer.
Puttying
Fill nail holes, cracks, rough spots, and other imperfections in
interior wood surfaces with putty. Handle the putty to soften it;
if it is very hard, add a drop or two of linseed oil or mineral
spirits. Apply with a putty knife or your finger and smooth it
on so that it is even with the surrounding surface.
Caulking
Use caulk to seal joints, fill cracks, and bridge gaps. Remove old
caulk as well as dust and any loose material remaining.
If the crack or joint being filled is more than 3
⁄8 inch wide,
fill it first with backing material to get a good bond. The bead
of caulk should be wide enough
to fill the gap between the
two surfaces, or gaps
will form.
Store your putty
in a sealed
container. If you
leave it out, it
will harden and
be wasted.
3 4


50 PAINTING
Surface Preparation.
Primer Selection
Applying primer, the first coat of paint, also is the last stage of
surface preparation. The primer makes the next coat stick to the
surface, protects the substrate, and seals the surface. There are
different primers for wood, concrete and masonry, plaster and
drywall, steel, and other metals.
Primers for Wood. Wood primers are available in oil-based or
water-based products and can be used indoors or outdoors.
Check the product label.
Primers for Concrete and Masonry. Exterior masonry surfaces
are often highly alkaline, so be sure to use primers on surfaces
that are alkali-resistant.
Primers for Drywall and Plaster. Make sure primers for plas-
ter surfaces are alkali-resistant and that plaster dust is removed
first. The best primers for drywall or gypsum board are water-
based, such as vinyl and acrylic.
Primers for Steel. The type of primer you choose depends on
the surface preparation required as well as the topcoat to be
applied over the primer. Use an oil-based primer for poorly
cleaned steel; synthetic primers require the steel to be thoroughly
cleaned. Primers are available that penetrate well but cure to a
hard, tough surface.
Proper Use of Power Tools
Professionals use power tools when greater speed and effort are
needed to clean a surface. These tools include grinders, sanders,
power wire brushes, needle guns, and many others, including
blasting tools and power washers. Professional painters know the
importance of using these tools properly by following all safety
guidelines and the manufacturer’s instructions at all times.
Remember to follow these safety guidelines:
• Always wear goggles and gloves.
• Keep tools in good condition.
• Do not leave unused tools lying around.
• Never throw tools; use tools only for the purpose they were intended.
• Avoid using tools that make sparks near combustible liquids or vapors.
• Properly dispose of used rags throughout and at the end of each day.


PAINTING 51
.Surface Preparation
Proper Use of Hand Tools
Common hand tools include rags, sandpaper, abrasive pads,
scrapers, broad knives and putty knives, wire brushes, and
chipping hammers. Before using a scraper, brush, knife, or
hammer, wash away oil and debris with detergents or solvents.
Brush away or vacuum particles afterward.
1. Wire brushes clean debris from all types of surfaces.
2. The scraper removes paint from any type of surface.
3. A chipping hammer chips away layers of loose material from surfaces.
4. Use putty knives and broad knives to apply patching material and to
scrape loose paint.
5. Use a cleaning brush to brush away debris and particles.
1
2
3
4
5





PAINTING 53
.Application Equipment and Procedures
Application Equipment
and Procedures
A good paint job requires the right equipment
and following the right procedures.
Brushes
Use brushes for cutting in and painting
areas that the roller can’t reach. Try to use
only quality brushes. Some brushes may be
more expensive, but they may be worth it in
the end because they will last longer and using
them will give a better overall performance as
you apply paint.
A paintbrush consists of four parts: the handle, the
bristles, the epoxy setting that binds the bristles together, and
the ferrule, which attaches the bristles to the handle.
Select a brush that is
appropriate for the job and
coating type. Use a synthetic
brush when painting with latex
paints. Make sure the brush
holds the bristles tightly. Use
natural bristles when using
oil-based paints and varnish.
Choose brushes suitable
in width for the specific job.
For large areas, use a wall
brush. Select a narrow sash
brush for smaller, hard-to-get-
to areas. For varnishing, use
a thinner brush. HANDLE
FERRULE
BRISTLES


Application Equipment and Procedures.
Rollers
Using rollers gets a paint job done quickly. There are two types
of rollers: the more common dip roller, which is dipped into the
paint for application; and the fountain or pressure roller, which
has a hollow core where the paint is stored and pressure-fed
through small pores to the outer fabric.
The fibers on the roller covers are
known as the nap, usually described
by the fiber length, which ranges from
1⁄4 inch to 13⁄4 inch. Generally, the
rougher the surface you are painting, the
longer the nap you should use. The lon-
ger nap makes it possible to work paint
into irregular surfaces such as concrete
block and highly textured walls like
stucco. The smoother the surface you
are painting—and the smoother the fin-
ish you want—the shorter the nap you
should use.
Other equipment used with rollers
includes extension poles, which can
make it easier to reach higher places;
trays; mesh grids, which are immersed
in 5-gallon paint buckets to serve the
same purpose as the rough edges in a
roller tray; and special tools for cleaning
roller covers.
Paint pads are
rectangular foam
pads covered with
fabric and set in a
plastic holder.
These pads, with
their straight sides,
are useful for
painting areas like
the space between
the ceiling and
doorframe as well
as exterior siding.
ROLLER
FRAME
ROLLER
COVERS
ROLLER
FRAME
PAINT TRAY


PAINTING 55
.Application Equipment and Procedures
Spray Systems
For professional painters, the most common spray-painting
method is airless spraying. An airless sprayer uses a pump
to pressurize the paint and force it through a tiny opening
in the tip of the spray gun.
Air, or conventional, spraying uses compressed
air to atomize paint into fine droplets as it leaves the
spray gun. Conventional air spray offers the profes-
sional painter the greatest control for even application.
Drawbacks of spraying include overspray
(which results in wastage), the need for
considerable masking, and the additional
protective equipment that this method
requires. However, spray painting is the
most productive application technique of
all, especially over larger areas. It offers
greater speed than other application methods.
Spray paint also
is available in
aerosol cans.
Professional painters always use the correct
respirator when spraying or working near a
spray system in use, and they make sure the
area is well-ventilated.


56 PAINTING
Application Equipment and Procedures.
Care and Storage of Equipment
The most important part of taking care of any paint application
tool or equipment is cleaning it immediately after painting.
Failure to do so can cost you more time and more money spent
on special cleaners, which in some cases may ruin the tool.
If you clean your brushes after each use, they will last a
long time. Cleaning takes only a few minutes and saves hours
of work and, quite possibly, the cost of replacement. If paint is
allowed to harden in a brush, cleaning that brush becomes a
difficult and time-consuming task—one that could have been
easily avoided.
If the same brush and paint have been used over several
days, store the brush for the night (with most of the paint
wiped off) in tightly folded aluminum foil or wet paper.
Thoroughly clean brushes that have been used in oil paint
with a solvent-based cleaner such as mineral spirits. (Follow the
solvent cleaning by washing in warm sudsy water and rinsing.)
If painting with water-based paint, clean the equipment well in
soap and water, then rinse. Carefully smooth down the bristles
and wrap the brush in its original packaging or heavy paper
tied around the ferrule.


PAINTING 57
.Application Equipment and Procedures
Be sure to
calculate for
additional coats
and touch-ups.
Unless they
take up a major
portion of the
wall, there is
no need
to subtract
for windows
and doors.
Remove roller covers from the frame. Clean them thoroughly
with the appropriate solvent or soap and water, and rinse well.
Be sure to clean up around the painted area. After the paint has
dried on the drop cloth, shake off any debris remaining on the
cloth, then fold or roll it up neatly for storage. Sweep up the
debris that you have shaken off and properly dispose of it.
Coating Application Procedures
By this time, you should have chosen the type of paint to use
for your project. You should also have studied your project and
decided on an appropriate color or colors, and have properly
prepared the surface for painting. You are now ready to paint.
Getting Started
The painting process requires a few procedures to make the
job go smoothly.


58 PAINTING
HOW MUCH PAINT?
Average house paint generally covers about 400 square feet per
gallon, but this figure will vary. Read the label on the paint can
before purchasing. Calculate the area you want to paint and
compare that with the label to know how much paint to buy.
Material Preparation
Preparing paint for application includes mixing, thinning, tint-
ing, and straining, when necessary. But first, be sure the work
area is ready.
Area Preparation
For interior areas, move furniture away from or out of the work
area. Use drop cloths or newspaper to protect all remaining fur-
niture, floors, and any other surface that should not be painted.
Be careful about using newspaper as the ink may rub off on
fabrics and carpet. Remove pictures and hardware before paint-
ing. Patch holes left by hangers if you won’t be putting pictures
back in the same place. Mask light switch plates, outlet covers,
baseboards, and any trim work that needs to be protected.
Calculate This!
Here is how to determine the amount of paint needed for a rectangular or
square area (say, a living room wall). Measure the height and the width,
then multiply the two numbers.
Example: 8 feet height x 20 feet width = 160 square feet
To determine the area of a room you plan to paint, such as a living room,
multiply the height and the width for each wall, then add the total for
each wall.
Example: 8 feet height x 20 feet width = 160 square feet for wall 1
8 feet height x 20 feet width = 160 square feet for wall 2
8 feet height x 15 feet width = 120 square feet for wall 3
8 feet height x 15 feet width = 120 square feet for wall 4
160 + 160 + 120 + 120 = 560 square feet total
For the living room, you will need enough paint to cover 560 square feet.
Depending on the type of paint you plan to use, you probably will need a
little less than 2 gallons for the job.


PAINTING 59
.Application Equipment and Procedures
Mixing
The ingredients in paint will separate and settle. To get adequate,
even coverage, the paint must be mixed by any one (or a com-
bination) of these methods:
• Stir with a wooden paint stick. (These sticks are usually
available at your paint dealer at no cost.)
• Have the paint dealer shake it mechanically.
• Box the paint by stirring and then pouring it back and forth
from one container to another to ensure a uniform color.
Thinning
New paint usually comes in the proper consistency and does
not require thinning. If the paint has thickened, however, it may
be necessary to add thinner.
Before thinning, mix your paint well and make sure it is at
the proper temperature. Paint that is too cold may not need
thinning, just warming. Because cold paint will be thicker than
it should be, allow the paint to sit in a warm area so that it will
have the proper consistency for spreading.
Never use oil-based thinner with water-based paint, and
never add water to oil-based paint. Using the wrong
type of thinner, or using a thinner in the wrong amount,
will ruin the paint. Refer to the paint can label to deter-
mine the right thinner to use, and the right amount to
add. After thinning, always mix the paint well.
Boxing


60 PAINTING
Application Equipment and Procedures.
Straining
If the paint has become lumpy, strain
the paint through a wire screen,
cheesecloth, or other straining
device. Always make sure the paint
is completely smooth, as lumps will
harm the beauty and protective ability
of the finished project. Oil-based
paints tend to develop a “skin” on
the surface from exposure to air.
Do not mix this skin into the paint;
lift it off, then strain the paint.
Application Methods
Common methods of applying paint are brushing, rolling,
spraying, and using a pad. When deciding which method to
use, consider the surface you are painting, its location and size,
how fast the job needs to be done, and the type of paint.
Usually, a combination of the different methods is used.
When painting a wall, for instance, use a brush to paint the
areas next to the ceiling, trim work, and baseboards, then use a
roller to quickly cover the larger area.
Application Techniques
It is best to pour a supply of paint into an empty, clean paint
can (or another appropriate container) and work directly from
this second container. Replenish your supply as needed. Begin
painting the least accessible areas first. Grasp the brush firmly
by the handle, holding it with the fingers on the ferrule just
above the bristles. Keep the handle perpendicular to the sur-
face. Dip the brush in the paint, just halfway up the bristles,
and pat off the surplus on the inside (not the lip) of the can.
The basic brush technique for flat surfaces is to use short
strokes in different directions to thoroughly cover an area about
two square feet. Then even out the paint with a horizontal
back-and-forth motion before reloading the brush. Start the next
section about two feet below the first, working the paint into
the previously painted area while the edges are still wet.
To minimize brush marks, feather the new paint.
Lighten your touch as the layers overlap. Paint wood surfaces
in the direction of the grain, and blend brush marks well on
smooth surfaces.
Master the trick of
not having too
much paint on the
brush, and you
will always have
smooth, attractive
surfaces.
Straining


PAINTING 61
.Application Equipment and Procedures
High-gloss enamel requires a different brush technique.
Make three vertical brush strokes a brush-width apart. Without
reloading your brush, make horizontal stripes across the three
vertical ones, filling in the gaps and smoothing out the paint.
Then, with the almost-dry paintbrush, go lightly over the
section with vertical strokes. Reload the brush and repeat the
process in the area below, blending it with the painted part.
For indoor painting, remember to keep the area well-
ventilated with open windows or doors. Well-ventilated
rooms dry more readily and are a safer and more comfortable
work environment.
Anything that is loose in the brush will end up on the
wall. Before painting, make sure the brush is clean and
in good repair. Loose bristles, dust, and dirt can leave
specks on walls and give unsatisfactory results.
Allow plenty of time between coats for the paint to dry. See the label for
drying times.
If you notice the handle of the brush becoming wet
with paint, stop and clean the brush with a clean, dry
rag. Dip the brush halfway into the paint, but no more.
Remember not to get too much paint in the brush.


62 PAINTING
Application Equipment and Procedures.
ROLLING
Rolling is a good technique for evenly covering a larger flat
area or a rough surface such as brick, stucco, or concrete. First
use a brush—which makes application in tight places easier to
control—to paint any areas that are adjacent to places that
should not be painted. For instance, when painting a wall in a
house, use a brush to paint a strip along the edges of the wall
near the ceiling and baseboard. Then, use the roller to cover
the rest of the area more quickly, evenly, and effectively.
Step 1—Rub down the roller cover with your hand to remove
loose nap. Make sure used rollers are clean and soft.
Step 2—Assemble the roller by sliding the roller cover over the
cylinder on the roller frame.
Step 3—Fill the well of a paint tray about halfway with paint.
Dip the roller into the paint and roll it across the ridged area of
the tray to coat the roller. Plan to work in three-foot squares,
which is about the coverage of one roller-load of paint.
Step 4—As you apply the paint, stroke the roller upward first
to avoid splattering paint, then toward the strip painted with
the brush. Roll back over the adjacent area to make the layer
more even. Keep the pressure constant.
1 2
3 4


PAINTING 63
.Application Equipment and Procedures
WOOD FINISHING
Wood finishing is the application of
transparent or semitransparent coatings to
protect the surface, accentuate the grain,
and enhance the natural wood beauty.
Interior Stains and Varnishes. Interior
stains are water-based and oil-based, and
are specially designed for interior use.
Unlike exterior varnishes, interior varnishes
are not resistant to moisture or ultraviolet
light. They are generally formulated to
accentuate color, but they cannot make
a surface opaque. However, interior
varnishes do have certain characteristics
to fit their functions. Floor varnish, for
instance, has a high resistance to abrasion
from heavy foot traffic.
Exterior Stains and Varnishes. Exterior stains and finishing
coats contain ingredients to protect the beauty of wood against
the elements such as sun and rain. Stains come in a variety of
colors and opacity, from nearly clear to opaque.
Basic wood-finishing projects generally need the following
treatments, in order:
1. Using a putty knife, fill gouges and scratches in the wood
surface with putty or wood dough.
2. Sand the wood smooth, if possible. Sand with the grain of
the wood, using progressively finer grades of sandpaper.
Make sure the surface is free of marks and dust, as any
blemish left will show through on the finished project.
Applying Varnish
Applying varnish is similar to painting. Varnish is clear, making it more
difficult to apply, so make sure lighting is adequate. The brush must be
very clean. To avoid sags and runs, the brush should hold as much varnish
as possible without dripping. Apply the varnish to a small area quickly,
spreading it out evenly. Brush it first across the grain, then lightly with the
grain to get a uniform thickness.


64 PAINTING
Application Equipment and Procedures.
3. Stain the wood surface to unify color and accentuate the
wood grain. Colors range from clear, which highlights the
grain, to dark, which hides the surface. Woods differ in their
coloring capacity, depending on how porous they are. The
same walnut stain that would produce a rich brown color on
gumwood, for instance, could be nearly black on woods such
as white pine, basswood, or poplar. Hardwoods, such as oak,
maple, birch, walnut, and mahogany, often are left in their
naturally beautiful state. Softwoods, such as pine, fir, and
cypress, are suitable for staining to change their color or for
a natural finish.
4. Seal the wood (particularly softwoods) with a sealer
(or thinned varnish or shellac) to prime the stained wood.
Follow the manufacturer’s recommendation for the product.
5. Sand the surface again. Use a tack cloth to remove dust.
6. Varnish the wood (or use shellac or polyurethane). Apply
finishing coats in the same way to each piece of wood (backs
and fronts, sides, tops, bottoms) so all parts react evenly to
moisture changes and won’t warp. Some products combine
procedures such as staining and sealing, or staining and
finishing, for one-step applications.
CONCRETE FINISHING
If the concrete surface is smooth (like a garage floor or porch),
fill in any cracks before proceeding. With rough concrete block
surfaces, block “fillers” often are used to help fill the porous
surface. This substance can be rolled onto the surface using a
long-napped roller to work the material into the pores of the
block. Allow the block filler to dry completely before applying
one or more finish coats.
To paint a concrete floor, scrub it thoroughly with
an abrasive detergent. Rinse it well and let it dry
completely. Apply a coat of primer, followed by one
or more coats of paint.


PAINTING 65
.Application Equipment and Procedures
METAL FINISHING
You can see metal finishes everywhere you look, from the
ornamental decoration inside and outside homes to automobiles,
commercial buildings, bridges, structures that support cities, and
many other products.
Coatings for metal finishes are used to help prevent
corrosion, provide resistance to abrasion and wear, add color,
improve appearance, and make cleanup and maintenance easier.
Spray painting is the most popular method for painting metal.
Remove any old flaking paint and rust with a wire brush
or sandpaper. Sand any glossy surfaces to help ensure good
adhesion for subsequent coats of paint. Check that all bolts or
railings are secure. Dust off the metal surface and wash down
with a metal preparation solution, solvent, or detergent.
Apply one coat of anti-rust primer over the entire area and
allow to dry according to instructions on the label. Then apply
one or two coats of finish paint. Follow the paint can label for
drying instructions.





PAINTING 67
.Opportunities in the Painting Craft
Opportunities in the
Painting Craft
Many options are available to someone interested in training in
the painting craft.
If you have a knack for and enjoy the skills and activities
involved in painting, you would likely enjoy the profession
itself. Painting is demanding work and requires good eyesight
and health, as well as physical strength and dexterity. The
professional must demonstrate some degree of the artistic
appreciation and ability necessary to define color schemes
and mix colors. Lastly, you must be intelligent, friendly, and
have a knack for pleasing your customer.
In some areas of the country, painting does have a seasonal
nature, which means you must save money when you are
working for the times when you may not be. Physical injury
is always a risk when you spend a good deal of time climbing
ladders and scaffolding or handling chemicals. However, these
risks are minimized when you prepare and plan ahead.
The advantages
of painting as a
career include
its relative ease to
learn, good pay,
and personal
satisfaction in the
improvements you
make on your
customers’
environment. You
often work
outdoors and
often are your
own boss. You
will rarely work in
the same location
or do the same
job for long.


68 PAINTING
Opportunities in the Painting Craft.
Training in the Craft
The best way to learn the painting craft is to get on-the-job
training. A three-year apprenticeship is a satisfactory way to
get not only the training but also the experience necessary
to secure your own position right away.
Sadly, fewer than 10 percent of all painting and decorating
contractors participate in a professional trade association.
As businesses become more complex with new regulations,
the need for continuing education becomes more important.
Many chapters of professional trade organizations through-
out the country, like the Painting and Decorating Contractors of
America, have apprenticeship-training programs in place. The
International Union of Painters and Allied Trades offers three-
year apprenticeship programs and training in the removal of
lead-based paint.
Another source of information is the National Center for
Construction Education and Research, which offers information
on how to find training in the painting craft that may be avail-
able in your area.
Check community
colleges in your
area to find trade
courses in the
construction
and painting
industries.
The Painting and Decorating
Contractors of America is the
nation’s largest trade association
serving the educational needs
of the painting and decorating
craftsperson and contractor.
Membership is voluntary, and
benefits range from business
training, to safety, to participation
in the development of industry
standards and publications, and
most importantly the exposure
to a network of contractors who
freely interact with each other to
improve the painting and wallcov-
ering industry. See the resources
section for more information.








PAINTING 71
.Glossary
Glossary
abrasion. The wearing down or removal of a surface with an
abrasive material.
accent. In decorating, a bright object or color that
draws attention.
acrylic paint. A synthetic resin- and water-based paint popular
for its ability to retain color, its durability, and its ease of appli-
cation and cleanup.
additive. A substance added to a coating to adjust, enhance, or
improve it.
adhesion. The degree of attraction between a coating and a
substrate or between two coatings.
alkyd. A type of synthetic resin used in coatings. An alkyd
paint is oil-based. See also resin.
analogous colors. Colors that are beside each other on the
color wheel.
apprenticeship. On-the-job training under the guidance of a
skilled craftsperson.
binder. The paint ingredient that binds pigment particles
together and makes them adhere to a surface. Resins and oils
are examples of binders.
boxing. Mixing paint by pouring it from one container to
another several times. See also mixing.
brush. See paintbrush.
colorant. Any substance that adds color to another material or
mixture. See also shade and tint.
color pigment. Organic or inorganic substance that provides
color to a paint.
color spectrum. The distribution of colors produced when sun-
light is dispersed by a prism.
color wheel. A round diagram of the color spectrum, showing
the relationships between colors.
complementary colors. Two colors that are opposite each
other on the color wheel.


72 PAINTING
Glossary.
drop cloth. A large piece of canvas or plastic used to protect
the surrounding area and furniture from damage.
drying oil. An oil that serves as a binder in oil-based paint and
converts to a solid film when exposed to oxygen.
eggshell. A level of gloss between semigloss and flat.
enamel. Topcoat that is characterized by its ability to form a
durable high-gloss surface.
evaporation. The process in which the paint binder solvent
(water) converts to a vapor, leaving a dried combination of pig-
ment and resin on the surface.
faux finishes. Decorative application of solid color coats and
glazes to simulate marble, granite, wood grain, and so on.
feather. To taper off the edge of a layer of paint.
ferrule. The metal band that binds the bristles to the
paintbrush handle.
filler. A substance used to fill cracks, pores, etc., in a surface
before painting or varnishing. See also wood filler.
finish coat. The last layer of coating in a painting operation.
See also topcoat.
flammable. Capable of igniting easily and burning quickly.
flat. A coating that lacks luster or gloss in the dried form.
full gloss. An almost mirrorlike surface when viewed from
all angles.
fungicide. An additive that helps resist the growth of
fungus (mildew).
gloss. The relative amount and nature of a surface’s reflection.
inorganic. A compound that does not share the characteristics
of living things (plants and animals) and generally is derived
from minerals.
intermediate color. The result of mixing a primary and
secondary color.
lacquer. A liquid consisting of organic or synthetic resins
dissolved in a quick-drying solvent. When the solvent
evaporates, the resins adhere to the coated surface,
producing a hard, smooth high-gloss finish.
latex paint. A water-based paint having a synthetic rubber
or plastic binder.
lead-based paint. Any coating that contains lead in excess
of limits established by the U.S. government. Because of its
dangers, lead in household paint has been banned by the
Consumer Product Safety Commission since 1978. Lead paint
should be removed only by a professional.


PAINTING 73
.Glossary
masking. The procedure of covering surfaces adjacent to the
painting area with a low-tack adhesive (painter’s) tape; paper
also is sometimes used.
mildew. A fungus that grows on paint and other materials
in damp places, causing discoloration and deterioration.
See also fungicide.
mineral spirits. A solvent used for thinning oil-based paint.
See also solvent.
mixing. Combining all ingredients in a paint to create a uni-
form liquid with even color and texture. See also boxing.
nap. The fibers on a paint roller cover, generally described in
terms of length.
natural resin. A resin originating in certain plants or insects.
See also resin.
oil-based coating. A paint that contains drying oil, oil varnish,
or oil-modified resin as the basic vehicle ingredient.
oil stain. A solution of dye in a blend of oil or varnish and
aromatic solvent.
opaque. Blocking rays of light; not transparent.
organic. Generally, a compound containing carbon and having
originated from a plant or animal.
oxidation. The process in which the paint binder solvent (oil)
chemically combines with oxygen and hardens the paint.
paintbrush. A tool made of natural or synthetic bristles set into
a handle.
painter’s tape. A special tape much like masking tape used in
the masking process to help protect areas adjacent to the area
being painted. This low-tack tape is easy to remove and will
not damage existing painted areas.
paint failure. The premature deterioration of a coating resulting
from problems of workmanship, substrate conditions, material,
coating, exposure, or a combination of these factors.
painting. The craft of improving the surface of a structure,
furniture, etc., by applying coatings to that surface. The craft
includes many processes, such as selecting appropriate
materials and preparing surfaces to accept the coatings.
paint roller. A paint application tool with a fabric-
covered tube that fits over a handled frame, designed
to roll paint onto a surface.
paint tray. A tray with a well for holding paint and a
rough-textured ramp for working paint into a roller cover.
pigment. See color pigment.


74 PAINTING
Glossary.
power washing. The use of pressurized water with or
without detergents or additives to clean a surface of
contaminants and debris.
primary colors. The three pigments of red, yellow, and blue,
which cannot be produced by any mixture of other pigments.
primer. The first coat in a painting operation, designed to
promote adhesion of subsequent coats.
resin. A natural or synthetic, transparent substance that
attaches or “binds” to the pigment in a coating.
respirator. A mask covering the nose and mouth to either
supply breathable air or filter impurities from the air.
safety data sheet. A sheet of product information required by
the U.S. government identifying hazardous chemicals, health
and physical hazards, exposure limits, and precautions for
employees in the workplace.
sanding. The act of leveling and smoothing a surface before
paint or stain is applied. The surface is rubbed with an abrasive
paper or sanding machines.
satin finish. A dried paint film with a luster resembling satin.
Ranks between eggshell and semigloss.
sealer. A coat of thinned varnish or shellac to prime wood
before staining, or after staining to penetrate the wood and
limit the number of finish coats required.
secondary color. The color produced by mixing equal amounts
of two primary colors. The secondary colors are orange, green,
and purple. See also primary colors.
semigloss. A gloss range between full gloss and eggshell.
shade. A color to which black has been added. The opposite
of tint.
sheen. The degree of luster of a dried, fully cured paint film.
shellac. A lacquer made from a natural resin deposited on
twigs by the lac insect of Asia.
solvent. A liquid that dissolves paint further for good
spreading. Also known as thinner.
split complementary scheme. The combination of a base color
with two colors flanking its complement on the color wheel.
stain. A transparent or semitransparent coating that colors a
substrate, usually wood, without hiding the grain or other texture.
stenciling. Applying a design to a surface by brushing ink or
paint through a cutout pattern.


PAINTING 75
.Glossary
straining. The removal of large particles from mixed paint
by pouring it through a wire screen, cheesecloth, or other
straining device.
substrate. Any surface to which paint, coating, or wallcovering
is applied.
surface. The substrate to which paints are applied.
surface preparation. Treatment of a surface, such as washing,
filling, puttying, cleaning, or power cleaning, to prepare it
for coating.
surfacing compound. A quick-drying surface compound used
to patch plasterwork, fill cracks and holes, and provide a
smooth surface for painting.
tack cloth. A clean, lint-free cloth treated with diluted varnish
to make it sticky, for removing dust from a surface.
tertiary color. The result of mixing two secondary colors.
thinner. See solvent.
tint. A color to which white has been added. The opposite
of shade.
tinting. Adjusting the color of paint to a wide range of tints,
shades, or tones.
tone. The result of adding both black and white to a color.
See also shade and tint.
topcoat. The finish coat of a coating system, designed to add
beauty or protection. See also finish coat.
toxin. A poisonous substance.
triad scheme. The combination of any three colors equidistant
on the color wheel.
undercoat. Any coat applied after the primer and prior to the
finish coat.
varnish. A liquid containing resins and/or oils that dries to a
translucent or transparent solid film after application.
vehicle. Composed of binder and solvent, the liquid portion of
paint in which the pigment is dispersed.
vinyl resin. A synthetic resin made from vinyl compounds.
See also resin.
wood filler. A substance made of crushed quartz and pigments
mixed with a binder and driers. It is used to fill the pores in
wood to produce a very smooth finish or to enhance the grain
pattern of the wood.





PAINTING 77
.Painting Resources
Scouting Literature
Home Repairs and Safety merit
badge pamphlets
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.
Books
Becker, Holly, and Joanna Copestick.
Decorate: 1,000 Professional Design
Ideas for Every Room in Your Home.
Chronicle Books, 2011.
Better Homes and Gardens. Decorative
Paint Techniques and Ideas, 2nd ed.
Better Homes and Gardens, 2009.
Donegan, Francis. Paint Your Home:
Skills, Techniques, and Tricks of the
Trade for Professional Looking
Interior Painting. Reader’s Digest
Association Inc., 1997.
Eiseman, Leatrice. Colors for Your Every
Mood: Discover Your True Decorating
Colors. Capital Books, 2000.
Essential Paint Techniques: Improving
Your Home With Paint Inside and
Out. This Old House Books, 2000.
McElroy, William. Painter’s Handbook.
Craftsman Book Company, 1988.
Painting and Decorating Craftsman’s
Manual and Textbook. Painting
and Decorating Contractors of
America, 1995.
Sloan, Annie. Quick and Easy Paint
Transformations: 50 Step-by-Step
Ways to Makeover Your Home for
Next to Nothing. CICO Books, 2015.
Starmer, Anna. The Color Scheme Bible:
Inspirational Palettes for Designing
Home Interiors. Firefly Books, 2012.
Travis, Debbie, and Barbara Dingle.
Debbie Travis’ Decorating Solutions:
More Than 65 Paint and Plaster
Finishes for Every Room in Your
Home. Clarkson Potter, 1999.
Wilbur, C. Keith. Homebuilding and
Woodworking in Colonial America.
Chelsea House Publishers, 1997.
Painting Resources


78 PAINTING
Painting Resources.
Organizations and Websites
American Coatings Association
paint.org
The ACA is a nonprofit organization
“working to advance the needs of the
paint and coatings industry and the
professionals who work in it.” Its website
provides information about proper
paint disposal, as well as technical and
educational materials.
BEHR
behr.com
This paint company’s internet site pro-
vides helpful links that offer such things
as how-to questions and answers and a
calculator that estimates the amount of
paint needed for a particular project.
Better Homes and Gardens
bhg.com
This site provides tips and techniques
for creating decorative wall patterns
and murals.
Environmental Protection Agency
epa.gov/lead
This site explains the EPA’s Renovation,
Repair, and Painting rule that applies to
companies working on certain projects
that disturb lead-based paint.
Handyman Wire
handymanwire.com
This site offers “expert advice and help
for do-it-yourselfers” and allows users to
post questions to experts.
International Union of Painters
and Allied Trades
iupat.org
The IUPAT is a labor union that helps
ensure safe working conditions and good
wages and benefits for its more than
160,000 members. The website provides
an extensive history of the union, union
news and events, information on training
and education in the trades, updates on
current political and community affairs,
and links to district and regional offices
across the country.
National Center for Construction
Education and Research
nccer.org
The NCCER develops and publishes stan-
dardized construction and maintenance
curricula, safety programs, management
education, industry image materials, and
craft skill assessments.
The Old House Web
oldhouseweb.com
This site gives “old-house enthusiasts”
ideas and advice on many home
improvement tasks, products,
and suppliers.
Painting and Decorating Contractors
of America
pdca.org
The official website of the Painting and
Decorating Contractors of America is a
resource for the professional painting
contractor and the home do-it-yourselfer
as well.
This Old House
thisoldhouse.com


PAINTING 79
.Painting Resources
Acknowledgments
Thanks to Barbara Richardson and
Jerry Glica of Glidden Professional
(formerly known as ICI Dulux Paints),
Cleveland, Ohio, for their assistance
with the traditional color wheel found
in this pamphlet.
Thanks to The Sherwin-Williams
Company for use of its safety data
sheet on page 25.
Scouting America is grateful to the
men and women serving on the
National Merit Badge Subcommittee
for the improvements made in updating
this pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration Credits
Getty Images—pages 20 and 28
Charles F. Mann IV, courtesy—pages 66
(stained glass windows, painter),
67, and 68
Mount Vernon Ladies’ Association,
courtesy—page 32 (Mount Vernon)
Jerry Padier, courtesy—page 10
The Sherwin-Williams Company,
courtesy—page 25
Thomas Jefferson Foundation Inc./
Robert C. Lautman, courtesy—
page 32 (Monticello)
Wikipedia.org, courtesy—pages 11 and
21
All other photos and illustrations are the
property of or are protected by
Scouting America.
Dan Bryant—pages 14, 16, and 51
Daniel Giles—pages 12, 52, and 70
John McDearmon—all illustrations on
pages 18 and 31
Randy Piland—pages 9, 26, 40
(painting with roller, painting with
brush), 44, 46 (scraping, sanding,
scraped and sanded surface), 48
(peeling tape, step 1, step 2), 49 (step
3, step 4, caulking), 57, 59,
60, 61 (painting exterior, close-up),
62 (step 1, step 2, step 3, step 4),
and 73 (painter’s tape)
Scouting America is grateful to Charles “Chuck”
Mann IV, Chas. F. Mann Painting Company, Toledo,
Ohio, for his assistance with revising the Painting
merit badge pamphlet. This dedicated Scouter is a
former president of the Painting and Decorating
Contractors of America. Scouting America also is
thankful to PDCA members Paul Corey, Mike
Sanford, Mike Ausherman, and Ken Anderson.


UP YOUR
MERIT
BADGE
GAME
Sign up today at go.scoutlife.org/subscribe
Use promo code SLMBP15 to get a special Scout rate.
Get ahead in Scouting with
Scout Life magazine. It’s loaded with the
latest news on merit badges and other advancement tools. Plus, it’s got
outdoor adventure, games and comics, leadership tips, life skills, stories
about other Scouts and more. It’s just what you need to succeed.