GOLF


GOLF
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Golf or check Scoutbook for the
latest requirements.
35905
ISBN 978-0-8395-3397-9
©2024 Boy Scouts of America
FPO


GOLF 3


4 GOLF


GOLF 5
Contents
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Golf Lingo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
Tools of the Game . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
How to Play the Game. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
Safety, First Aid, and Fitness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
Conduct and Procedures on the Golf Course. . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
Major Influences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
Introduction to Disc Golf . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
Mastering Disc Golf Techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87
Disc Golf Lingo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 90
Golf Resources. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93





GOLF 7
.Introduction
Introduction
Golf is an outdoor game played on a course that includes
greens, fairways, roughs, and usually bunkers and water haz-
ards. A standard round of golf includes playing 18 holes over
a course that measures about 6,000 to 8,000 yards. Each hole
• Includes a tee area, fairway, rough, and green, and usually
varies in length from 100 to 600 yards
• Begins from a teeing ground and ends at a green that has
a cup that is 4.5 inches in diameter, dug into the green
and marked with a flagstick
• Has a “par” (predetermined number of strokes to
complete play)
The object of golf is to get the golf ball, using specially
designed golf clubs, into the cup (also known as the hole)
in as few strokes as possible, following the “Rules of Golf.”
Players try to drive the ball from the teeing ground (the starting
point) to the fairway to the green, which has closely cut grass.
Usually on each side of the fairway is the rough, which can
include long grass, trees, and bushes. Fairway bunkers and
water hazards can provide other obstacles. After reaching the
green, a player uses a putter to roll the ball over the surface of
the green and into the hole.
Each hole on a course is rated as a par 3, par 4, or par 5,
depending on its length. For example, a hole is determined to be
a par 3 if a golfer is able to reach the green in one shot from the
tee. Two putts is considered the standard for each hole, so by
reaching the green on a par 3 in one shot and two-putting, a gol-
fer is said to have “parred” the hole. It should take two shots to
reach a par 4 and three to reach a par 5. Par for an 18-hole course
is determined by adding the total par scores for all 18 holes.
The two most common forms of play in golf are stroke play
(also called medal play) and match play. In stroke play, a player
counts each swing attempted at the ball and adds them for the
total score.


8 GOLF
Introduction.
In competition, the player with the fewest strokes over a set
number of holes is the winner. Ties usually are decided by
playoffs, or extra holes. When two or more players remain tied
after completing a playoff of a predetermined number of holes,
those golfers enter a sudden-death playoff in which the first
to win a hole is declared the winner. There also can be stroke
play among teams, with the lowest team score winning.
Match play can be individual against individual or
team against team. The individual or team taking the fewest
strokes on a hole wins that hole. The individual or team that
wins the most holes wins the match. If a hole is tied in number
of strokes, that hole is said to be “halved.” A match that ends
all square (in a tie) usually is decided by a playoff, with the
winner being the first to win a hole.
Golf is unique because the players police themselves. Other
sports depend upon referees or umpires to apply penalties when
there are infractions of the rules. Golf also has officials, but
seldom are there enough to watch every player in a tournament.
So, it is up to individual players and their opponents to call a
penalty if a rule is violated. Every player is expected to act
honorably, and the welfare and integrity of the game rely on
every player’s honesty.
Early History
Artifacts, drawings, and writings indicate that humans have been
hitting an object with a stick for hundreds, if not thousands, of
years. Out of these primitive beginnings, the game has evolved
into the vastly popular worldwide sport it is today.
Most historians believe that games using a stick to hit an
object, often a stone or feather-filled bag, were played at least
as far back as Roman times and probably earlier. The Romans
called their game “paganica.”
The expression
“par for the
course” is
borrowed from
golf terminology.
It means that
the results are
standard or
expected, yet the
speaker’s feelings
are negative—as
in this example:
My teacher said
we have to make
up the snow day
on Saturday.
Well, that’s par
for the course.
In match play, a match has gone dormie when a player
or team leads the opponent by the same number of
holes still to play. (For example, a player leads by four
holes with four holes remaining.) If the lead player
wins one more hole, then the competition is over. If,
however, the opponent wins all the remaining holes,
then the score would be “all square” and the winner
is determined by a hole-by-hole playoff.


GOLF 9
.Introduction
In the 17th century, the Dutch played a game called
“colve” or “kolven.” Some historians have said that the word
“golf” originated from “kolven,” but others believe the word
and game of golf originated from “gowf,”’ or “golfe,” a game
played by the Scots over pastures and fields.
Golf’s origin might always be debated, but most experts
agree that the game that most resembles what is played today
originated in Scotland in the 14th or 15th century. The game
caught on and became so popular with the common people in
Scotland that the Scottish Parliament passed laws three times
in the 15th century prohibiting people from playing golf. (The
government wanted to develop more proficient archers, who
could be used for military purposes.) However, most Scots
ignored the laws and continued to golf. Scotland’s King James
IV began playing the game in the 16th century, and golf soon
became a game favored by royalty and the rich.
One of the first premier golf courses was Leith, near
Glasgow. The first club to form an annual competition was the
Gentlemen Golfers of Leith, which began in 1744 and was later
renamed the Honourable Company of Edinburgh Golfers. The
St. Andrews Society of Golfers was established in 1754 and also
began annual competitions, using Leith’s rules. The first golf
club formed outside Scotland was the Royal Blackheath, near
London, in 1766, though there are indications that the game
had been played there for more than 100 years.
Golf also became competitive. The first major championship
was the British Open in 1860 in Prestwick, Scotland. There were
only eight competitors, and Willie Park won the first title. Stroke
play had been introduced in 1759, and six years later, the first
18-hole course, which became the standard, was constructed
at St. Andrews, Scotland.
Golf eventually was introduced to India, France, Canada,
Hong Kong, and the United States. Evidence suggests that golf
was being played in New York in 1779. The growth of the rail
system in the United States resulted in more golf courses
being built.
One of the first famous women to play was Mary, Queen of Scots. She
began playing in France, and the young men who attended her were
cadets, or students. The term later became “caddy,” or “caddie” in
Scotland and England, and that term is still used today for those who
carry the golf bags for golfers.
Numerous golfers
have had to call
a penalty on
themselves,
sometimes in major
tournaments. The
golfer often does
not realize when
a rule has been
violated. It is
important to know
the rules.
By 1900, there
were more
than 1,000 golf
courses in the
United States.


10 GOLF
Introduction.
The United States Golf Association was established in
1894 and, besides publishing rules of the game, it established
a handicapping system, began conducting major amateur and
open tournaments, and began funding turf and grass research,
among other things.
In 1895, the USGA began the U.S. Open and the U.S. Ladies
Amateur tournaments, and in 1911, John McDermott became
the first American-born player to win the U.S. Open. Two years
later, interest in golf blossomed even more when 20-year-old
Francis Ouimet, an American amateur, won the U.S. Open by
beating Englishmen Harry Vardon and Ted Ray, two of the
world’s best players, in a playoff. It was an astonishing upset
because Ouimet, a former caddie, was a virtual unknown.
Ouimet’s victory was considered a turning point for
American golf because, until then, golf had been dominated by
players from England and Scotland. There were few players in
the United States, and the game was played at golf clubs, mostly
by the wealthy. Within 10 years of Ouimet’s victory, the number
of golfers in the United States was said to have tripled and more
courses—including public courses—were built.
Modern Golf
In the United States, the Professional Golf Association of America
was established in 1916 when a group of New York–area profes-
sionals and amateurs met at a meeting hosted by businessman
Rodman Wanamaker in an effort to organize their sport. By 1944,
the PGA had formed a nationwide tour of 22 events. In 1968, a
players’ organization broke away from the PGA, but eventually
it compromised and formed the Tournament Players Division of
PGA. That organization is now known as the PGA Tour.
A view of the Old Course at St. Andrews in Scotland
A links course is
normally built
along a coastal
area. Because of
the sandy soil and
constant wind, the
course features
dunes, very deep
sand bunkers
called pot bunkers,
and very few—
if any—trees.


GOLF 11
.Introduction
In 1927, the Ryder Cup matches began with American
golfers competing against the British and Irish. Early on, the
Americans dominated the biennial match play event. Only since
1979, when golfers outside the British Isles were allowed to be
on the European team, has the Ryder Cup become more com-
petitive. But it was not until 1985 that the Europeans ended a
28-year U.S. victory streak. Since then, the Ryder Cup has grown
into an intense rivalry.
One of the first U.S. golfers to gain nationwide and world-
wide notoriety was Robert Tyre “Bobby” Jones Jr., who won 13
national championships and the original “grand slam”—the U.S.
and British Amateurs, and the U.S. and British Opens—in 1930.
Jones teamed with Clifford Roberts and began building
Augusta National Golf Club in 1930 in Augusta, Georgia. They
began the Augusta National Invitation Tournament for a select
list of players in 1934. The tournament’s name soon was changed
to the Masters, and it has since become one of the four major
tournaments in the world, along with the U.S. and British Opens
and the PGA Championship.
Great women golfers of the time were Joyce Wethered, who
won five consecutive English Ladies Championship titles, and
Glenna Collett Vare, who won six U.S. Women Amateur titles.
The first women’s U.S. Open was in 1946, and the Ladies
Professional Golf Association was formed in 1951.
World War II interrupted most international play in the
early 1940s, but interest in the game revived after the inspira-
tional comeback of Ben Hogan (who nearly died in 1949 when
his car collided with a bus) and the beginning of television
coverage in the 1950s. Other popular male golfers of that time
included Gene Sarazen, Walter Hagen, Tommy Armour, and
Byron Nelson.
Another major step came in 1961 when the PGA eliminated
its “whites only” rule, and Charlie Sifford became the first
African American to play the tour. In 1975, Lee Elder became the
first African American to compete in the Masters.
An open
tournament is
an event in which
both professional
and amateur
golfers are eligible
to compete.
While African Americans have excelled in almost every professional sport,
their success in golf has been slower. One factor is because the PGA did
not allow African American golfers to compete on the tour until 1961.
Economics and social barriers also contributed because for many years
the sport was played mainly at country clubs with whites-only member-
ship. Over the years, one of the game’s most positive advancements has
been the elimination of such barriers.


12 GOLF
Introduction.
Most golf historians credit the charismatic Arnold Palmer,
with his go-for-broke play and memorable comebacks, and golf-
ing President Dwight Eisenhower with further spurring the golf
craze. In the 1960s, Palmer, powerful Jack Nicklaus, and South
African Gary Player became known as the Big Three because of
their constant success, especially in major tournaments.
Nicklaus won a record 26 major titles, including two U.S.
Amateur Championships and six Senior PGA Championships.
Many experts believed Nicklaus’ record would never be chal-
lenged because of the increased competition worldwide. However,
the emergence of Tiger Woods in the 1990s changed those
attitudes. By his early 20s, Woods already had won 10 major
titles—four of them consecutive.
Meanwhile, golf has continued to attract more juniors,
women, and minorities; professionals are playing for millions of
dollars; and equipment continues to evolve to help make striking
a ball easier for the average player. Golf is still a staple of sports
media coverage. The National Golf Foundation reported in 2017
that there are almost 20 million committed golfers.
Governing Bodies
The organizations that establish the golf rules for most of the
world are the Royal and Ancient Golf Club of St. Andrews and
the United States Golf Association. Members of these organiza-
tions meet and communicate continually to review, improve,
clarify, and amend the rules to assure uniformity, and both
bodies must agree before changes are enacted.
The U.S. Amateur and British Amateur tournaments are no longer
part of the grand slam. To win today’s grand slam, a professional golfer
must win each of the four major tournaments—the Masters, PGA
Championship, U.S. Open, and British Open—in one calendar year.
No one has ever won the modern grand slam, but Gene Sarazen,
Ben Hogan, Gary Player, Jack Nicklaus, and Tiger Woods have won
career grand slams, which means they have won each of the major
tournaments at least once.


GOLF 13
.Introduction
The professional golf organizations in the United States are
the PGA of America, the Ladies Professional Golf Association,
the PGA Tour (which includes senior and secondary tours), and
the LPGA Tour. Members of the PGA include club, public, and
teaching professionals. The professional tours include men and
women who mainly compete for a living. Similar golf organiza-
tions have been formed in all parts of the world.
Changes in Equipment
Golf equipment has changed drastically over the
years, from clubs made from a single piece of wood
to the high-tech wonders of today. The first golf balls
also were quite primitive, being made of wood.
The first big change in golf balls was when the
“feathery” was introduced in the 17th century. These
usually were handmade stitched horsehide stuffed
with compressed feathers. The maximum distance
these balls could be driven was about 175 yards.
During the 19th century, featheries were replaced by
the gutta-percha ball, which was made from the latex of tropi-
cal trees, and the driving distance increased to almost 200 yards.
In 1898, the B. F. Goodrich Company and Coburn Haskell
of Akron, Ohio, introduced a ball with a solid rubber core
wrapped in rubber strips. This evolved to the production of balls
with liquid cores and various covers with dimples, and has led
to the modern-day golf ball. Golf balls now must have a diam-
eter of no less than 1.68 inches and weigh not more than 1.62
ounces to be legal, according to the rules of the sport’s govern-
ing bodies.
As equipment evolved, clubheads in Scotland and England
were made of different woods, usually from beech or fruit trees.
The shafts also were wooden, usually made from ash or hazel,
and makers of the clubs were considered skilled craftsmen.
In the 1800s, persimmon was the main wood used for
clubheads, and hickory for the shafts. The grips usually were
leather and quite slick. Hand-forged irons were introduced in
the 19th century. Most clubs were known by names, such as
spoon, mashie, and niblick, not numbers. In the 1930s, steel
shafts began replacing the wooden ones, causing players to
adjust their swings to take advantage of the more consistent
and stronger shafts.
The “feathery,” circa early 1700
The modern-day
golf ball


14 GOLF
Introduction.
Modern-day clubs include more high-tech
materials such as titanium, graphite, and boron.
Metal has replaced wood for clubheads, and these
metal-woods and irons usually have larger heads to
provide a more forgiving hitting area.
Players should be aware
that clubs and golf balls must
conform to USGA specifications
when used in tournaments played
under USGA rules. The USGA’s
policy is to prevent technology
from overtaking skill as the major
factor in success in golf. The
USGA has an equipment testing
and research center where special
machines are used to make sure
that clubs and golf balls conform
to the allowed specifications.
Golfing apparel also has
changed considerably over the
years. During the early days of
the sport, many golfers wore
knickers, coats, and ties. This mode of dress continued for
years, then in the 1920s and ’30s slacks replaced the knickers,
or plus fours. Coats and ties eventually were replaced by more
comfortable shirts and sweaters. Gradually, golfers began to wear
more casual clothes, and companies soon began making apparel
designed specifically for them.
Changes and Growth of Golf Courses
Modern golf courses are quite a contrast to those of the 1930s
and ’40s. Greens often were bumpy, fairways were not always
closely mowed, and players seldom knew what to expect from
course to course. But even that was far better and different from
the earliest courses, which might have been just green patches
of grass in a field or pasture.
Many golf courses today, public and private, are well-
manicured and beautifully sculptured by professional golf course
superintendents. The grass on the greens and fairways is mowed
short and tended to daily. The roughs are controlled and main-
tained to certain heights. Sand bunkers and water hazards are
designed not only to add difficulties but also for beauty.
Knickers and
tam-o’-shanter,
left, were
common sights
on the course
prior to the
1920s. In the
1980s and 1990s,
golfing great
Payne Stewart
(1957–99), right,
regularly donned
the unconven-
tional attire on
the course—a
reflection of his
great respect for
the tradition of
the game.


GOLF 15
.Introduction
Course architects began building “target” golf courses in
the late 1980s and 1990s, but many were considered too difficult
for the average player. Target courses usually entail a fairway or
green surrounded by hazards such as sand bunkers and water,
or waste areas and tall grass. The fairway or green is the target,
and players usually have few other good options on where to
hit the ball.
Architects began designing more player-friendly layouts.
They try to build courses that are visually appealing, and when
they cannot incorporate much of the natural terrain, they will
use landscaping timbers, create waterfalls, and build mounds,
if necessary.
Environmental Concerns
While courses have improved, architects and course super-
intendents also have had to become more aware of how the
environment and wildlife are affected as they build and tend
them. In the 1970s, some people became concerned about
how the game might be affecting the environment. A series of
droughts during the ’70s and early ’80s resulted in restrictions
on the use of potable water by homeowners and businesses in
many communities. Golf courses, considered nonessential users
of water, were severely restricted.
During the golf course boom of the ’80s and ’90s, golf
courses again were the focus. Concern mounted as to how golf
course construction and pesticides affected natural areas. Many
of the concerns related to the use of scarce water resources for
golf course irrigation, potential water pollution by pesticides and
fertilizers, loss of natural areas, and the possible effects of golf
course activities on people and wildlife. This brought about
increased new studies by several groups, including the USGA
and the Golf Course Superintendents Association of America.
The USGA and GCSAA have funded several research
projects over the years, and as a result, new grasses that use
less water and need fewer chemicals and pesticides have been
developed. Course superintendents have implemented better
management of the chemicals and pesticides, and studies
are continuing. Most new golf course plans must conform to
local, state, or national environmental statutes before building
can begin.


16 GOLF
Golf Lingo.
Golf Lingo
Becoming familiar with the language of golf is part of the game
and makes it more fun, too. Some of the more common golf
terms are explained below.
ace. A score of 1 on a hole. Also called a hole-in-one.
address. The position a player assumes when preparing to hit
the ball, either a full shot or a putt.
approach. A shot hit toward the green or hole.
apron. The short grass that surrounds a green and separates it
from the fairway or rough. Also called fringe, frog hair, or collar.
backspin. A reverse rotation of the ball.
backswing. The backward movement of the golf club and
body away from the ball; the coiling action before beginning
the downswing.
break. The curve of the ball down the slope of the green. To
be a proficient putter, a golfer must learn to read the break on
the greens.
bump-and-run. A chip shot that is designed to roll, or run,
farther than it travels in the air.
bunker. A depression in the ground that usually is filled with
sand. There also are grass bunkers.
caddie. A person who carries a player’s bag of clubs and
sometimes advises the player. Also “caddy.”
chip. A shot that rolls father than it travels in the air and
usually is hit from near the green onto the green.
clubface. The surface of the clubhead that is designed to strike
the golf ball.
Casual water is a temporary accumulation of water outside of a water
hazard that is visible before or after a player takes a stance. Players may
take relief (one club length) from casual water, no closer to the hole,
without penalty.
A birdie is a
score that is
1-under-par
for a hole. For
instance, a 2 on
a par-3 hole.
A bogey is a
score that is
1-over-par for a
hole. For instance,
a 4 on a par-3 hole.


GOLF 17
.Golf Lingo
clubhead. The weighted part of the golf club that makes
contact with the golf ball.
colve. A 17th-century Dutch game of hitting an object with
a stick.
course management. The use of a plan, or strategy, to best
take advantage of a player’s weaknesses and strengths to finish
a golf course in the fewest number of strokes.
cross-handed. A grip that, for right-handers, puts the left hand
below the right. The grip usually is used in putting, but some
golfers have played full shots cross-handed.
cup. The metal or plastic sleeve that fits inside the hole on the
green and holds the flagstick.
divot. Turf that is torn from the ground, usually during an iron
shot that digs into the ground.
dogleg. A hole with a fairway that bends or curves to the right
or left. It is so named because it can resemble a dog’s hind leg.
downswing. The part of the swing that starts after the back-
swing, reversing movement toward the ball and target.
draw. A shot that starts the ball on a path to the right of the
target, then gently curves back to the left (for a right-handed
player) to land at the target.
drive. The first shot off the tee.
duck hook. A shot that curves abruptly and severely right to
left for a right-handed player. Also called a snap hook.
duffer. An unskilled player.
explosion shot. A shot that removes a large amount of sand,
usually from a sand hazard or bunker, to get the ball out. Also
called a blast.
fade. A slightly curving shot from left to right for a right-
handed player.
fairway. The closely mown area between the tee and green.
fairway wood. Even though most fairway woods are made
out of metal, they still are called woods. These are any “wood”
other than the driver or 1-wood.
fat. Hitting the ground before hitting the ball. Also called
chunking the shot, or hitting it thick or heavy.
flagstick. A slender pole, usually about 7 feet tall, that is
adorned with a flag and placed inside the cup on the green to
mark the location of the hole. It is the preferred name for what
many amateurs call the “ping.”
flop shot. A high, soft shot designed to stop quickly when hit
to a green.
An eagle is a
score of two
strokes below par
on a hole. For
instance, a 3 on
a par-5 hole.
Even par is a
score that is
equivalent to par
during, or at the
conclusion of, a
round of golf.


18 GOLF
Golf Lingo.
follow-through. The continuation of a golf swing after the ball
has been hit.
fore. A word usually yelled out to warn golfers of a golf ball
heading toward them, allowing them to duck or seek cover.
forward press. A slight movement, usually of the hands, arms,
or knee, in the direction of the target to initiate the backswing.
grain. The direction the grass blades are growing. The grain
can affect the way a ball breaks on a green, especially on
Bermuda greens.
green. The most closely mown and smooth area on the course,
where the hole is located. Also called the putting green, putting
surface, or dance floor.
green fee. A charge that is paid to play a course.
green in regulation. When a golfer reaches a green within the
prescribed number of strokes. Hitting the green in regulation on
a par 3 is one shot; two shots on a par 4; and three shots on a
par 5. Often shown as GIR.
grip. The handle of a golf club, or the method of holding a club.
handicap. A number calculated by specific World Handicap
System (WHS) procedures that is the average difference
between a player’s scores and a set standard. The number is
used so that players of different skill levels can fairly compete
against one another.
hole. A 4.5-inch hole in a green into which the ball is to be hit.
Also the entire length and vicinity of the playing area from the
tee to the green.
hook. The flight path of a golf ball in which the ball starts out
to the right (for a right-handed golfer) before curving severely
back to the left.
knockdown. A shot played with less than a full swing, and
usually a shot hit on a lower trajectory than normal. Also called
a punch or half shot.
The spectators at
a golf tournament
or match are
called the gallery.
Gross score is
the actual or
unadjusted
number of strokes
taken to finish a
hole or round.
A hazard or penalty area is an area of a golf course that provides a
difficult obstacle, which may be of two types: water hazards such as lakes
and rivers; and man-made hazards such as bunkers. A body of water
usually is marked with either yellow or red stakes or lines, depending
on whether it is a regular water hazard or a lateral hazard. A bunker
generally is filled with sand, but it also can be filled with grass. A golfer’s
club cannot touch the ground before hitting a shot out of a hazard or a
penalty shot will be incurred.


GOLF 19
.Golf Lingo
lag. A putt that is intended to stop close to the hole but is not
hit hard enough to roll to the hole or past it.
lateral hazard. A water hazard (whether filled with water or
not) that is usually adjacent to, or to the side of, the line of
play. It is marked by red stakes or red lines.
lie. The way a ball rests on the ground. It can be a downhill lie,
an uphill lie, a fluffy (in taller grass) lie, a good lie, or a bad lie,
among others. It also can refer to the number of strokes taken
to a current moment on a given hole when the ball is at rest.
loft. The backward slant, measured in degrees, of the clubface.
mark. A flat object, usually a coin or plastic piece, used to
mark a golf ball’s original location after the ball is lifted,
usually on a green.
medalist. The player who has the lowest score, usually in the
first round of a tournament or in a qualifier.
mulligan. A second attempt or replay at a shot when the player
does not like the result of the first shot. This is not allowed in
the “Rules of Golf” but usually is tolerated on the first hole in
casual play.
out of bounds. An area that is not part of the golf course and
where play is not permitted. It usually is marked by white stakes,
lines on the ground, sides of roads, or property fences. If a play-
er hits a ball out-of-bounds, a stroke penalty results and the ball
must be played from where the player originally hit it.
pitch. A relatively short, lofted shot designed to land softly
and stop quickly. Usually it is hit with a wedge, sand wedge,
or lob wedge.
pitch-and-run. A shot near a green that is intended to roll
more than it travels in the air. Usually a less-lofted club is used
to hit this shot.
pot bunker. A small, deep bunker, typically with steep sides,
requiring a very steep angle of ascent to escape.
preferred lies. A local course rule that allows a player to improve
the lie without penalty. Often used when a course is wet and
muddy, or when the fairways are not in good condition. Also
called winter rules or improved lies.
Match play is one player or team against another, playing by holes
rather than strokes. The player or team that wins the most holes wins
the match. A hole is won by the golfer or team with the fewest strokes
on that hole. A player could have the lowest total score over the holes
played but lose more holes and thus lose the match.
Net score is a
player’s score
after the player’s
handicap has
been applied. If
the golfer shoots a
gross 82 and has
an 8 handicap, a
net score is 74.


20 GOLF
Golf Lingo.
putt. A shot usually hit with a putter on the putting green. A
putter also can be used from off the green.
putter. A club with a fairly straight clubface that is used for
rolling, or putting, a golf ball on the ground or green.
rough. Longer grass that is adjacent to the fairways, greens,
and perhaps tees. Designed to penalize golfers who are not
accurate because it generally is more difficult to hit from
the rough.
round. A completed circuit of 18 holes.
sandbagger. This derogatory term applies to a golfer who lies
about their ability in order to gain an advantage in a match,
tournament, or wager. The golfer often posts artificially high
scores to inflate their handicap.
sand trap. The common term for a sand-filled bunker. Traps
are considered hazards.
skins. A type of competition or wager format where only the
low score among a set group of players can win the hole. If more
than one person ties for low score, no one wins a skin. Usually
the bet, or skin, carries over when there is a tie on a hole.
slice. A wildly curving shot from left to right for a right-handed
player. Also known as a banana ball, this is the prevalent shot
among beginners.
stroke. The act of swinging a club, including the putter, with
the intention of hitting a golf ball.
stroke-and-distance. This is a penalty in certain circumstances,
including—for example—hitting a ball out of bounds. The golfer
must hit again from the original spot and incur a stroke penalty.
sweet spot. The perfect point on the clubface to strike a golf
ball to make an accurate shot.
A provisional ball is an additional shot played when it is believed that
the original ball might be out of bounds or lost. The shot should be
played after everyone in the group has hit and before leaving the area.
To save time, a player will elect to hit a provisional ball when thinking
the ball is out of bounds or lost. Otherwise, the player must return to
the tee to hit again.
Rub of the green usually refers to some odd occurrence, often a bad
break, not caused by the player or caddie, for which there is no relief
provided by the “Rules of Golf.” For example, a ball could hit a cart path
and bounce out of bounds or in a hazard whereas had it not hit the cart
path, it would have stopped well short of the out of bounds or hazard.
The term scratch
applies to a
golfer with a
0 handicap. This
golfer normally
averages par
and will have
no strokes
deducted from
the gross score.


GOLF 21
.Golf Lingo
swing plane. The plane, or arc, that the shaft of the club or
the clubhead takes during the swing. Usually described as
being flat or upright; often determines the flight of the ball.
tee box. The group of teeing grounds. It includes multiple sets
of tee markers.
tee markers. Two objects that indicate the forward boundary of
the teeing ground. Players cannot hit from in front of the mar-
kers without incurring a penalty. Also called tee blocks. “Markers”
also may refer to those who serve as scorers in competitions.
tee shot. The first shot on a hole.
unplayable lie. A player may determine that the ball cannot be
played from its current location and deem it unplayable. After
taking relief under the “Rules of Golf,” the player will incur a
one-stroke penalty.
up-and-down. This term is used when a golfer is able to hole
the ball in two shots from off the green, usually by a chip and
one putt.
waggle. To make small back-and-forth movements of the
clubhead before grounding the club on the approach shot.
yardage. This usually applies when a golfer wants to know
how many yards it is to the green from where they are hitting.
Some courses have yardage markers or yardage books to help
the golfer. Knowing the yardage helps the golfer decide which
club to hit.
yips. Generally, a nervous twitching during a putting stroke
that causes inconsistent results. Some golfers blame their poor
putting on “having the yips.”
The term through the green is used when a particular
rule applies everywhere except the green being
played. For example, the term might be used if play-
ers are allowed to lift, clean, and place their golf balls
“through the green” because of muddy conditions;
they would not be allowed to do so otherwise.
Stroke play
means scoring by
the total number
of strokes during
a round. Also
called medal play.
The teeing ground
is the starting
point for the hole.
This rectangular
area is defined
by one set of
tee markers.





GOLF 23
.Tools of the Game
Tools of the Game
In addition to having a good, reliable swing to produce long,
accurate tee shots, golfers should have clubs that match their
swing. That means having clubs with the proper shaft, grip size,
and swing weight for the golfer. If a golfer is equipped with a
poorly fitted or ill-maintained club, even a good swing might
not produce good shots.
Other golfing equipment also could enhance the game
of even a novice golfer, including the choice of ball and the
clothing worn on the course.
Clubs
Choosing golf clubs can be somewhat complicated. When
choosing a set of clubs, golfers must consider such elements
as the different types and shapes of clubheads; the length of the
club shafts, which have different flexes and are made from dif-
ferent materials such as steel or graphite; the total weight of
each club; and the size of the grips.
A golf professional can help players determine what types
of clubs and shafts might be appropriate for their swing. Golf
equipment can be bought, and usually can be tested, at golf
courses and/or golf specialty stores.
BACK
CLUBHEAD
GRIP
SHAFT
SOLE
SHAFT
HOSEL
CLUBFACE


24 GOLF
Tools of the Game.
Irons
Irons have clubfaces made of steel with
a relatively narrow sole—the bottom of
the clubhead. The most commonly used
irons are numbered from 2 to 9, with the
lower-numbered clubs used to achieve
shots of longer length and less height than
the higher-numbered ones. Some irons are
used for pitching, chipping, and hitting out
of bunkers, including the pitching wedge,
sand wedge, and lob wedge. There are
some specialty irons designed for chipping.
Wedges
Wedges are called “short” irons and have
the greatest loft. It’s best to use these clubs
for greater accuracy, for distances under 130
yards. Wedges will hit the ball up relatively
high and generally land without a lot of roll.
They are especially helpful for getting out
of bunkers. The gap wedge was introduced
to fill the “loft” gap between the pitching
wedge and sand wedge.
Woods
Woods have larger clubheads
than irons and have longer
shafts. Originally these club-
heads were made of wood, but
in recent years they have been
replaced by different types of
metal. Woods range from the
driver to fairway woods such
as the 3-wood and up to a
7-wood. As with the numbered
irons, the lower the number
of the wood, the longer the
shot will travel with the least
amount of loft. The driver is
the longest club, featuring a
clubface with the least loft of
all clubs. It is designed to hit
the ball for distance.
Loft is a term
used to indicate
the backward
slant, or angle,
of the clubface.
It is measured in
degrees. All golf
clubs have some
loft, but each one
varies according
to its use.
Driver
HEEL
TOE
Wedges
Irons
Woods


GOLF 25
Putters
Usually used on the greens, putters come in all shapes and
sizes, featuring almost flat clubfaces that allow the golf ball
to be rolled close to the ground. Most golfers will try several
putters before carrying one that feels right for them.
Hybrid Club
Also called a utility club, the hybrid club combines elements
of both a wood and an iron into a single club. Most hybrid
clubs are designed to replace the 2-, 3-, 4-, and 5-irons. Many
golfers think the hybrid clubs are easier to hit than those irons
because the hybrid combines the forgiveness, distance, and
height of a fairway wood and the stopping ability of an iron,
which adds up to the golfer’s sense of having greater control
and accuracy. Hybrid clubs are sold as hybrid “sets,” or as
individual clubs, such as the aptly named “rescue” club, which
helps rescue players from the rough.
Other Accessories
Golf Ball. Golf balls have varying covers, including
balata (a natural rubber) and various synthetics. Balata
gives a softer feel but cuts easier. Newer synthetic
covers also offer softer feels and usually are more durable
than balata. Golf balls come with either a wound or a
solid core. Wound golf balls usually have a small rubber
ball filled with liquid in the center and wound with narrow
rubber bands. More common are solid golf balls, which are
created from two solid pieces that are compressed together.
Multilayer balls have a solid core and a soft outer cover,
separated by ultra-thick layers of various materials. While these
balls offer good performance in distance, durability, spin, and
feel, they are very expensive. Ask your merit badge counselor
or a golf retail specialist for assistance with choosing the right
kind of golf ball for your playing style and ability.
Although the “Rules of Golf” allow you to carry any mixture of 14 clubs
in your bag, you can carry fewer if you like. Many golfers think the game
is based on three scoring clubs: driver, wedge, and putter. A “short”
set consists of six clubs: 3-wood, 3-, 5-, 7-, and 9-irons, and a putter. A
“full” set has 12 clubs: driver, 3- and 5-fairway woods, 3-, 4-, 5-, 6-, 7-, 8-,
and 9-irons, a pitching wedge, and a putter. Most golfers include a sand
wedge with the short or full set.
Putters
Golf towel and
golf balls


26 GOLF
Tools of the Game.
Tees. These wooden or plastic pegs are designed to cradle the
ball for the golfer’s tee shot. Different lengths of tees help
golfers consistently tee the ball to a desired height.
Ball Marker. These flat, usually plastic objects are used to
replace a golf ball on greens either to prevent blocking the
shot of another player or to allow the golfer to pick up the
ball and clean it. The golf ball then replaces the marker in the
exact location.
Divot Tool. These usually metal, horseshoe-shaped objects
are used to repair turf. With the two metal points, a golfer can
“stitch” the grass together where there is a ball mark and then
smooth the repaired area with the flat part of a putter.
Golf Towel. Many golfers attach a partially wet towel to their
golf bag and use it to help clean off golf balls or clubheads dur-
ing a round. In hot weather, some golfers carry another towel to
keep sweat out of their eyes and off their hands and arms.
Club Covers. While irons usually do not require covers, most
golfers use covers to protect their metal woods. Probably more
important to golfers when woods were actually made of wood,
club covers help reduce scratches or dents to club metal. They
come in many different materials and designs, including shaped
as animal heads and decorated in collegiate logos.
Golf Bag. While most touring professionals use a large, heavy
bag, they have someone else carrying it. For players carrying
their own bags, several lightweight bags are available, and a
double shoulder strap makes it easier on the back and more
comfortable to carry. Bags should have enough pockets
to carry such incidentals as rain gear, golf balls, tees, divot
tool, pencil, ball marker, golf glove, and rulebook. Oh, and
don’t forget the sunscreen. Young golfers might consider other
accessories, including a stroke counter that can be clicked after
each stroke, which could make keeping score much easier.
Maintenance and Care of Golf Clubs
Golfers should keep the golf club grips—their only contact with
the club—and clubheads clean and in good condition. Slick or
worn grips can cause hands to slip, resulting in errant shots.
Many pro shops or golf specialty stores have grip-cleaning prod-
ucts, though daily cleaning usually can be handled with warm
water and a towel. Kits are available to allow golfers to change
Among some of
the necessary
accessories for
the golf game
and protection
of equipment are
golf balls, club
covers, tees, ball
markers, and a
divot tool.


GOLF 27
.Tools of the Game
their own grips when necessary, though most pro shops or golf
specialty stores will change the grips for a relatively small fee.
It also is important to keep the clubfaces and clubhead
grooves clean. A clubhead can be cleaned with a towel and
water, and the grooves, which help produce the backspin on a
golf ball, usually can be cleaned using the sharp end of a tee.
Apparel
Golf Shoes. These come in several styles
and colors with either leather or synthetic
tops. Most golf shoes are available with
nonmetal spikes, which many golf courses
now require. Golf shoes with nonmetal spikes
are lighter and generally more comfortable.
Golf Gloves. Normally the better gloves are made of
leather. A right-handed golfer usually wears the glove on
the left hand, and the left-handed golfer wears one on the
right hand. Gloves usually help a golfer grip the club, though
some great golfers, such as Ben Hogan, never wore one. It is
important to keep them as dry as possible during use and to
allow them to dry fully after a round. Conditioners can be used
to help prolong the life of leather gloves.
Clubs and Accessories for Junior Golfers
Besides taking lessons from a qualified golf teacher, obtaining
correct-fitting clubs is considered very important to any golfer,
beginner or expert.
A common practice among parents is to equip their children
in cut-down adult golf clubs. Most teaching and club profes-
sionals advise against this, because when a shaft is cut down,
the weight of the clubhead becomes heavier and the flex
changes. Professionals say that neither change would be
appropriate for a junior and could lead to bad swing habits.
Professionals recommend buying clubs designed for
juniors. A golfer can be fitted for the correct size according to
height and age. Normally, a junior should be fit for clubs that
are 2 to 4 inches longer than what would be normal for their
current height. This would assure that the clubs would not
become too small in a short time as the player grows. It usually
is a good idea to let a qualified professional watch the junior
swing before obtaining a final fitting.





GOLF 29
.How to Play the Game
How to Play the Game
As equipment has changed, so has the swing. When golfers
played with wooden-shafted clubs, the clubheads usually had
to be fanned open on the backswing and then closed coming
through the ball because of the torque in the shafts. Swings
were flatter than the more upright swings of today. A flat swing
is more around the body, much like a baseball swing might be.
An upright swing is more up and down rather than around.
When steel shafts were introduced in the 1930s, players
began changing to a more upright swing with less hip turn and
the left foot staying closer to, or on, the ground. Golfers were
able to swing harder while maintaining accuracy.
Even though instructors may teach certain methods to
swing a club, there is no absolute way to swing. A look at
many of the top players over the years proves that. Many, such
as David Duval, Jim Furyk, and Fred Couples, employ swings
that would not fit many of the new methods.
However, knowing certain fundamentals can make play-
ing golf easier. The object is to develop a consistent setup
procedure and swing. Although golfers can try to learn how to
swing by reading and looking at pictures, it is recommended
that they take lessons from a qualified instructor.
Note: Left-handers should reverse all the instructions listed.
Assessing the Shot
Finding the grip and swing that works for you is critical for
becoming a consistent player. Watch the world’s best players
on the professional golf tours and you will see that there are
different grips and swings. They are proof that there is more
than one way to grip and swing a club. These players have
practiced long hours to find what works for them.
Some basics need to be observed, but each golfer should
experiment to find which grip works best and to build a
consistent swing.
Approximately
8 to 10 percent
of golfers in
America are
left-handed. In
2003, Mike Weir
was the first
lefty to win the
Masters. Then
Phil Mickelson,
another lefty, won
the Masters the
following year.


30 GOLF
How to Play the Game.
The Grip
Because the player’s hands are the only contact with a golf
club, the grip is critical to constructing a consistent golf game.
Three grips are widely used: the Vardon (or overlapping) grip,
the interlocking grip, and the full-fingered (often called the
baseball or 10-fingered) grip. Whichever grip is used, the hands
should be close together and more or less parallel so that they
can best work together.
Vardon Grip
Hold the club diagonally in the palm of the left hand and
close the fingers so that the shaft lies diagonally across the
second joint of the index finger. Close the hand with the thumb
positioned slightly to the right of the top of the shaft. The V
that is formed by the thumb and forefinger should point toward
the right shoulder. Now move the right hand over the shaft
with the left thumb fitting inside the palm of the right hand.
The little finger of the right hand should overlap the left index
finger or behind it. The club should be held with most pressure
on the last three fingers of the left hand and middle two fingers
of the right hand.
Vardon grip


GOLF 31
.How to Play the Game
Interlocking Grip
The interlocking grip is similar to the Vardon grip,
except that instead of overlapping the little finger of
the right hand, it interlocks with the index finger of
the left hand.
Full-Fingered Grip
Although the Vardon and interlocking grips are considered
best for allowing the hands to work together, many outstanding
players have used the full-fingered grip. The grip is taken the
same way as the other two, but all fingers remain on the shaft.
The little finger of the right
hand does not overlap
or interlock.
Interlocking grip
Full-fingered grip


32 GOLF
How to Play the Game.
The Stance
Before taking a stance to hit the golf ball, a player should
have assessed the upcoming shot and selected a club.
Grip the club and check to make
sure the clubface is square to the ball.
The first action should be setting the club
behind the ball along the line you want to
hit the ball. This should be done before
positioning the feet and body. After placing
the club, position your feet and body square
to the target. The feet, shoulders, and hips
should be perpendicular to the target on a
normal shot.
The ball position for normal shots usu-
ally is on a line an equal distance between
the two feet. Grip the club and position the
hands in a line with the inside of your left
thigh so that the hands are slightly ahead,
or in front, of the ball.
Flex your knees, bend slightly from
the hips, and keep a straight spine. Your
chin should be up enough to allow the left
shoulder to turn underneath. One way to
check your stance is to imagine a vertical
line descending down the middle of your
right shoulder, through your kneecap, and
into the ball of your right foot.
The square stance


GOLF 33
.How to Play the Game
This is a square stance, which helps a golfer swing back
the clubhead along the intended line to produce a straight shot.
An open stance, with the feet, shoulders, and hips positioned
slightly to the left of the ball, helps promote an outside-in
swing to produce a fade or slice—a ball that might start straight
and turn right.
The object of the swing is to lead the clubhead into the
ball with your hands. Usually the hands should be about
6 inches from your body. This helps set your shoulders in a
position to turn more easily on a fairly upright plane.
Left Arm
To help develop a consistent, repeating swing, a golfer should
set up for shots in a certain pattern. One checkpoint is that,
at address, the left arm and club shaft should be in about
the same line. The left wrist should form a slight angle. An
unnatural flat or straight left wrist can impede the hinging of
the wrists.
Hands at address: correct (left) and incorrect (right)


34 GOLF
How to Play the Game.
Right Side
A full coil of the upper body is necessary to achieve distance for
full shots. To help achieve the coil, you should relax the right
side and right arm at address. If the right side is tense, it is
harder to achieve a coil.
Right Shoulder
Your right shoulder should naturally be lower than your left at
address. However, this should be checked, especially if you are
slicing the ball. Holding the right shoulder lower than the left
helps to move the shoulder on the backswing on a more vertical
plane. If the right shoulder is too high, you could hit from the
outside and slice the ball.
Starting the Swing
Many golfers like to waggle the club to stay loose before
starting their backswing. They also like some type of action,
sometimes called a forward or stationary press, to begin the
backswing. A press can include slightly moving the hands
forward, cocking the head, or slightly bending the right knee.
When waggling the club back and forth, some golfers will
waggle the clubhead outside the line of flight if they are trying
to hit a fade or waggle it inside the line of flight if trying to hit
a hook. Many instructors say the takeaway should be in one
piece. In other words, the entire left side must move together,
or in one piece, to begin the backswing.
Safety
To keep yourself and those around you out of
harm’s way along the golf course, practice these
safety precautions:
• When swinging a club, either at the ball or practicing,
be far enough away from other players to avoid hit-
ting anyone. Do not hit the ball into the group playing
ahead of you. Make sure the players are out of the
way before anyone in your group tees off.
• Yell “Fore!” if your shot is heading for someone,
either in front of you or on adjacent holes.


GOLF 35
.How to Play the Game
Another way to start is to imagine your navel turning to
your right. More modern swings try limiting the hip turn while
fully coiling the shoulders, which builds up tension. However,
a person needs to be very flexible and strong to perfect this
swing. Basically, the hips should turn when the shoulders force
them. As they turn no farther than the shoulders, the left knee
will turn in and point to the ball.
Backswing Turn
Turn the shoulders to swing the clubhead back. Golfers who lift
the club with their hands and arms can create several problems
in the swing. Your weight should still feel as if it is on the inside
of your feet as you shift most of your weight back to your right
foot. Any swaying will throw your swing off plane and make it
difficult to return to the ball with consistency.
When the shoulder turn moves the club to about hip height,
the wrists begin cocking as the club continues upward. The
right arm should not fly out or stay so close to the body as to
restrict the backswing. Try to coil the shoulders as far as pos-
sible and still maintain balance while imagining that your hips
are turning in a barrel.
Top of the Swing
When the club reaches the top, you should be coiled and ready
to deliver a strong downswing toward the ball. The club should
be parallel to the target line. A shaft that crosses the line (point-
ing left of the target) will cause a swing that is too far inside, and
a shaft that is “laid off” (pointing right of the target) will cause
a swing that is too far outside the line.
Length of the backswing will vary with a golfer’s flexibility
and ability. Basically, the right knee should remain flexed, and
the left foot should not raise excessively off the ground. You
should not sway back on your left leg or foot, and the grip
should remain firm.
The clubface alignment at the top might also dictate the
type of shot you will hit. If the clubface is open (the toe pointing
to the ground), you might slice; if it is closed (clubface facing
skyward), you might hook. Square is considered somewhere
in between. However, many good golfers have had open and
closed clubfaces, so there is no absolute.


36 GOLF
How to Play the Game.
Downswing
The downswing is largely a reflex action of the backswing,
but your weight should begin shifting to the left side with the
shoulders and arms following. With the weight shifting to the
left foot, the knees begin moving fast toward the direction of
the shot. During the lateral slide of the knees, the hips should
be turning to the left to clear a path to swing the club along
the target line.
A major fault is starting the downswing with the hands
and arms before the legs and hips have begun to move. But
it also is possible to overuse the legs and hips. Another key
to having a consistent swing is maintaining your spine angle
throughout the swing. This prevents bobbing up and down
during the swing.
Modern instructors are teaching a flatter finish and
straighter back as you continue through the ball, rather than
the reverse C, which marked Jack Nicklaus’ strong swing. Also,
a flatter finish is regarded as being better for your back.
Full Shot From the Tee
The basic principles of the grip, stance, backswing, and down-
swing apply for all swings, including the drive. A swing with a
driver is more of a sweeping action. It probably is better to tee
the ball higher rather than too low so that the driver strikes it at
the bottom of the swing or slightly on the upswing. One good
measurement is to have the top of the clubface level with the
ball’s equator when the club is grounded.
The Tee Box
Every hole begins with a teeing ground, from which you will hit your drive
or tee shot. The teeing ground is two club lengths deep. Its width is defined
by a set of tee markers. You must tee up your ball between the markers. The
teeing ground refers to one set of markers, but there are multiple sets of
markers, which correspond to different yardages. These markers are called
forward, middle, and back tees. The forward tees are the shortest set; the
back tees are the longest. This group of teeing grounds is called a tee box.
Some courses have more than three teeing grounds in the tee boxes. Play
the forward tees until you understand how far you can consistently drive
the ball, then play from the markers that best suit your game.


GOLF 37
THE FULL SWING
4
3
2
1
5
6
7 8


38 GOLF
How to Play the Game.
The ball position normally will be a couple of inches inside
the left heel. Turning out the left foot may help clear the way
for the hands and arms on the downswing.
Hit through the ball, not at it, and, if the left side leads as
it should, you should be able to swing your arms and hands
through the ball as hard as possible. Extend your right arm
as you hit through the ball. To accomplish the speed through
the ball, it is important not to swing too fast going back.
Swinging back too fast can destroy the timing needed to
deliver a hard blow.
Using Fairway Clubs
The shot from the fairway with a
metal wood is slightly different from
the drive. Generally, a 3- or 4-wood is
used from the fairways, and the 5- to
7-woods are used to dig the ball out
of roughs. The swing is virtually as it
is with a driver, but there is more of a
downward blow to the ball to make sure
the ball gets off the ground. The ball
position will be slightly behind where
you would place the ball for a drive.
Irons
A 2- or 3-iron is longer than a 7- or 9-iron, but it does not mean
you have to swing harder to hit it. Irons can be more intimidat-
ing, though, because they have straighter faces and, generally,
smaller heads.
The stance will be wider than it is with short irons, and the
arc will be longer because the shaft is longer. This will create
more clubhead speed.
Usually, long irons should be used off tees and in fairways.
It is difficult to hit long irons out of the rough. A 4-, 5-, or 7-wood
would be a better choice from the rough. The ball position will
be similar as with the fairway woods, a good shoulder turn is
important, and the swing will be more of a sweeping one rather
than a downward blow as it would be with short irons.
It is better to hit with more of a downward blow with
the short irons because you usually are trying to stop the ball
as quickly as possible on the green. The downward blow will
impart more backspin and allow the ball to stop sooner.
Hitting a long
iron is similar to
hitting a driver.
Determine on the
practice tee how
far you can hit
the ball in the air
consistently with
all irons.


GOLF 39
.How to Play the Game
Put the ball back more in the middle of the stance in order to hit
it with a more downward strike. The ball should be hit first and
the divot will be taken in front of the ball as you swing through.
Specialty Shots
While it would be nice if you could swing the same way each
time, there may be occasions when you need to hit a low shot,
a high shot, a hook, or a slice.
To hit the ball low, choke
down on the grip an inch or two
and move the ball back in your
stance more toward the right
foot. Move your hands ahead
of the ball, swing shorter, lead
down with your hands, and
restrict your follow-through.
To hit it high, play the ball
more toward the left foot and
position the hands more even
with the ball. Stay behind the
ball during the swing. You still
hit down and through.
To draw or hook the ball,
move the ball back in the stance,
close your stance by drawing the
right foot back 2 to 3 inches, and
position the hands slightly ahead
of the ball. Take the club back
more inside, or on-line with the
way your feet are now aligned,
and make your regular swing. If
you need a more severe hook,
close the blade as much as you
deem necessary.
To fade or slice the ball, open your stance by drawing the
left foot back 2 or 3 inches. Position the ball either just off the
left heel or an inch back toward the middle. Take the club a
little outside the line to slightly cut across the line to promote
a left-to-right shot. If a more severe slice is needed, open the
blade of the club.
Be sure to practice all these shots and experiment with ball
and hand positioning so that you will know what works for you.


40 GOLF
How to Play the Game.
Scoring and Handicaps
Handicaps in golf are used to help make competi-
tion more fair among players of different abilities.
A handicap index is the USGA’s method to indicate
a measurement of a player’s potential scoring
ability on a course of standard difficulty.
A handicap index is issued by a specific golf
club and is determined using a player’s after
scores from multiple rounds of golf. It determines
the number of strokes a golfer receives to adjust
the gross score. The USGA prefers that a minimum
of 20 scores be submitted to determine a handicap
index. As a player continues to submit scores, the
handicap probably will fluctuate.
To figure out your unofficial handicap, you must
first determine the handicap differentials on 10 of
your last 20 scores, as follows.
Step 1—Subtracting the USGA course rating from
the adjusted gross score.
Step 2—Multiply the difference by 113 (the slope
rating of a course of standard difficulty).
Step 3—Divide that number by the USGA slope
rating and round to the nearest tenth.
Step 4—Find the average of the 10 differentials,
and multiply the average by 0.96.
Step 5—Delete all numbers after tenths, but do not
round to the nearest tenth.
The result is your handicap index. The handicap
index is then compared to the course’s handicap
chart to determine a player’s handicap for that course.


GOLF 41
.How to Play the Game
Short Game
Having a strong short game can be the fastest way to lower
your scores. Seldom does a golfer hit all 18 greens in regula-
tion, so chipping and putting become a critical part of scoring.
Putting
One area of golf in which styles are vastly
different is putting. Golfers sometimes go to
extreme lengths to find a dependable, reli-
able stroke that can work under pressure.
In the past few years, some players have
switched to a cross-handed style or some-
thing more unorthodox, have used long put-
ters that wedge against the chest, and have
tried every putter shape on the market.
Golfers once used a lot of wrist when
they putted over what were often slower
and bumpier greens. Today’s players usually
try to eliminate as much wrist movement
as possible and use arms and shoulders in
their stroke.
One of the first things a golfer must do
is find the “sweet spot” on the putter. This
usually is in the center of the putter face.
Balls that are putted on the toe or heel of
the face usually will not be solid strikes
and will cause erratic results. The hands
should form an extension of the club, and
they can help strike the ball square by using
a palm-to-palm grip.
Palm-to-palm grip


42 GOLF
How to Play the Game.
One of the most common putting grips involves
using a reverse overlapping. This involves overlap-
ping the left index finger down the first three or four
fingers of the right hand. Most of the pressure should
be in the left hand to help prevent that hand and wrist
from breaking down during the downstroke.
The putting stance, which varies widely from
golfer to golfer, usually has the feet about shoulder
width with the arms hanging down comfortably so
that they will not be restricted on either the backswing
or the downswing. The feet can be square to the line
and open (left foot pulled back) or closed (right foot
pulled back). There have been excellent putters who
have used each.
Most golfers believe it is critical to have the eyes
directly over the ball in order to see a more accurate
line to the hole. Most play the ball on a line opposite
the left heel with the hands either even or just slightly
ahead of the ball. Try to keep the stroke as smooth
as possible, maybe even trying a one-two count: The
backswing is the count of one, and the stroke and
follow-through is two.
Putting stance
Reverse overlapping grip


GOLF 43
.How to Play the Game
Johnny Miller, World Golf Hall of Famer and TV broadcaster,
bases his one-two count on the speed of the stroke as he cal-
culates it after examining the putt. He tries to visualize the line
from the ball to the hole, taking into account any break of the
green, and the distance to the hole. He then sets the blade of
the putter behind the ball that faces the line and strokes with
the hands following down the line.
Professional golfers and top amateurs normally have a
pattern of addressing the ball. For example, Miller looks at the
putt from behind and visualizes the line of the putt to the hole.
Then he steps up to the ball, places the putter on-line, takes his
stance, takes one look at the hole, looks back to the putter to
check his alignment, and then takes a second look at the hole
to get a feel for the distance. The moment he looks back at the
putter is when he begins drawing back his putter. Being system-
atic, he said, keeps your attitude positive and helps your mind
to visualize making the putt.
The backswing count The stroke and follow-through,
count two


44 GOLF
How to Play the Game.
For more
information
about golf
camps, schools,
tournaments, and
college-playing
opportunities,
see the
resources section.
Dave Pelz, a golf instructor who specializes in the short
game and is an adviser for several top players, has his own
method for putting. He also has devised drills that help golfers
develop a feel for putting. One is a short-putt drill. He said the
best way to sink short putts is to hit them firmly, at a force that
would cause the ball to roll 17 inches past the hole if it missed.
He says you should practice this by hitting one ball from
3 feet, one from 4 feet, and one from 5 feet, and repeat the
process from two other sides of the cup. After making all your
putts from all three sides, he suggests trying this with your eyes
closed after lining up the putts.
Another is the 20-foot drill. Putt 20-foot putts in groups of
three from opposite directions of the hole until you can stop 10
shots in a row within one putter length of the back edge of the
hole without leaving any putt short.
Then there is the lag-putt drill. On putts longer than
40 feet, try to lag the ball to the hole—get as close as you
can to the hole without going past it. Stroke three putts each
from 40, 60, and 50 feet and try to stop the ball within 4, 6,
and 5 feet, respectively.
Pelz recommends that golfers devote more of their practice
time on the short game, noting that a golfer who shoots 70 will
average about 30 strokes with the putter, and most who shoot
85 will use the putter about 35 times.
Golf is a sport you can enjoy for the rest of your life. These days you
may golf for fun with a family member or friend. Later you might decide
to try out for a position on a high school or college team, or play golf to
build business relationships, or just to relax. In any case, you can always
improve your game.
One exciting element of golf is that no two courses are identical;
landscapes vary. Many golfers think the battle is between the player
and the course. Although most golfers expect to compare their scores
to other players, they can also play a course again and again, compar-
ing their personal scores for different rounds to appreciate their own
improvement against the course.
In playing golf, you will learn much about yourself. Golf teaches you
to be humble and more patient, to have respect for other players and
the course, and to be courteous. If you want to improve your game, you
will work to develop social skills, self-discipline, and mental toughness.


The Course Scorecard
Using the course scorecard is required in tournament play. Typical cards have a line for the golfer’s name on
the left side and a grid with boxes to record scores for all 18 course holes. The pars for each hole also are
shown on the card. In competition, a golfer’s score for each hole is entered in the corresponding space. The
golfer is not required to total the scores for either set of nine holes or the 18-hole round, but for the card to be
official, the player and the scorekeeper must verify the scores and sign the card. In competition play, golfers
do not record their own scores.


46 GOLF
How to Play the Game.
Chip-and-Run Shot
Use a straighter-faced club, such as a 6- or 7-iron, for a chip-
and-run shot. The object is to hit the ball a short distance in
the air and then let it roll on the green as much as possible.
This usually is the best shot when the ball is just off the green
and the pin is several feet or yards away.
Generally, the ball will roll two-thirds of the distance to the
pin, so try to select a spot on the green to land the ball about a
third of the distance to the pin. This distance will vary accord-
ing to the green and the club that is used. Open the stance,
choke down on the club a couple of inches, position the ball
slightly back in the stance, and position the hands ahead of
the ball. The club is taken back with the arms and hands with
very little wrist action and with little or no movement of the
body. Come through firmly with the arms and hands and finish
directly toward the hole.
The chip-and-run shot, beginning stance (left) and follow-through (right)


GOLF 47
.How to Play the Game
Lob and Pitch Shots
These shots are performed with a more lofted club,
such as a wedge, lob wedge, or sand wedge. This
shot is commonly used when the pin is located
nearer the ball and there is not much green to
hit to.
To hit a lob shot, a high shot that should stop
quickly, position the ball off your left heel and
open your stance by moving the feet, hips, and
shoulders to the left. Take a fairly wide stance and
flex your knees. Keep them flexed throughout the
shot. Do not choke up on the club, but open the
blade of the club by turning the clubface to the
right and take a long, gentle swing. The more you
fan open the blade, the higher the shot should go
because the clubface’s loft will be increased. You
also will need to aim more to the left to compen-
sate for the open clubface.
The high, soft pitch is similar to the lob shot,
but the stance is not as wide and there usually is
more green to hit to. Set your hands slightly ahead
of the ball and position the ball to the left of the stance. Try to
avoid quickly cocking the wrist as you take the club away from
the ball. For a soft shot, finish with the hands high.
The pitch shot
Preparing for the lob shot


48 GOLF
How to Play the Game.
Sand Shots
To explode a ball out of the sand, you will need a sand wedge.
This club has a flange that prevents it from digging too far into
the sand. Practice as to how much you need to open the club-
face. It is usually a different degree according to the consistency
of the sand. Many professionals like a wide-open face, but aver-
age golfers have to be careful not to hit
the ball with the blade of the club. The
degree you open the blade also will dic-
tate how far you will hit the ball. The
more wide-open the face, the shorter
you will hit the ball.
Open your stance and plant your
feet firmly in the sand. Your weight
should be mostly on the left side and
your head ahead of the ball. Swing
back with the arms, keeping the body
turn to a minimum. On the down-
swing, pull down with the arms as
the weight remains on the left side.
Try to hit about 2 inches behind the
ball to blast it out of the sand. Follow
through naturally.
The sand shot


GOLF 49
.How to Play the Game
Recovery Shots
When playing golf, you eventually will put the ball in a position
that will be difficult to hit or impossible to hit to the green. Do
not try a miracle shot or a shot that you have not practiced in
these situations. It probably will save you strokes if you are able
to chip or pitch the ball back to the fairway and then try
to salvage your score.
Also, practice hitting from tall grass
by using a sand wedge and repeating the
swing you would use out of sand. Just
because you are off the green does not
mean you have to chip or pitch. If the
fringe is cut closely, you might opt to use
a putter. When the ball is lodged against
the fringe, you can use a 3-wood or blade
the ball with the edge of a wedge to roll it
toward the hole.
Basically, recovery shots require a lot
of practice and imagination.
Pitch From a Bad Lie
Shots from several types of bad lies can
be handled with the same technique. The
bad lies you might encounter include the
ball nestled in a depression, in heavy
rough, or in front of a big tuft of grass.
If you have to get the ball up and over
a bunker or some other object or hazard,
play the shot similar to a sand shot. Use a
sand wedge, and open the blade slightly.
Aim slightly left to allow for a left-to-right
spin on the ball. Pick up the club more
quickly than usual with your hands on the
backswing, then strike down an inch or
two behind the ball.
When going through the impact area, you should feel as
if the right hand is sliding the club under the ball. To offset
the bounce of the sand wedge and to compensate for hitting
behind the ball, you will have to swing harder than you
normally would do for the distance. If the shot is too risky,
it might be smarter to play to the center of the green rather
than at the pin and try to salvage the lowest score possible.


50 GOLF
How to Play the Game.
Full Shot From Heavy Rough
This is one of the most com-
mon shots a golfer will face. Yet,
it is the shot that is most often
misplayed. Too many players try
to whack the ball out of the tall
rough with a long iron.
The shot does need to be hit
hard, so keep the tension out of
the arms and hands to remain
loose. If distance is required, use
a 5-wood or 7-wood rather than
a long iron. Set your weight more
to the left and keep the ball posi-
tioned normally in your stance.
Open the clubface slightly and aim
slightly right because the tall grass
will wrap itself around the club’s
hosel, where the shaft or handle
is inserted into the clubface, and
cause the clubface to close and the
ball to be pulled left.
Lift the club a little more
quickly than normal on the back-
swing, which will allow you to come into the
ball at a steeper angle. Swing hard and keep
the left hand strong throughout the shot. Try to
finish high with your hands.
Get Out and Play!
Play a round of golf with a parent or with another adult, pref-
erably someone familiar with golf. Play at least one round in
a “tournament” against the adult and compete in either match
play or stroke play.
Before playing, be sure to mark your golf balls with a
unique, identifying mark and review the basic rules. On the
course, follow golf etiquette and courtesy. Use a scorecard
provided by the course, and have fun!
The full shot
from heavy rough


GOLF 51
.How to Play the Game
Chart Your Progress
Many golfers maintain a log of their rounds and make notes of
which phase of the game they have problems with. By doing
this, golfers can chart their progress and know which areas of
the game they need to work on during practice.
Date ______________________ Players ______________________________________________ Weather ________________
Course ____________________ Rating _______________________________________________ Slope ___________________
No. of eagles ______________ No. of birdies ____________ No of pars _______________ No. of bogies ___________
Clubs Fairway Up and Sand Green
Hole Yardage Par Score Used Putts Penalties Hit Down Saves Notes Other Notes
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Front
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
Back
Total


52 GOLF
Safety, First Aid, and Fitness.
Safety, First Aid,
and Fitness
As with any sport, athletes should be physically and mentally
prepared to play golf. It is also important to be prepared for a
lengthy period in the outdoors, since a round of golf typically
takes three to five hours.
Weather-Related Dangers
When playing, golfers should remain aware of the weather,
especially if lightning is in the area or is forecast. Approxi-
mately 67 people die each year in the United States because of
lightning strikes.
Some golf courses have lightning detectors and will warn
players if lightning is getting close. Even if you do not see light-
ning, it can strike suddenly from gray, low clouds that could be
rain clouds. It does not have to be stormy or rainy for lightning
to strike. If lightning is a threat, take these precautions:
• Do not hold a golf club.
• Seek shelter inside a building or car, if available, or leave the
course immediately. When in a car, avoid touching the metal.
• Do not seek shelter under a tree or under an open shelter,
and stay away from water.
If a severe, sudden storm strikes, threatening to harbor a
tornado, seek immediate shelter in a ravine, if possible.
Other possible hazards along the golf course could be fire ants, bees, and
wasps. Usually if one does not bother bees or wasps, they will not sting,
but fire ants are easily disturbed and swarm quickly. In some areas,
snakes and even crocodiles or alligators pose dangers.
Before playing
golf, always check
the weather
forecast. If
severe weather is
forecast, it might
be best to play
another day.


GOLF 53
.Safety, First Aid, and Fitness
Golf and First Aid
There are a few first-aid issues that apply especially to golfers
and golfing.
When we lose more water than we take in, we become
dehydrated. Symptoms of mild dehydration include increased
thirst, dry lips, and dark yellow urine. Symptoms of moderate to
severe dehydration include severe thirst, dry mouth with little
saliva, dry skin, weakness, dizziness, confusion, nausea, cramp-
ing, loss of appetite, decreased sweating (even with exertion),
decreased urine production, and dark brown urine. For mild
dehydration, drink a quart or two of water or sports drink over
two to four hours. Rest for 24 hours and continue drinking flu-
ids. See a physician for moderate to severe dehydration, which
requires emergency care.
Heat exhaustion can be brought on by a combination
of dehydration and a warm environment. Symptoms include
a severe lack of energy, general weakness, headache, nausea,
faintness, and sweating; cool, pale, moist skin; and a rapid
pulse. If you or anyone in your group shows signs of heat
exhaustion, get to a shady, cool spot. Have the person drink
small amounts of cool water or a sports drink. Apply water to
the skin and clothing and fan the person. Raising the legs may
help prevent a feeling of faintness. The person should feel bet-
ter after two or three hours but should rest for the remainder of
the day and be extra careful about staying hydrated.
In heatstroke, the body’s cooling system begins to fail
and the person’s core temperature rises to life-threatening levels.
Dehydration and overexertion, especially in high heat and
humidity, can lead to heatstroke. Symptoms can include those
of heat exhaustion as well as hot, sweaty, red skin, confusion,
disorientation, and a rapid pulse. If you suspect heatstroke in
someone, call for medical assistance immediately.
Besides injuries,
golfers should be
aware of other
factors when
playing, such
as the plants
that grow on golf
courses. Learn
what poison oak
and poison ivy
look like and
avoid them.
Golf Ball Liver—a Golfer’s Disease
You may have seen golfers lick the dirt off their golf ball so the ball will
roll true or to hold a used tee in their mouth, but this can be a dangerous
habit. Toxic substances on the courses may cling to the ball and tee. These
include fertilizers, pesticides, weed killers, and animal excrement. Some
golfers who have a habit of cleaning their golf balls by licking them
develop hepatitis, an inflammation of the liver. It is best to always carry
a towel in your golf bag and dampen it to wipe your ball clean.


54 GOLF
Safety, First Aid, and Fitness.
Then quickly work to lower the person’s temperature. Move
the person to a shady, cool area, loosen tight clothing, and fan
the person. Apply wet towels. If you have ice packs, wrap them
in a thin barrier (such as a shirt) and place them under the
armpits and against the neck and groin. If the person is able to
drink, give small amounts of cool water.
Blisters. Blisters are pockets of fluid that form when the skin is
aggravated by friction. A hot spot—the tender area as a blister
starts to form—is a signal to stop immediately. The protection
a golf glove gives you should help prevent blisters on the hand.
However, to help prevent foot blisters, wear golf shoes that fit
and pay attention to how your feet feel. To treat a hot spot,
cover the tender area with a piece of moleskin or moleskin
foam padding slightly larger than the hot spot. Use several lay-
ers if necessary. If you must drain a blister, clean the area first.
Then sterilize a pin in the flame of a match, prick the blister
near its lower edge, and press out the fluid. Change bandages
every day to help keep wounds clean and avoid infection.
Diabetics who develop blisters should see a physician.
Sprains and Strains. A sprain occurs when a joint is bent
far enough to overstretch the ligaments, the tough bands that
hold joints together. Twisting an ankle is one way a person
could sustain a sprain. A strain occurs when muscles are over-
stretched, creating tears in the muscle fibers, such as lower
back pain from muscles strained by overuse or by lifting loads
that are too heavy.
To treat sprains and strains, have the victim take any
weight off of the injured joint and instruct the person not to
use the joint. Do not try to move or straighten an injured limb.
Apply ice packs or cold compresses to the limb for no more
than 20 minutes at a time. Be sure to place a barrier such as a
thin towel between the ice pack and bare skin. Seek medical
treatment if the pain persists or is severe.
It is best to prevent sunburn. Whenever you are outdoors, use plenty
of sunscreen with a sun protection factor (SPF) rating of at least 15.
Apply sunscreen liberally about a half-hour before sunlight exposure
and reapply every two hours, especially if you are sweating. A broad-
brimmed hat, long-sleeved shirt, and long pants provide even more
protection. To treat painful sunburn, apply cool, damp, or wet cloths;
change the cloths frequently. Stay under shade.
If possible, carry
a cell phone on
the golf course;
in the event of
an emergency
you may need
to contact the
pro shop or call
911. However,
as a courtesy to
others, turn off
your cell phone
while you
are playing.


GOLF 55
.Safety, First Aid, and Fitness
Physical and Mental Fitness
Golf can be beneficial physically—especially if one walks while
playing—as well as mentally.
Overall fitness will help prevent injuries. Golfers should
develop their cardiovascular system by jogging, walking, climb-
ing stairs, or cycling. Jogging is a good way to become fit
because all it requires is a good pair of running shoes. Try
to work upward so that you can jog at least 30 minutes at a
time, three times a week.
Because golfers once believed that some exercises, such as
weight training, would impede their swings, they did little to
strengthen their bodies. More modern players, however, have
discovered that being fit can help to prevent injuries and
improve their stamina throughout tournaments. In some high
schools and colleges, coaches are requiring their players to at
least jog to improve their fitness levels.
You also can improve mentally because golf requires com-
petitors to learn how to handle pressure and control emotions,
eliminate or control negative thoughts, and think positively,
visualize a shot, and trust themselves and their abilities.
Because success in golf can be as much mental as physical,
some sports psychologists specialize in helping golfers. Some
golfers visit a sports psychologist for a mental tune-up as well
as an instructor for a swing tune-up.
Exercises
Before exercise and physical fitness became popular among
professional golfers, the 5-foot-7-inch, 150-pound Gary Player
already had endorsed a healthy lifestyle that included exercise
and eating properly. That Player continued to play well into
his 60s should be a testament to how a healthy lifestyle can
benefit not only a golfer, but anyone.
Player believes “physical fitness is the key to top perfor-
mance and success … on the golf course, behind a desk, in the
classroom, or in the kitchen.”
If you are
not accustomed
to exercising,
work into the
activities slowly
to avoid injuries.
Golf is considered by many to be a sport that poses little chance of injury
and that does not require a high level of physical activity. However, there
is plenty of physical movement in a swing and potential for injuries to the
back, elbows, knees, hips, or wrists—especially to players who are not
physically fit.


56 GOLF
Safety, First Aid, and Fitness.
His exercise regimen has included skipping rope, knee bends,
running, fingertip push-ups, squeezing a small sponge rubber
ball, swinging weighted clubs, pulling himself up a rope, and
working hard around his ranch in South Africa. He does warn
against bulking up by using heavy weights because he believes
large muscles can ruin a golf swing.
Player has complemented his exercising by following a diet
that includes plenty of whole grains, fish, vegetables, fruits, and
meat. He avoids fried foods, sugar, potatoes, white bread, rich
desserts, coffee, tea, and alcohol. He also abhors smoking.
It was not long before other players on the PGA Tour began
realizing that to compete for very long at a high level, they also
needed to be fit. Regardless of their fitness level, golfers are
susceptible to injury to certain parts of the body, such as the
elbow, hip, knee, and lower back. To strengthen those areas,
golfers should exercise.
For the hands and wrists: Tightly squeeze a rubber ball or
a hand-squeezing spring device. Clench it for seven seconds,
release, and squeeze again. Repeat this several times with both
hands. Do this as often as possible during the day.
For the legs: If you have weights, you can do half-squats and
toe raises with the weights across your shoulders. If
you do not have weights, running is the best way to
strengthen the legs. It improves leg stamina and the
cardiovascular system. Player also recommends jogging
and kangaroo jumps—standing on your toes, squatting
down, and springing as high as possible into the air.
Do this 10 to 15 times, twice a day.
Another good leg exercise is the wall sit. Simulate
a sitting position with your back flat against a wall,
your arms dangling at your sides, and your feet spread
widely apart. Hold this position for a minute at first,
but build up to two minutes. Repeat several times.
A one-legged squat also is one of Player’s favorites.
Put one leg and your arms out from your body while
standing. Then do a knee bend on the other leg.
For the forearms and wrists: Hold a dumbbell in each hand
with a weight that you can hold at arm’s length and shoulder
height. Twirl the wrists clockwise for 10 seconds and then coun-
terclockwise for 10 seconds. Bring your arms to your sides and
do the same thing. If you do not have dumbbells, just put your
arms out and double the amount of time you twirl your wrists.
The American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons suggests
similar exercises to strengthen the forearms. Take a lightweight
The one-legged
squat
Pros Vijay Singh
and Ernie Els both
saw measurable
improvement
in their golf
game after
boosting their
fitness routine.
The wall sit


GOLF 57
.Safety, First Aid, and Fitness
dumbbell and lower the weight to the end of your fingers. Then
curl the weight back into your palm, followed by curling your
wrist to lift the weight an inch or two higher. Do 10 repetitions
with each arm.
You also can do reverse wrist curls by using the same light-
weight dumbbell. Place your hands in front of you, palms down.
Using your wrist, lift the weight up and down. Hold the arm you
are exercising above your elbow with your other hand to limit
the motion to your forearm. Do 10 repetitions with each arm.
Lower Back Pain
The rotational stresses of the golf swing place considerable
pressure on the spine and muscles, and can cause lower back
pain. Poor flexibility and muscle strength can make one more
prone to this injury. Also, golfers with bad swing techniques are
more prone to hurt their backs.
One of the best ways for golfers to avoid back problems is
to do some simple stretching exercises before playing a round
of golf and then warm up by hitting some golf balls. Start out
with a short club, such as a pitching wedge or 9-iron, and work
up to the longer clubs, such as the 2-iron and 3-iron. Do not
start out taking full swings, but rather begin by hitting short
pitch shots with a half-swing.
Safety Tips and Etiquette
• During the stroke or practice swing: Make sure no one could
be hit by the club, ball or other loose impediments such as
stones that might be propelled by the club.
• Never hit into the group ahead of you. Play only when the
players are out of range of the distance of the club you are
going to use. Wait for them to leave the green.
• Alert grounds crew and other staff if they are in range. Yell
“fore” or give a wave that is acknowledged by them.
• If you hear “fore” don’t look for the ball … take cover!
• To avoid being hit by other players, always stay behind a
ball’s flight path.
• If riding in a golf cart follow all rules of the golf course, read
the safety labels, keep legs and arms inside the cart, and be
prepared for sudden stops or turns.
• Stay aware of your surroundings. Common sense and
a little forethought can go a long way toward keeping you
injury-free on the golf course.





GOLF 59
.Conduct and Procedures on the Golf Course
Conduct and Procedures
on the Golf Course
Besides following the “Rules of Golf,” players should also fol-
low a code of decent and friendly conduct. This code includes
safety, courtesy, fast play, and care of the course.
Courtesy and Fast Play
• When it is someone else’s turn to play, do not move, talk, or
stand too close or in the player’s line of vision.
• Play at an appropriate pace; do not dally. Be prepared to hit
when it is your turn. Line up your shot while others are lin-
ing up theirs. Leave the green as soon as all players in your
group have finished the hole. Slow play has become a major
problem at golf courses.
• Let faster players play through.
• When on the greens, do not step in the
line of another player’s putt.
• Play usually is in turn, with the
player farthest from the hole hit-
ting first, but in informal play,
it is often prudent to hit when
ready to help speed play.
• When replacing the flagstick, do
so carefully to avoid damaging
the hole.


60 GOLF
Conduct and Procedures on the Golf Course.
Care of the Course
• After hitting from a bunker, be sure to
rake where you walked and the area
from where you hit. Do not leave the
rake lying in the sand.
• Replace all divots—turf that is ripped up
after a shot (usually with an iron).
• Use a divot tool to repair your ball mark
or others’ ball marks after hitting to a
green. This not only keeps the surface
smooth for upcoming players but also
helps the grass heal. Repair any spike
marks (many courses do not allow metal
spikes) and walk carefully on greens. Do
not drag your feet.
• Avoid unnecessary practice swings to
avoid damaging turf during the swing.
Basically, try to leave the course in the con-
dition you would like to find it.
The Rules of Golf
Golf, as all sports, has rules that must be
followed. The Royal and Ancient Golf Club
of St. Andrews and the United States Golf Association write and
interpret the rules. Any rules changes occur every four years
when the two groups meet to discuss possible changes. While
there are too many rules to list here, you should learn some
basic procedures and rules before playing.
• It may help to pen a unique identifying mark on your golf
balls to distinguish them from those of the other players.
• Arrive at the first tee on time for your scheduled start.
• Announce your handicap to other players if it is a
handicap tournament.
• Play with undue delay. Be ready to hit when it is your turn.
• Play the ball as it lies unless local rules permit you to touch
or move the ball.
Marking your ball
Replacing a divot
Be respectful of
the golf course
wherever you
play. Dispose of
trash in the trash
receptacles on
the course, or
pack it out in your
golf bag. If you
are using a cart,
stay on the cart
path and along
designated routes.


GOLF 61
.Conduct and Procedures on the Golf Course
• Play the course as you find it. Do not improve the
lie of the ball or the area of the intended swing or
line of play.
• If you are in a hazard, do not ground (touch the
ground or water with your club) before striking the
ball or you will incur a penalty.
• You are allowed up to 14 clubs (any mix) in your
golf bag during a round.
• You cannot ask or get advice from anyone other
than your caddie or partner, if playing on a team.
• Do not play the wrong ball; that is why you mark
it. In match play, you would lose the hole. In stroke
play, you would incur a two-stroke penalty and
possible disqualification.
It is important to learn the options for penalty areas,
lost ball, out of bounds, and unplayable lie.
• Penalty areas might include areas such as deserts, jungles,
lava rock fields, etc. The two types of penalty areas will
be known by the color of their marking: red penalty areas
(formerly called lateral water hazards) and yellow penalty
areas (formerly called water hazards). If you hit into a
penalty area marked with a red stake, here are your options:
1. Play the ball as it lies
without penalty.
2. Drop a ball behind the
penalty area, keeping
the point at which the
original ball last crossed
the margin of the hazard
directly between the hole
and the spot on which the
ball is dropped, with no
limit to how far behind
the hazard the ball may
be dropped, and taking a
one-stroke penalty.
3. Follow stroke-and-distance
procedure and hit from
the original spot with a
one-stroke penalty.


62 GOLF
Conduct and Procedures on the Golf Course.
4. Drop within two club lengths of the point where the ball
entered the penalty area and no closer to the hole, and
take a one-stroke penalty.
• If you hit into a penalty area marked with a yellow stake or
line, here are your options:
1. Hit the ball as it lies without penalty.
2. Follow stroke-and-distance procedure by hitting from the
original spot with a one-stroke penalty.
3. Drop a ball behind the yellow penalty area, keeping the
point at which the original ball last crossed the margin of the
penalty area directly between the hole and the spot on which
the ball is dropped, with no limit to how far behind the
penalty area the ball may be dropped, and taking a
one-stroke penalty.
• If a ball is lost or is out of bounds, you should play a ball,
under penalty of one stroke, as close as possible to the spot
from where the original ball was last played.
• A player may declare the ball unplayable at any place on the
course except when the ball is in a water hazard. If the ball
is deemed unplayable, you may do any one of the following:
1. Play a ball, under penalty of one stroke, as near as
possible to the spot where the original ball was played.
2. Drop a ball, within two club lengths from the spot where
the original ball laid, but not closer to the hole.
3. Drop a ball, behind the point where the ball lay, keeping
that point directly between the hole and the spot on
which the ball is dropped, with no limit to how far behind
that point the ball may be dropped.
• When a ball is hit out of bounds, usually outside an area
marked by white stakes or lines, play a ball from as close as
possible to the original spot, under penalty of one stroke.
• If you breach the rules during match or stroke play and must
incur a penalty, you must mention it so that your opponent
knows the status of the match.
• If, during match play, you believe your opponent has broken
a rule, make your claim before teeing off on the next hole.
If you wait until playing the next hole, it will be too late.


GOLF 63
.Conduct and Procedures on the Golf Course
• If you are playing stroke play, carefully check your score
on each hole after your round. If you sign a card with a
lower score on a hole than you actually made, penalty is
disqualification. If you sign for a higher score on a hole,
the score will stand.
You should carry a small rules book in your golf bag. If you are
in a tournament and do not understand a rule, ask an official
for an interpretation.
Rules of Amateur Status
Amateur golf is for fun and sport. Often, business deals
and connections have been made on the golf course.
Certainly, many friendships have been made.
Throughout most of golf’s history, there has been
a distinct difference between amateurs and profession-
als. The purpose for this is to provide a basis for fair
competition because the professional should hold an
advantage over the amateur in playing skill. The USGA
has a long list of rules that a player must follow to
maintain amateur status. The most common violations
of those rules are:
• Playing for prize money.
• Receiving payment for teaching golf.
• Accepting a tournament prize that exceeds $500 retail
value, except a symbolic prize such as a trophy that is
intended for display.
• Accepting golf equipment from a dealer without
proper payment.
• Accepting certain expenses to play in golf tourna-
ments. There are some exceptions, including for
junior competitions and when representing one’s
school or college.


Harry Vardon


GOLF 65
.Major Influences
Major Influences
Hundreds, if not thousands, of officials, players, developers,
and managers have influenced the game of golf. Among those
who are most significant are Joseph C. Dey, former executive
director of the USGA and first commissioner of the Tournament
Players Division, and Deane Bernan, who succeeded Dey and
directed the PGA Tour into a rich, viable, nationwide tour. The
list of influences includes former players such as Paul Runyan,
Gene Sarazen, Bobby Locke, Sam Snead, Charlie Sifford, Lee
Elder, Althea Gibson, Seve Ballesteros, and Tom Watson, as well
as course architects such as Pete Dye and sports agents such as
Mark McCormack. Each has influenced the game, most notably
increasing the game’s popularity.
Harry Vardon and Bobby Jones
Englishman Harry Vardon and American Bobby
Jones were two early golfers whose precision play
and success made them heroes in their own coun-
tries. It was said of Vardon, who played in the late
1800s and early 1900s, that if he played a course
twice, he was so accurate that he would play
out of his same divots the second time around.
Because he had big hands, the right-handed
Vardon devised an overlapping grip, which still
bears his name.
Jones pulled off golf’s most famous feat in
1930 when he won the grand slam of that time—
the British and U.S. Opens and the British and U.S.
Amateurs. No one else has won four major tourna-
ments in the same year. Jones retired from compet-
itive golf later that year at the ripe old age of 28.
Jones’ record includes winning the British Open
three times, the U.S. Open four times, the British
Amateur once, and the U.S. Amateur four times.
Bobby Jones


66 GOLF
Major Influences.
Ben Hogan and Byron Nelson
These two Texans caddied together and learned how to play at
Glen Garden Golf and Country Club in Fort Worth, Texas.
Hogan, known for spending hours on the practice tee to
hone his swing, is considered one of golf’s greatest. He won
63 PGA Tour titles and was the leading money winner among
American professionals from 1940 to 1942 and in 1946 and
1948. He captured the hearts of many when he rebounded
from severe injuries suffered in a bus collision in 1949. Only
17 months later, Hogan came back to win his second of four
U.S. Open titles while limping around on wrapped legs. His
comeback inspired a 1951 movie, Follow the Sun. Hogan won
two PGA Championship titles, two Masters, and one British
Open, which gave him a career grand slam.
Byron Nelson is recognized by many as the first to adopt
a “modern” swing after switching from wooden shafts to steel
shafts. He won an unprecedented 11 consecutive tournaments in
1945 and won 18 tournaments that year, while averaging 68.3
strokes a round. His swing was so consistent that a golf-swinging
machine to test golf balls and clubs was dubbed “Iron Byron.”
Nelson, who won money in 113 consecutive tournaments,
including two Masters, a U.S. Open, and two PGA Champion-
ships, retired from playing full-time early in his career, in 1946.
He later worked as a television golf analyst and became the
first and only golfer to have a tournament named after him, the
Byron Nelson Classic. He also is known for his untiring work
for charities and other golf-related causes.
The Big Three
Jack Nicklaus, Arnold Palmer, and Gary Player each had his own
illustrious career, and because the three dominated professional
golf much of the 1960s and ‘70s, they became known as the Big
Three. A tournament’s prestige often was measured on whether
at least one of the Big Three competed. They also became
friendly rivals, and a television series of “Big Three Golf” was
produced that featured the three playing against each other.
Arnold Palmer’s charisma and his ability to fashion
comebacks during the dawn of television golf coverage in the
late 1950s and early ‘60s made him one of the game’s most
revered players. He had a throng of fans, appropriately dubbed
“Arnie’s Army.”


GOLF 67
.Major Influences
One of his biggest achievements and what gave
him his reputation for comebacks were the Masters and
U.S. Open in 1960. At the Masters, Palmer birdied the
final two holes of the tournament to edge Ken Venturi
by one stroke. In the Open, which was a 36-hole finish
back then, Palmer came from seven shots behind to
finish the final round with a 65. In typical Palmer
fashion, he ignored the trouble on the first short par-4
hole and drove the green to begin his rally.
Throughout his career, Palmer won four Masters
(1958, 1960, 1962, and 1964), the 1960 U.S. Open,
and the 1961 and 1962 British Open titles.
When Jack Nicklaus turned professional in 1962,
he immediately showed that he would be Palmer’s
main rival by winning the U.S. Open that year. He
often bested the popular Palmer and so was not well-
liked at first by many golf enthusiasts. He eventually
won them over with his outstanding play and a
physical makeover that included growing out his short,
blond hair and trimming his weight. This resulted in
his nickname, the Golden Bear.
Nicklaus has won an unprecedented 18 major
titles. He won six Masters (1963, 1965, 1966, 1972,
1975, and 1986, when he became the oldest Masters
winner at age 46); five PGA Championships (1963,
1971, 1973, 1975, 1980), four U.S. Open titles
(1962, 1967, 1972, 1980), and three British Open
championships (1966, 1970, 1978).
Arnold Palmer
Jack Nicklaus


68 GOLF
Major Influences.
Also during that time, South African Gary
Player began exerting himself. Player won three
Masters (1961, 1974, and 1978), two PGA titles
(1962 and 1972), three British Opens (1959,
1968, and 1974), and one U.S. Open (1965). He
became only the third golfer after Gene Sarazen
and Ben Hogan to win a career grand slam by
winning all four major tournaments.
Because of their prolific wins and domi-
nance of the game of golf during this period,
Palmer, Nicklaus, and Player became three of
the biggest names in golf.
Lee Trevino
When he became a major force on the PGA
Tour, Lee Trevino proved that you do not
have to grow up at country clubs and have a
picture-perfect swing to be successful at golf.
He grew up poor and developed an unorthodox
swing that includes an open stance, a closed
clubface, and a blocking-out move on the
downswing that promoted a fade.
Trevino’s family lived close to a golf course,
and he honed his game by working at a driv-
ing range in Dallas, Texas. He also caddied and
worked as a groundskeeper. He played his golf
at municipal courses and often would play
against opponents using only one club, or using
a soft drink bottle wrapped in tape as a club. He
joined the PGA Tour in 1966 after a stint in
the Marines and won the U.S. Open just two
years later.
Trevino has said his biggest moment came
when he beat Jack Nicklaus in an 18-hole
playoff to win the 1971 U.S. Open. He caused
some ripples when he refused to play the Masters for several years.
While he said it was because the course did not suit his game,
some speculated that he also was protesting the Augusta National
Golf Club’s past racial policies. He would change his shoes in
his car and seldom enter the clubhouse when he did play there.
During his career, Trevino won two U.S. Open titles, two British
Open titles, and three PGA Championships.
Lee Trevino
Gary Player


GOLF 69
.Major Influences
Recent Superstars
A host of young, up-and-coming golfers have
shown they are ready to take their places
among the top competitors in the world.
Rory McIlroy, Jason Day, and Rickie Fowler
are among the next generation of players
to emerge in recent years. Another, Joseph
Bramlett, might not be far behind.
McIlroy reached a new level with a record-
breaking victory at age 22 in the U.S. Open,
his first major, at the Congressional Country
Club in Bethesda, Maryland. His 16-under
par 268 over 72 holes broke the previous U.S.
Open record of 272 held by Jack Nicklaus, Lee
Janzen, Tiger Woods, and Jim Furyk. Analysts,
however, expect much, much more from McIlroy, who is from
Northern Ireland. He also almost won the Masters Tournament in
2011 and will no doubt be challenged in the future by the likes of
Day and Fowler, both of whom bring unique styles and talents to
the game.
Jason Day, an Aussie, is the only current golfer to have
top-10 finishes in three consecutive majors over the last year. In
August 2010, he finished tied for 10th at the PGA Championship
and, at age 22, had second-place finishes at 2011 Masters and
behind McIlroy at the 2011 U.S. Open.
Motocross racing was Rickie Fowler’s
first love, although he has been solely a golfer
since a dirt bike accident during his freshman
year in high school changed his priorities.
As an amateur, he helped the United States
to victory in the celebrated Walker Cup in
2007; he was only 19 at the time. In 2008,
he won the prestigious Ben Hogan Award—
presented to the top college golfer—as a senior
at Oklahoma State University. In 2007–2008,
he was the world’s No. 1–ranked amateur
male golfer. That success carried over to the
PGA Tour, where he was selected Rookie of
the Year in 2010 after earning seven top-10
finishes. In 2011, he finished fifth at the
British Open.
Rory McIlroy
Rickie Fowler


70 GOLF
Major Influences.
Many golf fans have an eye on Joseph Bramlett, one of
only two African American players on the PGA Tour in 2011. In
2002, Bramlett, then 14, became the youngest player to qualify
for the U.S. Amateur. As a freshman at Stanford, he was All-
American while helping his team to the NCAA championship.
However, a serious wrist injury kept him off the golf course for
almost two years. With uncommon resolve, Bramlett rebounded
to pursue his dream of a place on the PGA Tour, which he
earned in 2011.
Influential Women Golfers
While men have dominated golf throughout
most of history, women now account for
about 40 percent of new golfers. However,
women make up only about 13 percent of
the total number of players.
Probably the first woman to gener-
ate wide public interest in golf was Mildred
“Babe” Didrikson-Zaharias, a multitalented
athlete. She excelled in basketball and won
two gold medals and a silver in the high
jump, high hurdles, and javelin in the 1932
Olympics in Los Angeles. Then she took up
golf, and through hours and months of gruel-
ing practice, she became the top woman play-
er. She won every major amateur golf tourna-
ment in the next 15 years and helped form the
Ladies Professional Golf Association in 1950.
Before she died of cancer in 1956,
Didrikson-Zaharias had won 55 amateur and professional tour-
naments, including five majors. Her power off the tee allowed
her to hit farther than many men; she virtually overpowered
golf courses.
Another strong player, Mickey Wright, possessed a near-
perfect swing. Ben Hogan and Byron Nelson said she had the
best swing they had seen. Before her career ended, Wright won
82 professional tournaments. She was such an attraction that
sponsors would threaten to cancel their tournaments if she did
not play. She joined the tour in 1955 and won her first profes-
sional tournament in 1956. Among her victories were four U.S.
Women’s Open titles and four LPGA Championships. She won
13 titles in 1963.
Babe Didrikson-Zaharias


GOLF 71
.Major Influences
If there are any parallels in wom-
en’s golf to men’s golf and Tiger Woods,
it probably would be Nancy Lopez. She
had a hugely successful amateur career
and left college early to turn professional
in 1977. She was an immediate hit. She
finished second in her first three tourna-
ments, and her charisma and personality
won over her peers, the gallery, and the
media. Whenever she played, television
coverage often followed her.
Lopez has a powerful, though
unorthodox, swing and, despite her
relaxed attitude, she is an intense com-
petitor. She had 35 tour victories by the
time she was 30. In 1978, she won nine
tournaments, including her first of three
LPGA Championships. Heading into
2002, Lopez had won 48 titles, including
three LPGA titles.
Swedish golfer Annika Sorenstam
used a scientific analysis approach to
golf, practicing strokes and swings until
she had them letter perfect. She was
inspired by Sweden’s “first lady” of
golf, Pia Nilsson, who later became her
coach. In the early 1990s Sorenstam
attended the University of Arizona,
where she won seven collegiate titles.
She became a professional golfer in 1992
and was named Ladies European Tour
Rookie of the Year in 1993. She joined
the LPGA Tour in 1994 and was named
the LPGA Rookie of the Year. Her U.S
Women’s Open win in 1995 was her first
U.S. victory. Like her predecessor, Nancy
Lopez, Sorenstam brought more interest
and excitement to women’s golf. She
racked up tournament wins and awards
throughout her career, among them
LPGA Player of the Year in 1995, 1997,
1998, and 2001.
Nancy Lopez
Annika Sorenstam


72 GOLF
Major Influences.
In 2003, Sorenstam accepted an invitation to be the first
woman to play in a Colonial golf tournament. While she didn’t
make the cut to play in the whole tournament, she said she
found the experience exciting. That same year, she was voted
the Associated Press Female Athlete of the Year and inducted
into the World Golf Hall of Fame. After 16 years as a pro golfer,
Sorenstam retired in 2008.
By the time Lorena Ochoa was 7, she had already won
state and national golfing championships in her native
Guadalajara, Mexico, so it was no surprise when she declared
at age 11 that she wanted to be the best player in the world.
She eventually attended the University of Arizona, where she
piled up NCAA awards during the two years she was enrolled
there. In 2003, she received the Nancy Lopez Award as the
world’s best female amateur golfer.
Ochoa began her professional
career in May 2002, winning three
golf tournaments on the Futures Tour
that year. She broke the ice in 2004,
when she won her first two LPGA Tour
events. In 2008, she qualified for the
World Golf Hall of Fame and will be
eligible for induction in 2012, when
she completes 10 seasons on the LPGA
Tour. By 2009, Lorena was on her way
to her fourth Rolex Player of the Year
award and her fourth Vare Trophy win.
Lorena Ochoa


GOLF 73
.Major Influences
Taiwan native Yani Tseng picked
up golf clubs when she was 6. As a
young golfer, she gathered amateur golf
awards all around the globe, including
four wins in the United States and 15
international tournaments. She turned
professional in January 2007, and in
2008 she was named LPGA Rookie of
the Year. She was only 19.
Tseng’s accuracy and skill have
helped her become the fastest player
in LPGA history to earn $2 million in
earnings. In 2010, this record-breaking
young woman was named Female
Player of the Year by the Golf Writers
Association of America. In 2011 she
captured the No. 1 position in Women’s
World Golf Rankings and also became
the youngest player to win four con-
secutive LPGA major tournaments. One
month later, she won the Women’s British
Open, making her the youngest
player—male or female—to win five major championships.
She rounded out the 2011 season with the LPGA Tour Player
of the Year award for the second straight year.
Yani Tseng





GOLF 75
.Careers in Golf
Careers in Golf
Because of the many facets of golf, there are a variety of careers
available even if one is not a great player. First, there is a need
for architects to design and build courses. Then there are those
who work at various jobs at the clubhouses and pro shops.
Courses need maintenance personnel, and the PGA of America
has sectional offices throughout the country that need person-
nel. These sectional sites usually are clearinghouses for posi-
tions in their particular area, and one of their functions is to
conduct tournaments for their sectional professionals. Here are
some of the typical positions associated with golf.
Club Professional
Most golf professionals serve at public and private golf courses,
where they provide lessons, operate golf shops, direct a staff,
and help conduct tournaments. A club professional must attend
schools conducted by the PGA, pass playing tests, and complete
an apprentice program. In 1994, the PGA began its Golf
Professional Training program, replacing previous programs.
Although club professionals are tied to a club, they often
have tournaments that pit them against their peers.
Touring Professionals
While club professionals sometimes compete in tournaments,
other players devote themselves to tournament play and make
their living by competing for prize money. They often travel
nationwide and worldwide to compete.
The PGA Tour and the LPGA Tour are the two organizations
in the United States that offer the most prize money for men
and women professionals. There also are tours worldwide.
Satellite tours are available for players who are hoping to elevate
their games and earn playing privileges on the larger tours. There
also are tours for senior players, such as the Senior PGA Tour.


76 GOLF
Careers in Golf.
Professional Instructors
Although club professionals
offer lessons among their other
duties, some professionals
concentrate only on teaching.
Many teach at instructional
centers and use technology that
includes video to show different
angles of swings and that can
allow comparisons of students’
swings with those of the great
players. Some instructors spe-
cialize in certain areas of the
game, such as the short game.
Many of the world’s top players
usually have an instructor who
constantly monitors their game.
Sports Psychologist
Because golf can be as much a mental challenge as a physical
challenge, a growing number of golfers work with sports psy-
chologists. These specially trained professionals work with ath-
letes to help them eliminate negative thoughts and concentrate
on positive thoughts, among other things. Many top amateur
and professional golfers have sought this type of help.
Golf Course Superintendent
The golf course superintendent coordinates the management and
maintenance of the course with the club manager and the golf
professional. A superintendent monitors the course’s condition
and playability and works with a crew to ensure that day-to-day
tasks such as mowing, watering, raking bunkers, and repairing
divots are done. The golf course superintendent must know the
“Rules of Golf,” have administrative abilities to manage a budget
and staff as well as technical knowledge about turf management,
water conservation, drainage, and irrigation systems, appropri-
ate use of insecticides and fungicides, and the protection of
ecological systems on the course. Often, a course superintendent
has had formal education relating to plant science or landscap-
ing, or has met the requirements to be professionally certified
through a program offered by the Golf Course Superintendents
Association of America.


GOLF 77
.Careers in Golf
Architect
With the growing number of golf courses being built, there
has been an increase in the number golf course designers and
architects. Designing courses usually involves knowledge of
landscaping, engineering, turf, grasses, and environmental
statutes. Some well-known playing professionals, including
Arnold Palmer and Jack Nicklaus, entered this profession
and provided input about course design in partnership with a
known architect.
Management
Many courses being built are open to the public, and manage-
ment companies often are hired to operate the clubs. Many
municipalities have leased their courses to management
companies. Management companies hire their own employees
to operate the clubhouse and to maintain the course.





GOLF 79
.Introduction to Disc Golf
Introduction to
Disc Golf
Disc golf is played much like golf except, instead of a ball and
clubs, players use a flying disc. The goal of the sport is the
same as golf: completing each hole in the fewest strokes or, in
the case of disc golf, fewest throws.
A disc golf hole begins from a tee area and ends at a
target, most commonly an elevated metal basket type of
catcher. As a player progresses down the fairway, they must
make each consecutive throw from the spot where the previous
throw landed. In group play, the player who is farthest away
from the target always throws first.
Trees, shrubs, and terrain changes located in and around
the fairways provide challenging obstacles for the golfer. When
the disc comes to rest within the target, the hole is complete.
Where to Play Disc Golf
With more than 10,000 disc golf courses in the United
States and more than 13,000 worldwide, there probably is
a course near you. The PDGA course directory or the UDisc
Directory app can help you find a course.
Beginning players should look for a shorter, beginner-
friendly course. Look for courses under 2,500 feet for younger
or first-time players; 5,000 feet or under for older or more
advanced players. Easier courses have an average hole length
of 250 feet or less. When calculating the average hole length,
make sure to check the number of holes on the course, as not
all courses have 18 holes (the common length of a golf course).
Who Plays Disc Golf
More than half a million Americans regularly play disc golf.
Most of these play just for fun, but just as in regular golf, there
For information
on specific topics
and techniques
detailed in
the disc golf
requirements, visit
www.pdga.com,
edgediscgolf.org,
YouTube, and
other sites.*
*Get parent or guardian’s
permission before going
online.


80 GOLF
.Introduction to Disc Golf.
are professional players. The Professional Disc Golf Association
(PDGA) oversees both amateur events and a professional tour.
The PDGA sanctions more than 9,000 events each year and has
an active membership of more than 129,000 competitive disc
golfers from 70+ countries around the world.
Disc Golf Equipment
The roots of disc golf are firmly grounded with the Frisbee® and
date to early disc golf promoters like “Steady” Ed Headrick and
George Sappenfield in the 1960’s and 70’s.
Soon the days of using a simple Frisbee®
graduated to the modern golf disc, with
the triangular beveled-edge disc
patented by Dave Dunipace in
1983. This disc provides the
player a next-level experience.
With most of the disc’s
weight in the rim, the golf
disc flies farther and more
accurately, even in the wind.
Only one disc is needed
to enjoy the game, but as players
improve and get more active in the
sport, a range of discs can come into play. A
three-disc starter set helps players master the three
key throws: the drive, approach, and putt.
The Discs
• Distance drivers produce the maximum distance possible off
the tee. Some models provide a straight line of flight, while
others are designed to travel left or right down the fairway.
• Fairway drivers are for accuracy in the fairway and shorter
driving situations. For many players with slower arm speed,
fairway drivers provide nearly the same distance as the
distance driver, but with greater control and accuracy. New
players tend to find these discs easier to use as a main driver.
• Mid-range discs provide accuracy and control for a wide
variety of shots. These discs are effective in many situations,
from drives to approaches and even putting. The natural
slower speed makes them very accurate—a trade-off for the
distance they lack.


..Introduction to Disc Golf
• Putt and approach discs are molded specifically for putting
and making short, controlled upshots. Putt and approach
discs come in a variety of plastics and stiffnesses to accom-
modate different putting styles and grip preferences. These
discs offer players of all skill levels predictability and perfor-
mance around the target.
• The mini-marker is a small, 3- to 6-inch disc that is used to
mark your lie—where your disc lands on the course—so you
can pick up your main disc for your next throw.
The Target
Disc golf began with players throwing Frisbees® and flying discs
at objects like lampposts, trees, trash cans, or other items. In
1976, Ed Headrick invented the above-ground chain target that
standardized the sport.
There are basically two types of targets: heavy-duty targets
that are made to be installed permanently on courses, and
lighter, portable targets that can be moved and stored easily.
Rules of the Game
As with every sport, there are rules and regulations to follow
that ensure fair participation by everyone. The formal rules for
disc golf have been developed by the PDGA and are available at
www.pdga.com/rules/official rules-disc-golf.
Each hole requires the player to start from a tee area and
count each throw until the disc is in the target. Penalty throws
might be added in certain situations. Rules allow every
player to have an equal chance to play their best.
The acronym E.D.G.E. can help you remember the
four most basic rules of the sport.
E—Etiquette. Respect each other and your
surroundings. Safety is first priority. Player whose disc lies
farthest from the target always throws first.
D—Don’t get ahead of a player who is farther away.
No one should be between the thrower and the target.
G—Get your lie right. Play your disc where it lies.
You can place your foot behind your disc or use a mini-
marker to create the lie. Throw with at least one supporting
point behind your lie. You can run up and throw from your
lie outside of 10 meters.
E—Every throw counts. Even the shortest drop-in
putt counts as a throw.


82 GOLF
.Introduction to Disc Golf.
Throwing Fundamentals
The keys to throwing are timing and technique, not strength
or body composition. Starting with a backhand throw from a
standstill builds a solid foundation. As skills develop, work in
the backhand throw with an X-Step and other advanced throws
discussed in the next chapter.
Common Backhand Throw: Grips
The grip is a key to success, as the proper grip allows for
maximum speed, angle, and flight trajectory. Backhand
grips and throws are most common. To start, learn the
backhand throw using only the control grip—this promotes
safety by reducing “grip lock” and concentrates effort on
technique and timing. Once you feel comfortable here, move
on to the power grip for more distance. Putting uses either the
control or control fan grip. Approach shots can use any of the
three grips depending on comfort and distance.
CONTROL GRIP
A great grip for beginners, putting, and approaches.
• Rest disc rim into the palm pocket under the thumb.
• Fingers rest comfortably on the bottom flight plate,
not against the rim.
• Comfortably rest your thumb on top.
• Rest index finger against the outside nose of the rim
either directly on the parting line of the top/bottom or slight-
ly lower on the rim nose based on comfort.
POWER GRIP
The most widely used grip for throwing.
• Rest disc rim into the palm pocket under the thumb.
• Curl fingers under the bottom flight plate and against the rim.
• Comfortably rest your thumb on top; it should create a
pinch point between the thumb and index finger under-
neath.
• Rest index finger mostly against the inside nose of the
rim to help create the pinch point.
CONTROL FAN GRIP
The control fan grip is like the control grip except the index
finger slightly tucks on the underside of the rim.
Control grip
Control fan grip
Power grip


GOLF 83
..Introduction to Disc Golf
Common Backhand Throw: Drive Sequence
When using the backhand throw, think four easy steps:
GRIP > WHIP > HIT > RIP
THE GRIP
The power grip is the preferred grip for power and big distance.
Focus is on the pinch point between the index finger tucked
under the rim and the thumb on the top of the disc.
THE WHIP
The plant foot moves forward to the plant position, which
signals the uncoiling of the hips, shoulders, and arm. The
shoulders and hips rotate with speed and power unwinding
with the throwing arm. The elbow is opening and driving
toward to the target, moving forcefully through the whip.
THE HIT
This is where all of the created body momentum is transferred
to the arm, wrist and disc ejection point. The plant foot is firmly
set into The HIT position. In a proper HIT position, the throwing
shoulder, lead elbow, hip, knee and plant foot all come into
alignment to provide the most efficient rotation point.


84 GOLF
.Introduction to Disc Golf.
THE RIP
As the body rotates around the created axis, energy and
momentum are transferred to the arm, wrist and disc. The plant
foot pivots with the shoulders as the left foot comes off the
ground. At this point the hips are fully opened, the elbow has
extended and the wrist has abruptly stopped as the disc ejects
or Rips from the curled and pinched finger pads. An important
concentration point is the pinch between the index finger and
the thumb. They should be pinched strongly at the point of Rip.
Putting Fundamentals
Putting is the most important component of disc golf. It
does a player no good to be able to drive the hole and fail to
make the putt. The ability to be a consistent putter will directly
result in better scores. Putting forms and routines can be unique
to each player, yet all are grounded in putting fundamentals.
A comfortable and rhythmic putt starts from a solid
foundation. The feet should be well grounded to provide
a balanced base and traction while providing proper body
alignment toward the target.


GOLF 85
..Introduction to Disc Golf
Putting directly relates to success in disc golf. Therefore,
proper putting techniques and mental awareness should be at
the foundation of any disc golf program. Putting is a motor
skill that is characterized by kinesthesis, sense awareness,
balance, mechanical aptitude, and coordination. While various
styles and stances offer discrete motor skills, the process of
becoming a great putter can develop both open and closed
systems allowing the player pure execution and the ability to
adjust upon sensory input. The following considerations assist
in further refining putting skills.
Putting is an acquired skill through trial, error, and
adjustment. The student must adjust their stance, alignment,
body and arm movements, focus and follow through until they
find what works for them. The idea is to conform to a style that
allows for consistency.
A good putting
performance is
dependent on the
proficiency to analyze
the given task at
hand. The proficient
putter is able to
focus on pertinent
cues and disregard
distractions. It is
important to realize
focus cannot be
forced. Focus is
effortless. The easiest
way to regain focus
is to step away and
take a deep breath.
Highly effective
putting comes with
a connection to an
established routine.
A deep breath before
the putting routine is
an excellent centering
tool.





GOLF 87GOLF 87
.Mastering Disc Golf Techniques
Mastering Disc Golf
Techniques
Once you feel comfortable with the more basic disc golf
techniques, it’s time to try your hand at higher-level skills to up
your game. Next steps:
• Backhand shot with X-Step: The X-Step moves a player
from the back of the tee pad to the front and into position
to throw. It feels like a “step and skip” during which
momentum is built up and shifted smoothly forward.
• Forehand shot: A forehand places the opposite spin on the
disc when compared to a backhand. Throwing discs with
the opposite spin becomes very advantageous when facing
a shot requiring the disc to finish in that direction. Having
confidence to throw either a forehand or backhand when the
hole layout requires is a sign of a true, well rounded player.
• Backhand roller: The backhand roller is an advanced throw
used to get maximum distance when the terrain allows, aid a
player in trouble, or roll down a low canopy fairway for the
elusive birdie look on a tough hole. The roller throw has the
same mechanics as a regular backhand throw but thrown on
a different angle and release point.
• Forehand roller: The forehand roller is less complicated than
the backhand roller. Most players use this shot when they are
off fairway and surrounded by trees or have an obstructive,
shorter distance to the pin and need to get out of trouble.
• Overhand shot: The overhand is used to get a player out of
a jam. The overhand throw can cut fairway corners, take tall
shrubbery and trees out of play with the disc being thrown
on a vertical plain instead of a horizontal. It uses advanced
throwing techniques, which makes it wise to wait until
players fully understand throwing mechanics and how to
safely follow through before introducing the throw.
Always focus on
the throw, not
the result. During
the throw, your
emphasis should
be entirely on the
feel of the disc in
your hand.


.Mastering Disc Golf Techniques..
Move Up With the X-Step
The X-Step increases momentum and when combined with
timing and technique will increase the distance of throws.
These steps are for a right-handed player.
Step 1—The X step begins (and ends) with both feet
perpendicular to the target. Feet are shoulder-width apart, the
front foot positioned 90 degrees to the target, and knees are
slightly bent. Your weight begins to shift when the right foot
steps laterally toward the target and the back foot pushes off
to begin a slide behind the front foot. The upper body moves
away from the target as the legs shift forward. A natural reach
back should occur as the hips close.
Step 2a—The left foot slides laterally behind the right leg, as
weight is transferred from right to left. This is the skip/hop
position. At this point, both feet may be momentarily lifted
off the ground. This effect will depend on skill level, throwing
style, and acceleration through the Whip. The upper body
holds still as momentum
continues to move
forward smoothly.
Step 2b—The feet have
moved through the skip/
hop position. All weight is
now on the left foot. The
left foot lands with hips
rotated back in position
to throw (standstill
position). The right foot is
off the ground as it moves
laterally into the plant
position and pivot. The
Whip accelerates with
the weight shift forward
toward the target and into
The HIT.


GOLF 89
.Mastering Disc Golf Techniques
Step 3—When the lead foot plants The HIT begins and the
disc is released. The hips rotate first followed by the shoulders
and arm motion. The movement ends with the right foot
pivoting as the disc is released and left foot comes around in
the follow-through motion. This is very important, as it relieves
stress on the lead knee.
Enjoy!
Disc golf shares many of the same joys and frustrations as golf,
whether it’s sinking a long putt (yay!) or hitting a tree halfway
down the fairway (boo!). But unlike golf, disc golf is usually
free to play in public parks and takes about half as long to
complete a round. Disc golf is designed to be enjoyed by people
of all ages and economic status, making it a great lifetime
fitness activity. This merit badge is only the beginning!
A Scout is Courteous
Key points of disc golf etiquette, as detailed in the
PDGA’s “Official Rules of Disc Golf,” section 812:
A player must not:
1. Throw if the throw might injure someone or distract
another player; or,
2. Throw out of order without consent or when it would
impact another player; or,
3. Engage in distracting or unsportsmanlike actions
such as:
a. Shouting (unless warning someone at risk of
being struck by a disc)
b. Cursing
c. Striking, kicking, or throwing park, course, or
player equipment,
d. Moving or talking while another player is
throwing,
e. Advancing beyond the away player; or,
4. Leave equipment where it may distract other players
or interfere with a thrown disc; or,
5. Litter


90 GOLF
Disc Golf Lingo.
Disc Golf Lingo
In this section RHBH refers to a right-handed backhand
thrower. Reverse items for a left-handed thrower.
ace. A score of 1 on a hole. Also called a hole-in-one.
anhyzer. The angle of release where the outside nose or left
edge of the disc is tilted upward for a RHBH thrower. The flight
path is a high arc from left to right.
approach or mid-range disc. A slower, blunt-nosed disc
designed for medium-range. Used between a drive and putt or
as a driver on shorter holes. A multi-purpose disc for all-around
use. The slower speed of these discs aids in accuracy.
approach. Typically the second throw meant to set up for the
best putt possible or get a player out of trouble. Also referred to
as an upshot.
backhand. Bringing the disc across the chest, releasing it with
the back of the hand aimed toward the basket. Most common
throw in disc golf.
bead. Golf discs might have a small bead of plastic on the
underside of the rim. Usually on a mid-range disc or putter, the
bead’s presence provides extra stability in flight. Some players
enjoy the feel of resting the index finger on the bead for put-
ting.
bevel. In disc golf, this refers to the angular curve shape of the
disc rim that affects the speed and stability of the disc. Varying
the bevel will change the way the disc acts when thrown at
various velocities.
dome or flight plate. The flight plate is the top and/or bottom
of the disc center and dome is the height of the flight plate. The
flight plate’s thickness and dome height can provide varying
levels of glide and stability.
drive. The first throw on each hole (tee off). The goal is to get
close to the target or find good positioning on the fairway for
an approach or second throw.


GOLF 91
.Disc Golf Lingo.
driver. A higher speed golf disc designed for long distance
flight. Drivers are usually flatter and more sharply beveled in
the rim than shorter range golf discs.
fade. The natural hyzer finish from right to left at the end of
each throw for a RHBH thrower.
fairway driver. A medium speed golf disc designed for shorter
distance drives that favor accuracy over distance. These discs
are usually smaller in diameter, shorter in the wing and often
have a taller dome to aid glide.
flight rating. How the disc is designed to fly. The most com-
mon measurement is the four-number flight system represent-
ing the disc’s speed, glide, high-speed stability (turn), and low-
speed stability (fade).
forehand or sidearm. A grip and throw with the palm fac-
ing toward the target. The disc is brought across the body and
flicked like snapping a towel or forehand in tennis.
glide. The disc’s ability to maintain loft and seemingly float
through the air.
hyzer. The angle of release where the outside nose or left edge
of the disc is tilted downward for a RHBH thrower. The flight
path is a high arc from right to left.
lie. The spot where the disc comes to rest and from where the
next throw is taken. The lie is marked with a mini marker or by
leaving the thrown disc as the marker.
nose. Nose refers to the leading, front edge of the golf disc rim.
The nose can be thick or thin, rounded or beveled which affect
grip and controllability.
nose down. The disc is thrown with the front end or “nose”
titled downward. Nose down allows for maximum speed and
loft for the disc. A good technique for throwing into the wind,
and for longer distance throws.
nose up. The disc is thrown with the front end or “nose”
tilted upward. The flight characteristics will be higher, less dis-
tance, and fade with a sharper hyzer. It’s a good technique for
approaches and longer range putts.
overhand, thumber, or tomahawk. A throwing technique
similar to a high baseball throw. The disc is thrown overhand,
released vertically high and hard. Depending on whether the
thumb was on the inner rim or outer flight plate the disc will
flip toward the flight plate before making a dramatic landing. A
specialty shot for getting out of trouble.


92 GOLF
Disc Golf Lingo..
overstable. For a RHBH thrower, the tendency of a disc to fade
to the left at low or high speeds when thrown flat. Slang would
say this disc is beefy.
par. The average number of throws it takes an experienced
player to complete the hole. Amateur and Pro par may vary to
give appropriate challenges for each skill level.
parting line. The line formed on the disc rim where the lower
and upper molding plates come together.
putt. The final throw(s) of the hole. The goal is to get the disc
to come to rest in the target or “putt-out”.
rim. The outer portion of the disc that is measured by rim
depth or rim width. The rim nose can be thick or thin, rounded
or beveled which will affect grip and controllability. The rim
width is also called the wing which when widened, dramati-
cally changes the speed potential if enough spin is applied.
roller. Throwing the disc on an angle, with a backhand or fore-
hand release, so it lands on its edge and rolls toward the target
on the ground.
snap. The accelerated ejection of the disc causing the disc to
leave the hand.
spin. The speed of the disc’s rotation. Spin equals distance for
a golf disc. Velocity. The speed at which the disc is traveling
directionally through the air.
stable. The tendency of a disc to remain straight through most
of the flight when thrown flat.
tee pad or tee box. A designated area where all players begin
each hole.
turn. The destabilization of a thrown golf disc at its highest
speed. Usually in the first third of its flight. Causing a left to
right drift of the disc for a RHBH thrower.
understable or turnover. For a RHBH thrower, the tendency of
a disc to turn to the right during the high speed portion of the
flight when thrown flat. Slang would say this disc is flippy.
wing. A disc’s wing also refers to the rim width of a disc from
the outer nose to the beginning of the underside flight plate.
Changing the wing width drastically changes the way a disc
acts speed wise. A longer wing adds more weight to the outer
rim so when given more speed, the disc spins longer and more
spin equals more flight or more distance.


GOLF 93
.Golf Resources
Golf Resources
Scouting Literature
Athletics, First Aid, Personal Fitness, and
Sports merit badge pamphlets
Books
Cook, Kevin. Tommy’s Honor: The Story
of Old Tom Morris and Young Tom
Morris, Golf’s Founding Father and
Son. Penguin Group, 2008.
Davis, Martin, and Ken Venturi, Dan
Jenkins, and Tom Watson. Byron
Nelson: The Story of Golf’s Greatest
Gentleman and the Greatest Winning
Streak in History. The American
Golfer, 1997.
Els, Ernie, with David Herman. Ernie
Els’ Guide to Golf Fitness: How
Staying in Shape Will Take Strokes
Off Your Game and Add Yards to
Your Drives. Crown Publishing
Group, 2000.
Hogan, Ben, and Herbert Warren Wind.
Ben Hogan’s Five Lessons: The
Modern Fundamentals of Golf.
Touchstone, 1985.
Jones, Robert Trent. Golf by Design:
How to Lower Your Score by Reading
the Features of a Course. Little,
Brown and Company, 2005.
Leadbetter, David. The Golf Swing.
Penguin Group, 2001.
Nicklaus, Jack, with Ken Bowden. Golf
My Way. Simon & Schuster Adult
Publishing Group, 2005.
Peary, Danny, and Allen F. Richardson,
eds. Great Golf: 150 Years of
Essential Instruction. Stewart,
Tabori & Chang, 2005.
Pelz, Dave, with James A. Frank. Dave
Pelz’s Putting Bible: The Complete
Guide to Mastering the Green.
Doubleday, 2000.
Pelz, Dave. Dave Pelz’s Short Game
Bible: Master the Finesse Swing and
Lower Your Score. Doubleday, 1999.
Penick, Harvey, with Bud Shrake. Harvey
Penick’s Little Red Book: Lessons and
Teachings from a Lifetime in Golf.
Simon & Schuster, 2012.
With your parent’s permission, visit
the Boy Scouts of America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org,
for a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


94 GOLF
.Golf Resources.
Reading, Jay, with Des Reading. Getting
the EDGE: A Standards-Based,
Classroom-Linked Curriculum for
Teaching the Lifetime Sport of Disc
Golf. Educational Disc Golf Experience
(EDGE), 2024.
Rotella, Dr. Bob, with Bob Cullen. Golf is a
Game of Confidence. Simon & Schuster
Adult Publishing Group, 1996.
Russell, Mark, and John Andrisani.
Golf Rules Plain & Simple.
HarperCollins, 1999.
Shackelford, Geoff. Grounds for Golf:
The History and Fundamentals of
Golf Course Design. Thomas
Dunne Books, 2003.
St. Pierre, Denise. Golf Fundamentals:
A Better Way to Learn the Basics.
Human Kinetics Publishers, 2004.
Tait, Alistair. Golf: The Legends of the
Game. Firefly Books, 2003.
United States Golf Association. Golf
Rules Illustrated. United States Golf
Association, 2016.
Utley, Stan, with Matthew Rudy. The
Art of Putting: The Revolutionary
Feel-Based System for Improving
Your Score. Penguin Group, 2006.
Woods, Tiger. How I Play Golf. Grand
Central Publishing, 2011.
Organizations and Websites
American Junior Golf Association
1980 Sports Club Drive
Braselton, GA 30517
www.ajga.org
College Golf Camps
collegegolfcamps.com
College Golf Guide
collegegolf.com
Disc Golf Pro Tour
111 Notch View Road
Jeffersonville, VT 05464
www.dgpt.com
EDGE Disc Golf
2850 Commerce Drive
Rock Hill, SC 29730
edgediscgolf.org
The First Tee
firsttee.org
Golf Course Superintendents
Association of America (GCSAA)
1421 Research Park Dr.
Lawrence, KS 66049
GCSAA.org
Golf Digest
www.golfdigest.com
Golf Magazine
www.golf.com
Ladies Professional Golf Association
100 International Golf Drive
Daytona Beach, FL 32124-1092
www.lpga.com
Professional Disc Golf Association
3828 Dogwood Lane
Appling, GA 30802
www.pdga.com
Professional Golfers’ Assoc. of America
Box 109601
Palm Beach Gardens, FL 33418
www.pga.com
Professional Golfers’ Association Tour
100 PGA Tour Blvd.
Ponte Vedra Beach, FL 32082
www.pgatour.com
Safety Tips: Golf (for Teens)
kidshealth.org/en/teens/safety-golf.html


GOLF 95
..Golf Resources
U.S. Golf Association
P.O. Box 746
Far Hills, NJ 07931-0746
www.usga.org
U.S. Kids Golf
www.uskidsgolf.com
U.S. Sports Camps
1010 B St., Suite 450
San Rafael, CA 94901
www.ussportscamps.com
Acknowledgments
Thanks to Charles Clines for bringing the
merit badge pamphlet up-to-date and mak-
ing it functional and fun. Mr. Clines is a
retired golf columnist for the Fort Worth Star-
Telegram and is a former golf professional.
Thanks to Steve Rose for the initial
disc golf proposal as part of his Wood Badge
ticket and his dedication to the development
of the disc golf requirements in this badge.
We also appreciate the efforts of Des and
Jay Reading, co-founders of EDGE Disc Golf,
who contributed content and photographs for
the disc golf chapters. The Readings are both
World Disc Golf Hall of Fame tour players.
The Boy Scouts of America thanks
Tracey Stewart for the use of a family photo
of Payne Stewart.
The BSA is grateful to the U.S. Golf
Association for its assistance. USGA experts
included Rhonda Glenn, manager of commu-
nications; Genger Fahleson, manager of rules
education; Kevin O’Connor, senior director;
and Peter Dennis, assistant director of handi-
capping and course rating.
Thanks also go to Johnny Cake, director
of golf at Finley Golf Course, University of
North Carolina at Chapel Hill, for his help.
The Boy Scouts of America is grateful
to the men and women serving on the
National Merit Badge Subcommittee for
the improvements made in updating this
pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration Credits
Innova Champion Discs, courtesy—pages 80
and 81
Ladies Professional Golf Association, cour-
tesy—page 70
Professional Disc Golf Association,
courtesy—pages 78, 82, 83, 84-86, and 88
PGA TOUR Photographic Services,
courtesy—pages 67 (Arnold Palmer,
Jack Nicklaus) and 68 (Gary Player, Lee
Trevino)
Des Reading and Jay Reading, courtesy—
page 82
Bill Steber, courtesy—page 71
(Nancy Lopez)
Tracey Stewart, courtesy—page 14 (right)
U.S. Golf Association, courtesy—pages 10, 13
(feathery), 14 (golfer in
jacket), 64, and 65
Wikipedia.org—pages 69 (Rory McIlroy) and
73
Wikipedia.org/Keith Allison—pages 71
(Annika Sorenstam) and 72
Wikipedia.org/P.G. Jansson—page 69 (Rickie
Fowler)
All other photos and illustrations are the
property of or are protected by the Boy
Scouts of America.
Dan Bryant—pages 13 (modern golf ball),
46 (chip-and-run shot: beginning stance,
follow-through), 47 (lob shot, pitch shot
swing, pitch shot follow-through), 48 (sand
shot 1, sand shot 2, sand shot 3), 49, 50
(full shot from heavy rough, inset), 56 (one-
legged squat, wall sit), 58, 59, 60 (marking
ball, replacing divot), 61 (sand trap, drop-
ping a ball), and 76
John McDearmon—all illustrations on pages
30, 31 (interlocking grip,
full-fingered grip), and 37
(full swing sequence)
Randy Piland—page 39


Get ideas for your next merit
badge adventure in every
issue of Scout Life magazine.
Subscribe TODAY at
go.scoutlife.org/subscribe
Use promo code
SLMBP15
for a special Scout price!