GAME DESIGN
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


35708
ISBN 978-0-8395-0026-1
©2019 Boy Scouts of America
2023 Printing
Note to the Counselor
The project portion of the Game Design merit badge gives Scouts flexibility to work
with a medium of their choosing. The level of effort required to make a game in
different mediums can vary significantly. However, the requirements define what
individual Scouts must include in their design notebooks so that there is a baseline
for all Scouts to meet.
The notebook must demonstrate a thoughtful initial concept, multiple design
iterations based on initial testing, and feedback from blind testing. Encourage
Scouts to use their notebook to record brainstorming sessions, test parameters,
and any game-related ideas throughout the process. Also encourage them to record
thoughts behind key design decisions to help them trace and retrace their steps as
their designs evolve.
Before beginning the prototyping phase, the Scout must have counselor approval
for the design concept. The counselor must make sure that the Scout has put enough
effort into the concept phase to have a good foundation for the prototype phase. Watch
out for overly ambitious projects that could lead to unnecessary frustration. It is impor-
tant to understand that the Scout is making a prototype. The challenge of the project
is to develop and experiment with gameplay, not to develop extensive programming
skills, create beautiful artwork, or spend a lot of time fabricating components.
When prototyping, Scouts should devote most of their energy to assessing
and improving the play experience. With each iteration, Scouts should identify
game elements that they want to change and how the changes will alter the play
experience. After making changes, they then test the game and evaluate whether
or not the changes had the desired outcome. It is acceptable for the final prototype
to be very different from the initial concept, provided that the notebook shows
the progression.
Because the project is so flexible, it is likely that you will have Scouts working
in mediums with which you are unfamiliar. The game design community has a vast
array of publicly available resources, and the merit badge information online at
www.scouting.org maintains updated links to relevant material. If you have a specific
concern about programming an electronic game prototype, there are a number of free


GAME DESIGN 3
or inexpensive game design software packages available online.
Some are very easy to use with little or no computer knowledge,
and most have robust information resources to support them. See
the resources section at the end of this pamphlet.
The merit badge includes many opportunities for teamwork
and group play. Group participation is mandatory to complete
requirement 7, but all of the other nonproject requirements also
work well in collaboration. Note, though, that each Scout must
deliver their own game prototype to complete the project. This
ensures that every Scout has the chance to develop and use the
critical thinking skills that are part of testing and design iteration.
If they want to collaborate on their projects after completing the
requirements for the badge they are encouraged to do so, but that
is beyond the scope of this badge.
The Game Design merit badge relies heavily on specific
terminology. Because game design is broad and game analysis
is relatively young, there are few established definitions in the
industry. Please refer to the glossary at the end of this pamphlet
for definitions applicable to the pamphlet and requirements. For
additional questions, refer to the merit badge website and the
resources listed at the end of the pamphlet.


4 GAME DESIGN
1. Do the following:
(a) Analyze four games you have played, each from a
different medium. Identify the medium, player format,
objectives, rules, resources, and theme (if relevant).
Discuss with your counselor the play experience, what
you enjoy in each game, and what you dislike. Make a
chart to compare and contrast the games.
(b) Describe five different reasons that people play games.
For each, give an example of a game that fits that reason.
2. Discuss with your counselor five of the following 17 game
design terms. For each term that you pick, describe how it
relates to a specific game.
Thematic game elements: story, setting, characters
Gameplay elements: play sequence, level design, interface design
Game analysis: difficulty, balance, depth, pace, replay value,
age appropriateness
Related terms: single-player vs. multiplayer, cooperative vs.
competitive, turn-based vs. real-time, strategy vs. reflex vs.
chance, abstract vs. thematic
3. Define the term intellectual property. Describe the types of
intellectual property associated with the game design industry.
Describe how intellectual property is protected and why
protection is necessary. Define and give an example of
a licensed property.
4. Do the following:
(a) Pick a game where the players can change the rules
or objectives (examples: basketball, hearts, chess,
kickball). Briefly summarize the standard rules and
objectives and play through the game normally.
(b) Propose changes to several rules or objectives. Predict
how each change will affect gameplay.
(c) Play the game with one rule or objective change,
observing how the players’ actions and emotional
experiences are affected by the rule change. Repeat
this process with two other changes.
Requirements
Always check www.scouting.org for the latest requirements.


GAME DESIGN 5
(d) Explain to your counselor how the changes affected
the actions and experience of the players. Discuss the
accuracy of your predictions.
5. Design a new game. Any game medium or combination
of mediums is acceptable. Record your work in a game
design notebook.
(a) Write a vision statement for your game. Identify the
medium, player format, objectives, and theme of
the game. If suitable, describe the setting, story,
and characters.
(b) Describe the reason that someone would want to play
your game.
(c) Make a preliminary list of the rules of the game.
Define the resources.
(d) Draw the game elements.
6. Do the following:
(a) Prototype your game from requirement 5. If applicable,
demonstrate to your counselor that you have addressed
player safety through the rules and equipment. Record
your work in your game design notebook.
(b) Test your prototype with as many other people as you
need to meet the player format. Compare the play
experience to your descriptions from requirement
5b. Correct unclear rules, holes in the rules, dead
ends, and obvious rule exploits. Change at least one
rule, mechanic, or objective from your first version
of the game, and describe why you are making the
change. Play the game again. Record in your game
design notebook whether or not your change had the
expected effect.
(c) Repeat 6b at least two more times and record the
results in your game design notebook.
7. Blind test your game. Do the following:
(a) Write an instruction sheet that includes all of the
information needed to play the game. Clearly describe
how to set up the game, play the game, and end the
game. List the game objectives.
You must have your merit badge counselor’s approval of
your concept before you begin creating the prototype.


6 GAME DESIGN
(b) Share your prototype from requirement 6 with a group
of players that has not played it or witnessed a previous
playtest. Provide them with your instruction sheet(s)
and any physical components. Watch them play the
game, but do not provide them with instruction. Record
their feedback in your game design notebook.
(c) Share your game design notebook with your counselor.
Discuss the player reactions to your project and what
you learned about the game design process. Based on
your testing, determine what you like most about your
game and suggest one or more changes.
8. Do ONE of the following:
(a) With your parent or guardian’s permission and your
counselor’s approval, visit with a professional in the
game development industry and ask them about their
job and how it fits into the overall development
process.
(b) Alternatively, meet with a professional in game
development education and discuss the skills they
emphasize in the classroom.


GAME DESIGN 7
.Game Design Resources
Game Design Resources
Scouting Literature
Athletics, Chess, Digital Technology,
Inventing, Programming, and Scouting
Heritage merit badge pamphlets
Books
Bell, R.C. Board and Table Games
From Many Civilizations, revised ed.
Dover Publications, 1979.
Botermans, Jack. The Book of Games:
Strategy, Tactics & History. Sterling
Publishing, 2008.
Brathwaite, Brenda, and Ian Schreiber.
Challenges for Game Designers.
Charles River Media, 2009.
Koster, Raph. A Theory of Fun for
Game Design. Paraglyph Press, 2005.
Morehead, Albert H., Geoffrey Mott-
Smith, and Philip D. Morehead.
Hoyle’s Rules of Games, third revised
and updated ed. Signet, 2001.
Sackson, Sid. Card Games Around the
World. Dover Publications, 1994.
Schell, Jesse. The Art of Game Design:
A Book of Lenses. Morgan
Kaufmann, 2008.
Organizations and Websites
Adventure Game Studio
Website:
http://www.adventuregamestudio.co.uk
Entertainment Software Rating Board
Website: http://www.esrb.org
RPG Maker
Website: http://www.rpgmakerweb.com
Scratch Project
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Website: http://scratch.mit.edu
Unity 3D
Website: http://unity3d.com
YoYo Games/GameMaker: Studio
Website:
http://yoyogames.com/gamemaker/studio
With your parent’s permission, visit
the Boy Scouts of America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org,
for a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.