TEXTILE
G
r
t
G
r
t
35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Cover.indd 1 2/22/19 1:29 PM


TEXTILE
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”
35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 1 2/22/19 1:31 PM


35958
ISBN 978-0-8395-3344-3
©2014 Boy Scouts of America
2019 Printing
35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 2 2/22/19 1:31 PM
Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Textile or
check Scoutbook for the latest requirements.


TEXTILE 3
35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 3 2/22/19 1:31 PM


35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 4 2/22/19 1:31 PM


TEXTILE 5
Contents
21st Century Textiles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
A Little Textile History . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Natural Fibers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
Manufactured Fibers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
Spinning, Weaving, Knitting, and Bonding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
Weaving Your Own Textiles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
The Art of Fabrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
The Textile Detective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
Looking Good: You and Your Clothes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
Textiles and the Environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
Textiles, Tomorrow, and You . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
Glossary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
Textile Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76
35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 5 2/22/19 1:31 PM


35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 6 2/22/19 1:31 PM


TEXTILE 7
.21st Century Textiles
21st Century Textiles
Do you have a nylon windbreaker or raincoat? Do you pack a
Mylar emergency blanket for hikes and campouts? Are any of
your clothes made of polyester, in whole or in part? If you are
not sure, look at the sewn-in label. Chances are you have shirts
that are 65 percent cotton and 35 percent polyester, or a 50-50
blend of the two.
If you answered yes to any of these questions (and you
probably did), then you are wearing some of the same fabrics
that protect astronauts when they go on spacewalks.
Space-shuttle crews wear spacesuits made with 14 layers of fabric. Going
from the inside out, there’s nylon tricot, spandex, a lacing of plastic tubes,
urethane-coated nylon, polyester fiber, ripstop nylon, seven layers of poly-
ester film, and an outer layer made of fibers that are lighter and tougher
than steel.
Those same stronger-than-steel fibers, called aramid fibers, are used
to make bulletproof vests for police officers and flameproof suits for
firefighters. One of the best-known aramids has the trade name Kevlar.
1. LIQUID-COOLING-AND-VENTILATION
GARMENT LINER (NYLON TRICOT)
2. LIQUID-COOLING-AND-VENTILATION
GARMENT LINER—OUTER LAYER (NYLON/
SPANDEX)
3. LIQUID-COOLING-AND-VENTILATION
GARMENT LINER—WATER
TRANSPORT TUBING
4. PRESSURE GARMENT
BLADDER (URETHANE-
COATED NYLON) 5. RESTRAINT LAYER (PRESSURE-RESTRAINING POLYESTER FIBER)
6. THERMAL MICROMETEOROID GARMENT LINER
(NEOPRENE-COATED RIPSTOP NYLON)
7–13. THERMAL
MICROMETEOROID
GARMENT
(ALUMINIZED
POLYESTER FILM)
14. THERMAL
MICROMETEOROID
GARMENT COVER
(A BLEND OF
KEVLAR, NOMEX, AND
OTHER MATERIALS)
35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 7 2/22/19 1:31 PM


8 TEXTILE
21st Century Textiles.
Nylon and spandex are also used in swimsuits and other
kinds of athletic clothing. Nylon safety nets protect construction
workers from falls. In the Arctic, the U.S. Army uses nylon
fabrics to insulate shelters that keep the temperature inside
at 50 degrees when the temperature outdoors drops to minus
65 degrees.
Fabrics also can be used to make buildings. The Denver
International Airport terminal is a fabric building on a grand
scale. Its roof is made of 15 acres of fabric. Two layers of
woven fiberglass let sunlight in but resist dirt. The outer layer
is coated with Teflon, making it waterproof and easy to clean.
These are just some of the amazing ways in which fibers and
fabrics are used today. The list could go on for pages.
• Surgeons replace diseased arteries with artificial arteries
knitted or woven from fibers.
• Nylon, glass, and other high-tech fibers give strength to auto
bodies and sports equipment.
• There are road-paving fabrics and erosion-control fabrics.
• Fibers are used in electronic circuit boards.
• Fibers are used in artificial turf for athletic fields, in
tear-resistant mailing envelopes, and in attic insulation.
• In some buildings, combinations of textiles and plastics have
replaced steel construction beams.
The fabric roof of the Denver International Airport lets natural
light in during the day.
35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 8 2/22/19 1:31 PM


TEXTILE 9
.21st Century Textiles
People use countless
fibers and fabrics in their
everyday lives: clothes,
carpets, curtains, towels,
bedsheets, upholstered
furniture. Add to that list
boat sails, bookbindings,
bandages, flags, sleeping
bags, mailbags, airbags,
seat belts, backpacks,
parachutes, umbrellas,
basketball nets . . . Stop
and look around you, and
you are sure to see items
this list missed.
Fiber, Fabric, Textile
What is the difference between a fiber and a fabric, or between a
fabric and a textile? You will see these words many times in this
pamphlet, so take a minute now to be sure you understand them.
• A fiber is the thin strand or filament, either natural or manu-
factured, that is formed into yarns and then used to make a
fabric. For example, you might say, “This fabric is made from
cotton fiber.”
• Another word for fabric is “cloth” or “material.” You would
say, for example, “Good clothes for hiking may be made of
wool, cotton, or synthetic fabrics.” Fabrics are constructed
from fibers.
• Textile generally means a woven fabric, but all types of fabrics
are considered textiles, including knits, felts, laces, nets, and
braids. In the textile industry, the fibers and yarns used to
make fabrics are also referred to as “textiles.” A textile can be
a cloth or it can be a fiber, filament, or yarn used in making
cloth. In short, anything made of fibers is a textile.
Many of the words people use to talk about textiles are centuries
old. The word yarn, for instance, came into English so long
ago that nobody can say exactly when it was first used. Other
textile-related words are quite new. Aramid has been around
only since 1961. The glossary near the end of this pamphlet
will help you learn the special language of textiles.
High-Tech Textiles
The textile industry is among the most thor-
oughly modern of all industries. For example,
robots travel around yarn-spinning machines
and automatically tie broken threads with no
help from human hands. Computer-controlled
knitting machines can be instantly programmed
from a scanned photograph to knit the image
that was scanned. Other machines and pro-
cesses produce three-dimensional woven com-
posites for such products as kayaks, canoes,
and extreme sports gear.
35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 9 2/22/19 1:31 PM


35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 10 2/22/19 1:31 PM


TEXTILE 11
.A Little Textile History
A Little Textile History
We will never know who made the first thread or the first cloth,
or where the idea came from. Perhaps some early humans saw
how grass stalks and plant fibers could be rolled together to
form strings that would not pull apart. Maybe they saw wild
sheep shed their wool in spring, and they noticed how the
wool would twist and mat into yarnlike strings. Maybe people
got the idea from watching spiders weave webs or weaverbirds
build nests.
We know that people learned to weave thousands of years
ago. They wove grasses, leafstalks, palm leaves, and thin strips
of wood, from which they made fishnets and baskets. Soon
after, people combined the principles of basket weaving and
twine making to create crude mats and, in time, finer and
finer weaves.
Adventures in Fabrics
Textiles have long been
a part of the American
adventure. When Spanish
explorers made their way
inland from the coasts,
they found the local
people dressed in color-
ful garments woven of
native cotton. In Mexico,
the Spaniards faced Aztec
fighters wearing padded
cotton jackets as armor.
All over the Americas,
the native peoples knew
how to weave beautiful
cotton cloth. America‘s native people, such as this Navajo woman‘s
ancestors, were weaving beautiful fabrics long before
Europeans began exploring the New World.
35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 11 2/22/19 1:31 PM


12 TEXTILE
A Little Textile History.
From the Spaniards, the peoples of the Americas learned
about wool. For example, as Coronado and his bands of sol-
diers searched the Southwest in 1540, they left a few sheep in
the villages they visited, and they taught the American Indians
how to use wool as they used cotton for blankets, clothing, and
shelter.
Cloth in the Colonies
In the northern colonies of New England and New Amster-
dam, making fabrics was an important daily activity. In
Massachusetts, a law required
each family to produce
a certain amount of
cloth each month.
The spinning wheel
was a part of every
colonial kitchen.
Women worked
every spare
moment at the
spinning wheel
and loom.
In the wake of
pathfinders like Daniel
Boone, families went west
in huge canvas-covered wag-
ons, called “prairie schooners.”
The early settlers wore shirts and
pants of an itchy fabric called
linsey-
woolsey—half linen and half
wool. The soldiers on the fron-
tier wore uniforms of wool.
In those days, cloth was
precious, and not of a very high quality as compared with
today’s fabrics. Fine cloth and clothing were a sign of wealth
and were often given as gifts by kings. The good fabrics came
from England, where several textile machines had been invent-
ed, making it possible to make
hundreds of times more fabric.
Spinning wheel
35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 12 2/22/19 1:31 PM


TEXTILE 13
.A Little Textile History
A Revolution
The fabric the English shipped to the colonies was a profit-
able source of income, so England was careful not to let the
colonies develop their own textile industry. The English govern-
ment passed laws forbidding Americans to raise sheep or make
textiles. Eventually, these and other restrictions and taxes led to
the American Revolution.
When the Revolutionary War was won and the former
colonies became the United States, they still did not have a tex-
tile industry. The French and English were forbidden to leave
their countries with textile machines, or the knowledge of how
to make them.
Then along came Samuel Slater, who came to America
after serving an apprenticeship in a textile mill in England. He
knew how much the United States needed textile mills, so he
memorized the construction of every piece of textile machinery
used in a mill of the time. In 1789, he arrived in Rhode Island
disguised as a farmer. Slater built a spinning machine and the
other equipment needed to operate a mill.
The new spinning machines and power looms helped bring
about America’s industrial revolution, when power-driven
machines replaced handwork.
At the same time that Slater was building his mill, a
New England schoolteacher named Eli Whitney watched
people on a Georgia plantation cleaning cotton by hand.
After many experiments, he worked out a machine called a
“cotton engine,” or “cotton gin,” which did the work of 50
laborers in picking seeds and debris out of the cotton fluff.
His invention made growing cotton profitable in the South,
and this made more raw material available to the mills in the
North and in Europe.
With improvements in steam engines and the introduc-
tion of electricity, America’s textile industry flourished. By the
middle of the 19th century, textiles were the biggest industry in
the country.
35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 13 2/22/19 1:31 PM


35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 14 2/22/19 1:31 PM


TEXTILE 15
.Natural Fibers
Natural Fibers
For most of human history, people could make fabric only from
natural fibers from plants, animals, and minerals. The major
natural fibers are cotton, flax, wool, and silk.
Cotton
Cotton grows in puffy masses from the surfaces of the seeds in
the cotton plant pod or “boll.” It is the most widely used of all
plant fibers and is the world’s main clothing fiber.
Varieties
Cotton grows in warm and hot climates all over the world
and has played an important part in many civilizations. The
ancient cultures in India may have been the first to grow cotton
to make cloth, about 6,000 years ago. The Nile River delta in
Egypt was also good for growing cotton, and the people of the
pharaohs became highly skilled in cotton fabric making. The
Egyptian varieties of cotton are still among the finest.
Sea Island is an American cotton first grown along the
southeast Atlantic Coast. From it comes the finest and longest
fiber of all the cotton types, used in making sewing thread and
fabrics that imitate silk in their luster and quality.
Pima, named for the Pima Indians, is a cross of American
Pima and Egyptian Sakel cottons. It is a creamy colored cotton
grown in the southwestern United States.
Upland or American upland cotton makes up most of the
world’s cotton crop. The American colonists grew it inland,
or “upland,” from the Atlantic Coast, which is how it got its
name. Upland cotton is not as long or as strong a fiber as
Pima or Sea Island.
35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 15 2/22/19 1:31 PM


16 TEXTILE
Natural Fibers.
Flax
The fiber for linen comes from the inner stalk of the flax plant.
Like the cotton fiber, flax is mainly a woody substance called
cellulose, which forms a major part of the cell walls of trees,
grasses, and many other plants. All fruits and vegetables con-
tain cellulose, and cellulose fibers strengthen the stems, roots,
and leaves of many kinds of plants.
Linen’s reputation for elegance and quality is due to the
nature of the fiber. Flax is a long, smooth fiber, from 6 to 40
inches in length, which makes it possible to twist yarns with
no fuzzy ends, leaving a crisp,
clean surface. Flax also has a
natural wax that helps give the
finished linen a polish. Linen is
ideal for tablecloths, dish tow-
els, handkerchiefs, or any fabric
in which strength is needed.
Linen traditionally is popu-
lar as a summer fabric because
it can absorb and evaporate
perspiration, which helps keep
the wearer’s body cool. It also
can be washed and boiled with-
out harm. Linen wrinkles easily
but also presses easily.
Linen is the
strongest of the
plant fibers.
Flax has been used since ancient times to
make fabrics. The ancient Egyptians grew
flax along the Nile about 7,000 years ago.
Linen mummy wrappings from Egyptian
tombs are still in good condition, and to
this day linen fabrics have a reputation
for durability, beauty, and luxury. Most of
the world’s flax is grown in Russia.
Flax field
35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 16 2/22/19 1:31 PM


TEXTILE 17
.Natural Fibers
Preparing Flax Fibers
Flax harvested in late summer makes the best quality linen. The
stalks are pulled out of the ground, tied into bundles, and dried
in the sun. Then the stalks are soaked in water to decompose the
outer stalk and make the inner fibers available for gathering. This
process is called retting. The word resembles the English word
“rotting” and actually is a kind of rotting or decomposing.
After retting, the flax is dried. The final steps in separat-
ing the flax fibers from the outer stalk are breaking, where the
stalks are cut; scutching, where the pieces of bark are removed;
and hackling, which is a combing process that straightens the
flax fibers and separates the long from the short fibers. The long
fibers, called line, are used for high-quality items
such as fine tablecloths and clothing. The short,
irregular fibers, called tow, are used for less-
expensive items such as dish towels.
Jute, Hemp, and Ramie
Other plants have an inner fibrous growth, like
flax, that can be separated and spun. Jute is a
long, glossy fiber from a plant mainly grown in
China, India, and Bangladesh. The most impor-
tant use for jute is in the coarse bagging we call
burlap. It is also valuable for twine and rope
and as a backing on carpets.
The retting can be done in different ways.
• In dew retting, the flax is spread out on the grass and left in the sun
and rain for several weeks. Bacteria and moisture break down the
tissue around the flax fibers. The fibers can then be separated from
the stalk’s woody bark.
• In water retting, which is more common, bundles of flax are soaked
in tanks, pools, slow-moving rivers, streams, or bogs for a week or
two, until they are ready for the separation processes.
• Chemical and mechanical retting is faster, but the chemicals and the
mechanical rollers and crushers that hurry the retting process may
weaken the flax fibers.
Burlap
35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 17 2/22/19 1:31 PM


18 TEXTILE
Natural Fibers.
Hemp fibers come from the hemp plant’s woody stem
and are used to make rope, cord, and twine. Hemp produces a
strong fiber that can be more than 6 feet long. The fibers can
be spun tightly and can withstand great weights before pulling
apart or breaking.
Ramie is a fiber from an East Asian plant. It is also known
as China grass and has been used since ancient times. Ramie
is natural white in color, has a high luster, and is so similar to
linen that, when used in fabrics, it is often mistaken for linen.
It is absorbent, dries quickly, and is naturally resistant to
bacteria and molds.
Wool
People have been using sheep’s wool for at least 10,000 years.
Early herders in central Asia found that sheep were easy to
tame, stayed together, were not fussy about what they ate, and
produced a stretchable, durable fiber that could be made into
everything from clothes to blankets, rugs, and tents.
By 4000 b.c., people in Babylonia and Mesopotamia were
wearing elegant clothes made of wool. Over the centuries and
in all parts of the world, breeders have worked to improve
sheep, trying to develop wool that would be best for
different uses.
What Is Wool?
Wool is hair, an animal fiber made mostly of a tough protein
called keratin. Keratin is found not only in wool and hair, but
also in the nails, claws, and hooves of mammals; the scales of
reptiles; and the feathers of birds.
Wool is very stretchable. A
single fiber may be stretched to
nearly twice its own length with-
out breaking. This characteristic
makes woolen fabrics comfortable.
The warmth of woolens comes
from the natural crimp or waviness
of the wool fiber, which makes the
yarn bulk up and spread a little,
trapping air and creating an insula-
tion layer. This same waviness
that helps the fabric return to its
original shape after wrinkling.
Ramie is one of
the strongest
natural fibers, and
it is especially
strong when
wet. This “wet
strength” and its
natural resistance
to mildew have
made it historically
popular for such
items as ropes,
twine, sails,
and canvas.
35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 18 2/22/19 1:31 PM


TEXTILE 19
.Natural Fibers
Other Wool-Bearing Animals
Some wool comes from animals other than sheep. These
wool-bearing animals include the camel, alpaca, Angora
goat, Cashmere goat, llama, and vicuña.
Camel. Camel’s-hair coats are famous for their softness,
durability, light weight, warmth, and natural tan color.
Alpaca. The alpaca lives in the Andes Mountains, and its
wool is prized for its silky beauty and strength. The wool
of the alpaca is stronger than sheep’s wool and is about
6 to 12 inches long.
Angora goat. Angora goats were first
domesticated in Turkey. The long, silky
hair of the Angora goat is known as
mohair. (The fiber called “Angora wool”
is really the hair of the Angora rabbit.)
Mohair is lustrous and has more resil-
ience and bounce than sheep’s wool.
It is popular for men’s summer-weight
suits and in better grades of upholstery
and draperies. Because of its unusual
whiteness and luster, mohair can be
dyed very bright shades.
Cashmere goat. The Cashmere goat is
a native of the Himalayan Mountains.
Soft fibers from its fine undercoat are spun into a spongy,
woollike yarn. Cashmere is softer and lighter than wool but
less durable. It is popular for sweaters, scarves, and shawls.
Llama. The llama is related to the camel but is about one-third
as big. It is a beast of burden for the peoples of the high Andes
and has hair with good insulation qualities. The hair of the
llama is not as fine as that of its relatives the alpaca and vicuña,
but it has more colors. This makes possible many beautiful tones
when blended with the softer hair of its relatives.
Vicuña. The smallest and rarest of the llama family, the vicuña
lives wild in almost unreachable mountain heights, where peo-
ple ordinarily cannot survive without extra oxygen. A single
vicuña yields only a quarter-pound of hair. It takes the hair of
40 animals to get enough fiber to make a topcoat. Not surpris-
ingly, vicuña is among the most expensive fibers used
in suits and coat fabrics.
Angora goat
35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 19 2/22/19 1:31 PM


20 TEXTILE
Natural Fibers.
Silk
If you have done any nature study on the life cycle of moths
and butterflies, you know they go through an astonishing series
of changes. At one stage, the caterpillar creates a casing or
cocoon around itself. The caterpillar of the silk moth (Bombyx
mori) squirts out a fine, continuous thread called a filament
through a hole under its chin called the spinneret. With its
head, the silkworm whips the filament around its body in a
series of figure eights until it is enclosed.
In countries where silkworm production is important,
silkworms are carefully raised on clean trays and fed a diet
of young mulberry leaves. To produce a pound of silk fabric,
silkworms must eat 200 pounds of leaves. In Japan, raising
silkworms and “harvesting” the filaments has been a
major industry for more than a thousand years.
The origin of silk-making goes back thousands
of years earlier to China.
Silk’s Origin
According to legend, a Chinese
empress discovered how a cocoon
could become unwound when one
fell out of a tree into her cup of
tea. In the hot tea, the glue
holding the filament together
melted, and she could see the
fine, threadlike mass. A little
experimenting showed that this
nearly endless fiber could be
spun into fine yarn in much the
same way as cotton. When woven,
the lustrous yarn produced a wonderful cloth unlike any other.
The nobility thought this new cloth was a gift from heaven
and decided only princes and princesses could use it. Only the
Chinese knew how to make silk textiles for about 3,000 years.
The making of silk was a closely held secret, but there
were people ready to risk torture and death to take the secret
to their own countries. Silk was carried to the Roman Empire
by two monks who hid silkworm eggs in a hollow cane. By the
1200s, Italy was the major silk-weaving country of Europe.
When America was colonized, some people thought the
New World might be perfect for sericulture, as the raising of
Silk cocoons
35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 20 2/22/19 1:31 PM


TEXTILE 21
.Natural Fibers
silkworms is called. King James introduced it into the Virginia
Colony, and Benjamin Franklin tried to encourage the industry
during the Revolution, but the silkworm never did well in the
North American climate.
Making Silk
Manufacturing silk begins with incubating the tiny eggs of the
silkworm moth. After the eggs hatch, the larvae eat almost non-
stop for six weeks. Then they start to spin their cocoons. Each
caterpillar wraps itself in one continuous silk filament.
The finished cocoons are put in hot water to dissolve the
gummy substance that holds the silk filament together. When
the silk is loosened, the filaments from four to eight cocoons
are joined and twisted. They are then combined with several
other similarly twisted filaments to make a thread. The result-
ing thread, called raw silk, is made up usually of 48 individual
silk fibers. The thread is continuous and, unlike the threads
spun from other fibers such as cotton and wool, is made up of
extremely long fibers.
Mineral Fibers
In addition to fibers from plants and animals, there are
two important mineral sources of natural fibers—asbestos
and glass.
Asbestos is a hard mineral with an unusual threadlike
makeup. The rocklike mineral can be crushed and the fibers
gathered to make yarn and then cloth. Asbestos will not burn,
so it is valuable in insulation and other building materials.
Breathing asbestos fibers, however, can cause serious lung dis-
eases and cancer. In the United States, government regulations
ban any product that could release asbestos fibers into the air.
The raw material of glass fiber is quartz sand, much like
that found at the beach. Melted glass can be stretched and
drawn out to thread-thin filaments and spun into yarn. Fabrics
woven from glass yarns are fireproof and cannot be damaged
by sunlight, moths, or chemicals in the air.
35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 21 2/22/19 1:31 PM


22 TEXTILE
Manufactured Fibers.
Manufactured Fibers
In 1664, English scientist Robert Hooke suggested it might be
possible to make a fiber that would be “if not fully as good,
nay better” than silk. But the first patent for “artificial silk” was
not granted until 1855, to a Swiss chemist named Audemars.
Audemars dissolved the fibrous inner bark of a mulberry tree
and got liquid cellulose. He made threads of it by dipping
needles into the liquid and drawing them out.
Rayon
In 1889, French chemist Hilaire de Chardonnet caused a
sensation in Paris with the light, smooth, lustrous fabrics he
made from artificial silk—a fiber we now know as rayon. In
the United States, no attempt to produce artificial silk from
cellulose was commercially successful until 1910.
Acetate
In 1893, Arthur Little of Boston invented another substance
made from cellulose, called acetate. It originally was used to
make film and lacquer to stiffen the wing fabrics of airplanes.
By 1921, the spinning technique developed to make acetate
fibers allowed acetate to be knit and woven into cloth.
Microfiber Facts
Microfibers have been around since the late 1980s. Depending upon
how it is processed or “spun,” this amazing synthetic fabric can have
excellent breathing and wicking ability, be resistant to wrinkling and
abrasion, and be wind- and water-resistant and quick-drying, making
it a good choice for active wear and outerwear.
35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 22 2/22/19 1:31 PM


.Manufactured Fibers
Nylon
In 1931 American chemist Wallace H. Carothers told the world
about a new fiber he called “66.” It was later named nylon and
nicknamed the “miracle fiber.” Nylon was made from petro-
chemicals, which are found in petroleum and natural gas.
The first experiments used nylon as sewing thread, in para-
chute fabric, and in women’s hosiery. But in December 1941,
the United States entered World War II and every bit of nylon
was needed for parachutes, tires, tents, ropes, ponchos, and
other military supplies. It was even used for a high-grade paper
for U.S. money.
After the war, the demand for nylon stockings was so enor-
mous that almost all nylon was made into hosiery. By the end
of the 1940s, nylon also was being used in carpets and automo-
bile seats.
Olefin, Acrylic, and Polyester
Another synthetic fiber that is especially good for carpets and
upholstery is olefin, which dates from 1949. Olefin fibers are
strong and resist stains, which makes it useful in artificial turf
for athletic fields. A strong, dense olefin fiber has been devel-
oped that is 10 times stronger than steel and used to reinforce
hoses and power belts, and in athletic and automotive equip-
ment. Olefin and acrylic sandbags are used as highway crash
TEXTILE 23
35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 23 2/22/19 1:31 PM


24 TEXTILE
Manufactured Fibers.
barriers and on levees to prevent flooding. Olefin is light-
weight and will float in water, making it ideal for such
items as life rafts, life preservers, and marine ropes.
Acrylic, a wool-like manufactured fiber, came
into use in the 1950s. The phrase “wash and wear”
was coined to describe a new blend of cotton and
acrylic that needed little or no ironing after laundering.
Acrylic is highly resistant to ultraviolet light, so it finds
many uses in such products as awnings, canopies, and
outdoor furniture.
Another fiber that made the 1950s’ wash-and-wear list
was polyester. Clothes made with polyester were wrinkle-
resistant and quick-drying. Polyester became the most widely
sold manufactured fiber, used not only in clothes but also in
bedspreads, sheets, pillows, curtains, furniture, carpets, tires,
belts, hoses, backpacks, luggage, airbags, and high-performance
fabrics used by athletes and the military. Insulating polyester
fiberfill—put to the test by climbers on Mount Everest—is used
in sleeping bags, parkas, and other cold-weather gear.
Spandex, Aramids, and Carbon Fibers
Super-strong aramids and super-stretchy spandex were intro-
duced in the 1960s. The name “spandex” comes from the word
“expands”—just rearrange the letters. The U.S. space program
became a major user of special new fibers, for everything from
astronauts’ clothes to spaceship nose cones. When Neil
Armstrong set foot on the moon on July 20, 1969, his lunar
spacesuit included multiple layers of nylon and aramid fabrics,
an early version of the suits worn by shuttle astronauts
30 years later.
The fire-protective fabric used to
make firefighter uniforms is the
same material used in gear worn
by race car drivers, an aramid
fiber called Nomex®.
35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 24 2/22/19 1:31 PM


TEXTILE 25
.Manufactured Fibers
Aramid fibers are increasingly being used as replacements
for steel, fiberglass, asbestos, and aluminum. Yachts use strong,
fast sails of aramid fibers. Skis with aramid-fiber cores last
longer and perform better. Racing drivers wear aramid suits
that help prevent them from burning to death in fiery,
high-speed crashes.
Carbon fibers are extremely strong, stiff, lightweight fibers
of nearly pure carbon made by “baking” or “charring” rayon,
pitch, or acrylic fibers at high temperatures. They are used to
strengthen airplanes and spacecraft. The exhaust nozzles of the
two large booster rockets that lift the space shuttle into orbit
contain 30,000 pounds of carbonized (charred) rayon. Three-
dimensional fabrics made from carbon fibers may someday
replace steel in such products as automobiles, military vehicles,
and building structures.
Lyocell
Lyocell, first produced in the United States in 1992, is a relative
of rayon. Like rayon, it is a cellulose fiber. It is soft, absorbent,
and easy to dye. Unlike rayon, it is wrinkle-free. When the
proper finish is applied, lyocell can be safely laundered at home
and resists shrinking.
How Manufactured Fibers Are Made
There are two types of manufactured fibers:
• Cellulosic fibers are made from the cellulose in trees or other
plants. Rayon, acetate, and lyocell are the main
cellulosic manufactured fibers.
• Synthetic fibers come from chemicals made from refined
petroleum or natural gas. The main synthetic fibers are
polyester, nylon, acrylic, olefin, and spandex.
Most manufactured fibers are created by forcing a thick,
gummy liquid (about like cold honey) through the tiny holes
of a nozzle-like device called a spinneret. The spinnerets that
are used to make most manufactured fibers are similar to a
bathroom shower head. A spinneret may have from one to
several hundred tiny openings. The liquid comes out of the
holes in long, slender, soft strings that quickly harden. Fiber
properties can be engineered by changing the shape of the
holes to achieve different effects.
Lyocell yarns
have an especially
soft and luxurious
touch that
make this fabric
popular for
jeans, shirts, and
other garments.
35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 25 2/22/19 1:31 PM


35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 26 2/22/19 1:31 PM


TEXTILE 27
.Spinning, Weaving, Knitting, and Bonding
Spinning, Weaving,
Knitting, and Bonding
Most textiles are made by twisting fibers into yarns and then
weaving or knitting the yarns into fabrics.
• Twisting fibers together to make threads or yarns is
called spinning.
• Crossing threads or yarns over and under each other to form
fabrics is weaving.
• Looping and interlocking yarns is knitting.
Textiles are also made by bonding fibers together to form
fabrics that are neither woven nor knitted. Such fabrics are
known as nonwovens.
Spinning
Most fibers have what is called a staple length, which is their
usual or average length. Short-staple cotton, for instance, has
fibers typically ranging from .5 to 1.25 inches long. Long-staple
cotton fibers are about 1.5 to 2 inches long. Manufactured
fibers can be made in unbroken, almost endless filaments.
But many of them are cut into staple lengths for blending
with cotton or other staple fibers. In the process of spinning,
these individual short fibers are twisted into a strong, continu-
ous yarn of a workable length.
Hand Spinning
Around 8,000 to 10,000 years ago, people discovered how
to put the clinging characteristic of wool and cotton fibers
to work for them. Their basic tools were the spindle and the
distaff. You can see pictures of these tools in the art of ancient
Egypt. And if you visit the Navajo in the southwestern United
States, you will still see this yarn-making system.
35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 27 2/22/19 1:31 PM


28 TEXTILE
Spinning, Weaving, Knitting, and Bonding.
The ancient hand process of spinning yarn went like this:
The spinner tied a clump of wool, cotton, or flax fibers on the
end of a stick—the distaff. This stick was tucked under one
arm to leave the hands free. The spinner pulled at the clump of
fiber, drawing (drafting) a little of it off the distaff, and twisted
the fibers roughly into a stringlike mass. This loose string was
attached to the weighted spindle. As the spinner twisted the
fiber, it caused the spindle to turn, too. The turning of the
spindle further tightened the yarn to a firm, threadlike thickness
ready to use in weaving.
Machine Spinning
The steps hand-spinners go through in preparing wool, cotton,
or flax are still used. But in textile mills today, the steps are
done by machines that speed up the processes tremendously
and make many times more yarn.
Step 1—Opening and Blending. Compressed masses of
raw fiber, such as baled cotton fiber, are opened (loosened)
to separate and fluff the fibers. The fibers are blended, and in
the case of cotton, they are also cleaned. The loose fibers are
then blown through ducts to the next process, carding.
Step 2—Carding. The fibers pass over giant drums or
rollers that are covered with wire teeth. The teeth untangle
the fibers. This untangling process is called carding. Carding
produces a web of fibers lying in random directions. The web
of carded fibers is gathered into a soft, untwisted, rope-like
strand called a sliver (SLY-vuhr). A sliver is usually about the
size of a broomstick.
After carding,
an extra step
called combing
may be done to
further straighten
the fibers and
get them all
lying in the
same direction.
Combed fibers
make higher
quality yarns
for items such
as combed
percale sheets.
But many yarns
are only carded,
not combed.
Carding
35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 28 2/22/19 1:31 PM


TEXTILE 29
.Spinning, Weaving, Knitting, and Bonding
Step 3—Drawing. Several slivers are fed together into
machines called draw frames. The draw frames draw or pull
the slivers together to further straighten and blend the fibers
and make them more uniform.
Step 4—Roving. In the process called
roving, the slivers are pulled out
(drafted) even more thinly and then
gently twisted.
Step 5—Spinning. The roving is
drawn out and given more twist,
becoming tighter, thinner, stron-
ger, and more even, until the yarn
reaches the thickness or count
(weight per unit of length) that is
needed for the knitting or weaving
of the fabric.
Step 6—Winding. Yarns are tightly
wrapped around bobbins or tubes and are
ready for weaving or knitting. Sometimes, if
an even sturdier yarn is needed, two or three
of the yarns are twisted together in plies,
usually referred to as two-ply or three-ply.
Unravel a piece of string to see how yarns
are plied to make them stronger.
Roving
Spinning
Winding
35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 29 2/22/19 1:31 PM


30 TEXTILE
Spinning, Weaving, Knitting, and Bonding.
Weaving
The weaving process is basically a crisscrossing or interlacing
of straight yarns. Weaving is done on a loom, a rectangular
open frame that is fitted lengthwise with yarns called the warp.
Warp yarns are usually strong yarns, since they form the base
or “skeleton” of the fabric.
The crosswise filling or fill yarns (also called weft yarns or
picks) are worked in and out at right angles between the warp
yarns. Traditionally, weavers used a pointed, boat-shaped shuttle
to draw the fill yarn over and under the warp yarns. Faster meth-
ods are used today. Each row of fill yarn is a pick. The number of
picks per inch indicates the fineness and weight of the fabric.
As each fill yarn is drawn through, it is pushed firmly
against the previously inserted fill yarn. This process continues
until the desired length of fabric is woven.
Is It Woolen or Worsted?
Buying a wool suit or sport coat can be confusing if the salesperson
starts talking about “woolens” and “worsteds.” These are two basic wool
fabric types. The difference is essentially in the spinning of the wool yarn
before weaving. Worsted yarn, mainly used in suit and slack fabrics with
a tight weave and smooth surface, is a combed yarn. Woolen yarn is only
carded, not combed. Woolen yarn is not twisted as much as worsted yarn
and is therefore softer, fuzzier, and thicker. The cloth made from woolen
yarn is naturally softer and bulkier. Woolens, as you would expect, are
what you usually find in soft, wool sport jackets and sporty winter coats.
35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 30 2/22/19 1:31 PM


TEXTILE 31
.Spinning, Weaving, Knitting, and Bonding
In an industrial setup, the strong warp yarns that will
form the skeleton of the fabric are often covered by a protective
film. This process, called sizing or slashing, makes the yarns
stiffer and easier to handle when they are attached to the loom.
These warp yarns are wound on a warp beam and placed at
the back of the loom. Each warp yarn is then passed through a
vertical harness. The number
of harnesses depends on the
complexity of the weave. In
the harnesses, each warp yarn
is threaded through a heddle.
The heddles hold the individual
yarns in place and keep them
from tangling.
In every weaving process,
after the warp yarns are in
place, the following four basic
steps are repeated, in this order
and row by row, until the fabric
is completed.
Step 1—Shedding. Shedding
means raising some of the warp
yarns by means of the harnesses,
leaving others below. When the weaver
(or weaving machine) lifts the harness
that holds (for instance) the odd-
numbered warp yarns, a space called
the shed is created. The fill yarn will
pass through the shed.
Step 2—Picking. Passing the fill yarn
into the shed at right angles is called
picking. This step places the fill yarn over
and under the warp yarns.
Step 3—Beating up. To beat up means to push the fill yarn
firmly against the yarn that preceded it, using a comblike
device called a reed. The weaver (or weaving machine) levels
the harnesses and, with the reed, pushes the newly woven pick
compactly into place to tighten the weave.
Step 4—Taking up and letting off. As the weaving proceeds
pick by pick, the finished cloth is turned or wound onto a bar
called the cloth beam, or apron beam, at the front of the loom,
and more warp is brought on from the warp beam.
Hand loom
Modern
automated
loom
35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 31 2/22/19 1:31 PM


32 TEXTILE
Spinning, Weaving, Knitting, and Bonding.
Swifter Than a Shuttle
The reed and harnesses on today’s looms move much faster
than the eye can follow. Modern looms weave without using
shuttles. On a rapier loom, a mechanical arm called a rapier
grabs the yarn and passes it on to a second rapier at the
middle of the shed. In a projectile loom, a bulletlike projectile
grips the yarn and shoots it through the shed. Jet looms use
tiny jets of air or water to blow or propel the filling through
the shed.
Air- and waterjet machines are the fastest methods of
weaving today. They can insert up to 1,400 filling yarns per
minute, and one new machine can insert four filling yarns at
a time and weave 3,000 picks per minute.
Kinds of Weaves
What the weave will look like as it comes from the loom
depends on the way in which the harnesses lift groups of the
warp yarns to let the fill yarns slip through. In complicated
weaves there may be up to 30 harnesses, but for the simplest
constructions only two harnesses are needed.
Plain weave. The plain weave is a
simple interlacing of warp and fill
and is the weave used by makers of
basic fabrics, either on hand looms
or in mills.
Basket weave. The basket weave
is a variation of the plain weave,
but instead of one warp and one
fill yarn, it has two or more warp
yarns and two or more fill yarns,
which adds a fuller, bulkier texture
to the fabric. Oxford shirting is
an example.
Twill weave. The visible, diagonal line that runs through
fabrics like denim is a twill weave. The weave pattern forms
a stair-step look. In popular herringbone pattern in wool
sport jackets is also a twill weave. Twill construction is used
in work clothes and uniforms where durability is needed.
Modern looms
can insert picks
at speeds up to
300 to 400 feet
per second.
Plain weave
35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 32 2/22/19 1:31 PM


TEXTILE 33
.Spinning, Weaving, Knitting, and Bonding
Satin weave. The satin weave is similar to the twill weave, but
the diagonal line is hidden so that the surface of the fabric is
smooth and polished. The sheen and graceful drape of satin-
weave fabrics make them popular for formal clothes, in damask
for table linen, and for fine draperies. Satin-weave fabrics may
snag easily.
Pile weave. Terry-cloth towels, corduroy pants, plush toys, and
rugs can all be examples of pile-weave construction. Essentially,
pile weave is like plain or twill weave with one added step: an
extra warp or fill yarn is added and lifted above the surface to
form loops. These loops can be left as is. Bath towels are an
example. Or the loops can be snipped off, which allows the
yarn ends to unravel a little, causing a soft surface.
Geometric and fancy weaves. Shirts with a tiny geometric
pattern woven into the fabric, called “dobby fancies,” were
popular in 1910 and then 60 years later in 1970. They are made
on the dobby loom, which can raise or lower the warp yarns in
many more variations than are possible with simpler looms.
The Jacquard Loom
In 1801, French inventor Joseph Marie Jacquard created a loom
that used punched cards to direct the weaving process. Jacquard
“programmed” a design by cutting holes in a roll of paper. This
roll was connected to a series of needles controlling the loom
mechanism that moves the warp yarns up and down. When the
needles hit a hole in the paper, it made a change in the way the
yarns were woven. By changing cards and alternating the
patterns of punched holes, it was
possible to mechanically create
complex woven patterns.
Modern Jacquard looms
use electronic mechanisms for
controlling the weave design.
New designs can be quickly
downloaded to the loom from
a computer.
Corduroy is an
example of a
cut-pile fabric.
If the loops are
very long, you
get plush or a
fabric that may
look like fur.
Jacquard
35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 33 2/22/19 1:31 PM


34 TEXTILE
Spinning, Weaving, Knitting, and Bonding.
Knitting
Knitting is the process of making fabric by intermeshing loops
of yarn. In hand knitting, two long steel or plastic needles are
used. When the process is mechanized, multiple
needles are arranged, either in a straight line
or in a circle, to rapidly form loops of yarn into
fabrics. The needle hooks grab the yarn and
loop it through, quickly creating a flexible fabric.
Depending on the tightness or looseness of the
knit and the thickness of the yarn, the knitting
process can be used to make the thinnest nylon
stockings or the heaviest cable-stitch sweaters.
Knits are stretchable. They move with the
body and are comfortable. Knits make warm
outerwear because of the air spaces created
by the loops of heavy yarn. The same porous
quality also helps the fabric “breathe” in the
light constructions used for sheer summer-
weight knits.
Knitting Machines
There are two basic knitting machines.
The automated flat knitting machine has dozens of needles
arranged in a straight line and can make more than a million
stitches a minute. The flat needle bed produces a flat fabric
like that made on a loom. The machine can be programmed
to shape the fabric by adding or dropping out stitches. Two
shaped pieces can be sewn together, as for the front and back
of a sweater. Or a whole garment or stockings can be made
in one piece by dropping loops of yarn at strategic points
and in that way tapering the item. This construction is
called full-fashioned
and usually com-
mands a high
price because it
represents quality
workmanship.
Homemade
flat knitter
35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 34 2/22/19 1:31 PM


TEXTILE 35
.Spinning, Weaving, Knitting, and Bonding
The circular knitting machine has its needles placed in a
circle around a drum. The machine revolves, and the needles
knit a cloth that comes out the bottom as a tube of fabric. The
simplest circular knitting machines have only one set of needles,
called cylinder needles, which work up and down. Fabrics made
on these machines are called “single-knit” fabrics. T-shirts are
made on this kind of machine. An undershirt is made with the
same plain knit stitch often used in hand knitting. Technically,
circular knitting is a type of weft knitting. Weft knits stretch
more from side to side than up and down, so they are popular
in underwear and other light, pullover-type shirts.
Warp knitting is the other basic type of knitting and
differs from weft knitting in producing a fabric that is firmly
held together in all directions, having what the experts call
“dimensional stability.” This overall balanced strength makes
warp knitting popular for any item that has stresses placed
on it from all directions—from hairnets to rugs.
Double Knits
Double-knit fabric is made with machines using two sets of needles,
called dial and cylinder needles. The cylinder needles knit loops on the
face of the fabric, while the dial needles knit loops on the back of the
fabric. Using this knit and texturized synthetic fibers such as polyester,
manufacturers make a firm yet flexible fabric that can be cut and sewn
like woven fabric.
35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 35 2/22/19 1:31 PM


36 TEXTILE
Spinning, Weaving, Knitting, and Bonding.
Tricot knits are an important kind of warp construction, as
are raschel knits. Tricot knits are lightweight; raschel knits are
heavier. Raschel machines can knit any kind of fiber, including
metal and glass yarns. Raschel knits are used for a variety of
products, including blankets, men’s suits, and swimwear.
Felt and Other Nonwoven Fabrics
Take a good look at a piece of felt. You will see no sign of
woven or knitted construction in it, because felt is a nonwoven
fabric. It is made by pressing fibers of wool, fur, or animal hair
together, creating sheets that can be cut and sewn like cloth.
For hundreds of years, the basic nonwoven fabric was
felt. Today, many nonwovens are made from manufactured
fibers such as polyester, rayon, and aramids. The individual
fibers may be melted and fused together, stitched into place,
stuck together with adhesives, or tangled together by means
of hooked needles. Water jets and lasers are also being used
to make nonwovens that look and feel like traditionally woven
and knitted fabrics. The process is much faster and less costly
than weaving or knitting.
Nonwovens are often used for disposable items such
as place mats, napkins, fabric softener sheets, dust cloths,
eyeglass lens tissues, tea bags, vacuum cleaner bags, bandages,
and surgical gowns and masks. You will also find nonwovens
used in automobiles for such things as dash insulators, hood
silencer pads, and transmission oil filters. At home and school
you will find nonwovens in book covers, pennants, blankets,
and tennis balls.
The nonwoven
industry is one
of the fastest
growing industries
in the world. The
production of
nonwovens
amounts to about
20 percent of the
total production of
textiles, and that
percentage grows
year by year.
Nets and Braids
Nets, which are called “open-mesh” fabrics, have wide spaces between
the yarns. These fabrics can be made on some kinds of knitting machines.
Netting is used for fishing nets, hammocks, and tennis nets.
Braids are made from three or more interlaced yarns. Braided fabrics
are used for narrow items like shoelaces.
35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 36 2/22/19 1:31 PM


TEXTILE 37
.Spinning, Weaving, Knitting, and Bonding
Making Felt
You can make felt at home with a few simple items.
To make felt:
Step 1—Comb the wool fleece to make the strands lie
straight and parallel.
Step 2—Put one cotton rectangle in the bottom of the
dishpan. On the cotton, place a layer of wool fibers
so that the fibers are parallel to the long side of the
dishpan. Put another layer of wool on top of the first,
but with the fibers parallel to the short side of the pan.
Build up alternating layers of fibers, as many layers as
you wish. The more layers, the thicker the felt you will
make. Top the stack with the second cotton rectangle.
Step 3—Sprinkle soap flakes on top. Then carefully
spoon hot water onto the “sandwich” to dampen the cotton
and wool with just enough water to make it soggy. The water
should be hot but not scalding. If it is too hot to handle, allow
the stack to cool to a safe temperature before doing step 4.
Step 4—With your hands, rub the sandwich. Rub hard and
keep rubbing. If you stop too soon, the soap and hot water will
not have opened the scales of the wool enough for them to
catch on each other, and your felt will fall apart.
Step 5—Rinse the sandwich thoroughly, under running water,
to flush out all of the soap. Peel off the cotton fabric. Allow the
felt to dry.
When the felt is dry, examine it
under a magnifying glass. What
has happened to the wool
fibers you combed straight?
What has this activity
taught you about the dan-
gers of machine washing
and tumble drying a wool
sweater? Has anybody in
your family ever made that
mistake and accidentally
felted a good sweater?
Materials Needed
■ Wool fleece
■ Comb
■ Two rectangles
of plain cotton
fabric
■ Plastic dishpan
■ Soap flakes
■ Spoon
■ Hot water
SOAP FLAKES HOT WATER
COTTON
FABRIC
LAYERS OF
WOOL FIBERS
35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 37 2/22/19 1:31 PM


35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 38 2/22/19 1:31 PM


TEXTILE 39
.Weaving Your Own Textiles
Weaving Your
Own Textiles
Many books on crafts show how to
make simple looms such as those
traditionally used by American Indians. Here is a simple,
Indian-styled backstrap loom you can make. On it you can
weave a belt, coaster place mat, or similar item.
Materials Needed
■ 10 ice-cream sticks or
tongue depressors
■ Hand drill
■ Newspaper
■ Wood glue
■ Cord
■ Wood stick about 1 inch
thick and 6 inches long
■ Rope long enough to fit
around your waist
■ Carpet warp or string
for warp threads
■ Knife or coping saw
■ Cardboard
■ Thick yarn scraps
for filling threads
1
Backstrap Loom
To make the loom:
Step 1—Drill a small hole in the center of
six ice-cream sticks or tongue depressors.
35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 39 2/22/19 1:31 PM


40 TEXTILE
Weaving Your Own Textiles.
Step 2—Place two undrilled sticks on a
piece of newspaper, in position for the
crosspieces of the heddle.
Step 3—Spread glue on the two
crosspieces. Lay the six sticks with
holes across the two crosspieces,
leaving enough space between
the sticks for a warp thread to
pass between them.
Step 4—Glue the last two sticks across
the six sticks, facing the first two
cross-sticks. Now you have a heddle.
Place something heavy on it and let
the heddle dry.
Step 5—When the glue has dried,
secure the sticks with cord as shown.
Step 6—Near each end of the 6-inch-
long stick, whittle a notch around the
stick. Tie one end of the rope around
one notch. Put the stick in front of
your stomach and bring the rope
around in back of you and
to the front. Make a loop
in this end to slip over the
other notch.
5
6
2
3
4
35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 40 2/22/19 1:31 PM


TEXTILE 41
.Weaving Your Own Textiles
Step 7—Cut warp threads from carpet
warp or string. Cut one warp thread the
length of your project plus 18 inches, and
cut five more warp threads twice as long.
Step 8—Tie the first warp thread to the
6-inch stick with a square knot. Fold the
other warp threads in half. Wrap the fold
loop of each folded thread around the
stick. Pull both ends through the loop.
Step 9—Thread the first warp thread
through the hole in the first stick of the
heddle. Pass the second warp thread
between the first and second sticks.
Thread the third warp through the hole
in the second stick. Pass the fourth warp
between the second and third sticks.
Continue in this way until all 11 warps
are threaded. Tie all the ends together
with an overhand knot.
Step 10—Cut a
shuttle out of cardboard
about 1 inch wide and
longer than the heddle is
wide. Notch the ends of
the shuttle. Wind a thick filling thread around
the shuttle. If you want different colors in the
project, use several different-colored filling
threads, each on its own shuttle.
Step 11—Cut two strips of
cardboard 1
⁄2 inch wide and
as long as the heddle.
7
8
9
11
10
35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 41 2/22/19 1:31 PM


42 TEXTILE
Weaving Your Own Textiles.
To weave:
Step 1—Fasten the knot
of warps to a chair, hook,
or tree.
Step 2—Fasten the rope
around your waist.
Step 3—Start weaving
close to your body. First
weave in the two pieces
of cardboard. To do this,
raise the heddle. The
warp threads will form
the opening called the
shed. Put one of the
cardboard strips in the shed. Lower the heddle. This will make a second
shed. Put the second cardboard strip in there.
Step 4—To start the yarn, raise the heddle with your left hand and pass
the shuttle through, from right to left, with your right hand. The yarn
will lay between the warps. Hold the heddle with your right hand, and
with your left hand pass the shuttle around the last warp thread. With
the heddle still raised, pass the shuttle back, from left to right. The yarn
comes back between the same warps and is anchored. Every time you
start a new color or put more yarn on your shuttle, start and finish your
yarn this way.
Step 5—Begin weaving by dropping the heddle and passing the shuttle
through, from right to left, from your right hand to your left hand. Raise
the heddle with your right hand and pass the shuttle back with your left
hand. “Beat” or push the filling yarn together. Continue to do this for
the length of your belt. After you weave 5 or 6 inches, wrap the weaving
around the stick at your waist so you can weave easily. Do not pull your
weaving too tight. Keep the edges straight and even.
Step 6—Cut the ends of the warp threads tied to the stick. Remove the
cardboard strips and knot the warp threads together with a square knot.
Pull the knot up tight against the weaving to keep it from unraveling.
Cut and knot the other end the same way.
35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 42 2/22/19 1:31 PM


TEXTILE 43
.Weaving Your Own Textiles
Box Loom
You also could make a box loom to weave a wall
hanging, place mat, or small rug.
To make the loom:
Step 1—Use a sturdy cardboard box about 12 inches
wide, 14 to 18 inches deep, and 10 inches high. A
letter/legal-size cardboard storage carton with a lift-
off lid works well. A shoe box will not be large or
strong enough.
Step 2—If the box has flaps, cut them off the top. If
the box has a removable lid, lift it off.
Step 3—Using
ruler and pencil,
make a mark
every 1
⁄4 inch
along the top
edge of one short side of
the box. Do the same on
the other short side of
the box.
Step 4—Cut a slit 1
⁄4 inch to 1
⁄2 inch deep at each of
the marks.
Step 5—Use a long, strong yarn
for the warp threads. Tape one end
of the yarn to the box. Then begin
to wrap the yarn around the box,
inserting it into each slit at the top
of the box edge as you go. Wrap
the yarn completely around the box
and continue until you have filled
every slit. Keep an even tension on
the yarn but be careful not to pull it
so tight that you bend the sides of
the box loom. When you have fin-
ished threading the loom, tape the
tail end of the yarn to the box.
Materials Needed
■ Sturdy cardboard
box
■ Scissors or knife
■ Ruler
■ Pencil
■ Strong yarn
■ Adhesive tape
■ Thick, fluffy, or
textured yarns
■ Knitting needle or
1
⁄4-inch dowel
■ Weaving needle or
1
⁄4-inch dowel
■ Fork
3
5
35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 43 2/22/19 1:31 PM


44 TEXTILE
Weaving Your Own Textiles.
To weave:
First weave a header. The header helps align the warp threads
properly, lets you check for mistakes made in threading the
loom, and gives a firm edge for beating the weft into place. You
can use any type of scrap yarn for the header because you will
remove it when the project is finished, but try to use a yarn
similar in weight to the yarn you will use in the finished piece.
To weave the header:
Step 1—Use a knitting needle or a
1
⁄4-inch dowel rod (sharpened to a dull
point at one end and sanded smooth)
to pick up the warp threads. To make a
plain weave, pick up every other warp
thread so the weft will travel over and
under each thread.
Step 2—Rest the knitting needle or
dowel on the edges of the box to hold
the raised threads in place. Using a weav-
ing needle or a second dowel rod as a
shuttle, draw the weft thread through the
open shed. To turn a 1
⁄4-inch dowel rod into a shuttle, whittle
a notch near one end and tie the weft thread to the notch.
Sharpen the other end to a rounded point.
Step 3—Slide the knitting needle or first dowel rod out from
between the warp threads.
Step 4—For the next row, use the knitting needle or dowel to
pick up the other warp threads (the ones not raised for the first
row). Weave the weft thread back across.
Step 5—Repeat until you have woven a header three or four
yarns wide.
To weave the finished piece:
Step 1—Remove the scrap yarn from the shuttle (the weaving
needle or your improvised dowel-rod shuttle). Thread the
shuttle with the yarn you are using for the finished piece.
Step 2—Use the knitting needle or dowel exactly as you did
before to pick up alternating warp threads.
Step 3—Draw the weft thread through the open shed. Arc or
curve the weft thread as you draw it across, to put a little slack
in it. If you draw it across too straight, it will pull on the warp
2
35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 44 2/22/19 1:31 PM


TEXTILE 45
.Weaving Your Own Textiles
threads when the weft or filling is beaten into place. This will
cause the edges of the woven piece to draw in and may break
the warp threads on the edges.
Step 4—Use the tines of a fork to “beat” (gently press) the weft
threads into place, evenly across the loom. Take care to keep the
edges of the weaving straight and parallel. If the edges draw in,
it means you are pulling the weft threads too taut and straight
across. Arc them as described in the previous step.
Step 5—Continue drawing the weft threads back and forth,
alternating them with the warp threads and pressing them into
place, until your weaving reaches the size you want for a place
mat, wall hanging, or other project. Tie off the weft thread.
Step 6—To remove the weaving from the loom, cut the warp
yarns across the middle of the bottom of the cardboard box.
Remove two or three cut warp ends at a time from the loom,
and tie each group together with an overhand knot. Repeat
until all ends of the warp
yarns are tied. (Remove the
scrap header before knotting
the warp ends at that edge of
the finished piece.)
Step 7—To make a fringe,
trim the warp ends no
shorter than 2 inches. If they
are any shorter, the weaving
might unravel.
Try this: Draw on
a piece of paper
a design the size
of your loom. Or,
use a computer
drawing program
to make a design.
Print the design
on paper to match
the size of your
loom. Slip the
drawn or printed
design under the
warp threads.
Follow the pattern
of the design as
closely as you
can to weave
a picture.
4
35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 45 2/22/19 1:31 PM


35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 46 2/22/19 1:31 PM


TEXTILE 47
.The Art of Fabrics
The Art of Fabrics
From earliest times, people have used colors and various
stenciling and printing methods to make themselves look better
in the eyes of their gods and their mates, to frighten their
enemies, or to make their homes more pleasant places to live.
For fabric colors, people have used bright berries, colored
flowers, vegetables, insects, shellfish, tree bark, and natural
earths. These natural colors are not very strong and usually
fade over time or in bright sunlight. One of the great searches
throughout history has been for colors and dyes that would
keep their richness. In ancient Rome, a purple dye from a shell-
fish was so rare and highly prized that only the nobles could
wear the color. People still use the expression “born to the
purple” to describe a noble or an aristocrat.
It took people more than 2,000 years
from the time of the Roman Empire to come
up with a purple color that could be made
cheaply. It was discovered by an Englishman
still in his teens. In 1856 young William
Henry Perkin invented the first chemical
dye—a purplish color called mauveine.
The modern aniline dye industry sprang
from this discovery. Modern textile technology
uses 4,000 to 6,000 different dyes, practically
all of which are chemically produced.
How Dyeing Is Done
The typical method of coloring yarn or fabric
is to dissolve the color in hot or boiling liquid
and put the yarn or fabric in the solution.
In some cases, other chemicals are added to
speed up the process or to make the colors
more uniform or permanent.
Industrial dyeing operation
35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 47 2/22/19 1:31 PM


48 TEXTILE
The Art of Fabrics.
If masses of fibers such as wool or cotton are placed in the
dye bath, it is called stock dyeing. If the fiber is spun into yarn
before it is dyed, it is called yarn dyeing. If the fabric is woven
and then dipped as whole cloth into the dye, it is known as
piece dyeing.
Each method has its virtues. Piece dyeing is good for
coloring large pieces of fabric in one color, but the item may
fade in time if the dye has not penetrated to the innermost
fibers. Jet dyeing under pressure is used today to get better pen-
etration of dyes.
Using stock-dyed yarn gives the most colorfastness and
uniformity of color. A textile maker can create interesting effects
in the final fabric by mixing colored fibers before they are spun
into yarns.
Another method of dyeing used in coloring manufactured
fibers is to dissolve the color in the liquid from which the fila-
ments are made. This puts the color “inside”—it is completely
a part of the final fiber. This is called solution dyeing or
dope dyeing.
Another method of dyeing, called cross-dyeing, takes
advantage of the fact that different fibers—say, wool and
rayon—take the color in varying degrees, one slower or faster
than the other. You can use cross-dyeing to get two or more
tones from one dye.
A fabric woven
from dyed yarns
can be more
colorfast. By
working with
varied colored
yarns, the
weaver can
create interesting
designs such as
plaids, stripes,
and checks.
Do Your Own Dyeing
With an old white shirt, pillowcases, or light-colored
pair of slacks, you can try experimenting with dyes.
At a supermarket or other store that sells fabric-care
products, get a package or two of different-colored
dyes—one a light color, one a dark. Follow the instruc-
tions on the box. Experiment with small pieces of
similar material. Try to get a two-color effect by dyeing
with the light color first, then dyeing the fabric again
with the darker shade. Try tie-dyeing: Tie small knots in
the fabric (or use rubberbands), dip in the dye, let it dry,
and then untie the knots for a sunburst effect. Repeat
with the other color. Remember, be sure to get your
parent’s permission and help before you begin.
35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 48 2/22/19 1:31 PM


TEXTILE 49
.The Art of Fabrics
Natural Dyes
You can use nonpoisonous berries, stems, bark, and flowers
to make dyes that will color fabric or yarn. Use ripe berries,
flowers at full bloom, freshly picked leaves, bark collected in
spring or early summer, or roots collected in early fall. Also,
before you begin, get your parent’s permission and help.
Making Natural Dye
Step 1—Chop or break plants into small pieces and cover
with water in a large pot. Soak overnight.
Step 2—Boil for an hour or more, until the color is much
deeper than the color you want.
Step 3—Strain, to remove all pieces of plants.
Preparing the Material to Be Dyed
Be sure to wear household rubber gloves.
Step 1—Wash fabric in soap and water and rinse well.
Step 2—Add 1 ounce of alum (found in the spice section
of most grocers) to a gallon of water. Also add 1
⁄4 ounce of
washing soda (check the laundry detergent aisle) if fabric is
made of a vegetable fiber—cotton, linen, or rayon. If fabric
is made of an animal fiber—silk or wool—add 1
⁄4 ounce
cream of tartar.
Step 3—Put fabric in this solution and boil for an hour. Rinse
and dry.
35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 49 2/22/19 1:31 PM


50 TEXTILE
The Art of Fabrics.
Dyeing the Material
It’s a good idea to wear household rubber gloves during the
dyeing process, too.
Step 1—Use a kettle large enough to hold the dye and the
fabric to be dyed. (An enamel kettle works well.) Add enough
water so that the dye will cover the cloth.
Step 2—Bring the liquid to a boil and add the cloth. Stir with a
wooden spoon or stick.
Step 3—Lift the cloth on the spoon so that you can see light
through it. The color you see will be close to the color your fab-
ric will be when it dries. You may have to boil the fabric in the
dye from a half hour to an hour to get it the shade you want.
Step 4—Set the dye so it will not wash out: Add 1
⁄2 cup of vin-
egar or 1 tablespoon of salt to the liquid in the kettle. Boil for
15 minutes.
Step 5—Remove the cloth from the dye and rinse it in cool
water. Hang it in the shade to dry.
These Plants Make These Colors
Onion skins Red or yellow
Beets Red-violet
Dandelion roots Magenta
Rhubarb leaves Light green
Spinach leaves Green
Blackberries Blue
Sunflower seeds Blue
Hickory bark Brown
Walnut hulls Brown
Sumac leaves Yellow-brown
Goldenrod stalk
and flowers Yellow
35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 50 2/22/19 1:31 PM


TEXTILE 51
.The Art of Fabrics
Printing Textiles
Many fabrics are printed rather than dyed. The process is
basically the same, except that instead of color being applied
to the whole area of cloth, it is applied to specific areas. The
same dyes are used in both processes, but dye baths are liquid,
whereas printing uses a thick paste of the coloring material.
Most fabric-printing today is done on high-speed presses
much like those used in printing newspapers. A roller with a
design etched into it is covered with ink and rolled across the
fabric. When the roller touches the fabric, the inked portion
leaves an impression on the cloth.
Another important printing method is called screening
or the silk-screen process. A fine mesh or screen of nylon is
stretched over a flat wooden frame. This screen is painted over
in all areas except where the pattern is to be. The screen is
laid over the fabric to be printed, and dye paste is placed in
the frame. As the paste is squeegeed back and forth, it seeps
through the exposed open mesh and colors the cloth under-
neath. Visit a local T-shirt printing shop to see silk-screening
on a small scale. For large production, this process is done with
elaborate, high-speed machinery.
In another process, called heat transfer printing, the design
is printed on paper and then ironed onto the fabric. When the
paper is peeled off, it leaves the design on the fabric. You can
buy heat-transfer paper at craft shops and fabric stores.
35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 51 2/22/19 1:31 PM


52 TEXTILE
The Art of Fabrics.
Digital printing methods are also in use today. Digital print-
ing produces prints with great clarity and vivid colors.
Finishing
Virtually all fabrics are called gray goods as they come from
the loom or knitting machine. This term (also spelled greige,
pronounced “gray”) does not refer to the color of the cloth.
It just means that the fabric has not been given any finishing
treatments. To make certain that the fabric will be suitable
for its final intended use, gray goods undergo many finish-
ing processes, some of which occur before dyeing. Scouring,
bleaching, and desizing are often necessary before the fabric
can be dyed. Other finishing treatments help fabrics resist
fading, flames, mildew, moths, static, stains, and water.
Print Your Own Fabric
You can print a fabric in much the same way as the
first printed fabrics were made—by carving a design
in a wood block, inking it with a roller, and pressing
the block on a piece of cloth. Art supply stores or paint
stores will have the ink and other items you need. Try
printing your patrol design on a big handkerchief for
each member of the patrol.
Here are some things that happen to fabrics after they
leave the loom or knitting machine. For descriptions of
these treatments and finishes, see the glossary.
• Antistatic finishes • Permanent press
• Bleaching • Sanforizing
• Calendaring • Scouring
• Desizing • Shearing
• Flame-retardant finishes • Singeing
• Mercerizing • Sizing
• Mothproofing • Soil-resistant finishes
• Napping • Water-resistant finishes
35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 52 2/22/19 1:31 PM


TEXTILE 53
.The Art of Fabrics
Waterproofing
Fabrics may be made water repellent in many different ways.
Some water-repellent finishes will wash out; others are more
permanent. Some water-repellent finishes make the fabric
resistant to oil stains also.
With your parent’s or counselor’s assistance, here are some treat-
ments you can use to make a piece of fabric water repellent. Be
sure to work carefully and wear household rubber gloves.
1. Dissolve 1 ounce of gelatin in 1 pint of hot water. Dissolve
1
⁄4 pound of lye soap in 2 pints of hot water. Dissolve
1
⁄4 pound of alum in 1 pint of hot water. Mix the gelatin solu-
tion with the soap solution and place the fabric in this solu-
tion. Agitate the fabric in this solution for 5 minutes. Add the
alum solution, mix well, and let it set for 5 minutes. Spread
the fabric and let it dry. Note: Look for lye soap at your local
natural products grocer. Alum can be found in the spice aisle
at most supermarkets. The three solutions may be mixed and
the mixture brushed on the fabric, if desired.
2. If your fabric is a loosely woven material, a paraffin solution
will give complete waterproofing. Grate 1
⁄2 pound of paraffin
wax (found at most craft stores) and dissolve it in 2 quarts
of turpentine. The wax will dissolve better if you warm the
mixture in the sun; do not heat it on a fire. Spray or brush
the fabric with the wax solution or submerge the fabric in
the solution. Spread and hang the fabric and allow it to dry.
Do not use a dryer to dry the fabric. Most of the turpentine
will evaporate as the fabric dries.
35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 53 2/22/19 1:31 PM


35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 54 2/22/19 1:31 PM


TEXTILE 55
.The Textile Detective
The Textile Detective
One day you’re doing laundry, and you have a pile of shirts
that are missing their care labels. You don’t know what the
shirts are made of and without knowing that, you can’t be sure
how to wash them—or even if they are safe to wash. What do
you do?
With this basic course in being the Sherlock Holmes of the
fabric world, you can find out. Knowing how to identify fibers
used in clothes, rugs, curtains, etc., is valuable in deciding on
proper washing, dry cleaning, pressing, and storage. When
you know the characteristics of the various fibers, you can buy
clothes and household items more intelligently, too. You’ll be
sure to get the fiber that will do the best job.
To the naked eye, yarns pulled from pieces of cloth may
look alike. But, like people, each yarn has its own personality
and physical character. Here are some simple methods used to
identify fibers.
Microscope Identification
If you have a microscope or can use one at
school, you can magnify fibers to see their
individual differences clearly. Start with a fab-
ric you can identify from the label. Be sure it
is 100 percent, not a 50/50 or 65/35 blend. If
you examine a fiber from a mixed-fiber-blend
fabric, you will not be sure which of the two
fibers you are looking at.
Unravel an all-cotton or pure-wool yarn,
and place a few fibers under the microscope.
On a 3-by-5 card or piece of paper, draw a
picture of what you see and print the name of the fiber.
Complete your collection by repeating this process with other
natural fibers: silk, linen, jute, ramie. Compare these with the
appearance of manufactured fibers such as nylon, acrylic, ace-
tate, polyester, aramid, and olefin.
35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 55 2/22/19 1:31 PM


56 TEXTILE
The Textile Detective.
You will notice that the natural fibers have scales or a
twisted or kinky construction. Cotton fiber, for instance, looks
like a twisted ribbon under a microscope. The rough texture
of natural fibers helps the fibers stay together when they are
twisted into yarns. Manufactured fibers are smooth or have
been given lengthwise grooves and specially treated to be
crimped or twisted.
The Breaking Test
Fibers break in different ways. This fact can be helpful in
identifying them. Start with threads you pull from the edge
of an identifiable piece of fabric. Get a sample of yarn about
a foot in length. Hold the ends in your fingers and pull the
yarn apart. Observe the point of breakage, and compare to
the descriptions that follow.
35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 56 2/22/19 1:31 PM


TEXTILE 57
.The Textile Detective
Cotton. Will show ends
that are short, even, and
fuzzy. There will be a curl
to the ends.
Wool. Fuzzy surface, stretches easily, very
elastic. The ends will be wavy and spiral.
Silk. Will stretch a lot and
break with a snap. The ends
will be fine and lustrous.
Linen. Strong, so you will need a long yarn.
When pulled apart, the ends will be long,
shiny, and pointed. Ends will not flare
outward or curl.
Rayon. When dry, is quite
strong. Breaks with treelike
ends. If wet, yarn will break
more easily.
35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 57 2/22/19 1:31 PM


58 TEXTILE
Looking Good: You and Your Clothes.
Looking Good:
You and Your Clothes
You will discover some practical, everyday reasons for learning
about textiles. For one thing, knowing how fabrics are made
can help you choose fabrics that are right for the job and show
you how best to take care of them so they will last longer and
keep looking good.
If you want to know how to take care of the clothes you
buy, your Scout uniform, tents, and other equipment, look first
at the hang tags that are attached to the items. Also check the
labels sewn into clothes or other items made of fabric. Save
the hang tags, read them, and give them to your parent to
look over.
35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 58 2/22/19 1:31 PM


TEXTILE 59
.Looking Good: You and Your Clothes
Here are some of the important terms you will find on fabric tags and
labels, and their meanings.
Label Meaning
Permanent Press No ironing needed for the life of
the garment.
Durable Press Little or no ironing needed.
Waterproof or Rainproof Water will not come through the fabric.
Rain Resistant Will keep rain out for a reasonable time.
Water Repellent or Water sprinkled on the surface will bead
Rain Repellent and roll off. Surface finish may need to
be restored by a dry cleaner.
Washable or Wash, bleach, dry, and press by
Machine Washable any customary method, including
commercial laundry.
Delicate Cycle or Gentle Cycle Set the dial of the washing machine to
this reading or wash by hand.
Hand Washable or Wash by Hand Launder only by hand in warm water.
Tumble Dry, Remove Promptly Dry in a tumble dryer at the appropriate
setting; in absence of a cool-down cycle
remove at once when tumbling stops.
Block to Dry Pull back into original shape while drying.
Commercial Clean or Send to a commercial dry cleaner. Do not
Professional Clean Only use self-service dry cleaning.
Sanforized Garment has been preshrunk and is
guaranteed to shrink no more than an
additional 1 percent.
Preshrunk Has been shrunk by the maker before sale
but is not guaranteed not to shrink more.
Fire Retarding Treated to resist flame but will burn if
held in flame.
Mercerized Fabric has been chemically treated to give
it a high luster. Used on cotton fabrics.
35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 59 2/22/19 1:31 PM


60 TEXTILE
Looking Good: You and Your Clothes.
Comparing Fabrics
The charts shown here list the fibers often used in making fabrics for
clothes. Read the descriptions of the various fibers and the care
summaries to help you decide whether a garment has the qualities
or balance of qualities you want or need in a piece of clothing.
Natural Fibers
Fiber Characteristics Care
Cotton Durable, soft, absorbent, May be machine
strong, cool, comfortable. washed in hot water
Easy to dye. Wrinkles easily and dried. Finishes
unless special finishes add to ease of care.
are applied.
Linen Absorbent, crisp, cool, Must be dampened
durable. Wrinkles easily well and ironed at
unless given special finish. high temperature.
Silk Luxurious, dyes well, Dry cleaning preferred;
lightweight, strong; resists some silks are washable,
wrinkles. May water spot. preferably by hand.
Weakened by long exposure
to heat and moisture unless
specially treated.
Wool Warm, very durable, springs Dry cleaning preferred, unless
back into shape. Will shrink with labeled washable. Must be
exposure to heat and moisture protected from moths unless
unless specially treated. specially treated.
Ramie Linen-like appearance; often Machine washable; sometimes
blended with polyester, cotton, requires no ironing.
linen, and acrylic.
35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 60 2/22/19 1:31 PM


TEXTILE 61
.Looking Good: You and Your Clothes
Manufactured Fibers
Fiber Characteristics Care
Acetate and Smooth, drapes well. Weak Dry cleaning preferred unless
Triacetate when wet; dries quickly. labeled washable. Press
Arnel® Builds up static electricity. carefully at low-heat setting.
Chromspun®
Rayon Cool, comfortable, drapes Dry cleaning preferred.
Avril® well. Wrinkles easily. Tends Some rayons are washable.
Courcel® to shrink.
Zantrel®
Lyocell Similar to rayon in feel. Generally machine or hand
Galaxy® Breathable, lightweight, washable in cold water.
Tencel® comfortable, drapes well. Drip drying preferred to
Resists wrinkling and shrinking. machine drying.
Acrylic Wrinkle-resistant. Wool-like Generally machine or hand
Acrilan® feel and warmth. Builds washable. Remove oil stains
Creslan® up static electricity. Rubbing before washing.
Orlon® may cause “pilling” (matting
into little balls).
Metallic Heavy, stable. May be Hand washable. Do not rub
Lurex® damaged by abrasion. or iron.
Olefin Strong, flexible, absorbs Avoid high temperatures.
Herculon® very little water.
Polyester Colorfast, strong, holds its Washable; dries quickly.
Dacron® shape. Resists wrinkles, Needs little ironing. Pretreat
Fortel® abrasions, moths, mildew, oily stains before washing.
Kodel® and bleach.
Spandex Good stretch; springs back May be machine washed in
Lycra® into shape. Resists abrasion warm water. Dry in dryer at
Cleerspan® and body acids. lowest heat setting.
Nylon Very strong, durable, Can be machine washed.
Antron® lightweight; dries quickly. Low or no heat usually
Celanese® recommended.
35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 61 2/22/19 1:31 PM


35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 62 2/22/19 1:31 PM


TEXTILE 63
.Textiles and the Environment
Textiles and the
Environment
Producing fibers and making textiles requires large amounts of
natural resources. Some of the resources used (such as fossil
fuels) are nonrenewable; that is, they cannot be replaced. Once
they are used up, they are gone forever.
Some methods of manufacturing textiles can cause air and
water pollution. Some of the chemicals used in making and
cleaning textiles can be harmful to people and the environment,
and manufacturers must take precautions to minimize or elimi-
nate the negative effects.
Major Environmental Concerns
To protect yourself and the environment, it is important that
you learn about the environmental impact of textile production
and care. Here are brief descriptions of some major issues. Can
you think of ways these problems might be solved now or in
the future?
Water Use
It takes water to grow fiber crops like cotton. Water for
irrigating fields comes from streams, rivers, and lakes, or is
pumped out of the ground. In some countries and in some
U.S. states, more water is used for irrigation than for any other
purpose. In regions of low rainfall or in times of drought, using
large amounts of water to irrigate crops can dry up lakes, rivers,
and wells.
Textile processing operations, from the scouring of natural
fibers to the dyeing and finishing of fabrics, also use a great
deal of water. Textile mills have traditionally been located near
abundant sources of water.
As the world’s population grows, the demand for water
steadily increases. It is important that water resources be well-
managed and conserved to prevent water waste and shortages.
35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 63 2/22/19 1:31 PM


64 TEXTILE
Textiles and the Environment.
Water Pollution
Chemical fertilizers and pesticides that are applied to fields
of fiber crops may end up polluting rivers, lakes, and wells.
Pollution also may come from textile mills. Most of the water
used in a textile mill is released back into the environment.
Untreated water often contains impurities such as waxes,
greases, pesticides, dyes, detergents, and salts.
One vital pollution-control method is to treat the mill
water to make it clean enough to go back into the environment.
It is also important to use cleaner ways of growing crops and
making textiles.
Many cotton producers, for example, no longer use syn-
thetic pesticides on the soil or on plants to kill insects or
prevent diseases. They remove weeds by hoeing their fields,
and they use beneficial insects to help control insect pests.
Cotton textiles also may be made from naturally colored
cotton fibers that need no dyeing. Cottons that naturally grow
in colors have always existed in nature. Native peoples have
long used them for hand spinning and weaving. Only recently,
however, have plant breeders discovered how to combine the
natural colors of wild cottons with the long, strong fibers of
commercially grown white cottons. These colored cottons
come from the field in rich shades of reddish brown,
bronze, green, oatmeal, khaki, and similar natural colors.
By using yarns spun from the colored fibers, textile
makers can avoid the high costs of dyeing. They save
money by not buying dyestuffs, and they also save
energy, water, and the expense of safely disposing of toxic dye
wastes.
Organic cotton is grown without the use of
pesticides, defoliants, or other chemicals.
Allergy sufferers and other people who are sensi-
tive to the chemicals used in many traditional
textiles may prefer bed and bath linens
made from organically produced cotton.
35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 64 2/22/19 1:32 PM


TEXTILE 65
.Textiles and the Environment
Human Health and Safety
Several substances that are used in making textiles can be dan-
gerous to people. These include some preservatives, pesticides,
resins, the heavy metals found in certain synthetic fibers and
dyes, and dyes that are known to cause allergic reactions and
have other harmful effects.
Resource Consumption and Air Pollution
Textile mills must use energy to make heat for such processes
as dyeing, curing, heat setting, and drying. To generate the
steam used in these processes, most mills burn coal, oil, or
natural gas, or they use electricity produced from these fossil
fuels. Burning fossil fuels for energy can release pollutant gases
into the air.
Fuels are also consumed
to move textiles around.
In today’s global economy,
the raw fibers may have
traveled around the world
before being put to their
intended use as a finished
textile product. From an
environmental perspective,
it is better to use raw
materials—whether fiber,
yarn, or fabric—that are
produced close to home.
Fossil fuels also provide
the raw material for making
synthetic fibers like nylon and
polyester. Garments made
from these synthetics are not
biodegradable. That is, they
cannot easily be broken down
or naturally decomposed by
the action of bacteria, sun,
and rain. Clothing made from
synthetics often will outlast
its usefulness.
35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 65 2/22/19 1:32 PM


66 TEXTILE
Textiles and the Environment.
Earth-Friendly Fabrics
It is important to realize that many textile products can be used
to protect the environment. Fabrics known as “geotextiles”
hold soil in place and help prevent erosion. Fabrics are used
as filters to clean up air and water. Manufactured fibers can act
as absorbents to remove spilled oil from water and wetlands.
Many textile makers are working to develop environmentally
sustainable textiles—that is, textiles
that are economical in their use of
energy and natural resources; that
are clean to make and to care for,
producing few waste products; and
that are biodegradable, recyclable,
or reusable.
You can help protect the envi-
ronment, and also influence the
way things are done in the textile
industry, by making responsible
choices in the clothes, fabrics,
and other textile products you buy.
One partial solution to conserve
resources might be to recycle
petroleum-based materials into
new products. The bottles are
melted down into a resin and spun
into fiber. It takes about eight two-
liter containers to produce one
sweatshirt. Plastic soda bottles, for
example, are being recycled to make
synthetic fiber.
Construction sites use geotextiles to help
control erosion and drainage.
35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 66 2/22/19 1:32 PM


TEXTILE 67
.Textiles and the Environment
A good way to evaluate or rate textiles according to their environmental
benefits and drawbacks is to make a chart that lists the advantages and
disadvantages of each major group. The chart shown here is partly filled
in, to get you started. What other advantages or disadvantages can you
think of for each textile group?
Textiles Advantages Disadvantages
Natural Plant • Renewable plant resource • Chemical fertilizers and
Fibers (can be replaced by pesticides often applied
• Cotton growing again) to fields
• Linen • Biodegradable • Often require irrigation
• Jute • Recyclable •
• Ramie • •
• •
• •
Natural Animal • Renewable animal product • May require dry cleaning
Fibers • Biodegradable using chemical solvents
• Wool • Wool can be reused •
• Mohair • •
• Silk • •
Cellulosic • Made from wood pulp • Treated with solvents and
Manufactured (renewable plant resource) chemicals during production
Fibers • Can be made from plant • May require dry cleaning
• Rayon waste products such as with chemical solvents
• Acetate sawdust or cotton linters •
• Lyocell • Biodegradable •
• •
• •
Synthetic • Strong, durable • Made from nonrenewable
Manufactured • Versatile petrochemicals
Fibers • Easy to care for • May outlast usefulness
• Nylon (machine washable) • Not biodegradable (break
• Polyester • down very slowly, like plastic)
• Acrylic • •
• Spandex • •
• Aramids • •
• Olefin • •
Responsible Choices
35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 67 2/22/19 1:32 PM


35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 68 2/22/19 1:32 PM


TEXTILE 69
.Textiles, Tomorrow, and You
Textiles, Tomorrow,
and You
In the textile industry are many interesting and unusual careers.
If you can visit a textile mill or manufacturer, talk to people who
work there and ask about their responsibilities. Here are a few
examples of some of the fields you might discover.
Engineer
The average textile operation has mechanical, electrical, chemi-
cal, and industrial engineers as well as textile engineers who
handle the many complicated processes and operations in
developing and making thousands of textile products. If you
like to operate or repair machines, you will find highly unusual
and complicated machines in a textile plant.
Scientist
The textile industry employs top-notch scientists whose
research leads to new fibers and to new ways of using
fabrics and textiles. Textile companies need people trained
in chemistry, physics, and biology.
Artist or Writer
All printed fabrics, upholstery, carpet designs, towels, sheets,
and ties are designed originally by artists. Most fabric designers
work for companies that make fibers, fabrics, or clothing. They
must know enough about making textiles to know whether
their creative ideas can be used in actual products.
Thinking about a
career in textiles?
Two subjects
to study are
computers and
foreign languages.
Computers now
play an essential
role in textile
design and
manufacturing,
and they are
constantly
getting more
sophisticated.
You also will need
a knowledge of
foreign languages
because today’s
textile industry
is global.
35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 69 2/22/19 1:32 PM


70 TEXTILE
Textiles, Tomorrow, and You.
If you are good in English, a textile company might hire
you to work in its advertising or public relations departments.
You see fabric advertisements in magazines and newspapers
and look at television commercials for items made of fabrics.
This work is done by artists and writers who work either for
the textile companies or for their advertising agencies.
Sales Representative
Selling calls for people who like people, who welcome chal-
lenges, who are enthusiastic, and who know the product they
sell inside and out. If you think you have these qualities, you
could think about a career in textile sales, sales management,
or marketing. Many textile companies have training courses for
sales representatives.
Other Professions
Many careers in textiles require college training. If you are in
high school, talk to your guidance counselor or a teacher about
your ideas for your future. In addition, you can write to the
schools for catalogs and pamphlets describing their programs.
See the resources chapter for a list of schools and colleges that
offer special programs for careers in textiles.
35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 70 2/22/19 1:32 PM


TEXTILE 71
.Textiles, Tomorrow, and You
Textile Graduates Are in Demand
The U.S. textile industry is the second leading contributor to the gross
domestic product, second only to the auto industry. The textile industry
consists of more than 30,000 fiber, textile, and apparel companies. As
the industry moves into the 21st century, college graduates must meet
the challenges and complexities of a high-tech industry.
What Career Opportunities Are Available in Textiles?
Textile Engineering
Chemical process engineer
Industrial engineer
Information systems engineer
Machine design engineer
Process engineer
Product design engineer
Quality engineer
Research and development
engineer
Technical management
Technical sales
Textile and Apparel Management
Apparel design
Computer integrated
manufacturing
Distribution and sales
Human resources
Manufacturing management
Marketing and merchandising
Product development
production planning
Quality control
Technical services
Textile Chemistry
Chemical manufacturing
Color science
Dyeing and finishing preparation
Environmental protection
Polymer synthesis and production
Technical sales and service
Textile Technology
Color forecasting
Freelance design
Graphic design
Manufacturing management
Process control
Product development
Quality management
Styling
Technical sales
Textile graduates typically go to
work for a textile company in one
of the fields listed above. Some
continue their education in gradu-
ate programs. About 25 percent
go to work outside the textile
industry in one of the fields
listed below.
Other Career Options
Armed forces
Banking
Computer programming
Consulting
Education
Finance
Government
Law
Medical
Pharmaceuticals
Software development
—From Kent Hester, director of Student and Career Services, College of Textiles,
North Carolina State University
35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 71 2/22/19 1:32 PM


72 TEXTILE
Glossary.
acetate. A manufactured fiber made from
chemically modified cellulose, refined from
cotton linters or wood pulp, and squeezed
through a spinneret and then hardened.
acrylic. A synthetic manufactured fiber that
feels like wool.
aniline. A chemical from which many dyes
are made.
antistatic. A finish that reduces static
electricity and the tendency of a fabric to
cling, especially fabrics made from
manufactured fibers.
aramid. A kind of synthetic fiber, very strong
and resistant to high temperatures. Kevlar
and Nomex are examples.
asbestos. A fibrous mineral used for making
fireproof articles. Asbestos is very dangerous
to human health if breathed into the lungs.
beating. Pushing the loose filling yarns into
place in a woven fabric by striking them with
the reed.
bleaching. Chemical treatment to remove
impurities and whiten the fabric; can be done
either in preparation for dyeing and finishing
or to get bright whites in the finished fabric.
blend. A yarn or a fabric that is made up
of more than one fiber. In blended yarns,
two or more different types of staple fibers
are twisted or spun together.
bobbin. A spool upon which yarn is wound.
breaking. Cutting flax stalks into short pieces
to get at the fibers.
calendering. A process for finishing fabrics
by passing them through heavy rollers
under pressure and usually heat to add
special effects.
carbon fibers. Strong, stiff, thin fibers of
nearly pure carbon.
carding. Partially straightening and cleaning
fibers before spinning. Carded yarn is generally
coarser and more uneven than combed yarn.
cellulose. A natural substance based on
glucose (a sugar) found in the cell walls of
plants. Cellulose is an important part of plant
fibers like cotton and flax, and is the major
raw material used for the manufactured fibers
of rayon, acetate, and lyocell.
cellulosic. Made from cellulose. Compare to
synthetic.
colorfastness. A dyed fabric’s ability to resist
fading from washing, exposure to sunlight,
and other environmental conditions.
combing. An additional step beyond card-
ing that gets the fibers highly parallel and
removes the shorter, undesirable fibers.
Combed yarns are finer, cleaner, and more
even than those that are not combed.
count. A number indicating the fineness
or coarseness of yarn. Counts in denim,
for example, range from 5 to 12, whereas
counts in shirting can range from 28 to 50
and even higher.
crease resistant. A finish that reduces a
fabric’s tendency to crease and wrinkle.
cross-dyeing. A method of coloring fabric
made from yarns of different fibers, by dyeing
the fabric with different dyes for each type
of yarn.
desizing. Breaking down sizes (stiffeners,
starches, or glazes) that were applied to the
yarns before fabric making.
distaff. A staff for holding fibers for spinning
by hand.
dobby loom. A loom equipped with a
special attachment (the dobby) that controls
the harness, allowing the weaving of small,
geometric or floral patterns.
Glossary
35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 72 2/22/19 1:32 PM


TEXTILE 73
.Glossary
double knit. A weft-knit fabric formed by
using two sets of needles knitting face loops
and back loops into the fabric.
drafting. Drawing or pulling out fibers in
spinning, either by hand or by machine.
dry cleaning. Cleaning fabrics with
chemicals, not water.
durable press. A finishing treatment applied
to a fabric so that the fabric stays smooth,
resists wrinkling, and keeps its creases or
pleats during laundering.
elasticity. The ability of a fiber or fabric to
return to its original length, shape, or size
immediately after being stretched out of
shape; its springiness.
fabric. A cloth made by weaving, knitting, or
bonding fibers.
felt. A nonwoven fabric of pressed,
matted fibers.
fiber. A fine, slender, threadlike strand, either
natural or manufactured, that is twisted into
yarns and then used to make a fabric.
filament. A long, continuous fiber; a
manufactured fiber of indefinite length
(continuous), extruded from the spinneret
during the fiber production process.
filling yarns. In a woven fabric, the yarns
that run crosswise to the warp or lengthwise
yarns. Also called pick or weft.
finish. Any process a fabric goes through after
it is woven or knitted to make it wear longer,
be easier to care for, or be more attractive.
flame resistant. A finish that prevents fabric
from spreading a flame. A flame-resistant
fabric stops burning when removed from
the flame.
flame retardant. A chemical applied to a fab-
ric or added to the fiber at the time of produc-
tion, to give protection against flame flareup.
flax. A slender, annual plant grown for its
fiber and seeds. The fiber of the flax plant is
made into linen yarn.
full-fashioned. Knitted to conform to the
shape of the body.
gin. A machine for separating the fibers of
cotton from the seeds.
gray goods. Unfinished fabric; fabric as
it comes from the loom or knitting
machine, before it has gone through any
finishing processes.
greige goods. See gray goods.
hackling. Combing, as flax or hemp.
harness. On a loom, the frame containing
heddles through which the warp is drawn and
which, in combination with another frame or
frames, forms the shed and determines the
woven pattern.
heddle. On a loom, the main part of the
harness that guides the warp yarns.
hemp. A tall, coarse plant native to Asia. A
tough fiber, valuable for making rope, comes
from its inner bark.
herringbone. A broken twill weave with
rows of slanting lines that form zig-zag V’s.
Also called fishbone.
jacquard. A fabric with a complicated pattern
woven or knit into it as part of its structure.
jute. A strong, coarse fiber, chiefly from
India, used for making burlap, gunny sacks,
and carpet backs.
knitting. Making a fabric by interlocking
loops of one or more yarns, either by hand
with knitting needles or by machine.
line. The longer, better flax or hemp fibers.
Compare to tow.
linen. Fibers taken from inside the woody
stem of the flax plant.
linters. The short fibers remaining on
cottonseeds after the longer fibers have
been removed by the cotton gin.
loom. A hand-operated or power-driven
device for weaving fabrics.
lyocell. A manufactured fiber made from
cellulose; similar to rayon but stronger.
manufactured fibers. Fibers made through
chemical processes, such as polyester, nylon,
and spandex.
mercerization. A chemical finishing process
with caustic soda that removes impurities and
loose surface strands from a yarn or fabric
and gives it a shiny look. Mercerizing makes
cotton and linen fabrics lustrous, stronger,
more durable, and easier to dye.
mildew resistant. A finish that slows or
prevents the growth of mildew and mold.
35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 73 2/22/19 1:32 PM


74 TEXTILE
Glossary.
moth resistant. A finish that discourages
insects from attacking wool fibers.
napping. A finishing process to produce a
soft, fleecy surface on smooth, hard fabrics,
using brushes or wire teeth to rub the fabric
surface to create the desired appearance.
natural fibers. Fibers found in nature, such
as cotton, wool, linen, and silk.
nonrenewable. Not capable of being
replaced or replenished.
nonwoven. Made of fibers matted, tangled,
fused, glued, or melted together.
nylon. The first completely synthetic fiber,
known for its strength and resilience.
olefin. A synthetic manufactured fiber
often used for indoor-outdoor carpets and
lawn furniture.
permanent press. A fabric treatment that sets
the shape and aids in wrinkle resistance for a
smooth appearance after laundering.
petrochemicals. Chemicals from crude oil
and natural gas.
pick. Filling yarns; weft. Also, one passage of
the filling insertion mechanism in a loom.
piece dyeing. Coloring a fabric by dipping it
as a whole cloth into a dye bath.
ply. Two or more yarns twisted together.
Three-ply yarn, for example, consists of
three strands of yarn twisted together for
added strength.
polyester. The most widely used synthetic
manufactured fiber; it is second only to
cotton in worldwide use.
preshrunk. Put through a shrinking
process before marketing to keep later
shrinking minimal.
ramie. A strong natural fiber taken from the
stalk of an Asian shrub of the nettle family.
raschel knit. A warp-knitted fabric that
resembles hand-crocheted fabrics, lace,
and netting.
rayon. A manufactured fiber made of
cellulose from wood pulp, cotton linters,
or other plant matter.
reed. In a loom, the parallel, comblike wires
that force the filling yarns tightly up against
the rows already woven.
retting. Soaking flax or hemp in water or
exposing to moisture to make it easier to
remove the fiber from the woody tissue.
roving. Forming slivers of fibers into slightly
twisted strands; a step in spinning.
Sanforizing. A trademarked finishing process
to preshrink fabrics so that they will shrink
very little in laundering.
scouring. Washing cotton or wool to remove
dirt, grease, and other impurities that might
cause uneven dyeing.
scutching. Dressing or preparing flax
by beating.
sericulture. Raising silkworms to make silk.
shearing. Clipping the wool from sheep.
Also, a finishing process used in carpet mak-
ing to obtain the desired pile height and loft.
The process consists of passing the unfinished
carpet over precisely set knife edges that cut
yarns to required lengths.
shed. On a loom, the opening created between
raised and lowered warp yarns through which
the shuttle or other filling insertion mechanism
carries the crosswise filling yarns.
shedding. Raising warp yarns to make a shed.
shrink resistant. A treatment that helps
fabric retain its original size and shape after
laundering. Labels should give the percentage
of shrinkage to be expected when the item is
washed, such as “Guaranteed not to shrink
more than 1%.”
shuttle. A device in a loom for passing or
shooting the weft or filling yarn through the
shed from one side to the other; traditionally
a boat-shaped piece of wood with a bobbin
on which the filling yarn is wound.
silk-screening. A printing method in which a
mesh cloth (screen) is stretched over a heavy
wooden frame, and the design that is printed
or stenciled on the screen is printed by using a
squeegee to force dye paste through the open-
ings in the screen in areas not blocked out.
singeing. Burning or scorching off the fuzz
or nap on a fabric to get a smooth surface.
sizing. A solution of starch or resin applied
to warp yarns to stiffen them for weaving,
or to a fabric to temporarily increase weight,
luster, and body.
35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 74 2/22/19 1:32 PM


TEXTILE 75
.Glossary
slashing. Applying a protective film, usually
starch or a synthetic, to warp yarns to make
them stiffer and easier to handle on a loom.
See sizing.
sliver. A loose rope of untwisted or loosely
twisted fibers produced in carding
and combing.
soil release. A finish used to make soils and
stains easier to remove from fabrics.
soil resistant. Finishes applied to clothing,
upholstery, draperies, floor coverings, and
bedding to help keep stains from penetrating.
solution dyeing. A way of dyeing manufac-
tured fibers in which colored pigments are
mixed into the syrupy solution before the
solution is extruded through a spinneret to
form fibers. Fibers and yarns dyed in this
way are highly colorfast.
spandex. A highly elastic, synthetic manu-
factured fiber; it can be repeatedly stretched
without breaking and will recover to its
original length.
spin. To make yarn by drawing out, twisting,
and winding fibers.
spindle. A rod, usually made of wood, used
in hand-spinning to twist the fibers drawn
from the mass on the distaff, and upon which
the yarn is wound as it is spun.
spinneret. The body part that a spider or
caterpillar uses to spin silk for its web or
cocoon; or, a metal plate or nozzle with tiny
holes through which a chemical solution is
extruded to make continuous filaments.
spinning. Twisting staple (short) lengths of
fiber into continuous yarn.
stain resistant. A finish that makes fibers less
absorbent so it is easier to wash off stains.
staple fibers. Short fibers, typically ranging
from 1
⁄2 inch up to 18 inches long. Wool,
cotton, and flax exist only as staple fibers.
Manufactured fibers can be cut to a staple
length from the continuous filament.
stock dyeing. Dyeing staple fiber before it
is spun into yarn; a common method for
woolen fabrics.
synthetic. In textiles, a manufactured fiber
made from petrochemicals. Compare
to cellulosic.
textile. Any fiber, filament, yarn, or fabric
or anything made of fiber.
tow. The shorter flax fibers separated from
the longer fibers (line) in hackling. Tow is
also the name given to a sliver of synthetic
(especially continuous filament) fibers.
tricot. A warp-knit fabric with fine vertical
ribs on the face and crosswise ribs on
the back.
twill weave. A basic weave in which the
warp and filling yarns are interlaced in a way
that creates a diagonal effect.
warp. In a woven fabric, the yarns that run
lengthwise and are interlaced with the weft
(filling) yarns.
warp knit. A knitted fabric produced by
interlocking loops in a lengthwise direction;
common examples are tricot knits and
raschel knits.
waterproof. Fabrics whose pores have been
closed, and therefore will not allow water or
air to pass through them.
water repellent. Fabrics that have been
treated with a finish that causes them to
shed water. The finish does not close the
pores of the fabric as waterproofing does,
so the fabrics are still permeable to air.
water resistant. See water repellent.
weaving. Interlacing yarns to make a fabric;
or, interlacing other materials, like strips of
wood or leaves, to make an item like a basket
or a mat.
weft. In woven fabric, the filling yarns that
run crosswise to the warp yarns.
weft knit. A knitted fabric formed by inter-
locking loops in the widthwise direction; com-
mon examples are double knits and rib knits.
whorl. A flywheel or weight for a spindle.
woolen. A fabric of carded wool in which
the fibers vary in length; looser, bulkier, and
less regular than worsted.
worsted. A tightly woven fabric made by
using only long-staple, combed wool or
wool-blend yarns. The fabric has a hard,
smooth surface and no nap.
yarn. A continuous strand of textile fibers
created when a mass of individual fibers is
twisted together to create fabrics.
yarn dyeing. Dyeing yarns before they are
made into fabrics.
35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 75 2/22/19 1:32 PM


76 TEXTILE
Textile Resources.
Scouting Literature
American Business, Animal Science,
Art, Basketry, Chemistry, Energy,
Environmental Science, Graphic Arts,
Indian Lore, Insect Study, and Plant
Science merit badge pamphlets
Books
Alvarez, Nilda Callanaupa. Textile
Traditions of Chinchero: A Living
Heritage. Thrums LLC, 2012.
Barber, Elizabeth Wayland. The Mummies
of Ürümchi. W.W. Norton, 2000.
Brown, Rachel. The Weaving, Spinning,
and Dyeing Book. Knopf, 1983.
Burningham, Veronica. Weaving
Without a Loom. Search Press, 1998.
Crolius, Kendall, and Anne
Montgomery. Knitting With Dog Hair.
St. Martin’s, 1997.
Dean, Jenny, and Karen Diadick
Casselman. Wild Color.
Potter Craft, 2010.
Delaney, Connie. Spindle Spinning:
From Novice to Expert. Kokovoko
Press, 1998.
Garfield, Simon. Mauve: How One Man
Invented a Color That Changed the
World. W.W. Norton, 2001.
Gordon, Beverly. Textiles: The Whole
Story: Uses, Meanings, Significance.
Thames & Hudson, 2011.
Joseph, Marjory L., et al. Joseph’s
Introductory Textile Science. 6th ed.
Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1992.
Kadolph, Sara J. Textiles: Basics.
Prentice Hall, 2012.
Keeler, Patricia A., and Francis X.
McCall Jr. Unraveling Fibers.
Atheneum, 1995.
Macaulay, David. Mill. Houghton
Mifflin, 1989.
McGrayne, Sharon Bertsch. Blue Genes
and Polyester Plants: 365 More
Surprising Scientific Facts,
Breakthroughs, and Discoveries.
John Wiley and Sons, 1997.
Schoeser, Mary. Textiles: The Art of
Mankind. Thames & Hudson, 2012
Textile Resources
With your parent’s permission, visit
the Boy Scouts of America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org,
for a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.
35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 76 2/22/19 1:32 PM


TEXTILE 77
.Textile Resources
DVDs
Unicorn Projects Inc. Mill Times.
PBS Home Video.
Magazines
Ecotextile News
Website: http://www.ecotextile.com
Textile World
Website: http://www.textileworld.com
Organizations and Websites
All Fiber Arts
Website: http://www.allfiberarts.com
American Fiber
Manufacturers Association
Telephone: 703-875-0432
Website: http://www.fibersource.com
American Sheep
Industry Association
Telephone: 303-771-3500
Website: http://www.sheepusa.org
American Textile History Museum
491 Dutton St.
Lowell, MA 01854
Telephone: 978-441-0400
Website: http://www.athm.org
The Center for Traditional Textiles
of Cusco
Website: http://www.incas.org/
SPChinchero.htm
Fabrics.net
Website: http://www.fabrics.net
FiberWorld
Website: http://www.fiberworld.com
Mohair Council of America
Telephone: 325-655-3161
Website: http://www.mohairusa.com
National Cotton Council of America
P.O. Box 2995
Cordova, TN 38088-2995
Telephone: 901-274-9030
Website: http://www.cotton.org
Textile Resources on the
World Wide Web
Website: http://libguides.uwstout.edu/
content.php?pid=18267&sid=124796
35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 77 2/22/19 1:32 PM


78 TEXTILE
Textile Resources.
Textile Colleges
The schools listed below offer a general
college education with a specialization
in textiles, leading to degrees in textile
engineering, textile management,
textile chemistry, textile design, and
textile marketing.
Auburn University
Polymer and Fiber Engineering
Samuel Ginn College of Engineering
Auburn, AL 36849
Website: http://www.eng.auburn
.edu/txen
Clemson University
School of Materials Science
and Engineering
Clemson, SC 29634
Website: http://www.clemson.edu/majors/
materials-science-and-engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology
School of Materials Science
and Engineering
771 Ferst Drive
J. Erskine Love Building
Atlanta, GA 30332-0245
Website: http://www.mse.gatech.edu
Institute of Textile Technology
Box 8301
Raleigh, NC 27695-8301
Website: http://www.itt.edu
North Carolina State University
College of Textiles
Raleigh, NC 27695-8301
Website: http://www.tx.ncsu.edu
Philadelphia University
School of Design and Engineering
4201 Henry Ave.
Philadelphia, PA 19144
Website: http://www.philau.edu/
designandengineering
Southern Polytechnic State
University
Apparel Textile Technology
1100 S. Marietta Parkway
Marietta, GA 30060-2896
Website: http://spsu.edu/iet/iet_att
University of Massachusetts,
Dartmouth
Materials and Textiles
285 Old Westport Road
North Dartmouth, MA 02747-2300
Website: http://www.umassd.edu/
engineering/mtx
Research Centers
Clemson Apparel Research
500 Lebanon Road
Pendleton, SC 29670
Website: http://car.clemson.edu
Fiber and Biopolymer Research
Institute (formerly International
Textile Center)
Texas Tech University
1001 East Loop 289
Lubbock, TX 79403
Website: http://www.pssc.ttu.edu/fbri
Navy Clothing and Textile
Research Facility
Building #86 DSN 256-4172
Kansas Street
Natick, MA 01760
35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 78 2/22/19 1:32 PM


TEXTILE 79
.Textile Resources
Texas A&M AgriLife Research and
Extension Center
Texas A&M University
7887 U.S. Highway 87 North
San Angelo, TX 76901
Website: http://sanangelo.tamu.edu
TRI/Princeton
601 Prospect Ave.
Princeton, NJ 08540
Website: http://www.triprinceton.org
Yocom-McColl Testing
Laboratories Inc.
540 W. Elk Place
Denver, CO 80216-1823
Website: http://www.ymccoll.com
Acknowledgments
The Boy Scouts of America gratefully
acknowledges the following textile
educators and industry professionals
who contributed generously to this edi-
tion of the Textile merit badge pamphlet:
• Kay Caddel, former national executive
secretary/treasurer, Phi Psi Fraternity,
a textile fraternity emphasizing
scholastic achievement, professional
ethics, and leadership
• College of Textiles, North Carolina
State University; in particular,
Wade Carter, extension specialist
and In-Plant Program director
(now retired), and Kent Hester,
director, Student and Career Services
(now retired)
• International Textile Center (now the
Fiber and Biopolymer Research
Institute), Texas Tech University,
Lubbock, Texas; in particular, textile
engineer James L. Simonton, commu-
nications coordinators Mike Stephens
and Scott Irlbeck, and analytical
chemist Bobby G. Wyatt
• Dr. Christopher J. Lupton, professor
emeritus, Agricultural Research and
Extension Center at San Angelo, The
Texas A&M University System
• Ted Settle, Sportswear Graphics,
Fort Worth, Texas, for assistance
with photography
• Emerson Tucker, Plains Cotton
Cooperative Association,
Lubbock, Texas (now retired)
• Dave Williams, National Space
Science Data Center, NASA Goddard
Space Flight Center, Greenbelt,
Maryland, for information about
textiles on board the Mars Pathfinder
• Tommy Woolam, Woolam Gin,
O’Donnell, Texas
The Boy Scouts of America is
grateful to the men and women serv-
ing on the National Merit Badge
Subcommittee for the improvements
made in updating this pamphlet.
Portions of the 2003 edition were
adapted from the 1972 edition written
by John Hayward.
35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 79 2/22/19 1:32 PM


80 TEXTILE
Textile Resources.
The BSA thanks the American Textile History Museum in Lowell, Massachusetts, for
its cooperation with the 2003 edition of the Textile merit badge pamphlet. The Museum
is dedicated to collecting, preserving, and interpreting “objects and information
about the design, production, and use of textiles to increase the enjoyment and
understanding of textiles in America.” The photos you see on pages 4, 14, 20, 26, 28
(carding), 29 (roving), 30, 31 (hand loom), 32–34, 38, 49, 54, and 66 (recycling series)
were taken at the Museum, with the cooperation of Lowell’s Troop 6.
Photo and Illustration Credits
International Textile Center, Texas
Tech University, Lubbock, Texas,
courtesy—pages 28 (machinery), 29
(spinning, winding), 31 (automated
loom), 35, and 47
Northwestern University Library,
Edward S. Curtis’ “The North
American Indian: The Photographic
Images,” 2001, courtesy—page 11
Shutterstock.com—cover (spinning
wheel, ©Berents; yarn, ©ZHIDKOVA
ANNA; parachute, ©Ensuper; cotton
plant, ©Alter-ego); pages 3 (©Joy
Tasa), 5 (©vladimir salman), 18
(©Stefano Garau), 54 (©tmcphotos),
57 (cotton ©Piotr Zajc; wool,
©BrankaVV; silk, ©Jaxja; linen,
©Andy Piatt; rayon, ©Monte Rego
Images), 58 (©Kzenon), 64 (©Alter-
ego), 65 (©vladimir salman),
68 (©David Crockett), and 70
(©photobank.ch)
Wikipedia.org, courtesy—pages 10,
16 (flax field), and 19
All other photos and illustrations are
the property of or are protected by
the Boy Scouts of America.
Dan Bryant—page 23
Daniel Giles—page 62
John McDearmon—all illustrations on
pages 7, 12, 16, 24, 34, 37, 43–45,
and 56
Brian Payne—page 8
Randy Piland—page 23
35958(19)_Textile_MBP_Pages.indd 80 2/22/19 1:32 PM