NATURE

STEM-Based

BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES

NATURE

“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”

Requirements
1. Name three ways in which plants are important to
animals. Name a plant that is protected in your state
or region, and explain why it is at risk.
2. Name three ways in which animals are important to plants.
Name an animal that is protected in your state or region,
and explain why it is at risk.
3. Explain the term “food chain.” Give an example of a fourstep land food chain and a four-step water food chain.
4. Do all of the requirements in FIVE of the following fields:
a. Birds
(1) In the field, identify eight species of birds.
(2) Make and set out a birdhouse OR a feeding station
OR a birdbath. List what birds used it during a period
of one month.
b. Mammals
(1) In the field, identify three species of wild mammals.
(2) Make plaster casts of the tracks of a wild mammal.
c. Reptiles and Amphibians
(1) Show that you can recognize the venomous snakes
in your area.
(2) In the field, identify three species of reptiles
or amphibians.
(3) Recognize one species of toad or frog by voice;
OR identify one reptile or amphibian by eggs, den,
burrow, or other signs.
35922
ISBN 978-0-8395-3285-9
©2018 Boy Scouts of America
2020 Printing

d. Insects and Spiders
(1) Collect and identify either in the field or through
photographs 10 species of insects or spiders.*
(2) Hatch an insect from the pupa or cocoon; OR
hatch adults from nymphs; OR keep larvae until
they form pupae or cocoons; OR keep a colony of
ants or bees through one season.
e. Fish
(1) Identify two species of fish native to your area.
(2) Collect four kinds of animal food eaten by fish in
the wild.
f. Mollusks and Crustaceans
(1) Identify five species of mollusks and crustaceans.
(2) Collect, mount, and label six shells.
g. Plants
(1) In the field, identify 15 species of wild plants.
(2) Collect and label the seeds of six plants OR the
leaves of 12 plants.
h. Soils and Rocks
(1) Collect and identify soils found in different layers
of a soil profile.
(2) Collect and identify five different types of rocks
from your area.
5. Discuss the principle of Leave No Trace and how it
relates to nature.
*Photos may be taken with your own equipment or gathered from other sources.

Note: In most cases, all specimens should be returned to the wild at the location of original capture after the requirements have been met. Check with your
merit badge counselor for those instances where the return of these specimens
would not be appropriate.
Under the Endangered Species Act of 1973, some plants and animals
are or may be protected by federal law. The same ones and/or others may
be protected by state law. Be sure that you do not collect protected species.
Your state may require that you purchase and carry a license to collect
certain species. Check with the wildlife and fish and game officials in your
state regarding species regulations before you begin to collect.

.Nature Resources

Nature Resources
Scouting Literature

Books

Conservation Handbook; Fieldbook;
The Principles of Leave No Trace;
Mammals pocket guide; Reptiles
and Amphibians pocket guide;
Eastern Backyard Birds pocket guide;
Western Backyard Birds pocket guide;
Bugs and Slugs pocket guide; Edible
Wild Plants pocket guide; Roadside
Wildflowers pocket guide; Freshwater
Fishes pocket guide; Trees pocket guide;
Geology pocket guide; Animal Science,
Backpacking, Bird Study, Camping,
Canoeing, Environmental Science, Fish
and Wildlife Management, Fishing,
Fly-Fishing, Forestry, Gardening, Geology,
Hiking, Insect Study, Mammal Study,
Oceanography, Photography, Plant Science,
Reptile and Amphibian Study, Soil and
Water Conservation, Sustainability,
and Wilderness Survival merit
badge pamphlets

Arnett, Ross H. American Insects:
A Handbook of the Insects of
America North of Mexico, 2nd ed.
CRC Press, 2000.

With your parent’s permission, visit
the Boy Scouts of America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org,
for a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.

Fichter, George S., and Phil Francis.
Fishing: A Guide to Fresh and
Salt-Water Fishing, St. Martin's
Press, 2013.

Behler, John. Reptiles (The National
Audubon Society First Field Guide).
Scholastic Trade, 1999.
Bland, Roger G., and H.E. Jaques.
How to Know the Insects, 3rd ed.
Waveland Press, 2010.
Cassie, Brian. Amphibians (The
National Audubon Society First
Field Guide). Scholastic Trade, 1999.
Dance, S. Peter. Shells, 2nd ed. DK
Adult, 2002.
Dillon, Mike. The Great Birdhouse Book.
Sterling Publications, 2000.
Elpel, Thomas J. Botany in a Day:
The Patterns Method of
Plant Identification, 6th ed.
Hops Press, 2013.

Griggs, Jack, ed. All the Birds of
North America: American Bird
Conservancy’s Field Guide.
Harper Collins, 2002.

Nature Resources.

Harris, James G., and Melinda
Woolf Harris. Plant Identification
Terminology: An Illustrated
Glossary, 2nd. ed. Spring Lake
Publishers, 2001.
Izaak Walton League of America. Guide
to Aquatic Insects and Crustaceans.
Stackpole Books, 2006.
Levine, Lynn, and Martha Mitchell.
Mammal Tracks and Scat: Life-Size
Tracking Guide. Heartwood
Press, 2008.
MacDonald, David, ed. The
Encyclopedia of Mammals. Facts on
File, 2006.
Rehder, Harald A. National Audubon
Society Field Guide to North
American Seashells. Knopf, 1981.
Tarbuck, Edward J., et al. Earth: An
Introduction to Physical Geology,
11th ed. Pearson, 2013.
Wernert, Susan J., ed. Reader’s Digest
North American Wildlife. Reader’s
Digest, 2008.

Organizations, Periodicals,
and Websites
Acorn Naturalists
Website: www.acornnaturalists.com
American Birding Association
Toll-free telephone: 800-850-2473
Website: www.aba.org
American Museum of Natural History
Central Park West at 79th Street
New York, NY 10024-5192
Website: www.amnh.org
Bee Culture Magazine
Website: www.beeculture.com
Discover Magazine
Website: www.discovermagazine.com

National Audubon Society
Website: www.audubon.org
National Fish and Wildlife Foundation
1133 15th St. NW, Suite 1000
Washington, DC 20005
Website: www.nfwf.org
National Geographic Society
Website:
www.nationalgeographic.com
National Park Service
Website: www.nps.gov
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
Website: www.fws.gov
World Wildlife Fund
Website: www.worldwildlife.org

Recordings of Bird Calls
Peterson, Roger Tory. Field Guide to
Bird Songs: Eastern/Central North
America. 1990. CD with 250 species.
Walton, Richard, and Robert Lawson.
Birding by Ear. 1989.
———. Birding by Ear: Western. 1990.
———. More Birding by Ear: Eastern
and Central. 1994.

Biological Supply Companies
BioQuip Products
Telephone: 310-667-8800
Website: www.bioquip.com
Carolina Biological Supply Company
Website: www.carolina.com

