GEOLOGY
STEM-Based


GEOLOGY
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Geology
1. Define geology. Discuss how geologists learn about rock formations. In geology,
explain why the study of the present is important to understanding the past.
2. Pick three resources that can be extracted or mined from Earth for commercial
use. Discuss with your counselor how each product is discovered and processed.
3. Review a geologic map of your area or an area selected by your counselor,
and discuss the different rock types and estimated ages of rocks represented.
Determine whether the rocks are horizontal, folded, or faulted, and explain
how you arrived at your conclusion.
4. Do ONE of the following:
(a) With your parent’s and counselor’s approval, visit with a geologist, land-
use planner, or civil engineer. Discuss this professional’s work and the tools
required in this line of work. Learn about a project that this person is now
working on, and ask to see reports and maps created for this project. Discuss
with your counselor what you have learned.
(b) Find out about three career opportunities available in geology. Pick
one and find out the education, training, and experience required for this
profession. Discuss this with your counselor, and explain why this profession
might interest you.
5. Do ONE of the following (a OR b OR c OR d):
(a) Surface and Sedimentary Processes Option
(1) Conduct an experiment approved by your counselor that demonstrates
how sediments settle from suspension in water. Explain to your counselor
what the exercise shows and why it is important.
(2) Using topographical maps provided by your counselor, plot the stream
gradients (different elevations divided by distance) for four different stream
types (straight, meandering, dendritic, trellis). Explain which ones flow
fastest and why, and which ones will carry larger grains of sediment
and why.
(3) On a stream diagram, show areas where you will find the following
features: cut bank, fill bank, point bar, medial channel bars, lake delta.
Describe the relative sediment grain size found in each feature.
(4) Conduct an experiment approved by your counselor that shows how
some sedimentary material carried by water may be too small for you to
see without a magnifier.
(5) Visit a nearby stream. Find clues that show the direction of water
flow, even if the water is missing. Record your observations in a notebook,
and sketch those clues you observe. Discuss your observations with
your counselor.


(b) Energy Resources Option
(1) List the top five Earth resources used to generate electricity in the
United States.
(2) Discuss source rock, trap, and reservoir rock—the three components
necessary for the occurrence of oil and gas underground.
(3) Explain how each of the following items is used in subsurface explora-
tion to locate oil or gas: reflection seismic, electric well logs, stratigraphic
correlation, offshore platform, geologic map, subsurface structure map,
subsurface isopach map, and core samples and cutting samples.
(4) Using at least 20 data points provided by your counselor, create a sub-
surface structure map and use it to explain how subsurface geology maps
are used to find oil, gas, or coal resources.
(5) Do ONE of the following activities:
(a) Make a display or presentation showing how oil and gas or coal
is found, extracted, and processed. You may use maps, books, articles
from periodicals, and research found on the internet (with your par-
ent’s permission). Share the display with your counselor or a small
group (such as your class at school) in a five-minute presentation.
(b) With your parent’s and counselor’s permission and assistance,
arrange for a visit to an operating drilling rig. While there, talk with
a geologist and ask to see what the geologist does onsite. Ask to see
cutting samples taken at the site.
(c) Mineral Resources Option
(1) Define rock. Discuss the three classes of rocks including their origin
and characteristics.
(2) Define mineral. Discuss the origin of minerals and their chemical com-
position and identification properties, including hardness, specific gravity,
color, streak, cleavage, luster, and crystal form.
(3) Do ONE of the following:
(a) Collect 10 different rocks or minerals. Record in a notebook where
you obtained (found, bought, traded) each one. Label each specimen,
identify its class and origin, determine its chemical composition, and
list its physical properties. Share your collection with your counselor.
(b) With your counselor’s assistance, identify 15 different rocks and
minerals. List the name of each specimen, tell whether it is a rock
or mineral, and give the name of its class (if it is a rock) or list its
identifying physical properties (if it is a mineral).
(4) List three of the most common road-building materials used in your
area. Explain how each material is produced and how each is used in
road building.
(5) Do ONE of the following activities:
(a) With your parent’s and counselor’s approval, visit an active
mining site, quarry, or sand and gravel pit. Tell your counselor what
you learned about the resources extracted from this location and how
these resources are used by society.


(b) With your counselor, choose two examples of rocks and two
examples of minerals. Discuss the mining of these materials and
describe how each is used by society.
(c) With your parent’s and counselor’s approval, visit the office of a
civil engineer and learn how geology is used in construction. Discuss
what you learned with your counselor.
(d) Earth History Option
(1) Create a chart showing suggested geological eras and periods. Determine
which period the rocks in your region might have been formed.
(2) Explain the theory of plate tectonics.
(3) Explain to your counselor the processes of burial and fossilization,
and discuss the concept of extinction.
(4) Explain to your counselor how fossils provide information about ancient
life, environment, climate, and geography. Discuss the following terms and
explain how animals from each habitat obtain food: benthonic, pelagic,
littoral, lacustrine, open marine, brackish, fluvial, eolian, protected reef.
(5) Collect 10 different fossil plants or animals OR (with your counselor’s
assistance) identify 15 different fossil plants or animals. Record in a note-
book where you obtained (found, bought, traded) each one. Classify each
specimen to the best of your ability, and explain how each one might have
survived and obtained food. Tell what else you can learn from these fossils.
(6) Do ONE of the following:
(a) Visit a science museum or the geology department of a local
university that has fossils on display. With your parent’s and coun-
selor’s approval, before you go, make an appointment with a curator
or guide who can show you how the fossils are preserved and
prepared for display.
(b) Visit a structure in your area that was built using fossiliferous
rocks. Determine what kind of rock was used and tell your counselor
the kinds of fossil evidence you found there.
(c) Visit a rock outcrop that contains fossils. Determine what kind of
rock contains the fossils, and tell your counselor the kinds of fossil
evidence you found at the outcrop.
(d) Prepare a display or presentation on your state fossil. Include an
image of the fossil, the age of the fossil, and its classification. You may use
maps, books, articles from periodicals, and research found on the internet
(with your parent’s permission). Share the display with your counselor or
a small group (such as your class at school). If your state does not have a
state fossil, you may select a state fossil from a neighboring state.


94 GEOLOGY
Geology Resources.
Geology Resources
Scouting Literature
Archaeology, Chemistry, Collections,
Drafting, Energy, Engineering,
Environmental Science, Landscape
Architecture, Mining in Society, Nuclear
Science, Oceanography, Orienteering,
Soil and Water Conservation,
Surveying, Sustainability, and Weather
merit badge pamphlets
Books
Altman, Linda Jacobs. The California
Gold Rush. Enslow Publishers Inc.,
2012.
Dixon, Dougal. The Practical Geologist.
Simon & Schuster
Inc., 1992.
Erickson, Jon. Historical Geology. Facts
On File Inc. 2002.
Gaines, R., H. Skinner, E. Foord,
B. Mason, and A. Rosenzweig.
Dana’s New Mineralogy.
Wiley-Interscience, 1997.
Hyne, Norman J., Ph.D. Nontechnical
Guide to Petroleum Geology,
Exploration, Drilling, and
Production. PennWell Corp., 2012.
Johnson, Carl. Fire on the Mountain.
Chronicle Books, 1994.
Lamb, Simon, and David Sington.
Earth Story: The Forces That Have
Shaped Our Planet. Princeton
University Press, 2003.
Lambert, David, and the Diagram
Group. The Field Guide to Geology.
Checkmark Books, 2006.
Pough, Frederick H. Rocks and
Minerals. Houghton Mifflin
Harcourt, 1998.
Redfern, Martin. Planet Earth.
Kingfisher Publications, 1999.
Thompson, Graham R., Ph.D., and
Jonathan Turk, Ph.D. Introduction
to Physical Geology. Harcourt Brace
College Publishers, 1998.
VanCleave, Janice. Rocks and Minerals.
John Wiley & Sons Inc., 1996.
Visit the Boy Scouts of America’s
official retail website at http://
www.scoutstuff.org for a complete
listing of all merit badge pamphlets
and other helpful Scouting materi-
als and supplies.


GEOLOGY 95
.Geology Resources
Organizations and Websites
American Association of
Petroleum Geologists
1444 S. Boulder Ave.
Tulsa, OK 74119
Toll-free telephone: 800-364-2274
Website: http://www.aapg.org
American Geosciences Institute
4220 King St.
Alexandria, VA 22302-1502
Telephone: 703-379-2480
Website: http://www.agiweb.org
American Petroleum Institute
1220 L St. NW
Washington, DC 20005-4070
Telephone: 202-682-8000
Website: http://www.api.org
The Geological Society of America
P.O. Box 9140
Boulder, CO 80301-9140
Telephone: 303-357-1000
Website: http://www.geosociety.org
Paleontological Research Institute
1259 Trumansburg Road
Ithaca, NY 14850
Telephone: 607-273-6623
Website: http://www.priweb.org
Society of Exploration
Geophysicists
8801 S. Yale Ave., Suite 500
Tulsa, OK 74137-3575
Telephone: 918-497-5500
Website: http://www.seg.org
U.S. Geological Survey
Website: http://www.usgs.gov
Acknowledgments
The Boy Scouts of America thanks
the E.F. Reid Scouting Fund of the
American Association of Petroleum
Geologists Foundation for its work in
promoting the science of geology
in Scouting. In particular, the BSA
thanks Ronald Hart (team leader),
Robert Baxter, Richard Erickson,
Sherman Lundy, John “Jack” Thomas,
and William Underwood for their time
and expertise in writing this edition
of the Geology merit badge pamphlet,
as well as the 2009 revision.
Special thanks to Michael Jackson,
Tony Kolodziej, and Robert Silva for
their assistance in reviewing materials
and to the American Association of
Petroleum Geologists and the Society
of Exploration Geophysicists for
their assistance.
The Boy Scouts of America is
grateful to the men and women serving
on the Merit Badge Maintenance Task
Force for the improvements made in
updating this pamphlet.