WATER
SPORTS


WATER SPORTS
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


WATER SPORTS 3
Requirements
1. Do the following:
a. Explain to your counselor the most likely hazards you
may encounter while participating in water sports
activities and what you should do to anticipate, help
prevent, mitigate, and respond to these hazards.
b. Review prevention, symptoms, and first-aid treatment
for the following injuries or illnesses that could occur
while participating in water sports: blisters, cold-water
shock and hypothermia, dehydration, heat-related ill-
nesses, sunburn, sprains, strains, minor cuts and
bruises, spinal injury, and concussions and head trauma.
c. Review the BSA Safety Afloat policy. Tell how it applies
to water sports.
2. Do the following:
a. Discuss with your counselor the characteristics of life
jackets most appropriate for water sports, and tell why
one must always be worn while waterskiing or wake-
boarding. Then demonstrate how to select and fit a life
jacket for water sports activities.
b. Review and discuss the Water Sports Safety Code with
your counselor. Promise that you will live up to it and
follow it in all water work for this merit badge. Review
the safety precautions that must be used by the boat
operator in pulling waterskiers and wakeboarders.
3. Before doing requirements 4 through 6, successfully
complete the BSA swimmer test: Jump feetfirst into water
over the head in depth. Level off and swim 75 yards in a
strong manner using one or more of the following strokes:
sidestroke, breaststroke, trudgen, or crawl; then swim 25
yards using an easy, resting backstroke. The 100 yards must


be completed in one swim without stops and must include
at least one sharp turn. After completing the swim, rest
by floating.
4. Show the following skier signals to the safety observer in
the boat: skier safe, faster, slower, turns, back to dock, cut
motor, skier in water.
5. Showing reasonable control while using two skis, one ski,
or a wakeboard, do EACH of the following:
a. Show how to enter the water from a boat and make a
deepwater start without help.
b. Starting from outside the wakes, show you can cross
both wakes four times and return to the center of the
wake each time, without falling.
c. Show you can fall properly to avoid an obstacle. Also
show that you can drop handle and coast to a stop
without losing your balance.
6. While on shore, show that you know how to properly adjust
the bindings of your ski(s) or wakeboard to fit yourself.
Then, in deep water, show you can adjust bindings to fit.
Recover and put on your ski(s) or wakeboard that has come
off during a fall.


70 WATER SPORTS
Water Sports Resources.
Scouting Literature
Boy Scout Handbook; Fieldbook; Deck of
First Aid; Basic Illustrated Wilderness
First Aid; Emergency First Aid pocket
guide; Be Prepared First Aid Book;
Athletics, First Aid, Kayaking, Lifesaving,
Motorboating, Personal Fitness,
Small-Boat Sailing, Snow Sports, and
Swimming merit badge pamphlets
For more information about
Scouting-related resources, visit
(with your parent’s permission)
the BSA’s retail website at
http://www.scoutstuff.org.
Books
Blomquist, Christopher. Wakeboarding
in the X Games. PowerKids
Press, 2003.
Cooperman, Stephanie. Wakeboarding:
Techniques and Tricks. The Rosen
Publishing Group Inc., 2003.
Duvall, Camille. Camille Duvall’s
Instructional Guide to Water Skiing.
Simon & Schuster, 1992.
Favret, Ben. Water Skiing and
Wakeboarding. Human Kinetics
Publishers, 2010.
Firestone, Mary. Extreme Waterskiing
Moves. Capstone Press, 2003.
Hayhurst, Chris. Wakeboarding! Throw
a Tantrum. Saddleback Educational
Publishing Inc., 2000.
Kalman, Bobbie. Extreme Wakeboarding.
Crabtree Publishing Company, 2006.
Maurer, Tracy M. Wakeboarding.
Rourke Publishing, 2002.
Thompson, Luke. Essential Waterskiing
for Teens. Children’s Press, 2006.
Weber, Jason. Wakeboarding . . .
On the Edge. Sports on the
Edge LLC, 2000.
Boating Regulations
Boating regulations vary from state to state. To find out what your state requires,
get your parent’s permission to use the Internet and check the website for the
U.S. Coast Guard’s Boating Safety Division. You will find a Reference Guide to
State Boating Laws at http://uscgboating.org/regulations/state-boating-laws.php.
Water Sports Resources


WATER SPORTS 71
.Water Sports Resources
Organizations and Websites
International Waterski and
Wakeboard Federation
Website: http://www.iwwfed.com
USA Water Ski
Telephone: 863-324-4341
Website: http://www.usawaterski.org
U.S. Coast Guard Boating
Safety Division
Website: http://www.uscgboating.org
World Wakeboard Association
Website: http://www.thewwa.com
Acknowledgments
The Boy Scouts of America is grateful
to the men and women serving on the
Merit Badge Maintenance Task Force
for the improvements made in updating
this pamphlet.
For their assistance with this book’s
predecessor, the Waterskiing merit badge
pamphlet, thanks go out to devoted
Scouter Greg Tucker, Readyville,
Tennessee; Sue Smith, American Water
Ski Association; Betty Bonifay and the
Bonifay Ski School; and to MasterCraft
Boat Company and O’Brien International.
Photo and Illustration Credits
Dave Bell, courtesy—page 39 (type I)
MasterCraft Boat Company,
courtesy—cover (motorboat)
Shutterstock.com, courtesy—pages 13
(doctor, ©PathDoc), 21 (skiing icon,
©mindscanner), 22 (slow wake sign,
©Brian Morrison), 29 (drinking
water, ©Jackie Smithson), 35 (step-
ping on jellyfish, ©Lionel B), and 37
(approaching storm, ©rafcio76)
USA Water Ski, Lynn Novakofski,
courtesy—pages 6, 9, and
45 (wakeboarder)
www.wikipedia.org, courtesy—page 7
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of
or are protected by the Boy Scouts
of America.
Dan Bryant—cover (life jacket) and
page 39 (type III)
John McDearmon—all illustrations
on pages 19, 22, 25, 26, 54-56, 58,
and 66
Brian Payne—pages 39 (type II) and
40 (cushion)
The Boy Scouts of America thanks USA Water
Ski, Polk City, Florida, for assisting in so many
ways with this new edition of the Water Sports
merit badge pamphlet. In particular, we are
grateful to Natalie Angley, media relations
coordinator, who so graciously coordinated USA Water Ski’s involvement.
Thanks also to Lynn Novakofski, graphic designer, for assistance with
photographs, and to Lisa St. John, competition and events director, for
her input and expertise. USA Water Ski is the national governing body for
organized waterskiing in the United States.