CYCLING
STEM-Based


CYCLING
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Requirements
1. Do the following:
a. Explain to your counselor the most likely hazards you
may encounter while participating in cycling activities
and what you should do to anticipate, help prevent,
mitigate, and respond to these hazards.
b. Show that you know first aid for injuries or illnesses
that could occur while cycling, including cuts, scratches,
blisters, sunburn, heat exhaustion, heatstroke, hypo-
thermia, frostbite, dehydration, insect stings, tick bites,
and snakebite. Explain to your counselor why you
should be able to identify the poisonous plants and
poisonous animals that are found in your area.
c. Explain the importance of wearing a properly sized
and fitted helmet while cycling, and of wearing the
right clothing for the weather. Know the BSA Bike
Safety Guidelines.
2. Clean and adjust a bicycle. Prepare it for inspection
using a bicycle safety checklist. Be sure the bicycle meets
local laws.
3. Show your bicycle to your counselor for inspection.
Point out the adjustments or repairs you have made.
Do the following:
a. Show all points that need regular lubrication.
b. Show points that should be checked regularly to make
sure the bicycle is safe to ride.
c. Show how to adjust brakes, seat level and height, and
steering tube.
35881
ISBN 978-0-8395-3226-1
©2017 Boy Scouts of America
2017 Printing


CYCLING 3
4. Describe how to brake safely with foot brakes and with
hand brakes.
5. Show how to repair a flat by removing the tire, replacing or
patching the tube, and remounting the tire.
6. Describe your state and local traffic laws for bicycles.
Compare them with motor-vehicle laws.
7.* Using the BSA buddy system, complete all of the require-
ments for ONE of the following options: road biking OR
mountain biking.
Option A: Road Biking
a. Take a road test with your counselor and demonstrate
the following:
(1) Properly mount, pedal, and brake, including
emergency stops.
(2) On an urban street with light traffic, properly execute a
left turn from the center of the street; also demonstrate
an alternate left-turn technique used during periods of
heavy traffic.
(3) Properly execute a right turn.
(4) Demonstrate appropriate actions at a right-turn-only
lane when you are continuing straight.
(5) Show proper curbside and road-edge riding. Show
how to ride safely along a row of parked cars.
(6) Cross railroad tracks properly.
b. Avoiding main highways, take two rides of 10 miles each,
two rides of 15 miles each, and two rides of 25 miles each.
You must make a report of the rides taken. List dates for
the routes traveled, and interesting things seen.
c. After completing requirement b for the road biking
option, do ONE of the following:
(1) Lay out on a road map a 50-mile trip. Stay away
from main highways. Using your map, make this
ride in eight hours.
*The bicycle used for fulfilling these requirements must have all required safety
features and must be registered as required by your local traffic laws.


4 CYCLING
(2) Participate in an organized bike tour of at least
50 miles. Make this ride in eight hours. Afterward,
use the tour’s cue sheet to make a map of the ride.
Option B: Mountain Biking
a. Take a trail ride with your counselor and demonstrate
the following:
(1) Properly mount, pedal, and brake, including
emergency stops.
(2) Show shifting skills as applicable to climbs
and obstacles.
(3) Show proper trail etiquette to hikers and other
cyclists, including when to yield the right-of-way.
(4) Show proper technique for riding up and down hills.
(5) Demonstrate how to correctly cross an obstacle
by either going over the obstacle on your bike or
dismounting your bike and crossing over or around
the obstacle.
(6) Cross rocks, gravel, and roots properly.
b. Describe the rules of trail riding, including how to know
when a trail is unsuitable for riding.
c. On trails approved by your counselor,
take two rides of 2 miles each, two
rides of 5 miles each, and two rides
of 8 miles each. You must make
a report of the rides taken. List
dates for the routes traveled,
and interesting things seen.
d. After fulfilling the previous
requirement, lay out on a trail
map a 22-mile trip. You may
include multiple trail systems,
if needed. Stay away from main
highways. Using your map,
make this ride in six hours.


94 CYCLING
Cycling Resources.
Cycling Resources
Scouting Literature
Fieldbook; Deck of First Aid; Emergency
First Aid pocket guide; First Aid merit
badge pamphlet
Books
Bohlinger, Tim. Mountain Biking: A
Beginner's Essential Guide to Getting
Started in the Sport of Mountain
Biking. CreateSpace Independent
Publishing Platform, 2015.
Bortman, Tori. The Bicycling Big Book
of Cycling for Beginners: Everything
a New Cyclist Needs to Know to Gear
Up and Start Riding. Rodale, 2014.
Burke, Edmund R., and Ed Pavelka.
The Complete Book of Long-Distance
Cycling: Build the Strength, Skills,
and Confidence to Ride as Far as
You Want. Rodale, 2000.
Clark, Nancy, and Jenny Hegmann.
The Cyclist’s Food Guide, 2nd ed.
Sports Nutrition Publishers, 2011.
Downs, Todd. The Bicycling Guide to
Complete Bicycle Maintenance and
Repair: For Road and Mountain
Bikes, 6th ed. Rodale, 2010.
Forester, John. Effective Cycling, 7th ed.
MIT Press, 2012.
Forth, Clive. The Mountain Biking
Pocket Guide. Falcon Guides, 2012.
Friel, Joe. The Cyclist’s Training Bible,
4th ed. VeloPress, 2009.
———. The Mountain Biker’s Training
Bible. VeloPress, 2000.
Glowacz, Dave. Urban Bikers’ Tricks and
Tips, 3rd ed. Wordspace Press, 2010.
Hewitt, Ben. Bicycling Magazine’s
New Cyclist Handbook, revised ed.
Rodale, 2005.
———. Bicycling Magazine’s Nutrition
for Peak Performance: Eat and
Drink for Maximum Energy on
the Road and Off, revised ed.
Rodale, 2000.
Lopes, Brian, and Lee McCormack.
Mastering Mountain Bike Skills, 2nd
ed. Human Kinetics Publishers, 2010.
Visit the Boy Scouts of America’s
official retail website (with your
parent’s permission) at http://
www.scoutstuff.org for a com-
plete listing of all merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


CYCLING 95
.Cycling Resources
Sumner, Jason. Bicycling Complete Book
of Road Cycling Skills: Your Guide to
Riding Faster, Stronger, Longer, and
Safer, 2nd ed. Rodale, 2016.
Zinn, Lennard. Zinn & the Art of
Mountain Bike Maintenance, 5th ed.
VeloPress, 2010.
———. Zinn & the Art of Road Bike
Maintenance, 5th ed. VeloPress, 2016.
Magazines
Bicycling
400 S. 10th St.
Emmaus, PA 18098
Website: http://www.bicycling.com
Ride BMX
2052 Corte Del Nogal, Suite 100
Carlsbad, CA 92011
Website: http://bmx.transworld.net
Mountain Bike
Website: http://www.mountainbike.com
Organizations and Websites
Adventure Cycling Association
Toll-free telephone: 800-755-2453
Website: http://www.adventurecycling.org
International Mountain
Bicycling Association
Toll-free telephone: 888-442-4622
Website: http://www.imba.com
League of American Bicyclists
Website: http://www.bikeleague.org
National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration
Website: http://www.nhtsa.dot.gov
National Off-Road Bicycle
Association (NORBA)
Telephone: 719-434-4200
Website: http://www.usacycling.org/
norba.htm
USA Cycling
210 USA Cycling Point, Suite 100
Colorado Springs, CO 80919
Telephone: 719-434-4200
Website: http://www.usacycling.org
Acknowledgments
The Boy Scouts of America is grate-
ful to Andrew Rosch, communications
coordinator at Trek Bicycle Corporation,
for his technical expertise and support
of this new edition of the Cycling merit
badge pamphlet. Thanks to Trek for its
continued support of this merit badge
and pamphlet. The Trek Bicycle Store in
Madison, Wisconsin, provided many of
the bicycles, helmets, and other equip-
ment photographed for this pamphlet.
We appreciate the help of the BSA’s Four
Lakes Council, Madison, Wisconsin, for
its help with photography arrangements.
Thanks to Richardson Bike Mart and Jim
Hoyt, Richardson, Texas, for assistance
with photography, as well.
The BSA is thankful to Eagle Scout
Peter Reigelman, a cycling enthusiast,
for his assistance. We appreciate support
from Philmont Scout Ranch, as well.
The Boy Scouts of America is grate-
ful to the men and women serving on
the Merit Badge maintenance Task Force
for the improvements made in updating
this pamphlet.