PETS


PETS
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Pets or check Scoutbook
for the latest requirements.
35929
ISBN 978-0-8395-3281-1
©2024 Scouting America/Boy Scouts of America
2024 Printing FPO


PETS 3
Contents
The Wonderful World of Pets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
Puppies and Dogs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
Kittens and Cats . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
Fish . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
Birds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
Pocket Pets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
Breeding, Training, and Showing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
Resources for Pets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62





PETS 5
.The Wonderful World of Pets
The Wonderful
World of Pets
Pet ownership is a mixture of fun, excitement, responsibility,
commitment, expense, and learning. Besides providing a win-
dow into the animal world, owning pets gives us opportunities
to participate in activities that strengthen the human-animal
bond. Pet ownership teaches us about the responsibility we have
to the other living beings on this planet, and pets can be just
plain fun. A pet can be our most loyal friend and companion.
When you acquire a pet,
you probably are most excited
about the thrill of playing with
a new animal friend. However,
soon you will see that the pet
requires nearly the same care as
an infant. Overpowering as these
new responsibilities might seem,
with time, patience, and practice,
you and your pet will grow into a
team. This will provide the
necessary ingredients to make
pet ownership a rewarding
experience for you and your pet.
If you already have a pet, consider
whether you are caring for it in
the best possible way. As you read
through this merit badge pamphlet,
identify what you could be doing
differently. Then, with your parents’
approval, make changes to improve
your pet’s quality of life.


6 PETS
The Wonderful World of Pets.
Before You Begin
If you are not a pet owner and plan to buy or adopt an
animal to earn this merit badge, first give serious thought
to pet ownership. You must realize what every responsible
pet owner already knows: It takes time, effort, and money
to care for a pet properly. You must provide food and shelter
for your pet. You must ensure quality health care for your
pet, which could include vaccinations and preventive and
emergency care as needed. You must take the time to properly
train your pet so that it does not become a nuisance. You must
dedicate yourself to the well-being of a living animal, which
means sometimes giving up other activities, such as TV, to
tend to your pet’s needs.
Consider what type of pet to choose. Understand that
different pets require different living arrangements. For exam-
ple, a large-breed dog will need a large yard and a lot of space
for exercise. Municipal laws may restrict the types of pets you


PETS 7
.The Wonderful World of Pets
keep, and some pets may not be allowed in certain types of
homes and apartments. Remember that a Scout is courteous,
and keep in mind that good pet owners are always courteous
to their neighbors.
When you get a pet, it is a commitment for the lifetime of
the pet, and you must be prepared to honor that commitment.
Your pet might live for quite a long time. Dogs and cats regu-
larly live more than 10 years, and some parrots can live for
decades. Do not count on your parents or someone else to
finish what you have started just because it is no longer
convenient to do so.
Despite what appears to be a long list of things to consider
when adding a pet to your life, all of these things can be done.
Reading this pamphlet and earning the Pets merit badge will
help you learn how to be a good pet owner. Dogs, cats, guinea
pigs, hamsters, mice, parakeets, canaries, tropical fish, and
goldfish will be discussed in this pamphlet. However, other
pets can be used to earn this merit badge. Before you start,
discuss with your parents and your merit badge counselor
what type of pet you will raise.
Do not keep wild animals
such as squirrels, raccoons,
or opossums as pets. Wild
animals should be left in their
natural habitat and enjoyed
only when encountered there.
Also, wild animals could carry
disease and pests such as ticks
and fleas.


8 PETS
Puppies and Dogs.
Puppies and Dogs
There are many things to consider when choosing a dog. First,
what kind of dog do you want? A large dog or a small one?
Male or female? Is it important that the dog not shed? Where
you live will affect your choice. Do you live in an apartment or
a house? Will the dog have enough room to exercise? Will the
dog stay indoors or outdoors? Is the year-round climate where
you live good for the type of dog you want to get?
What other pets do you own, and how will they interact
with the new dog? Do you have any special requirements for
the dog, such as hunting, hiking, herding, or winter sports?
Whether you get a puppy or an older dog, each will provide
challenges and experiences. A puppy must be housebroken,
trained, and socialized, but the fun of watching it grow will
repay you for the extra effort. An older dog might become
homesick, and it might have undesirable
habits that will be hard to change. But an
older dog probably will be housebroken,
and it will have had at least some
training and socialization.
Male dogs generally are larger than
females of the same breed; otherwise, male
and female dogs do not differ in behavior
and temperament. Whether you choose a
male or female, spay or neuter your dog to
help control dog overpopulation.
Dog Breeds
The American Kennel Club recognizes
150 of the more than 400 breeds found
worldwide. Some breeds are quite
common and you probably see them
often, while others are rare and seldom
seen outside of dog shows. Breeds have


PETS 9
.Puppies and Dogs
Always be
prepared to
clean up after
your dog if it
goes to the
bathroom while
out on your walks.
been developed for thousands of years. Most were developed
by different societies to satisfy the specific needs those people
had for dogs, such as hunting, guarding, herding, tracking, and
racing. Some have been bred for appearance and size. Many
purebred dogs have been entered in dog shows and may have
a certain degree of worth.
Mixed-breed dogs are mixtures of two or more breeds
and may have no outward appearance of any specific breed.
However, they are just as loyal and intelligent as purebred
animals and just as much fun to raise. A mixed-breed dog usu-
ally costs much less than a purebred. However, the care and
training needs of purebred and mixed-breed dogs are the same.
General Care
When you get your new dog, take it to a veterinarian for a
thorough exam. The veterinarian will know which vaccinations
and other preventative measures are recommended for a dog
in your area. Also, the veterinarian can give advice on proper
feeding, grooming, tooth-brushing, and housing needs.
Dog breeds vary tremendously in shape, size, color,
and personality.


10 PETS
Puppies and Dogs.
Additionally, most veterinarians can give guidance
on obedience training, house-training, socialization,
and behavior training. If not, they can direct you to
someone who can.
All dogs need exercise to stay healthy. If you
do not have a large, fenced-in yard, you must take
your dog for walks regularly. Large and giant breeds
might require an hour of exercise each day. Smaller
breeds might do fine with a few daily walks around
the neighborhood.
Daily brushing will remove most dirt, debris,
and loose hair and is a good practice to begin as
soon as you get your dog. Bathe your dog once a
month and otherwise only if the dog gets really
dirty. Before the bath, place a drop of mineral oil in
each eye to prevent soap from causing irritation.
Use a commercial dog shampoo unless your dog
has a specific need for therapeutic shampoo. Rinse
all of the soap out of the dog’s hair and then dry
the dog thoroughly.
Besides brushing your dog’s coat, don’t forget to brush your
dog’s teeth. Dental care for your dog is as important as taking
care of your own teeth. Ask your veterinarian how to properly
take care of your dog’s teeth.
Foot and nail care also is important. Remove dirt or mud
clods from between the toes. If this is a problem, you might
need to wash the feet often. Some dogs’ nails wear down
naturally; others must be clipped or filed regularly. Ask your
veterinarian how to care for your dog’s nails.
Health Care
Depending on the age of your dog, it should be vaccinated
regularly for canine distemper, hepatitis, leptospirosis, “kennel
cough,” canine parvovirus, coronavirus, and rabies. Puppies
usually receive a series of vaccinations beginning as early
as 6 to 8 weeks of age. This series will require two to four
follow-up vaccinations during the first few months to insure
good immunity. Rabies vaccination—required by law—is given
according to your state’s public health guidelines. Boosters to all
of these vaccinations will be given throughout your dog’s life.
Longhaired dogs should be
combed and brushed after
a bath to prevent their hair
from matting.
Keep your dog on
a regular feeding
schedule. This
will let you verify
that your dog has
a healthy appetite.
It also will help
you house-train
your dog.


PETS 11
.Puppies and Dogs
In many areas of the country, dogs can become infected
with heartworms, which are spread by mosquitoes. Heartworms
can seriously damage your dog’s heart, lungs, and quality of
life. Your veterinarian can test for heartworms and prescribe
the necessary medications. Also, many diseases are spread by
ticks and fleas. Good tick and flea control will help eliminate
most of these problems.
Feeding Your Dog
Choose a dog food that provides all the nutrients (carbohydrates,
fats, minerals, proteins, and vitamins) your dog needs to stay
healthy. As a rule, dry dog food is less expensive, easier to store,
and plenty healthful for your dog. But if your dog prefers it, you
can supplement with semimoist or canned dog food.
Feed an adult dog once or twice a day and puppies several
small meals throughout the day. To estimate how much to feed
your puppy, weigh the dog. The rule of thumb is 1 cup of dry
food for every 20 pounds of body weight per meal. A 5-pound
puppy might receive 1/4 cup per meal, three times a day.
Keep plenty of fresh water available at all times. Use a clean
bowl or other container, and place it in the shade or where it will
stay cool. Check the bowl regularly to make sure it is not empty.
Dog Feeding Don’ts
Give your dog only as much food as it will eat. Keeping your dog’s
bowl filled with dry food might be easier on you, but some dogs will
overeat by trying to consume all the food in the bowl. Your dog might
become obese if fed this way.
In general, bones don’t make good treats for your dog. Do not feed
a dog pork bones, chicken bones, chop bones, T-bones, or other bones
that can splinter. They can cause serious injury. As an alternative for
the chewing exercise your dog enjoys, offer instead large durable
rubber toys recommended by your veterinarian. Such toys that can’t
be destroyed by your dog can be found at pet stores.
Intestinal worms
can be dangerous
to puppies. Your
veterinarian will
examine a stool
sample to check
for the eggs
of intestinal
worms common
to dogs and
then prescribe
the proper
medication.


12 PETS
Puppies and Dogs.
House-Training Your Dog
A puppy (and older dogs, too!) should be
housebroken as soon as possible. Begin
the first time you feed your puppy in the
morning. Offer food to the puppy for only
10 minutes, then pick up any uneaten food.
After the 10-minute feeding period (or less if the puppy eats the
meal faster) take the puppy outside. Also take a small portion of
the puppy’s food with you for a reward. Put the puppy on the
ground. When the puppy begins to squat to go to the bathroom,
say, “Go pottie, go pottie.” When the puppy finally goes to the
bathroom, praise the puppy lavishly (“Good pottie, good pottie”)
and give the food reward. These rewards, both vocal and food,
will reinforce what you want the puppy to do.
Soon, the puppy will associate the outdoors with using the
toilet. Always use the same door and always take your dog to
the same general area. This will create patterns in your dog’s
mind, helping the dog understand what you want it to do.
If there is an accident in the house while you are watching,
say “No” firmly but gently so the dog does not become fearful,
and immediately take the dog outside. Praise the dog a lot if
it uses the toilet outside. Soon, you can depend on your dog’s
signals to let you know when it has to go outside.
If there is an accident and you are not present, do not
punish the dog. Unless the reprimand comes right as it is
going to the bathroom, the dog will not connect the accident
with the reprimand—and you will only make the dog fearful.
During the first few weeks, take the
dog out on a regular schedule: after
the puppy wakes up in the morning
or after a nap, after meals, when
you return after having left the
puppy alone, after playing or
training sessions, and right before
you put the puppy to bed.


PETS 13
.Puppies and Dogs
Crate Training
It is a good idea to get a crate in which to confine a puppy. Crates
might seem small, but dogs like cozy places of their own. Crates also
help house-training because dogs will not go to the bathroom in the
same area in which they eat or sleep.
Buy a crate that is just big enough to allow your dog to easily stand
up, turn around, lie down, and stretch out. You can buy a crate large
enough to fit your dog when it is fully grown, but pad the inside
to make the space the right size for your puppy. Otherwise, the space
might be large enough that your puppy will use one end as a bathroom.
Until fully house-trained, keep your dog in the crate whenever you
are not handling it. This will
make house-training easier.
Later, you can let the dog out
unsupervised, but leave the
door open so the dog can
return to the crate to rest.
The important thing to
remember is that the crate is
your dog’s safe place. Make
it comfortable with soft, wash-
able bedding (not newspaper),
and never confine your dog
there as punishment.
If your puppy soils the carpet, use a biologically active
cleaner that eliminates pet odor. You can find these cleaners
at your pet supplier. Clean the area immediately. Do not use
ammonia products to clean up the mess. Normal cleaners
might mask the odor for you, but not for your dog’s keen
sense of smell. If your dog can still smell the odor, it will
likely use the area as a toilet again.


14 PETS
Puppies and Dogs.
Socialization
Socializing a puppy with other people and dogs is an important
part of helping your pet become well-adjusted to its environ-
ment. In nature, litters of wolf puppies and other wild canines
interact with other members of their pack. By doing so, they
learn how to accept the presence of other animals. Our pets
need this same socialization period in their lives.
Try to introduce your new puppy to friends and family
members as often as possible. Do not allow anyone to rough-
house, tease, or torment your puppy. Instead, have the person
hold, pet, give treats, and talk gently and softly to the dog.
Remember, good behavior on the part of people will promote
good behavior in your puppy.
Sometimes an adopted older dog has not been properly
socialized. Learn to observe your older dog for things that seem
to bother it. Try gradually introducing the dog to these things
a little at time to allow it to become more comfortable. Always
praise your dog for anything it does correctly; this will reinforce
the dog’s good behavior and speed its behavior development.
Housing Your Dog
Dogs that live outdoors need shelter. If you plan to house your
dog outdoors, start when the dog is a puppy. An older dog that
is used to being kept indoors will have a hard time adapting to
outside living. If you choose an adult dog, find out if it was
raised as an outdoor dog before you leave it outside.
An outdoor dog needs a dry, elevated doghouse with clean,
dry bedding and a flap over the entrance to keep
out drafts during inclement weather. It should be
small enough to allow the dog’s body heat to keep
the space warm. If you have a garage, consider
adding a dog door to the garage and putting a soft
cushion in the warmest corner.
If you live in the North, you must give your
pet extra care in the winter. Check outdoor water
bowls often when the temperature is below freez-
ing. When necessary, break the ice or refill the
bowl with warm water.
Dogs living in extremely hot or humid envi-
ronments need air circulation, plenty of clean, fresh water, and
daylong shade. In summertime, be sure to change the water at
least twice daily to keep it clean and fresh and free of algae.
Dogs can suffer from heat exhaustion and die of heatstroke.
In extreme weather
conditions—hot or
cold—bring your
dog inside.


PETS 15
.Puppies and Dogs
Laws and Ordinances
Know the animal ordinances in your area. You can check with your
veterinarian, animal control center, or city police to learn the laws you
must follow. Ask your local librarian to help you find them in your city
or county code. Some cities have pamphlets outlining your obligations.
Pay attention to the law.
Laws regulating animals might include the following:
• Leash laws. Many communities require dogs and cats to be leashed
in all public areas unless otherwise designated.
• Pooper-scooper laws. These laws require owners to pick up and
properly dispose of their pet’s feces. Violators may have to pay a fine.
• Licensing laws. Licenses help your community keep track of pets and
let people know whom to call if a pet is lost.
• Rabies vaccination laws. These exist in every state.
• Nuisance laws. Common nuisance violations include excessive
barking or continuous howling and whining.
• Dangerous or vicious dog laws. If your dog has caused injury or
damage to a pet, person, or property, you may be required to confine
or muzzle it, and you may have to insure your dog. In some cases, a
dog may have to be destroyed. Also, some household insurance
policies will not cover damage or liabilities caused by certain breeds.
Have your parents check their homeowner’s insurance policy.
• Breed-specific laws. These controversial laws single out dog breeds
such as pit bulls, Rottweilers, Doberman pinschers, Chow Chows,
and others for specific regulations. Some people believe these laws
are discriminatory while others believe that certain breeds require
additional regulations.
• Spaying and neutering laws. These ordinances regulate the breeding
of dogs and cats.
• Wild or exotic animal laws. Some communities do not allow certain
animals, such as skunks, squirrels, raccoons, poisonous snakes,
and alligators, to be kept as pets. As a general rule, keeping a “wild”
animal as a pet is not recommended. In most places, this is also
prohibited by law.





PETS 17
.Kittens and Cats
Kittens and Cats
Cats are curious. Their curiosity will keep you and your cat
entertained for hours. Cats also purr—they hum with affection.
Cats come in many sizes and colors. There are tailless cats,
longhaired cats, shorthaired cats, large-breed cats, and small-
breed cats. There are striped cats, blue cats, yellow cats, black
cats, white cats, calico cats, and all colors in between.
With all the different shapes, sizes, and colors, how does
one decide what type of cat to get? Well, that is up to you and
your pocketbook. Cats can be purchased at pet stores, through
cat breeders who might advertise in the newspaper, at your
local animal shelter, or maybe from a neighbor with a new litter
of kittens. Wherever you get your new cat, like any other pet,
it will require full-time care. When selecting a kitten, make
sure it is bright-eyed and playful. Avoid kittens with runny
noses, runny eyes, and signs of illness, and kittens from
dirty quarters.
Cat Breeds
The American Cat Fanciers Association recognizes more
than 45 cat breeds. People who show cats professionally
generally divide cats into two main groups: longhaired
and shorthaired varieties. The shorthaired varieties are
further divided into domestic and foreign categories.
Most of the cats kept as pets generally are mixtures
of various domestic shorthaired varieties.


18 PETS
Kittens and Cats.
It is a good idea
to brush your
cat’s teeth daily.
Ask your
veterinarian how.
Many differences exist among the
purebreds. Breeds such as the Siamese,
Oriental, Devon Rex, Cornish Rex,
Colorpoint Shorthair, and Balinese
are delicate-featured, petite cats.
Breeds such as the Maine coon and
the Norwegian forest are large cats
noted for their size and weight. Most
cats have a long tail, but the Manx is
tailless and the Japanese bobtail has
only a stub of a tail. Most cats have
an angular face with a prominent nose
and muzzle, but Persian cats have a
flat, stubby nose. Most cats have erect,
alert-looking ears, while some breeds such as the American
curl and the Scottish fold have small, irregularly shaped ears.
And besides the longhaired and shorthaired varieties, there are
curly-haired cats, such as the Selkirk Rex, and a completely
hairless breed, the sphynx.
Health Care
Kittens need vaccinations beginning at 6 to 8 weeks of age
and continuing every three to four weeks until they are about
16 weeks old. Common vaccinations include feline distemper,
the feline respiratory complex, FIP, FIV, feline leukemia,
and rabies. Visit your veterinarian to find out about the
vaccinations recommended for your area. Also have
your cat checked for internal worms, fleas,
and ear mites.
General Care
Cats require only a few supplies. They
need a location for their food and water, a
secluded place for their litter box, a few toys, a
hairbrush or comb, and maybe a scratching post.
A cat bed is an option, but cats tend to sleep just about
anywhere they feel comfortable.
Brushing your cat’s hair will keep it clean and free
of mats and debris. Use a soft brush on a kitten and a
stiff-bristled brush or a metal comb on an older cat. Brush
longhaired cats every day and shorthaired cats about twice
a week.
Good daily brushing can
help prevent hairballs,
which result when cats
swallow large amounts
of their own hair.
Cats sleep between 12 and 16 hours a day.


PETS 19
.Kittens and Cats
Feeding Your Cat
Good nutrition is important for both active, fast-growing kittens
and older cats, but their nutritional requirements differ. Feed
kittens a growth formula cat food until they are about 6 months
old. Older cats do not need to eat a high-energy growth food
like kittens do; these foods might make your older cat gain too
much weight. The choice between canned (moist) food and
dry food is up to you.
Some people like to leave out food to allow their cat to
free-feed all day long. Other cat owners feed their cat at two or
three specific times each day, such as once in the morning and
once in the evening. Some cats learn to regulate how much
they eat; others overeat and become overweight. With a veteri-
narian’s guidance, choose what works best for you and your
cat and make adjustments as needed.
If you already have a cat and are introducing a new kitten to your
household, put the new arrival in a separate room (like a bathroom),
with its food, water, and litter box, for about a week. Remember to
spend time with your kitten in this room. This separation time will
allow the older cat to adapt gradually to the new kitten, and it will help
reduce problems later. After this first week, you can let your kitten out
to explore the rest of the house.
Cats enjoy a variety of foods, but do not feed them table food or scraps. Contrary
to popular belief, cats do not need milk; however, fresh clean water that is changed
daily is a must.


20 PETS
Kittens and Cats.
House-Training Your Kitten
Cats can be trained to use a litter box in a very short time. In
fact, most cats prefer to use the litter box as a bathroom. Cats
like privacy, so place the litter box in an area where your cat
will not be disturbed when using it.
Have a litter box ready in a quiet area, such as a bath-
room or laundry room, when you bring your cat home. As
soon as you bring the cat into the house, show it the litter box.
The cat probably will use the box from the start. If it does not,
try to catch the cat when it is looking for a place to go to the
bathroom and put it in the litter box. The cat will get the idea.
Fill the litter box 2 to 3 inches deep with litter and clean the
box every day. You can use any of a number of different types
of cat litter. Some cats prefer gravel litter; others might prefer the
types that clump. Similarly, some cats do not like scented litter.
You will have to learn from your cat which it prefers.
Some cats prefer to sleep in a
place of their own, such as this
small basket.
Homes with more than one cat should have
multiple litter boxes. A rule of thumb is to have
one more litter box than the number of cats in
your home.
Keep the litter box cleaned out daily. Change the litter when it is damp or
excessively soiled. Remember, no cat likes a “smelly” litter box, which
might tempt a cat to “go” elsewhere in the house.


PETS 21
.Kittens and Cats
A license and ID
tag on your cat’s
collar will help
you recover your
cat if it is lost.
Use a “break-
away” collar for
your cat’s safety.
Cat Habits
Cats, whether living indoors or outdoors, sharpen their claws
by scratching on objects. Such an object might be a tree or your
family’s favorite couch or chair. To prevent unwanted scratching,
get a scratching post. You can make one by tacking an old piece
of carpet to a post or to a wall next to where the cat likes to
sleep. Make the scratching post at least 3 feet tall.
Declawed cats still enjoy scratching, but they do not do
any damage.
Cats are expert hunters. A cat will stalk prey from an early
age if its mother teaches it how. Outdoor cats can become quite
proficient in needlessly killing songbirds, however. To help warn
prey, put a bell on your cat’s collar.
Cats also can be quite skilled at catching mice. Sometimes
this is the main reason for owning a cat. An old-time belief that
a starved cat would catch more mice is simply not true. A
healthy cat is a much better mouser; therefore, never starve
a cat hoping it will catch more mice.
Cats in the wild get lots of exercise hunting for food and
avoiding predators, but remember that indoor cats need exer-
cise also. Play with your cat daily. Cat toys, such as a small
ball or a small stuffed toy on the end of a line, will challenge
your cat and give it plenty of exercise. Check your local pet
store for a variety of cat toys. Avoid allowing your cat to play
with string or yarn. Cats might swallow these items, which
might cause severe medical problems.
Cats fare better indoors if it is possible for them
to stay there. Cats that live outdoors are more likely
to get hit by cars, run away, or get into fights with
stray cats (which is one way deadly cat diseases
are spread).


22 PETS
Fish.
Fish
Raising fish is a fascinating hobby. Just watching fish swim,
eat, and court can be entertaining and very relaxing. If you
already have an aquarium, you have seen the rare and colorful
sight fish provide. If you are a new fish fancier, you are in for
a treat.
Tank and Equipment
You will need an aquarium, but it need not be an expensive
one. In fact, a secondhand tank works fine if you clean it with
water (no detergent or soap) before putting your fish in it.
A large rectangular tank is best. Avoid round fishbowls, tall
tanks, or narrow-topped aquariums.
Fish need oxygen to survive.
Because oxygen dissolves (and carbon
dioxide escapes) at the water’s surface,
the larger the water’s surface area the
more oxygen will dissolve into the
water. Fishbowls with a small water
surface area (like goldfish bowls) do not
allow carbon dioxide, which will poison
your fish, to escape fast enough.
A 10- to 20-gallon rectangular tank
is a good size to start. In general, keep
1 inch of cold-water fish per gallon
(although goldfish may require 1.5
gallons per inch). You can safely
double the number of fish only if
you properly aerate the tank. When
measuring fish, remember that the
length of a fish is measured from the
nose to the root of the tail. Do not
include the tail fin in your measure-
ments. Allow for fish growth.


PETS 23
.Fish
Lighting is essential if you plan to keep
live plants in your aquarium. A one- or
two-bulb reflector will light up your tank.
You can buy reflectors or make your own.
Fluorescent, incandescent, and other bulb
types can be used, and all are satisfactory.
A glass cover or hood will keep fish in
and dirt out of your aquarium. Leave a small
space open in the hood along the back of the
tank to provide access for other aquarium equip-
ment, such as tubes, filters, and heaters.
A reflector can be mounted on top of the glass cover.
You will need a dip tube or a siphon and bucket.
These items will be used to pick up debris from the bottom
of the aquarium and whenever you change the water. Use a
dip net to remove fish from the tank. Nylon nets with straight
edges are preferred.
That is all the essential equipment you will need to start.
But, once the fish bug bites, you probably will want to get
more. An air pump, aerator, and filter all are good investments.
An aerator is simply an air pump that makes air bubbles
in the tank. Air bubbles increase the oxygen exchange in
the aquarium. A filter will help keep the tank clean. Filters
that fit on the outside of the tank are easiest to clean. If the
temperature in your house varies a lot, or if you plan to
purchase tropical fish, you will need an aquarium heater
with a thermostat.
Lastly, as you become more confident with your aqua-
culture skills and attempt to raise different kinds of fish, you
must learn about monitoring and adjusting the water quality
in your aquarium. Testing for and adjusting the pH (acid or
base), minerals (the hardness of the water), and chemical
levels will be your next step. Aquarium water test kits are
available for these needs. Your pet store or merit badge
counselor can help you.
A tank thermometer is a must. Fish are sensitive
to water temperature, so you will need to monitor
the temperature.
Make sure
your tank sits
on a level,
sturdy surface.


24 PETS
Fish.
Where to Put Your Aquarium
If you do not plan to keep plants in it, you can put the aquar-
ium almost anywhere except in a dark corner, drafty places,
or where the temperature fluctuates a lot. Put an aquarium
containing plants by a northward-facing window so that the
plants and fish get enough light. In nature, fish are used to
light filtering through the surface of the water. Try to duplicate
these natural conditions as much as possible.
If you plan to landscape your aquarium, you must give
your plants something in which to grow, such as sand or
gravel. Artificial plants also need a gravel base in which to
anchor. A beginner’s best bet is the coarse gravel sold in most
pet shops. Do not use beach sand. Slope the gravel upward
from the back of the tank to the front. Waste will collect at the
bottom of the slope, which makes it easier to remove.
Use at least 5 pounds of gravel for a 10-gallon tank.


PETS 25
.Fish
Once the gravel is in place, fill the tank with tap water to
a depth of 2 to 4 inches. To add water without disturbing the
gravel, place a clean plate over the gravel and pour water care-
fully and slowly over the plate. Then, remove the plate. Allow
the tank to sit for 24 hours to let the water “age.” Aging the
water allows the chlorine, which is added to tap water to kill
microorganisms, to dissipate out of the water.
Next, add plants (live and plastic). Your merit badge
counselor can show you how. Some plants have stems that are
bunched together. These can remain together as a bunch, but
do not plant individual plants in bunches. Also, do not plant
them too deep by burying the crown of the plant. Spread the
roots after you set the plants, and carefully level the gravel
around their bases. Make sure you keep live plants moist while
you are working.
Underwater Arrangements
Use scenic objects sparingly
in your aquarium. A few
rocks will spruce up your
aquarium, but you will need
the right kind. A rock from
your garden or another
body of water could harm
your fish. Buy rocks from
a fish dealer. Limestone,
seashells, and coral should
never be used in a freshwater
tank. These rocks will dis-
solve slowly and change the
water quality.
Keep metal objects out of
your tank. Metal oxidizes
in water and can release
chemicals that might
make your fish ill or kill
them. Ceramic ornaments
are best and will add to
an underwater scene.
An easier and faster approach to “aging” water
is to use a dechlorinator (neutralizer), available at
most pet shops that carry tropical fish. Follow the
manufacturer’s instructions carefully, and always use
chemicals under the close supervision of an adult.
Plants from local
ponds or streams
can carry parasites
and diseases that
harm fish. Buy
plants from a
reliable dealer.


26 PETS
Fish.
Once the gravel, plants, and scenic objects are in place,
fill the tank with water. Be careful not to dislodge the
plants or stir up the gravel—the plate technique
works well for this. Now let the tank stand.
A newly established tank should stand
for about one week before fish are
added. This waiting period, besides
aging the water, will bring the water
to room temperature. If you plan to
raise tropical fish, use your aquarium heater
to adjust the temperature.
Adding the Fish
Acclimate the fish before you add them to the tank. If you do
not, the fish may go into shock and die. Turn off the artificial
light. Leave the plastic bag containing the fish sealed, and float
it in the aquarium 20 to 30 minutes, until the water in the bag
reaches the same temperature as the water in the tank. Then
open the bag to allow the fish to swim out.
Tropical Fish
There are more than 500 kinds of tropical fish.* These are
divided into some 40 different scientific families, which are
divided into genera and further divided into spe-
cies. As a new aquarist, you probably will hear
the common names of the genera, such as barbs,
mollies, platys, guppies, bettas, and angelfish.
A lot of new fish fanciers start with a pair of
guppies, a pair of mollies, and perhaps a pair of
platys, all of which are live-bearers. In addition,
you could add some egg-bearers, such as one
pair of barbs, zebras, or white clouds. When mix-
ing fish like this, make sure the fish are neigh-
borly and can tolerate the same water tempera-
ture and water quality. If you choose schooling
fish, you may want to invest in three or more of
these so that they are able to school, or swim in
*Tropical fish can live in freshwater or saltwater (marine). This merit badge
pamphlet covers only those tropical fish that live in freshwater. Raising marine
tropical fish is an exciting world of color, equipment, and expertise that you may
want to explore as your interest in raising fish expands.
Allow 24 hours for the fish to
adjust to their new environ-
ment. Do not feed the fish
during this time. They probably
will not eat anything and the
food will rot.
Regardless of
how you stock the
tank, remember
not to overcrowd
it. Keep in mind
that your fish will
grow, too.


PETS 27
.Fish
a group—they will be much
happier. Choose fish that are
around the same size, even if
they are different species.
Buy fish from a good dealer—
your merit badge counselor can tell
you where to find one. Avoid bar-
gain buys. Make sure the fish you
buy look healthy. Select only fish
that appear vibrant and active.
Food and Feeding
Fish food commonly comes in
flakes, but it also comes frozen, live,
and in pellets. Feeding different forms and types of food pro-
vides variety that is more like what fish experience in the wild.
Try to feed fish twice daily at the same times each day,
putting the food into the same area of the aquarium each time.
The fish will get used to the schedule. If you can only feed
once daily, do it in the morning.
Feed only enough that almost all the food is gone in five
minutes. This will help your fish stay healthy, because over-
feeding can cause disease. Excess food settling on the bottom
of your tank will also pollute the water, so feed small amounts
to help your tank stay clean.
Do not let anyone who does not know how to care for
fish feed yours when you are away. It is OK not to feed your
fish if you are gone for a weekend. If you will be away longer
than that, measure out the food for each day so that the fish
will not be overfed. Remember, a feast is worse than a famine
as far as fish are concerned.
If feeding frozen food to your fish, make sure it has
been pasteurized. Plain freezing does not kill all bac-
teria and parasites, which can infect your aquarium.
You can specialize and keep one type of
fish, or you can start with a community
tank—a tank with small numbers of
different fish.
Some fish lay
eggs; they are
called egg-bearers.
Live-bearers do
not lay eggs.
Instead, the
female hatches
eggs within her
body, and the
babies, called
fry, appear only
when they are
fully formed.


28 PETS
Fish.
General Care
Make sure to keep the tank clean. A filter will help, but it must
be cleaned every week. Use a siphon to remove the food and
droppings that accumulate in the bottom of the tank. Water
that is a little green will not harm your fish, but when it gets
soupy and opaque, you had better change it. Additionally, you
also must replace water that evaporates over time. Age the new
water overnight before adding it to the tank, or use a chemical
dechlorinator (under the close supervision of an adult).
A helpful, little, live vacuum cleaner for any tank is
a small catfish. It will eat bits of food that other fish miss.
Catfish also help keep a tank clean, but do not depend on
them to do the entire job. They can only do so much, and they
can suffer from overeating also.
Snails also will help with housecleaning.
They eat leftover food and the algae that
grows on the side of the tank and on your
plants. Popular snails are the Japanese snail,
the mystery snail, and the red ramshorn.
But do not neglect these small scavengers:
If a snail dies it might cloud and poison the
water. Be aware that some species of snails
readily reproduce and can quickly overpopu-
late an aquarium.
Before you buy a
type of fish, find
out what kind
of food it needs.
Flesh-eating and
plant-eating fish
need different
types of protein.
Also, some fish
will only eat
live food.
The Synodontis courteti, a spotted catfish, comes from
West Africa.
This species of the Apple snail,
called the Pomacea bridgesi, is
a good choice for aquariums.


PETS 29
.Fish
You might want to add new fish to an established tank,
especially after some of your fish die. First, isolate and treat
any diseased fish in a small separate tank. If you had sick
fish in your main tank, consider cleaning the entire tank and
changing the water to prevent disease from spreading to the
new fish. Second, check your new fish for signs of disease.
Quarantine the new fish in a separate tank for at least one
week. This will ensure that your tank does not become con-
taminated. Then, just before you add the new fish to the tank,
feed your “regulars.” Float the plastic bag containing the new
fish in the aquarium until the two water temperatures are the
same. Then let the fish swim out.
Health Hints
“Ich,” short for Ichthyophthirius, is the most common proto-
zoal disease of tropical fish. It is also known as the “salt and
pepper” disease. A newly infected fish has white specks on
its fins and body. A fish with an advanced case looks as if it
has been sprinkled with salt and pepper. Infected fish shake,
become thin, and eventually drop to the bottom. A sudden
drop in water temperature or a chill seems to cause the disease.
To get rid of it, gradually raise the water temperature to about
85 degrees. You can buy remedies from a fish dealer, but you
must follow the directions exactly.
If the water in the
tank turns green
or gets cloudy,
you might need
to feed less or
keep fewer fish.
Overcrowding
and overfeeding
are the most
common causes
of dirty water.
Saltwater Cure
The saltwater cure can be used for Ich and other dis-
eases, but before you try this method, be sure your
fish will tolerate the salt. Put your diseased fish in a
container of warm salt water. Make the salt water by
mixing 1 tablespoon of aquarium salt (not iodized
table salt) in 5 gallons of aged or aquarium water.
Keep the diseased fish in the salt water until they are
cured. The exact time will vary with the fish. If the
water starts to smell stale, put the fish into new salt
water. Clean the tank before returning the cured fish.
Sterilize your dip net after using it with a sick fish.


30 PETS
Fish.
Goldfish
Goldfish and their relative,
the koi, have been kept as
pets in Asia for centuries.
You usually can find five
or six varieties of gold-
fish for sale at pet shops,
but there are about 20
kinds—some costing as
much as several thousand
dollars apiece. The fantail,
comet, and nymph are common breeds. Fancier breeds include
round-bodied veiltails; fringetails, which have long fins and
tails; bulging-eyed telescopes and celestials; lionheads; and the
Chinese moors.
When you buy goldfish, check each one carefully. Each
fish should have good, bright color. If it is speckled with white
dots, coated with scum, swims on its side, or seems the least
bit sluggish, look for a better fish in another tank. Size does
not indicate the health of a fish.
The fancier breeds of goldfish, such as this Oranda, usually are
not as hardy as the common types.


PETS 31
.Fish
General Care
Feed goldfish prepared food made specifically for goldfish.
Flakes are adequate and you can feed a variety of types—
one type one day and one type another day. Feed once daily,
preferably in the morning. Feed only enough so that almost all
the food is gone in five minutes. Excess food will settle on the
bottom of your tank and pollute the water.
Goldfish fare best in 60-degree water, but they will do
well at temperatures between 55 and 70 degrees. However,
they cannot take a sudden change in water temperature. When
adding aged water, let it stand until it is the same temperature
as the water in the aquarium.
If you use an aerator and filter, your tank will stay reason-
ably clean. But goldfish generate a lot of waste, so remember
to clean the filter every week. If you do not use a filter, you
must remove food and droppings from the bottom of the
aquarium with a dip tube. When the water begins to look
dirty, exchange some of the water with aged water.
If you do not use an aerator, you must make sure the
water contains adequate oxygen. Live plants will supply some
oxygen, but probably not enough. If your fish are always near
the water’s surface and moving their gills faster than usual,
they probably need more oxygen. This is a sign you need to
change at least part of the water.
Health Hints
Fin congestion and white fungus are two common goldfish
diseases. Overfeeding causes fin congestion. Sudden chill, or low
or high temperatures for an extended time also cause this disease.
An affected fish will have red or bloodshot fins. Reduce the stress
on the fish by limiting food and stabilizing the tank temperature.
You also can use the saltwater cure mentioned earlier. White
fungus attacks weakened or bruised goldfish. You can spot the
white spores of this disease on the fins or on a bruise. Treatment
is limited to isolation in a separate tank and the saltwater cure.
Never dispose of unwanted fish or live aquatic plants in lakes,
streams, irrigation canals, or other bodies of water. Diseases and
noxious plant life in your tank can be introduced into the wild and
cause great damage in this manner. In most areas, it is against the
law to do this.
In warmer months
you may need to
change the water
more regularly,
or consider
purchasing an
aerator.





PETS 33
.Birds
Birds
Are you “for the birds” as far as having a pet? You have a
wide choice—canaries, tame crows, cockatiels, mynah birds,
lovebirds, parrots, pigeons, peacocks, parakeets, toucans, and
others. Any one of them will make a good pet. Of course,
along with the variety of choices comes a variety of life spans,
costs, housing requirements, and safety concerns, but also a
wide range of personalities that make endless hours of fun
and companionship.
Whichever bird you choose, find out as much as you can
about it before you buy. Books and pamphlets on all types
of birds are available at pet stores, at libraries, and on the
internet. In this chapter, you will find tips and hints on how
to raise the two most popular choices among bird lovers, the
parakeet and canary.
Parakeets
For a bird that is easy to care
for and learns tricks quickly,
the inexpensive pocket-sized
parrot, the parakeet, is ideal.
Also called the keet, budgie,
and budgerigar, the parakeet
is a colorful bird native to
Australia. This bird also talks,
like its cousin the parrot. It is
curious, cocking its little head
to study everything it encoun-
ters. It also is a mimic, acrobat,
and comedian.
Budgies can be divided into three basic color groups:
green, blue, and yellow. Each of these is divided into shades.
The greens, for example, are called light, dark, and olive.
Parakeets live an
average of six years,
with the record
being 18 years.


34 PETS
Birds.
Budgies also have different color markings: cinnamon, black,
and gray. There are albinos (all white), too. A lutino is a yellow
budgie with red eyes. Budgies with white or yellow patches
are called pieds or harlequins. Males can be differentiated from
females by the presence of a lavender to dark blue “cere”
above the beak; the cere on a female is usually brown or tan.
When purchasing a parakeet, look for a healthy, lively
bird. It should be at least 5 weeks old. Buy only from a dealer
with a good reputation. Make sure birds in cages adjacent to
the bird in which you are interested appear healthy and lively
also. Both male and female budgies make good pets. It is bet-
ter to purchase only one budgie. A single bird will be more
attentive to you and will learn faster than if it had a partner.
Cages
Some people let
their birds have
the run of the
house, but this
habit is risky,
especially if you
have ceiling
fans and open
windows. Get a
roomy cage, one
that is at least
1 foot by 2 feet and 18 inches high. An oblong cage is best.
Avoid rounded cages because the space between the bars nar-
rows at the top, which could trap your bird’s head and neck.
A cage with a removable bottom tray and removable food cups
is recommended. Make sure these cups are within easy reach
because you will add food and change the water daily. Two
doors having secure, not sliding, latches are preferred. A plas-
tic guard around the lower part of the cage will help keep
seeds and dirt from being pushed out.
To your budgie,
a cage without a
perch would be
like a house
without a chair.
Place round
hardwood perches
where the budgie
can reach food
and water easily.
Avoid wooden
perches wrapped
in sandpaper
because these
might irritate the
bird’s feet. Later,
you can add
accessories, such
as a ladder. A little
bell hung from the
side of the cage
and a small mirror
make nice toys.
Don’t let the colors confuse you. Colors have nothing to do with a
parakeet’s personality or abilities. Younger birds might appear duller
in color, but soon they will molt (lose their feathers) and develop
brilliantly colored adult plumage.


PETS 35
.Birds
Cover the cage at
night to keep the
bird quiet and to
mimic the natural
day/night cycle
birds experience
in nature. Make
sure the cover
leaves an air
space at the top
of the cage.
Hang the cage from a wall or a ceiling bracket, or simply
set it on a secure table. Wherever you put the cage, try to keep
the highest level that the bird can reach below the height of
your head. This will keep the bird from thinking it is dominant.
Keep the cage out of drafts and full sunlight. Avoid placing the
cage in the kitchen, and of course, keep the cage out of the
reach of dogs and cats.
When you are ready to introduce the budgie to its new
home, take out all but the bottom perches in the cage. This
will force the bird to perch close to its food and water. Lastly,
always cover the cage at night with a sheet, or something simi-
lar, that has a ventilation hole at the top. Birds fare best on a
12-hour daylight/12-hour nighttime cycle.
Feeding
Your budgie probably will not eat when you first bring it home,
but feed it anyway. Also scatter some seed on the floor around
the food cup. You might notice that your budgie acts a little
drowsy the first day. Don’t worry, this is a normal reaction.
Feed your budgie a parakeet seed mix. Give the budgie
fresh, clean seed and fresh water every morning. Your bird will
eat the seeds and leave the husks (the seed coverings); keep
the food cup free of hulls and full of
seeds. Occasionally stir the seed in the
food cup to keep the seeds exposed to air.
Feed young budgies crushed seeds for the
first few weeks.
Supplement your bird’s diet with
small treats, such as finely chopped
dark green or dark yellow vegetables
and fruits. Bread, macaroni, cooked
egg, and millet seeds also can be used.
During breeding or molting, your bird
might need special foods. Ask your
veterinarian for recommendations.
General Care
Your new budgie might need some time to get used to your
home. Cover the cage with a cloth for several hours during the
first day to help reduce the stress and confusion of the new
surroundings. Perhaps the most important thing you can do is
leave your pet alone until it gets settled.


36 PETS
Birds.
Avoid putting the cage next to an air conditioner duct or
in front of a window when the weather is cold because cold
drafts might make your budgie sick. Putting the cage across
the room from a window is fine; the window will provide
entertainment for the bird.
Budgies preen to stay clean. Preening is when a bird
combs and grooms itself with its beak and feet. Your budgie
also might take a bath. It might like to splash around in a
shallow dish of water, fluff its feathers when misted lightly
with water, or roll around in wet lettuce leaves. Try each
method to see which one your bird prefers, but do it only in
the morning. A budgie’s feathers should never be wet when it
settles down for the night.
Empty the bottom tray every day. Wash the tray with hot
water and soap at least once a week. Wash out the water and
food cups daily. Make sure to thoroughly rinse and dry them.
Do not wash the perches; occasionally scrape them clean with
a knife.
If you want to let your bird fly loose in your home, first
bird-proof the room you in which you will release it. Close all
drapes and blinds to prevent it from flying into a window. Turn
off all fans, including ceiling fans. Remove all dogs and cats
from the room.
Some bird owners clip their bird’s wings to prevent flying.
However, a bird with clipped wings might be able to fly for
short distances. If you wish to have your bird’s wings clipped,
a veterinarian can help you. But be vigilant about the bird’s
flying abilities as the wing feathers begin to grow out.
Health Hints
Budgies are hardy little birds. However, they are susceptible to
colds brought on by excessive chill, rough handling, and con-
taminated, spoiled, or moldy food or water. Exposure to other
sick birds is another source of infection. A common sign of ill-
ness is a bird with its feathers fluffed up continuously. If your
bird appears sick, keep the bird warm (85 to 90 degrees) and
take it to a veterinarian immediately. Mites found on the beak,
feet, skin, and feathers are another problem for bird owners.
A veterinarian can recommend treatments for your bird, while
treatment for the bird’s environment can be done at home. You
can cleanse the empty cage and equipment by immersing them
in boiling water.
You will need
to trim your
bird’s nails from
time to time.
A veterinarian
can show you
how to do
this using an
emery board.
Keep a cuttle-
bone in the
cage. This chalky
white bone
provides neces-
sary calcium for
your bird. It also
will help keep
the budgie’s
beak trim.


PETS 37
.Birds
Bird Handling Tips
You might want to pick up
and handle your bird on
occasion. Do it carefully.
Slowly insert your hand
into the cage so as not
to frighten your pet. Pick
up the bird from the rear.
Put your hand over its
back and your fingers and
thumb around its neck.
Hold the bird loosely—
do not squeeze it.
To finger train your bird, put
your extended index finger in
front of its feet. Slowly push
against the bird. It might
move away or nip. However,
be persistent. It might take
some time for the bird to
finally step up on your finger.
Training sessions should be
limited to 15 minutes or less,
two or three times a day.


38 PETS
Birds.
Canaries
Canaries were
discovered on the
Canary Islands,
hence the name.
Pet-shop canaries
are related to the
wild canaries found
on those islands
centuries ago.
Through careful
breeding, they have
developed better
singing abilities and
more color patterns.
There are some
50 varieties of
canaries. For ease
of discussion, canaries
are divided into two
general groups: canaries bred for appearance (fancy-colored
canaries) and canaries bred for singing. The “fancies” come in
pink and orange-red shades. Additionally, some have feathered
crests that look like wigs, while others have curly feathers.
Some are even fed food coloring to turn their feathers
different colors.
Canaries are famous for their singing. Singing varieties
include rollers (soft, rolling melodies), choppers (loud singers),
and warblers. If you want a bird that sings, buy a male that is
younger than 2 years old. Females seldom do more than chirp
or sing a few simple trills.
Pick a healthy, lively bird, one with good, bright, feathers.
Make sure birds in cages adjacent to the one in which you are
If you bring the canary home in a traveling box,
fasten the box to the cage and let the bird enter on
its own. Cover the cage with a cloth or newspaper.
Drafts and the excitement of a new environment can
be stressful for your bird.
A singing canary is a cheerful pet that
can live for 15 years or more.


PETS 39
.Birds
interested appear healthy and lively also. Listen to the songs of
the different birds at the shop, then pick the bird whose song
you like best. Purchase your canary only from a dealer with a
good reputation.
Cages
Buy a rectangular cage, not a round one, because the shape is
more comforting to canaries and provides more room in which
to fly. The minimum size should be 12-by-12-by-10 inches.
Initially, put perches only near the food and water cups. You
may add additional perches once your canary is used to the
location of its food and water. Keep in mind, however, that too
many perches will interfere with flying space. Likewise, one or
two playthings are enough. Use unpainted perches of different
thicknesses, and put them where they will not get wet.
Hang the cage from a wall or a ceiling bracket, or simply
set it on a table. Wherever you put the cage, try to keep the
highest level that the bird can reach below the height of your
head. This will keep the bird from thinking it is dominant.
Never keep a bird
near a kitchen
where nonstick
cooking pans
will be used. If
overheated, the
nonstick surface
releases toxic
fumes that will
kill your bird.


40 PETS
Birds.
To encourage your pet to sing, put the cage in good day-
time light but never where it will be in the sun all day. Also,
avoid drafts from ceiling fans and household air vents, which
will chill and stress your bird. Avoid placing the cage in the
kitchen, and of course, keep the cage out of the reach of dogs
and cats. Lastly, always cover the cage at night with a sheet, or
something similar, that has a ventilation hole at the top. Birds
fare best on a 12-hour daylight/12-hour nighttime cycle.
Feeding
Feed 1 tablespoon of a fresh canary seed mixture per bird
daily. Buy good, formulated canary seed. Pelleted diets are
available for canaries, too. Have a cuttlebone and fresh, clean
water in the cage at all times. Change the water and clean the
water cup twice daily. Once a month, sprinkle 1/4 teaspoon of
gravel (purchased at a pet store) on the bottom of the cage.
Canaries eat the gravel, which helps them digest food.
An occasional eggshell is good for canaries. Crush the
shell from a boiled egg and put it in the cage. Some mashed
yolk of a hard-boiled egg is also good. A small slice of ripe
apple or sweet orange can be given every day.
General Care
Because canaries are easily startled, make sure the canary
knows when you approach the cage. Whistle or talk to your
canary to let it know the direction from which you are coming.
Avoid using synthetic nesting fibers. These items
might entangle the feet, toes, or other small body
parts of your canary. Safe nesting material can be
purchased at a pet store.
Your canary will bathe if you give it a shallow dish of
water. Set it on the bottom of the cage. Do this in the
morning, so the feathers will be dry by evening, and
no more than twice a week.


PETS 41
.Birds
Empty the bottom tray every day. Wash the tray with hot
water and soap at least once a week. Wash out the water and
food cups daily. Make sure to thoroughly rinse and dry them.
Do not wash the perches; occasionally scrape them clean with
a knife.
Health Hints
Canaries are tropical birds that like warm environments. They
are susceptible to chills, which can lead to illness. Other stresses
include rough handling and contaminated, spoiled, or moldy
food or water.
Exposure to other sick birds is another source of infection.
A common sign of illness is a bird with its feathers fluffed up
continuously. If your bird appears sick, keep the bird warm
(85 to 90 degrees) and take it to a veterinarian immediately.
Mites found on the beak, feet, skin, and feathers are
another problem for bird owners. A veterinarian can recom-
mend treatments for your bird, while treatment for the bird’s
environment can be done at home. You can cleanse the empty
cage and equipment by immersing them in boiling water.
Some birds have identification bands on their lower
legs. If your bird has such a band, inspect it daily to
make sure it is not causing irritation. If leg swelling
develops, immediately take your bird to a veterinarian
to have the band removed.


42 PETS
Pocket Pets.
Pocket Pets
Looking for a small pet—one
you can hold in your hands,
teach tricks, and leave in a
cage when you are away?
Then consider a hamster,
guinea pig, or mouse. These
pets are affectionately
called “pocket pets” because
they actually can be carried
in your pocket. These types
of animals make great apart-
ment companions, if it is OK
with your landlord.
Guinea Pigs
A guinea pig is not a pig, it is a rodent.
Guinea pigs are 6 to 9 inches long and
weigh about 2 pounds at adulthood.
They have four toes on the front feet,
but only three toes on each hind foot.
They also lack a tail. They live an aver-
age of five years.
While three breeds of guinea
pigs—English, Abyssinian, Peruvian—
are common, most people raise the
English, or smooth-haired, guinea
pigs. English come in a variety of
colors and require less daily care than
the other breeds. The Peruvian, with long
straight hair, and the Abyssinian, with rough
wiry hair, require daily brushing.
A relative of the porcupine,
the guinea pig is native
to South America and is
commonly known as a
cavy (rhymes with navy).


PETS 43
.Pocket Pets
Housing
Guinea pigs can be kept in almost
anything, but enclosures made of
small mesh wire are best. Allow a
minimum space of 2 square feet
per adult. A 2-foot-square wire
mesh box with sides 6 to 12 inches tall, a lid, and a tray to
catch droppings will work well for one guinea pig. Bedding
should be provided in abundance. Good bedding materials
include hardwood shavings, recycled paper materials, pellets,
and shredded paper. Drinking water bottles with a sipper tube
should be hung high enough above the bedding that they stay
clean and free of debris. Use a small ceramic food bowl.
A room temperature of 55 to 70 degrees is best for a
guinea pigs. Temperatures above 85 degrees may cause heat-
stroke, and temperatures below 50 degrees are too cold. Also,
it is important to protect your guinea pig from drafts and mois-
ture. You can house your guinea pig outdoors if the tempera-
ture is right. Keep the guinea pig separated from other pets,
and make sure mice and rats cannot invade its cage and food.
When you purchase a guinea pig, make sure it is at
least 6 weeks old and comes from a reliable dealer
with a clean pet shop.
Guinea pigs like a hiding place
in their cage where they can
feel safe. A small, overturned
box with a cutout works well.


44 PETS
Pocket Pets.
Feeding
Use commercial guinea pig food (containing 20
percent protein and 16 percent fiber), and store it
in a sealed container to keep it fresh. Guinea pigs
also like to eat hay. Carrots, celery tops, alfalfa cubes,
green vegetables, and apples can be given as treats,
but they should be limited to no more than 1 or 2
tablespoons per 24-hour period. Too many treats can
give a guinea pig diarrhea. If diarrhea develops, stop
the treats until the droppings appear normal. Then
gradually reintroduce the treats in smaller amounts
than before.
General Care
Make sure to keep your guinea pig’s
cage clean and dry. Change the bed-
ding every two days. Thoroughly
clean the pen with soap and water at
least twice a week. Change the water and
clean the water bottle and sipper tube daily. A
clean, large pipe cleaner works well to clean the sip-
per tube. The food bowl also must be cleaned daily.
Brush shorthaired guinea pigs weekly and longhaired
breeds daily. The teeth and toenails might need occasional
trimming or filing to prevent overgrowth. A veterinarian can
assist you with these tasks.
Handle your guinea pig often, but do so gently. Guinea
pigs do not often bite, but they will if handled roughly. When
you hold your guinea pig, put one hand under it and the other
hand around its shoulders for support.
Health Hints
Guinea pigs most commonly develop medical problems involv-
ing the respiratory system, skin, and digestive system. If your
pet shows signs of sickness, such as breathing difficulties,
bedraggled fur, loss of appetite, a discharge from the nose or
eyes, or a tendency to bury its head in a corner and remain
inactive for long periods, isolate the guinea pig and contact
your veterinarian. Help prevent disease by keeping the pen
clean, feeding the proper diet, providing fresh clean water,
and keeping the quarters dry and draft-free.
Guinea pigs require
a dietary supplement
of vitamin C. You
can add vitamin C
directly to the drink-
ing water (mix 50
milligrams of vita-
min C with 8 ounces
of water). Pieces of
an orange or a small
handful of cabbage,
kale, or parsley
given daily
also provide
vitamin C.
Sipper tube


PETS 45
.Pocket Pets
Hamsters
Hamsters are active, athletic, entertaining
little balls of fur. These rodents are native
to Asia and Europe, where they are pests
that burrow under farmland. They love
to hoard things and store great piles in
their nests. They usually are clean and do
not require much grooming. Hamsters are
nocturnal and probably sleep more during
the day than other pocket pets. However,
they can be escape artists and must be
kept in secure cages. They live about two
years and grow to about 6 inches long.
Housing
Adult hamsters need at least a 2-foot-square enclosure
that is at least 10 inches high. The best home for your
hamster would be made of wire mesh with a solid
floor of plastic or aluminum. A cage like this is
easiest to clean and will provide good ventilation.
Avoid cages made from too much wood, plastic,
or soft metal, as hamsters are strong chewers and
good escape artists. A 10-gallon glass aquarium is
OK if it has a securely fastened lid. If you use an
aquarium, make sure the lid is made of wire mesh
to allow proper ventilation.
Cover the floor of the cage with bedding, such as
hardwood shavings, recycled newspaper, or pellets, to
a depth of 1 to 2 inches. Hamsters will enjoy a separate
sleeping box (about 4 inches square) attached to the side
of the cage. Put in a small ladder to let the hamster climb
into its box. Also, your hamster might enjoy playing on an
exercise wheel.
Water bottles with a sipper tube should be hung high
enough above the bedding that they stay clean and free
of debris. Clean the bottle and sipper tube daily. A clean,
large pipe cleaner works well to clean out the sipper tube.
The ideal temperature for a hamster is between 65 and
70 degrees. Prolonged temperatures below 55 degrees will
cause your hamster to hibernate.
Exercise balls provide
good opportunities
to interact with your
hamster, guinea pig,
or pet mouse. However,
these must be used only
under constant, close
supervision so that your
pet does not get injured.
Hamsters come in many colors and with
a variety of hair lengths. The golden
hamster comes in shorthaired and long-
haired varieties. There are also Chinese,
European, and Hungarian varieties.


46 PETS
Pocket Pets.
Feeding
Feed a commercial hamster diet that contains at least
16 percent protein. Do not feed seed-type pet mixes
because the hamster will pick out only the foods it
wants and hoard (bury) the rest. Hamsters tend to
stuff their cheeks with food and then store
it away. Hoarded food will only spoil and
rot, and you must remove it from the cage
regularly. You can give your hamster treats
of salad sprouts, walnuts, raisins, various
salad greens, and small bits of apple, but these
should be limited to no more than 1/2 teaspoon
per 24 hours. Too many treats might upset the
digestive system. If this occurs, discontinue these foods
for a few days.
A hamster’s front teeth grow continuously and normally
are worn down by chewing on hard items. You can give your
hamster small pieces of dog biscuit or natural wood chew
sticks to help wear down the teeth. Because hamsters are
nocturnal, plan to serve meals in the late afternoon or early
evening. Keep fresh, clean water available in a regularly
cleaned sipper bottle.
General Care
Hamsters will wash themselves, but you will have to wash and
clean the cage once a week. Change the bedding twice a week
and remove all droppings and hoarded food. If your hamster
is nesting with babies, mix some of the used bedding with
the new bedding you add. However, it is best to leave your
hamster alone when she has a litter. Limit your cleaning to
once every two weeks, if possible, until the babies are weaned.
Hamsters like to be handled, and the more you handle
them the tamer they get. However, they may bite if startled,
handled roughly, or abruptly awakened from a sound sleep.
Do not surprise your hamster. Let it know you are coming, and
pick it up gently by scooping up the animal. Put your other
hand under it to cradle its body.
Health Hints
Like most pocket pets, hamsters most commonly develop
medical problems involving the respiratory system, skin,
and digestive system. If your pet shows signs of sickness,
Generally,
hamsters do
better as solitary
pets. Mixing
males and
females, besides
creating lots of
baby hamsters,
might lead to
hamster fights.
Diarrhea,
sometimes called
“wet tail,” is a
serious condition
that requires
veterinary
attention.


PETS 47
.Pocket Pets
such as breathing difficulties, bedraggled fur, loss of appetite, a
discharge from the nose or eyes, and long periods of inactivity,
isolate the hamster and contact your veterinarian. Help prevent
disease by keeping the cage clean, feeding the proper diet, pro-
viding fresh water, and keeping the quarters dry and draft-free.
Mice
Mice are lively little pets. There are many different breeds
available in a range of colors including white, black, tan, and
brown. Mice are also escape artists, and they are active both
day and night. If you decide to get more than one mouse,
start with two females and one male. Males might fight
initially when caged together. Mice live about two years.
Housing
Mice are easier to house than other pocket pets. Usually,
1 square foot per adult mouse is sufficient. A female with a
litter requires about two to three times as much space.
You can house mice in wire mesh or plastic enclosures, or
a converted aquarium with a secure wire mesh lid. Whichever
you use, make it large enough to accommodate feeding and
nesting areas, an exercise wheel, and other toys such as a
paper towel tube. Provide adequate bedding, such as hardwood
shavings, shredded recycled paper, shredded paper, or pel-
lets. Cedar and pine shavings are not recommended for mice.
Shredded, unscented paper towels, tissue paper, and old socks
and mittens also make excellent nesting materials. Mice do
well at room temperatures of 65 to 85 degrees.
Mice are great climbers and will enjoy multiple levels and tubes
in their mouse house.


48 PETS
Pocket Pets.
A small ceramic food container and a water bottle
designed for mice that hangs from the side of the cage are
a must and need to be cleaned daily.
Feeding
Feed a commercial rodent mix that contains at least 14 percent
protein. Avoid seed-based diets and sweets, veggies, salt blocks,
and liquid vitamins. Occasionally, treats such as crumbled dog
biscuits, bread crusts, and small bits of apple, carrot, or lettuce
may be given. Do not give your mice meat; it may make them
cannibalistic and smelly. Make sure the food bowl always
contains food. Mice demand a lot of energy and will starve
quickly if food is not available. Never let them go more than
20 hours without food.
General Care
Thoroughly clean the cage once a week, and change the bed-
ding at least weekly. Mice mark their territory with scent,
which the bedding absorbs. If you replace all of the bedding
at once and too often, the mice might become uncomfortable.
Instead, when you replace the bedding, leave some of the old
bedding in the cage.
You can handle your mice, but do it gently because they
are very small and fragile. Pick up a mouse by simultaneously
grasping the loose skin on the neck and the base of the tail.
Then place the mouse in your hand.
Mice move quickly and can run from your hand up your
arm with surprising speed. Be careful never to drop a mouse
on the floor. Your mouse might pass some droppings or urinate
in your hand while you hold it. Therefore, always wash your
hands after handling mice.
Mice love to
chew, so give
them pieces of
hardwood to
chew on.
Cheese? Never, Please!
Believe it or not, cheese is not good for mice. Feed
only commercial rodent food mix.


PETS 49
.Pocket Pets
Health Hints
Mice are hardy pets. Keeping the cage clean will minimize
odors and help keep mice healthy. If one of your mice appears
sick (breathing difficulties, bedraggled fur, loss of appetite, a
discharge from the nose or eyes, long periods of inactivity),
immediately isolate it in a separate cage and consult your
veterinarian. Meanwhile, disinfect the mouse’s cage and
change the bedding.
As your mouse gets used to you, it might just crawl into your
hand so you can pick it up.





PETS 51
.Breeding, Training, and Showing
Breeding, Training,
and Showing
Pets are a pleasure to have and enjoy. But with many pets,
you can have the added pleasure of breeding and training them.
Cats and dogs can be exhibited in official cat and dog shows,
while any animal can be exhibited at an ordinary pet show.
Some pets cannot be bred. The common pet turtle, for
example, does not normally mate and breed in captivity. Some
pets cannot be trained. Fish are a good example. However,
all pets can be shown at some type of pet show, and any pet
is likely to arouse the interest of another person.
With your
experience,
you can teach
a friend how to
raise a pet like
the one you have.
Should You Breed a Cat or Dog?
Every year millions of puppies and kittens are born in the United
States. Unfortunately, many of them will never find a home. Litters of
unwanted animals are sometimes abandoned or dumped along road-
sides when their owners move or are tired of caring for them. It is
estimated that more than 20 million cats and dogs enter the nation’s
animal shelters each year. Fewer than 20 percent of these animals are
ever adopted or claimed by their owners. The sad reality is that many
are put to death because no one wants them. Additional millions of
abandoned animals never make it to shelters, where they at least have
a chance of adoption. Instead, they spend their lives roaming city
streets and country roads, dying of starvation, disease, and exposure.
You can help solve the problem of pet overpopulation and prevent
the death of unwanted animals. First, be a responsible pet owner. Do
not buy or adopt an animal unless you are committed to properly car-
ing for the pet throughout its lifetime. You must be willing to exercise,
feed, groom, train, socialize (dogs), attend to the medical needs of, and


52 PETS
Breeding, Training, and Showing.
Training Your Cat
Cats learn by watching. Therefore, teaching your cat tricks
takes a lot of patience and repetition. Because cats normally
scratch trees or the ground to remove the old nail casings on
their claws, it is important the teach your cat to use a scratch-
ing post instead of your furniture.
otherwise spend time with your pet according to the animal’s needs
and not your own convenience.
People who leave an animal alone in an apartment or house for
long periods and neglect to feed or exercise it wind up with a frustrated,
lonely, and badly behaved pet instead of the affectionate companion
they wanted. It is these animals that often are abandoned or taken to
the shelter to be put to sleep. Be sure you understand that when you
bring a pet into your home, it becomes your responsibility. In return,
your pet will give you years of faithful companionship and love.
Second, have your pet spayed or neutered so it cannot reproduce.
Cats and dogs that are allowed to breed freely are the root of the pet
overpopulation problem. According to Spay/USA, 70,000 puppies and
kittens are born each day. Millions of unwanted dogs, cats, kittens, and
puppies are destroyed by animal control agencies each year.
One female dog or cat can give birth to a dozen or more puppies or
kittens every year. If you let your pet breed, you might find homes for
that first litter, but what happens when each of those puppies or kittens
has a litter of its own? Counting all the descendants, one cat or dog can
add thousands of new animals to the pet surplus during its lifetime.
There are many advantages to having your cat or dog spayed or
neutered. Spaying a female will reduce her risk of getting cancer and
will keep barking male dogs or yowling tomcats from invading your
yard when she is in heat. Neutered males are less likely to get into
fights, and tend to be more affectionate. A tomcat neutered when
young is less likely to develop the habit of spraying urine and marking
territory in your home.
Neutering will not make your pets fat and lazy, as people commonly
believe. Overeating and lack of exercise do that. Neutering helps your
pet live a longer and healthier life and gives you a more affectionate
and manageable pet.


PETS 53
.Breeding, Training, and Showing
Training Your Dog
Learning how to respond to basic obedience commands can
literally save a dog’s life in today’s world of busy streets and
fast automobiles. Obedience training can begin when dogs are
4 to 6 months old and continue throughout a dog’s lifetime.
Obedience-trained dogs make better pets, have fewer behav-
ioral problems, and generally bond more closely with
their owners.
There are many training methods, some more effective
than others. A good trainer can help you figure out what
works best with your dog. This can be an excellent way to
train your pet and to improve your own skills. If you decide to
do this, enroll your dog once it has been vaccinated. Ask your
veterinarian for help in picking a class that matches your
dog’s abilities.
Breeding Tropical Fish
Breeding tropical fish can be an interesting and fascinating
project. Breeding egg-bearers is generally considered a
project for the experienced aquarist. As a beginner, start
with live-bearers.
A female live-bearer drops live fry, not eggs. She might eat
those fry if you do not take certain precautions. To assist you
in raising fry, use a breeding trap that fits on the inside of your
aquarium. When a female is ready to give birth, put her in the
trap. Return the female to the aquarium the day after the fry
are born. Keep the young fish in the trap until they are too big
for adult fish to swallow.
Whatever training program you pick, make sure you
stick to it. In some cases, if you apply a little of this
program and a little of that one, you can confuse
your pet and diminish the effectiveness of the train-
ing. The most important part of training your dog is
consistency and fairness.


54 PETS
Breeding, Training, and Showing.
If you have an unused tank, fill it with aged water and
use it as a maternity ward. Plant it with live or plastic plants,
or attach a breeding trap to the tank. Put the ready-to-bear
female in the maternity tank. When the fry are born, remove
the female and allow the young to hide among the plants.
Most young live-bearers can be fed finely powdered, dry
fish food. Small sifted daphnia, newly hatched brine shrimp,
or microworms are good food for young fish. Increase the size
of the food as your fish grow.
Breeding Goldfish
Breeding goldfish is not hard, but it is best to
use fish that are 3 to 4 years old. A female that
is ready to lay eggs will have an enlarged body,
and the male will have little white pellets or
bumps on his fins and gills. As he chases her,
she will scatter 500 or more eggs. He will
fertilize the eggs, which will sink and cling
to plants or ornaments in your tank. The eggs
are almost invisible, but you can see them if
you look closely.
Because breeding traps greatly restrict movement, put the preg-
nant female in the trap only when she appears ready. Look for a
plump belly, dark triangular mark (called a gravid spot) behind
the anal fin, and an air bubble below the mark. Sometimes, you
will be able to see the eyes of the unborn fry shortly before birth.
Fish
Breeding Tips
1. Keep the young of simi-
lar species separated.
2. Plan ahead—make
sure you have enough
aquarium space for
your new arrivals.


PETS 55
.Breeding, Training, and Showing
When the parents settle down, put the adults into a sepa-
rate tank, or remove the plants and ornaments to which the
eggs are attached and put them into a separate tank. If you do
not separate the eggs from the adult fish, the eggs and the
babies will be eaten. The eggs—not all of them—will hatch in
three to six days. At 6 weeks old, the fry will look like real fish.
Feed the new arrivals a finely powered goldfish food,
newly hatched brine shrimp, or sifted daphnia.
Breeding Budgies
To breed your budgie, you will need a breeding cage, a nest
box to hang in the cage, and nesting food to supplement the
female’s diet. These are available at most pet shops.
A male budgie should be 10 months old or older before
his first mating; a female should be at least 1 year old. The
mate for your bird should come from a reliable source and
should be healthy and active.
The female can lay as many as seven eggs, but not all
on the same day. The eggs hatch 18 to 20 days after the first
one is laid. Leave the parents alone during this period. Never
disturb the nest.
Plan to breed your bird after March or April. Warm weather is best
for the baby birds.


56 PETS
Breeding, Training, and Showing.
The parents will feed their young. But, once the young
start pecking for themselves (about one week after hatching),
put them in a separate cage from their parents. Do this first
thing in the morning.
Training Your Budgie
A budgie will pick up plenty of tricks on its own. But if you
hold regular sessions and offer rewards for successful learning,
you will have a truly educated bird. Teach your budgie four
things: how to perch, how to hold on with its beak, how to
climb, and how to descend. Once your bird masters these, you
can teach it all kinds of tricks.
You had one
budgie, now you
have five. What
are you going to
do with them? For
the birds’ sake,
make sure they
get good homes.
Baby budgies start to grow feathers about two weeks after
they are hatched. They will have all of their feathers in four to
five weeks.


PETS 57
.Breeding, Training, and Showing
To teach your budgie how to hold things in its beak, simply
hold the bird in your hand and gently push its beak over a
small round stick. Make sure the stick is not too thick—1/8 inch
in diameter is OK. Soon your budgie will be pushing and
pulling all kinds of small toys.
Parakeets love to climb, so give your bird a ladder. Put the
budgie on the first rung, and if it does not start climbing, give
the bird a boost under the tail. It soon will go right up the lad-
der. When the bird gets to the top, reward it, and then turn it
around. The bird will not go down as easily as it went up. But,
do not forget to reward it when it does.
Teaching your bird to talk would be quite a trick, wouldn’t
it? You can do it, but it will take patience. The earlier you start,
the better. The bird should be tame, and if possible, younger
than 6 months old. Teaching an older bird
to talk is possible but more difficult. Only
one person should do the teaching.
Hold regular sessions in the quiet of
your room. Do not surprise your budgie
during the session. Sudden noise, move-
ment, or changes in light will scare the
bird. Start with one or two words. It may
take two or three months for your pet to
learn these. Talk loudly and slowly, and
use the same pitch and pronunciation each
time you speak. A high-pitched voice
seems to get the best results. Make your
sessions short, stopping when your budgie
Brainy Birds
To teach a trick, first show your
budgie what to do. Develop a
motion, such as snapping your
fingers, for each trick you want
the bird to learn. Your bird will
soon associate that motion
with the trick. Reward the bird’s
successes with a treat, such as
a piece of soda cracker.


58 PETS
Breeding, Training, and Showing.
gets tired or bored. Budgies learn by repetition, so repeat the
words and phrases over and over.
After you have taught your pet several words, come back
to the first words it learned or it might forget them. Keep talk-
ing with your budgie once it learns to speak or it will forget all
that it has learned.
Budgies do not talk as well as parrots or mynah birds. Do
not be disappointed if your pet’s speech is somewhat garbled.
Although your budgie might never learn to say “Polly wants a
cracker,” with patience and persistence, you can teach the bird
several words and simple phrases.
Breeding Canaries
About all you need for breeding canaries is a breeding cage,
a little common sense, and a healthy mate for your bird.
Breed canaries only in the spring. In April or May, put
some paper in the female’s cage. If she proceeds to tear it up,
and if she calls to the male bird, put them both in the breeding
cage. Remove the divider once the male shows signs of courting.
If they fight, replace the divider for a day and try again.
Give them some privacy. Drape a cloth over the nest end of the
cage. You can use nesting material like 2-inch-thick string wool
or cloth ravelings, but avoid any fine synthetic fibers or thread
that might entangle feet, toes, or other body parts.
If you are tempted
to teach your bird
to whistle, wait
until you have
taught it to talk.
Once it learns
how to whistle, it
might not want to
learn how to talk.
Canary Breeding Tips
1. Take out the male if he annoys the female.
2. Feed nesting birds egg food and
conditioning seeds.
3. At night, once the lights are off near the cage,
leave them off; do not disturb the birds at night.
4. Remove any broken eggs.
5. Check the nest daily to see if you need to add
more nesting material.
A breeding cage has a divider that separates the
male and female. When the male begins to sing and
court the female, you can remove the divider.


PETS 59
.Breeding, Training, and Showing
Give baby canaries all the egg food (available at pet stores)
and conditioning food they want. But, do not hand-feed them;
the mother will do it. The babies will start eating without help
in about five weeks. They will lose their first feathers (the fuzz)
in two to four months. At that time you can start them on
regular mixed canary seed. In a year’s time, you will have a
cage full of adult canaries that you might be able to sell.
Training Your Canary
A canary is easy to train. You can teach your bird to perch on
a T-stick and then on your fingers. Once you and your canary
become pals, open the cage door and hold the T-stick in the
cage. In time, the bird will hop onto the stick. Once the canary
learns to stay there, slowly draw the bird and the stick out of
the cage. Make sure all the windows, shades or blinds, and
doors are closed in case the bird
flies off the stick. Also, be sure
no ceiling fans are in use. Do not
chase the bird if it flies. Simply
leave the cage door open and the
bird will return when it is ready.
Breeding Guinea Pigs
It is not difficult to raise a family
of guinea pigs. Newborn guinea
pigs have all their fur, open eyes,
and can eat solid food within the
first day. However, they might
nurse for two to three weeks.
The sow should be very
young when she breeds. It is
best to breed before she is
10 months old because at that age her pelvic bones fuse,
which makes delivery more difficult.
When you think the sow is pregnant, put her in a separate
pen. The time between breeding and birth (gestation time) is
between 59 and 72 days. You can expect between one and six
babies in a litter. Keep the sow and her youngsters in separate
quarters because the sow might be ready to breed again shortly
after the litter is born.
A male canary
will learn to sing
on its own or from
another canary
when it matures.
This is not a skill
you have to teach
your bird.
Once your bird is
trained to perch
on a T-stick, try
substituting your
finger. Always
work and move
slowly when
training your bird.


60 PETS
Breeding, Training, and Showing.
Guinea pigs can be weaned once they are 3 weeks old. To
wean them, simply take the young from the sow and put them
in new pens. Separate the males from the females. Return the
sow to her regular pen a week after weaning.
Keep in mind that guinea pigs can produce a large number
of offspring that can themselves start reproducing in a short
time. Nobody really wants to be overrun by guinea pigs.
Showing Guinea Pigs
Guinea pigs are exhibited at some county and state farm
shows. You might also be able to enter your guinea pig in a
local community show. Competition with other guinea pigs
will teach you a lot more about raising and selecting a guinea
pig. Deformities, missing toenails, unmatched eyes, improper
hair color, plucked hair, and evidence of disease are some of
the faults that might disqualify a guinea pig from the showring.
Breeding Hamsters
If you have room for about eight more hamsters, or have a
bunch of friends who want hamsters, give breeding a try.
However, be aware that once you start breeding hamsters they
will produce many, many offspring very quickly. Make sure
you have homes for them before you begin.
The following instructions will help you decide when to
breed your pets. A female should be at least 8 weeks old to
breed, and a male should be 2 to 3 months old. Put the
prospective parents together in the evening. (Always put the
female into the male’s cage. If you bring a male to the female,
she will consider him an intruder and start fighting. If they
start to fight, separate them.) Try again the next evening. Once
they stop fighting leave them together for about a week.
Baby hamsters will arrive in 15 to 18 days. They will be
born hairless and helpless. Do not handle them even if they
seem to be lost from their mother. She eventually will round
Female guinea pigs are called sows; the males are
called boars. When breeding guinea pigs, do not put
two boars with a group of sows because the boars
will fight too much.


PETS 61
.Breeding, Training, and Showing
them up. She might carry a baby in the pouch of her mouth, so
do not get worried if you see her put one there. Do not disturb
the mother or the litter for the first week. Litter abandonment
and cannibalism are fairly common if the mother is disturbed
too much. After the first week, remove the soiled bedding from
the cage. In seven to 10 days, you can put out food for the
babies. Put softened hamster pellets directly on the floor of the
cage. Clean up the uneaten food daily. Make a small water tube
(sipper) available to the babies at this time.
Leave the babies with their mother for about 26 days.
When you take out the litter, separate the males and females.
Give the mother four days of additional rest.
Breeding Mice
Mice can be bred after they are 4 months old. It takes only 20
days for a female to produce a litter, and that litter might contain
12 mice. If you choose to breed mice, make sure you will have
homes for the new arrivals. A pet shop might take some.
The babies will be born blind and hairless but will grow
up in three to four weeks. Leave the babies alone to let the
mother care for them. If you interfere, she might destroy the
newborns. About all you need to do is provide a nest. This can
be a small box about 4 inches square with a 2-inch opening.
Hinge the top to make it easy to clean. Separate the mother
from the male after the litter is born to prevent them from
breeding again. Also, the male might destroy the baby mice if
left in the same cage with them.
Guidelines for Responsible Pet Owners
• Observe all laws, ordinances, and neighborhood rules regarding pets.
• Spay or neuter all dogs and cats that will not be used for breeding.
• Give your pet the proper nutrition, exercise, housing, and veterinary
care as required.
• Be courteous; respect the property of others.
• Always dispose of wastes and bedding in a proper manner, and
always practice good personal sanitation.


62 PETS
Resources for Pets.
Scouting Literature
Animal Science, Bird Study, Dog
Care, Fish and Wildlife Management,
Horsemanship, Mammal Study, Reptile
and Amphibian Study, and Veterinary
Medicine merit badge pamphlets
With your parent’s permission,
visit Scouting America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org,
for a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.
Books
Davis, Radford G., DVM, MPH, ed.
Caring for Family Pets: Choosing
and Keeping Our Companion
Animals Healthy. Praeger, 2011.
Stein, Sara. Great Pets!: An
Extraordinary Guide to Usual
and Unusual Family Pets. Storey
Publishing, LLC, 2003.
BIRDS
Athan, Mattie Sue. Guide to a Well-
Behaved Parrot, 3rd ed. Barron’s
Educational Series, 2007.
Gallerstein, Gary A. The Complete Pet
Bird Owner’s Handbook, 3rd ed.
Avian Publications, 2003.
Johnson, Melinda. Clicker Training for
Birds. Sunshine Books, Inc. 2003.
CATS
Arden, Darlene. The Complete Cat’s
Meow: Everything You Need to Know
About Caring for Your Cat. Howell
Book House, 2011.
Bradshaw, John. Cat Sense: How the
New Feline Science Can Make You
a Better Friend to Your Pet. Basic
Books, 2013.
Krieger, Marilyn. Naughty No More. I-5
Press, 2011.
DOGS
Bradshaw, John. Dog Sense: How the
New Science of Dog Behavior Can
Make You a Better Friend to Your
Pet. Basic Books, 2011.
Kilcommons, Brian, and Wilson, Sarah.
Good Owners Great Dogs. Warner
Books, 1999.
———. My Smart Puppy: Fun, Effective,
and Easy Puppy Training. Grand
Central Publishing, 2006.
Rosen, Michael J. My Dog!: A Kids’
Guide to Keeping a Happy and
Healthy Pet. Workman Publishing
Company, 2011.
Resources for Pets


PETS 63
.Resources for Pets
FISH
Alderton, David. Encyclopedia of
Aquarium and Pond Fish.
DK Adult, 2008.
Andrews, Chris, et al. Manual of Fish
Health. Firefly Books, 2010.
Boruchowitz, David E. The Simple
Guide to Freshwater Aquariums, 2nd
ed. TFH Publications, 2009.
Thraves, Stuart. Setting Up a Tropical
Aquarium Week by Week. Firefly
Books, 2009.
SMALL ANIMALS
Birmelin, Immanuel. Guinea Pigs:
A Complete Pet Owner’s Manual,
2nd ed. Barron’s Educational
Series, 2008.
Fox, Sue. Hamsters. TFH
Publications. 2006.
Geiger, Diana. Ferrets: A Complete
Guide. CreateSpace Independent
Publishing Platform, 2011.
OTHER PETS
Bartlett, R.D. Lizard Care From A to Z:
From Anoles to Zonosaurs, 2nd ed.
Barron’s Educational Series, 2008.
Mull, Kayla, and Lorrie Blackburn,
DVM. Pot-Bellied Pet Pigs: Mini-Pig
Care and Training. All Publishing
Company, 2008.
Purser, Philip. Good Snakekeeping: A
Comprehensive Guide to All Things
Serpentine. TFH Publications, 2010.
Parker, Karen, DVM. The Rabbit
Handbook, 2nd ed. Barron’s
Educational Series, 2009.
Organizations and
Other Resources
American Cat Fanciers Association
P.O. Box 1949
Nixa, MO 65714-1949
Telephone: 417-725-1530
www.acfacat.com
American Humane Association
1400 16th St. NW, Suite 360
Washington, DC 20036
Toll-free telephone: 800-227-4645
americanhumane.org
American Kennel Club
Telephone: 212-696-8200
www.akc.org
The Humane Society of the
United States
2100 L St., NW
Washington, DC 20037
Telephone: 202-452-1100
www.hsus.org
SPAY/USA
25 Davis Ave.
Port Washington, NY 11050
Toll-free telephone: 800-248-7729
www.spayusa.org


64 PETS
Resources for Pets.
Acknowledgments
Scouting America gives special thanks
to Boy Scout National Merit Badge
Committee member Steve Bowen,
D.V.M., for his assistance with this
edition of the Pets merit badge
pamphlet. We appreciate his time
and expertise. Dr. Bowen is a retired
veterinarian from El Centro, California.
Scouting America is grateful to
the men and women serving on the
National Merit Badge Subcommittee for
the improvements made in updating
this pamphlet.
Photo Credits
Beth Blair, courtesy—page 18 (cat)
Budgies.org, courtesy—pages 33
and 56
Hamsterific.com, courtesy—
page 45 (hamster with car)
Shirley L. Sharp, http://freshaquarium.
about.com, courtesy—pages 26
(striped fish), 27, 28 (both), and
30 (both)
All other photos not mentioned above
are the property of or are protected by
Scouting America.
Michael Goldman—cover (cat)
Brian Payne—pages 4–6 (all), 10, 13,
20 (both), 32, 34, 37–39 (all), 43
(wire cage), 49–50 (both), 55, 57
(both), 59, and 64
Randy Piland—page 24
Steve Seeger—page 42 (guinea pig)
Dr. Steve Bowen