INVENTING
STEM-Based


INVENTING
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
The Inventing merit badge and pamphlet were made
possible in part by the Lemelson–MIT Program.
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Note to the Counselor
While the scope of inventing projects is far too wide to cover
here, there are some general guidelines and concerns that a
merit badge counselor should keep in mind. Be mindful of
managing risk and using good judgment when undertaking
any invention project. Remember, an injury that doesn’t
happen needs no treatment; an emergency that doesn’t occur
requires no response.
Safety is the top priority, so Scouts who are working on
their inventions should follow safety precautions whenever
using tools, equipment, and other materials. In a workshop
setting, use the buddy system. Be sure Scouts know they
should always work under the supervision of a responsible
adult who is knowledgeable about the tools, equipment, and
materials they plan to use.
Working on inventions can take place in home
workshops, in school shops, or even in community shops.
When working outside of the home, be sure to familiarize
Scouts with the safety requirements of the shop. Some
shops require a basic safety class or will have minimum age
requirements to use equipment like a lathe or milling machine.
Here are some basic rules to follow:
• Use the proper personal protective equipment, including
body, hand, ear (such as protective foam ear plugs),
and eye-face protection (such as safety glasses with side
shields), closed-toe shoes, and foot coverings.
• Use protective clothing whenever necessary to prevent
exposure to hands, eyes, and face, and to keep hazardous
materials from contaminating street clothes.
35833
ISBN 978-0-8395-5833-0
©2021 Boy Scouts of America
2023 Printing
See the Composite Materials, Home Repairs, Woodwork,
Emergency Preparedness, and First Aid merit badge
pamphlets for more information about safety, first aid,
and managing risk.


INVENTING 3
• Be trained on any equipment you plan to use before you
get started.
• If fine particles in the air are anticipated—even in a well-
ventilated area—be sure to have the proper respiratory
equipment on hand for protection from dust, exhaust,
and fumes.
• Never tolerate horseplay when using tools.
• Stay an arm’s length away from others using tools or equipment.
• Know where the “off” switch is before turning on a power tool.
• Clean up the area every time work is finished and return all
tools to their proper location.
• Have a first-aid kit and fire extinguisher on hand.
• Ask questions; never assume or guess!
Wear close-fitting
clothing. Loose
or baggy clothing
can easily
get caught
in machinery.


4 INVENTING
Requirements
Always check www.scouting.org for the latest requirements.
1. In your own words, define inventing. Then do the following:
a. Explain to your merit badge counselor the role of
inventors and their inventions in the economic
development of the United States.
b. List three inventions and state how they have
helped humankind.
2. Do ONE of the following:
a. Identify and interview with a buddy (and with your
parent’s permission and merit badge counselor’s
approval) an individual in your community who has
invented a useful item. Report what you learned to
your counselor.
b. Read about three inventors. Select the one you find most
interesting and tell your counselor what you learned.
3. Do EACH of the following:
a. Define the term intellectual property. Explain which
government agencies oversee the protection of
intellectual property, the types of intellectual property
that can be protected, how such property is protected,
and why protection is necessary.
b. Explain the components of a patent and the different
types of patents available.
c. Examine your Scouting gear and find a patent number
on a camping item you have used. With your parent’s
permission, use the internet to find out more about that
patent. Compare the finished item with the claims and
drawings in the patent. Report what you learned to
your counselor.
d. Explain to your counselor the term patent infringement.
4. Discuss with your counselor the types of inventions that
are appropriate to share with others, and explain why. Tell
your counselor about one unpatented invention and its
impact on society.


INVENTING 5
5. Choose a commercially available product that you have used on an overnight
camping trip with your troop. Make recommendations for improving the
product, and make a sketch that shows your recommendations. Discuss your
recommendations with your counselor.
6. Think of an item you would like to invent that would solve a problem for your
family, troop, chartered organization, community, or a special-interest group. Then
do EACH of the following, while keeping a notebook to record your progress.
a. Talk to potential users of your invention and determine their needs. Then,
based on what you have learned, write a statement describing the inven-
tion and how it would help solve a problem. This statement should include
a detailed sketch of the invention.
b. Create a model of the invention using clay, cardboard, or any other
readily available material. List the materials necessary to build a working
prototype of the invention.
c. Share the idea and the model with your counselor and potential users of
your invention. Record their feedback in your notebook.
7. Build a working prototype of the item you invented for requirement 6*. Test and
evaluate the invention. Among the aspects to consider in your evaluation are cost,
usefulness, marketability, appearance, and function. Describe how your original
vision and expectations for your invention are similar or dissimilar to the
prototype you built. Have your counselor evaluate and critique your prototype.
*Before you begin building the prototype, you must have your counselor’s
approval, based on the design and building plans you have already shared.
8. Do ONE of the following:
a. Participate with a club or team (robotics team, science club, or engineering
club) that builds a useful item. Share your experience with your counselor.
b. Visit a museum or exhibit dedicated to an inventor or invention, and create a
presentation of your visit to share with a group such as your troop or patrol.
9. Discuss with your counselor the diverse skills, education, training, and experience
it takes to be an inventor. Discuss how you can prepare yourself to be creative
and inventive to solve problems at home, in school, and in your community.
Discuss three career fields that might utilize the skills of an inventor.


94 INVENTING
Inventing Resources.
Scouting Literature
American Business, American Labor,
Architecture and Landscape Architecture,
Composite Materials, Digital Technology,
Drafting, Electronics, Engineering,
Entrepreneurship, Game Design, Home
Repairs, Metalwork, Model Design and
Building, Programming, Robotics, Textiles,
and Woodwork merit badge pamphlets
Books
Anderson, Maxine. Amazing Leonardo
da Vinci Inventions You Can Build
Yourself. Nomad Press, 2006.
Boy Scouts of America. Boy Scouts
Handbook, The First Edition, 1911,
reprint. Dover Publications, 2005.
Brown, David E. Inventing Modern
America: From the Microwave to the
Mouse. MIT Press, 2002.
Brown, Travis. Popular Patents America’s
First Inventions From the Airplane to
the Zipper. The Scarecrow Press, 2000.
Carson, Mary Kay. The Wright Brothers
for Kids. Chicago Review Press, 2003.
Griffith, Saul, Nick Dragotta, and Joost
Bonsen. Howtoons: The Possibilities
are Endless. HarperCollins
Publishers, 2007.
Macaulay, David, and Neil Ardley. The
New Way Things Work. Houghton
Mifflin Company, 1998.
Robinson, James. Inventions.
Kingfisher, 2006.
Sobel, Dava, and William J. H.
Andrewes. The Illustrated Longitude.
Walker and Company, 1998.
Woodford, Chris, James Flint, Ben
Morgan, Clint Witchalls, and Luke
Collins. Cool Stuff and How It Works.
DK Publishing Inc., 2005.
Periodicals
Make
makezine.com
Inventors Digest
www.inventorsdigest.com
Organizations and Websites
CreativeFuture
www.creativefuture.org
Design Squad
pbskids.org/designsquad
FreePatentsOnline
www.freepatentsonline.com
Inventing Resources
With your parent’s permission, visit
the Boy Scouts of America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org,
for a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


INVENTING 95
.Inventing Resources
Howtoons
www.howtoons.com
This do-it-yourself comic website with
tools of mass construction includes
fun projects.
Lemelson-MIT Program
Massachusetts Institute
of Technology
lemelson.mit.edu/
The program recognizes outstanding
inventors, encourages sustainable new
solutions to real-world problems, and
enables and inspires young people to
pursue creative lives and careers through
invention. The program is funded by the
Lemelson Foundation and administered by
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
OpenCourseWare
ocw.mit.edu/index.htm
A special section, “Highlights for High
School,” features materials useful for
students and their teachers.
SolidWorks®
www.solidworks.com
Free trial software is available.
U.S. Patent and Trademark Office
www.uspto.gov
Acknowledgments
The Boy Scouts of America thanks the
Lemelson–MIT Program and Dassault
Systèmes SolidWorks Corporation for
their support in the development of
the new Inventing merit badge and
production of the inaugural edition of
the Inventing merit badge pamphlet.
Special thanks to patent attorney
Mike Brown for his guidance on legal
issues and terminology and for providing
much of the material for the revisions in
this edition of the Inventing merit badge
pamphlet.
The Boy Scouts of America
is grateful to the men and women
serving on the National Merit Badge
Subcommittee for the improvements
made in updating this pamphlet.
The vision for this merit badge and much of the content for the Inventing
merit badge pamphlet was provided by Scouts from across the country,
many of whom are young inventors. In addition to Scouts, many people
from university laboratories, high schools, museums, and corporations gave
freely of their time and resources to make this merit badge a reality because
they believe in the inventive spirit.