ANIMAL
SCIENCE
STEM-Based


ANIMAL SCIENCE
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


35854
ISBN 978-0-8395-3395-5
©2023 Boy Scouts of America
2023 Printing FPO
Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Animal-Science or check Scoutbook for the latest
requirements.


ANIMAL SCIENCE 3


4 ANIMAL SCIENCE


ANIMAL SCIENCE 5


6 ANIMAL SCIENCE


ANIMAL SCIENCE 7
Contents
Animals of Farms and Ranches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Livestock Breeding and Breeds. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Management Practices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
Livestock Diseases and Prevention . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
Production Notes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76
Careers in Animal Science . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86
Animal Science Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92





ANIMAL SCIENCE 9
.Animals of Farms and Ranches
Animals of Farms
and Ranches
Cattle, horses, sheep, goats, hogs, poultry, and other domesti-
cated animals are important to people for many reasons. They
supply us with food and clothing, we use them for recreational
purposes, they work with and for us.
Farm animals provide us with meat, a basic part of the diet
in human cultures the world over. They also supply milk, eggs,
wool, and hides, and many valuable by-products ranging from
medicines to glue, candles, soap, brushes, fertilizers, and other
chemicals. Some animals are used for transportation and work
as draft animals. Others are trained for sporting events or kept
simply because we enjoy them.
This pamphlet will
help you learn
about the many
kinds of useful
animals raised by
farmers and will
introduce you to
principles of
livestock selection,
breeding, nutrition,
health care,
and management.





.Livestock Breeding and Breeds
Livestock Breeding
and Breeds
A Thoroughbred and a draft horse are bred for different
purposes—one for speed, the other for strength. A cow may
be a milk cow or a beef animal. A beef cow’s purpose is to
produce calves that will be raised for meat; a milk cow’s
purpose is to produce a lot of milk with a fairly low butterfat
content or less milk with a high butterfat content.
The same principle of breed differences holds true for other
livestock. A livestock producer needs to know the advantages
and drawbacks of various breeds. The choice of
stock to raise will depend on the producer’s pref-
erence, the breed’s characteristics, the area of the
country in which the stock will be raised, and the
strength of the market for that breed.
Livestock producers constantly try to upgrade
their herds or flocks by breeding or buying animals
that will improve the herd. They pay close attention to the
health, condition, environment, and proper feeding of their
stock. These measures—good breeding and good manage-
ment—are essential for success in livestock production.
Even within a single breed, great
differences may exist between
animals. For example, a Holstein cow
will give more milk on average than
a Jersey. But a healthy, well-tended
Jersey of superior lineage might
produce more milk than a poorly
managed Holstein whose parents
had inferior genetics.
Butterfat is the
natural fat of milk.


12 ANIMAL SCIENCE
Livestock Breeding and Breeds.
Livestock Breeding
Distinct animal breeds are the result of many generations of
selective breeding of individuals with specific traits. Animal
breeders maintain these breeds by continually selecting
individuals that look or perform well, according to the
“breed standard.”
By definition, animals within a breed are more related than
animals of different breeds. They have common ancestors and
therefore share more genetic similarity and, thus, more similar-
ity in appearance and performance.
Some livestock producers are interested in using purebred
animals, or animals of a specific breed. But many producers
will produce crossbred animals by mating two animals of differ-
ent breeds to get the best characteristics of the two breeds.
For example, a beef cattle producer interested in the good milk
production of an Angus cow and the size of a larger animal
like a Simmental would mate an Angus to a Simmental to
produce crossbred offspring that have some characteristics from
both breeds.
Think of the cattle producer who uses an Angus-Simmental
cross. Both breeds are good choices if the producer wants a
large animal with good quality meat. If the cattle lived in a hot,
desert environment, a Brahman cross might be better because
of its heartiness and ability to withstand harsh conditions.
In many cases, breed standards are kept by breed
associations, or groups of people who agree on what
the characteristics of the breed should include and
who help other breeders and producers to meet
the standards.
The most
important thing
in livestock
breeding is for
the breeder to
establish goals,
depending on
what the
production
environment
might include.
/ +


ANIMAL SCIENCE 13
.Livestock Breeding and Breeds
This is a case of the environment interacting with genetics,
an essential consideration for livestock producers.
Beef Cattle
People do not eat grass or hay or other such roughages (coarse
vegetation). Cattle, however, can convert roughages into meat,
milk, and usable by-products. Cattle are the most efficient
and economical way for people to get food from lands that are
wooded, mountainous, or otherwise unsuited for growing crops
but that will produce good supplies of grass and forages.
Breeds of Livestock
This section describes the principal breeds of beef
cattle, dairy cattle, horses, sheep, dairy goats, hogs,
and chickens raised in the United States. To learn more
about a breed, check the resources listed at the end of
the pamphlet, or ask your merit badge counselor or
county agent where you can get more information.
RIB CHUCKTENDERLOIN
SIRLOIN
ROUND
SHORT LOIN
BRISKET
SHANKPLATEFLANK
BOTTOM
SIRLOIN
TOP
SIRLOIN
SHANK
Meat cuts of beef cattle


14 ANIMAL SCIENCE
Livestock Breeding and Breeds.
Terms to Describe Beef and Dairy Cattle
Bull—a sexually intact (uncastrated) adult male.
Bullock—a young bull.
Steer—a male castrated before reaching sexual maturity.
Cow—a mature female.
Calf—a young animal of either sex. Cattle are called calves until 1 year of
age; from 1 to 2, they are yearlings.
Heifer—a young cow that has not produced a calf.
Heiferette—a young cow that has not had more than one calf.
Springer—a heifer or cow that is nearly ready to calve and will, therefore,
begin producing milk; the lactating period begins as soon as the calf is born.
Freemartin—a female calf that is born as a twin with a male and is sterile.
Major Breeds of Cattle
Beef cattle:
European breeds: Angus, Devon, Hereford, Red Angus, Shorthorn
Indian breeds: Brahma
U.S.–developed breeds: Beefmaster, Brangus, Polled Hereford, Santa Gertrudis
Exotic breeds: Blonde d’Aquitaine, Charolais, Chianina, Galloway,
Gelbvieh, Highland, Limousin, Maine-Anjou, Murray Grey, Piedmontese,
Polled Shorthorn, Simmental, White Park
Dairy cattle: Ayrshire, Brown Swiss, Dutch Belted, Guernsey, Holstein,
Jersey, Kerry
Dual-purpose cattle (used for both beef and dairy): Milking Shorthorn,
Normande, Pinzgauer, Red Poll, Tarentaise


ANIMAL SCIENCE 15
.Livestock Breeding and Breeds
Beef Breeds
Beef cattle are raised throughout the United States in all kinds
of climates. Certain breeds are better adapted than others to the
local weather and feed supplies and make better choices for
certain parts of the country. Ranchers choose a breed based
on personal preference and the breed’s characteristics such
as its adaptability, body size, longevity, ability to efficiently
reproduce, mothering and milking abilities, ability to gain
weight, and other traits that match the producer’s production
environment and goals.
Angus. The Angus breed was developed
from the native cattle of Scotland and came
to the United States in 1873. They tolerate
cold climates well. Angus steers average
1,200 pounds at harvest. They are noted
for their ability to produce high-quality beef.
The breed is popular in the central, south-
ern, and western United States.
Hereford. The Hereford is an old English
breed that, until the mid-1700s, was bred
mainly as draft animals. The first Herefords
in the United States arrived in 1817.
Gradually, breeders began improving
the Hereford for beef, changing the body
structure toward more smoothness and
less weight. Herefords are especially
popular in the West and Southwest for
their ability to graze over a vast range.
They take good care of their offspring,
making the breed popular under range
conditions where good mothering may
be vital for the calf’s survival.
Polled Hereford. The Polled Hereford
developed directly from the American
Hereford. In 1898, a young Hereford breeder
from Iowa saw some hornless cattle being
exhibited at the Trans-Mississippi World
Fair in Omaha, Nebraska. By 1901, he
established the Polled Hereford breed with
naturally hornless whiteface cattle he had
obtained. The two breeds look much alike,
except the Polled Hereford has no horns.
Angus, which are polled (hornless)
and solid black in color, often are
used in crossbreeding programs
with Herefords to produce the
“black baldy,” a black animal
with a white face, popular with
cattle producers.
The Polled Hereford has a red
coat with a white face, crest,
brisket, belly, and switch (tail) and
usually has white below the knees.
Its horns curve downward and
slightly forward.


16 ANIMAL SCIENCE
Livestock Breeding and Breeds.
Shorthorn. The Shorthorn originated
on England’s northeastern coast.
By 1783, these cattle were found in
America. Shorthorns were valued by
America’s early settlers for their meat
and as draft animals for pulling wag-
ons and plows. The cattle are noted
for their adaptability, nurturing ability,
reproductive performance, good
disposition, good feed conversion
(pounds of feed needed per pound
of weight gain), and longevity.
Brahman. The American Brahman
was developed from cattle imported
from India and Brazil. The first
Brahman-type stock arrived in the
United States in the late 1800s. The
Brahman has a genetic resistance to
diseases such as tick fever and pink-
eye. These cattle are well-adapted to
hot climates and tolerate parasites
better than some breeds. Brahman
cattle are particularly popular in the
hot and humid southern states. The
breed does not stand extreme cold
as well as breeds that originated in
cooler climates.
Midwesterners discovered in 1870 that hornless cattle
sometimes appeared in horned Shorthorn herds. Thus,
Polled Shorthorns were developed. Both Shorthorns
and Polled Shorthorns will adapt to a wide range of
climates, from the heat of the southern states to colder
mountain weather.
Shorthorn cattle are combinations of
red, white, and roan (a mixture of red
and white hairs).
The Brahman has a large hump above
the shoulders and long, narrow, droopy
ears. Coat color varies from shades of
gray to black, to red and speckled
coats, with dark skin coloring, particu-
larly around the eyes, for protection
from the sun.


ANIMAL SCIENCE 17
.Livestock Breeding and Breeds
Santa Gertrudis. The Santa
Gertrudis was developed in the early
1900s in South Texas on the King
Ranch. Shorthorn cows bred to
Brahman bulls produced cattle that
could do well in the hot, humid South
and also have good-quality carcasses.
Mature bulls weigh up to 2,600
pounds; cows average 1,200 to 1,400
pounds. Market weight is about 1,100
pounds. This breed tolerates hot
weather as well as colder climates.
Brangus. Crossbreeding work
between Angus and Brahman cattle
started in 1912. By 1949, a cross was
stabilized at five-eighths Angus and
three-eighths Brahman, and the new
breed was named the Brangus.
Now found in nearly every state
in the United States and in Canada,
Australia, Mexico, Central America,
South America, and Africa, the cattle
tolerate hot weather very well.
Charolais. The Charolais was devel-
oped in central France. The King
Ranch of Texas is given credit for
importing the first Charolais bulls to
the United States in 1936. The cattle
are noted for their ability to grow
rapidly and produce lean, tender
beef that is fine-textured and of excel-
lent quality. Bulls weigh as much as
2,600 pounds, and mature cows may
weigh 1,700 pounds. The breed is
marketed at 1,250 to 1,350 pounds.
The Santa Gertrudis are dark red. Most
have horns, but some are polled.
The Brangus combines the best of the
Brahman and the Angus. These cattle are
solid black and polled.
The Charolais is large, long-bodied, and
heavily muscled. Its coat is white or a
light straw color. Charolais generally
have horns, but some are polled.


18 ANIMAL SCIENCE
Livestock Breeding and Breeds.
Chianina. One of the world’s oldest
breeds, the Chianina comes from Italy.
Bred as draft and beef animals, the
Chianina was introduced in the United
States in 1971 and is frequently used
in crossbreeding programs. Mature
bulls weigh up to 3,500 pounds;
females up to 2,400 pounds. These
animals grow rapidly and are marketed
at 1,350 pounds. The Chianina is a
good beef breed, well-muscled with a
thin layer of fat.
Limousin. The Limousin breed,
developed in France, was introduced
into North America in 1968 when
a bull arrived in Canada. The first
Limousin bulls imported permanently
into the United States did not arrive
until the fall of 1971. The breed is
noted for the extra thickness and
muscling typical of the cattle. Mature
bulls average 2,400 pounds; cows are
about 1,350 pounds.
Simmental. The Simmental has
long been a popular breed in Europe.
The first purebred Simmental bull
arrived in the United States in 1971.
Breeders here kept the Simmental’s
basic color pattern when crossing
it with the Hereford. U.S. beef produc-
ers have also crossed Simmentals with
the Angus and Charolais, and the
resulting cattle include red and black
individuals. Mature Simmental bulls
weigh 2,400 to 2,800 pounds; cows
weigh from 1,300 to 1,800 pounds.
Limousin cattle are horned and red-gold
with a light buckskin color on the under-
side, legs, and muzzle. Through cross-
breeding, there are also polled Limousin
and black Limousin.
In Europe, purebred Simmental cattle
vary in color from light to dark red, with
distinct areas of white. The horns, legs,
and tail generally are white, and there
may be white patches on the flanks and
behind the shoulders.
Chianina cattle are off-white in color,
with black on the tongue, nose, and
switch and around the eyes.


ANIMAL SCIENCE 19
.Livestock Breeding and Breeds
Registered Herd or Commercial?
Registered purebred cattle herds usually are smaller than commercial
operations. For the breeder to be successful, a market must exist for the
animals produced. The advantage of a purebred program is that the
breeder can produce a generally superior and more uniform animal that
will bring a premium price. A purebred herd can be the best way to get
the greatest income from a small acreage.
Managing a registered herd takes effort, however. The registration
procedures, the paperwork involved in keeping breeding records, and the
certification of animals demand careful attention to detail and a large
investment of time.
A commercial cattle herd made up of crossbred beef cattle may have
recognizable bloodlines—for instance, white-face cattle that are mostly
Hereford and black cattle that are mostly Angus—but the animals are not
pedigreed. The modern commercial beef herd usually has crossbred cattle
for increased productivity and adaptability to various market and produc-
tion conditions. The herd may be confined on improved pasture or
allowed to run on open range. One cow on well-managed, improved
pasture may get all of the nutrients she needs for herself and her calf on
as few as 1 to 3 acres. In areas of low rainfall and poor plant growth, she
may need to graze 100 acres or more.
Ask ranchers and breeders in your area about the most common and
popular beef breeds there. Ask about the advantages and disadvantages of
breeding purebred animals versus raising a commercial crossbred herd.


20 ANIMAL SCIENCE
Livestock Breeding and Breeds.
Dairy Cattle
Milk is a source of high-quality protein, minerals, and vitamins.
All 50 states produce and process milk; California, Wisconsin,
New York, Pennsylvania, Minnesota, and Idaho lead the way in
milk production. Fluid milk, half-and-half, whipping cream,
yogurt, butter, cheese, and ice cream are a few of the products
we enjoy thanks to the dairy industry.
Dairy Breeds
In the United States are six commonly recognized dairy breeds:
Ayrshire, Brown Swiss, Guernsey, Holstein, Jersey, and Milking
Shorthorn. Holstein and Brown Swiss produce greater amounts
of milk; Jersey and Guernsey give milk with a higher butterfat
percentage. More butterfat in milk gives a richer taste.
A dairy farmer should pick the breed that best fits local
conditions and markets. In some areas, nearly all of the milk
produced is used as fluid milk. In other areas, most of the milk
goes to make cheese and other dairy products.
Holsteins are the
dominant breed,
especially in fluid
milk markets.
POLL
FOREHEAD
BRIDGE
OF NOSE
NOSTRIL
MUZZLE
JAW
THROAT
NECK
HEART
GIRTH
BARREL
FORE RIB
POINT OF SHOULDER
BRISKET
POINT OF ELBOW
KNEE
CHEST
FLOOR
MAMMARY
VEIN
MILK
WELL
FORE
UDDER
FORE UDDER
ATTACHMENT
TEAT
UDDER
FLOOR
SOLE
HEEL
HOOF
PASTERN
DEWCLAW
HOCK
SWITCH
FLANK
REAR UDDER
REAR UDDER
ATTACHMENT
THIGH
TAIL
PIN
TAIL HEAD
WITHERS CHINE LOIN RUMP
HOOK
THURL
CROPS
BACK
REAR
RIB
Parts of a dairy cow


ANIMAL SCIENCE 21
.Livestock Breeding and Breeds
Ayrshire. The Ayrshire originated in
Scotland. Today it is found throughout
the United States but mostly in the
Northeast and Midwest. Ayrshires are
well-built, of medium size, strong, and
rugged, with symmetrical udders that are
well-attached to the body. Almost all
Ayrshires are dehorned as calves because
their long, curved horns are impractical
in dairy operations. Mature cows weigh
about 1,200 pounds.
Brown Swiss. The Brown Swiss, one
of the world’s oldest dairy breeds, was
developed on the mountain slopes and
valleys of Switzerland. Brown Swiss
are known for their calm dispositions.
The first Brown Swiss to be introduced
into America came to Massachusetts in
1869 and 1870. Mature cows weigh
about 1,500 pounds.
Guernsey. This breed originated on the
Isle of Guernsey off the northern coast of
France. Guernseys are found throughout
the United States, mostly in the central
states. They are medium-sized cattle,
gentle, and easily handled. A mature
cow in milk weighs about 1,150 pounds.
Heifers mature early. The milk of these
cattle is especially yellow.
Ayrshires usually are light to deep
reddish-brown or mahogany, or a
combination of red and white, with
distinctive markings.
Brown Swiss are solid brown, varying
from very light to dark.
Guernseys are fawn-colored with white
markings. Skin color is golden yellow
or pinkish.


22 ANIMAL SCIENCE
Livestock Breeding and Breeds.
Holstein. Holsteins descended from
cattle developed in the northern part of
the Netherlands, especially the province of
Friesland, and northern Germany. This is
the most popular dairy breed in the United
States and is found in all states in great
numbers. It is also the largest breed, with
mature cows weighing about 1,500
pounds. Holsteins are noted for producing
large volumes of milk with low butterfat.
Jersey. The Jersey came from the Isle of
Jersey, in the English Channel between
Great Britain and France. Jerseys—the
smallest of the major U.S. dairy breeds—
often were kept aboard sailing ships to
supply milk during long sea voyages, and
probably came to America with early
colonists. The breed’s first recorded arrival
in America was in 1850. The cows produce
a rich milk, high in butterfat and protein.
Mature cows weigh 900 to 1,100 pounds.
Heifers mature early, calving for the first
time at 20 to 24 months of age.
Dual-Purpose Breeds
Cattle originally filled three roles for people: They provided
milk, meat, and labor. Eventually, horses and then machinery
replaced cattle for labor, so they were often developed for the
single purpose of providing either meat or milk. Some breeds,
however, still serve a dual purpose and can be raised as either
beef or dairy cattle.
Milking Shorthorn. The Milking Shorthorn was an important
dual-purpose breed for the pioneers in America, who depended
on it for both milk and meat. In early American history, the
breed was often called the Durham cow. Modern Milking
Shorthorns are raised mainly to produce milk. They are red
or white, or a combination (roan), with no black markings.
Mature cows weigh about 1,400 pounds.
All breeds of dairy cattle have the genes for growing horns, but in U.S.
dairy herds nearly all are dehorned soon after birth. Why? Because horns
can cause injury to other animals and to those who work with the cattle.
Most Holsteins are black and white;
some are red and white.
The Jersey is medium-brown to
fawn in color.


.Livestock Breeding and Breeds
Horses
In 1920, 27 million horses lived in the United States. Today
there are only about 9.2 million. The big drop was caused by
the internal combustion engine. With the invention of the
truck, tractor, and automobile, horses were no longer needed
for heavy farm work and transportation.
In recent times, however, the horse has made a comeback
as millions of people have discovered the fun of owning a horse
for sport and recreation. Most horses today are kept for riding
and racing, but some are still workhorses.
Descriptive Terms
Horse enthusiasts use several terms to describe the
sex, age, or condition of a horse:
• Stallion—a sexually intact male horse more than 3 years
of age
• Stud—a stallion used for breeding
• Colt—an intact male up to 3 years of age
• Gelding—a castrated male horse
of any age
• Mare—a mature female
• Filly—a female horse age
3 years or younger
• Foal—a male or female less than
1 year old
• Weanling—a just-weaned young
horse of either sex
The cow horse is
one working horse
that is still on the
job. A good cow
horse is still
needed to work
cattle in many
cattle operations.
Terms used to describe the
markings on a horse’s face
or legs include baldface (a
mostly white face), blaze (a
large white patch on the
face), star (any small white
patch on the forehead), snip
(any small white patch near
the muzzle), and sock (a
white patch above the foot).


24 ANIMAL SCIENCE
Livestock Breeding and Breeds.
POLL
MANE NECK
BACK
LOINS
POINT OF HIP
FLANK
STIFLE
GASKIN
HOCK
TRAPEZIUM
HEEL
KNEE
RIBS
CANNON
FOREARM
JUGULAR GROOVE
CHEST
POINT OF SHOULDER
CHEEK
JAWCHIN GROOVE
THROATLATCH
LOWER LIP
UPPER LIP
MUZZLE
NOSTRIL
EYE
FOREHEAD
FORELOCK EAR
WITHERS
SHANK
CHESTNUT
SHEATH
BELLY
BRISKET
CORONET
HOOF
CROUP
ROOT OF TAIL
POINT OF REAR
THIGH
TAIL
QUARTERS
Parts of a horse
FETLOCK
PASTERN


ANIMAL SCIENCE 25
.Livestock Breeding and Breeds
Horses may be various shades of black, brown, chestnut
(reddish-brown), dun (yellowish-gray), gold, gray, sorrel
(yellowish-brown), and white. Bay horses have a brown coat
and black points (legs, mane, and tail). Chestnut horses may
have flaxen (pale yellow) or sorrel manes and tails but not
black points. Many gray horses are born a dark color and turn
a lighter shade with age. Some gray horses turn white by the
time they are fully grown. Roan horses are yellowish-brown
or reddish-brown and sprinkled with white or gray hairs.
Calicoes are predominantly white with red and black patches.
Palominos have a golden coat and a light blond or silvery
mane and tail. Most have no white except on the face and on
the legs below the hocks and knees. Almost every horse breed
except the Thoroughbred has palominos. The color type was
developed by breeders in the United States and Mexico.
Horse Breeds
This country has more breeds and varieties of horses
than anywhere else in the world. Some breeds came
from other countries; others were developed here for
specific uses.
Major Breeds of Horses
Light horses: American Saddlebred, Appaloosa,
Arabian, Hackney, Morgan, Paint, Quarter Horse,
Standardbred, Tennessee Walking Horse, Thoroughbred
Heavy horses: American Cream, Belgian, Clydesdale,
Percheron, Shire, Suffolk
Ponies: Connemara, Hackney, Pony of the Americas,
Shetland, Welsh


26 ANIMAL SCIENCE
Livestock Breeding and Breeds.
American Saddlebred. The American
Saddlebred was developed during Colonial
days in Virginia, West Virginia, Kentucky,
and Tennessee. Recognized as a distinct breed
around 1900, the original stock included
Thoroughbreds, Canadian pacers, Morgans,
and Standardbreds. It is popular today for
its easy, comfortable ride. Most American
Saddlebreds are used for recreational riding
and are popular in the show ring.
Appaloosa. Appaloosas probably came to
this continent with Spanish explorers. In the
19th century, most of these horses were
owned by the Nez Percé Indians of the
Northwest. Later, the breed became widely
scattered. Today, Appaloosas are mostly stock
and recreation horses.
Arabian. As the name implies, the Arabian
was developed in Arabia. It has been bred
in the United States since the Colonial period.
George Washington rode a gray Arabian
charger. Noted as an “easy keeper,” the
Arabian can be maintained on less-than-ideal
pasture or grain rations, making it an
economical horse to own.
Morgan. The Morgan was founded by a
single outstanding horse. A bay stallion
named Justin Morgan, born in 1789, was
renowned for his strength, speed, and
stamina. He also had the remarkable ability
to pass on his likeness and his strengths to his
offspring. His descendants, in turn, passed
these traits to their offspring. Morgans are
popular as saddle horses, trotting racers,
carriage horses, and show horses. Some are
used as cow horses on cattle ranches.
The Saddlebred may be chestnut,
bay, gray, black, or golden in color.
The Appaloosa is noted for the
colorful spots on its rear quarters.
The Arabian is known for speed,
stamina, beauty, and alertness.
The Morgan has a proud
carriage, upright graceful neck,
and distinctive head.


ANIMAL SCIENCE 27
.Livestock Breeding and Breeds
Paint. From early human cave paintings,
Egyptian wall murals, and statues found in
ancient Chinese burial mounds, we know
the striking paint horse has been around for
a long time. Spanish conquistadors brought
paints and other horses to the Americas in
the 16th century. By the 1800s, paints (also
called pintos) were favorite mounts of
American Indians and cowboys. Today, paints
are popular saddle, show, and stock horses.
They are deep-chested, well-muscled, power-
ful animals that perform well under saddle.
A calm disposition and quiet intelligence
make the paint a good recreation horse.
Quarter Horse. The quarter horse was the
first horse breed established and developed
in the Americas. Stallions of Arab, Barb, and
Turk breeds shipped to the Americas by
Spanish explorers and traders were crossed
with a band of mares that arrived from
England in 1611. The result was a compact,
heavily muscled horse that could run short
distances faster than any horse before it.
As settlers moved west and cattle
ranches began stretching across the plains,
the quarter horse became famous for its
“cow sense,” which made it invaluable for
working cattle on the open ranges of the
West. Today, the quarter horse is still used
in ranch work and is the most common breed
in rodeo events.
Paint horses have two-toned coat markings
of white and a darker color. Its two major color
patterns are called tobiano (usually red or
sorrel on the sides, with white extending over
the back), and overo (white on the sides with
the color over the back).
The quarter horse gained a reputation in Colonial America as a
short-distance runner. Its usual race distance was a quarter mile;
hence its name.
Riders find the quarter horse
surefooted and intelligent, and
a sturdy, dependable mount for
weekend trail rides.
Overo
Tobiano


28 ANIMAL SCIENCE
Livestock Breeding and Breeds.
Shetland. The Shetland pony was
developed in the Shetland Islands
about 100 miles north of Scotland.
Small and rugged, it originally was
used in coal mines to pull heavy
loads in tight spaces. This pony is
widely used today as a child’s
mount and show pony.
Standardbred. A Thoroughbred
stallion named Messenger bred in
the 18th century to native mares
that were natural trotters or pacers
produced the Standardbred. Used
mostly in harness racing, the breed
has been popular here since the
early 1800s.
Mustangs are descended from horses that Spanish explorers brought
to North America in the 1500s. Some of their horses escaped and ran
wild. By the mid-1800s, bands of mustangs roamed wide areas of the
West. These small, fleet-footed horses make excellent “cow ponies.”
They have great stamina and seem to sense what a cow might do next.
Today, the quick, agile quarter horse has replaced the mustang as the
cowboy’s favorite mount.
There are two kinds of harness horses—trotters and pacers. A trotter
moves the front leg on one side of its body and the hind leg on the
other side at the same time. A pacer moves the legs on the same side
of its body together. Most of the harness-racing horses in the United
States are pacers. The two types do not usually race together because
pacers generally go faster than trotters.
Shetlands come in almost all horse colors.
Standardbreds are known for great stam-
ina and the ability to trot or pace rapidly
without breaking into a running gallop.


ANIMAL SCIENCE 29
.Livestock Breeding and Breeds
Tennessee Walking Horse. The smooth
and easy gait of the Tennessee walking
horse, a breed founded in middle
Tennessee, makes this horse a favored
mount of park rangers, mounted police
officers, field trial enthusiasts, hunters,
endurance riders, competitive trail riders,
show-ring performers, and riders of all
ages and skill levels.
Thoroughbred. The Thoroughbred,
developed in England for racing, arrived
here in the 18th century. Known for its
great heart and tremendous speed and
stamina in flat racing and jumping,
nearly all Thoroughbreds are bred for
racing. Some are used as saddle horses
and polo mounts. They tend to be some-
what nervous and excitable.
Draft Horse. The draft horse is a type
of horse that includes several breeds that
may weigh 2,200 pounds or more. The
most popular breeds are the Clydesdale,
Belgian, Percheron, Shire, and Suffolk.
The tractor and truck of the 19th century
and before, few draft horses are work
animals today; some are kept for show.
Coat colors in Thoroughbreds may be
bay, chestnut, black, or gray; roans are
seen rarely.
The powerful Belgian (left) and
Clydesdale (above) are favorites for
pulling wagons in parades.
The famous running walk of the
Tennessee walking horse is an inher-
ited, natural gait unique to this breed,
known for its calm, easy temperament.


30 ANIMAL SCIENCE
Livestock Breeding and Breeds.
Sheep
Sheep are good foragers and can be produced economically on
land that is virtually useless for crops. Millions of acres in the
United States that cannot be used profitably by other livestock
are grazed by sheep. Of the 200 or more sheep breeds scattered
throughout the world, more than 35 are found in the United
States. Most are of British or European origin.
Only about 10 sheep breeds are commercially important
today, but the great genetic diversity of sheep allows breeders
to make changes rapidly to meet changes in economic condi-
tions and the demands of the market. For successful sheep
breeders, the market is an important factor in breed selection.
There are three major markets for sheep: raising lambs for
meat, producing wool, and raising show lambs.
Other important considerations when choosing a sheep breed
include the breed’s
• Adaptability to the local environment, taking into account
climate and the availability of forage
• Reproductive efficiency, such as number of lambs born and
raised per lambing season or year
• Growth rate and carcass quality (faster growth and more lean
meat with less fat in the carcass are most economical)
• Wool production
Sheep breeds have tremendous
genetic diversity. Some have fine wool;
others have hair. Some breeds at
maturity weigh as little as 100 pounds;
others may weigh four times as much.
Some breeds average one lamb per
ewe (mature female); others commonly
produce three or more lambs at each
lambing (birth). Various breeds differ
in their herding or flocking instincts.
Some tend to herd or flock together
better than others, making them better
adapted to the open range.


ANIMAL SCIENCE 31
.Livestock Breeding and Breeds
Meat cuts of a sheep
Major Breeds of Sheep
Ewe breeds (fine wool): Debouillet, Finnsheep, Merino,
Rambouillet, Romanov
Ram breeds (meat-type): Cheviot, Columbia, Cotswold,
Dorset, Hampshire, Leicester, Lincoln, Oxford, Romney,
Shropshire, Southdown, Suffolk
Dual-purpose breeds: Cheviot, Columbia, Corriedale,
Dorset, Polwarth, Romeldale, Targhee
Terms to Describe Sheep
Ewes—mature females
Rams—mature, sexually intact males
Wethers—male sheep castrated before sexual maturity
Lambs—young sheep
BREAST
FILLET
SHOULDER
NECKRACK
LOIN,
LOIN CHOPSADDLE
LEG
SHANK


32 ANIMAL SCIENCE
Livestock Breeding and Breeds.
Sheep breeds are classified according to their role in
crossbreeding and commercial use. Ewe breeds are generally
the white-faced breeds of fine-wool type. Ram breeds are
meat-type sheep used mainly as sires for market lamb
production. Dual-purpose breeds are used as either ewe
or ram breeds depending on the production situation.
Ewe Breeds
Ewe breeds developed mainly from crosses of fine-wool
and long-wool types and highly fertile breeds such as the
Finnsheep, Booroola Merino, and Romanov. All the fine-wool
breeds in the United States trace their ancestry to the
Spanish Merino.
Merino. The Merino was first imported
into the United States in the 18th century.
Its three types—types A and B of the
American Merino, and type C, the Delaine
Merino—differ chiefly in the degree of skin
folds or wrinkles. The Delaine Merino has
the smoothest skin. Merino are strong,
hardy, and herd well. Mature Delaine
rams weigh from 150 to 200 pounds;
ewes weigh from 110 to 150 pounds.
Most rams are horned.
Rambouillet. The Rambouillet is a good
wool producer and also offers acceptable
meat. These sheep herd well and are popu-
lar in range country. Rams weigh 225 to
275 pounds and ewes 140 to 200 pounds.
Most rams have large, spiral horns, but
some are polled. The breed was developed
from Merino stock imported from Spain
into France about 1786, and came to the
United States in the 19th century.
Delaine Merinos produce the best-
quality wool in the United States.
Rambouillets are noted for their
high-quality wool, ability to adapt
to tough range conditions, and
size (they are the largest of the
fine-wool breeds).


ANIMAL SCIENCE 33
.Livestock Breeding and Breeds
Ram Breeds
The ram breeds are selected on the basis
of size, growth rate, carcass quality, and
ease of lambing. The principal ram breeds
in the United States are the Suffolk and
Hampshire. The Columbia, Shropshire,
Oxford, Southdown, Dorset, and others
are used as ram breeds to a lesser extent.
Suffolk. The Suffolk was developed in
England and brought to America in the
late 1880s. This large, hardy breed toler-
ates heat well and adapts well to range
conditions of the western states. The
ewes are excellent mothers. Lambs
mature rapidly.
Hampshire. Originally from southern
England, the Hampshire is a large and
active breed, with mature rams weighing
275 pounds or more and mature ewes
200 pounds or more in breeding condi-
tion. The Hampshire is well-muscled,
hornless, and noted for its vigor, strength,
and mild disposition. These sheep do well
on the range. Ewes lamb easily and have
heavy, vigorous lambs.
Columbia. The Columbia originated in
Wyoming and Idaho from the crossing
of Lincoln rams (a long-wool breed) and
Rambouillet ewes. It adapts well to range
conditions. Mature Columbia rams weigh
225 to 275 pounds; ewes weigh 125 to
190 pounds. The breed produces a high-
quality fleece. Ewes produce a wool clip
(the wool shorn at shearing) of 12 pounds
or more annually.
The Suffolk is hornless and has a
black face, ears, and legs.
The Hampshire’s ears and face
are dark and relatively free of
wool, as are the legs below the
knee and hock.
The Columbia has a white, open-
faced, polled head.


34 ANIMAL SCIENCE
Livestock Breeding and Breeds.
Shropshire. The Shropshire, developed in
England, first appeared in the United States
about 1855. In size, it ranks between the
Hampshire and the Southdown. It is a
good meat animal, grows rapidly, and
shearing yields about 8 to 12 pounds
of wool annually.
Oxford. Developed in south central
England, the Oxford arrived in this country
in 1846. Rams weigh 200 to 275 pounds;
ewes weigh 150 to 225 pounds. The Oxford
shears heavier than many others used as
ram breeds, producing 10 to 12 pounds of
wool a year.
Southdown. Native to southeastern
England, the Southdown had arrived in
the United States by the 17th century. An
excellent meat breed, the Southdown also
produces fine-quality wool but in small
amounts. It matures early and is smaller
than other ram breeds, with deep, firm
flesh. Rams weigh 190 to 230 pounds;
ewes weigh 140 to 180 pounds.
Southdown rams and ewes are
polled. This breed is a popular
choice for 4-H and National FFA
Organization market lamb and
sheep projects.
Shropshire rams and ewes are polled.
Both sexes of the Oxford are polled.


ANIMAL SCIENCE 35
.Livestock Breeding and Breeds
Dorset. The Dorset originated in England
and is now found in nearly all parts of the
United States except the mountain states
and the extreme southeast. Multiple births
and out-of-season lambs are common,
giving these sheep the nickname “the
mother breed.” The Dorset is a medium-
sized sheep, with good body length and
muscling and good carcass quality. Rams
weigh 225 to 275 pounds; ewes weigh
150 to 200 pounds.
Dual-Purpose Breeds
The breeds classified as dual purpose usually are crossed with
the ewe breeds to produce crossbred females for market lamb
production. Breeds in this category include the Columbia,
Dorset, Corriedale, and Cheviot.
Corriedale. The Corriedale was developed
in New Zealand from Lincoln rams crossed
with Merino ewes. The breed was imported
into Wyoming in 1914. These sheep may
shear 10 to 12 pounds of wool a year.
Mature rams weigh 185 to 225 pounds,
and ewes range from 125 to 185 pounds.
Both sexes are polled.
Cheviot. Cheviots originated in the border
country between Scotland and England
and arrived in the United States in 1838.
The breed is noted for its vigor, good
milking and nurturing ability, quality
meat, and ability to adapt to rugged
grazing conditions. Mature rams weigh
160 to 200 pounds; ewes weigh 120 to
160 pounds. Fleece weight usually is light,
about 5 to 7 pounds annually. The face
and legs have no wool. Both sexes
are polled.
The Dorset breed is noted for moth-
ering ability and milking ability.
Corriedales produce good meat and
dense fleece of good quality.
The Cheviot is a small, hardy sheep
with excellent meat.


36 ANIMAL SCIENCE
Livestock Breeding and Breeds.
Dairy Goats
Goats are grazing animals that can eat a wide variety of plants.
Some ranchers use them to clear brush and other unwanted
plants from pastures. Goats actively hunt for food and can
cover a wide area in search of scarce forage. They thrive in
harsh environments such as rocky and mountainous areas and
dry or semitropical climates.
Domestic goats produce milk, meat,
leather, and wool. Babies, the elderly, and
people with stomach ailments may find goat’s
milk easier to digest than cow’s milk. People
who are allergic to the protein in cow’s milk
may be able to drink goat’s milk safely.
However, those who cannot digest the lactose
in cow’s milk can’t drink goat’s milk either,
because the milk sugar is the same in both
kinds of milk.
An adult male goat is called a buck or a billy goat. An
adult female is a doe or a nanny goat. A goat less than a year
old is a kid. The mature weight of modern dairy breeds
is between 130 and 200 pounds.
In the United States and Canada, the most popular milk-producing goat is the
Anglo-Nubian, or Nubian. It was developed by breeding British dairy goats with
goats imported from Africa and India. Other major breeds of dairy goats are the
Saanen, Toggenburg, and Alpine, all developed in Switzerland.
In its composition, goat’s milk differs slightly from
cow’s milk. Both are about 87 percent water, 3 to
4 percent protein, 3 to 5 percent fat (depending on
the breed), and 5 percent lactose (milk sugar). Both
provide similar amounts of calcium and phosphorus.
Goat’s milk, however, contains more vitamin A than
cow’s milk but smaller amounts of certain B vitamins
including vitamin B12.
Goat’s milk
cheeses have a
creamy texture
and a wide range
of flavors. Popular
goat’s milk
cheeses include
blue, chèvre, feta,
and ricotta.


ANIMAL SCIENCE 37
.Livestock Breeding and Breeds
Hogs
Hogs breed rapidly, require little space, and reach market size
relatively quickly. These qualities make them a natural choice
for small farmers who want to turn home-raised grain into a
marketable meat product quickly. Intensive commercial produc-
tion, however, is rapidly replacing the small pig farmer. Small
farmers may typically raise pigs for market from fewer than
50 to 100 sows (adult female swine), but intensive commercial
producers often have from 500 to 10,000 sows.
Swine producers today breed for a meat-type hog with a
good yield of the lean cuts—ham, loin, picnic shoulder, and
Boston butt. Quality hogs are well-muscled and lean.
Hogs have been in America since explorer Hernando de Soto brought
some, and lost them to the wilds, in the early 1500s. Pioneers brought
hogs to Jamestown in 1609. Settlers moving westward spread them
throughout the United States. By 1840, the center of production had
shifted to the Midwest, where it remains today, although swine make
important contributions to every state’s economy.
BOSTON BUTT
PICNIC
JOWL
LOIN
SPARERIBS
BACON
HAM
FEET
Meat cuts of a hog


38 ANIMAL SCIENCE
Livestock Breeding and Breeds.
Swine Breeds
As is true for other livestock, there is no “best” breed of
swine. A hog producer must base breed selection on the
growth rate of the breed, the number of pigs in an average
litter, and the desirability of the meat, as well as suitability
to the producer’s goals.
American Landrace. The American
Landrace was developed from Landrace
stock from Denmark and other European
countries. Mature boars (adult, sexually
intact male swine) weigh 700 to 900
pounds, and sows weigh 550 to 750
pounds. The Landrace has a long body
and is known for its large litter size.
Berkshire. An English breed, the
Berkshire is the oldest improved swine
breed. It first came to the United States
in 1823. A mature Berkshire is of medium
size, with boars weighing 700 to 900
pounds and sows 600 to 750 pounds.
The breed is long-bodied and produces
fine quality meat.
Chester White. Because of their mother-
ing ability, large litters, durability, and
soundness, Chester Whites are popular
with pork producers. Chesters mature early
and can be marketed at a lighter weight
than some breeds. Chester White carcasses
are noted for large hams.
Major Breeds of Hogs
British breeds: Berkshire, Tamworth, Yorkshire
U.S.-developed breeds: American Landrace, Chester
White, Duroc, Hampshire, Poland China, Spotted Swine
The American Landrace is white.
The Chester White originated in
Chester County, Pennsylvania.
Berkshires are black with white on
the face, tail, and all four feet.


ANIMAL SCIENCE 39
.Livestock Breeding and Breeds
Duroc. The Duroc originated in New
Jersey and New York in the mid-1800s.
A popular and hardy breed, it is noted for
an excellent rate of weight gain and feed
efficiency (that is, the number of pounds
of feed needed to produce one pound of
weight gain). Sows have large litters and
are good nurturers. Durocs mature early.
Hampshire. The Hampshire was
developed from English breeds in Boone
County, Kentucky, during the 19th century.
Hampshires are noted for leanness, dura-
bility, carcass quality, and efficiency. They
are large-framed and deep-bodied.
Poland China. The name of the Poland
China is misleading because no swine
from Poland or China contributed to
its development. It originated in Ohio
and was named by a Polish farmer.
The breed is known for producing a
heavy ham carcass.
Spotted Swine. The Spotted swine has
changed drastically from the short, fat
hog in the early 1900s to a long-sided,
fast-growing, large, and hardy breed
with excellent carcass quality. The Spot
is noted for its mothering ability, litter
size, and muscling.
The Duroc is all red, the shade vary-
ing from light to dark.
The Hampshire has a black body
with a white belt running over the
shoulders and front legs.
The Poland China is black with
white feet, snout, and tip of tail.
Spotted swine are known as highly
productive hogs.


40 ANIMAL SCIENCE
Livestock Breeding and Breeds.
Poultry
Chickens produce meat and eggs, two of the world’s major
sources of food. In the United States, many poultry farms are in
Georgia, Arkansas, North Carolina, Alabama, Mississippi, Texas,
California, Virginia, Pennsylvania, Minnesota, Iowa, and Ohio.
Poultry kept for human use
includes turkeys, geese,
ducks, guinea fowl, and
chickens. People also raise
game birds such as chukar
partridge, quail, and
pheasant. This pamphlet will
mention only chickens. To
learn more about the others,
visit your local library or a
poultry producer.
White Leghorn pullets.
A pullet is a young hen.
Barred Plymouth Rock male
Besides the pure breeds of swine, many
hybrids (crossbred animals) have been
developed to produce pigs that excel in
certain characteristics, such as carcass
leanness, growth rate, feed efficiency, and
reproductive rate. The white breeds have
been used extensively as sows for mating
to boars of the colored breeds such as the
Berkshire, Hampshire, and Poland China.


ANIMAL SCIENCE 41
.Livestock Breeding and Breeds
Broilers. Commercial poultry farms normally buy chicks from companies
that specialize in chick production for either meat or egg production.
For broiler (meat) production, straight-run (unsexed) chicks usually
are ordered.
Layers. Brown eggs are popular in some areas, but most commercial egg
farms use hens that produce white eggs from the White Leghorn breed
or from strains of the breed. Commercial producers use high-producing
laying hens that have been bred for egg production.
Major Chicken Varieties in the United States
The major chicken varieties include the White Leghorn, White Plymouth
Rock, Barred Plymouth Rock, Rhode Island Red, New Hampshire, and Dark
Cornish. Most chickens in the United States are hybrids. The high-quality,
high-producing birds of commercial egg farms and broiler farms are the
results of careful selection and crossbreeding.
EYE
FACE
NOSTRIL
BEAK
WATTLE
SHOULDER
WING BOW
WING FRONT
BREAST
THIGH
SHANK
TOE
MAIN TAIL
FEATHERS
FLUFF
PRIMARY FLIGHTS
HOCK
SPUR
COMB
HEAD
EAR
EAR LOBE
CAPE
BACK
Major external parts of a chicken


Animals need fresh, clean water available to them at all times.


ANIMAL SCIENCE 43
.Management Practices
Management Practices
Livestock animals have certain physical needs that must be
met if they are to grow and develop normally, stay healthy,
and be productive.
Feeding and Watering
The nutritional needs of different animals vary, but all require
the following.
Water. Fresh, clean water is a must at all times for every
animal. A cow, for instance, will drink about 12 gallons of
water a day—more in hot weather than in cold. She can live
for weeks without food but only a few days without water,
which she needs to regulate body temperature, dissolve and
carry nutrients, and eliminate wastes.
Carbohydrates. Sugars, starches, and cellulose are carbohy-
drates that the body “burns” (oxidizes) to provide the energy
used for growth, fattening, and reproduction.
Fats. This class of nutrients mainly provides high amounts
of energy but also supplies the small amounts of fatty acids
required for proper growth.
Proteins. These complex compounds provide the amino
acids essential for an animal’s normal growth and functioning.
The body uses amino acids mainly to build soft tissues such
as muscles.
Cattle, horses, sheep, goats, hogs, and poultry
have the same basic needs, but the way their
needs are met varies. This section will cover
these needs in general terms. For more detailed
information, talk with your merit badge coun-
selor, a county agent, or a livestock producer.
Without a balanced
diet of all these
nutrients, animals
will not flourish.
They will be less
productive than
healthy specimens,
or become infected
with disease,
and their offspring
may be weak
or deformed.


44 ANIMAL SCIENCE
Management Practices.
Vitamins. These complex substances are vital to normal
growth and health. Vitamins are required in small amounts
and play specific roles in the body.
Minerals. Normal body functioning requires elements such as
iron, copper, phosphorus, potassium, selenium, calcium, and
iodine. More than a dozen minerals are known to be essential
in an animal’s diet.
Digestive Systems of Livestock
Feed is the most important factor in the growth, health, and
productivity of all kinds of livestock. For most types of livestock,
feed is the producer’s biggest expense. Livestock producers must
feed their animals well, but they must keep costs down to
make a profit. Producers can achieve both good nutrition and
good economy if they understand how animals use feed and
convert it into profitable meat, milk, eggs, wool, or offspring.
The digestive systems of farm animals are of two kinds.
Ruminants are cud-chewing, cloven-hoofed animals, including
cattle, sheep, and goats. (Deer, bison, antelope, camels, giraffes,
and llamas also are ruminants.) All other livestock, including
horses, swine, and poultry, are nonruminants.
The main differ-
ence between
ruminant and
nonruminant
animals is that
the ruminant’s
“stomach” has
four compart-
ments, while the
nonruminant’s has
only one. As a
result, the types of
feed they can use
are quite different.
Hay is good feed for cattle because the ruminant digestive
system contains microorganisms—bacteria and protozoa—
that can break hay down into usable forms of energy,
protein, vitamins, and minerals.
SMALL INTESTINE
(9 QUARTS)
ESOPHAGUS COLON
RECTUM
STOMACH
(6 TO 8 QUARTS)
CECUM
LARGE INTESTINE
(10 QUARTS)
The digestive process of
simple-stomached animals,
such as the pig, is similar
to that of humans.


ANIMAL SCIENCE 45
.Management Practices
DIGESTION IN NONRUMINANTS
Let’s follow the digestive process of a familiar nonruminant—
the horse. The process starts in the mouth, as the horse chews
the feed and moistens it with saliva. Chewing causes some
physical breakdown of the feed, and saliva eases the feed’s
passage down the esophagus (the tube linking the mouth with
the stomach).
Once in the horse’s stomach, the feed mixes with gastric
juices that break down fats and proteins. In the small intestine,
which is around 70 feet long, enzymes continue to break down
proteins, fats, and sugars into simpler substances that can be
absorbed into the bloodstream and used by the body.
Digestion and absorption of nutrients continue as food
passes through the cecum and colon (the large intestine). The
cecum houses microbes (bacteria and protozoa) that help to
break down forages such as hay and grass into nutrients that
can be absorbed. Undigested fiber and
wastes are expelled through the rectum.
The digestive tract of a chicken, a
nonruminant animal, has a pouch, or
crop, that stores food and slowly passes it
to the stomach. After the food has mixed
with digestive juices in the stomach, it
enters the gizzard. This organ’s strong
muscles grind food. Birds have no teeth to
crush their food, so the grinding in the gizzard
replaces chewing. The gizzard holds small pieces
of gravel that the bird has swallowed, which help
to break up and grind the food for better digestion.
The horse’s cecum is relatively large, as this drawing of a horse’s
digestive system shows. Therefore, the horse can use large
amounts of forage. Because the cecum of swine and poultry
(and people) has a limited capacity, these animals cannot use
forage well.
CECUM
(4 FEET)STOMACH
(8 TO 17 QUARTS)
LARGE INTESTINE
(29 FEET, 130 QUARTS)
ESOPHAGUS
(4.5 FEET)
SMALL
INTESTINE
(70 FEET, 48 QUARTS)
LARGE COLON
(10 TO 12 FEET)
PELVIC
FLEXURE
SMALL COLON
(10 TO 12 FEET)
RECTUM
(1 FOOT)
14 QUARTS
ANUS
80 QUARTS
28 TO 32 QUARTS
ESOPHAGUS
CROP
GLANDULAR STOMACH
GIZZARD
For its size, a
horse has a small
stomach. This
means it must eat
relatively small
amounts over a
long period
instead of large
amounts quickly.
If a horse is not
fed, its stomach
will be empty
within 24 hours.


46 ANIMAL SCIENCE
Management Practices.
DIGESTION IN RUMINANTS
A cow eats by wrapping its tongue around grass and twisting it
off. The animal chews its food very little before swallowing it,
but does mix the grass with saliva in the mouth to lubricate it
and make swallowing easier.
The feed travels down the esophagus to the rumen, also
called the paunch or fermentation vat. The rumen may hold as
much as 50 gallons. This large vat contains microorganisms—
bacteria and protozoa—that actively break down the forage the
cow eats. These tiny organisms digest the roughage to survive
and, in the process, make substances such as fatty acids, B vita-
mins, and amino acids that the cow needs. When the organisms
die, the cow digests them and absorbs the nutrients they release.
The rumen of a mature cow acts as a storage vat. After
feeding, the cow regurgitates (casts up) a cud of partially
chewed feed and fluid. Forcing the cud up the esophagus from
the rumen to the mouth, the cow chews it more thoroughly and
then reswallows it. Digestion by the microbes continues until the
particles of feed are small enough to flow down the digestive
tract through the small opening of the rumen and reticulum.
A cow’s rumen
may have
200 billion
microorganisms
per teaspoon.
Only microbes produce the enzymes that digest forage; the animal itself
does not. A calf is not born with the microorganisms needed to digest
forages. It must inoculate its digestive system by eating or drinking with
more mature animals to pick up the necessary microorganisms. Calves start
ruminating when they are about 3 months old; they digest only small
amounts of roughage at that age. By weaning, a calf’s digestive system
is functioning completely.
A cow’s digestive system has a “stomach” with four compartments:
rumen, reticulum, omasum, and abomasum. A limited amount of
microbial digestion continues in its cecum.
RETICULUM
(10 QUARTS)
SMALL INTESTINE
(62 QUARTS)
ESOPHAGUS
COLON
RECTUM
LARGE INTESTINE
(40 QUARTS)
RUMEN
(160 QUARTS)
ABOMASUM
(15 QUARTS)
CECUMOMASUM


ANIMAL SCIENCE 47
.Management Practices
Next comes the omasum, which removes most of the
water. Most microbial digestion is completed by the time the
food reaches the next stop, the abomasum. Often called the true
stomach because it performs much like the simple stomach of
the horse and pig, the abomasum uses digestive juices to break
down food into its nutrient building blocks, which are then
absorbed through the wall of the small intestine. Undigested
material moves through the cecum and large intestine and is
expelled as manure through the rectum.
Ruminants can go for longer periods without food than
nonruminants, provided they have adequate rations when they
are fed. They can also use more roughages such as grass and
hay, which are more difficult to digest than feeds such as grains.
Feeding Cattle
The rations fed to cattle depend on the intended goal—fattening
a steer for market, feeding dairy cows to increase milk produc-
tion, feeding show animals, or wintering cattle, for instance.
Rations often are prepared with computers and complicated
nutritional data, but you can use some general guidelines to
plan basic rations.
• Any sign of unthriftiness (lack of vigor or health) in cattle
should prompt a change in the ration if parasites and disease
can be ruled out as the cause of the problem.
A ruminant’s
stomach takes
72 hours to empty.


48 ANIMAL SCIENCE
Management Practices.
• Two percent of the body weight of cattle may be fed daily
as hay (roughage), or three times this amount for silage.
(Silage is a fermented, moist feed.)
• For protein, feed 1½ to 2 pounds of oil meals, or three times
this amount of alfalfa or other leguminous hay. Leguminous
hays include vetch, clovers, and alfalfa.
• To fatten cattle, feed a ration of at least 60 percent concen-
trates (grains) and 40 percent roughages (hay, silage), in
amounts equal to 3 percent of the body weight.
• With any ration, also provide needed mineral supplements.
Many areas of the country have mineral deficiencies in their
soils. To balance a feed, stockraisers may need to supplement
with various extra minerals that are deficient in their area.
Suggested Beef Cattle Rations
The table shows some suggestions for basic rations in pounds per day.
Supplementing a
1,000-pound cow
Fattening a
600-pound calf
1. Nonleguminous hay 20 10
Oil meal 2 2
Grain (shelled corn or ground
grain sorghum)
— 6
2. Nonleguminous hay — 3
Silage 60 20
Oil meal 2 1.5
Grain (corn or grain sorghum) — 6
3. Nonleguminous hay 16 8
Leguminous hay 6 2
Oil meal — 1.5
Grain (corn or grain sorghum) — 6
4. Leguminous hay 6 10
Silage 48 —
Oil meal — 1
Grain (corn or grain sorghum) — 7


ANIMAL SCIENCE 49
.Management Practices
Feeding Horses
A horse’s dietary needs depend on its age and how it is used.
Working and race horses need more energy than idle ones.
Mares with foals at their side need more protein than unbred
mares. Young horses generally need a more nutritious diet than
older horses.
Horses can use high-energy concentrate feeds but require
some bulk (forage) to keep the food from becoming compacted
in the digestive tract. Compaction can cause dangerous disorders
such as colic. Oats are excellent grains for horses. They are high
in nutrition, somewhat bulky, and horses like to eat them.
A horse kept for recreational riding should do well on a
simple ration of 95 percent oats and 5 percent linseed meal,
or half oats and half sweet feed (premixed corn, soybeans,
linseed, wheat, and vitamin-mineral supplements), plus a
bright, clean, leafy hay for roughage.
Feeding horses
with rations
that are too low
in roughages
can cause
colic—acute
abdominal pain.
Linseed oil meal is a
popular protein feed for
horses. It promotes a
shiny coat. Grains—
especially oats, and to
a lesser degree corn,
barley, and wheat—
provide energy. An
iodized, trace-mineral,
free-choice salt block
will prevent mineral
deficiencies. Lush
pastures will provide
a horse with the
necessary vitamins.
If no pasture is
available, green,
leafy forages may
be substituted.


Suggested Horse Rations
The table gives sample daily rations for horses doing light work and for
stallions and mares used for breeding.
1,000-pound
saddle horse
1,200-pound
broodmare and
stallion in service
1. Alfalfa hay 10 pounds 14 to 16 pounds
Oats 4 pounds 10 pounds
Mineral supplement — 2 ounces
2. Alfalfa hay — 10 pounds
Grass hay 14 pounds 4 pounds
Oats 5 pounds 5 pounds
Corn — 3 pounds
Barley — 2 pounds
Wheat bran — 2 pounds
3. Alfalfa hay 10 pounds 5 pounds
Grass hay — 8 pounds
Oats 3 pounds 12 pounds
Barley 1 pound —
Wheat germ oil — 1 ounce
Mineral supplement — 2 ounces
Do not feed livestock hay on the ground. That
can lead to worm infestations and may cause
“sand colic,” a common digestive disorder in
horses. Feed hay in bunks or hay nets. Keep feed
boxes free of moldy feed, which often causes
chronic coughing.
Points to remember: Feed and water
horses at least twice a day. Do not
let a horse drink its fill of water after
vigorous exercise. Always walk a
horse to cool it off before letting
it drink.


ANIMAL SCIENCE 51
.Management Practices
Feeding Sheep
Rations for sheep are often mostly roughages. Sheep thrive on
good pastures. Generally, ewes need 4½ to 5 pounds of dry
feed or its equivalent each day. This may be made up of
legume hay, grass hay, and silage, or merely a good pasture.
Often, ½ to 1½ pounds of grain are added to the daily
diet of ewes during pregnancy, after lambing, and just before
breeding. Finishing lambs (putting on weight) normally will
require 3 to 4 pounds daily of a ration containing at least
70 percent grain.
Feeding Dairy Goats
Feed adult dairy goats good-quality hay and grain.
Make plenty of clean water and salt available to them
at all times.
Kids can either get milk from their mothers or be
raised by hand using a bottle or pan. They should be
fed 1 to 2 quarts a day of goat’s milk, cow’s milk, or goat-
or sheep-milk replacer. They need milk
three to four times daily the first week of
life, then twice daily for three or four months.
Starting when they are 1 week of age, offer kids leafy hay
and grain. After weaning, they need 1 pound of grain a day
and all the hay they will eat.


52 ANIMAL SCIENCE
Management Practices.
Feeding Hogs
Hogs are easy to feed if you use commercially available pre-
mixed, balanced feeds that contain all the necessary nutrients.
It is possible to simply fill a self-feeding hopper once or twice a
week, and check daily to see that the hopper is not clogged and
to ensure that the hogs have fresh water available at all times.
Three basic commercial premixed rations are available for
feeder pigs. Weaned piglets younger than 5 weeks of age may
be fed prestarter rations, which have 20 to 22 percent protein.
Slowly switch the pigs, by the time they are 5 weeks old, to
starter rations, which are up to 20 percent protein. At 65 to 70
pounds, switch them to a grower ration that provides about 16
percent protein. Continue this ration until slaughter, or put
hogs weighing 120 pounds on finisher rations containing 14
percent protein.
Some swine producers use these rules:
• Give 1 pound of feed for each 30 pounds of body weight
from 120 pounds to market weight.
• Feed only the amount eaten in 20 to 30 minutes.
• Finishing hogs (120 to 245 pounds), while on full feed,
will eat 4 to 6 pounds of feed each day per 100 pounds
of live weight.
Swine rations
normally will
contain only
concentrates.
The fiber content
must be less than
5 percent. If you
feed hogs rough-
ages, feed only
those of high
quality, such
as alfalfa leaf
meal, legumes,
or grazing
cereal grains.


ANIMAL SCIENCE 53
.Management Practices
A diet that is good for market hogs will not be nutritious
enough for gilts (young females) that will grow up to rear litters
of piglets. Breeding females need extra nutrients. Pregnant gilts
and sows should receive 4 to 6 pounds a day of a special gesta-
tion diet. Females housed outside may need an extra pound or
two of feed daily but should not be overfed during gestation to
avoid gaining too much weight and fat.
After farrowing (giving birth), females require a nutrient-
rich lactation diet of 16 to 17 percent protein. A lactating sow
that is nursing produces 15 to 30 pounds of milk daily, making
her nutrient requirements three times higher than during gesta-
tion. The average sow requires 4 to 6 pounds of feed per day
plus 1 pound daily for each nursing piglet.
When the piglets are weaned at the end of the three-week
lactation period, a sow’s daily feed intake falls off dramatically
as she stops producing milk. At this time, the “dry” sow goes
back on a prebreeding or gestation diet containing 12 to
14 percent protein.
Feeding Chickens
Corn is the most important grain used in poultry rations,
followed by sorghum (milo) and wheat. Soybean oil meal
often is used as a protein supplement. Common calcium sup-
plements include crushed oyster shells and ground limestone.
The science of
feeding chickens
has become
highly technical
as our knowledge
of nutrient
requirements
grows. Today,
almost all
commercial
growers purchase
their feed rather
than mix their own.
The high water content of the eggs and meat makes fresh,
clean water doubly important for poultry. It should be available
at all times.


54 ANIMAL SCIENCE
Management Practices.
Housing
Every kind of livestock needs protection against severe weather
and predators, shelter for times of illness, and protection for its
young. The type of shelter needed depends on the type of live-
stock, its size and feeding habits, and the climate.
For range cattle in most areas, open shelters are adequate.
Beef cattle on pastures with some natural windbreaks such as
treelines or cliffs may not need buildings for shelter.
Sheep are hardy but should have shelter to protect them
from cold or rain. A plain, open shed facing away from the
wind will be enough in most areas.
Make sure barns or other living
quarters for animals are clean and
dry, with no sharp edges or nails
that might cause injury. Good drain-
age is important. See that all waste
material is removed regularly.


ANIMAL SCIENCE 55
.Management Practices
Dairy goats need an exercise area and a sturdy shelter free
of drafts. Goats are curious, active creatures and will try to
escape from enclosures. The best way to keep them in is to use
solid board fencing or electric fences.
Hogs do best in sanitary, cool, well-kept quarters. People
should wear clean footwear when working in farrowing houses
or other buildings where hogs are kept because small pigs are
highly susceptible to disease. Sanitation is especially important
in swine management because hogs normally are kept in large
numbers in close confinement.
Contrary to
popular belief,
a hog does not
prefer to live in
a mud wallow.
Swine actually
are quite clean.
An open shed facing away
from the wind provides
adequate shelter for hardy
farm animals like sheep
and goats.
The landscape of farming continues to evolve. While the average size
of a farm has more than doubled in the last 20 years—creating larger,
industrialized operations—smaller specialty farms that produce goods
from animals such as free-range chickens and turkeys, alpacas, and
farm-raised fish have become profitable options.


56 ANIMAL SCIENCE
Management Practices.
Layer houses provide nests, roosts, feeders, and waterers.
Broiler chickens are housed in broiler houses, 30 to 40 feet wide
and as long as necessary to hold the number of birds desired.
Adequate space is important. Birds need enough room at the
feeders so that all can comfortably eat at the same time.
Overcrowding is dangerous for poultry flocks. Diseases can
pass more easily between birds, and the stress of overcrowding
makes birds more vulnerable to disease. Good housing reduces
stress on the birds.
Layer and broiler houses protect birds from the elements. Most houses today,
such as this layer house, are well-ventilated and well-insulated and have controlled
temperature and automatic lights, feeders, and waterers.


ANIMAL SCIENCE 57
.Management Practices
Grooming
Grooming helps keep animals clean, stimulates blood circulation,
and helps prevent skin disease. A groomer may see blemishes
that should be addressed. Clean, well-groomed animals are more
comfortable and less likely to spread infections or parasites to
other animals.
While the horse has only one hoof per foot, cattle, pigs,
sheep, and goats have two toes (or claws) covered by a hoof
on each foot. Trimming the feet of dairy cattle may be neces-
sary to help keep them from growing abnormally. Abnormal
claw growth can affect how a cow stands on its feet, causing
pain that can affect eating habits—and thus affect the cow’s
milk production and body flesh.
Except for horses, most farm live-
stock are not groomed regularly
unless they are show animals,
such as this heifer.
Shoes protect a horse’s feet and
keep the hooves from cracking and
splitting. To stay healthy, horses need
their hooves trimmed regularly by an
experienced farrier (a person who
shoes horses). Cleaning a horse’s
hooves is part of regular care. A hoof
pick is used to remove dirt, stones,
and other debris.


58 ANIMAL SCIENCE
Livestock Diseases and Prevention.
Livestock Diseases
and Prevention
Ranchers and stockfarmers must be familiar with the diseases,
parasites, and disorders that may afflict domestic stock, and
constantly guard against them. This section describes some
common diseases of livestock. Talk with your merit badge
counselor, county agent, or veterinarian about the diseases
common in your area. Study these and learn the most effective
means of prevention.
Plan a health program for your animals. Find out what vac-
cines are given routinely in your area. Use a calendar to remind
you of the best times to vaccinate against disease and
to control parasites. Coordinate a year-round health plan for
your herd or flock with your other management practices.
Each year, losses from diseases and parasites run into
the millions of dollars. Timely measures of prevention
and control could probably avert many of these losses.
The old saying that “an ounce of prevention is worth a
pound of cure” certainly applies to the livestock industry.
Each time you
buy an animal, ask
for its vaccination
record. Because
mixing animals
can spread
diseases, always
try to isolate
incoming animals
for one month
to determine
whether they
are carrying
a disease.


ANIMAL SCIENCE 59
.Livestock Diseases and Prevention
Diseases of Cattle
Dairy and beef cattle get the same types of diseases. A few
diseases that affect the udder are, of course, especially serious
in dairy cattle.
The first sign of illness in cattle often is high temperature.
Normal temperature is 100.4 to 102.8 degrees Fahrenheit. An
animal thermometer inserted into the rectum is used to take
the temperature of cattle. Get instruction from an expert before
trying to take an animal’s temperature.
Some common or serious diseases of cattle, and their
causes, symptoms, and methods of prevention, are described
below. For treatments, consult a veterinarian.
Blackleg. Blackleg, caused by a microorganism, is contagious
and often fatal. Most outbreaks occur in the warmer months
of spring and autumn. The first symptom is lameness, and
the upper parts of the leg swell. Temperature usually is high
and the animal loses its appetite. Death occurs quickly; a
cattle producer might not notice signs of a problem until
one or more calves have died. Blackleg can be prevented
through vaccination.
Bloat. Bloat is not a disease but a painful and unhealthy
condition that can kill cattle. It shows up as abnormal swelling
of the left side of the animal that, in severe cases, puts pressure
on the diaphragm and lungs and causes the animal to gasp for
breath. To help prevent bloat, feed cattle dry hay before turning
them out to graze legume pastures.
Bloat occurs
when gas builds
up in the first two
compartments
(rumen and
reticulum) of
the digestive
tract of cattle and
other ruminants.
Legume pastures,
alfalfa hay, and
high-concentrate
feeds can bring
it on.
Blackleg most often strikes cattle between 6 months and
2 years of age.


60 ANIMAL SCIENCE
Livestock Diseases and Prevention.
Brucellosis (Bang’s Disease). The key sign of brucellosis is a
cow that aborts after the fifth month of pregnancy. A micro-
scopic organism is the cause. Testing involves checking a blood
sample for signs of the organism’s presence. All cattle that react
positively to the test must be slaughtered to prevent the spread
of the disease. Herds in which brucellosis is suspected are quar-
antined until they are tested and certified clean.
Through direct contact with infected cattle or contaminated
grass, ground, or water, brucellosis easily spreads from one cow
to another. It is not transmitted by marketing the meat or the
by-products of an infected animal. It is spread through contact
with unpasteurized milk—causing a condition in humans
known as undulant fever.
The Scoop About BSE, or
Mad Cow Disease
You probably have heard a lot about bovine spongi-
form encephalopathy (BSE, also known as mad cow
disease), a fatal disease of adult cattle that kills an
animal’s brain cells. BSE is caused by a class of infec-
tious agents called prions, which are neither viruses
nor bacteria. Symptoms of the disease may include
skittishness or aggression, weight loss, abnormal pos-
ture, difficulty standing up, and paralysis. The infection
may lie quiet in an animal’s brain for years. Once the
disease flares up, the animal dies quickly—usually in
less than six months. No treatment is known.
Since BSE was first diagnosed in Great Britain in
1986, Europe has had more than 180,000 cases of
infected cattle. BSE is not contagious and does not
spread from one cow to another. Cattle become
infected by eating contaminated feed.
However, people who eat meat containing the
nervous tissues from BSE-infected cattle may die
of a human brain disorder, a variation of a rare
disease called Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD or,
the variation, vCJD).
Strict rules in the United States keep the risk of
contracting the disease extremely low here. Cattle can
no longer be imported from Europe.
A strict
government
program of
eradication
requires carriers
of Bang’s disease
to be destroyed,
reducing the
incidence of
brucellosis from
30 percent of the
cattle herds in
the United States
years ago to
less than
2 percent today.


ANIMAL SCIENCE 61
.Livestock Diseases and Prevention
Calf Scours (White Scours). Many newborn calves die from
calf scours, or diarrhea, in the first month of their lives. Those
that recover are often stunted for life. Scours kills through
dehydration. Calves pass watery manure and lose weight.
If 15 percent of the body weight is lost because of dehydration,
the calf goes into a coma and dies.
Scours may be caused by bacteria and viruses and made
worse by poor management. Overcrowding, overfeeding,
vitamin A deficiency, and parasites may all contribute. To
prevent scours, make sure cows have enough of vitamins A
and D before calving. Keep calves in clean quarters, disinfect
stalls, isolate infected calves, and give each newborn calf a
full feed (about 2 quarts) of colostrum milk
within one hour after birth.
Foot Rot. Foot rot is common in feedlots or where
cattle are confined in muddy areas. The skin
between the toes becomes swollen and red and
sometimes breaks open. Cattle stop eating because
of the pain and may run a fever. Foot rot, which is caused
by an organism in the soil, can lead to deformed hooves
and lameness. Prevent foot rot by keeping animals away
from wet areas.
There are many more ailments that strike cattle than
we can include here. For more about diseases of cattle,
see the resources section at the back of this pamphlet
or visit your local library. With your parent’s permission,
search the web. Some other diseases of interest
include anaplasmosis, founder, grass tetany, ketosis,
lumpy jaw, malignant edema, pneumonia, and red
water disease.
To survive, the newborn needs
colostrum, a special milk the cow
produces during the first three days after
calving. Colostrum contains high levels
of energy, vitamins, and minerals, and also
supplies antibodies (immunoglobulins) to
protect the newborn against infection and disease.


62 ANIMAL SCIENCE
Livestock Diseases and Prevention.
Leptospirosis. Leptospirosis affects the kidneys and may bring
on various conditions including abortion, mastitis (an infection
in the udder), high temperature, jaundice, wine-colored urine,
and anemia. Although very young animals commonly die
from the disease, older cattle may survive. The cause is a
microorganism, and the disease can be diagnosed only through
laboratory testing. Vaccinations are recommended for all cattle
herds. Deer carry the disease and may infect cattle if herds
are not immunized.
Mastitis. Mastitis, caused by a bacterial infection in the udder,
results in milk that is lumpy and sometimes streaked with
blood. The udder may become hot and hard; milk production
is affected. Left untreated, the infection can spread through the
cow’s body, leading to fever and other signs of general sickness.
A routine monthly test will detect the disease before symptoms
become apparent. To prevent mastitis, keep milking machines
well-maintained and take care during milking to avoid injury
to the udder.
Milk Fever. Milk fever is a nutritionally related condition
brought on by a calcium deficiency. It may occur at or shortly
after calving. The cow is weak and wild-eyed, and often loses
consciousness. Her body temperature will generally be below
normal. A veterinarian can treat the condition. Untreated cows
will likely die.
Leptospirosis is
transmitted mainly
through water and
can affect people
as well as cattle
and deer.
On dairy farms, milking parlors must be properly sanitized to
prevent mastitis. Cleanliness is essential.


ANIMAL SCIENCE 63
.Livestock Diseases and Prevention
Pinkeye. A cow with pinkeye is sensitive to bright light, is
teary eyed, and has reddened eye membranes. A milky film
may cover the eyeballs, and an affected animal may be blinded.
This bacterial infection seldom kills cattle but is economically
serious because of the weight loss and decreased milk produc-
tion in afflicted animals.
Pinkeye is more likely to
develop when cattle’s eyes are
irritated by bright sunlight, dust,
wind, flies, pollen, and weed and
grass seeds. This disease is more
common in pastured cattle than
in feedlots. Prevention practices
include controlling flies and dust,
and clipping or mowing pastures
to reduce weed-seed irritation.
Shipping Fever. Shipping fever
is caused by a combination of
stress, bacteria, and viruses.
It may occur after a calf has
been stressed by castration;
vaccination; dehorning; weaning;
exposure to cold, wet, or drafty
conditions; or especially if it has
traveled a long way to a new
location. Stress can bring on the
illness, but the actual cause is
any number of various microor-
ganisms. Symptoms include fever
of 104 to 106 degrees Fahrenheit,
not eating, difficulty breathing,
coughing, runny eyes and nose, and diarrhea.
Stress is the major contributor to this disease, so avoid
doing all of the tasks of weaning, dehorning, castrating, and
vaccinating at one time. Work cattle gently over a period of
time. As a precaution, vaccinate cattle for shipping fever
before they are shipped.
Pinkeye spreads rapidly, carried by face flies from
animal to animal.


64 ANIMAL SCIENCE
Livestock Diseases and Prevention.
Diseases of Horses
A healthy horse always wants to eat; a poor appetite or a
refusal to eat is a first sign of illness. A rectal temperature above
or below the average range of 99 to 100.8 degrees Fahrenheit
(100.5 degrees average) will confirm the presence
of a problem.
Call a veterinarian when a horse shows signs of illness.
Some common diseases, injuries, and parasites of horses are
described below.
Colic. A digestive problem, colic may be brought on by a
horse’s overeating, drinking too much water while hot, or
eating moldy feeds. The intestine is blocked or impacted,
causing the horse much pain. Halter an afflicted horse to
prevent rolling, and walk it until a veterinarian arrives.
The veterinarian may give mineral oils by stomach tube
to relieve the compaction in the intestine.
Horse owners
can help prevent
disease by keeping
stables and horses
clean. Clean feed
boxes and change
bedding regularly.
A horse with colic will be greatly agitated, constantly moving,
sweating, and trying to roll. Rolling may lead to a twisted gut,
which is fatal.


ANIMAL SCIENCE 65
.Livestock Diseases and Prevention
Equine Encephalomyelitis
(Sleeping Sickness). This disease
causes inflammation of the brain
and spinal cord. The two most com-
mon forms found in the United
States are Eastern and Western
equine encephalomyelitis. A third
form, Venezuelan, has not occurred
here for decades but is found in
other countries. The cause of all
forms is a virus transmitted by
infected mosquitoes. Outbreaks are
most common during the summer.
An infected horse generally has
a fever and rapid heart rate, loses its
appetite, and acts depressed. As the
illness progresses, the animal may
show muscle weakness, wall lean-
ing, compulsive circling, and blind-
ness, followed by convulsions and
coma. Up to 90 percent of horses
infected with EEE die. The mortality
rate for WEE approaches 50 percent.
Annual vaccination is highly recommended. Vaccines for horses
may come in a “three-way shot” that includes vaccination for
EEE, WEE, and tetanus.
Influenza. Symptoms of equine influenza, a respiratory disease
much like the flu in humans, include coughing, nasal discharge,
and high fever. A variety of different viruses may cause it, and
vaccines that will give immunity are available for some of them.
Humans also can contract equine encephalomyelitis
from the bites of infected mosquitoes. Healthy adults
who get the virus may show flulike symptoms such
as high fever and headache. The young, the elderly,
and people with weakened immune systems can
become severely ill or die from this disease.
A collapsed colt suffering from
equine encephalomyelitis


66 ANIMAL SCIENCE
Livestock Diseases and Prevention.
Strangles (Equine Distemper). Strangles may strike horses
between 6 months and 5 years of age. It is caused by a
microorganism and is contagious. Symptoms include high
fever, coughing, discharge of pus from the nose, and swelling
of glands under the jaw. Eventually, the glands break open
and discharge pus. Isolate an afflicted horse in a clean, well-
ventilated stall, allow it to rest, and follow a veterinarian’s
orders. Strangles is seldom fatal, and once a horse has
recovered, it usually is immune from further attacks.
Swamp Fever (Infectious Equine Anemia). The virus
that causes swamp fever is carried by flies and mosquitoes.
Symptoms are high fever,
labored breathing, pound-
ing heartbeat, and exhaus-
tion. Most afflicted horses
die within 30 days;
those that recover
are immune from
further attacks but can spread the
disease. Carriers can be identified by
the Coggins test. A negative Coggins
test certificate is required for interstate and
international travel, and at most larger horse
shows and race tracks as a part of the horse’s
health papers. The disease may be controlled
by keeping horses out of low places and by
properly draining land.
Tetanus (Lockjaw). Puncture wounds may be infected by
the tetanus organism, which produces a powerful poison
that causes muscle contractions. Stiff legs, noise sensitivity,
and folding of the inner eyelid over the eye are the symptoms
of a horse with lockjaw. Death may occur within 24 hours.
A vaccine will prevent the disease.
Horses are susceptible to many different types of afflictions. Some others
not discussed here include founder, horse bots, Monday morning disease,
West Nile virus, and worms. For more information, use the resources
section in this pamphlet, visit your local library, and search the web (with
your parent’s permission).
Swellings on the abdomen can indicate swamp fever.


ANIMAL SCIENCE 67
.Livestock Diseases and Prevention
Diseases of Sheep
As with other classes of livestock, body temperature often is
the first sign of disease in sheep. The normal temperature range
is from 100.9 to 103.8 degrees Fahrenheit, with an average of
102.3 degrees. For blackleg, bloat, foot rot, and pinkeye, the
signs and prevention are the same as for cattle. Bluebag in
sheep is the same disease as mastitis in cattle. Other common
diseases of sheep are described below.
Bluetongue. Symptoms of bluetongue are depressed appetite,
an inflamed nose and mouth lining that may turn blue,
frothing at the mouth, and labored breathing. A red band may
appear at the top of the hoof. Bluetongue is of most concern to
sheep ranchers in the southwestern United States. It is caused
by a virus transmitted by insects. A vaccine is recommended
for prevention.
Circling Disease (Encephalitis). An animal afflicted with
encephalitis walks in circles, staggers, and may be paralyzed.
The disease usually is fatal. It is caused by a bacterial infection
of the brain. Prevention is through good sanitation.
Sheep should be
treated gently at
all times, and
especially when
they are ill. Ill or
injured sheep can
easily slip into
shock, followed
by death.
Taking a blood sample for testing


68 ANIMAL SCIENCE
Livestock Diseases and Prevention.
Enterotoxemia (Overeating Disease). Enterotoxemia is a
serious problem in feedlots. A high level of concentrate feeding
can bring on a condition afflicting feedlot lambs with staggering
and convulsions, which may lead to death. Toxins produced by
bacteria in the digestive tract cause enterotoxemia. Vaccines for
prevention are available.
Lamb Dysentery (Scours). Good sanitation and well-protected,
dry shelters help prevent lamb dysentery, which can cause high
death losses among lambs during the first few days after birth.
Diarrhea and fever are the main symptoms. The cause is a
microorganism. Lamb dysentery usually is a problem where
sheep are in close confinement, seldom on open range.
Scrapie. Sheep with scrapie will scrape off wool by rubbing
against fences and other objects because of the unbearable
itching. They usually have no fever but will walk with an
unsteady, uncoordinated gait. Paralysis and death follow.
Scrapie is caused by the same class of infectious agents
called prions, which are neither viruses nor bacteria, that
cause BSE in cattle. No treatment is known. To prevent the
spread of this highly fatal disease, government regulations
often require that infected flocks be destroyed.
Other ailments that can strike
sheep include pregnancy dis-
ease, soremouth (contagious
ecthyma), stiff lamb disease
(white muscle disease), tetanus
(lockjaw), wool maggots, ticks,
mites, and worms. You can learn
more about these by using the
resources listed at the end of this
pamphlet, visiting your local
library, and searching the web
(with your parent’s permission).


ANIMAL SCIENCE 69
.Livestock Diseases and Prevention
Diseases of Goats
Soremouth, a highly contagious disease, causes sores on
the mouths of goats. The virus caprine arthritic encephalitis
causes arthritis in goats, can cause paralysis in goat kids, and
may reduce milk production in does. Some three-quarters of
goats tested in one herd had CAE, although many showed no
symptoms. Check with a veterinarian for tips on
prevention and treatment.
Most goatkeepers vaccinate their herds
against two serious diseases—tetanus,
which affects the muscles, and entero-
toxemia, which affects the intestines.
Goats should receive selenium shots in
areas where this mineral is lacking.
Worms are often a problem in goat
herds, so regular deworming usually
is necessary.
Diseases of Swine
Good sanitation of buildings and equipment and a planned
immunization program go a long way toward keeping a swine
herd free of disease and parasites. Sanitation is extremely
important in swine management because hogs usually are kept
in close confinement. Some common or serious illnesses of
hogs are described below.


70 ANIMAL SCIENCE
Livestock Diseases and Prevention.
Anemia. A lack of iron causes anemia and is most common
among hogs in confinement. Hogs kept outdoors are able to
root around in the soil and pick up the needed iron. Anemia is
particularly a problem of rapidly growing piglets. Sow’s milk
supplies only a fraction of a baby pig’s daily iron requirement.
Symptoms of a deficiency include rough hair coat, listlessness,
and pale eye and mouth membranes. In the advanced stages,
labored breathing and rapid heartbeat also appear.
Brucellosis. Similar to brucellosis in cattle but caused by
different bacteria, this disease causes sows to abort. To prevent
the spread of brucellosis, herds should be tested annually and
hogs that carry it destroyed.
Injecting baby pigs at 1 to 3 days of age with an iron
solution may easily prevent anemia. Providing fresh
soil for pigs to root around in and swabbing the
sow’s udder with an iron sulfate solution may also
be effective.
The normal rectal
temperature of
swine is 102 to
103.6 degrees
Fahrenheit, with
an average of
102.6 degrees.
As with other
livestock, any
deviation from
the normal
temperature
could be a
sign of illness.


ANIMAL SCIENCE 71
.Livestock Diseases and Prevention
Cholera. Hog cholera is a highly contagious disease caused by
a virus. The usual symptoms are lack of appetite, high tempera-
ture, diarrhea, and weight loss. There may be discharge from
the eyes. Afflicted animals suffer dehydration and drink much
water. They may walk with a wobbly gait. Infected herds are
quarantined and destroyed.
Erysipelas. Pigs with the acute form of swine erysipelas may
have fever, lose their appetite, develop sore muscles or tender
feet, have an arched back, and walk with a shuffling gait or
remain lying down. Red patches may appear on the skin. Some
pigs die suddenly. Pigs affected with the chronic form may suf-
fer from arthritis and swollen joints, and the tips of their ears or
tail may blacken and fall off. The disease is caused by bacteria.
Sanitation and vaccination are effective in prevention.
Mycoplasma Pneumonia. A dry, rasping, persistent cough is
the most common sign of this pneumonia, which is caused by
bacteria. Affected pigs grow slowly. Although the original
infection is mild, secondary infections (those that happen as
a result or consequence of the original infection) can cause
severe losses. Swine producers should stock herds from sources
free of this disease.
Transmissible Gastroenteritis (TGE). An infectious disease
that causes many deaths among young pigs, TGE is signaled
by poor appetite, vomiting, scours, and weight loss. Afflicted
pigs pass whitish, yellowish, or greenish feces and soon die
from dehydration. TGE is caused by a virus usually passed
through the manure and the respiratory tract of infected swine.
Prevention requires strict sanitation, disinfection, and vaccination.
To learn more
about other
ailments of swine
such as atrophic
rhinitis, dysentery,
leptospirosis, and
pseudorabies
(mad itch), search
the web (with
your parent’s
permission), visit
your local library,
and use the
resources listed
at the end of
this pamphlet.
Hog cholera is among the most serious diseases of
swine. It was eradicated from the United States in 1978
but remains a problem elsewhere. To ensure pigs are
free of the disease, swine from countries affected by
hog cholera can enter the United States only after a
90-day quarantine.


72 ANIMAL SCIENCE
Livestock Diseases and Prevention.
Diseases of Chickens
Modern confinement methods of raising broilers and layers
make disease outbreaks particularly serious. As always, think
prevention rather than treatment. Good poultry management
emphasizes sanitation, immunization, quarantine of sick birds,
and proper housing that avoids overcrowding and other stresses
on the birds.
Each year, inspectors reject millions of pounds of poultry
for human consumption because of diseased birds. In a laying
flock, a 10 to 12 percent annual death rate may be expected.
The normal annual death loss for broiler flocks is 4 percent or
less. Losses greater than these signal a serious threat that
demands prompt attention.
Some of the more common or serious problems are
described below.
A bird that
eats and drinks
little may be
sick. Diarrhea,
paralysis,
breathing
difficulties,
skin conditions,
and bloody or
unusually wet
droppings are
other signs
that something
is wrong.
Some 80 separate diseases or parasite problems of
poultry are recognized, among them avian tumor dis-
eases, coccidiosis, infectious bursal disease, infectious
coryza, and parasites. To learn more, visit your local
library, explore the web (with your parent’s permis-
sion), and use the resources section of this pamphlet.


ANIMAL SCIENCE 73
.Livestock Diseases and Prevention
Chronic Respiratory Disease. Microorganisms cause chronic
respiratory disease, which affects the air sacs. The sacs fill with
fluid, the lungs harden, and breathing becomes difficult. The
death rate may be high. Broilers that recover may be rejected at
carcass inspection. Isolating sick birds and practicing proper
sanitation help prevent its spread.
Fowl Pox. Birds with fowl pox show black, raised scabs on the
comb, wattles, face, shanks (legs), and feet. Egg production
drops, growth slows, and egg fertility is reduced. The cause is
a virus spread by infected birds and mosquitoes. Vaccinating
against fowl pox gives chickens lifelong immunity.
Hysteria. Birds subjected to loud noises, rapid light changes, or
quick movements may panic. Broilers in open houses fly into a
corner, and many may suffocate. Caged layers may try to fly
and break their wings or necks. To prevent hysteria, take care
not to frighten birds. Some poultry managers play a radio in
houses to get the birds used to the sound of human voices and
noise. Some knock before opening a door to the poultry house
to draw the birds’ attention so they won’t be startled when
humans enter.
Vaccinating for fowl pox
Hysteria is a
behavioral
problem rather
than a disease.


74 ANIMAL SCIENCE
Livestock Diseases and Prevention.
Infectious Bronchitis. Coughing, sneezing, and difficult breath-
ing are common signs of infectious bronchitis, an extremely
contagious viral infection of chickens. Young birds often die,
and hens stop laying or lay defective eggs. A vaccine can
provide control.
Newcastle Disease. Death losses can be high among broilers
with Newcastle disease, and a laying flock that has it can fail to
produce eggs. Symptoms include difficult breathing, gasping,
and sneezing. This highly contagious disease is caused by a
virus. Vaccination is recommended for prevention.
Salmonelloses. Baby chicks with pullorum disease huddle
together, lose their appetites, may show labored breathing, and
often develop a whitish diarrhea. Although they do not show
signs of it, adult birds that have recovered from pullorum carry
the disease and may lay infected eggs. A poultry manager who
suspects pullorum will commonly fumigate the incubator and
eggs. Strict sanitation is important. Infected breeder birds
should be eliminated from the flock.
Fowl typhoid, another salmonella-induced disease,
has signs similar to those of pullorum. Good hatchery
sanitation and elimination of infected birds are the recom-
mended control methods.
Salmonella bacteria attack many animals and can be a
serious health threat. In chickens, these organisms
cause pullorum disease and fowl typhoid.


ANIMAL SCIENCE 75
.Livestock Diseases and Prevention
What’s Up With Bird Flu?
Avian influenza, or bird flu, has attracted a lot
of attention lately. Bird flu viruses, which rarely
infect people, strike domesticated birds, includ-
ing chickens, ducks, and turkeys. Infected birds
act depressed and stop laying eggs. Watery
diarrhea is common. Chickens’ heads may be
darkened, and fluid may build up around the
eyes and in the wattle and comb (fleshy areas
around the neck and head).
Birds exposed to infected poultry, contami-
nated cages or dust, or soiled feed or water can
catch the highly contagious virus. As of early
2006, highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI)
had become a significant problem in Asia and
was spreading into the Middle East and Europe. Proper
biosecurity measures will help keep HPAI from spread-
ing in those areas already affected and from entering
North America.
HPAI can wipe out an entire flock. Milder strains of
bird flu, however, are responsible for most outbreaks in
poultry. Infected birds shed flu virus in their saliva,
nasal secretions, and droppings. To control an outbreak
of bird flu, a flock is quarantined (or isolated), sick birds
are destroyed, and the houses or cages are thoroughly
cleaned and disinfected.
Low pathogenic avian influenza A outbreaks occur
among poultry from time to time in North America.
Based on a report from the World Organization for
Animal Health, since 1997 the United States has experi-
enced only one outbreak of highly pathogenic avian
influenza A (or H5N2) virus in poultry. It was restricted
to one poultry farm.
The practice of
being extremely
careful not to
spread disease
between animals
is called
biosecurity.
It is the key
to keeping a
healthy flock.


Production Notes.
Production Notes
When livestock producers speak of production, they are talking
about an animal’s growth, fattening, milk or egg production,
reproduction, or work. By choosing stock carefully; by manag-
ing the herd or flock properly to ensure that the animals have
adequate food, water, shelter, and exercise; and by attending to
the health-care needs of their animals, livestock producers can
enhance their animals’ productive ability.
This section gives a few guidelines to help you judge how
well a herd or flock is doing. To better understand the level of
production to be expected in your area, talk with your merit
badge counselor, a local livestock producer, or your county agent.
Length of Estrous Cycle and
Pregnancy in Farm Animals
Length of Estrous Cycle Length of
Animal (Heat Period) Pregnancy
Cow 21 days 282 days
Sow 20 to 21 days 114 days
Ewe 16 to 17 days 150 days
Goat 19 to 20 days 150 days
Mare 19 to 23 days 336 days
Knowing the fertility
(estrous) and pregnancy
cycles of animals and
length of pregnancy
is basic to being
able to judge their
productivity potential.
76 ANIMAL SCIENCE


ANIMAL SCIENCE 77
.Production Notes
Beef Cattle Performance
A cow’s economic value is judged by its repro-
ductive efficiency, mothering ability, rate and
economy of gain, longevity, and carcass merit.
High-producing cows should be fertile and have
a record of regular pregnancies, live births, and
good milk production. Their calves should be
efficient in using feed to gain weight rapidly.
A calf’s growth from birth to weaning is a good
reflection of a cow’s milk production and the
calf’s inherited ability to gain.
Fattening Cattle
Cattle may be expected to gain weight over the winter on
roughage. Calves weighing about 400 pounds when purchased
in October or November can be expected to gain about
1½ pounds per day over winter. In the spring and summer,
they can be finished, or fattened to their best weight, on a
combination of roughage and a high level of grain.
Cattle also can be finished quickly in a feedlot. Cattle
weighing 750 pounds can be finished in 150 days or fewer in
a feedlot on a full-feed program with high-concentrate rations.
In a feedlot, cattle can be expected to gain about 1 pound of
weight per 7 pounds of feed.
Carcass Grading
Beef carcass grades are based on the quality of the meat (USDA
quality grades) and the quantity or yield of trimmed, boneless,
major retail cuts of beef (USDA yield grades). Both grades are
assigned to a beef carcass.
USDA quality grades are prime, choice, good, standard,
commercial, utility, cutter, and canner, with prime being the
“best.” Quality grade is a prediction of the expected palatability
(taste qualities) of the meat. It is based mostly on animal matu-
rity and marbling (the amount of fat visible in a cross section
of the rib muscle).
Yield grade measures the amount of salable meat on a
carcass. It is based on the amount of external or back fat, the
carcass weight immediately after slaughter (also known as hot
carcass weight), the amount of fat surrounding the kidney and
heart or in the pelvic area, and the area of a cross section of
the rib muscle. USDA yield grades are expressed by a number,
1 through 5, with yield grade 1 having the highest yield of retail
cuts, and yield grade 5 the lowest.
Reproductive efficiency and
mothering ability are two traits
in cattle that contribute to high
economic value.


78 ANIMAL SCIENCE
Production Notes.
Performance Characteristics
Weight is just one of several factors considered when farm animals are
judged for their economic value. There are other important traits.
Carcass Merit. The fineness of a dressed meat animal, based on the
quality of the meat (its taste, tenderness, and “eating” characteristics)
and on the yield (the percentage of lean meat obtained from the carcass).
Feed Efficiency (or Feed Conversion). The number of pounds of feed
needed to produce 1 pound of weight gain or product. For example,
it takes about 9 pounds of feed to produce 1 pound of weight gain on
a live cow and 4 pounds of feed to produce a pound of pork, but only
1.11 pounds of feed to produce 1 pound of milk.
Fertility (Reproductive Efficiency). An animal’s ability to reproduce
regularly; to produce vigorous, fast-growing offspring; and to produce
multiple births (depending on the animal).
Longevity. How long the animal lives and can reproduce.
Mothering and Nursing Ability. A breeding female’s ability to feed,
protect, and care for her young. The survival of young animals and
their weight at weaning depend largely on the mother’s maternal
and milking abilities.
Rate of Gain. How quickly the animal gains weight. Rate of gain
and economy of gain in meat animals are related. For example, some
cattle may gain only 1 pound a day, while others (in the same feedlot
and on the same ration) may gain more than 3 pounds daily. Those
that put on weight the fastest also show the most economical gains.


ANIMAL SCIENCE 79
.Production Notes
Dairy Cow Performance
A dairy cow normally will produce milk for 305 days, with a
60-day dry period. This may vary from a 270-day milking
period or less, to a lactation of more than 400 days. Shorter
periods normally are caused by the cow being bred again soon
after calving, or because of illness. Longer periods are mainly
due to breeding problems.
The average cow commonly produces 15,000 to
25,000 pounds of milk in a year or 50 or 100 pounds of milk
per day. Many top cows produce more than 40,000 pounds
per year. Producing such large amounts of milk places
enormous demands on the cow’s metabolism and requires
careful nutritional management. A lactating dairy cow’s diet is
carefully formulated, often with the help of computer programs
and specialized dairy nutrition consultants.
Milk production
is fairly high
immediately
after calving and
increases until
the cow reaches
her maximum
production. Daily
lactation peaks
45 to 60 days after
calving. Then the
amount of milk
produced declines
gradually until the
cow is dried up, to
give her time to
prepare to deliver
her next calf.
It is virtually impossible for a high-producing dairy cow to eat enough to
satisfy her energy needs during the peak of her lactation period. As a
result, a good dairy cow is expected to lose weight, or “condition,” during
peak production. This weight is replaced later in the lactation period.
Milk cows must be cleaned and milked two or three times a day.


Production Notes.
Horse Performance
A direct relationship exists between a horse’s conformation
(build) and its type, and the work it is to do.
A quarter horse, for example, should have a well-balanced,
well-muscled body, firmly supported by strong, straight legs.
A quarter horse viewed from the side should have a short back
and long underline. This gives the horse the ability to stretch
out underneath. It should have short, erect ears that often point
forward. This indicates a horse that is in good condition, alert,
and paying attention to its surroundings—essential qualities in
a cutting horse, roping horse, or stock horse. The eyes should
be prominent and set well apart so that the horse can see for-
ward and backward without moving its head. This allows the
horse to react quickly. The nostrils should be large to allow the
intake of air necessary for a hard-working horse (horses do not
breathe through the mouth).
Sheep Performance
Ewes of most sheep breeds can
conceive (become pregnant) only
during the fall. Unlike cattle that
can be managed to calve in the
spring, the fall, or all year round,
sheep normally lamb in the spring.
A few breeds do not follow this
pattern and may produce out-
of-season lambs. The Dorset is
an example.
A horse, such as this jumper, must be built for the job it is to do.
Ewes normally
Iamb in the spring.
The points of
conformation
judged ideal for
various breeds of
horses are beyond
the scope of
this pamphlet.
Check with the
appropriate breed
association to find
out more about a
specific breed.
(See the resources
section.) Most
associations have
a list of standards
available at
no cost.


ANIMAL SCIENCE 81
.Production Notes
Feeding extra grain or grazing ewes on lush pasture two or
three weeks before the breeding season is recommended to
make ewes more fertile and increase the chances of twins being
conceived. A 110 to 150 percent lamb crop (an average of one
or more lambs per ewe) in a flock is desirable. Feeding a half
pound of oats or corn per head per day in the weeks before the
breeding season may produce an increase in the lamb crop of
10 to 20 percent.
Meat
Sheep produce meat and wool. In meat-type breeds, the
emphasis is on carcass traits; wool generally is a minor
concern. Sheep destined for slaughter should be well-muscled.
The carcass of a slaughtered sheep is classified as lamb for
a young animal or mutton for a mature animal. A carcass will
generally yield from 46 to 53 percent meat. The rest of the
carcass produces by-products such as glue, soap, and fertilizer.
Wool
With sheep kept for wool production, producers put less
emphasis on body traits and pay more attention to the weight
and quality of the fleece. As a rule, wool-type sheep are larger,
more angular, and less muscular but have heavier fleeces than
meat breeds. Sheep are sheared for wool once a year, usually in
the spring.
The fleece is examined, and undesirable wool (with stains
or clumps of plant matter, for example) is removed. Wool that
is shorter, coarser, or otherwise different from most of the fleece
(such as the wool from the belly and hindquarters) is sorted
out and bagged separately to keep from mixing wools of vary-
ing qualities within the same fleece.
One by-product,
chamois skins, is
unique to sheep.
Cleaned of wool
and tanned,
sheepskins once
were used for
college diplomas.
Now, chamois
skins are most
likely to be seen
in gas stations
and car washes.
Shearing is a skill that can be learned only through practice. A skilled
shearer, using electric clippers, can shear a sheep in about five minutes,
taking care to remove the fleece in one piece as if it were a blanket being
unwrapped from the animal. If you want to learn, check into the possibility
of attending a sheepshearing school or training with professional shearers.
Producers judge individual ewes according to the birth weight of their
lambs, how often they have lambs, how often they have twins, the wean-
ing weight, weight gain, feed efficiency, fleece weight, and carcass merit.


82 ANIMAL SCIENCE
Production Notes.
Fleeces are graded according to their fineness—the thick-
ness (diameter) of individual wool fibers. The American
or “blood” system of grading wool is based on comparing the
quality with that of Merino wool. The grades, ranging from
finest to coarsest, are fine (for full-blooded Merino), half blood,
three-eighths blood, quarter blood, low quarter blood, common,
and braid. Fineness is the main factor that determines the
market value of raw wool. Fine wools are used to make
lightweight fabrics for clothing, while coarser wools are
used in blankets and carpets.
Dairy Goat Performance
Good dairy goats can produce up to 8 quarts of milk a day,
averaging about 2 quarts a day over 10 months. A doe should
be milked twice daily on a regular schedule.
The mating season of a goat depends on where it lives.
In tropical areas near the equator, goats mate throughout the
year, but in the temperate regions they breed only from late
summer to late winter. They begin breeding as the days grow
shorter. A doe gives birth to two or three kids about five
months after mating.
Hog Production
Litter size and weight at birth, litter size and weight at wean-
ing, conformation, rate and efficiency of weight gain, and
carcass value are the traits that determine swine productivity.
Sows have large litters at short intervals, making it possible
to market large numbers of animals. An outstanding sow can
produce more than two litters of 10 market pigs, or nearly
5,000 pounds of pigs for market, per year.
The usual litter size is eight or nine piglets. Gilts (young
female hogs) usually are bred when they are 8 months old or
on their third heat period, which allows them to farrow
(give birth) at about 1 year of age.
Another grading system, which is used internationally and is replacing the
American blood system, is the micron system that measures individual
fiber diameters in microns (a length equal to 1/25,400 of an inch). A wool
graded half blood under the American blood system would have a fiber
diameter of 22 to nearly 25 microns. The micron system is the most accu-
rate measure for determining the grade of wools.


ANIMAL SCIENCE 83
.Production Notes
Pork and Carcass Grades
Market hogs are classified and sold in four market classes based
on sex, the use to which the animal is best suited, and weight.
• Most finished market hogs are barrows and gilts—castrated
male hogs and young females. They reach market weight at
200 to 250 pounds. Most pork for human consumption
comes from this market class.
• Sows, usually weighing upward of 220 pounds, make up the
second market class of swine. Pork from sows marketed for
human consumption is mainly in the form of cured pork.
• Stags (castrated males that show some sexual development)
and boars (intact males) are low in market value because
little of the carcass is suitable for human consumption.
Lubricants, fertilizers, hides, and other by-products are the
main uses of these classes.
Carcass grades indicate the quality of an animal in its
specific market class. The U.S. carcass grades for pork are
U.S. No. 1, U.S. No. 2, U.S. No. 3, U.S. No. 4, and U.S. Utility.
These grades are determined by inspecting the fat and the lean
for quality, including firmness, color, backfat thickness, belly
fatness, and loin marbling (the intermixture of fat and lean),
and by the percentage of the four major wholesale cuts—hams,
loins, picnics, and Boston butts. U.S. No. 1 carcasses have a
high-quality lean, a high yield of lean cuts, and a low percent-
age of backfat. The poorest quality carcasses—those with unac-
ceptable belly thickness and those that are soft or oily—are
graded U.S. Utility.
Sows have large
litters at short
intervals,
sometimes
producing more
than two litters
of 10 market pigs
each year.


84 ANIMAL SCIENCE
Production Notes.
Poultry Production
Commercial high-laying hens will produce 20 eggs a month.
Layers are seldom kept for more than 19 months because
production begins to drop by this age. With good management,
it should take less than 4½ pounds of feed to produce a
dozen eggs.
Eggs are graded according to weight and quality for
three markets.
• Consumer grades—Grade AA or Fresh Fancy, Grade A;
and Jumbo, Extra Large, Large, Medium, Small, and Peewee
• Wholesale grades—U.S. Specials, U.S. Extras, U.S.
Standards, U.S. Trades, U.S. Dirties, and U.S. Checks
(used in wholesale trade; may be re-sorted to conform to
consumer grades)
• U.S. procurement grades—Special designations for
institutions and the armed forces
Broilers
A broiler should weigh about 5½ pounds at 50 days of age.
Feed conversion should average 2 pounds of feed or less per
pound of gain.
The U.S. Department of Agriculture
has established the grades for broilers
(dressed birds are Grade A). The
grades are based on conformation,
fleshing, fat covering, and presence or
absence of defects.
Eggs should be
collected frequently,
cleaned immediately,
and refrigerated.


ANIMAL SCIENCE 85
.Production Notes
Other classes of chicken meat include these.
• Roaster—a young chicken more mature than is acceptable
for broilers
• Capon—a castrated male younger than 8 months of age
• Stag—a male chicken younger than 10 months but showing
developing sex characteristics
• Cock or rooster—a mature male
• Hen or stewing chicken—a mature hen, usually older than
10 months, often culled from laying operations
The Rock Cornish or Cornish game hen is a female less
than 4 weeks of age and weighing no more than one
pound ready to cook, selected from Cornish or Cornish-
cross matings. These are popular at convention
banquets and similar affairs.


86 ANIMAL SCIENCE
Careers in Animal Science.
Careers in
Animal Science
Few professions are more important to American society than
that of agricultural producer. Farmers and ranchers grow the
crops and raise the livestock that provide the food we eat and
the natural fibers we need for clothing and other items.
Stockraisers are involved in genetics, business and econom-
ics, advertising and merchandising, nutrition, animal health,
and agronomy and range science. Many ranchers and stock-
farmers raise crops as well as livestock, growing nearly all of
the grains and forages their animals need.
Advances in agricultural production mean that fewer
people are needed on farms and ranches than in years past.
A hundred years ago, a farmer produced enough food and
fiber for five people. Now, each farm worker supplies enough
for more than 100 people.
Agricultural producers are the first
link in the vast chain that includes
the raising, processing, transport-
ing, and marketing of food and
fiber. The whole chain is called
agribusiness. People who are
interested in animal science
may pursue careers in livestock
production or in many related
fields in agribusiness, research,
education, or veterinary medicine.


ANIMAL SCIENCE 87
.Careers in Animal Science
Farm and Ranch Managers. The manager—whether
the farm or ranch owner or an employee hired to oversee the
business—plans the operation of the farm or ranch, supervises
the work, sees that animals are properly cared for, and that
barns, pens, and other farm buildings are kept clean and in
good repair. Farm and ranch managers also make the business
decisions, such as securing loans to finance the purchase of
livestock, feed, and equipment. The financial records of the
operation and the production records of the herd or flock are
the manager’s responsibility.
Farm Workers. Members of farm families and hired employees
do most of the routine work required of modern farming and
ranching. They maintain the facilities. They feed and water the
animals, check stock regularly for signs of infection or disease,
and often vaccinate livestock against diseases or spray them
with insecticides for protection against parasites.
For many of their tasks, farm workers use machinery, such
as tractors, hay balers, and milking machines. Farm workers
must have basic skills as mechanics and be able to set up,
operate, maintain, clean, and repair farm equipment. They
also maintain and repair barns, fences, and other structures.
The greatest
career
opportunities in
today’s agriculture
often lie in off-
farm positions.
However, don’t
overlook the many
opportunities in
the related fields
of animal health,
genetics, the meat
industry, and
agricultural
education.
Ranch managers of
small operations may
do much of the work
themselves. Those who
oversee large spreads
often have several
employees. Large
farms and ranches
may have dozens of
full-time workers.
Many farm laborers
learn their responsibili-
ties on the farm and
need little or no
outside training.


88 ANIMAL SCIENCE
Careers in Animal Science.
Off-Farm Occupations
Modern agriculture indirectly employs millions of people.
The number and variety of off-farm positions have grown as
the business and technical sides of agriculture have become
more complex.
Researcher. Animal scientists study breeding, feeding, and
marketing problems and develop improved methods of housing,
sanitation, and disease control. Research technicians generally
help scientists with their experimental work. Technicians have
the training and skills needed to prepare animals for tests, use
specialized equipment, and conduct experiments under a scien-
tist’s supervision.
Educator. Teachers are a vital link between researchers and
those who use the knowledge gained in the laboratory or from
the test herd. Vocational educators teach secondary school and
adult education classes in
farm and ranch manage-
ment; agricultural produc-
tion; agricultural supplies,
services, and sales; and
related areas.
Two- and four-
year colleges
and universities
in every state
offer degree
programs in the
agricultural sci-
ences, including
animal science. Animal science research is conducted by many universities and
private industries and by the U.S. Department of Agriculture.
This parasitologist checks
water sources used by live-
stock and wild animals for
signs of harmful organisms.


ANIMAL SCIENCE 89
.Careers in Animal Science
County Extension Agent. County extension agents are commu-
nity teachers and provide information to individuals, families,
and communities. They offer educational programs in agricul-
ture, natural resources, youth groups, community development,
and other areas of interest to local residents. They help improve
people’s lives, the local economy, and the environment.
This is a people career. Agents give educational workshops
and seminars and spread information through radio programs,
web pages, printed materials, and other communications tools.
Agricultural agents work mainly with farmers, ranchers, and
agribusinesses. Youth development agents train adults, recruit
volunteers, and work with young people through 4-H clubs,
special projects, and school programs.
To be a county extension agent, you need a bachelor’s or
master’s degree in agriculture or natural resources, education,
science/technology, or related field, along with the desire to
work with people of many backgrounds and contribute to the
local community.
Production Services and Specialists. As farms and ranches
become larger and agriculture grows more complex, producers
increasingly rely on specialists for livestock and crop services.
Veterinarians, for example, test animals for disease, supervise
programs to eradicate certain diseases, and conduct research to
develop vaccines. Ranchers may hire technicians to artificially
inseminate cows.
Testers employed
by dairy herd
improvement
associations
travel from farm
to farm to test the
milk from each
cow for acidity
and butterfat
content. Sheep
shearers shear
wool. Poultry
hatcheries employ
animal caretakers
to vaccinate birds,
place eggs on
trays in incubators,
and care for
baby chicks.
The number and variety of off-farm positions have grown as the
technical aspects of agriculture have become more complex.


90 ANIMAL SCIENCE
Careers in Animal Science.
Inspectors. Meat and poultry inspectors work for the U.S.
Department of Agriculture and for many state departments of
agriculture. Working under the supervision of a veterinarian,
they inspect meat and poultry slaughtering, processing, and
packaging operations to ensure that proper sanitation is main-
tained. They also inspect meat additives and make sure that
processed meats are correctly labeled.
Agricultural Commodity Graders. Graders inspect agricultural
products to determine their quality and grade, and issue
grading certificates. They generally specialize in a particular
commodity, such as eggs or dairy products.
If you love animals and the outdoors, stockraising
could suit you perfectly—but it is challenging.
Animals must be fed and watered every day.
Because of the demands of their work, farmers
and ranchers rarely take vacation.
For off-farm occupations, working conditions
vary. Researchers and educators generally work
in offices and laboratories and have fairly regular
hours. Veterinarians, however, may have to work
in uncomfortable surroundings, and outdoors in
all kinds of weather.


ANIMAL SCIENCE 91
.Careers in Animal Science
Preparing for a Career
Growing up on a family farm or ranch and taking part in
programs for young people such as the National FFA
Organization or 4-H is important training for prospective live-
stock producers. However, because of the scientific and busi-
ness complexities of modern farming and ranching and the
need to keep up with advances in farming methods, many
young people who grow up on farms and ranches also attend a
two- or four-year college of agriculture before launching their
own careers in livestock production.
Colleges of agriculture offer four-year degree programs in
general agriculture, agronomy (field crops), soil science, animal
science, agricultural economics, agricultural business, food
science, agricultural education, agricultural engineering, and
related fields. Although a bachelor’s degree usually is enough
for a livestock producer, related positions in animal science,
breeding, and research may require an advanced degree.
Many technical schools or junior colleges offer programs
in agricultural production, agricultural supply and service,
agricultural mechanics, and other specialties. The training may
last only a few weeks, or students may enroll in a two-year
degree program, depending on the subject.
Colleges of veterinary medicine offer professional training leading to
the doctor of veterinary medicine degree.


92 ANIMAL SCIENCE
Animal Science Resources.
The county extension office is home
base for your county agent. If possible,
visit the county extension office before
you start on requirement 6. High school
vocational agriculture teachers are
also good resources.
On the internet (with your
parent’s permission) visit
www.nifa.usda.gov.
Scouting Literature
Mammals pocket guide; Bird Study,
Environmental Science, Farm Mechanics,
Horsemanship, Mammal Study, Plant
Science, Public Health, Soil and Water
Conservation, and Veterinary Medicine
merit badge pamphlets
hlets
Books
Belanger, Jerry. Storey’s Guide to Raising
Dairy Goats. Storey Publishing, 2018.
Damerow, Gail. Barnyard in
Your Backyard: A Beginner’s Guide
to Raising Chickens, Ducks, Geese,
Rabbits, Goats, Sheep, and Cattle.
Storey Publishing, 2002.
Dutson, Judith. Getting Your First
Horse. Storey Publishing, 2003.
Ekarius, Carol, and Ken Ekarius.
How to Build Animal Housing:
60 Plans for Coops, Hutches, Barns,
Sheds, Pens, Nestboxes, Feeders,
Stanchions, and Much More.
Storey Publishing, 2004.
Haynes, N. Bruce. Keeping Livestock
Healthy: A Veterinary Guide to
Horses, Cattle, Pigs, Goats, and
Sheep. Storey Publishing, 2001.
Klober, Kelly. Storey’s Guide to Raising
Pigs. Storey Publishing, 2018.
Peck-Whiting, Jeanie. Farm Animals:
Your Guide to Raising Livestock.
On the Farm Press, 2003.
Simmons, Paula, and Carol Ekarius.
Storey’s Guide to Raising Sheep.
Storey Publishing, 2019.
Thomas, Heather Smith. Getting Started
With Beef and Dairy Cattle. Storey
Publishing, 2005.
Vogel, Colin. Complete Horse Care
Manual. DK Publishing, 2011.
Organizations and Websites
AgNIC (Agriculture Network
Information Collaborative)
Telephone: 301-504-6999
www.agnic.org
AGRICOLA (National
Agricultural Library)
Telephone: 301-504-5755
agricola.nal.usda.gov
Animal Science Resources
With your parent’s permission, visit
the Boy Scouts of America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org,
for a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


ANIMAL SCIENCE 93
.Animal Science Resources
Agriculture in the Classroom
www.agclassroom.org
American Delaine and Merino
Record Association
Telephone: 785-456-8500
admra.net
American Angus Association
Telephone: 816-383-5100
www.angus.org
American Bantam Association
www.bantamclub.com
American Berkshire Association
Telephone: 765-497-3618
www.americanberkshire.com
American Brahman
Breeders Association
Telephone: 713-349-0854
www.brahman.org
American Cheviot Sheep Society
www.cheviots.org
American Chianina Association
Telephone: 816-431-2808
www.chicattle.org
American Corriedale Association
Telephone: 618-676-1046
www.americancorriedale.com
American Dairy Goat Association
Telephone: 828-286-3801
www.adga.org
American Farm Bureau Federation
600 Maryland Ave. SW, Suite 1000W
Washington, DC 20024
Telephone: 202-406-3600
www.fb.org
American Goat Society
Telephone: 830-535-4247
www.americangoatsociety.com
American Guernsey Association
Telephone: 614-864-2409
www.usguernsey.com
American Hampshire Sheep
Association
Telephone: 785-456-8500
www.hampshires.org
American Hereford Association
Telephone: 816-842-3757
www.hereford.org
American-International
Charolais Association
Telephone: 816-464-5977
www.charolaisusa.com
American Jersey Cattle Association
Telephone: 614-861-3636
www.usjersey.com
American Milking Shorthorn Society
Telephone: 608-365-3332
www.milkingshorthorn.com
American Morgan Horse Association
Telephone: 802-985-4944
www.morganhorse.com
American Paint Horse Association
Telephone: 817-834-2742
www.apha.com
American Poultry Association
www.amerpoultryassn.com
American Quarter Horse Association
Telephone: 806-376-4811
www.aqha.com
American Rambouillet Sheep
Breeders Association
Telephone: 785-456-8500
www.countrylovin.com/ARSBA/
index.htm
American Saddlebred
Horse Association
Telephone: 859-259-2742
www.asha.net
American Sheep Industry Association
Telephone: 303-771-3500
www.sheepusa.org


94 ANIMAL SCIENCE
Animal Science Resources.
American Shetland Pony Club
Telephone: 309-263-4044
www.shetlandminiature.com
American Shorthorn Association
Telephone: 402-393-7200
www.shorthorn.org
American Simmental Association
Telephone: 816-599-7777
www.simmental.org
American Southdown
Breeders’ Association
Telephone: 325-429-6226
www.southdownsheep.org
Appaloosa Horse Club
Telephone: 208-882-5578
www.appaloosa.com
Arabian Horse Association
Telephone: 303-696-4500
www.arabianhorses.org
Breeders World
www.breedersworld.com
Brown Swiss Association
Telephone: 608-365-4474
www.brownswissusa.com
Certified Pedigreed Swine
(Chester White, Hereford, Poland
China, and Spotted Swine breed
associations)
Telephone: 309-691-0151
www.cpsswine.com
Columbia Sheep Breeders
Association of America
Telephone: 507-360-2160
www.columbiasheep.org
Continental Dorset Club
Telephone: 401-647-4676
continentaldorsetclub.com
The Coop
www.the-coop.org
Holstein Association USA Inc.
Toll-free telephone: 800-952-5200
www.holsteinusa.com
National Cattlemen’s Beef Association
Telephone: 303-694-0305
www.ncba.org
National 4-H Council
Telephone: 301-961-2800
www.4-h.org
National FFA Organization
Toll-free telephone: 888-332-2668
www.ffa.org
National Pork Producers Council
Telephone: 202-347-3600
www.nppc.org
National Swine Registry
(American Landrace Association,
American Yorkshire Club, Hampshire
Swine Registry, and United Duroc
Swine Registry)
Telephone: 765-463-3594
www.nationalswine.com
NetVet—Veterinary Resources
netvet.wustl.edu
North American Limousin Foundation
Telephone: 303-220-1693
www.nalf.org
Pony of the Americas Club Inc.
Telephone: 317-788-0107
www.poac.org
Tennessee Walking Horse Breeders’
and Exhibitors’ Association
Telephone: 931-359-1574
www.twhbea.com
U.S. Ayrshire Breeders Association
Telephone: 614-335-0020
www.usayrshire.com
U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA)
1400 Independence Ave. SW
Washington, DC 20250
Telephone: 202-720-2791
www.usda.gov
United Suffolk Sheep Association
Telephone: 641-684-5291
www.suffolks.org


ANIMAL SCIENCE 95
.Animal Science Resources
Acknowledgments
For assistance in preparing this edition
of the Animal Science merit badge
pamphlet, the Boy Scouts of America is
grateful to Daniel G. Peterson, Ph.D., a
professor in the Animal Science
Department at California Polytechnic
State University in San Luis Obispo.
Cal Poly’s Animal Science Department
boasts one of the country’s most com-
prehensive “hands-on, learn by doing”
programs. For more information, visit
www.animalscience.calpoly.edu.
The BSA thanks Dr. Paul O.
Brackelsberg, professor emeritus,
Iowa State University, and Dr. Gerald T.
Schelling, Texas A&M University, for
their help with this pamphlet.
The Boy Scouts of America is
grateful to the men and women serving
on the National Merit Badge
Subcommittee for the improvements
made in updating this pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration Credits
American Hampshire Sheep Association,
courtesy—page 33 (Hampshire)
American Shropshire Registry
Association, courtesy—
page 34 (Shropshire)
American Southdown Breeders’
Association, courtesy—
page 34 (Southdown)
California Polytechnic State University/
Olivia Grupp and Heather Wilson,
courtesy—cover (piglet, calf shelter);
pages 3 (udder), 5, 9 (cows),
11 (cow and calf), 23 (horse faces),
27 (quarter horse), 33 (Suffolk), 42,
43, 44 (hay), 47, 51 (sheep herding),
52, 53, 54 (barn, shelter), 62, 63 (sick
cow), 64, 70, 77, 79, 80 (jumping
horse), 83 (piglets), and 86
The Cattleman magazine, Texas
and Southwestern Cattle Raisers
Association, courtesy—
page 17 (Brangus)
Continental Dorset Club, courtesy—
page 35 (Dorset)
Im Your Gold Huckleberry, Tennessee
Walking Horse Stallion, owned by
Mary Bittner of Deer Creek Walkers,
Quitman, Texas, courtesy—
page 29 (Tennessee walking horse)
Shaffer’s Goldrush, courtesy—
pages 38–39 (all)
Rick and Michelle Shannon,
Smokey Valley Farm, courtesy—
page 35 (Cheviot)
USDA Natural Resources Conservation
Service/Jeff Vanuga, courtesy—
page 55 (hogs)
U.S. Department of Agriculture,
courtesy—pages 17 (Santa
Gertrudis), 59, 65, 66, and
90 (inspector)
U.S. Department of Agriculture/Scott
Bauer, courtesy—page 88 (pig)
U.S. Department of Agriculture/Ken
Hammond, courtesy—page 87 (farm
laborer)
U.S. Department of Agriculture/Bob
Nichols, courtesy—page 87
(ranch manager)
U.S. Department of Agriculture/Larry
Rana, courtesy—page 55 (goats)
U.S. Department of Agriculture/Bill
Tarpenning, courtesy—pages 15
(Angus, Hereford), 17 (Charolais),
18 (Limousin), 21 (Ayrshire,
Guernsey), 22 (Jersey), 26
(Appaloosa), 27 (overo), 29
(Belgian), and 57 (cow)


96 ANIMAL SCIENCE
Animal Science Resources.
U.S. Department of Agriculture/
Joe Valbuena, courtesy—
page 40 (white Leghorn pullets)
U.S. Department of Agriculture/
Keith Weller, courtesy—page 88
(parasitologist)
Wikimedia Commons/Keystone
International, courtesy—
page 34 (Oxford)
Wikipedia.org, courtesy—pages 12
(all), 16 (Shorthorn, Brahman), 18
(Simmental), 19, 21 (Brown Swiss),
22 (Holstein), 26 (Morgan), 28
(Shetland, Standardbred), 32
(Merino), 36, 40 (chick), and 61
Wikipedia.org/Paul Keleher, courtesy—
page 25 (Clydesdales)
Wikipedia.org/Natural Resources
Conservation Service/Bob Nichols,
courtesy—page 35 (Corriedale)
Wikipedia.org/soxophone player,
courtesy—page 33 (Columbia)
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of
or are protected by the Boy Scouts
of America.
Daniel Giles—page 57 (Scout
picking hoof)
John McDearmon—all illustrations
on pages 13, 20, 24, 31, 37, 41,
and 44–46
Brian Payne—page 91