PULP AND
PAPER


PULP AND PAPER
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Pulp-And-Paper or check
Scoutbook for the latest requirements.
35937
ISBN 978-0-8395-3343-6
©2025 Scouting America
2025 Printing


PULP AND PAPER 3





PULP AND PAPER 5
Contents
A Brief History of Paper . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
A Walk Through the Papermaker’s Woods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
How Paper Is Made . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
How We Use Paper Today . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
Making Paper by Hand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
Careers in Pulp and Paper . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
Papermaking Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46


6 PULP AND PAPER
A Brief History of Paper.
A Brief History of Paper
Nearly 2,000 years ago, in the year 105, a Chinese man named
Ts’ai Lun ground up some plants, including mulberry bark and
hemp. He may also have recycled old rags into the mixture. He
added water and mixed up the
fibers until he had a big, squishy
mess. Then he spread the wet
pulp on a cloth screen framed in
bamboo. He set the thin mat of
fibers in the sun to dry.
Some archaeological evidence
suggests there may have been
other papermakers even earlier
than Ts’ai Lun, but he was the
first to have his work recorded
for history.
The Chinese kept papermak-
ing their secret for hundreds of
years, but gradually their Korean
and Japanese neighbors learned
the art. Then, in 751, the Chinese
lost a battle with the Arabs in
Central Asia. The victorious Arabs
made prisoners of several Chinese
papermakers and took them to
Samarkand, an ancient city that
today is in Uzbekistan. From the
captured Chinese papermakers,
the Arabs learned the art
of papermaking.
Paper spread across the Arab
world, from the Middle East to
Egypt (where it displaced papyrus)
Papermaking began in China in about A.D. 105.
The bark of the mulberry tree (pictured top right)
was shredded, mixed with scraps of linen and
hemp, soaked, and beaten into a pulp. The pulp
was dipped up on a mold (bottom left), and the
water drained away to form a sheet of paper
(bottom right). The Chinese symbol for paper is
shown at top left.


PULP AND PAPER 7
.A Brief History of Paper
and westward to Morocco. The Moors from North Africa
brought papermaking to Europe. These Arabic invaders, after
conquering Spain, built Europe’s first paper mill there in about
1150. Then Italy became a major paper producer in 1250.
Soon the art spread to France, where monks in the 1300s
began making paper for holy texts. European monks had long
used parchment, made from animal skins that were stretched,
scraped, dried, and cut to the right size. Parchment was
extremely expensive. It has been estimated that a single Bible
handwritten on parchment required the skins of 300 sheep.
When Johannes Gutenberg of Germany perfected the movable-
type printing press in the 1450s, a tremendous thing happened.
Books suddenly became available to ordinary people. Before
Gutenberg, books had been so rare and costly that only mon-
asteries, royalty, and scholars could own them. Now, even poor
people could get their hands on books.
People became better educated. More people learned to
read, they wanted more books, and the demand for paper sky-
rocketed. Papermakers couldn’t find enough old clothes and
rags to turn into enough paper to meet the demand. Surely,
they thought, there had to be something they could use that
would provide plentiful papermaking material so books and
writing paper could be made widely available at low cost.
Ts’ai Lun was a court official and a scholar. What he invented that day would
change the world. He made paper, one of the most important inventions
of all time. Imagine getting through just one day without a product made
from paper.
B.P. (Before Paper)
You have to go back a lot longer than 2,000 years to discover when people
started writing. It seems from the time of the cavemen, people wrote and
painted on cave walls. Early on, they drew designs on wood, on wet clay,
and on metal. The Chinese, before Ts’ai Lun gave them paper, wrote on
silk cloth—very expensive stuff—and made heavy, clumsy books from
bamboo. The ancient Greeks used parchment made from animal skins.
Egyptians more than 5,000 years ago wrote on papyrus made from Nile
River reeds, cut into thin strips and crisscrossed in layers, then hammered
together into thin, hard sheets. Our word “paper” comes from the word
papyrus, but papyrus was not true paper as we know it today.


8 PULP AND PAPER
A Brief History of Paper.
In the 1700s, a French scientist named René Antoine Ferchault
de Réaumur realized what could be used as a plentiful papermak-
ing material. Réaumur watched a paper wasp build a nest out of
chewed-up wood. The wasp would chew on wood, grind it up,
digest it with its internal enzymes (an early form of what we call
biopulping today), and spit it out, making a fine paper to create its
nest bit by bit. As far as we know, Réaumur never tried to chew
up wood himself to make paper with it. However, he found that
paper could be made from wood, and wood was plentiful and
practical. A major step toward modern papermaking had been
taken, but it would not be until the late 1800s that technology
was developed to use wood on a large scale in papermaking.
Papermaking in Colonial America
The first paper mill in America was built in 1690 near
Germantown, Pennsylvania, by William Rittenhouse. He had
been an apprentice papermaker in Holland. He settled near
Philadelphia because the city’s population was big enough to
provide him with the main raw material that was still being
used for paper at that time: old rags. He also chose a spot
where there was plenty of water, the other necessary ingredient
for making paper. The first American papermakers were trained
at the Germantown mill—one sheet at a time.
Making paper by hand, sheet by sheet, was slow and
tedious. The rags were washed and then kept damp for weeks
so they would partly rot. The wet, decaying rags were then
ground into a pulp and pounded with water in large wooden
vats to make a creamy batter.
Then it was the role of a skilled “vatman” to dip up a
thin layer of the pulp on a wire screen stretched over a wooden
frame. This equipment was called a mold. The vatman drained
off the excess water, then gave the mold several sharp jerks to
shake out most of the remaining water and to help mat and
lock the fibers together for strength.
Early paper was made from cotton and linen rags. Papermakers had a
tough time getting enough rags. When the Black Death, a horrible plague,
killed millions of people in Europe during the 1300s, tons of rags from
clothing became available for use, and dealing in old rags became a
thriving trade. Some historians say the Black Death entered England
from Europe on these infected rags.


PULP AND PAPER 9
.A Brief History of Paper
The vatman passed the mold to the “coucher,” who
gently pressed a dry piece of felt against the wet sheet to trans-
fer the wet sheet to the felt. The coucher then stacked the felt
with the wet sheet on it with other felt-sheet layers into a post
of up to 144 layers. This post was squeezed in a large press to
force out water and compact the paper fibers together.
The post was turned over to a “layman” who carefully
peeled the paper from the felt, then laid each sheet of damp
paper on a fresh, dry piece of felt. The layman restacked all the
sheets of paper, layering them as before with dry felt. Then the
stack (the post) was again squeezed in the press to remove more
water. This was repeated three times. After the last pressing, the
paper was hung up to dry.
At this stage, the paper was too absorbent to print on. Ink
would make blotches, like trying to write on a paper towel with
a felt-tipped pen. To prepare the surface to take ink crisply, each
dried sheet of paper was dipped in a vat of sizing, a gummy
liquid. Then the sheets were once more layered with felt and
squeezed in the press to remove the excess sizing.
Because the process was slow and rags were hard to get,
paper was always in short supply. In the early 1700s a good
papermaking team could make only about 1,500 sheets of paper,
about 22 by 30 inches, in one day’s work.
Still, with some paper available, the American colonists
could publish newspapers. The first newspapers in the colonies
were the Boston News Letter (founded in 1705), the Boston
Gazette (1719), and Bradford’s Mercury (1719).
After a while, Great Britain required the colonists to pay a
tax on newspapers and pamphlets. This new tax, imposed by
the Stamp Act of 1765, did not sit well with the Americans.
No Squares Here
Why is paper rectangular in shape, not square? Probably because early
papermakers—vatmen—found it easier to control rectangular molds than
square ones. The rectangular shape made it easier to dip the mold into
the vat, then jerk the layer of pulp evenly. Tradition kept the shape rectan-
gular, even after papermaking machines took over from skilled vatmen.


10 PULP AND PAPER
A Brief History of Paper.
Colonial printers published works that spoke out against British
rule, and the British government responded by trying to restrict
papermaking in America.
So important was papermaking in the colonies that a
skilled maker of paper molds, Nathan Sellers of Pennsylvania,
was discharged from the American army in 1776 by a special
resolution of the Continental Congress. They sent him home
to make the molds that were desperately needed to produce
paper for writing military orders and dispatches during the
Revolutionary War.
From Handmade to Machine-Made Paper
In Europe, inventors continued to work on ways to speed up
papermaking. In 1798, Nicholas-Louis Robert of France invented
a machine that would form a continuous sheet of paper on a
moving wire screen, making paper production much faster
and less expensive than molding single sheets by hand. The
invention, a huge step forward, was patented in 1799.
Two English brothers, Henry and Sealy Fourdrinier,
developed a practical version of the continuous paper machine
in the early 1800s. Mills in Britain, Europe, India, and America
acquired these Fourdrinier machines, as they were commonly
called. The first paper machine in the United States was set up
in a mill near Philadelphia in 1817.
By 1810, the new United States boasted 185 paper mills.
Rags for making paper became critically scarce, and the search
was on for plentiful raw materials that could serve as a better
alternative. Mills tested tree bark, sugarcane waste, straw, and
cornstalks for sources of fiber.
One of the oldest words in papermak-
ing is “ream.” The word can be traced
to the Arabic “rismah” or “rizmah,”
meaning a bale or bundle (of clothes,
paper, etc.). In French the word is
“rame,” and the Dutch variation is
“riem.” Over time, the number of
sheets of paper in a “bundle” or ream
became fixed at about 480 or 500. In
the United States, a 500-sheet ream
of paper is the most common.
The modern paper
machines, which
produce most of
our paper, are
basically improved
Fourdrinier
machines and
new high-speed,
twin-wire gap
machines, which
produce some
papers at 6,600
feet per minute,
or 75 mph.


PULP AND PAPER 11
.A Brief History of Paper
Of the available raw materials, wood stood out as the best
and most plentiful. Inventors developed workable ways to grind
wood for making wood pulp. In the 1850s and ’60s, English and
American chemists found they could use chemicals to separate
the wood fibers. About 1880, German chemist Carl F. Dahl
perfected the use of wood for papermaking by adding yet
another chemical. His sulfate, or kraft, method spread quickly
and reached the United States in the early 1900s. (Kraft means
“strength” in German.) Low-cost, mass-produced paper soon
became available. Books, newspapers, and magazines were
printed in large numbers. Schoolchildren gave up their writing
slates in favor of paper.
Paper Firsts
Today, paper products such as cups, towels, and tissues are so
common that we use them daily and hardly think about them.
Not so long ago, however, people did not have these handy
items. Consider these:
• Toilet paper, invented by American Joseph Gayetty in 1857,
was considered a luxury item at first, but it came into wide-
spread use after the Civil War.
• George Eastman manufactured coated photographic paper
in 1885.
• In the 1800s it was common for people to drink after one
another from a single cup attached to a public water fountain.
Disposable paper cups came along in the early 1900s as
protection against the germs and diseases that were spread
by people drinking out of the same cup.
• During a cold epidemic in 1907, a Philadelphia teacher
suspected that her students were spreading germs by all
using the same cloth towel. She cut heavy paper into
squares—the first paper towels—and gave them to her
students to use.
• When cars came on the American scene, women began
using more cosmetics to protect their skin from the effects
of wind hitting their faces as they rode in cars that were
open to the elements. Women used cold cream to remove
the cosmetics, and they needed cloths for wiping away the
cold cream. In the 1920s, facial tissues were developed for
women to use for removing cold cream and makeup.
In 1863, the
Boston Weekly
Journal became
the first American
newspaper to be
printed on paper
made from ground
wood pulp.





PULP AND PAPER 13
.A Walk Through the Papermaker’s Woods
A Walk Through the
Papermaker’s Woods
Paper consists mainly of cellulose, a substance that strengthens
the stems, roots, and leaves of trees, grasses, and other plants.
Early papermakers discovered that the inner bark of certain
shrubs and trees contains a fairly pure form of cellulose fibers.
Wood is about half cellulose. The purest form of cellulose fibers
that occurs naturally is cotton, which is more than 95 percent
cellulose. The highest quality papers are almost pure cellulose.
Anselm Payen, a French chemist, identified cellulose in
wood in the 1830s. Wood has been the major raw material
in papermaking for more than 100 years because it is widely
available and it is a renewable (replaceable) resource.
Trees Used in the Paper Industry
Trees are often grouped as softwoods (needleleaf or evergreen
trees) and hardwoods (broad-leaved trees that lose their leaves
in the fall and winter). The wood fibers from different trees vary
in length, from about 1
⁄32 to 1
⁄4 inch (1 to 5 millimeters) long. The
longer fibers come from softwood trees such as pines, firs, hem-
locks, and spruces. Broad-leaved trees such as aspens, beeches,
birches, gums, maples, and oaks have short fibers.
The shorter hardwood fibers that provide smoothness in
papers for printing and writing are used for softness in toilet
tissue. The longer softwood fibers are used for papers that need
to be strong, such as packaging papers. Papermakers mix these
fibers in combinations, depending on what they want the
finished paper to look like and how it will be used.
All fruits and
vegetables
contain cellulose.
The stiff stalks
of celery, for
example, are
rich in cellulose.
Many of the natural resources we use, such as ores, oil, and coal, are not
renewable. Once they’re taken from the ground, they can’t be replaced.
They are gone forever. Trees, however, are a renewable resource. We can
plant and grow more of them to replace the ones we use.
Pine—a softwood


14 PULP AND PAPER
A Walk Through the Papermaker’s Woods.
Some trees are grown and harvested, like a crop, especially
for papermaking. Paper manufacturing also uses leftover scraps
of lumber and the trimmings, shavings, and wood chips from
trees that are used for other purposes such as furniture making
and building construction. In the United States, recycled paper
and leftover wood make up about two-thirds of all the fiber used
in pulp and paper mills. The other one-third comes from whole
tree trunks. These whole trees are generally small, between
4 and 8 inches across. High-quality trees larger than 8 inches
in diameter can be too valuable to chip up for paper. They’re
normally sawed into lumber—boards and planks.
Trees that are dying from old age, insects, disease, or forest
fires are also used in papermaking. Foresters must remove these
trees to keep the forest healthy, and it’s sensible to use them for
wood pulp.
Leaves, needles, small branches, and roots left in the forest
enrich the soil and hold it in place, and can be used as biomass
fuel to generate energy. Nearly every part of a tree gets used for
something—lumber and paper, or for products ranging from
photographic film to chewing gum, shoe polish, dyes, soaps,
glues, medicines, rayon tire cord, and LCD screens in your TV
and cell phones.
Sustainable Forestry
Many pulp and paper companies
plant, harvest, and replant their
own forestlands. In the United
States, most of the trees that are
harvested for papermaking are
planted and grown in forests called
tree farms. When these trees mature
and are cut down, new ones are
planted to replace them, a practice
known as reforesting. This type
of forest management is called
sustainable forestry.
Professional forest managers
know they must use forests wisely so that the trees and other
resources are not permanently damaged or used up. Healthy,
productive forests provide wood fiber for the products that the
pulp and paper industries make. It’s in these industries’ best
interests, therefore, to protect the health of forests at the same
Spruce—
a softwood
Maple—
a hardwood
Oak—
a hardwood


PULP AND PAPER 15
.A Walk Through the Papermaker’s Woods
time they harvest trees to make their products. Paper companies
work to manage their lands so that the forests will keep on
producing fiber for paper products, habitat for fish and wildlife,
clean water, clean air, and woods where Scouts can go hiking
and camping.
Forest Management Systems
Several methods, or systems, are used to harvest, then replant
trees. Here’s a quick look at the systems commonly used in
American forests. (You can find more about these
in the Forestry merit badge pamphlet.)
• Clear-cutting is harvesting all (or almost all)
of the trees in an area of the forest. The cleared
area is then sown with seeds or planted with
seedlings. Or a new stand of trees, all the same
age, may grow naturally from seeds dropped
by trees around the cleared space, from seeds
already on the forest floor, or from sprouts that
grow from the stumps and roots of the cut trees.
Clear-cutting is a common harvest method for
trees grown for pulpwood.
To sustain a thing
means to keep it
up or keep it going.
Clear-cutting
In the 1920s, people were predicting that demand for
lumber, paper, and other wood products would use up
the country’s supply of trees by 1945. Not only have
those predictions proved untrue, but today the United
States has more trees than it did 90 years ago.


16 PULP AND PAPER
A Walk Through the Papermaker’s Woods.
• Seed trees provide a natural source of seeds
from which a new stand of trees grows after a
mature stand is harvested. During harvesting, a
few healthy seed-producing trees are left stand-
ing to reseed the area. Then, when the fresh crop
of young trees has become established, the seed
trees themselves are harvested. The seed-tree
system can be used with various pines.
• In the shelterwood system, trees are harvested
in stages over a period of 10 to 20 years. A new
stand grows where an old one stood. The mature
trees that are left uncut—the shelterwood—shade
the seedlings and young trees. Such trees as oak,
ponderosa pine, and white pine need shade when
they’re young. As the new trees grow up, the
shelterwood trees can be harvested.
• In the single-tree selection system, trees are
harvested individually as they mature. Seedlings
or sprouts grow in the open spaces created.
Similarly, small patches of mature trees can be
selectively harvested, making room for younger
trees but leaving many larger trees standing to
produce seeds. Selection cutting creates only
small openings in a forest, and so it works
best with trees that grow well in shade, such
as American beech and hemlock.
• Improvement cuttings may be made to thin
the forest and remove undesirable trees—under-
sized trees or ones that are crowding larger trees,
for example. Salvage cuttings are made to har-
vest trees damaged by wind, ice, or fire and
to clear the way for new growth. Sanitation
cuttings remove trees infested by insects or
infected by disease, to protect the health of
neighboring trees.
Shelterwood
Single-tree selection
Seed trees


PULP AND PAPER 17
.A Walk Through the Papermaker’s Woods
Forests combat the greenhouse effect because, in wood,
they naturally capture and store carbon (carbon dioxide) from
the atmosphere. Products from the forest also store carbon.
Paper and wooden houses and structures may store carbon for
decades or throughout their lifetimes.
In this way, the cycling of carbon back into the atmosphere
is delayed. The forests, especially young, vigorously growing
forests like those used in the paper industry, are carbon sinks,
good at “fixing” atmospheric carbon as trees take in far more
carbon than they give out.
Forests and
the Greenhouse Effect
You’ve probably heard of the greenhouse effect—the
warming that happens when carbon dioxide and other
gases trap heat in Earth’s atmosphere much as a glass
greenhouse captures sunlight. Many scientists believe
the trapped heat can raise Earth’s average temperature,
cause sea levels to rise, and change the world’s climate
in ways that may lead to extreme, damaging weather.
Recycling a ton of paper
spares 17 trees, which can
absorb up to 250 pounds of
carbon dioxide from the air
each year. If that same ton
of paper were burned
instead of recycled, it
would create 1,500 pounds
of carbon dioxide, which
in turn would contribute
to pollution and green-
house gases.





PULP AND PAPER 19
.How Paper Is Made
How Paper Is Made
To see how wood is made into paper, let’s start with a tree
that is harvested from a tree farm. The tree’s limbs are taken
off, and the trunk is hauled to a pulp mill. At the mill, the bark
is removed, to be burned for fuel or made into garden mulch.
Then the wood in the trunk has to be separated into individual
fibers, a process called pulping. And from the pulp, paper is
made. These are the steps; illustrations showing this process
appear on the next pages.
PULPING
Step 1—Separate the wood fibers, either by breaking them apart
mechanically or by cooking the wood in chemicals until it falls apart,
or by combining these methods to turn wood into pulp.
Step 2—Clean the pulp (step not shown).
Step 3—Bleach the pulp, if desired.
PAPERMAKING
Step 4—Rough up the fibers to create more surfaces for better fiber-to-
fiber bonding. This process, called refining, makes for a stronger
finished paper.
Step 5—Add dyes and fillers to the pulp to color the paper and give it
other desirable properties (step not shown).
Step 6—Make the paper by spreading the watery pulp on a fast-moving
forming fabric and draining off the water. Then press the wet paper to
remove more water, and dry it on hot, steam-heated drying cylinders.
Step 7—Coat the paper, if desired.
Step 8—Form a jumbo roll, then rewind and slit the jumbo roll into
shorter-width shipping rolls on paper cores.
CONVERTING
Step 9—Converting means cutting and shaping the paper to make boxes,
cups, plates, bags, and many other products.


20 PULP AND PAPER
How Paper Is Made.
From log of wood to finished paper product, that’s just
nine steps. It can’t be that easy, you say? Well, it is—and it
isn’t. Take a closer look at each step, and you will see how
much science, technology, engineering, and mathematics go
into making the paper you use every day.
DEBARKER
CHIPPER
FOURDRINIER SHEET FORMER
FORMING FABRIC PRESSES
HEAD BOX
DISK REFINER
PULP BLEACH
SYSTEM
VORTEX PULP CLEANERS
Chemical Pulping for Papermaking—From Trees to Paper


PULP AND PAPER 21
.How Paper Is Made
DIGESTER
STEAM
BLOW TANK
PULP WASHERS
CALENDER STACK
COATERDRYER SECTION


22 PULP AND PAPER
How Paper Is Made.
When you were younger and just
learning to write, you may have used
a grayish paper with wide rules. Get
a piece of that kindergarten writing
paper and hold it up to the light. Can
you see bits of wood in it? This is
an example of paper made from
mechanical pulp. Such paper doesn’t
need to be strong, bright, or pure,
because it isn’t meant to last as long as
a book printed on fine paper will last.
Pulping
The three main pulping methods are mechanical, chemical,
and semichemical (which combines chemical and
mechanical methods).
Mechanical Pulping
Groundwood pulp. The original way that paper-makers made
wood pulp was by mechanical means, simply grinding up the
wood to separate the fibers. In the oldest mechanical method,
called the stone groundwood process, short logs are pressed
sideways against a grindstone that tears fibers out of the logs.
Friction heats the wood and softens the lignin (a natural glue in
trees that sticks the fibers together). The lignin is not removed.
Paper made from groundwood pulp is good for printing on, but
it’s weak and—because of the lignin—it will discolor, especially
in sunlight. Mechanical pulps are suited for low-quality printing
papers that are used briefly, such as newsprint for newspapers.
They are also blended with chemical pulps to make higher-
value paper.
Thermomechanical pulp (TMP). Though the old stone
groundwood method hasn’t altogether disappeared, modern
methods of mechanical pulping have nearly replaced it. In
the method known as thermomechanical pulping, the wood
is first cut into chips about the size of a quarter. The chips
are steamed to heat and moisten them, and then fed through a
machine called a refiner, which has round plates with raised
bars on its flat surfaces. The discs tear the chips into fibers
under elevated temperature and pressure. This pulp makes
stronger paper than groundwood pulp, but its uses are similar.
Pulp that is not
made into paper in
the same location
as the pulp can be
rolled, dried, and
cut into sheets
that are baled for
shipment to
papermaking
facilities around
the world.


PULP AND PAPER 23
.How Paper Is Made
Chemical Pulping
In chemical pulping, chemicals dissolve and
remove much of the lignin. Wood chips are
cooked in a solution of water and chemicals,
in a big pressure cooker called a digester,
until the fibers fall apart. Chemical pulp pro-
duces strong paper that is used for printing
and writing, shipping boxes, paper bags, and
other products needing strength.
Chips to Fiber: The Digester. The wood chips go into the digester
for cooking. The cooking chemicals dissolve the wood’s lignin, the
natural glue that holds wood fibers together. The used solution
of chemicals is recovered to be recycled. The dissolved lignin is
either burned to generate steam and electricity that is used in
the mill, or is made into many different byproducts.
Logs to Chips. Logs are tumbled through a big, rotating debarking drum that removes
the bark. Then the logs are cut into even-sized chips (about the size of quarters).


24 PULP AND PAPER
How Paper Is Made.
Semichemical Pulping
Semichemical processes also use chemicals to dissolve lignin,
but the chips are cooked for a very short time. Then the soft-
ened chips are mechanically broken down into individual
fibers with a machine called a refiner.
Cleaning and Bleaching
Pulps are screened to remove knots and clumps, and are washed
to get rid of impurities and cooking chemicals, which are recycled.
Some pulps are bleached to produce white paper.
Good-quality writing papers are made from blends
of bleached chemical pulps. Bleaching is often
done in a series of steps, using different chemicals
at each stage. The bleaching chemicals either
remove the color-causing compounds from the
pulp or make them colorless.
Rag Pulping
The oldest pulping pro-
cess—rag pulping—is still
done. New rags—scraps
from the textile industry—
are preferred, though old
rags can be used. The rags
are cut up, cooked in
chemicals, then washed,
bleached, and rewashed. The resulting pulp is
used for making fine writing papers, business
letterhead and art papers, and durable, high-quality
papers for such things as blueprints, legal documents, and paper money.
The paper used for American paper money is a blend of cotton and
flax. The long cellulose fibers in cotton and flax make a strong paper—
which is why a dollar bill can go through the laundry, hidden in a pocket,
without falling apart.
Finished pulp
looks like watery
mush. But examine
a sample of
pulp under a
microscope,
and you’ll see
the separate,
individual
wood fibers.
Brown to White: Bleaching. A series of chemical
bleaching and washing processes turns brown
wood fiber into white pulp. Unbleached pulp
makes brown paper, as for grocery bags, kraft
wrapping paper, and cardboard boxes.


PULP AND PAPER 25
.How Paper Is Made
Mixing Things Up. In the paper mill, different pulps are
combined, and papermaking chemicals and minerals
are added.
Papermaking
Here is how paper is made.
Refining
Most pulp can’t be used for papermaking as it comes from the
pulp mill. For most grades of paper, fibers direct from a pulping
operation won’t bond well enough to make a strong sheet. The
fibers must be unraveled or frayed to increase their ability to
bond. So before the fibers are put into a paper machine, various
types of beaters and refiners are used to loosen them and make
them more flexible so the fibers can bond together better. The
quality of the paper depends on how much the pulp is refined.
Mixing and Blending Pulps
To get a paper that has the desired color, strength, texture, writing
surface, and other qualities, the right ingredients must be mixed
together in the proper amounts. Softwood and hardwood pulps
may be blended, and they may be mixed with recycled pulp.
Papermaking chemicals and minerals are added: sizing, to control
the rate of water and ink absorption; fillers, to fill the spaces
between fibers to improve the smoothness of the final paper;
and dyes, in some cases, to add color.
To be used in
papermaking,
baled pulp is
repulped in water
to make a slurry.


26 PULP AND PAPER
How Paper Is Made.
Forming the Sheet
At the wet end of the papermaking machine, the well-blended
pulp (99 percent water at this stage) is spread onto a long, wide,
endlessly moving screen called forming fabric. Right away, water
begins to drain from the bottom of the forming fabric. The water
is collected and recycled. On the top side of the wire, fibers from
the pulp catch and begin to bond together in a thin mat. Vacuum
is used to suck more water from the mat, but when the wet paper
leaves the wire, it is still mostly water (75 percent).
To press out more water, the wet paper is squeezed between
heavy presses. The paper, supported on endless fabric loops
called felts, leaves the wet end of the papermaking machine. As it
moves rapidly to the dry end, the paper passes between huge
metal cylinders that are steam-heated. These hot cylinders heat
and dry the wet sheet.
More heavy cylinders press, or iron, the drying paper smooth.
This part of the machine, called a calender stack, evens the
surface and makes the paper all the same thickness.
Modern
papermaking
machines, running
at speeds above
60–70 miles per
hour, can make
continuous sheets
of paper up to
33 feet wide. They
are the longest
pieces of
industrial
equipment in
the world. On the paper machine, a vacuum pulls water through the bottom
of the forming fabric. The paper machine also has presses—
rollers—that squeeze water out of the paper.
Temperature Rising: The Dryers. The steam-heated cylinders of the
main dryer heat and dry the paper. Then the sheet may go through
a size press, where a starch solution is applied to seal both sides
of the paper before it passes through an afterdryer.


PULP AND PAPER 27
.How Paper Is Made
Coating the Paper
Either on the paper machine or afterward, paper can be coated.
Most of the time paper is coated to improve its smoothness so it
will print better. These coatings are usually composed of minerals
like calcium carbonate or clay and combined with binders like
starch or latex. The thick coating slurry is applied to one or usually
both sides of the paper in a very thin layer with rollers or other
devices. The wet coating layer is dried with steam-heated dryer
cylinders, just like those that were used to dry the wet sheet before
it was coated. The coating stays mostly on the surface of the
paper, so a very thin layer—perhaps 10 to 20 percent of the total
sheet weight applied to each side—is sufficient to greatly improve
the smoothness and brightness of the paper.
Coatings can be made more glossy (for example, for calendars
or magazine covers) by careful choice of the coating components
and also by pressing or even buffing the coated sheet after it is
dried. Functional coatings are applied for special purposes like
thermal printing paper (for cash register receipts and portable
printers), multipart forms, protective coatings such as anti-tarnish
or moisture resistant coatings for wrapping small metal parts, and
adhesive coatings for stick-on labels and tapes.
Wax is applied to paper to make waxed papers in a process
similar to coating. Wax papers are not true coated papers,
because the wax actually saturates the sheet completely rather
than coating the surface only. Some types of surface treatments
are applied with completely different processes. For example,
milk cartons are extrusion coated (the plastic coating is applied
at high temperatures, near its melting point), and foil-coated
papers are usually made by laminating sheets of foil onto the
paper with a binder. These special coatings are applied separate
from the papermaking process.
All Rolled Up. The paper passes through a calender stack that
gives it a smooth and even surface. Then it’s collected on a large
reel in jumbo rolls that weigh 40 tons or more. On the winder,
the rolls are slit to desired widths and wound on cores, ready to
be shipped to customers or cut into smaller sheets.


28 PULP AND PAPER
How Paper Is Made.
Winding and Slitting the Paper
When the paper is dry, it’s wound onto a big spool or reel. These
jumbo rolls of paper can be slit into smaller rolls for sale or for fur-
ther processing. From these rolls come printing, publishing, and
writing papers, newsprint, tissue, wrappers and bags, cartons and
boxes, plates and cups, envelopes, and many other products.
Converting
The process of making paper products from the large rolls
coming off the paper machine is known as converting. Paper
is slit and cut to the right size and shape, and may be bent,
folded, and glued to form the final product. Some paper is
overlaid with a thin sheet of plastic, called laminating. Much
paper is formed into folded cartons, such as cereal boxes,
and into corrugated board, used for making shipping boxes.
Corrugated Board
Companies ship products such as light bulbs, glassware, and
your new DVD in corrugated boxes to secure and protect them
from damage. A whopping 95 percent of all manufactured goods
are shipped in corrugated boxes.
Corrugated packaging is made from two flat sheets of paper
called liners glued to a middle layer that has ridges and grooves—
the fluting. This construction is like a sandwich with a filling of
connected arches, which can support a lot of weight. The three-
layer structure makes corrugated board rigid, strong, and hard to
crush. The air circulating in the flutes (the grooves) also acts as
an insulator, protecting against changes in temperature.
What many people call cardboard is known to
papermakers as paperboard. This stiff type of
paper is used in food packaging (such as cereal
boxes) and for other kinds of containers such as
shoe boxes and video game boxes. Corrugated
paper is folded into ridges and grooves, giving it
a strong structure when glued between two
sheets of liner.
Get samples of paperboard and corrugated
and compare them. You can find many examples of paperboard in the
kitchen, in food packages. For corrugated, cut a piece from a shipping
carton and peel apart the layers to see the fluting inside.
Corrugated board
is made on
machines called
corrugators.
Various types
of converting
machines are
then used to
make boxes out
of the board.


PULP AND PAPER 29
.How Paper Is Made
All of these things make corrugated board a good material
for packaging and shipping. Manufacturers use it to pack, stack,
cushion, and transport their products to stores and individual
customers. Afterward, used boxes and cartons made of corru-
gated board can be recycled into new paper and board.
Visiting a Mill or Plant
For your work on this merit badge, you may choose to visit a
pulp or paper mill, or a container plant or box plant. The United
States has more than 350 paper and pulp mills, found—as you
might expect—in forested areas but also in urban areas. Some
are in the Pacific Northwest. Many operate in the South, in the
lake states, and eastward through the Middle Atlantic States
and New England.
Work with your counselor to arrange a visit to a pulp or
paper mill in your area. To find a box plant to visit, check your
local telephone directory under “Boxes—Corrugated” and
“Boxes—Paper.” You can also search the internet for paper mills
and box manufacturers.
As of 2010, the 12 states ranking highest in paper production were Alabama, Georgia,
Louisiana, Wisconsin, South Carolina, Washington, Virginia, Maine, Michigan, Arkansas,
Florida, and Tennessee. As of 2010, 63.5 percent of paper and boxes were recovered
and recycled. The 12 states that rank the highest in recycling were Georgia, Wisconsin,
New York, Louisiana, Alabama, Michigan, Virginia, Oklahoma, Washington, Maine,
Oregon, and California.
Companies that
manufacture
corrugated boxes
and paper cartons
are located
nationwide, in
cities large and
small. There are
about 450 box
plants in the
United States.


30 PULP AND PAPER
How We Use
Paper Today
Here’s an astonishing number to digest. Each person in the
United States uses about 700 pounds of paper each year. Paper
is everywhere in our lives. Every year in the United States,
more than 2 billion individual books, 24 billion newspapers,
and 350 million magazines are published on paper. Movie
tickets, popcorn tubs, cereal boxes, cash register receipts,
crayon wrappers, paper board games, your television set,
and even the LCD screens in your cell phone contain paper.
How could you possibly get through your school day without
using paper? How about money, checks, birth certificates, marriage
licenses, permits, and all of the documents we need to go about
our daily lives?
The home you live in was built with wood and paper
products. Those laminated kitchen countertops, the insulation
that keeps your house cool in summer and warm in winter,
gypsum wallboard, wallpaper, flooring, and shingles—all are
at least partly paper. Sandpaper, electrical cable wrapping,
and masking tape all have paper backing.
In our world today are more than 6,000 products made
from paper. Listed are some everyday examples you can find
all around you. What other paper products can you think of or
find in your home? What new products are being developed?
(You may discover several fascinating examples if you do
requirement 7(e), about research and development in the
papermaking industry.)


PULP AND PAPER 31
.How We Use Paper Today
People pretty
much take paper
for granted, but
we would be
hard-pressed to
live without it.
At School and Work
Books
Business cards
Calendars
Copier and printer paper
Envelopes
Maps
Masking tape
Notebook paper
Paper money and checks
Postage stamps
Poster board
Report cards
At Home
Cereal boxes
Countertops
Egg and milk cartons
Facial and toilet tissue
Grocery bags
Lamp shades
Magazines and newspapers
Microwave-food containers
Paper towels, plates,
and cups
Pizza boxes
Rayon clothing
Tea bags
Waxed paper
Wallpaper
Window shades
Wrapping paper
In Medicine and Technology
Bandages
Filters and gaskets
Hospital and surgical gowns
LCD screens
Medical charts
Surgical dressings
Sutures
Pollen and dust masks
Just for Fun
Board games
Bumper stickers
Coloring books
Confetti
Gum and candy wrappers
Jigsaw puzzles
Kites
Paper airplanes
Party hats
Photographs
Stickers
Streamers
Tickets
Trading cards
Products From
Byproducts*
Caulk and putty
Cellophane
Cellulose sponges
Chewing gum
Combs and
brush handles
Eyeglass frames
Furniture polish
Ink
Paint and varnish
Perfume
Photographic film
Pine oil
Sausage casings
Shoe polish
Suntan lotion
Turpentine
*These items are made
from byproducts of the
papermaking process.


32 PULP AND PAPER
How We Use Paper Today.
Recyclers Wanted
The United States currently recovers 67 percent of the paper and board
it produces; more paper is recycled than is buried in landfills. That is
good for our environment, but we need to do better, and encouraging
people and businesses to recycle remains a challenge. The European
Union (EU) reports a recovery rate of 72 percent, with some countries
as high as 85 percent and a few as low as 15 percent. China reports
a recovery rate approaching 72 percent, and Japan has approached
85 percent.
You and your fellow Scouts are coming of age now. Will you be part
of the problem, or part of the solution as knowledgeable leaders?
Remember the three R’s: Reduce, Reuse, Recycle.
New Paper From Old: Recycling
More than a third of all the papermaking fiber used at American
mills comes from recycled paper. Papermaking fibers can be reused
multiple times before they become too short to bond together.
Newspapers are often recycled into tissue and paperboard.
Magazines, in their second life, may become newsprint. When
magazines are printed on glossy paper, the clay that was added to
the paper to make it glossy actually helps separate the ink from
the paper during recycling.
What happens when you recycle a piece of paper? The pro-
cess begins when you gather up discarded paper—old newspa-
pers, magazines, office and computer paper, and corrugated
boxes—and put it in a recycling bin. It’s best to keep all paper
products intended for recycling out of sunlight and wet weather,
because exposure to the elements makes it harder to remove
the ink from the paper.
The paper is collected, sorted, wrapped in tight bales, and
transported. Once it reaches a recycling facility, repulping is
next. In a pulper—a big vat with a powerful agitator—water
and chemicals are blended with the recovered paper to form a
dispersed fiber-water slurry. Heat helps to further break down
the old paper into fibers, thus turning the mixture into pulp.


PULP AND PAPER 33
.How We Use Paper Today
The pulp is screened to remove small contaminants. It’s
further cleaned by spinning it around in cone-shaped cylinders.
Heavy bits like staples and paper clips are thrown to the side
of the cone and fall out the bottom. Lighter contaminants
collect in the center of the cone and are removed.
To get the ink out (for white grades such as recovered
newsprint or office papers only), in a process known as
deinking, the pulp is washed to rinse away loose ink
particles. Soaplike chemicals are added to make the
remaining ink float to the surface, where it is skimmed
away, leaving clean pulp behind. The ink, along with
clay, glue, and other materials and impurities removed
during deinking, can be burned for energy to run the
recycling facility.
The cleaned pulp may be bleached if it will be used to
make white paper, and perhaps a little refining will be done to
improve bonding between fibers. From this point, the pulp is
used just as it would be if it had been made from fresh wood
chips rather than recycled paper. Papermakers may use the
recycled fiber alone, or combine it with varying amounts of
new wood fibers to produce different kinds of paper. Recycled
fibers can be made into many new products
including boxes, newsprint, napkins, towels,
tissue, writing paper, envelopes, egg
cartons, and paper bags.
What’s great about recycling is that,
in the end, a new paper product is created
from material that might have ended up
instead in a landfill. Recycling is an excellent
way people and papermakers can work
together to have a cleaner and more
sustainable environment.
The industry is trying to cut down on its need for new
fiber taken from trees. New technologies are being
developed to make paper with less fiber, and to make
even more products with wastepaper and recycled
fibers. Though most recovered paper is recycled back
into paper and paperboard products, it can be used for
such purposes as insulation and roofing—even animal
bedding, cat litter, and fuel.


34 PULP AND PAPER
How We Use Paper Today.
Reusing Water and Leftovers
Recycling is important in many ways in the pulp and paper
industries. Fiber from recycled paper isn’t the only thing that
gets recovered and reused.
• Millions of gallons of water are used in papermaking. The
water is recycled, up to 25 times, to cut down on the need
for fresh water.
• The chemicals necessary in pulping and papermaking are
recovered and reused to keep them out of rivers and streams.
Useful products such as turpentine or lignin are drawn off
and saved. Recovery and recycling keeps many potentially
hazardous chemicals from ever reaching the environment
outside the mill.
The United States is the world’s largest paper recycler,
with more than 200 mills now using recycled paper.
Even so, the wastepaper that we Americans throw
away makes up almost a third of all the trash that goes
into landfills. We could save a lot of landfill space if
we would start thinking of wastepaper as a valuable
resource rather than as trash. We could also save energy.
Recycling uses half the energy needed to manufacture
paper from new wood. Think about that the next time
you throw away a piece of paper.
Every day, U.S.
papermakers
recycle enough
paper to fill a
train of boxcars
15 miles long.


PULP AND PAPER 35
.How We Use Paper Today
• Making paper takes an enormous amount of energy, but pulp
and paper mills can generate energy by burning waste wood,
bark stripped from logs, and used chemicals for fuel. Heat
from the paper-drying process is captured, and the energy is
used in other parts of the mill. From its leftovers, the paper
industry generates more than two-thirds of the energy it
uses—more than any other major industry in the world.
Some mills are completely self-sufficient in energy.
Looking to Nature
Some of the strongest chemicals used in papermaking are the bleaching
chemicals that whiten pulp. Researchers are looking for more environmen-
tally friendly bleaching agents. One promising approach uses enzymes—
natural chemicals made by living things—that work in a clean, biological
way. Enzymes are also used as an energy-efficient method of removing ink
from recycled newspapers and magazines.
Other researchers are interested in a fungus that chews through the
lignin in wood to predigest wood chips, making them softer and easier to
tear apart into fibers. Mechanical pulping using “biopulped” wood chips
takes less energy. And because the pulp has less lignin, paper made from
this kind of pulp is stronger and less prone to discolor.
Researchers are also looking for advanced uses of nanocrystalline
cellulose. This material, which is extracted during the pulping process, is
stronger than steel. Scientists are trying to discover how this super-strong
byproduct can be used to reinforce carbon fiber structures, making that
synthetic material stronger and more stable. Carbon fiber is used in many
products, from fishing poles and golf clubs to boats and footballs.
These are just several examples of research in the paper industry
aimed at reducing pollution, protecting the environment, and improving
the products. What other new ideas can you find out about?


36 PULP AND PAPER
Making Paper by Hand
Now that you know how paper is made, make some at home
and practice this centuries-old art. After your own papermaking
session, you will develop a deeper appreciation for paper in its
many forms: no-frills copier paper, shipping boxes, Scouting
books, and bags for everything from grass clippings to groceries
and gifts—even your homework papers.
Preparation is the key element in successfully making paper.
Before you begin working, gather all the supplies and materials in
your work area. Read these instructions from beginning to end and
review until you are familiar with the complete process and know
what supplies you will need for each step.
Papermaking
Making the Mold and Deckle
Step 1 (if using frames)—Place a large piece of screen on a flat
surface and center one of the blank wooden frames over it, front
side down. Fold one long side of the screen over the edge of the
frame and secure it to the back of the frame with staples or thumb-
tacks. Do the same with the other long side of the screen, pulling
gently for a snug fit, and staple or tack it in place. Do the same with
the short sides of the screen and frame. This is your papermaking
mold. The other blank frame will serve as the deckle when the
frames are held together face-to-face with the screen in the middle.
Be aware that papermaking is messy. Be sure you get an adult’s OK
before starting. Wear old clothes and set up your workstation in a clean,
safe area that will not disrupt others. If the weather is nice, you can work
outside on a picnic table or patio area. If you are working inside, be sure
to protect the floor by spreading newspapers under your work area.
Making Paper by Hand


PULP AND PAPER 37
.Making Paper by Hand
Step 1 (if using a hoop)—Center the screen over the inside
hoop, slide the outer hoop about halfway down from the top,
and tighten the clamp to hold the screen in place. To form the
deckle, position the outer hoop only halfway down. Gently tug
on the screen outside the hoop to eliminate any loose areas
inside the hoop.
Step 2—Make sure the screen is stretched tight across the
frame or hoop. If necessary, loosen the tacks or hoop clamp
and tug on the screen to tighten any loose areas.
Step 3—When the screen is smooth and tight, trim away
any excess.
Basic Supplies Needed
 Fine mesh fabric, flexible plastic
screening, or stiff nylon netting
 Two inexpensive 8-by-10 wooden
frames or a large wooden
embroidery hoop
 Staples or tacks
 Assorted scrap papers:
—Unprinted computer paper
or copy paper
—Household paper (toilet paper,
napkins, or paper towels)
—Construction paper
—Index cards, old greeting cards, or
cardstock scraps
 Large measuring cup
 Large mixing bowl
 Bowl scraper or rubber scraper
 Large wire whisk or
hand-held eggbeater
 Newspapers (to cover floors)
 Plastic basin or tub (bigger than
your papermaking mold)
 Cookie sheets or large, flat trays
 Towels, absorbent cloths,
newspapers, or paper towels
(for couching)
 Sponges
 Spatula
 Rolling pin
 Paper-size pieces of felt, flannel,
or any other thin cloth (for drying)
A deckle is a
frame placed
on top of the mold
to define the
paper’s edge.
In the early days of printing, all paper had a
deckle edge. The automation of papermaking,
when paper was produced in long rolls,
eliminated this uneven edge. Deckled edges
later became a status symbol.
If you can’t start using the mold and deckle right away, put it in a box to pro-
tect the screen from nicks, bumps, or stretching. Handle the mold and deckle
carefully—only by the sides—to help prevent the screen from stretching.


38 PULP AND PAPER
Making Paper by Hand.
Making Paper
Step 1—Tear (do not cut!) the scrap paper into
small pieces about the size of a postage stamp, or
about an inch square. Tear up at least 6 cups of
scraps. (You will need 4 cups for papermaking,
plus extra in case the pulp slurry is too thin.)
Step 2—Place 4 cups of paper scraps in the mix-
ing bowl and add enough warm water to cover the
pieces, about 2 cups. As the scraps start absorbing
water, they will break down into a soggy mush
called “pulp.” Use the bowl scraper to stir the mix
so all the scraps absorb water.
Step 3—Use the whisk or eggbeater to mix the
pulp until all fibers are separated and evenly dis-
tributed. You can use your hands to break up any
clumps. Pulp that includes cardstock scraps may
need additional whisking or beating.
Step 4—Carefully pour the pulp into the basin
and add water until the basin is about half full.
This slurry should have the consistency of thin,
watery oatmeal. The thicker the slurry is, the
thicker the paper will be. Add more warm water
if the slurry is too thick. If it is too thin, make
another batch of pulp and stir it in, a little at a
time, until it is the right consistency.
Step 5—Set up the couching area now so it is ready
when you need it in step 9. Fold the absorbent
cloths into a pad about an inch thick and a little
bigger than the papermaking mold. Place the pad
on the cookie sheet and put the cookie sheet on a
flat, stable surface where there is room to work.
Step 6—Stir the slurry again. If you are using frames, hold the
mold screen-side up and place the other frame (the deckle) on
top. This will ensure the paper’s edges are straight.
1
To create interesting effects, use a combination of paper colors, types,
textures, and weights. Be sure to have a good mix of weights so the
paper is not too bulky or too flimsy.
Couching (pronounced “cooch-ing”) is the process of transferring the
paper from the mold to the surface where it will dry.
2
3
4


PULP AND PAPER 39
.Making Paper by Hand
Step 7—Hold the mold/deckle firmly and lower them
into the slurry at a 45-degree angle, changing to a hor-
izontal hold when they are below the slurry line. Still
keeping a firm grip on the mold/deckle, swirl them
around in the slurry to set the fibers in motion. Keep
the mold/deckle level to ensure the paper will have
the same thickness above all areas of the screen. With
the slurry still in motion, gently lift the mold/deckle
straight up out of the mix and check the pulp layer.
Step 8—Gently shake the mold/deckle from side to
side, then back and forth over the basin to help
drain off water. If the screen is not completely cov-
ered, return the mold/deckle to the pulp slurry and
swirl it around again. If the pulp layer is uneven,
jiggle the mold a little to help even out the pulp. If
there are holes in the pulp layer, thicken the slurry
with more pulp, then swirl the mold/deckle in the
slurry again. With practice you will learn what
works best for the type and weight of paper you
want to make. When you are satisfied with the pulp
layer, keep holding the mold/deckle over the basin
until the water stops dripping. If you are using the
frame method, remove the deckle.
Step 9—It’s now time for couching. Hold the mold
over the couching pad. With a smooth, quick
motion, flip it over and gently place it pulp layer
down on the couching pad. Slowly roll the mold
from one edge to the other to help loosen the sheet
from the screen. You may need to pat a sponge
against the back side of the screen, squeezing out
water and pressing the paper flat on the couching pad until you
see the paper separating from the screen. Use the spatula to gently
separate the rest of the sheet and screen.
Step 10—Place a towel or a layer of paper towels on top of the
sheet of paper. Use the rolling pin to firmly but gently press the
towels into the sheet to remove more water. Keep rolling and
replacing towels until no more water can be squeezed out of the
sheet. Move the paper sheet and the top layer of the couching
pad toweling to a drying area.
7
8
9
10
For a new papermaker, couching can be the trickiest part
of the whole process. You will get better with practice.


40 PULP AND PAPER
Making Paper by Hand.
Step 11—Repeat steps 7 through 10 to make as many sheets of
paper as you wish. Before starting a new sheet, be sure to stir
the pulp slurry. You can stack new sheets in the drying area to
conserve space, but keep the stacks short to help the papers dry
faster. Place a piece of drying cloth between each sheet, and top
the stack with a drying cover. To speed up the process, place the
stacks outside on a warm day or near a sunny window.
Step 12—Make sure all the sheets of paper are dry.
Gently separate the layers of each stack, leaving
each sheet on its drying cloth backer. Make sure
each one is completely dry before peeling off the
fabric backer.
Step 13—Paper may curl as it dries. To flatten,
put the finished paper under a heavy book. Leave
it overnight, and it will be flat the next day.
Note: If you have pulp left over, pour it through a strainer or
the mold, then hand-squeeze the recovered pulp to thicken it
further. The recovered pulp can be stored in jars for a few days
in the refrigerator for later use, or it can be thrown in the
compost bin or trash can. Do not pour pulp down the drain.
Customizing Papers
Once you have mastered basic papermaking techniques, branch out and
customize your next paper batch. Special paper projects can include
decorative additions, 3-D shaping, and watermarks.
Creative Effects
There is no limit to the number of creative paper effects you can make.
Adding unusual colors to your handmade paper can be as easy as drip-
ping a little food coloring or water-based ink into the pulp. Mix in small
bits of confetti, tin foil, or glitter for extra pizzazz. Crumble dried flower
petals, leaves, grasses, ferns, or dried herbs to create natural effects. For
sturdier paper, you can increase the fiber content with burlap fibers or
shredded cotton balls (real cotton works better than synthetic cotton). Add
snippets of yarn or thread to the pulp to give your paper a touch of color.
3-D Paper
Let your imagination be your guide to creating all sorts of artful objects
with your handmade paper. Create a paper bowl by couching a sheet of
damp paper over an overturned bowl. Fold and smooth the sides, then let
12


PULP AND PAPER 41
.Making Paper by Hand
the paper dry in place. A similar technique can be used to make a paper
tray. Make napkin rings by wrapping slender strips of paper around a
smooth tube and couching it from the outside.
Watermarks
A watermark is an image that is embossed in paper and can be seen
only by holding the paper up to a light. Watermarks are often used as
security measures. For example, banknotes with watermarks help prevent
forgeries, and legal papers with a watermark make it easy to tell an
original document from a copy. Personal stationery can be customized
with a watermark design that has special meaning to the user.
Step 1—Think of what you might want
for a watermark, such as your initials,
a symbol, or a design of your own.
Step 2—Sketch your ideas and consider
how each drawing will work as a water-
mark. Eliminate designs that are too
elaborate, too stark, or too big for the
size of paper you plan to make. The best
watermark will come from a simple
design with a few lines that form a
recognizable image.
Step 3—Draw your final design on a
piece of paper. As you draw, make sure
the lines can be seen through the screen
of your mold.
Step 4—Protect your design by making a copy of your final drawing,
and keep the original in a plastic sheet protector. If your watermark
paper mold is ever lost or damaged, you can make a new mold with
the original drawing.
Step 5—Place the mold over your backup design copy, positioning it so that
the watermark design shows through the screen where you want it to be
on the finished paper. Use correction fluid, puff paint, or glue to carefully
trace the design on the screening. Apply the fluid in small dabs, a little at
a time, so that the lines of the design do not run together. Make sure the
lines are not too wide or thick; otherwise, holes will form in the paper.
Step 6—Set aside the mold and let the design dry completely. Your water-
mark paper mold is now ready for making paper.
The watermark becomes a perma-
nent part of the screening in your
mold, so be aware that this will be
a limited-use mold.
In addition to the papermaking
supplies listed earlier, you will
need correction fluid, puff paint,
or waterproof wood glue to create
your watermark.





PULP AND PAPER 43
.Careers in Pulp and Paper
Careers in
Pulp and Paper
The pulp and paper industry offers hundreds of different career
possibilities. The work may include making paper, helping to
protect the environment, running laboratory tests, process
design, computer systems, working in a forest, or working in a
corporate office. If you have enjoyed earning the Pulp and Paper
merit badge, you may find the perfect career in this field. The
industry needs trained people in many areas, including forestry,
engineering, manufacturing, research and development, sales
and marketing, and administration.
Forestry and Timber Operations
Professional foresters manage the timberlands that provide wood
fiber to the pulp and papermaking industry. Foresters plan and
direct tree planting and timber harvesting. They help
prevent damage from insects, disease, and fire. They
know how to help trees grow, how to get more
wood from an acre of land, and how to keep a
never-ending supply of trees growing to meet the
demand for wood fiber. It’s also the responsibility of
foresters to protect and manage wildlife, water, soil,
and other forest resources. Foresters also plan for
recreational uses of timberlands, including hiking,
fishing, and camping.
Most foresters have at least a bachelor’s degree
in forestry. Many have advanced degrees. In college,
forestry students take classes in biology, physical
and social sciences, ecology, silviculture (the
science of growing and harvesting trees and caring
for forests), forest economics, forest protection, and
resources management.
If you like to work
outdoors and
enjoy being in the
woods, forestry
might be the
career for you.


44 PULP AND PAPER
Careers in Pulp and Paper.
Engineering
Engineers work to make pulp and paper mills more productive,
safe, clean, and efficient. They supervise the mills’ operations,
design and oversee the construction of new mills, and make
improvements to older manufacturing plants to reduce waste,
prevent delays, and keep costs down. Civil, mechanical, chemical,
industrial, and electrical engineering skills are all useful in
this career.
Environmental engineering is another needed specialty. These
professionals design and supervise systems to control discharges to
the environment, protect the environment, protect the health and
safety of people, and make sure that pulp and paper mills are good
neighbors in their local communities. Education in paper science,
chemical and civil engineering, biology, and chemistry can prepare
you for a career as an environmental engineer. There are also
academic programs in paper science and engineering.
Another position important to the industry is the systems
engineer. This person is an expert in the control systems and
computers that run high-speed paper machines.
Manufacturing
Modern pulp and paper mills need skilled people to plan mill
operations, keep those operations running smoothly, and maintain
the machinery so that pulp and paper production continues—
oftentimes around the clock—with no breakdowns or interrup-
tions. In addition to engineers, chemists, and other scientists,
the workers needed in mill operations include electricians, pipe
and steam fitters, and machine operators. Technical training is
generally required for these positions.
Some examples of machine operators are
• Wood yard operators, who run the equipment that transforms
logs into small chips to be made into pulp
• Digester operators, who are in charge of the big, kettlelike
digesters that break down the wood chips through chemical
action, heat, and pressure
• Paper machine operators, who adjust the flow of pulp onto
the paper machine and, with the help of computer-controlled
monitors, run and track the machine’s functions
• Backtenders, who work at the dry end of a paper machine,
operating the equipment that dries and smoothes the paper
and winds it on rolls
To prepare for
an engineering
or technical
career, in high
school you
should study
biology, chemistry,
physics, mathe-
matics, social
studies, computers,
and English.


PULP AND PAPER 45
.Careers in Pulp and Paper
Research and
Product Development
Research and development professionals
come up with the paper industry’s new
and improved ideas. They develop new
paper products, find solutions to environ-
mental challenges, and devise more
efficient production methods. In this
field, formal training and advanced
degrees are often required in physics,
chemistry, chemical engineering, bio-
chemistry, biology, mathematics, paper
science, engineering, or ecology.
Sales and Marketing
After the products are created, they must
be marketed to a large variety of users.
Salespeople identify potential clients and
explain or demonstrate their company’s
products. If they make a sale, they follow up to be sure the
customer is satisfied. People who have a flair for sales and mar-
keting combined with an engineering or technical background
do well in these positions. There are also sales and marketing
positions available at companies that supply equipment, chemi-
cals, and services to pulp and paper manufacturers.
Administration
In every company, there are management and administrative
positions, and positions for accountants, computer program-
mers, and legal professionals. Many college graduates who go
into the paper business become managers early in their careers.
Are you interested in traveling overseas? The U.S. paper
industry has a global market, and its professionals often go to
other countries to oversee or expand a company’s operations. It’s
not unusual for people in the paper business, or for those in engi-
neering consulting, to spend a year or more on assignments abroad.
Quality control experts check to make
sure a mill’s finished paper products are
of high quality. They test sample sheets
for strength, brightness, and weight, and
direct laboratory tests to look for flaws
in the paper. People working in quality
control often have backgrounds in
industrial engineering or chemistry.
Career opportunities also exist in related industries, including agriculture,
product packaging and containers, chemical products, industrial products,
scientific instruments, machinery, printing, and consulting.


46 PULP AND PAPER
Papermaking Resources.
Papermaking Resources
Scouting Literature
Chemistry, Energy, Engineering,
Environmental Science, Fish and Wildlife
Management, Forestry, Graphic Arts, Soil
and Water Conservation, Sustainability,
and Textile merit badge pamphlets
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.
Books
Asunción, Josep. The Complete Book
of Papermaking. Sterling, 2003.
Couzins-Scott, Elizabeth.
Papermaking: 25 Creative
Handmade Projects Shown Step
By Step. Lorenz Books, 2014.
Dawson, Sophie. The Art and Craft
of Papermaking: Step-by-Step
Instructions for Creating Distinctive
Handmade Paper. Sterling, 1999.
Draper, Allison Stark. Choosing a Career
in the Pulp and Paper Industry.
Rosen Publishing Group, 2001.
Grummer, Arnold. Arnold Grummer’s
Complete Guide to Easy Papermaking.
Krause Publications, 1999.
Hiebert, Helen. The Papermaker’s
Companion: The Ultimate Guide to
Making and Using Handmade Paper.
Storey Books, 2000.
Rainey, Rhonda. Papermaking for the
First Time. Sterling, 2002.
Reimer, Mary. 300 Papermaking Recipes.
Martingale and Company, 2006.
Saddington, Marianne. Making
Your Own Paper: An Introduction
to Creative Paper-Making. Storey
Books, 1992.
Saltman, David. Paper Basics: Forestry,
Manufacture, Selection, Purchasing,
Mathematics and Metrics, Recycling.
Krieger Publishing, 1991.
Toale, Bernard. The Art of Papermaking.
Davis Publications, 1983.
Woods, Samuel G. Recycled Paper: From
Start to Finish. Blackbirch Press, 2000.
Organizations and Websites
American Forest and
Paper Association
1101 K St., NW, Suite 700
Washington, DC 20005
Telephone: 202-463-2700
afandpa.org


PULP AND PAPER 47
.Papermaking Resources
Robert C. Williams Museum
of Papermaking
Renewable Bioproducts Institute
Mail code 0620, Georgia Tech
Atlanta, GA 30332-0620
paper.gatech.edu
Society of American Foresters
10100 Laureate Way
Bethesda, MD 20814-2198
Toll-free telephone: 866-897-8720
eforester.org
Society of Wood Science
and Technology
P.O. Box 6155
Monona, WI 53716-6155
Telephone: 608-577-1342
swst.org
Wisconsin Paper Council
10 E. Doty St., Suite 445
Madison, WI 53703
Telephone: 608-467-6025
wipaper.org
Acknowledgments
For assistance in updating the Pulp
and Paper merit badge pamphlet,
Scouting America thanks Larry
Montague, president and CEO of TAPPI
(Technical Association of the Pulp and
Paper Industry) for coordinating the
review. Thanks also to Terry Bliss,
Ph.D., Ashland Water Technologies
Group; Michael J. Kocurek, Ph.D.,
North Carolina State University; Danny
Haynes, AkzoNobel Specialty
Chemicals; Richard A. Horn; and
John Sunderland, Pulp and Paper
Safety Association.
Scouting America is grateful to the
men and women serving on the
National Merit Badge Subcommittee for
the improvements made in updating
this pamphlet.
Thanks also to those who contrib-
uted to previous editions of this
pamphlet, lending a level of expertise
that continues to guide Scouting
America’s approach to this fascinating
subject:
• Dick Madsen of Weyerhaeuser
Company, one of the world’s largest
forest products companies and
a winner of many awards for
social responsibility and
environmental protection
• T.J. Stenuf, Ph.D., and Richard A.
Horn of Pulp, Paper, and Composites
Research, USDA Forest Service, Forest
Products Laboratory, Madison,
Wisconsin, who helped revise
previous editions
• TAPPI, the Technical Association
of the Pulp and Paper Industry
(tappi.org), for its cooperation in the
production of the pamphlet


48 PULP AND PAPER
Papermaking Resources.
Photo and Illustration Credits
American Paper Institute, courtesy—
page 6
Stora Enso, courtesy—page 14 (forester)
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Natural
Resources Conservation Service/
Tim McCabe, courtesy—page 35
U.S. Department of Agriculture/
Bill Tarpenning, courtesy—
page 17
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of
or are protected by Scouting America.
John McDearmon—all illustrations
on pages 15–16, 20–21, 23–24,
and 26–27
Brian Payne—cover (trading cards);
page 34 (recycling center)