READING
Scoutin

OK
DBO
FIEL

g’s Man

ual of Bas

ic and Adv

anced Skil

ls for Out

door Adv

OK
DBO
FIEL
lls for Out
anced Ski
ic and Adv
l of Bas
g’s Manua
Scoutin

enture
door Adv

BOY SCOUT

THE

enture

3/5/14

ing

2014 Print

1:12 PM

BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES

READING

“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”

Reading
1. Do EACH of the following:
(a) Take a tour of a library. Discuss with your counselor how the library is
organized and what resources and/or services are offered in the library.
(b) Learn how to search a library’s card catalog or computerized catalog by
author, title, and subject.
(c) In a library, search the card catalog or computerized catalog for six books
of four different types, such as poetry, fiction, nonfiction, and biographies.
(d) With the assistance of your merit badge counselor or the librarian, see if
you can locate on the shelves the six books you selected.
2. Do EACH of the following:
(a) Identify a book you have enjoyed. Find out what other books the author
has written.
(b) Look at one or more “best books” lists. These can be based on year, subject, or even all time. Identify at least one book you would like to read.
3. Read four different types of books, such as poetry, fiction, nonfiction, or biographies. Do any ONE of the following for each book you have read:
(a) Write a review of the book. Include what you liked/didn’t like about the
book. Include if you would recommend this book, and if so, who might enjoy
reading it.
(b) Watch a movie based on the book. What was the same between the book
and movie? What was different? Which did you enjoy more? Discuss this with
your merit badge counselor.
(c) Give a “book talk” to your class, troop, or patrol.
4. Read a nonfiction book or magazine that teaches you how to do something
like cooking, wood-building projects, video game design, science experiments,
knot-tying, etc. With your counselor’s and parent’s or guardian’s permission,
complete a project from the book. Share your experience with your merit
badge counselor. Reading a merit badge pamphlet will not count toward completing this requirement.
5. Read about the world around you from any two sources: books, magazines,
newspapers, the internet (with your parent’s or guardian’s permission), field
manuals, etc. Topics may include Scouting, sports, environmental problems,
politics, social issues, current events, nature, religion, etc. Discuss what you
have learned with your counselor.

6. With your counselor’s and parent’s or guardian’s permission, choose ONE of
the following activities and devote at least four hours of service to that activity. Discuss your participation with your counselor.
(a) Read to a sick, blind, or homebound person in a hospital or in an
extended-care facility.
(b) Perform volunteer work at your school library or a public library.
(c) Read stories to younger children, in a group or individually.
(d) Organize a book swap in your troop, school, or place of worship.
(e) Organize a book drive to collect books. Donate them to an organization
in need.

Reading Resources.

Reading Resources
Scouting Literature
Boy Scout Handbook; Fieldbook; Stories
for Around the Campfire; More Stories for
Around the Campfire; The Gospel of the
Redman; Learn to Fly-Fish in 24 Hours
Visit the Boy Scouts of America’s
official retail website at
http://www.scoutstuff.org for a
complete listing of all merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.

Book Lists
Book lists or reading lists are put
together every year by readers,
librarians, and others who know
books. Your school or public library
will have lists to get you started.
Many lists are published on the Web;
the Internet address of some are given
here. Also ask your librarian or teacher
for a list of books that have won (or
are competing for) your state’s awards
for children’s and young adult books.
American Library Association:
Best Books for Young Adults
Website: http://www.ala.org/yalsa/
booklists/bbya

44

READING

Newbery Medal Winners and
Honor Books
Website: http://www.ala.org/alsc/
awardsgrants/bookmedia/newberymedal/
newberymedal
Education World: Summer
Reading Lists
Website: http://www.educationworld.
com/summer_reading
International Literacy Association
Reading Lists
Website: http://www.literacyworldwide.
org/get-resources/reading-lists
National Book Awards for
Young People’s Literature
Website: http://www.nationalbook.org/
nbawinners_category.html#yp
TeachersFirst.com: 100 Best Books
Website: http://www.teachersfirst.com/
100books.cfm
Teenreads.com
Website: http://www.teenreads.com
Young Adult Books Central
http://www.yabookscentral.com/

.Reading Resources

Books Online
Many classic books are available online
for no charge. Several websites have
free e-books (electronic books) that you
can read on a computer or print out
to read later. The websites listed here
offer hundreds of e-books.
The Online Books Page
Website: http://digital.library.upenn.
edu/books
Project Gutenberg
Website: http://www.gutenberg.org

Magazines
Readers your age can choose from many
magazines published especially for you.
Some of these magazines also publish
stories and articles written by young
people. Check your school or public
library for these and other magazines.
Boys’ Life
P.O. Box 152401
Irving, TX 75015-2401
Toll-free telephone: 866-584-6589
Website: http://www.boyslife.org
Cicada (ages 15 and up)
Cricket (ages 9 to 14)
13625A Dulles Technology Drive
Herndon, VA 20171
Telephone: 703-885-3400
Website: http://shop.cricketmedia.com/
Kids Discover
149 Fifth Ave., Floor 10
New York, NY 10010-6832
Telephone: 212-677-4457
Website: http://www.kidsdiscover.com

National Geographic Kids
1145 17th St. NW
Washington, DC 20036-4688
Toll-free telephone: 800-647-5463
Website:
http://kids.nationalgeographic.com/kids
Skipping Stones
P.O. Box 3939
Eugene, OR 97403
Telephone: 541-342-4956
Website: http://www.skippingstones.org
Sports Illustrated Kids
Toll-free telephone: 877-747-1046
Website: http://www.sikids.com
Stone Soup: The Magazine by Young
Writers and Artists
P.O. Box 83
Santa Cruz, CA 95063
Toll-free telephone: 800-447-4569
Website: http://www.stonesoup.com

Newspapers
Ask your counselor or a librarian to
help you find newspaper articles on
subjects that interest you. Listed here
is a website that contains online
newspaper indexes. Your librarian can
show you how to search for articles
using this or other indexes.
Refdesk.com
Website: http://www.refdesk.com/
paper.html

READING

45

Reading Resources.

Reference Books
Check the reference section of your
school or public library for these and
many other useful reference books.
Barron’s Profiles of American Colleges.
Barron’s Educational Series, annual.
Books in Print. Bowker, annual.
Contemporary Authors. Gale, annual.

Internet Search Engines for Kids
Website: http://www.ivyjoy.com/rayne/
kidssearch.html
Kids and Teens: Directories
Website: http://dmoz.org/Kids_and_
Teens/Directories

Literacy Programs

Guinness World Records. Bantam
Books, annual.

Hundreds of organizations promote
literacy. Here are a few of the major
programs. Through them you may find
local opportunities.

Readers’ Guide to Periodical Literature.
H.W. Wilson, annual.

America’s Literacy Directory
Website: http://www.literacydirectory.org

Current Biography. H.W. Wilson, annual.

Subject Guide to Books in Print.
Bowker, annual.
Subject Guide to Children’s Books in
Print. Bowker, annual.

Organizations and Websites
Ask your counselor, parent, or librarian to recommend Web-related guides,
directories, and search engines that
are good for Internet users your age.
Bookshare
Website: http://www.bookshare.org

American Foundation for the Blind
2 Penn Plaza, Suite 1102
New York, NY 10121
Toll-free telephone: 800-232-5463
Website: http://www.afb.org
The Barbara Bush Foundation
for Family Literacy
516 N. Adams St.
Tallahassee, FL 32301
Telephone: 850-562-5300
Website: http://www.barbarabush.org

Bookshare has signed a memorandum of mutual support with the Boy Scouts
of America that emphasizes an ongoing relationship to provide Scouts and their
leaders access to an electronic library of key Scouting publications. Individuals
with disabilities can have resources like the Boy Scout Handbook and dozens
of merit badge pamphlets at their fingertips—on their PCs, smartphones, and
e-readers via audiobooks, or can hear books being read as words are highlighted
on a screen. These resources can even be accessed using a Braille “reader”—a
display that can be hooked up to a computer to generate a Braille translation.
For more information about Bookshare and its agreement with the BSA, go to
http://blog.scoutingmagazine.org/2011/09/28/bookshare-bsa-open-a-new-chapter.

46

READING

.Reading Resources

Read Across America
National Education Association
1201 16th St., NW
Washington, DC 20036-3290
Telephone: 202-833-4000
Website:
http://www.nea.org/grants/886.htm
Reading Is Fundamental Inc.
1730 Rhode Island Ave., NW, Suite 1100
Washington, DC 20036
Toll-free telephone: 877-743-7323
Website: http://www.rif.org

Acknowledgments
The Boy Scouts of America thanks the
following organizations and individuals
for their help in preparing this revised
edition and previous editions of the
Reading merit badge pamphlet and
the requirements:

• Children’s Book Council
• Deborah J. Lightfoot, author
and editor
• Jaye McLaughlin, Youth Center
Manager, Fort Worth Public Library
• Christine McNew, Youth Services
consultant, Texas State Library
• Puget Sound Council for Reviewing
Children’s Media
The Boy Scouts of America is grateful
to the men and women serving on the
Merit Badge Maintenance Task Force
for the improvements made in updating
this pamphlet.

• Burlington County Council Reading
Merit Badge Task Force, Rancocas,
New Jersey

READING

47

