WEATHER
STEM-Based


WEATHER
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Weather or check Scoutbook
for the latest requirements.
35964
ISBN 978-0-8395-3274-3
©2025 Scouting America/Boy Scouts of America
2025 Printing


WEATHER 3





WEATHER 5
Contents
Earth and Its Atmosphere . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Moisture—The Water Cycle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
Clouds and Precipitation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
Hazardous Weather . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
Measuring and Recording the Weather . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
Weather and Climate Prediction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
Careers in Meteorology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
Weather Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77





WEATHER 7
.Earth and Its Atmosphere
Earth and Its
Atmosphere
Earth’s atmosphere can be thought of as an ocean. It is an
ocean of air instead of water. The air is almost never at rest.
Its restless movement is the source of everything people call
weather. The study of the atmosphere and its weather is the
science of meteorology.
Components of the Atmosphere
The atmosphere is a mixture of gases, six of which are present
in amounts large enough to be important in studying
meteorology. Four of the six stay more or less in
constant proportions, at least in the atmosphere’s
lowest 8 miles or so. The most abundant of these
is nitrogen, making up about 78 percent of
the atmosphere. Oxygen is next, at about
21 percent, followed by argon at about
1 percent, and carbon dioxide at about
0.03 percent. Nitrogen, oxygen, and
carbon dioxide are essential to life on
Earth. If their proportions were to change
significantly, all life would disappear.
The atmosphere contains two other
important gases. Because their amounts
change from time to time and place to place,
they are called variable gases. One is water
vapor, which can range from nearly zero to as
high as about 4 percent of the total. Most of the
water vapor is concentrated in the lowest mile of the
atmosphere. When it condenses to form clouds, rain,
and snow, it is the most important part of the weather.


8 WEATHER
Earth and Its Atmosphere.
The other variable gas is ozone, most of which is found
more than 6 miles above Earth. While ozone at sea level harms
humans and plant life, its presence high in the atmosphere
shields us from the sun’s ultraviolet rays.
The Vertical Structure of the Atmosphere
A cross section of the atmosphere shows that it consists of four
main layers. There is no “top” to Earth’s atmosphere. Instead,
it gradually thins until it vanishes into the vacuum of space.
The lowest layer of Earth’s atmosphere is called the tropo-
sphere. This layer varies in depth from about 10 miles at the
equator to only 4 miles over the North and South poles. It is
within this layer that most weather occurs. The troposphere is
constantly stirred by the motions that produce weather, so the
mixture of gases is nearly constant. Earth’s surface, which is
warmed by the sun, in turn warms the air of the lower tropo-
sphere. As a result, temperatures in this layer tend to decrease
as altitude increases. On average, for every 1,000 feet gained, the
air temperature will decrease by roughly 3.5 degrees Fahrenheit.
The layer above the troposphere is the stratosphere. This
layer extends to a height of about 30 miles. In the stratosphere,
the atmosphere is quite thin and the mixture of gases begins
to change. The small amount of ozone in the stratosphere is
vital to life on Earth because it absorbs the sun’s harmful ultra-
violet radiation.
Stratosphere
Mesosphere
Thermosphere
Troposphere
Sea
Level
10
20
30
(48 km)
(32 km)
(16 km)
50
(80 km)
120
(200 km)
ALTITUDE (IN MILES)
MOUNT EVEREST
AIR TRAFFIC


WEATHER 9
.Earth and Its Atmosphere
The boundary between the troposphere
and stratosphere is called the tropopause, a
lid on the weather-filled troposphere.
Temperature begins to increase with height
above the tropopause because an increasing
number of ozone molecules absorb the
sun’s ultraviolet radiation.
Above the stratosphere is the meso-
sphere, which extends about 30 to 50
miles. Temperature decreases with height
in this coldest layer of the atmosphere. The
next layer is the thermosphere. Because of
the sun’s rays, air temperatures in this
layer can reach more than 1,800 degrees.
The particles in the thermosphere, mostly
nitrogen and oxygen, are so far apart that
a standard thermometer cannot be used.
The temperature is actually a measure of
the sun’s energy absorbed by the particles.
The Origin of Wind
In prehistoric times, humans became aware that the weather—
cloudy or clear skies, warm or cold air—depended on wind
direction and speed. During the 1600s, people learned that air
has weight. Scientists discovered that air becomes lighter (less
dense) when it is warm and heavier (denser) when it is cold.
Because the pressure that anything exerts on the surface of
Earth depends on its weight, air temperature affects air pressure.
Air temperature also is a factor in how winds arise. If air
in one place is heated so that it is warmer than the air around
it, that air tends to rise. As it does, air must flow in from
around the heated region to replace the air that is rising.
Air has weight for the same reason you do. It is held to Earth by
gravity. In fact, the air above a square inch of Earth’s surface exerts
14.7 pounds of pressure at sea level. Atmospheric pressure, or air
pressure, is the amount of force the air exerts on a unit surface area
(an area that has equal length and width). Why don’t you feel all that
weight pressing down on you? One reason is that the air is not really
pressing down but is pressing in all directions. Also, the air inside your
body is pressing in all directions with equal pressure.


10 WEATHER
Earth and Its Atmosphere.
If you live near a seacoast or the shore of one of the Great
Lakes, you may see this process operate every day. During the
day, the land heats more rapidly than the ocean. This heat
warms the air over the land and makes it rise. Cooler air from
the ocean flows in to replace it. In turn, the rising air over land
flows out to sea at some level above the surface to replace the
air flowing inland. This creates a sea breeze.
At night, the opposite happens. The land cools more rapidly
than the ocean. Air flows from land to sea at the surface,
and the cycle is reversed. The circulation that results is a land
breeze. Similar circulations can develop around mountains,
creating mountain and valley breezes. The winds that create
the weather all arise in this way, as a result of unequal heating.
However, it is not always this easy to understand why winds
behave the way they do.
The fact that sunlight does not evenly heat Earth’s surface means that
temperatures vary from place to place and from time to time. This
difference in air temperature (and therefore air pressure) creates a
force that makes the air move from high- to low-pressure regions,
trying to equalize the pressure. The air motion is what we call wind.
Sea breezes
LANDOCEAN
C O O L E R A I R M O V E S I N
T O
T
A
K
E
WA R
M AIR’S PLACE.
WARMERAIRRISINGG
OE S B A C K O U T T O S E A .
RISING WARM AIR


WEATHER 11
.Earth and Its Atmosphere
Global Wind and Pressure Systems
Warm air near the equator, in the tropics, tends to rise and flow
toward the poles (poleward). Along the way, the air cools and
begins to sink. Because the equatorial regions are warm, they
tend to form a belt of relatively low pressure. The regions of
sinking air tend to be associated with relatively high pressure,
in what are called the “horse latitudes,” or subtropics.
In a similar fashion, air over the poles tends to sink, being
colder and heavier. This sinking sends the air flowing into the
subpolar regions, where it warms and rises, forming a belt with
relatively low pressure at the surface. (Remember, warm air
brings about low pressure, and cold air brings about high
pressure because it weighs more.)
The middle latitudes lie between the belt of subpolar lows
and the subtropic highs. Most of the United States can be found
in the Northern Hemisphere’s middle latitudes. The Southern
Hemisphere also has middle latitudes. Air tends to flow pole-
ward at the surface of Earth, and toward the equator (equator-
ward) aloft, completing the transition between the polar and
equatorial circulations.
Land breezes
WARM OCEAN
LAND COOLING
C
O
O
L
A
I
R


12 WEATHER
Earth and Its Atmosphere.
Notice on the diagram how the surface winds blowing
toward the equator in both hemispheres tend to flow from east
to west. Similarly, the surface winds blowing poleward tend to
include a flow from west to east. Meteorologists refer to winds
according to the direction from which they blow. Winds blow-
ing from east to west are called easterlies, and winds blowing
from west to east are called westerlies.
If it were not for the development of easterly and westerly
winds, the tendencies for winds to blow straight from high- to
low-pressure regions would be very similar to the local breezes
described at the beginning of this chapter.
POLAR
HIGH
POLAR
HIGH
LOW LOW
LOW LOW
LOW LOW
HIGH HIGH
HIGH HIGH
60°N SUBPOLAR LOW
MIDLATITUDES (PREVAILING WESTERLIES)
30°N SUBTROPICS (HORSE LATITUDES)
NORTHEAST TRADE WINDS
0° TROPICS (EQUATOR)
SOUTHEAST TRADE WINDS
SUBTROPICS (HORSE LATITUDES)
30°S
MIDLATITUDES (PREVAILING WESTERLIES)
60°S SUBPOLAR LOW
This global winds diagram shows wind’s basic patterns. The actual patterns of wind at
any given moment are far more complicated.


WEATHER 13
.Earth and Its Atmosphere
The Relationship Between Wind
and Pressure
To understand why global winds have both easterly and
westerly movement, remember that Earth is rotating about its
polar axis. It makes one complete turn in 24 hours, which causes
day to alternate with night. The speed of rotation varies as you
move north or south—it varies with latitude. You can see this
on a globe. Spin the globe and watch while points near the
equator move fast while the poles do not move at all. A point
on Earth’s equator travels more than 1,000 miles per hour
(about 25,000 miles in 24 hours), while the poles do not move.
This difference in speed produces an interesting effect as
seen by an observer watching things from Earth. Imagine firing
a cannon due south. As the cannonball travels south, it passes
over points that are moving more and more rapidly beneath it.
Its path, as seen on Earth (the solid arrow), curves to the right.
A mysterious force appears to make the path of the cannonball
curve. An observer in space would see the path of the
cannonball as a straight line (the dashed arrow in the
diagram), but it appears curved to earthbound observers.
This apparent force—called the Coriolis force after French
scientist Gustave-Gaspard Coriolis, who first described it—is
very real to people living on the rotating Earth. It must be
accounted for when firing long-range weapons and launching
satellites. For the weather, it makes the moving air seem to
curve to the right in the Northern Hemisphere and to the left in
the Southern Hemisphere.
Much of the time,
a low-pressure
system is
related to poor
weather, and a
high-pressure
system is related
to fair weather.
The rising air of
a low-pressure
system invites
the formation
of clouds and
precipitation.
The sinking air
of a high-pressure
system makes
cloud formation
less likely.
THE CORIOLIS FORCE
NORTH POLE NORTH POLE
OBJECT
TRAVELING
SOUTH
OBJECT
TRAVELING
NORTH
SOUTH
A
A
B
B
SOUTH
The origin (cannon)
moves from A to B due
to Earth’s rotation.
The object (cannonball)
follows a curved path
(B to C) relative to
Earth. From space, an
observer would see the
object follow a straight
line (A to C).
C
C





WEATHER 15
.Moisture—The Water Cycle
Moisture—
The Water Cycle
The most important thing about the weather is the moisture it
brings. The wind could blow night and day and the tempera-
ture could rise and fall, but if no rain fell, Earth would be in
real trouble.
Fortunately, in addition to a wonderful air-circulating
system, Earth has a wonderful water-circulating system. The
water vapor that forms clouds and precipitation comes mostly
from evaporation from Earth’s oceans. A small part comes from
lakes, streams, and transpiration, that is, the giving off of water
by the leaves of green plants.
Most of the rain that falls over land evaporates and is
transported as water vapor by the winds, often many thousands
of miles from its source. Water vapor condenses (changes from
a gas to a liquid) in clouds and falls back to Earth as rain, snow,
and other forms of precipitation. Some precipitation forms run-
off, the water that flows in rivulets and streams to the rivers.
Part of the precipitation filters down into the ground to replen-
ish the groundwater supply, which also feeds the rivers. Some
groundwater is taken up by plants that restore it to the atmo-
sphere through transpiration.
Some precipitation falls as snow. Of this, most eventually
melts and becomes runoff or groundwater. However, part of the
snowfall remains frozen, locked into slow-moving rivers of ice
called glaciers. A considerable amount of Earth’s freshwater
supply is tied up in the form of ice over the polar regions of
the globe, especially in Antarctica. The ice gradually moves
in glaciers toward the ocean, but it may take hundreds or
thousands of years for water that falls as snow over glaciers
to reach the ocean.


16 WEATHER
Moisture—The Water Cycle.
A small amount of the groundwater becomes trapped in
the ground, forming underground reservoirs called aquifers.
In many parts of the world, including the United States, the
water in aquifers is tapped for human use, especially for irriga-
tion. Once the aquifers are drained, they may not fill again for
thousands of years.
Polar ice packs, glaciers, and underground aquifers tie up
some of Earth’s water supply, but overall, water that evaporates
from the oceans eventually finds its way back to the oceans.
All of the events described above—evaporation, transpiration,
water vapor transport, condensation, precipitation, runoff, and
streamflow—are part of a cycle of events known as the water
cycle, also called the hydrologic cycle. On the whole, the cycle
is in balance, that is, the total amount of water on the planet
remains constant.
PRECIPITATION (RAIN)
CLOUD
FORMATION
TRANSPIRATION
EVAPORATION
SURFACE RUNOFF
GROUND WATER
PERCOLATION (SOAK-IN)
S T R E A M T O O C E A N
The water cycle


WEATHER 17
.Moisture—The Water Cycle
Humidity and Dewpoint
Humidity describes the amount of water vapor in the air. Water
molecules are constantly going back and forth between vapor
form and either solid (ice, snow) or liquid (cloud drops, rain
drops, lake surface). Evaporation occurs when more water
molecules leave a raindrop (or any other water surface) than
arrive. If evaporation lasts for a while, the drop will disappear
because all the molecules will be in vapor form. (Sublimation
is the word used to describe water molecules leaving an ice
surface to become vapor.) Condensation happens when the
number of water molecules joining the raindrop is greater than
the number leaving. In this case, the drop will grow. When the
number of water molecules leaving a water surface equals the
number joining, the air is said to be saturated.
The saturation point changes as the temperature changes.
This happens because water molecules are more energetic when it
is warm than when it is cold. When the air and the water drops in
it are warm, the energetic molecules escape the surface and
become water vapor in the surrounding air. If the air
and the water drops are cool, fewer molecules escape
and saturation can occur.
On a clear night, the temperature of the air near
the ground may fall until saturation takes place. If the
air continues to cool, condensation will begin as the
first tiny drops form on imperfections on the surface
(a blade of grass, for example). In the cool water
drop, the molecules will not be very energetic, so the
number of molecules joining the drop will be greater
than the number leaving. This condensation process
causes dew to form. Sometimes condensation in the
cooling air leads to fog. Only rarely is condensation in
the atmosphere caused by adding water to the air
through evaporation at the same temperature.
The dewpoint is the temperature to which air
must be cooled for saturation to occur when both
the air pressure and the amount of water vapor stay
constant. If the air already is saturated, the air tem-
perature and the dewpoint are the same. Dewpoint
often remains fairly constant during the day.
A more common measure of atmospheric moisture is
relative humidity. You have probably heard radio and television
announcers give the relative humidity as part of the weather
Some people refer
to dew and frost
as precipitation,
but they are
not forms of
precipitation
because they
do not actually
precipitate, or fall.


18 WEATHER
Moisture—The Water Cycle.
report. Relative humidity is the actual amount of water vapor in
the air divided by the maximum amount of water vapor possible
at that temperature. It usually is expressed as a percentage. For
example, saturated air is said to be at 100 percent relative humid-
ity. If the air contains one-half of the amount of water vapor
needed to saturate it, the relative humidity is 50 percent.
However, recall that when the air temperature rises, so does
the amount of water that can evaporate. Therefore, if the actual
amount of water vapor stays the same, the relative humidity
decreases when the temperature rises and increases when the
temperature falls. That is why relative humidity reports can be
deceiving. In hot weather, humans sweat to stay cool. As the
water in the sweat evaporates from our skin, it takes heat away
from the body. If the air is near saturation, sweating is not very
effective at cooling us, so we feel uncomfortable.
Human comfort depends more on the dewpoint than
on the relative humidity. Summer days can be uncomfortable
when the dewpoint rises above 60 degrees, even though the
relative humidity at the time of the maximum daytime tempera-
ture can be low. Here is an example: At a temperature of 95
degrees and a dewpoint of 65 degrees, the relative humidity is
only about 35 percent, but the air will feel hot and muggy. If
the dewpoint remains the same and the temperature drops to
70 degrees after dark, the relative humidity will rise to almost
85 percent. Even though the relative humidity is higher, the air
will feel more comfortable than it did during the day.
By noting changes in relative humidity as indicated on a hygrometer,
you can determine whether the day will be muggy or comfortable.


WEATHER 19
.Moisture—The Water Cycle
Condensation: Fog, Dew, Frost, and Rime
Fog is merely a cloud forming at Earth’s surface. It forms when warm, moist
air comes in contact with the colder air and forms a cloud. The chilled water
vapor condenses and attaches to particles in the air.
Fog occurs most frequently at night along
water sources where the cooling of slow-moving
air, combined with the source of moisture, pushes
the air to saturation. Also, when cold air moves
over warm water, the water evaporating into the
cold air can increase the dewpoint temperature of
the air to saturation, resulting in widespread fog.
You may have noticed that there is often fog in the
mountains and hills. This fog occurs when warmer
air moves quickly up a slope. The air cools as it rises, and the water vapor
condenses to form fog.
Dew is formed when the water vapor in the
air condenses on cool objects. Dew usually forms
on cool nights during warm seasons. Daytime air
that is almost at its saturation point will cool
down, and the air will become fully saturated
with water. The extra water vapor will condense
on objects cooler than the air itself, such as grass
and spider webs.
In cold seasons, the
same kinds of conditions
that bring about dew will form frost instead. Frost
occurs when the air’s dewpoint is below freezing.
The condensing water vapor is deposited in
feathery patterns of ice crystals instead of tiny
droplets. The objects it forms upon must also
be below freezing, but the air from which it con-
denses may be several degrees above freezing.
When the wind blows fog against objects
with surface temperatures below freezing, a type
of ice deposit called rime forms. The fog particles,
which can remain liquid down to temperatures of
about -40 degrees, freeze upon contact with the
object and build up a white deposit. (A similar
deposit may build up in some refrigerator freez-
ers.) The white or milky appearance of rime ice is
due to small regions of air that are trapped
between the fog particles before they freeze.
Dew
Fog
Frost
Rime





WEATHER 21
.Clouds and Precipitation
Clouds and Precipitation
Clouds form when water
vapor condenses to form ice
crystals or water droplets in
the air. Cloud formation gen-
erally is associated with rising
air. Air cools as it ascends
because pressure decreases
with height. The drop in pres-
sure causes the rising air to
expand, eventually, the air to
its dewpoint. Then condensa-
tion or freezing begins. The
water vapor condenses
around tiny particles in the
air, such as dust or salt from
the sea. The resulting droplets
are about one-millionth the
size of a medium raindrop.
These condensed particles are
so minuscule that turbulent
air motion holds them aloft.
Learning Latin
The cloud names are derived from Latin words. If you learn the Latin
meanings, you can more easily remember the cloud types. Here are the
basic Latin-based words and their meanings.
Cirrus: Curl or tendril of hair
Stratus: A layer, like a blanket stretched out
Cumulus: A heap or pile (Think of the word accumulate.)
Nimbus: Rain
32,800 FEET
CIRRUS
CIRROCUMULUS
CIRROSTRATUS
ALTOCUMULUS
ALTOSTRATUS
CUMULONIMBUS
STRATOCUMULUS
STRATUS
CUMULUS
NIMBOSTRATUS
19,700 FEET
6,600 FEET


22 WEATHER
Clouds and Precipitation.
Cloud Formation and Types
Meteorologists use four main groupings for clouds: low clouds,
middle clouds, high clouds, and clouds that develop vertically.
Meteorologists also consider the shapes of clouds.
High Clouds
The highest clouds are generally above 20,000 feet and are called
cirrus clouds. These high clouds are often wispy. Cirrus clouds
are composed entirely of ice crystals because of their low
temperatures and the heights where they form.
Sometimes cirrus clouds are lumpy. Those are called
cirrocumulus. Cirrocumulus clouds can be arranged in patches
or aligned in rows.
Cirrus uncinus
clouds are
sometimes called
“mare’s tails”
because they
look a bit like a
horse’s tail.
Cirrus clouds
Cirrocumulus clouds


WEATHER 23
.Clouds and Precipitation
Cirrus clouds forming in extensive flat layers are known
as cirrostratus. Cirrostratus clouds can cover the whole sky or
only part of it and can be quite thin and nearly transparent.
When cirrus clouds give way to cirrostratus, precipitation may
be on the way within the next 24 hours.
The deep, towering thunderheads known as cumulonimbus
clouds can be more than 50,000 feet tall and can occupy more
than one height category. Their height certainly qualifies them
to be high clouds, though meteorologists think of them as clouds
of vertical development. Cumulonimbus clouds almost always
flatten out near the tropopause. Their flat, anvil-shaped top is a
help in identifying them. Cumulonimbus clouds will likely bring
lightning, heavy rain, and possibly hail and gusty winds.
Cumulonimbus clouds
Cirrostratus clouds


24 WEATHER
Clouds and Precipitation.
Middle Clouds
The middle group of clouds, with heights roughly between
6,500 and 25,000 feet, has the prefix alto-. This group includes
altocumulus clouds, which often look like a fluffy blanket
covering the sky. Altocumulus clouds also can appear in
patches or in rows. They can be distinguished by the rounded
contours of the clouds with small openings showing blue sky
above, and by their height. Altocumulus clouds indicate that
moisture is rising and that rain may be on the way.
Altostratus clouds appear flat and layered. Altostratus
clouds occasionally can cover nearly the whole sky but can be
thin enough to let the sun show through dimly. Altostratus
clouds often indicate an approaching warm front and a change
of weather, such as rain or snow.
Fog can be
thought of as a
stratus cloud at
the surface.
Altostratus clouds
Altocumulus clouds


WEATHER 25
.Clouds and Precipitation
Low Clouds
Low clouds appear from near
Earth’s surface up to about 6,500
feet. Stratus clouds appear as a
uniform cloud layer, with little
or no texture.
Stratocumulus clouds
typically are flat and nearly
uniform at their bases but puffy
and clumped on top. They are
likely to form heavy ridges that
look like corrugated roofing.
Stratocumulus clouds often
indicate heavy precipitation,
especially if they are at the
head of a cold front.
Nimbostratus clouds are
dark, sheetlike clouds and indi-
cate that rain or snow is falling.
Cumulus clouds form below
6,500 feet but can grow very tall,
much taller than they are wide.
Meteorologists consider them
clouds of vertical development.
When these fluffy “cloud ships”
float in the bright blue sky, they
are called fair-weather cumulus,
and they usually mean good
weather is ahead.
Stratus clouds
Stratocumulus clouds
Cumulus clouds
Nimbostratus clouds


26 WEATHER
Clouds and Precipitation.
Precipitation
A cloud is made of water vapor that has condensed into tiny
water droplets or ice crystals. As more and more water vapor
condenses, some of the particles collide with each other and
merge to form droplets large enough to fall. As they fall, they
continue to grow by sweeping up smaller droplets along the
way—a process called coalescence. When droplets become just
large enough to fall to the surface, they are called drizzle. It
may take a thousand or more cloud droplets to form a single
drop of drizzle. As the droplets continue to grow, they reach a
size large enough to be called rain.
Snow forms when cloud temperatures are well below
freezing. Ice crystals become larger when they attract water
from nearby supercooled water droplets. When the ice crystals
are heavy enough to fall, they stick to other ice crystals and
form snowflakes. Snow can form and fall even when tempera-
tures at Earth’s surface are above freezing. If surface tempera-
tures are warm enough, however, the falling snow will melt
before reaching the ground and will fall as drizzle or rain.
Melting snowflakes usually are small enough to become drizzle,
but sometimes snowflakes collect rime ice and form small white
pellets called graupel (pronounce the “au” like “awe”).
Sometimes rain will fall into a layer of below-freezing air
before it reaches the ground. The rain then forms ice pellets, or
sleet. If rain falls to the ground and hits a very cold surface, the
result is freezing rain. Freezing rain can cause icy road
conditions and can form heavy ice coverings on power lines
and vegetation.
One of the most spectacular forms of precipitation is hail.
Hail is the result of ice forming in the rising currents of air, or
updrafts, of thunderstorms. When an updraft is strong enough,
it holds the ice aloft. Many layers of supercooled water freeze to
the ice pellets, adding to their size. They give the hailstone a
structure like an onion.
The Dirt About
Snowflakes
Dirt, pollen, sand,
dust—these are
the kinds of
elements that
serve as building
blocks for ice
crystals, which
join together
to become
snowflakes. Each
delicate snowflake
has six sides
and is made up
of as many as
200 ice crystals
stuck together.
Most of the time, raindrops are not collections of
smaller water droplets but are instead melted snow or
graupel. If the air never becomes very warm, as in the
winter, the snowflakes and graupel simply fall as snow
and snow pellets.


WEATHER 27
.Clouds and Precipitation
The hailstone grows until the updraft can no
longer hold it aloft or until its motion within the
storm carries it out of the updraft. Then it falls to
the ground, perhaps melting somewhat as it nears
the surface. Hailstones can range from the size of
small peas to the size of grapefruits. Large hail-
stones often are not simple spheres, but take on
irregular shapes as a result of being tossed and
turned within the turbulent air of the thunderstorm.
Visibility
Visibility indicates the transparency of air. Air contains particles
that reflect and scatter light, so that objects at a distance cannot
be seen. Smoke from fires, dust picked up over land, and salt
particles from evaporated ocean spray can be carried great
distances by wind and can collect in still areas. Water droplets
in the form of clouds or fog can also reduce visibility, as can
raindrops and snowflakes if there are enough of them.
To determine visibility for meteorological purposes, look
for several objects whose distances from the observing point are
known. By noting the distance of the farthest object that can be
seen, you can then estimate visibility. Visibility is normally
reported in miles or a fraction of a mile. Visibility is essential in
aircraft operation and in navigating almost any kind of trans-
portation vehicle (cars, trucks, and especially planes and
boats). Observations of visibility are routinely reported all over
the world.
Hailstone
Supercooling
An interesting phenomenon called supercooling plays a role in the
formation of snow. Water that is supercooled remains in its liquid state
when the temperature is below freezing. The reason the water does not
freeze is that, in order for a liquid to crystallize into a solid, there needs to
be something for the crystals to form around, such as a particle of dust,
salt, or plant matter. If a water droplet in a cloud contains no such particle,
or nucleus, it will remain liquid. However, when a nucleus is present, an
ice crystal will begin to form and grow around the nucleus.


28 WEATHER
Clouds and Precipitation.
Fronts
In radio and television weather reports, you often hear about
fronts. A weather reporter might say something like, “A warm
front is coming up the coast” or “A strong cold front is moving
down from Canada.” These reports sound as though an inva-
sion were on the way! In a sense, that’s right. The reports are
describing the invasion of air masses.
Air masses form when air remains in place over a particular
region for several days. The air gradually takes on the character-
istics of the surface beneath it. For example, air over tropical
oceans becomes warm and moist, while air over snow-covered
polar regions becomes dry and cold. When the air moves away
from the place where it formed, known as its source region, it
replaces air of a different type. The boundaries between air
masses of different types are what meteorologists call fronts.
Fronts are regions of transition and often are where important
weather events take place.
Air masses usually are associated with high-pressure
regions (anticyclones) at the surface. Low-pressure regions
(cyclones) dominate on the boundaries of air masses. By
increasing the winds and pushing the air away from its source,
the development of cyclones causes air masses to move away
from their source regions.
Air masses
have similar
temperature
and moisture
characteristics
based on their
source regions.
They can be
cold (polar) or
warm (tropical)
and dry
(continental) or
humid (maritime).
Watching the Sky
The movement of a frontal system often is heralded by a procession of
different cloud types, each signaling a greater likelihood of an approaching
storm. You might first see a clear sky of high, feathery cirrus clouds, or
“mare’s tails.” These clouds will thicken until the sun is hidden behind a
thin cirrostratus veil. A gray curtain of altostratus clouds comes next,
followed by a moist blanket of dark stratus clouds rolling close to Earth.
Finally, nimbostratus clouds bring rain.
Of course, not all clouds signal bad weather. Cirrus clouds detached
from one another indicate that the weather will stay fair for a while. A scaly
mackerel sky formed by cirrocumulus clouds usually promises fair weather,
but it also might be a sign of inclement weather. Outdoor groups eager for
dry trails welcome the sight of cumulus clouds. On hot days, however,
travelers are wise to take cover if swelling cumulus clouds develop into
dark cumulonimbus thunderheads, the breeders of violent storms.


WEATHER 29
.Clouds and Precipitation
When cold air replaces
warmer air, the front is
called a cold front. In the
United States, cold air usu-
ally comes from the north
or northwest of Canada and
from the polar regions.
Because cold air is denser
than warm air, it tends to
stay nearer the surface and
wedges beneath the warm
air. This tends to make the
warm air rise, as seen in
the diagram. The rising
air cools by expansion,
forming clouds and per-
haps precipitation.
Because the advancing
cold air remains near the
surface where friction is a
factor, the movement of the
cold air is slowed some-
what by the friction of
objects and landforms on Earth’s surface. This creates a steep
slope along the leading edge of the front. The slope can mean
that most of the rising motion along the front is confined to a
narrow zone near the front.
When warm air replaces cold air, the front is called a
warm front. Warm air masses form over the warm tropical
oceans south and southeast of the United States and over land
areas to the southwest. Those forming over oceans are moist.
Those forming over land are dry. When warm air approaches a
cold air mass, it tends to ride up over it rather than wedging
beneath it. Unlike cold fronts, therefore, warm fronts tend to
have gentle slopes. As the warm air rises and cools, clouds
and precipitation may form. The shallow slope means that rain
and clouds can precede the passage of a warm front by a day
or more.
CROSS SECTION OF CLOUDS ON A COLD FRONT
FRONTAL MOVEMENT
CUMULONIMBUS WARM AIR
STRATOCUMULUS
COLDFRONT COLDAIR
CROSS SECTION OF CLOUDS ON A WARM FRONT
FRONTAL MOVEMENT
COLD AIR
WARM FRONT
WARM AIR
NIMBOSTRATUS
STRATUS





WEATHER 31
.Hazardous Weather
Hazardous Weather
People readily adapt to routine weather changes that occur with
the passage of air masses. Sometimes, however, the weather can
become so violent or the temperature so extreme that people
need to take special precautions.
Forecasting
Forecasters with the National Weather Service issue watches,
warnings, and advisories to alert the public to potentially violent
or hazardous weather. There is an important difference between
a watch and a warning. A watch means that hazardous weather
is possible or that conditions are favorable for it to develop. A
warning is a more urgent notice that hazardous conditions already
exist or are heading your way. Watches and warnings are issued
for events such as winter storms, tornadoes, severe thunderstorms,
high winds, and flash floods. The National Weather Service issues
advisories when conditions are expected to cause serious inconve-
niences. A common type of advisory alerts motorists to hazards
such as slippery roads caused by wintry weather.
Winter Storms
During the winter, some cyclones (low-pressure areas) develop
into unusually intense storms that bring heavy snow, strong
winds, and cold temperatures. When the wind is strong enough
(above 35 miles per hour) and visibility is reduced to less than
a quarter mile by snow or blowing snow for at least three
hours, the event is termed a blizzard. Even if a snowstorm does
not quite qualify as a blizzard, a combination of snow, wind,
and cold can be deadly for people caught unprepared.
Another winter event that can be quite severe is freezing
rain (or drizzle), or an ice storm. If ice coatings build up
enough, tree branches can break, often crashing into power
and telephone lines already burdened with ice. Roads become
ice-covered and treacherous.


32 WEATHER
Hazardous Weather.
Even without snow or ice, extreme cold can be dangerous.
Bitter cold can be even more hazardous when accompanied by
high wind because the two increase the rate of heat loss from
exposed skin. The result can be frostbite, which is damage to
skin from freezing, or hypothermia, a dangerous lowering of
body temperature.
Meteorologists use wind chill to describe the combined effect
of cold and wind on the human body. Wind chill temperatures
always are the same as or lower than the actual temperature, and
decrease with higher winds. For example, with a temperature of 30
degrees, the wind chill also is 30 degrees if winds are nearly calm,
but it drops to 17 degrees if winds are blowing at 20 miles per hour.
If you are caught outdoors in a winter storm or in extreme
cold, it is important to stay dry, cover all exposed parts of your
body, and avoid overexertion. These precautions will help prevent
frostbite and hypothermia. If there is no shelter available, prepare
a lean-to, windbreak, or snow cave for protection. Build a fire if
possible for heat and to help attract the attention of rescuers.
Rocks placed around the fire will help absorb and reflect heat.
If you are out in a car, stay with the car and tie a brightly
colored cloth to the antenna so that you might be seen by rescuers.
For about 10 minutes each hour, start the car and run the heater.
Make sure the car’s exhaust pipe is not blocked; otherwise, deadly
exhaust fumes will fill your car. You may move your arms and legs
to keep your blood circulating, but try not to sweat or burn too
much of the energy you need to keep warm.
Always melt snow
for drinking, rather
than eating it to
quench thirst.
Using your own
body heat to
melt snow will
lower your body
temperature.
Heat Hazards
The high summer temperatures create a different set of dangerous
weather-related conditions. Help keep summer safe and comfortable for
you and your family by:
• Drinking plenty of water—even if you don’t feel thirsty—and limit
strenuous activities to early morning or evening hours, when it is cooler.
• Spending time in places where it is cooler, in particular where air
conditioning is available. That could be your home, a library,
restaurant, or any place where you could get some relief from the
heat during at least part of the day.
• Never leaving children or pets unattended in a vehicle—even with the
windows down.
• Avoiding overexposure to the sun.


WEATHER 33
.Hazardous Weather
Wind Chill Table
Equivalent temperature in cooling power on exposed flesh
Air temperature (degrees Fahrenheit)
35 30 25 20 15 10 5 0 -5 -10 -15 -20 -25 -30
0–4 35 30 25 20 15 10 5 0 -5 -10 -15 -20 -25 -30
5 31 25 19 13 7 1 -5 -11 -16 -22 -28 -34 -40 -46
10 27 21 15 9 3 -4 -10 -16 -22 -28 -35 -41 -47 -53
15 25 19 13 6 0 -7 -13 -19 -26 -32 -39 -45 -51 -58
20 24 17 11 4 -2 -9 -15 -22 -29 -35 -42 -48 -55 -61
25 23 16 9 3 -4 -11 -17 -24 -31 -37 -44 -51 -58 -64
30 22 15 8 1 -5 -12 -19 -26 -33 -39 -46 -53 -60 -67
35 21 14 7 0 -7 -14 -21 -27 -34 -41 -48 -55 -62 -69
40 20 13 6 -1 -8 -15 -22 -29 -36 -43 -50 -57 -64 -71
45 19 12 5 -2 -9 -16 -23 -30 -37 -44 -51 -58 -65 -72
Wind speeds greater than 45 mph have little additional chilling effect.
Wind speed (miles per hour)


34 WEATHER
Hazardous Weather.
Thunderstorms
Thunderstorms are most common in the tropics and subtropics
and during the warm season in the middle latitudes, but they
can occur in winter and at polar latitudes. They form when
warm, moist air creates updrafts that form large precipitation
drops in clouds. As this precipitation develops, positive and
negative electrical charges separate and build up in different
parts of the clouds and on the ground beneath the clouds.
When charges have built up enough, they can “jump the gap”
between regions of opposite charge, discharging the areas.
This discharge is what we see as lightning. Some lightning
flashes strike the ground, but most are from one part of a cloud
to another. Lightning ground strikes, fairly common in the
United States, can be deadly. In the United States about 55
people die each year from being struck by lightning.
Thunder is caused by the great heat generated during the
brief time (less than a second) that a lightning discharge occurs.
The heat causes the air to expand and contract rapidly, as in
an explosion.
You hear thunder after you see lightning because of the
difference between the speed of sound and the speed of light.
Sound travels at a speed of 1,100 feet per second, but light travels
at a speed of about 186,000 miles per second. Therefore, you will
see a lightning flash almost instantly, but the sound of thunder will
take longer to reach you.
Count the seconds
it takes for the
sound of the
thunder to reach
you after you see
a lightning flash.
Since a mile is
5,280 feet, it takes
thunder about
5 seconds to
travel 1 mile.
The instability of electrical charges within a cloud is heightened by
collisions of ice crystals and hail and by differences in air temperature at
different altitudes. When the imbalance becomes great enough between
negatively charged and positively charged areas of clouds or between a
cloud and the ground, electrons (negatively charged subatomic particles)
form a pathway called a leader and flood from one zone to the other,
resulting in a lightning strike.


WEATHER 35
.Hazardous Weather
Staying Safe During a Thunderstorm
If you are caught outdoors in a thunderstorm, do not stand in
open areas or near lightning targets such as trees, power poles,
or wire fences. Metal conducts electricity, so also stay away
from metal poles (such as tent poles) and such. Remove any
metallic frame packs and do not stay near them.
Water also conducts electricity, so if you are boating or
swimming, get to land immediately when a storm is approaching.
When hiking near mountaintops, which are struck by
lightning often during summer, get downhill before the lightning
begins, if possible. If a storm catches you, take shelter in a cave
or a low spot among the rocks, making sure to avoid prominent
outcroppings and overhangs. Try to pick an area that is not
likely to flood.
If you cannot find shelter, become the smallest target you
can. Do not lie flat on the ground, because lying flat makes you a
bigger target than crouching down. If you feel your hair stand on
end or your skin get tingly, crouch down immediately and take
the following pose: Squat on the balls of your feet, cover your
ears with your hands, and get your head close to your knees. Get
small! The less of you that is touching the ground, the better.
Take shelter in a steel-framed building or hard-topped
motor vehicle (not a convertible) if you can. Such places are
safe because the charge stays within the frame of the building or
vehicle and is conducted safely to ground without endangering
the occupants. When you are taking shelter in a car during a
thunderstorm, avoid touching the metal parts.
When taking shelter in a building during a thunderstorm,
do not use the telephone or hold objects connected to electrical
power (such as hair dryers). Staying near stoves, fireplaces,
and plumbing is also dangerous, because metal can conduct
electricity. Also, do not take a bath or shower or run water.
Rubber-soled
shoes and rubber
tires provide
no protection
against lightning.


36 WEATHER
Hazardous Weather.
Although the location where
lightning will strike is not predictable,
some places are much more likely
to be struck than others. Because
lightning follows the path of least
resistance, objects closer to the cloud
are more likely to be struck. Trees in
an otherwise open space often are
targets for lightning, so trees are
not a good place to take shelter in
a thunderstorm.
Thunderstorms can become
quite violent, producing large hail,
flooding rains, strong winds, and
tornadoes. These severe thunderstorms tend to occur where
the air mass is very unstable. During winter, a single cyclone
can produce blizzards, ice storms, and severe thunderstorms
with tornadoes.
When taking safety precautions during a thunderstorm, you
should stay alert and be ready to revise your plans if a more
hazardous weather condition occurs, such as a flash flood.
Floods
Floods are an unavoidable part of life along rivers. The torrential
rains of thunderstorms or tropical cyclones can cause flooding.
Some floods occur when winter or spring rains combine with
melting snows to fill river basins with too much water too quickly.
Such events usually take several days to develop. Other floods
arise suddenly as the result of heavy localized rainfall. These
flash floods can become raging torrents very fast, sometimes in
less than an hour, and can sweep away everything in their path.
Areas of rugged terrain are particularly vulnerable to flash
floods. Picturesque river valleys in the mountains can be swept
without warning by floods from rains falling some distance
away. When camping, stay clear of natural streambeds during
the time of year when rainstorms are common. If you camp on
low ground, you might be caught unawares, especially when
asleep at night. In case of a flood in rugged terrain, climb to
high ground immediately, even if it means abandoning your
gear. If the floodwaters are already rising, do not get into motor
vehicles and attempt to drive away from the flood danger.
Never enter a flooded low spot on the road or trail if you do not
know how deep the water is, especially if the water is rising.
Although lightning
can be hazardous,
it is not all bad.
It changes the
air’s nitrogen into
a form that can
be taken up by
plants. Thus, a
thunderstorm can
be a natural plant
fertilizer as well
as a waterer.


WEATHER 37
.Hazardous Weather
Most fatalities of floods are victims trapped in automobiles.
When water covers the road ahead, turn around. It takes only 2
feet of water to float a car, and even less to stall a car or truck’s
engine. If your vehicle’s engine stalls, abandon it and climb to
higher ground.
Keep alert to signs of wet weather—not just in your location
but also in nearby areas. Listen for distant thunder and watch for
lightning flashes. Faster flowing streams or rising water levels can
signal rainfall upstream. In seasons when heavy rains are possible,
at least one person in your group should carry a portable radio
and stay informed about weather conditions when in range of a
radio station. When out of radio range, be keenly observant and
alert to the weather.
Tornadoes
On rare occasions, rapidly rotating columns of air form within
a thunderstorm. When these rotating columns reach Earth’s
surface, they become tornadoes.
Tornadoes can produce the strongest winds on Earth,
occasionally reaching 300 miles per hour or more. The tornado
is an extreme form of cyclone, with very low pressure at its
core. Most tornadoes produce paths of damage that are only
a few hundred yards wide or less. Because tornadoes usually
last only a few minutes, path lengths typically are a mile or
less. A few tornadoes, however, are more than a mile wide
and last for an hour or more, producing damage paths more
than 100 miles long.
Most tornado casualties are caused by flying debris, so
the best thing to do if a tornado threatens is to get to a place that
provides as much protection from flying debris as possible. Avoid
taking shelter near trees. They become a source of debris during
tornadoes. If you are caught in the open when a tornado
approaches, get to a low spot, lie face down, and cover your head.
Your goal is to be less of a target for flying debris. Therefore, lying
flat is the right position. A ditch or other low spot is a good place
to lie down, especially if there is no flood water.
Tornadoes can occur while you are in school or at home.
Be aware of any plans for tornado safety in your school. You
and your family should develop a safety plan at home. If your
home has a tornado shelter, use it. If your home has a basement,
it can be a good shelter if part of it offers protection from falling
debris. For example, you might take shelter under a stairway or
a heavy workbench.
As with floods,
never attempt to
drive away from
a tornado. You
are likely to be
trapped in your
vehicle, which
is an extremely
dangerous
situation.


38 WEATHER
Hazardous Weather.
If you cannot get to a tornado shelter or basement, put
as many solid walls between you and the outside as possible.
Closets in interior hallways are good shelters. Bathrooms often
have stronger walls than the rest of the house because the
plumbing makes a kind of reinforcement. Stay away from
windows—flying glass is extremely hazardous. Abandon mobile
homes and seek nearby shelter. Take along a radio and some
source of fresh water. If your home is hit, be alert to leaking
gas from broken pipes. Outside, beware of fallen power lines.
Hurricanes
Among the most dangerous storms that affect the United States
are hurricanes. Hurricanes have wind speeds of 74 mph or
higher. They originate in the southern part of the north Atlantic
Ocean, the Caribbean Sea, the Gulf of Mexico, and the south-
eastern Pacific Ocean off the west coast of Mexico. The same
type of storm occurs elsewhere in the world, notably in the
oceans near India and Australia, where they are called cyclones,
and in the western Pacific Ocean, where they are called
typhoons. A general name for all such storms is tropical cyclone.
Tropical cyclones with wind speeds between 38 mph and 74
mph are called tropical storms.
Unlike the low-pressure systems of middle latitudes, tropical
cyclones contain no fronts because they form in a single, tropical
air mass. When well-developed, they are nearly circular in
shape and vary in diameter from about 100 to 1,000 miles.
In rare instances, their winds can exceed 200 miles per hour,
spiraling inward to the low-pressure center. Storm surge is
produced by water pushed toward the shore by the force of the
wind moving around the storm. Low pressure plays a minor
role in the increasing water level.
Storm surge is usually highest just
to the right of the path of the
storm’s center. As the storm
approaches land, the storm surge
can combine with normal tides to
produce extensive flooding. It is
the storm surge, not the wind,
that causes the most damage and
the most casualties from hurri-
canes. Most hurricane deaths are
caused by drowning.
Sometimes
tornadoes form
so quickly there
is no warning
from the news or
weather service.
Large hail, flying
debris, and a
noise like a freight
train are all
signals that a
tornado may be
on the way.


WEATHER 39
.Hazardous Weather
At the center is the eye of the storm, which can range from
about 5 miles to more than 20 miles in diameter. Within the eye,
winds are light. Low clouds might be present, or skies might actu-
ally be clear within the eye. Surrounding the eye is a ring of deep
clouds called the eyewall. The strongest winds in the storm usually
are found within the eyewall next to the relatively calm eye.
Several cloud bands made up of lines of thunderstorms, called
spiral bands, usually are present in a tropical cyclone. They spiral
into and join the eyewall from the outer parts of the storm.
Torrential rains often accompany the eyewall and the spiral bands.
Tropical cyclones “feed” on warm tropical ocean waters.
This is how they obtain their strength over the open waters of
the tropics and why they normally weaken rapidly and soon
dissipate after they meet land. But even a dissipated hurricane
can produce extremely heavy rainfall—sometimes well inland
from the point where it made landfall.
In nearly all cases, hurricane watches and warnings will
precede any landfalling hurricane. If you are camping along or
near a seashore when hurricane watches are issued, strike camp
and leave the area immediately. Encountering
a hurricane at sea also is extremely dangerous
and should be avoided at all times.
If officials have not advised that you evac-
uate the area, stay indoors, away from win-
dows, and follow the guidelines for tornado
safety. After the eye passes, the hurricane winds
blow in the opposite direction, breaking trees
and other things not quite destroyed by the first
round of winds. Do not be fooled by the eye of
the storm. Much danger still follows. Follow
safety procedures for floods as well.
SPIRAL BANDS EYE EYEWALL
Cross section showing the structure of a typical mature
tropical cyclone
Tropical cyclones
can produce
tornadoes, which
most often occur
in the thunder-
storms embedded
in rain bands
well away from
the center of
the storm.





WEATHER 41
.Measuring and Recording the Weather
Measuring and
Recording the Weather
Accurate information about the various factors that together
define the weather is necessary in making reliable forecasts.
For each of these factors, there is an instrument that measures
intensity, velocity, or degree.
Air Pressure
Air pressure is measured using a barometer. An aneroid barom-
eter is the type you are most likely to have at home or see in
stores. It uses a small, thin-metal “box” sealed with average
air pressure inside. The box contracts under high pressure and
expands when the outside air pressure drops. An indicator
needle is attached to the side of the box by levers and records
the pressure on a dial.
Scientific barometers used by laboratories contain mercury,
a metallic element that is liquid at room temperature. A simple
mercury barometer consists of a slender glass tube filled with
mercury and closed at one end. The open end of the tube rests
in a bowl of mercury. The mercury in the tube falls to a level
that is about 30 inches above the level of that in the bowl. A
vacuum forms at the top of the tube. Air pressure acts on the
surface of the mercury in the bowl, forcing the mercury up into
the tube. The higher the air pressure, the higher the level of
mercury in the tube.
Mercury is very poisonous. Just a small amount can pollute a large
body of water such as a lake. The United States government has placed
restrictions on mercury. If you have an old barometer that uses mercury,
be careful never to open it up. Liquid mercury can be absorbed through
your skin. Just a small amount can also poison the air, and disposing of
it improperly will cause pollution.


42 WEATHER
Measuring and Recording the Weather.
Barometers, either mercury or aneroid, are read
in terms of the height in inches of a column of mer-
cury. Average air pressure at sea level corresponds to
a column of mercury about 30 inches tall. This is
where the barometer reading comes from on weather
reports—a pressure of 30.25 inches, for example. Air
pressure at sea level varies by only a small amount.
A reading of, say, 31 inches is unusually high, while a
reading below 29 inches occurs only in the strongest
cyclones, such as hurricanes.
The height of the mercury column is affected by
altitude. Pressure decreases as altitude increases because
there is less atmosphere above as one goes higher. To
adjust for differences in elevation, it is common to cor-
rect the readings for altitude so that the measurements
are comparable to those taken at sea level.
On actual weather maps, pressures are converted
to millibars, the scientific unit used to measure pres-
sure. The numbers on the isobars on a weather map
correspond to pressure adjusted to sea level in millibars.
Downward air pressure on
the mercury in a mercury
barometer forces mercury
up into the tube. The higher
the air pressure, the higher
the mercury column.
POINTERS
FACE
SPRING
CHAIN
LEVERS
METAL DRUM
(PARTIAL VACUUM)
VACUUM
760mm
MERCURY ATMOSPHERIC
PRESSURE
Changes in pressure result in changes in width of an aneroid
barometer’s sealed box. Levers and springs convert these
changes into pressure readings.


WEATHER 43
.Measuring and Recording the Weather
The rate at which the air pressure is changing often is
more important than the pressure reading itself. Air pressure
rises typically with the approach of high pressure and its
attendant fair weather. So if you hear a weather reporter say,
“The barometric pressure is 29.65 inches and rising,” you can
be pretty sure that good weather is on the way. Likewise, the
approach of a low-pressure area causes the reading to fall.
Wind Direction
You probably have seen wind vanes on houses and barns.
Most are in the form of an arrow that pivots on special bearings
so that it can turn freely in the wind. It is accurately balanced
on the bearing. The size of the “feather” part of the arrow is
larger so that wind vanes always swing into the wind and point
in the direction from which the wind is coming.
Wind Speed
Wind speed is measured by an instrument called an anemome-
ter. Although there are several types of anemometers, the most
common type is a cup anemometer, in which three or four
cups are mounted on horizontal rods. The unit is attached to
a vertical rod so that it can rotate as the wind turns it. As wind
speed increases, so does the speed at which the cups rotate.
Wind speed is measured by the number of turns the cups
make in a set period of time.
Wind speeds can be measured in miles per hour, in knots,
or in meters per second. A knot is one nautical mile per hour—
a nautical mile is about 6,080 feet, roughly 15 percent longer
than an ordinary mile of 5,280 feet. Miles per hour normally
are used in the weather reports you hear on radio and televi-
sion, while knots are used mostly in marine and aviation
weather reports. Most scientific measurements are in meters
per second.
A professional
wind vane usually
has electrical
connections to
a scale in the
weather office
so that no one has
to go outside to
read it. Weather
reporters do know
enough to stay out
of the rain!


44 WEATHER
Measuring and Recording the Weather.
Beaufort Wind Scale
Beaufort
Number Description Wind Speed
(mph)
Observations
(visible effects on land)
0 Calm Less than 1 Smoke rises vertically.
1 Light air 1–3 Wind direction is shown by smoke drift, but not by wind
vanes.
2 Light breeze 4–7 Wind is felt on the face; leaves rustle; ordinary vanes are
moved by the wind.
3 Gentle breeze 8–12 Leaves and small twigs are in constant motion; wind extends
a light flag.
4 Moderate breeze 13–18 Dust and loose paper are raised; small branches are moved.
5 Fresh breeze 19–24 Small trees in leaf begin to sway; crested wavelets form on
inland water.
6 Strong breeze 25–31 Large branches are in motion; whistling is heard in telegraph
wires; an umbrella is difficult to use.
7 Moderate gale 32–38 Whole trees are in motion; inconvenience is felt in walking
against the wind.
8 Fresh gale 39–46 Twigs break off trees; progress generally is impeded.
9 Strong gale 47–54 Slight structural damage is reported; branches break.
10 Whole gale 55–63 Considerable structural damage is reported; trees are
uprooted; seldom experienced inland.
11 Storm 64–72 Widespread damage is reported; very rarely experienced.
12 Hurricane Above 72 Extreme damage is reported.
This scale was devised by Sir Francis Beaufort in 1805. Although used mainly to
estimate winds at sea, the visible effects described here relate to observations
on land.





46 WEATHER
Measuring and Recording the Weather.
Make a Wind Vane
Materials Needed
■■ Aluminum baking dish, pie tin,
or tray
■■ Sturdy wooden garden stake (at
least 3 feet tall and 1 inch thick)
■■ 12-inch piece of wood about
1⁄2 inch thick
■■ Nail (2 to 3 inches long)
■■ Electric or hand drill
■■ Thick metal washer
■■ Hammer
■■ Mallet
■■ Glue
■■ Small saw
■■ Scissors
Step 1—Select a location for your
wind vane. Then use the mallet to
carefully drive the garden stake into
the ground.
Step 2—Use the saw to cut a half-
inch slot at each end of the 12-inch
piece of wood.
Step 3—With an adult helping you,
place the piece of wood on top of the
stake, as shown, and drill through the
wood and the stake. Use a drill bit
that is slightly larger in diameter
than the nail you will be using.
3


WEATHER 47
.Measuring and Recording the Weather
Step 4—Place the washer
on top of the stake and
insert the nail through
the wood and into the
stake. The wood should
turn easily on the axis of
the nail.
Step 5—Cut the head and tail of the arrow from the aluminum tray or
dish using the pattern shown as a guide. Glue the head of the arrow
into one slot in the piece of wood and the tail into the other slot.
5
4


48 WEATHER
Measuring and Recording the Weather.
Air Temperature
Air temperature is an important factor in weather, especially
when associated with other factors such as humidity and
pressure. It is measured with a thermometer.
The most accurate thermometers are the liquid-in-glass-
tube type, containing either mercury or alcohol. The alcohol
version is more appropriate for very cold places because alcohol
freezes at a lower temperature than mercury.
A thermometer should be kept in the shade and away
from wind and rain. The weather professional’s thermometer
is housed in a ventilated box raised above the ground and
protected from the weather.
Make a Cup Anemometer
Materials Needed
■■ New sharpened pencil
■■ 5 plastic foam cups
■■ Hole punch
■■ Straight pin
■■ 2 extra long plastic straws
■■ Felt marker
■■ Tape
Step 1—Mark the numeral “1” on one of
the cups and set it aside.
Step 2—Set one of the unmarked cups on a
work surface and punch four holes in it as
shown. Be sure one set of holes is lower
than the other set of holes.
Step 3—Carefully poke the pencil through
the bottom of the cup.
2
3
For most of the United States, -40 degrees Fahrenheit to 110 degrees
Fahrenheit is a range of temperatures wide enough to cover most
temperature observations. In Death Valley, California, however, the
temperature once soared to 134 degrees, while at Rogers Pass, Montana,
the temperature once plummeted to -70 degrees. The record low
temperature in the United States was -80 degrees at Prospect Creek, Alaska.


WEATHER 49
.Measuring and Recording the Weather
Step 4—Push the pencil
down so that it is below
the holes and then
thread the straws
through the holes in the
top of the cup to make
a cross shape. Tape the
straws in place.
Step 5—Raise the pencil
up so that the eraser
comes into contact with
the crossed straws.
Push the straight pin
through the straws and
into the eraser. Do not
push the pin all the way
in. The unit needs to be
able to turn freely.
Step 6—Punch one hole each in the side of the other
three unmarked cups and the marked cup, and mount
them on the straw apparatus as shown. If necessary,
add tape to better secure the cups to the straws.
Step 7—To determine wind speed, count how many
complete revolutions the marked cup makes in
one minute.
In most of
the world,
temperatures
are measured in
degrees Celsius,
but in the United
States surface
air temperatures
are measured
and reported
in degrees
Fahrenheit.
Water freezes
at 32 degrees
Fahrenheit, which
is 0 degrees
Celsius, and boils
at 212 degrees
Fahrenheit, or
100 degrees
Celsius.
4
5


50 WEATHER
Measuring and Recording the Weather.
Water Vapor
A common instrument for finding out the amount of water
vapor in the air is the wet-bulb hygrometer. It is relatively easy
to make. Begin by purchasing two identical liquid-in-glass
alcohol thermometers. These can be bought in hardware stores
for a reasonable price. Mount both thermometers on a milk
carton exactly the same distance from the bottom. Cut off
about 6 inches of a new, round shoelace, trimming off the tip.
Slip the shoelace over the bulb portion of one of the two ther-
mometers. Cut a slot in the milk carton so that you can slip the
bottom part of the lace into the carton. Fill the carton with
water up to the slot. If possible, use distilled or filtered water
because impurities in the water will cause inaccurate readings.
Place the carton in the breeze of an electric fan or in a
breezy open window. Make sure the shoelace is wet up to the
thermometer bulb. Evaporation of water from the lace will
cause the temperature measured by the wet-bulb thermometer
to decrease, while the other thermometer should remain at the
actual air temperature.
Using the following chart, you can figure out the relative
humidity by the temperature difference between the two ther-
mometers. When they both read the same, or nearly so, expect
wet weather because that means high (nearly 100 percent)
relative humidity. Generally, the wet-bulb temperature is
somewhere between the actual air temperature and the
dewpoint temperature.
MILK CARTON
RUBBER BANDS
SHOELACE (CUT IN
HALF AND PUT OPEN
END OVER BULB)
WATER
SLOT
Wet-bulb hygrometer


WEATHER 51
.Measuring and Recording the Weather
Relative Humidity Based on Dry-Bulb (Air)
and Wet-Bulb Temperatures
Using this table, compare readings on a wet-bulb thermometer with those on a
dry-bulb thermometer to determine relative humidity. Check the degree difference
shown on your two thermometers. Find this number in the left column of the
table and read across to the column under the air (dry-bulb) temperature. The value
shown is the relative humidity. Example: If the difference between dry- and wet-bulb
temperature is 6 degrees and the air temperature is 70 degrees, the relative humidity
is 72 percent.
Dry-bulb temperature (Fahrenheit)
Difference
(dry-bulb
minus wet
bulb)
30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
1 88 92 93 94 95 96 96 –
2 77 84 87 89 90 92 92 –
3 67 76 80 84 86 87 89 –
4 57 68 74 78 81 83 85 –
6 37 53 62 68 72 76 78 80
8 17 38 50 58 64 68 71 74
10 23 39 49 56 61 65 68
12 9 28 40 48 54 59 62
14 17 31 41 48 53 57
16 7 23 34 41 47 52
18 14 27 35 42 47
20 7 20 30 37 42
22 14 24 32 38
24 7 19 27 33
26 1 14 22 29
28 9 18 25
30 4 14 21


52 WEATHER
Measuring and Recording the Weather.
Rainfall
Rain is measured with a rain gauge. We measure rain in terms
of the depth of the layer it would make if none drained off or
was otherwise lost. In the United States, rainfall is measured
in inches to the nearest hundredth. An amount too small to
measure is called a trace.
Rainfall can be measured in many ways, but usually a
large funnel and narrow receptacle are used. The figure shows
a simple type of rain gauge that you can make.
SPLASH GUARD
(TIN CAN WITH ENDS
REMOVED)
FUNNEL
(MEASURE DIAMETER
OF TOP)
Rainwater funnels into a narrow tube so that amounts can be
read more accurately. Measure the diameters of the funnel top
and the tube and calculate their ratio. Mark off the tube, then
square that ratio. For example, if the funnel opening is twice as
wide as the tube, then 4 inches (2 x 2) in the tube will mean 1
inch of rainfall. If the ratio is 3 to 1, then 9 inches (3 x 3) will
equal 1 inch of rain, and so forth.
CLEAR PLASTIC OR
GLASS TUBE
(MEASURE INSIDE
DIAMETER)





54 WEATHER
Measuring and Recording the Weather.
Weather Maps
The various elements just described, including temperature,
pressure, wind, and precipitation, are measured at weather
stations all over the world at specified times each day.
Observations usually are made every six hours at all land
stations and aboard ships at sea.
Weather observations are prepared using a short code of
numbers and are transmitted electronically to major weather
centers. The contents of these reports are plotted on surface
weather maps, mostly by computers. In addition to the surface
reports, information is gathered by balloon-borne instruments
called radiosondes. A radiosonde consists of instruments that
measure temperature, air pressure, and relative humidity,
usually every 12 hours. The radiosonde data also are plotted
on weather maps for various levels in the atmosphere. All this
information is combined with similar reports from other
countries and used in preparing weather charts for forecasting.
Every day in the United States,
the National Weather Service and
private weather companies prepare
and transmit many weather maps. In
addition to showing the data, the
maps have many lines drawn on
them. Similar to terrain contours,
these lines connect points of equal
values of weather elements. Isobars,
discussed earlier, are lines of equal
pressure. Lines of equal temperature
are called isotherms. Other features
may be included on weather maps,
such as fronts, precipitation, visibility,
and cloud types. These elements nor-
mally are indicated by special symbols.
The information transmitted
to the major weather centers also
is entered into computers and used
to generate computer models of
the atmosphere. These models are
different from physical replicas.
A radiosonde instrument package attached
to a weather balloon records data about the
temperature, humidity, air pressure, and
winds aloft.


WEATHER 55
.Measuring and Recording the Weather
Atmospheric models exist only as programs in a computer.
Weather observations are entered into the computer and
processed through mathematical formulas to make what are
called numerical weather prediction (NWP) forecasts. NWP
forecast information is sent back to the weather offices to be
used by weather forecasters.
By using current weather information at the surface
and aloft, combined with satellite images of clouds, data
from weather radars, and NWP forecasts, meteorologists can
make fairly accurate predictions about the weather systems
affecting an area. It has been shown that even if meteorologists
had perfect models of the atmosphere, there are practical
limitations on how well they could forecast the weather.
Weather models are not perfect, because it is not possible to
take perfect measurements at every point within the entire
atmosphere. As everyone knows, forecasts sometimes are wrong.
However, weather forecasting is much more accurate than it used
to be because of improvements in observing systems, computer
technology, and in the scientific understanding of weather events.
Reading Weather Maps
The best way to learn about weather maps is to look at a few.
Following are examples of daily weather maps issued by the
National Weather Service. Study them carefully. They tell much
about the weather. On them, isobars are marked in millibars.
Where the lines are far apart, winds tend to be weak. Where
they are close together, winds generally are strong.
Note the symbols for the winds at each station. The wind
barbs show the direction from which the wind is blowing.
The flags and lines show the speeds. A half line is 5 knots,
a full line is 10 knots, and a flag is 50 knots. Temperatures
are shown in degrees Fahrenheit. Below the temperatures
are dewpoint temperatures, also in degrees Fahrenheit.


56 WEATHER
Measuring and Recording the Weather.
How to Read a Weather Map
The surface weather maps on the following pages
show a sampling of plotted station observations and
analyses of pressure, temperature, and front locations.
Cold fronts are shown as heavy solid lines with
triangles pointing in the direction in which the cold air
is advancing. Warm fronts are shown as lines with solid
semicircles pointing in the direction toward which the
warm air is moving. Fronts with alternating triangles
and semicircles pointing in opposite directions are
stationary fronts. Neither the warm air nor the cold is
moving very much, so these fronts are hardly moving
at all. The cold air will sometimes wrap around a low-
pressure system, forming an occluded front in the tran-
sition zone between the cold and warm air masses.
Occluded fronts usually extend from strong, well-
developed cyclones. They are shown with alternating
triangles and semicircles pointing in the same direction.
Contours of equal pressure, or isobars, are shown
as solid lines and are labeled in millibars. Centers
of high pressure (anticyclones) and low pressure
(cyclones) are indicated by high and low, respectively.
Note on the maps how surface winds generally spiral
counterclockwise into cyclones and clockwise away
from anticyclones. The tracks of well-defined cyclones
are shown by a chain of arrows, with previous cyclone
center locations shown by small black squares with
white crosses. Thick dashed lines show elongated
areas of low pressure, or low-pressure troughs.
Areas of precipitation are indicated by shading.
Lines of equal temperature (isotherms) are shown for
32 degrees Fahrenheit (thin dashed line) and 0 degrees
Fahrenheit (dash-dot line).


WEATHER 57
.Measuring and Recording the Weather
Weather maps you access may vary in detail from
the maps shown. Simpler versions usually appear in
newspaper and television weather reports, while maps
analyzed by weather forecasters often are much more
detailed. But general features (such as fronts) are
shown similarly on most maps using standard symbols
like those shown here.
Surface maps and the station model below were
provided by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA), National Weather Service,
Climate Analysis Branch.
PPP
pp
RR
TT
T
wwV
d
Study this sample plotted station model and compare it with the
actual reports on the maps to find station temperatures, winds,
pressure, 6-hour rainfall, and so on.
WIND SPEED AND
DIRECTION
SEA LEVEL
PRESSURE
PRESSURE
TENDENCY
PRESSURE CHANGE
OVER THE LAST
THREE HOURS
SKY CONDITION
DEW POINT TEMPERATURE
CURRENT
WEATHER
CONDITIONS
VISIBILITY
TEMPERATURE








60 WEATHER
Measuring and Recording the Weather.
Visit a Weather Office
The National Weather Service has more than 120 offices in the
United States and its territories. You should be able to arrange
a visit to one while you are working on your Weather merit
badge requirements. Alternatively, you might meet with a
weather broadcaster at a local television station or an instructor
from the meteorology or atmospheric science department at a
nearby university or college. There also are many amateur
weather observers who can show you the basic measurements,
instruments, and weather charts.
You can find the
locations of
National Weather
Service offices
by visiting
weather.gov
with your parent
or guardian’s
permission.
Ask an Expert
Here are a few sample questions you might ask when you talk to a
meteorologist for your merit badge requirements. You can come up with
your own questions as well.
• What subjects in high school are related to meteorology?
• How can high school students work as interns or student trainees?
• What books and internet resources do you recommend for learning
more about meteorology?
• What kind of degree does a person need to become a meteorologist?
• What career opportunities exist for meteorologists?
• What is the job outlook for meteorologists?
• What kinds of responsibilities do meteorologists have?
• What areas of meteorology do you foresee becoming increasingly
important in the next 10 to 20 years?


WEATHER 61
.Measuring and Recording the Weather
The most obvious way to study the
weather is to observe actual events and keep
a record of what you see. Daily observations
of temperature, wind, pressure, clouds, and
rainfall can help you understand how the
atmosphere behaves. Keep a daily weather
log, similar to the one shown, for at least a
week. If possible, record observations for a
month or more. Make entries at the same
time each day.
You can obtain readings from your own
instruments, from local television or radio,
and from internet sites devoted to meteorology.
Up-to-the-minute weather information is also
available from the NOAA’s National Weather
Service, NOAA Weather Radio All Hazards,
operating on high-band FM frequencies, trans-
mits updates that can be received by special
receivers and by AM/FM radios equipped with
a weather-band feature. By comparing readings
from day to day, you can see how the various weather elements
change at your location in response to passing weather systems.
Daily Weather Log
Observation time: ______________
Date Observed
Weather Temperature Relative
Humidity
Wind
(Direction/Speed) Pressure 24-Hour
Rainfall
Forecast for
Tomorrow
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Make your own weather chart, using this form as a guide. Keep a 30-day
record based on local weather forecasts and your own observations.
Make and record observations at the same time each day.





WEATHER 63
.Weather and Climate Prediction
Weather and
Climate Prediction
The whole of the atmosphere is involved in weather changes.
To forecast the weather, a meteorologist must know conditions
of temperature, pressure, humidity, and wind throughout the
ocean of air, top to bottom and all over the planet. The meteo-
rologist must know about Earth’s oceans as well. Because it is
hard to obtain information where there are no people, such as
over the oceans, there are many gaps in the knowledge used in
weather forecasting.
Forecasting Tools and Instruments
Weather Balloons
Early attempts to obtain weather data aloft were made using
kites or airplanes that carried recording instruments called
meteorographs as high as the top of the troposphere. The infor-
mation recorded on a meteorograph could not be used until
the instrument was returned to a weather office.
The balloon-borne radiosonde changed all that. It was
responsible for a revolution in understanding the atmosphere.
A radiosonde is a small box that contains a barometer, a
thermometer, and a hygrometer. Radiosondes are attached to
weather balloons that carry them aloft. By tracking the bal-
loons, it is possible to measure wind speed and direction aloft,
even where no clouds are present. The practical use of this abil-
ity did not become widespread until the development of radio
direction-finding devices called radiotheodolites. A radiosonde
with wind-measurement capability is known as a rawinsonde.
Rawinsondes typically rise to well above the tropopause, so
today it is common to have measurements of all the needed
weather variables up to heights of about 100,000 feet.
Commercial
aircraft help
gather wind
and temperature
information. More
than 100,000
aircraft observa-
tions are collected
each day across
the United States
for use in
numerical weather
prediction models.


64 WEATHER
Weather and Climate Prediction.
Radar
After World War II, observers noticed that weather
seemed to affect radarscopes used for tracking air-
planes. They decided that radar might be a good way
to detect and track weather targets. The earliest
weather radars were converted from military radars
in the late 1940s. By 1960, weather radars were in
widespread use for tracking precipitation. Basically,
the radar beam is sent out from an antenna and is
bounced back off objects that the beam strikes. The
reflected signal is amplified electronically and dis-
played in various ways. Radar signals are called
echoes because of their similarity to an ordinary sound echo.
By the 1990s, National Weather Service radars began to
include Doppler equipment (named for the Austrian physicist
Christian Doppler). Doppler radars work like police radars to
measure the speed of a target and provide information about the
speed of precipitation echoes along a radar beam. The radar gives
meteorologists helpful information about motions within storms,
especially severe thunderstorms that might contain tornadoes.
The colored areas indicate areas of precipitation, with the spec-
trum color indicating precipitation intensity. Heavy precipitation
is red, and light precipitation is blue. The lightest shades of blue
might even be large cloud droplets.


WEATHER 65
.Weather and Climate Prediction.Weather and Climate Prediction
Satellites
The first weather satellite, known as TIROS-1, was
launched in the spring of 1960. It was highly successful
at giving meteorologists their first overall view of entire
storm systems. Since then, satellites have become much
more sophisticated, allowing a nearly continuous watch
over the entire Earth.
NOAA has two satellite systems: polar-orbiting sat-
ellites and geostationary satellites. The satellite systems
are named Polar Operational Environmental Satellites
(POES) and Geostationary Operational Environmental
Satellites (GOES). The polar-orbiting satellites circle Earth, passing
over or near the poles at a height of approximately 520 miles. They
travel around the globe several times each day. The polar-orbiting
satellites are placed in sun-synchronous orbits, which means they
pass over the same spot at the same time each day. It takes about
100 minutes to complete an orbit. Polar-orbiting satellites observe
only the atmosphere and the ground along their track.
Geostationary satellites are placed in an orbit about 22,300
miles above the equator. At this position, the satellite is orbiting at
a speed that matches Earth’s rotation. Thus, the satellite remains
over the same spot. Such an orbit is called geosynchronous.
Geostationary satellites observe almost the entire half of Earth
within their view. Images taken over a period of time, sometimes
as frequently as each five minutes, can be displayed in sequence
to show cloud motions. Satellite observations are especially
important in areas where little or no information is available,
such as the oceans.
Both polar-orbiting and geostationary satellites have sensors
that can be used during day and night. Visible sensors provide
images during daylight that look just like pictures taken with your
camera. When Earth is not illuminated by the sun, visible images
cannot be made. Infrared sensors on the satellite are able to
measure the temperature of the surface during both day and night
to provide important observations of clouds, land, ocean, crops,
and other vegetation. As sensors on satellites become more
sophisticated, increasingly detailed observations of atmospheric
temperature and moisture through the depth of the atmosphere
are being made. Such observations are filling the gaps between
rawinsonde stations (where atmospheric information is gathered)
and improving numerical weather forecasts. GOES satellites also
monitor the sun, and they detect emergency locator beacons that
have been activated to help with search and rescue activities.


66 WEATHER
Weather and Climate Prediction.
Weather Forecasting—Past and Present
Americans in earlier times did not have much help from
weather forecasters until the United States Weather Bureau
(the predecessor to today’s National Weather Service) became
well-established in the late 1800s. As often as not, farmers and
sailors had to be their own forecasters. They used all kinds of
natural signs as indicators. To predict short-term events, they
observed cloud patterns, dew on the grass, winds, and waves.
For long-term indications, they studied the hair on caterpillars,
the migration patterns of birds, or the hibernation of animals.
In addition to the natural indicators, there were annual
almanacs that contained weather forecasts and other informa-
tion. Predictions published in these books were very general
and were based mostly on past weather history. Though their
true value was questionable, almanacs have served as the only
forecast source for many people through the ages and are still
around today.
In recent years, there has been much improvement in
science-based weather forecasting. Much of this progress
began with World War II. The vast wartime movements of
ships, planes, and troops made it necessary for the armed
services to have forecasts as accurate as possible far in
advance. They set up their own meteorological groups and
worked with universities and the U.S. Weather Bureau to
develop new techniques. Thousands of men and women
received weather training. Many stayed in meteorology
after the war and helped pioneer the peacetime application
of new ideas.
Advances in electronics technology have made high-speed
computers an everyday working tool in many areas, including
weather forecasting. The computer made it possible to solve
mathematical formulas and equations of meteorology that had
been unsolvable before. A completely scientific means for
weather forecasting became possible in the 1950s, when the
numerical weather prediction (NWP) forecasts were developed.
These models are being improved continually.


WEATHER 67
.Weather and Climate Prediction
Climate
Recall that weather is the condition of the atmosphere over a
particular area for a short time. Climate is the average of the
weather over a region for a longer time, such as 30 years or more.
The word climate comes from the Greek word klima,
meaning “angle.” This name was used because the angle at
which the sun strikes Earth largely determines the climate.
At the equator, the sun is nearly straight overhead most of
the year, so most of the equatorial region is hot. In the polar
regions, the opposite is true. Poleward from the equator, the
climate gradually shifts from hot to cold. In between are what
we call the temperate zones.
We have seasons because Earth’s axis is tilted relative to the plane of its orbit around
the sun. This tilt (about 23.5 degrees from the perpendicular) remains the same all
year as seen from deep space (top) but changes relative to the sun (bottom). At the
summer solstice (the first day of summer, bottom left), the North Pole tilts toward the
sun, and the sun reaches its northernmost point in the sky. This is the longest day of
the year in the Northern Hemisphere. The North Pole is in constant daylight, while the
South Pole is in constant darkness. Everything is reversed at the winter solstice (the
first day of winter, bottom, second from right). The South Pole tilts toward the sun,
and the Southern Hemisphere has long days and warm weather as the sun appears
at its southernmost point in the sky. In between, during the autumnal equinox and
spring equinox, sunshine is evenly distributed across both hemispheres.
SUN
SUN
SUMMER SOLSTICE
(JUNE)
AUTUMNAL EQUINOX
(SEPTEMBER)
WINTER SOLSTICE
(DECEMBER)
SPRING EQUINOX
(MARCH)
EARTH’S ORBITSPRING WINTER
SUMMER AUTUMN
While most of the
United States is in
the temperate
zones, Hawaii
is in the tropics
and Alaska is in
the polar and
subpolar regions.


68 WEATHER
Weather and Climate Prediction.
Many other factors influence climate, of course. No definite
rule can be made for a part of the world simply because it is a
certain distance from the equator. Altitude affects climate, for
example. Many high peaks are covered in snow all year, despite
their location close to the equator.
Ocean currents and ocean temperature can make a major
difference as well. England is as far north as part of the Canadian
province of Newfoundland and Labrador, but the frequent west
wind blowing across the relatively warm water of the North
Atlantic Ocean moderates the winters in England so that they
are warmer on average than those in New York City, which is
significantly south of England.
Climate information helps experts lay out airport runways
and determine heating and cooling needs for houses, factories,
or the shipment of goods.
Human Impacts on Climate
As long as Earth has been in existence, its
climate has varied. This has been caused by
complicated interactions among many factors
such as the amount of energy available from
the sun, ocean circulations, ocean tempera-
tures, plant life, natural changes to the land-
scape, and natural changes in the atmo-
sphere. Warming and cooling cycles, along
with wet and dry periods, have occurred in
different places at different times throughout
Earth’s history. An important thing to think about is the effect
present human activities can have on future climatic conditions.
In some areas of the world, human actions have had a clearly
negative impact on the local climate.
Desertification
The work of archaeologists has shown that many areas that
now are deserts once were fertile and productive. In such plac-
es, overgrazing, unsound farming methods, or mining have
stripped the land of its protective plant cover and caused desert-
ification of the land.
Desertification has occurred in many countries near the
Mediterranean Sea and the Arabian Desert. For example, the
region north of Egypt and Egypt itself once had lush fields,
orchards, and gardens, but over many years human activities
In Peru at 10,000
feet to 15,000 feet
above sea level,
the sun can make
it quite warm
during the day,
but at night it gets
very cold.


WEATHER 69
.Weather and Climate Prediction
resulted in the erosion of fertile topsoil and
the loss of plant cover. A cycle began that
produced parched soil, sand dunes, and scant
rainfall. Similar events have occurred in the
United States, such as during the “Dust Bowl”
era of the 1930s, but changes in agricultural
methods may have kept the effects
from becoming permanent.
Acid Rain
Acid rain is another result of the effect human
activities can have on weather and climate,
some scientists believe. Rain becomes acidic
when it is polluted by acidic substances emitted
into the atmosphere by vehicles, power plants,
and factories. Pollutants in the atmosphere con-
taminate the precipitation that later falls back to
the ground. Scientists say acid rain can destroy
life in lakes and rivers, which results in damage
to the water cycle, crops, forests, outdoor
statues, and buildings.
Other Threats to Climate
People worldwide have become aware of the possible threat of
greenhouse gases. The most notable greenhouse gas is carbon
dioxide, given off when fossil fuels such as coal, gas, and oil
are burned. Other greenhouse gases include water vapor, meth-
ane, tropospheric ozone, nitrous oxide, and carbon monoxide.
Although meteorologists and climatologists do not know
exactly what effect the greenhouse gases will have, it appears
that excess carbon dioxide and other gases might trap more of
the sun’s heat and cause the climate over much of the globe to
warm up. Some scientists believe global warming could have
disastrous effects. For instance, the polar ice caps reflect the
sun’s rays and are essential in keeping Earth’s climate as it is. If
the ice caps melt, even a small amount, these scientists say
Earth’s temperature, weather patterns, and the amount of water
in the oceans may change. Many islands and seacoasts could be
flooded permanently.
Another concern is the loss of the ozone layer, which is 12 to
15 miles above Earth in the stratosphere. Ozone is a pale blue gas
that plays an important role in the stratosphere, where it acts to
shield all forms of life on Earth from the sun’s harmful ultraviolet


70 WEATHER
Weather and Climate Prediction.
radiation. Damage to the ozone layer appears to be the result of
chemicals called chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), once used as propel-
lant in aerosol cans, as refrigerants in air conditioners, and as
solvents in certain industrial processes. Most of the ozone loss
occurs over the Antarctic because of the very, very low upper
atmosphere temperatures in the winter. Polar stratospheric clouds
form and participate in chemical reactions involving ultraviolet
radiation and CFCs. The eventual result of the reactions is the
destruction of ozone molecules. Although recent laws have greatly
reduced the use of CFCs, scientists are not certain when the ozone
layer will recover. Substantial improvement is possible near the
middle of the 21st century, but that depends on continued decrease
of CFCs and the influence of changes in climate. Deforestation, the
removal of extensive areas of trees, is another human-related factor
that can influence climate. When forests are replaced by open land
or brush, changes occur in the way the sun’s energy is received
at Earth’s surface. An extensive loss of trees also affects how mois-
ture is exchanged between the atmosphere and the ground. The
burning of trees that have been cut down releases carbon dioxide
into the atmosphere. Aerosols, which are tiny particles in the air
such as dust, smoke, or air pollution, are able to affect the sun’s
energy in the atmosphere. Scientists are studying how aerosols can
modify clouds, which are a major part of Earth’s climate system.
In general, conservation of resources, such as fossil fuels
and the world’s forests, can be of long-term benefit by lessening
the effects of human activities on the global climate.
Water conservation and careful agricultural and mining practices
also can help preserve the natural balance of things.


WEATHER 71
.Weather and Climate Prediction
Weather Affects All of Us
A rainy day will keep you from mowing the lawn or playing a baseball
game. A serious heat wave could prevent your Scout troop from taking a
hiking trip. For people in some occupations, however, the weather fore-
cast is vital. Planning ahead for weather conditions can mean the differ-
ence between profit and loss or even life and death.
Climate information helps experts lay out airport runways and deter-
mine heating and cooling needs for houses, factories, or for the shipment
of goods. Climate records may be introduced as evidence in court to clarify
the causes of accidents on highways, in the air, and at sea. Climate can
affect people’s health and social behavior as well as agricultural, commer-
cial, and industrial pursuits the world over. Here are a few examples:
Aviators. Pilots need accurate, up-to-date forecasts to help them make deci-
sions such as whether to land a plane. If a destination airport is fogged in
or has icy runways, the pilot may delay departure or land at a different air-
port. If there is a thunderstorm brewing along the planned route, a pilot can
take an alternate route. Pilots also take advantage of good weather, letting
the tailwind push the plane along to save fuel.
Sailors. Being caught far out at sea during severe weather poses great
danger to sailors. Knowing the forecast can help sailors avoid areas of
high wind and other trouble. Sailors can plan alternative routes to their
destinations or choose safe areas in which to work (fishing, for instance)
when they have information about the weather.
Farmers. Farmers know the importance of wind, rain, and temperature on
their plants and animals. An early frost can ruin a citrus crop. A bitterly
cold winter or a very wet season can reduce the weight gain of livestock.
Farmers plan when to sow, weed, and harvest according to the day-to-day
weather forecast. They also plan what crops to grow according to the
seasonal forecast. For instance, a rice crop needs wet conditions while it
grows and dry conditions while it ripens.
Outdoor Construction Workers. Builders and other people in the field of
construction pay close attention to weather forecasts. Road-paving crews,
roofers, painters, and others cannot do their work successfully in the rain.
Wind can endanger those who must keep their balance high above the
ground. Many building materials such as paint may be used effectively
only within certain limits of humidity and temperature.





WEATHER 73
.Careers in Meteorology
Careers in Meteorology
The meteorologists you probably are most familiar with are
the weather newscasters on television. But there are many
additional career opportunities for meteorologists.
Research and Teaching
Researchers work to further develop satellites, computer pro-
grams, mathematical formulas, and other instruments used in
forecasting, analyzing, and collecting data related to climate
and weather. Such researchers work for universities, private
industry, and the U.S. government. The National Aeronautics
and Space Administration (NASA) is just one government
agency that uses researchers. Many researchers analyze levels
of pollution in the oceans and atmosphere. At the National
Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR), climate research is a
high priority. At universities, meteorology professors teach and
conduct research. Their research is usually supported by grants
from the government or private foundations.
Forecasting
Weather forecasting is also known as operational meteorology.
Many forecasters work for the National Weather Service
(a branch of the NOAA), which includes the National Center for
Environmental Prediction as well as 122 field offices across the
country. The National Weather Service is a government agency
that gathers information from weather balloons, satellites, and
observation stations around the world. People and computers at
the National Weather Service analyze and interpret the gathered
data to produce forecasts.


74 WEATHER
Careers in Meteorology.
The U.S. military also employs meteorologists to help plan
operations on the ground, in the air, and at sea. Weather fore-
casts help Army troops know when to travel and help Air Force
aviators plan their flights. Naval meteorology and oceanography
often go hand in hand, as the Navy needs to predict conditions
under the water as well as above it.
Other forecasters work for private organizations, such as
AccuWeather, that make their own forecasts, interpret data from
the NWS, and sell their specific analyses to newspapers, radio and
television stations, and industries such as aviation, construction,
energy, and farming. Private forecasting companies supply
newspapers with full-color weather maps and the forecasts that
radio stations broadcast. Industries that purchase forecasts use
them to determine how the weather could affect airplane flights,
outdoor painting, and crop harvests. Many television stations
have professional meteorologists who can prepare their own
forecasts by analyzing observations and interpreting guidance
from computer models. They can also explain complex radar and
satellite imagery in a way that viewers can understand.
Qualifications
What knowledge and skills do you need to work in meteorology
and its related fields? This list gives you some guidelines for
what it takes to become a meteorologist.
• You will need a good foundation in science and mathematics.
Take these classes seriously while you are in middle school
and high school.
• You will need a bachelor’s degree in meteorology (also called
atmospheric sciences) or a related field, such as physics. You
will need to take classes in thermodynamics and calculus.
Those classes are required by the National Weather Service,
no matter which branch of meteorology you plan to pursue.
• If you would like to become a television weather reporter,
you will need to develop strong communications skills.
You also will probably have to start your career in a small
market, that is, a small city or community. In other words,
forecasting for Los Angeles or New York City will probably
not be your first job.
• Forecasters work in shifts that often require them to work
nights and weekends. During weather emergencies, these
meteorologists may have to put in extra hours.








WEATHER 77
.Weather Resources
Weather Resources
Scouting Literature
Basic Illustrated Weather Forecasting;
Fieldbook; Chemistry, Emergency
Preparedness, Environmental Science,
and Oceanography merit badge pamphlets
Books
Burt, Christopher C. Extreme Weather:
A Guide and Record Book.
W.W. Norton, 2007.
Ceban, Bonnie J. Tornadoes: Disaster and
Survival. Enslow Publishers, 2005.
Chaston, Peter R. Weather Maps: How to
Read and Interpret All the Basic Weather
Charts, 4th ed. Chaston Scientific
Inc., 2009.
Cosgrove, Brian. Weather.
DK Publishing, 2007.
Day, John. A., and Vincent J. Schaefer.
Peterson First Guide to Clouds
and Weather, 2nd ed. Houghton
Mifflin, 1998.
Elsom, Derek M. Weather Explained:
A Beginner’s Guide to the Elements.
Henry Holt & Company, 1997.
Gardner, Robert, and David Webster.
Science Projects About Weather. Enslow
Publishers, 1994.
Kahl, Jonathan D. W. National Audubon
Society First Field Guide: Weather.
Scholastic, 1998.
Moran, Joseph M., and Michael D.
Morgan. Meteorology: The Atmosphere
and Science of Weather. Prentice
Hall, 1997.
Petheram, Louise. Acid Rain.
Capstone Press, 2006.
Sorbjan, Zbigniew. Hands-on
Meteorology: Stories, Theories,
and Simple Experiments. American
Meteorological Society, 1996.
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


78 WEATHER
Weather Resources.
Organizations and Websites
Career Resources for the American
Meteorological Society
ametsoc.org/index.cfm/ams/
education-careers
Jetstream—Online School
for Weather
weather.gov/jetstream
Lightning Protection Institute
P.O. Box 99
Maryville, MO 64468
Toll-free telephone: 800-488-6864
lightning.org
Satellite Meteorology for
Grades 7–12
cimss.ssec.wisc.edu/satmet
The National Center for Atmospheric
Research and the UCAR Office
of Programs
P.O. Box 3000
Boulder, CO 80307-3000
ncar.ucar.edu
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration’s
National Weather Service
1325 East West Highway
Silver Spring, MD 20910
weather.gov
Acknowledgments
Scouting America thanks Kerry M.
Jones, senior forecaster with the
National Weather Service in
Albuquerque, New Mexico. Mr. Jones
diligently provided his expertise, time,
and other resources for this edition
of the Weather merit badge pamphlet.
We appreciate his thoroughness
and his attentiveness during this
lengthy project.
Scouting America is grateful to the
men and women serving on the
National Merit Badge Subcommittee for
the improvements made in updating
this pamphlet.


WEATHER 79
.Weather Resources
Photo and Illustration Credits
NASA, courtesy—cover (Earth) and
page 30
National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, Department of
Commerce/Grant W. Goodge,
courtesy—page 19 (rime)
National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, Department of
Commerce/Historic NWS Collection,
courtesy—page 38
National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, Department of
Commerce/Ralph F. Kresge,
courtesy—pages 22 (cirrocumulus
clouds), 23 (cumulonimbus),
and 24 (altocumulus)
National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, Department of
Commerce/National Weather Service,
courtesy—page 64 (map)
National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, Department of
Commerce/Michael Thebrege,
Maine Maritime Academy, courtesy—
page 17
National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, Department of
Commerce/Don Whelpey, courtesy—
page 25 (stratus)
New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation,
courtesy—page 69
NOAA Photo Library, NOAA Central
Library; OAR/ERL/National
Severe Storms Laboratory (NSSL),
courtesy—page 27
Wikipedia.org, courtesy—page 78
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of
or are protected by Scouting
America.
Daniel Giles—pages 46–47 (all), 53,
60–61, 72 (both), and 75 (computer
screens, TV monitor)
John McDearmon—all illustrations on
pages 10–13, 16, 21, 29, 34, 39, 42
(both), 50, 52, and 67
Brian Payne—page 36
Brad Range—pages 54, 62, and 75
(white ball, weather balloon)


