SALESMANSHIP

BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES

SALESMANSHIP

“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”

5. Make an accident prevention plan for five family activities outside the home (at
your place of worship, at a theater, on a picnic, at the beach, and while traveling,
for example). Each plan should include an analysis of possible hazards, proposed
action to c­ orrect hazards, and reasons for the correction you propose in each plan.
6. Plan and complete a safety project approved by your counselor for your home,
school, place of worship, place of employment, or community.
7. Explain what the National Terrorism Advisory System is and how you would
respond to each type of alert.
8. Learn about three career opportunities in the field of safety. Pick one career
and find out the education, training, and experience required for this profession. Discuss this choice with your counselor, and explain why this profession
might interest you.

Salesmanship
1. Do the following:
(a) Explain the responsibilities of a salesperson and how a salesperson serves
customers and helps stimulate the economy.
(b) Explain the differences between a business-to-business salesperson and a
consumer salesperson.
2. Explain why it is important for a salesperson to do the following:
(a) Research the market to be sure the product or service meets the needs
of customers.
(b) Learn all about the product or service to be sold.
(c) If possible, visit the location where the product is built and learn how it is
constructed. If a service is being sold, learn about the benefits of the service to
the customer.
(d) Follow up with customers after their purchase to confirm their satisfaction
and discuss their concerns about the product or service.
3. Write and present a sales plan for a product or service and a sales territory
assigned by your counselor.
4. Make a sales presentation of a product or service assigned by your counselor.
5. Do ONE of the following and keep a record (cost sheet). Use the sales techniques
you have learned, and share your experience with your counselor:
(a) Help your unit raise funds through sales of merchandise or of tickets to a
Scout event.
(b) Sell your services such as lawn raking or mowing, pet watching, dog walking, snow shoveling, and car washing to your neighbors. Follow up after the
service has been completed and determine the customer’s satisfaction.
(c) Earn money through retail selling.

209

6. Do ONE of the following:
(a) Interview a salesperson and learn the following:
(1) What made the person choose sales as a profession?
(2) What are the most important things to remember when talking
to customers?
(3) How is the product or service sold?
(4) Include your own questions.
(b) Interview a retail store owner and learn the following:
(1) How often is the owner approached by a sales representative?
(2) What good traits should a sales representative have? What habits
should the sales representative avoid?
(3) What does the owner consider when deciding whether to establish an
account with a sales representative?
(4) Include at least two of your own questions.
7. Investigate and report on career opportunities in sales, then do the following:
(a) Prepare a written statement of your qualifications and experience. Include
relevant classes you have taken in school and merit badges you have earned.
(b) Discuss with your counselor what education, experience, or training you
should obtain so you are prepared to serve in a sales position.

Scholarship
1. Do ONE of the following:
(a) Show that your school grades have been an average of B or higher (80
percent or higher) for one term or semester.
(b) Show that for one term or semester you have improved your school grades
over the previous period.
2. Do TWO of the following:
(a) Make a list of educational places located where you live (other than
schools). Visit one, and report on how you used the place for self-education.
(b) With your counselor’s and your parent’s approval, interview two
professionals (other than teachers or other professionals at your school)
with established careers. Find out where they were educated, what training
they received, and how their education and training have helped prepare
them for the career they have chosen. Find out how they continue to educate
themselves. Discuss what you find out with your counselor.
(c) Using a daily planner, show your counselor how you keep track of
assignments and activities, and discuss how you manage your time.
210

.Sales Career Opportunities

Salesmanship Resources
Scouting Literature
Boy Scout Journal; American Business,
Communication, Entrepreneurship,
Inventing, Personal Management, and
Public Speaking merit badge pamphlets
Visit the Boy Scouts of America’s
official retail website (with
your parent’s permission) at
http://www.scoutstuff.org for
a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other
helpful Scouting materials
and supplies.

Books
Adams, Rob, and Terry Adams.
Success for Less: 100 Low-Cost
Businesses You Can Start Today.
Entrepreneur Media, 1999.
Bochner, Arthur, and Rose Bochner.
The New Totally Awesome Business
Book for Kids, 3rd ed. Newmarket
Press, 2007.
Brescoll, James, and Ralph M. Dahm.
Opportunities in Sales Careers.
VGM Career Horizons, 2001.

Chatzky, Jean. Not Your Parents’
Money Book: Making, Saving,
and Spending Your Own Money.
Simon & Schuster Books for Young
Readers, 2010.
Girard, Joe, and Stanley H. Brown.
How to Sell Anything to Anybody.
Fireside, 2006.
Godfrey, Neale S. Neale S. Godfrey’s
Ultimate Kids’ Money Book. Simon
& Schuster Books for Young
Readers, 2002.
Joachim, Jean C. Beyond the Bake Sale:
The Ultimate School Fund-Raising
Book. St. Martin’s Griffin, 2003.
Schiffman, Stephan. 25 Sales Skills
They Don’t Teach at Business
School. Adams Media, 2002.

Organizations and Websites
The BizWorld Foundation
311 California St., Suite 750
San Francisco, CA 94104
Toll-free telephone: 888-424-9543
Website: http://www.bizworld.org

SALESMANSHIP    47

Sales Career Opportunities.

Education, Training, and
Enterprise Center
200 Federal St., Suite 244
Camden, NJ 08103
Toll-free telephone: 800-963-9361
Website: http://www.edtecinc.com/
nye/index.htm
Junior Achievement
One Education Way
Colorado Springs, CO 80906
Telephone: 719-540-8000
Website: http://www.ja.org
Teen Business Link
Website: http://archive.sba.gov/teens

Acknowledgments
Thanks to Don Herman, founder and
president of Young Entrepreneur Inc.,
a nonprofit educational organization
“Helping Teens Turn Hobbies Into
Businesses Since 1997,” for background
information on salesmanship techniques.
(With your parent’s permission, visit
http://www.youngentrepreneur.com.)
Our appreciation to C.J. Hayden,
the author of Get Clients Now!, who
contributed tips on sales presentations.
(Useful sales and marketing techniques
can be found at Hayden’s website,
http://www.getclientsnow.com. Get
your parent’s permission first.)
Special thanks to Y&E: The
Magazine for Teen Entrepreneurs
(created by the Ewing Marion
Kauffman Foundation and YoungBiz
Inc.) for allowing the BSA to reprint
the steps for planning and delivering
a winning sales presentation.

48    SALESMANSHIP

Thanks to Justin Hitt, a former
Scout and Explorer who now works as
a sales and marketing consultant, for
his time and expertise.
The Boy Scouts of America is
grateful to the men and women serving on the Merit Badge Maintenance
Task Force for the improvements made
in updating this pamphlet.

Photo and Illustration Credits
Dell Computer Corporation, courtesy—
page 23
©Jupiterimages.com—cover (handshake, clipboard, phone, lemonade
stand, dog-walker)
Milton Hershey School Office of
Historical Records—page 9
©Photos.com—pages 19, 31 (bottom),
33, and 45
Shutterstock.com—cover (laptop;
Evgeny Karandaev/Shutterstock.
com, courtesy); pages 4 (Dmitry
Kalinovsky/Shutterstock.com,
courtesy), 13 (Blend Images/
Shutterstock.com, courtesy), and 18
(Goodluz/Shutterstock.com, courtesy)
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property
of or are protected by the Boy
Scouts of America.
Darrell Byers—page 8
Brian Payne—page 32
Randy Piland—cover (yard worker,
lawn mower); pages 6, 16, 20, 24,
34, 39, and 46

