PROGR AMMING
STEM-BasedSTEM-Based


PROGR AMMING
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Note to the Counselor
Thank you for offering your talents as a merit badge counselor.
Scouting’s merit badge program succeeds because of the dedication
and generosity of people like you.
This merit badge is intended to introduce Scouts to
programming, to help them understand how programming
affects them in their everyday lives, and to help them realize
that programming is something any Scout can do and even
possibly pursue as a career.
To that end, the requirements are designed simply to expose
the Scout to several kinds of programming in different industries—
not to turn the Scout into a “programmer.” Please help guide the
Scout to make project choices that are fun and relatively simple.
Supporting this merit badge is an online resource,
www.scoutlife.org/programming, where the Scout will find
many examples, video tutorials, and development tools provided
at minimal or no cost. This resource is presented with the young
Scout in mind and serves as the starting point for accomplishing
the “meat” of the merit badge requirements (specifically
requirements 5a–5d).
35710
ISBN 978-0-8395-0029-2
©2022 Boy Scouts of America
2023 Printing
Before spending a lot of time and effort on the
requirements, the Scout should meet with you to be sure
the requirements are being met to your satisfaction.


PROGRAMMING 3
For the purposes of this badge, we expect a program to take
an input, make decisions based on that input, and then provide
an output based on those decisions. Scouts should write the
instructions in the languages and development environments of
their choice. While “programming” a home thermostat or a DVR
is not an acceptable project, creating a macro in a spreadsheet
program could qualify as a project if you think it is appropriate.
Please guide the Scout accordingly.
Also note that the requirements do not restrict the code from
being run natively on an actual ‘machine.’ Running the program
on a simulated machine or in a virtual world is fine. For exam-
ple, most cell phone development environments provide cell
phone simulators with which the code can be tested.
Thank you again for your service. Now, let’s get some
Scouts excited about programming!


4 PROGRAMMING
1. Safety. Do the following:
a. Show your counselor your current, up-to-date Cyber Chip.
b. Discuss first aid and prevention for the types of injuries
that could occur during programming activities, including
repetitive stress injuries and eyestrain.
2. History. Do the following:
a. Give a brief history of programming, including at
least three milestones related to the advancement
or development of programming.
b. Discuss with your counselor the history of programming
and the evolution of programming languages.
3. General knowledge. Do the following:
a. Create a list of five popular programming languages in
use today and describe which industry or industries they
are primarily used in and why.
b. Describe three different programmed devices you rely
on every day.
4. Intellectual property. Do the following:
a. Explain the four types of intellectual property used to
protect computer programs.
b. Describe the difference between licensing and
owning software.
c. Describe the differences between freeware, open source,
and commercial software, and why it is important to
respect the terms of use of each.
5. Projects. Do the following:
a. With your counselor’s approval, choose a sample
program. Modify the code or add a function or
subroutine to it. Debug and demonstrate the modified
program to your counselor.
Requirements
Always check www.scouting.org for the latest requirements.


PROGRAMMING 5
b. With your counselor’s approval, choose a second pro-
gramming language and development environment,
different from those used for requirement 5a and in
a different industry from 5a. Then write, debug, and
demonstrate a functioning program to your counselor,
using that language and environment.
c. With your counselor’s approval, choose a third program-
ming language and development environment, different
from those used for requirements 5a and 5b and in a
different industry from 5a or 5b. Then write, debug, and
demonstrate a functioning program to your counselor,
using that language and environment.
d. Explain how the programs you wrote for requirements
5a, 5b, and 5c process inputs, how they make decisions
based on those inputs, and how they provide outputs
based on the decision making.
6. Careers. Find out about three career opportunities that
require knowledge in programming. Pick one and find out
the education, training, and experience required. Discuss
this with your counselor and explain why this career might
be of interest to you.
The Programming merit badge website, www.scoutlife.
org/programming, has a number of sample programs
that you could use for requirement 5a. However, you
have the option of finding a program on your own. It’s a
good idea to seek your merit badge counselor’s guidance.


6 PROGRAMMING
Programming Resources.
Programming Resources
Scouting Literature
Animation, Communication, Digital
Technology, Electronics, Game Design,
and Robotics merit badge pamphlets
Books
Foxall, James. Sams Teach Yourself Visual
Basic 2015 in 24 Hours. Sams
Publishing, 2015.
Henney, Kevlin. 97 Things Every
Programmer Should Know: Collective
Wisdom From the Experts. O’Reilly
Media, 2010.
Horstmann, Cay S. C++for Everyone,
2nd ed. Wiley, 2010.
Newsome, Bryan. Beginning Visual
Basic 2015. Wrox, 2015.
Sharp, John. Microsoft Visual C#, 9th ed.
Microsoft Press, 2018.
Watson, Karli, Jacob Vibe Hammer,
Jon Reid, Morgan Skinner, et al.
Beginning Visual C# 2012
Programming. Wrox, 2012.
Organizations and Websites
Android
Tutorials for Android app building
developer.android.com/guide
Code.org
Free tutorials and introductions
to programming
code.org
HowToStartProgramming.com
Beginner information about programming
for Visual Basic and PHP
www.howtostartprogramming.com
The best place to start your
programming journey is with the
companion website for this merit
badge, scoutlife.org/programming.
There you will find many examples
and free resources appropriate
for Scouts. You will be up and
running quickly and be able to
find what you need to fulfill the
Programming merit badge require-
ments.
With your parent’s permission, visit
the Boy Scouts of America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org,
for a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


PROGRAMMING 7
.Programming Resources
InterConnecting Automation Inc.
Free access to Scouts (send them a note);
learn about PLCs (programmable
logic controllers)
www.interconnectingautomation.com
Learn C++
Free tutorials and other resources on
how to program in C++
www.learncpp.com
Learnpython.org
Interactive Python tutorial
www.learnpython.org
Oracle Corporation
Java tutorials
docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial
Robotics Academy of
Summer Learning
From the Carnegie Mellon Robotics
Academy, animation, robotics, web
design, game design, and more
www.cs2n.org
Scratch
Good, free examples of programs
scratch.mit.edu
U.S. Copyright Office
www.copyright.gov
U.S. Patent and Trademark Office
www.uspto.gov
W3schools.com
Tutorials for all web design
programming tools
www.W3schools.com
Special thanks to Automation
Direct.com, an industry leader in
factory automation, for providing
the services of Rick Folea. He
coordinated the development of
the Programming merit badge,
and AutomationDirect.com sup-
ported the launch of the merit
badge at the 2013 National Scout
Jamboree with equipment,
supplies, and personnel.