RG
is
ner
gh
s,
est
PHOTOGRAPHY


PHOTOGR APHY
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


35930
ISBN 978-0-8395-3340-5
©2016 Boy Scouts of America
2020 Printing
Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Photography or check
Scoutbook for the latest requirements.
FPO


PHOTOGRAPHY 3





PHOTOGRAPHY 5
Contents
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
What Makes a Good Photograph? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
Cameras and How They Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
Image Adjustment: Making the
Photos You Take Even Better . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
Telling a Story With Your Pictures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
The Ethics of Photography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
A Career in Photography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
Glossary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
Photography Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73





PHOTOGRAPHY 7
.Introduction
Introduction
Photography is a part of everybody’s life. You look at photo-
graphs all the time. Your school textbooks, the local newspaper,
the internet, and your Scouts BSA handbook all have photos.
You might see photos hanging on the walls around you at
home, at school, and in a museum or gallery, and on your
troop website.
Beyond capturing family memories, photography offers a
chance to be creative. Many photographers use photography
to express their creativity, using lighting, composition, depth,
color, and content to make their photographs into more than
snapshots. Good photographs tell us about a person, a news
event, a product, a place, a scientific breakthrough, an endan-
gered animal, or a time in history. Imagine what the world
would be like without photography.
Words shown in
bold print appear
in the glossary
near the back of
this pamphlet.


8 PHOTOGRAPHY
Introduction.
Your parents probably took photographs of you soon
after you were born or on your first birthday. Photos
provide lasting memories of family milestones,
Scouting activities, vacations, holidays, and other
special events.
Choosing subjects and taking photos can be exciting. What’s
even more fun is sharing images with your friends. This pamphlet
will help lead you into the fun of photography. Using this infor-
mation and fulfilling the requirements for the Photography merit
badge will put you on your way to capturing the visual world.
You will find that creating thoughtful photographs can be much
more rewarding than just shooting snapshots.
The History of Photography
Photographic technology, compared to the whole of human
history, has developed in only the blink of an eye. Less than
two centuries ago, in 1839, French artist Louis-Jacques-Mandé
Daguerre created a process
called the daguerreotype,
which produced a sharp and
detailed image but could not
be printed.
Samuel F.B. Morse, who
was an American painter and
inventor, met Daguerre in Paris.
Upon returning to New York,
Morse set up a studio and began
to make daguerreotypes. He also
taught the new process. One of
his students was Mathew Brady,
whose crew of photographers
made documentary photographs
of the Civil War. Brady wrote to
Morse in 1855, acknowledging
his teacher as “the first successful
introducer of this rare art
in America.”
Daguerreotype of
Louis-Jacques-Mandé Daguerre


PHOTOGRAPHY 9
.Introduction
In 1841 Henry Fox Talbot introduced
the calotype, the first negative/
positive system of photography. The
negative was paper and less detailed
than the daguerreotype, but copies
could be made.
The next advancement, in 1851,
was the collodion wet plate, a light-
sensitive emulsion coated on glass.
The plate was made in the field,
exposed, and developed before it was
dry. This produced a high-definition
glass plate negative from which many prints
could be made.
In 1880 American entrepreneur George Eastman
patented a process to make dry plates, which did not
have to be processed in the field. By the end of that decade,
Eastman had also patented the first photographic film, coated
on one side with a gelatin emulsion containing microscopic,
light-sensitive silver halide crystals. Eastman’s flexible film base
also led to the invention of motion picture cameras in the early
1890s, and film remained the standard medium for photography
throughout the next 100 years.
George Eastman, an inventor,
entrepreneur, and philanthropist,
was largely responsible for making
photography available to the masses.


10 PHOTOGRAPHY
Introduction.
Camera Film—
A Thing of the Past
While camera film may be a thing of the past, for more
than a century it played a significant role in photogra-
phy. You may have seen the familiar canisters typically
used to store a roll of film that was loaded into a
camera and allowed the user to take a specific number
of photos. Film came in a variety of types including
black-and-white negative, color negative, and color
transparency (slide) films.
Photographers could choose from a number of
different film speeds, such as 100-speed (100 ISO)
film, which was used on sunny days and when a
photographer needed more control over the level of
artificial light (usually a flash). Film with a faster speed,
such as 400 ISO, would be used with less light, such
as outdoors on a cloudy day. The higher the film
speed number, the more sensitive the film was to light.
However, higher film speed reduced the sharpness
and quality, giving the photo a grainy appearance.
While higher film speed was popular with the amateur
photographer, a professional photographer or more
serious amateur would opt to use the slowest film
speed possible for the best quality.


PHOTOGRAPHY 11
.Introduction
Eastman Kodak created the first digital camera in 1975. The
camera weighed 8 pounds and recorded black-and-white images
to a cassette tape. But this prototype was not developed for
production, and it wasn’t until the early 1990s that true digital
cameras were introduced in the marketplace. Since then, image
sensors have replaced roll film as the industry standard, storing
pictures that can be downloaded from the camera to a computer
or posted directly to social media.
Perhaps the greatest advantage of digital photography over
the wet chemistry and film methods of the past is the ability to
immediately learn from the picture you just made. You know
instantly whether your picture is satisfactory or you need to
make adjustments.
Among Samuel Morse’s many inventions were the
telegraph and its language of transmitting messages—
Morse code. The code uses dots and dashes via sound
(whistle, horn), light flashes
(flashlight, lantern), or electrical
pulse to communicate. The
requirements for the Signaling
merit badge, one of the original
57 merit badges available in
1911, included sending mes-
sages in Morse code. You can
learn more about Morse code
by earning the Signs, Signals,
and Codes merit badge.SIGNS, SIGNALS
AND CODES
SKU 620095
35777_Cover.indd 1 1/9/15 11:29 AM





PHOTOGRAPHY 13
.What Makes a Good Photograph?
What Makes
a Good Photograph?
Photography requires not only creativity but also technical
ability. The guidelines in this section will help build a good
understanding for making interesting, properly exposed,
and well-composed photographs.
Light
The human eye sees certain wavelengths of light. What people
can see is known as the visible spectrum of light. Beyond this
range are wavelengths that our eyes can’t see—infrared, ultravi-
olet, X-rays, and others.
Photographers work with just two types of light: natural
and artificial.
Natural light, provided by the sun, moon, or stars, is
available outdoors, as well as indoors as it passes through win-
dows and illuminates a room and its contents. All other light—
including streetlights, household lamps, car headlights, or the
flash on your camera—is considered artificial light.


14 PHOTOGRAPHY
What Makes a Good Photograph?.
Natural light can give off certain casts of color. Early morning
and late afternoon sunlight produces warmer, more amber colors.
The low direction of this light and its warmness make it the pre-
ferred light among many photographers. The shadows are longer
and the light softer at this time of day. During the middle of the
day, the sun produces harsh shadows and cooler, bluish colors.
Incandescent light such as from a table lamp produces
a warm cast, creating a mood similar to a campfire’s glow.
Fluorescent light inside an office building casts a greenish light.
Your eyes correct for this color. You can use this light to enhance
your desired effect, or you can correct the color by using a flash
or attaching a correcting filter to your lens. Digital cameras can
adjust for different colors of light by adjusting white balance.
Most digital cameras can be set for automatic white balance
(AWB) or you can select the desired white balance on your own.


PHOTOGRAPHY 15
.What Makes a Good Photograph?
Daylight image:
This photograph
was taken in
bright daylight
and shot with
the white balance
set to auto.
Shade image:
This photograph
was taken in
bright daylight
and shot with the
white balance set
to shade. Notice
that the image is
too yellow.
Tungsten image:
This photograph
was taken in bright
daylight and shot
with the white
balance set to
tungsten. Notice
that this image is
too blue.


16 PHOTOGRAPHY
What Makes a Good Photograph?.
Flash
A flash is an artificial light source that adds light to the ambient
(existing) light. It can be a flash built into your camera or
attached to your camera or on a stand with a reflective umbrella
like you see in a portrait studio. Most modern flash units can
automatically adjust the output of light. With an adjustable
flash, you can control the amount of light on your subject.
Flash also is used to stop action. Used up close, the flash
freezes movement for that split second. If you are too far away
from a subject, your flash may be too weak to illuminate or
stop action. Check the scale on your flash to know its range.
The LCD display on most modern flashes will show the flash
range based on the other camera settings. A camera with a
built-in flash will illuminate a subject only 10 to 20 feet away.
An automatic flash reads the light reflected off the subject to
determine the range of flash.
Be sure your flash is reading the light off the correct subject;
if there is anything between the flash and the subject, the flash
might read that reflecting light and inadequately light the real
subject. The flash will act differently depending on what the
subject is made of. As an example, a street sign that is made to
reflect light will cause the flash to not put out enough light for
the intended subject.


PHOTOGRAPHY 17
.What Makes a Good Photograph?
Exposure
Three camera settings contribute to the exposure, which is
the amount of light that reaches the electronic image sensor.
These settings are shutter speed, aperture, and ISO. They are
all interrelated.
For any given lighting situation, there is only one correct
exposure. As an example, when using 100 ISO your
exposure is 1/125th of a second at f/16 on a sunny day.
This is known as the “sunny 16” rule.
Shutter Speed
Shutter speed controls the length of time the shutter is open to
let light into a camera. For example, 1/125th of a second is twice
as fast as 1/60, and 1/250 is twice as fast as 1/125. Moving the
other way, the slower the shutter speed, the longer the light will
pass through the lens.


18 PHOTOGRAPHY
What Makes a Good Photograph?.
Aperture
The aperture of a camera lens works just like the iris in your
eye. It opens or closes to adjust the amount of light reaching
the sensor, just as the iris in your eye adjusts to bright or dim
environments. Adjusting the aperture, or f-stop, in one direction
or the other cuts in half or doubles the amount of light passing
through the lens.
By shifting the f-stop you are shifting the size of the open-
ing in the lens: The lower the f-stop number, the more light you
are letting in. For example, an aperture of f/5.6 will allow twice
as much light through the lens as the f/8 setting. To let in half
as much light as the f/8, change the f-stop to f/11.
Aperture openings and f-stops
Common f-stop numbers are f/1.2, f/1.4, f/2, f/2.8, f/4,
f/5.6, f/8, f/11, f/16, f/22, and f/32. The f-number is
calculated by dividing the focal length of the lens by
the aperture (lens opening) you are using.
The f-number results from dividing the focal length of the
lens in millimeters by the size of the opening as the aperture is
adjusted. The lens is marked by its maximum aperture or widest
opening possible. For example, a 100mm lens with a maximum
opening of 25mm is an f/4 lens (100mm lens ÷ 25mm maximum
opening = f/4). Smaller openings divided into the same focal
length lens produce larger numbers (100mm lens ÷ 12.5mm
opening = f/8). You can easily see from this formula how larger
f-stop numbers actually represent smaller openings in the lens.


PHOTOGRAPHY 19
.What Makes a Good Photograph?
Depth of field is the range of distance between the nearest
and the farthest objects that appear in acceptably sharp focus.
The aperture that you use will affect depth of field. The smaller
the f-stop—f/22, for example—the greater the area that will be
in focus from foreground to background. A larger f-stop—f/2,
for instance—creates less depth of field. That is, the part of
the image in sharp focus will be more limited. Distance to the
subject will also affect depth of field. As an example, if you use
the same lens and aperture setting but move closer, the depth of
field will be shallower.
A smaller f-stop, top, results in a greater area in focus
from foreground to background. A larger f-stop, bottom,
results in an image with less area sharply in focus.


20 PHOTOGRAPHY
What Makes a Good Photograph?.
ISO
ISO is simply an acronym for the International Standards
Organization. This organization sets the standard by which
camera sensors and their sensitivity to light are measured. By
changing the ISO setting, you control the relative sensitivity
of the electronics in your camera to light. With every doubling
of the number, the camera’s digital sensor becomes twice as sen-
sitive to the light available for the picture. So a setting of
400 has twice the sensitivity of 200, and a setting of 800 is
twice as sensitive as 400, etc.
All three settings—shutter speed, aperture, and ISO—work
together to achieve proper exposure. Suppose your camera is set
to 1/125th of a second, f/8, and ISO 400. But you want to photo-
graph action and you know you will need a higher shutter speed,
so you decide to use 1/500. Changing your aperture increment
in the opposite direction—from f/8 to f/4—and keeping the ISO
where it is will maintain the same exposure. Your camera is now
set at 1/500, f/4, and ISO 400. For an equivalent exposure you
could use 1/500, f/5.6, and ISO 800. Can you see why?
Variations in shutter speed and aperture can be used for the
kind of picture you are trying to achieve. Faster shutter speeds
freeze motion; slower shutter speeds create blur. A stopped
down aperture (higher f-number) creates an extended depth
of field or zone of acceptable sharpness. A more wide-open
aperture (lower f-number) has limited depth of field, such that
background is blurred and the focused object is sharp.


PHOTOGRAPHY 21
.What Makes a Good Photograph?
ISO enables you to use the particular shutter speed or
aperture you want for creative effect. For example, suppose your
camera is set at 1/500, f/2.8 (the widest possible aperture), and
ISO 400. You are afraid that 1/500th of a second will not be fast
enough to stop action so you want to use 1/1,000. You cannot
open your aperture any more to compensate for the higher shutter
speed, but you can raise the ISO from 400 to 800 to compensate.
When starting out, you can make good pictures using
the automatic settings on your camera. As you practice
and your knowledge of photography grows, you will be
able to enhance your work by understanding and using
creatively the magical interaction of shutter speed,
aperture, and ISO.
Measuring Light
The key to determining proper exposure is to accurately measure
the lighting. Most single-lens reflex (SLR) cameras have built-in
light meters that measure the light reflecting off the subject.
A camera with manual mode allows you to choose both the
aperture and the shutter speed as you take a light reading.
Many professional photographers and serious amateurs
prefer using manual control to automatic. With manual exposure
controls, you can determine the shutter speed needed to stop
movement or the aperture required to get only the foreground in
focus and not the background.


22 PHOTOGRAPHY
What Makes a Good Photograph?.
With a fully automatic setting, the camera automatically sets
both the shutter speed and the aperture. In automatic point-and-
shoot cameras, your shutter speed and aperture are selected for
you and usually make for good exposure.
Low Light
In settings where available light is limited, the camera should be
set at a high enough ISO to enable a shutter speed that would pre-
vent unwanted motion. For example, if the initial exposure is
1/30th of a second at an aperture of f/2.8 and an ISO setting of
200, increasing the ISO to 1,600 allows a shutter speed of 1/250th
of a second, which is more than enough to prevent a blurry pic-
ture caused by the photographer’s motion.
Shooting in sunlight or other
brightly lit conditions might
require a shutter speed and
f-stop combination that is
beyond the capability of your
camera; in such cases, a lower
ISO setting is best.
There is a negative aspect of
using high ISO settings, particularly
with point-and-shoot cameras with
small image sensors. In general,
the higher the ISO, the higher the
electronic noise in your image.
The manual for
your camera
details how it
works. Carry it
with you in your
camera bag.


PHOTOGRAPHY 23
.What Makes a Good Photograph?
Noise can take several forms. It can appear as color flakes
in areas of the picture that should be neutral in tone; these
flakes typically have a pattern to them. Sometimes the noise
is random or it looks like bands of tonal variation in the picture.
A common term for this noise is “grain.”
The electronics in modern digital cameras are very sophisti-
cated computers. Many cameras have the ability to reduce noise
at higher ISOs as the picture is processed inside the camera. There
are a number of image adjustment software applications that
can reduce noise in a photograph. Software
from camera manufacturers including Canon,
Nikon, and Sony are tuned to optimally reduce
noise in pictures made from their cameras.
If you plan to shoot in low-light settings
like campfires, you will probably be using
slow shutter speeds with the lens wide open
(maximum aperture) even with a high ISO
setting. This increases the risk that the shot
will be blurry, so make sure you provide
stable support for your camera. A tripod is
perfectly stable but would not normally be
carried on a hiking trip, though it might
be available at large gatherings such
as camporees.


24 PHOTOGRAPHY
What Makes a Good Photograph?.
Some commercially available hiking sticks have a camera-
mounting bolt in the top of the handle. When attached to a
camera, the hiking stick becomes what photographers call a
monopod. This support will hold the camera much steadier than
you could hold it with your hand. If necessary, look for a natural
object like a boulder or stack of wood to serve as a stable base
for your camera. Bracing the camera against a tree will work too.
Try to avoid using a flash when taking photos at a camp-
fire or other settings where a relatively subdued mood is
appropriate. Using higher ISOs and bracing the camera can
result in sharp, spectacular pictures in low light without
distracting and annoying your fellow participants. If possible,
test the different options ahead of time to see what works best.
Most cameras today let you use something between a completely manual
setting and a fully automatic setting. Selecting “shutter priority” mode
lets the photographer choose the shutter speed desired while the camera
automatically sets the aperture. “Aperture priority” mode lets the photog-
rapher choose the aperture while the camera sets the correct shutter speed.
Some consumer-priced digital cameras are fully automatic, whereas higher-
end and professional models allow for manual control. Most phones that
have cameras can shoot only fully automatic unless a particular app allows
the adjustments.


PHOTOGRAPHY 25
.What Makes a Good Photograph?
Composition
Good composition in photography is much like that in other
visual arts. Photographic composition involves such elements as
framing, contrast, texture, leading lines, balance, and the rule of
thirds. Here are a few guidelines for good composition.
Rule of Thirds
As you compose your subject in the viewfinder, think about the
placement. Placing your subject off-centered both vertically and
horizontally is a starting point.
Use the rule of thirds to help understand this concept. On
a blank, rectangular sheet of paper, draw two lines dividing
the paper into three equal parts top to bottom, then two more
lines dividing it into three equal parts side to side. You should
have nine small sections with four intersecting lines. Imagine
these lines in your viewfinder when taking pictures. Place your
subject at or near one of the four spots where the lines intersect
to help avoid a centered, bull’s-eye effect. If your photograph
has something like a horizon in it, place it on one of the two
horizontal lines.


26 PHOTOGRAPHY
What Makes a Good Photograph?.
Framing
Framing means almost surrounding your subject with some
nearby foreground element, such as overhanging tree branches.
This technique draws attention to the center of interest in the
image. The contrast between the near objects and the distant
subject also can help show distance. Framing can be helpful for
disguising a dull, boring sky or hiding unwanted scene elements.
A photographer may soften the contrast in a photo by
using fill light. For example, there may be a source of
illumination that lightens shadows cast by the main
light and thereby reduces the contrast in a photograph.


PHOTOGRAPHY 27
.What Makes a Good Photograph?


28 PHOTOGRAPHY
What Makes a Good Photograph?.
Contrast
Contrast adds interest by emphasizing differences in the elements
that make up an image. Differences in tone, color, texture, size, or
shape, for instance, can create appealing contrasts in a photograph.
In this example, the hikers’ light-colored hats and the leaves in the
upper left corner contrast well with the darker tones elsewhere.
Leading Lines
Leading lines, straight or curved, lead the viewer’s eye into the
picture and draw attention to the subject. You can find a line in
almost anything—a road, fence, bridge, stream, or hedge, for
example. Even a line of people waiting to buy movie tickets can
be used effectively.


PHOTOGRAPHY 29
.What Makes a Good Photograph?
Balance
Balance refers to the weight or significance of objects in the
picture and how they work with other portions of the image.
Symmetrical balance divides the picture into even halves.
A photograph with asymmetrical balance has two very
different halves.
Backgrounds
Backgrounds can add to or
detract from photos. Even if
the photographer does not
notice something distracting,
the camera will. Before you
press the shutter release,
look to see if there is a lamp
or a pole growing out of your
subject’s head.
Avoid clutter. Use high
or low angles to separate
the subject from a busy
background. You might
need to add background
information to a foreground
subject to give your photos
a feeling of depth. You can
use a shallow depth of field
to isolate your subject from
a confusing background.


30 PHOTOGRAPHY
What Makes a Good Photograph?.
Camera Angles
A normal camera angle, looking straight across at your subject
from its own level, usually produces the most natural—although
not the most dramatic—viewpoint. Animals and children usually
look their best when photographed at their own level.
Some subjects, however, are better photographed from a
low or high angle. You may avoid a cluttered or ugly background
by looking up at your subject, shooting from a low angle to put
trees or a blue sky in the background. Many scenic pictures will
appear more vast if you look down at them from a high angle.


PHOTOGRAPHY 31
.What Makes a Good Photograph?
Angle of View
The angle of view is the amount of a scene that a lens can take
in. The lens you use determines the angle of view. Some point-
and-shoot cameras have a fixed focal length lens, giving you
only one angle of view. This angle of view is much like what
human eyes see in normal vision, roughly equivalent to a 50mm
lens. Other cameras have zoom lenses, which give a varied focal
length and varied angle of view.
Generally, a wide-angle lens will give a larger angle of
view, while a telephoto lens compresses the subject and gives
a smaller angle of view. A wide-angle lens is a good choice
when you are close to your subject. A telephoto lens is best
for subjects when you can’t get up close.
Stopping Action
Earlier we discussed the importance of f-stops in controlling
your depth of field and what is in focus. Now look at how the
other part of the exposure equation—shutter speed—helps in
stopping action.
Remember that shutter speed controls the length of time
that light enters the camera through the lens and into the sen-
sor. Most shutter speed settings of 1/60th of a second or faster
are OK if you are hand-holding the camera with a normal or
wide-angle lens.
In low-light situations, you might not be able to set your
shutter speed at 1/60 or above. Anything below this will tend
to show camera movement in your final results. To attempt
taking photos below 1/60, keep your arms close to your body,
take a deep breath, and slowly press the shutter release button.


32 PHOTOGRAPHY
What Makes a Good Photograph?.
Some cameras and lenses have image stabilization
features that minimize your own motion and may allow
you to hand-hold your camera at a slow shutter speed
and still make a sharp picture. Image stabilization
features do not freeze your subject’s motion.
Shutter speeds of 1/125 or 1/250 are best for normal situ-
ations. If you want to stop fast action such as at a track meet,
a pinewood derby, or a downhill ski event, you should set your
shutter speed at 1/500 or above. When using these faster
shutter speeds, you will need to be in a well-lit environment
with a fast ISO setting of 400 or even higher.
A higher shutter speed allows you to take sharp photos even
though the subjects may be moving.


PHOTOGRAPHY 33
.What Makes a Good Photograph?





PHOTOGRAPHY 35
.Cameras and How They Work
Cameras and
How They Work
A digital camera is basically a light-tight box with a lens on
the front and an image sensor inside. All-electronic automated
cameras must have battery power.
The camera lens controls the sharpness
and the angle of view. When you press
the shutter release button, the camera’s
mechanical and electronic systems
kick in. The aperture closes down to
the selected f-stop and the shutter
opens. Light reflects off the subject,
enters through the lens, and forms an
image on the sensor. The shutter then
closes, blocking the light again,
and the sensor is reset for
the next image.
MIRROR
IMAGE SENSOR


36 PHOTOGRAPHY
Cameras and How They Work.
The sensor is made up of millions of light-capturing receptors
called pixels. When light hits these spots, the number of pixels
(picture elements) the camera uses determines the final quality
of the image. A digital camera with 10 megapixels produces
an image of higher resolution than a 5-megapixel camera.
The digital files are then transferred to a computer for editing,
viewing, and output to a printer. These digital files can be stored
on the computer, on the internet, or on a storage device such as
a DVD or an external hard drive.
Camera and Lens Care
Whether you use an inexpensive point-and-shoot camera or
a pricier SLR model, you will need to care for it. Here are
some tips.
• Keep your camera dry and clean.
• Never open the camera to touch or clean the image sensor.
Doing so could ruin your camera.
• Use a camera case or bag to keep and carry your camera in
between uses.
• Do not leave your camera in your car or hot places for
long periods.
• Avoid dropping your camera.
• When storing your camera for long periods, remove
the batteries.


PHOTOGRAPHY 37
.Cameras and How They Work
• Use a UV/skylight filter on the front of your lens to prevent
dust from collecting and to help reduce ultraviolet rays.
• Use a camera strap when carrying your camera.
• Always secure your camera—do not leave it unattended.
Smartphone Cameras
The question is often pondered, which camera is best? The
ultimate answer: the one you have with you! Increasingly, that
camera is a smartphone.
Dedicated cameras are designed to give you an optimal
photographic experience, but the quality of pictures taken
with a smartphone can be extraordinarily good. The process
can be totally automatic, or you can use apps that allow
professional controls beyond making smartphone pictures with
“auto everything.” Apps allow post-exposure image adjustment
in any number of ways to achieve an enhanced photograph or
wild interpretations of the scene. Some apps allow individual
placement of exposure and focus. ISO can be adjusted. Some
smartphones even have motion stabilization for the camera.
Finally, sharing a picture with family and friends is very easy:
Just press a button and the photo is on its way.


38 PHOTOGRAPHY
Cameras and How They Work.
Point-and-shoot cameras that don’t make phone calls
are now manufactured with Wi-Fi so they can connect to
smartphones. Photographs are wirelessly transferred to
the smartphone and from there enhanced with various
apps and moved to social media.
Every technology, of course, has its pros and cons. It takes
longer to get ready to make a picture with a smartphone than
with a traditional camera. Adjustments of exposure and focus
are more cumbersome. Changing to a different lens, usually
a clip-on addition, is also a bit complicated and sometimes
involves removing a protective case from the phone.
On smartphones without mobile stabilization, tapping a
button on the screen to make a picture can cause camera motion
and blur the image. In those cases, an accessory is needed
to mount the smartphone to a tripod for stability. All these
problems are manageable if you recognize them and plan ahead.


PHOTOGRAPHY 39
.Cameras and How They Work
Wearable Cameras
Since 2007, there has also been a proliferation of small,
wearable cameras that are generally used to document
outdoor adventures. Wearable cameras have no notice-
able weight and can be easily mounted on a safety
helmet or on outdoor equipment like surfboards or
mountain bikes. These are sometimes called point-of-
view (POV) cameras because the recorded images place
viewers in the scene as if they are seeing through the
eyes of the photographer.


The top image is too dark. The photo above has been adjusted.


PHOTOGRAPHY 41
.Image Adjustment: Making the Photos You Take Even Better
Image Adjustment:
Making the Photos
You Take Even Better
Photographs usually look very good when taken with modern
digital cameras or smartphones. Can they be improved? The
answer is almost always. A little tweaking after the image is
made can make a good picture great.
Photographers call the process of improving a picture after
it is made “toning.” The range of tones from highlights to shad-
ows can be adjusted as well as the overall color balance. Local
areas of the picture can be lightened or darkened. The overall
look of the picture can change by adjusting contrast.


42 PHOTOGRAPHY
Image Adjustment: Making the Photos You Take Even Better.
Tonal Range
As you take a picture, you will notice the difference in light inten-
sity between highlights and shadows; this is called tonal range.
Suppose the subjects in your photo are two Scouts, one wearing a
white neckerchief and the other wearing a black one. When you
shoot the picture, the sky is overcast with no direct sun.
In this case, the difference in exposure between black and
white will not be sufficient to use the full exposure range of
the digital image sensor in your camera. If you expose your
picture so that the white neckerchief looks white, the black
one will be a dark gray—not black. If you expose the shot so
that the black neckerchief looks black, the white one will look
medium gray—not white. The range of light reflected off the
white and black neckerchiefs is not enough to use the full
range that the sensor can capture. Photographers would call
the lighting in that scene “flat.” However, software can be
used to improve the lighting in the captured image so that the
two neckerchiefs look as they should.
Image adjustment software
often displays a rectangular box
with a display of the picture’s light
content (data) looking much like
a mountain range. This is called a
histogram. You can tell the picture is properly exposed for both
shadows and highlights if the ends of the data taper to the left
and right corners of the box. If the data does not range across
the entire box, software controls can be used to expand the
data so that it does. The visual display of the picture will show
you a preview of the improvement.
Image adjustment software offers
various tools to improve a picture for
impact beyond just cropping the frame
or correcting the lighting and color.
Explore the tools to see if you can
remove imperfections such as the “red
eye” effect or change the texture of the
image in interesting ways.
Software
sometimes has
an “auto” or
“enhance”
adjustment
button that
you might try.
It often works
well and, if it
does, that is one
step toward a
better-looking
photograph.


PHOTOGRAPHY 43
.Image Adjustment: Making the Photos You Take Even Better
The major camera manufacturers also distribute software
for enhancement of images. Software is often the easiest path
to quality images because individual camera formats are pro-
prietary, meaning that their products and software work well
together. All of these programs have “help” menus and numerous
internet tutorials showing you how to use the various functions
to enhance your photographs. There are also commercial
programs available to help you adjust images.
Smartphone apps can make many of the same adjust-
ments—depending on the app. Explore the features before you
download an image adjustment app. Pay attention to what
other photographers are using to enhance their smartphone
pictures. Fortunately, most smartphone apps are inexpensive
and you can experiment on a limited budget.
Color Balance
Most stand-alone digital cameras and smartphones default to
automatic white balance (AWB). This setting is designed to make
the colors of objects in your frame as close as possible to the
actual colors—ensuring that a red apple, for example, will have
the right shade of red in your picture.
Light has color, as Sir Isaac Newton discovered in 1666 when
he saw colors of the visible spectrum (what humans can see)
displayed as sunlight passed through a triangular prism. These
are the same colors sometimes displayed as a rainbow after a
rain. While there are a few other hues in the visible spectrum,
the dominant three are red, green, and blue. When combined in
equal proportions, these colors will create white light.
An added
advantage of
smartphone apps
is that it is easy
to move your
pictures to social
media. Then your
family and friends
can see how
much fun you
are having
in Scouting.


44 PHOTOGRAPHY
Image Adjustment: Making the Photos You Take Even Better.
The proportions of these colors vary with the light source
used for photography. Candlelight produces warmer indoor
images (more red) than an electronic flash, which makes the
image appear cooler (more blue). The color of light varies in
sunlight as well. Sunlight at sunrise and sunset contains more
red than at other times of the day. Sunlight at noon has approx-
imately equal mixtures of red, green, and blue, and pictures
made in that light seem neutral in color tint—neither warm nor
cool. These qualities can vary widely in daylight depending on
weather conditions. If direct sunlight is blocked by an overcast
sky, there is a much higher percentage of blue in the light.
The AWB camera setting is intended to remove color tints
in a picture to make the lighting neutral, or without a colorcast.
A white neckerchief will appear accurately as white and not
tinted with blue or red.
Many cameras, and some
smartphone apps, allow adjust-
ment of color balance as the
picture is made. Icons are often
used to display different light
conditions such as sunlight,
overcast sky, etc. Software can
adjust the color balance after the
exposure. For example, a picture
made under an overcast sky may
appear to have a blue tint. You
can remove this tint by making
an adjustment with the software
to add a proportional amount
of yellow. In addition, image
adjustment programs often
have two sliders, one to change
the blue/yellow mixture and
the other the green/magenta
mixture. Adjusting both sliders
can alter the red/cyan component
in a picture.
The top photo is too
yellow. A simple software
adjustment makes the color
appear more normal.


PHOTOGRAPHY 45
.Image Adjustment: Making the Photos You Take Even Better
Red, green, and blue are the three additive primaries
of light. Subtracting any one of those colors
from white light will turn it to one of the three
subtractive primaries: cyan, magenta, or yellow.
Subtractive primaries are generally used as ink
on paper to produce full-color photographs on
the printed page. Subtracting red from white
light produces cyan; white minus green gives you
magenta; and white minus blue results in
yellow light.
Just as any color in the visible spectrum can be
created by varying the additive proportions of red, green, and blue light, so
too can cyan, magenta, and yellow inks on the pages of Scout Life reproduce
a color photograph by subtraction. In print publications, black is added to the
shadow areas in addition to cyan, magenta, and yellow inks.
Imagine you are looking at a red apple in sunlight. Remember that
white light can be redefined as equal mixtures of red, green, and blue
light. The pigment in the surface of the apple is absorbing green and
blue light and reflecting red light to your eyes.
Now imagine you make a picture of the apple and it is
reproduced in Scout Life magazine. White light is falling
on the magazine, which is printed using only three colors
of ink: cyan, magenta, and yellow. Where the color red
appears in the original photograph, the printed page will
have magenta and yellow ink mixed together but no cyan.
The magenta ink absorbs green light and the yellow ink
absorbs blue light. Since there is no cyan ink to absorb red light,
red light is reflected to your eye from the page and you see a red apple.
Black ink is added to the shadows to overcome the limits of a printing press.
In a photograph, any color may be created by addition using varying
proportions of red, green, and blue light. On the printed page, any color may
be created by subtraction using varying proportions of cyan, magenta, and
yellow ink.
Digital camera sensors are sensitive to red, green, and blue light, and
computer monitors use those three primary colors to display your picture. If
you print the picture on paper, it is printed with cyan, magenta, and yellow inks.
Understanding the relationship between additive and subtractive colors
is essential in color balancing your images.


46 PHOTOGRAPHY
Image Adjustment: Making the Photos You Take Even Better.
Dodging and Burning
Dodging and burning are terms derived from the days when
photographers routinely made prints in a darkroom using
chemistry. Now, in the digital era, the same words mean to
make adjustments with software in specific areas of the picture
that may be a little light or dark. Software controls can be used
to “burn” an area that is a bit too light or to “dodge” an area
that is a bit too dark. The result is a picture that seems to be
balanced in overall exposure.
How will you know how much to dodge or burn? The
answer is when it seems correct to your eyes. Software
programs frequently use sliders to fine-tune the adjustment.
Sharpening
The same programs
have tools for “sharpen-
ing” a picture. What is
really happening is
edge enhancement.
When edges are more
defined and separated,
the picture appears to be
sharper. This assumes
that the lens was
focused and the shutter
speed was fast enough
to prevent motion blur.
Software sharpening cannot make an out-of-focus picture sharp.
It’s a way of making a good photograph a little better.
Cropping
Maybe you captured a great expression on your subject’s face
but the framing of the photo is centered so precisely that it looks
too conventional. Software has a feature called cropping that
allows you to reframe and give the picture a unique perspective.
Sometimes cropping an extraneous object out of the edge of the
frame gives the dominant feature more visual impact.


PHOTOGRAPHY 47
.Image Adjustment: Making the Photos You Take Even Better
Cropping should be used to fine-tune a picture. If you find you are
consistently cropping out a large percentage of your frame, you are not
close enough to your subject when you make the pictures.





PHOTOGRAPHY 49
.Telling a Story With Your Pictures
Telling a Story With
Your Pictures
A picture story is much like a story you would write. It should
have a beginning, middle, and end. The only difference is you
use pictures to tell the story rather than words.
When you go into the field to make pictures, think about
the story you want to tell. Will you tell it in a single picture
or a series of pictures? What details are needed in the shots to
explain what is happening? Can you write the essence of the
story you want to tell in a single sentence? If not, think some
more until you can state the focus of your story. This focus
statement keeps you on track. It is the framework that provides
the structure of your story.
AIR (Action, Interaction, Reaction)
Scouting is an active endeavor. Skills are learned and practiced.
All that is learned is put into practice in the great outdoors, the
practical laboratory of Scouting. To be a Scout is to have an
active and adventurous life. So how do you capture great pictures
of Scouting?
The focus state-
ment keeps you
from being
sidetracked and
taking unneces-
sary pictures.


50 PHOTOGRAPHY
Telling a Story With Your Pictures.
The answer lies in three simple words: action, interaction,
and reaction. In every picture you make, try to include at least
one of those concepts.
Action. Scouting is loaded with action. Let your brain tell you
just the right moment to press the shutter so the action will be
captured perfectly. Part of taking a great action photo is antici-
pating what will happen next.
Let’s say you are watching a two-person sawing competi-
tion in which the fastest contestant will win a piece of pie. You
wait until a piece of log has just been cut through and is start-
ing to drop to the ground. You press the shutter. This picture,
you realize, is a little better than the one you made a few min-
utes earlier when the saw was just cutting through the wood.
You anticipated and waited for the end of the log to drop—and
the result was more action in the picture. Pictures are usually
made in a fraction of a second. It’s up to you to find the par-
ticular fraction of a second that will tell the best story.
Interaction. An older Scout is teaching a new Scout how to tie a
knot. This is a great opportunity to capture interaction. Any time
two or more Scouts are doing something, there is interaction.
Look for it and show it in your pictures.


PHOTOGRAPHY 51
.Telling a Story With Your Pictures
Reaction. Reaction in photographs is generally found in facial
expressions. A Scout has just made a fire-by-friction set and is
using it for the first time to try to make a fire. Success will require
a magical combination of pressure on the spindle and the speed
at which it spins. The Scout becomes exhausted several times
without throwing a spark but, finally, achieves success. And you
are there with your camera, capturing the joy in the Scout’s face.
The action is operating the bow and spindle. The reaction is the
Scout’s facial expression when he or she creates fire.
Creating Your Own Story
Illustrating an idea is different from covering an activity as it
happens. When you document an event or activity, you do not
set it up beforehand. For this next project, however, you will
create a visual story to fit the topic or theme you have chosen.
First, come up with an idea. Talking over ideas or brain-
storming with friends or family members can help you think
of a topic for your project. Once you have an idea, use a tech-
nique called storyboarding—writing down on index cards or
sticky notes the various photos you want to use in your project.
Each card or note represents one picture, one shot, or one scene
and can include a rough sketch of the shot and any pertinent
information such as location, camera angle, or the message the
shot should convey.
Decide how the presentation will start and how it will flow
from the beginning through the middle to the end. Think about
your setting and what props you might need. Decide what
the subjects are to be doing in each shot. Once you have your
topic all planned out and storyboarded, then set up the shots
one at a time as described on your storyboard cards. Once the
sequence of shots is established, start photographing.
Action.
Interaction.
Reaction.
Put some AIR in
your pictures.
If a photo has one
of these concepts,
it’s good. If it has
two, it’s better.
If it has all three
(very difficult),
it’s a winner.


52 PHOTOGRAPHY
Telling a Story With Your Pictures.
Documenting a Story
The most common approach to visual storytelling with photos
is the documentary style, using the camera to photograph what
is happening—to document it, showing accurately what takes
place. If this is your purpose, you should make sure that nothing
in the photos is being posed or set up especially for the camera.
The more you can narrow the subject of your story, the
better you will be able to tell it. For example, instead of a series
of photos about Scouting in general, try focusing on a troop
hike, a campfire program, or a court of honor. You might take
photos of individuals or groups participating in summer camp
activities or, even better, you could follow a pair of best friends
on their first year at camp. Be there each day to document in
pictures what these two buddies experience, and be careful not
to interrupt or guide them. Focus on the Scouts “telling their
story” in a natural way through the fun adventures they have.
Besides Scouting activities, community events may offer
good visual opportunities to document. You might select a
parade, a fair, a town meeting, a dedication, a competition, or
any activity involving multiple participants. Find something
you feel comfortable doing and ask the person in charge of the
event if you can photograph it for your merit badge project.
Find the right subject to give your visual story a focus. Then
consider giving the story a title to help you stick to that focus.


PHOTOGRAPHY 53
.Telling a Story With Your Pictures


54 PHOTOGRAPHY
Telling a Story With Your Pictures.
The idea of the two buddies at summer camp is a good
example of story focus. The photos you shoot could provide
visual information about the Scouts and the overall camp set-
ting as they go through their daily routine there. Wherever you
take your pictures, plan what to photograph by knowing the
subjects’ schedule and location throughout the day. Knowing
there may be times when they aren’t involved in anything
special, look instead for interesting visual moments filled with
action, interaction, and reaction (AIR).
Look for a variety of images that work together to tell
the story. You will need a photo that introduces the story; this
could be an overview shot that gives a sense of the location and
the different people who are there. Then get shots of people
interacting with each other during the event. Think about what
part of the event is most important and include that special
moment, or peak action. Finally, look for the closing picture.
If you are in an auditorium, this could be a shot of the event
coming to an end—everyone on stage for a “grand finale.” Look
for an image that brings closure to the story.
Do a thorough job of documenting the event by taking
multiple shots of each part of your visual story. Later, in the
editing process, look for the pictures that tell the story best;
then arrange them in order with a beginning, middle, and end
to give the story a natural flow.


PHOTOGRAPHY 55
.Telling a Story With Your Pictures
The Presentation
You may print your pictures and put them on a poster board
for presentation at a troop meeting or other gathering. Or
you may decide to present your story in a digital slide show.
Whichever format you select is fine, but be sure to create a
caption that tells the who, what, when, where, and why of each
image. Captions supplement the photos by giving the viewer
additional information.
Now is the time to practice everything you have learned
in studying for this merit badge. Practice can make you more
proficient at knot tying or basic canoe strokes. You become
a photographer in the same way. When you start to think
of making pictures as a continuously active process where
you are always thinking about the next picture—you are a
photographer. Congratulations!
If you create
a slide show,
remember to run a
test to make sure
that your digital
format will work
with the available
equipment.


56 PHOTOGRAPHY
Telling a Story With Your Pictures.
A Picture Is Worth a Thousand Words
You probably have heard
this saying before, and it’s
one that photographers
take to heart. They use
photography to tell a
story, which can some-
times be accomplished
with just one picture. If
there is a subject, that
person may or may not
be aware of the photog-
rapher. The picture
might be a candid photo,
where the subject is
unaware of or might
ignore the photographer.
If it is a posed photo,
the photographer directs
the subject on how to
sit or stand, or what to do.
In a camera aware photo,
the subject is looking at
but not being directed by
the photographer in any
way. Take a shot at these
different techniques and
see which one you enjoy
using the most.
Candid
Camera aware
Posed


PHOTOGRAPHY 57
.Telling a Story With Your Pictures
Seizing the Decisive Moment
French photographer Henri Cartier-Bresson (1908–2004) captured what
he called “decisive moments” in his photography. It could be a memo-
rable facial expression or moment in time or life that can’t be reenacted
or repeated. He likened it to candid photography where a picture taken a
split second before or after wouldn’t be as profound as one taken at that
precise moment.
Capturing the decisive moment does not mean the photo could not be
planned. In fact, Cartier-Bresson himself said it often takes patience to do
so. He conceived many of his shots and took numerous photos of a scene,
timed just right, so he could capture a decisive moment.
As a photographer, Henri Cartier-Bresson liked to stay in the shadows,
unnoticed by those he photographed. He liked to take pictures of everyday
people, everyday life, that provided plenty of opportunities for him to cap-
ture so many decisive moments.
“One must always take photographs with the greatest respect
for the subject and for oneself.”—Henri Cartier-Bresson





PHOTOGRAPHY 59
.The Ethics of Photography
The Ethics
of Photography
Photography is a way of placing viewers in a setting they might
never be able to experience firsthand. Photographs in National
Geographic, for example, take us to the ends of Earth and we
learn from them even though we are not present in those physical
locations. When we view such photos, we believe that what we
are seeing is real; this trust is based on the reliable practice of
photographers who subscribe to a professional standard of ethics.
Manipulation of photographs
does occur and dates back to the
late 1800s. Today, the latest software
makes those tricks easier than ever
before. Some enhancements may
be acceptable if done in the proper
context. For example, magazines
often publish what are called “photo
illustrations.” These are highly
manipulated photos intended to
convey a story or an idea. Perhaps
someone well known has been
caught telling a lie. The photographic
illustration might show the celebrity’s
familiar face with a Pinocchio nose.
Of course, no one would interpret
that image as being real, so this sort
of manipulation is considered fair
game. Even more commonly, photos
used in advertisements have been
manipulated in creative ways that
may be subtle or obvious. These are
images with a viewpoint!


60 PHOTOGRAPHY
The Ethics of Photography.
However, the ethical standard for news, editorial, and
documentary photography is that no manipulation or enhance-
ment that changes what the photographer saw at the scene is
acceptable. That means not removing people or objects such
as telephone lines. It means not increasing saturation of colors
beyond a natural level. Anything that changes the visual mean-
ing is unacceptable because news photographs should represent
reality as closely as possible.
Ethical standards apply not only to professional photog-
raphers but also to beginners and amateurs like yourself.
The standards even apply when taking photos with your
smartphone. Smartphones are like having a miniature camera
on steroids, and many apps come with fun tools to adjust the
pictures you take. You can explore your creativity by making
and altering photos in weird, imaginative ways.
Remember, a picture posted on the internet is forever
even if you think you deleted it. Before uploading,
be sure to ask yourself if the photo is appropriate or
worthy of a Scout. If the answer is no, don’t post it.


PHOTOGRAPHY 61
.The Ethics of Photography
But when you are telling a photographic story—such as
the one required for this merit badge—you must take the
documentary approach of not changing, enhancing, or manipu-
lating the viewer’s interpretation of anything you photograph.
Truth is a value worth preserving when telling a story, and
being real means being true to that story.
Finally, how do you decide when and when not to take
pictures of other people? There are many ethical theories, but
the simplest and best is the Golden Rule: Do unto others as you
would have them do unto you. If someone took a picture of
you in a particular situation and sent it out via social media,
would you be OK with it? If not, don’t press the shutter.
Practicing ethics is really an ordering of the values we hold,
having learned them from parents, Scout leaders, religious
teachers, schoolteachers, and others. Remember that a Scout is
trustworthy. Thinking through ethical decisions can be a sticky
process but acting ethically, in its essence, is simply doing what
one ought to do.
A photographer’s
work is copy-
righted at the
moment of
exposure. To
further protect
his or her rights,
a photographer
may register a
photograph with
the U.S. Copyright
Office. Those
works may not
be used without
the copyright
owner’s express
permission.
The BSA obtains written permission, called a model
release, from anyone appearing in a photo before the
image is published in a merit badge pamphlet or other
publication. The legal issues surrounding model releases
are complex and vary by jurisdiction.





PHOTOGRAPHY 63
.A Career in Photography
A Career in Photography
Whether you are photographing a presidential election or a class
of kindergartners, photography can be fun and profitable. There
are many careers in photography. Several careers are listed in
this chapter, and there are many others. Many fields have photog-
raphers who work only in those particular areas, including
sports, scientific, technical, educational, or research work.
The most common types of professional photography are
commercial, portrait, photojournalism, and specialized work
such as taking medical or underwater photos. Some careers
keep you indoors in one location, while others may take you
around the globe.
A digital photojournalist with a
computer, for example, can receive a photo
assignment in an email, go to a location,
take the pictures, edit the choices, caption
each image, then transmit the results to
the office from anyplace around the
world by using a wireless connection or
telephone. This has sped up how fast
news can be communicated worldwide.
Before digital photography, it would take
30 to 45 minutes to get a picture on the
wire. A photographer can now photograph
an event like a rocket launch and have it
on the internet within 10 seconds. Such
assignments can keep a photographer in
the field more days of the year than he or
she is working in an office.
From the careers listed here, or by
finding one on your own, choose a particu-
lar field of photography that interests you
and research it. Talk with your counselor
about what you have learned.


64 PHOTOGRAPHY
A Career in Photography.
Careers in Photography
Advertising Military
Aerial Multimedia
Agricultural Nature
Archaeological Oceanographic
Architectural Photo editor
Commercial Photojournalism
Documentary Portrait
Educational Real estate
Entertainment Scientific
Fashion Sports
Fine art Stock
Fire Studio
Forensic Travel
Industrial Underwater
Magazine Wedding
Medical Wildlife
How to Prepare
Learn by doing. Look for ways to get experience as a photog-
rapher. Join a camera club. Take pictures for your school
newspaper or club newsletters or websites. Get a summer or
part-time job with a local newspaper, photo studio, or camera
store. Assist and learn from an experienced photographer.
Cultivate a good eye for composition and your artistic sense.
Submit your best work to magazines.
Learn to use computers and specialized software to edit
digital images. Take art classes to learn about design and
composition. Depending on your career goals, you also might
need to know about business, advertising, journalism, printing,
publishing, physics, chemistry, or electronics.
Many universities, community colleges, and vocational-
technical schools offer photography courses. As a photography
student, you will learn about equipment, processes,
and techniques.


PHOTOGRAPHY 65
.A Career in Photography
Getting a job in photojournalism or industrial or scientific photography
generally requires a college degree in journalism or photography with
internship experiences. Photographers working in any field must have
good technical skills, whether they gain their skills through experience,
a degree program, or vocational-technical training.





PHOTOGRAPHY 67
.Glossary
Glossary
action. The activity or movement that
you are photographing. The best action
shots are taken at moments when the
action is at its peak.
additive primaries of light. Red,
green, and blue (RGB), which are the
major sections of the visible portion of
the electromagnetic spectrum. These
colors combined in equal proportions
create white light. Imaging sensors in
cameras work using RGB receptors.
AIR. An acronym standing for action,
interaction, and reaction. Photogra-
phers look for ways to capture each of
these elements in their pictures.
ambient light. Existing light.
aperture. Lens opening; the opening
in a lens system through which light
passes. The size of the aperture is either
fixed or adjustable. Lens openings usu-
ally are indicated by f-numbers.
automatic camera. A camera with a
built-in exposure meter that automati-
cally adjusts the lens opening, shutter
speed, or both for proper exposure.
automatic focus. A system by which
the camera adjusts its lens to focus on a
given area; for example, whatever is at
the center of the image.
AWB. An acronym standing for au-
tomatic white balance. This camera
setting adjusts photos to look natural
when taken under light sources with
various color tones.
background. The part of the scene
that appears behind the main subject
of the picture.


68 PHOTOGRAPHY
Glossary.
burning. Using image adjusting software
to darken part of a photo.
camera angles. Various positions of
the camera (high, medium, or low; and
left, right, or straight on) with respect
to the subject, each giving a different
viewpoint or effect.
composition. The arrangement of
all elements in a picture: main
subject, foreground, background,
and supporting subjects.
contrast. The difference in darkness or
density between one tone and another.
Also, using different forms, textures,
colors, etc., in a composition to empha-
size their differences for artistic effect.
cool. Bluish colors that, by association
with common objects (water, ice, etc.),
give an impression of coolness.
cropping. Using software to reframe
a portion of the original image. This is
usually done to enhance composition or
eliminate distracting elements. Crop-
ping can increase the visual impact of
a picture.
daguerreotype. The first practical
photographic process, developed by
Louis-Jacques-Mandé Daguerre in 1839.
depth. A photograph has depth when
two or more areas of the picture, from
front to back, have something interest-
ing to look at.
depth of field. The distance range be-
tween the nearest and farthest objects
that appear in acceptably sharp focus in
a photograph. Depth of field depends on
the lens opening, the focal length of the
lens, and the distance from the lens to
the subject.
dodging. Using image adjusting soft-
ware to lighten part of a photo.
editing. The process of selecting,
arranging, and preparing images and
image sequences.
enlargement. A print that is larger than
the negative or slide; blowup.


PHOTOGRAPHY 69
.Glossary
existing light (available light). Strictly
speaking, existing light is any type
of natural lighting from moonlight to
sunshine. By definition for photographic
purposes, existing light is the light that
is already on the scene and includes
room lamps, fluorescent lamps, spot-
lights, neon signs, candles, daylight
through windows, outdoor scenes at
twilight or in moonlight, and scenes
artificially illuminated after dark.
exposure. The quantity of light used
in making a photo; a product of the
intensity (controlled by the lens open-
ing) and the duration (controlled by
the shutter speed) of light striking the
digital sensor in the camera.
exposure setting. The lens opening
and shutter speed selected to expose
the digital sensor.
film. The material used in a film camera
to record a photographic image. Gener-
ally it is a light-sensitive emulsion coated
on a flexible acetate or plastic base. Film
remained the dominant form of photog-
raphy for more than a century before
advances in technology drew consumers
to digital formats.
filter. A colored piece of glass or other
transparent material used over the lens
to emphasize, eliminate, or change the
color or density of the entire scene or
certain elements in the scene.
flash. A brief, intense burst of light
produced by an electronic flash unit,
usually when lighting on the scene is
inadequate for picture-taking.
focus. The position at which rays of light
from a lens meet to form a sharp image.
focus statement. A single declarative
sentence describing a story that you
plan to tell in one or more pictures.
Developing that sentence ahead of time
will help you focus your attention on
the reason for the photographs.
foreground. The part of the scene that
appears in front of the main subject of
the picture.
f-stop. A number used to indicate the
size and light-passing ability of the lens
opening on most adjustable cameras.
Common f-numbers are f/2.8, f/4, f/5.6,
f/8, f/11, f/16, and f/22. The larger the
f-number, the smaller the lens opening.
In this series, f/2.8 is the largest lens
opening and f/22 is the smallest.
image adjustment. Anything done to
an image after the exposure is made to
enhance the look of the picture such as
adjusting the tonal range or color balance.


70 PHOTOGRAPHY
Glossary.
image sensor. The device in the camera
that converts light from the image into
electrical signals to create a digital file.
interaction. Action or visual communi-
cation between people or subjects
in a picture.
ISO. A numerical rating that describes
the sensitivity of a camera’s digital
sensor to light. The ISO rating doubles
as the sensitivity to light doubles.
lens. A piece or several pieces of
optical glass shaped to focus an image
of a subject.
light meter. An instrument that mea-
sures the light reflected from or falling
on a subject; used as an aid to selecting
the exposure setting.
noise. Digital artifacts generated in
a digital picture that are not part of
the scene. These are generally present
when using a high ISO with a small
digital sensor. (See ISO.)
normal lens. A lens that makes the
image in a photograph appear similar
to what the human eye sees. A normal
lens has a wider field of view than a
telephoto lens and a narrower field of
view than a wide-angle lens.
pixel. Short for picture element. Images
are composed of many individual pixels,
each having a specific color or tone that
can be displayed, changed, or stored.
When the pixels are small enough, the
eye merges the individual pixels into
continuous tones.
print. A hard copy of a photograph.
reaction. The visible result of action or
interaction in a photograph, typically
seen in captured facial expressions.


PHOTOGRAPHY 71
.Glossary
resolution. The fineness of detail in
a digital image, often expressed as the
number of pixels per inch (ppi) in a
displayed image or the number of dots
per inch (dpi) in a printed image.
RGB. (See additive primaries of light.)
sensor. The feature in a camera that
detects an image and translates that
information to create the image.
sharp. Showing crisp, precise texture
and detail; the opposite of blurred
or soft.
shutter. The blades, curtain, plate, or
other movable cover in a camera that
controls the time during which light
reaches the digital sensor.
single-lens reflex (SLR) camera. A
camera in which the scene to be pho-
tographed is viewed through the same
lens that takes the picture. A mirror
reflects the scene onto a piece of glass
where it can be focused and composed.
smartphone. Smartphone is a generic
label for handheld phones that do much
more than make phone calls. They are
small computers with a myriad of apps
to do our bidding.
subtractive primaries. The pigment
or ink colors of cyan, magenta, and
yellow. These inks, in various propor-
tions, can produce any color in the vis-
ible spectrum on a printed page. Only
these inks are used to reproduce color
photographs in a magazine or newspa-
per. A fourth color of black is printed
only in the deep shadow areas and for
text. These inks are the ones used in
printing pictures from a computer sent
to a printer.
tonal range. The difference in light
intensity between highlights and
shadows in a scene. This is also called
dynamic range.
warm. Reddish colors that, by associa-
tion with common objects (fire, sun,
etc.), give an impression of warmth.





PHOTOGRAPHY 73
.Photography Resources
Photography Resources
Scouting Literature
Art, Communication, Journalism,
Moviemaking, and Theater merit
badge pamphlets
Books
Burian, Peter K., and Robert Caputo.
Photography Field Guide: Secrets to
Making Great Pictures, 2nd ed.
National Geographic, 2003.
Busch, David D. Mastering Digital SLR
Photography. Cengage Learning PTR,
4th ed., 2014.
Davies, Paul Harcourt. The Complete
Guide to Close-Up & Macro
Photography. David & Charles, 2002.
Eastman Kodak Company, editors.
The Joy of Photography. Perseus
Publishing, 1991.
Frost, Lee. Teach Yourself Photography,
2nd ed. McGraw-Hill, 2008.
Grimm, Tom, and Michele Grimm. The
Basic Book of Digital Photography:
How to Shoot, Enhance, and Share
Your Digital Pictures. Plume, 2009.
Kelby, Scott. The Digital Photography
Book: Part 1, 2nd ed. Peachpit
Press, 2013.
———. The Photoshop Elements 14
Book for Digital Photographers.
New Riders, 2015.
London, Barbara, John Upton, et al.
Photography, 11th ed. Pearson, 2013.
Long, Ben. Complete Digital
Photography, 8th ed. Cengage
Learning PTR, 2014.
Norton, Boyd. Boyd Norton’s Outdoor
Digital Photography Handbook:
How to Shoot Like a Pro. Voyageur
Press, 2010.
Peterson, Bryan. Understanding
Exposure: How to Shoot Great
Photographs With Any Camera,
4th rev. ed. Amphoto Books, 2016.
———. Understanding Shutter Speed:
Creative Action and Low-Light
Photography Beyond 1/125 Second.
Amphoto Books, 2008.
With your parent’s permission, visit
the Boy Scouts of America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org,
for a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


74 PHOTOGRAPHY
Photography Resources.
Sammon, Rick. Rick Sammon’s Complete
Guide to Digital Photography:
107 Lessons on Taking, Making,
Editing, Storing, Printing, and
Sharing Better Digital Images, 2nd ed.
W.W. Norton, 2007.
Shaw, John. John Shaw’s Guide to
Digital Nature Photography. Amphoto
Books, 2015.
Stuckey, Scott. National Geographic
Ultimate Field Guide to
Travel Photography. National
Geographic, 2010.
Tharp, Brenda. Extraordinary Everyday
Photography: Awaken Your Vision to
Create Stunning Images Wherever You
Are. Amphoto Books, 2012.
Periodicals
Digital Photo Pro
Telephone: 617-706-9110
Website:
http://www.digitalphotopro.com
News Photographer
Telephone: 706-542-2506
Website: http://nppa.org/page/news-
photographer-digital-archive
Popular Photography
Website: http://www.popphoto.com
Shutterbug
Telephone: 321-269-3212
Website: http://www.shutterbug.com
Organizations and Websites
American Society of
Picture Professionals
201 East 25th St., No. 11C
New York, NY 10010
Telephone: 516-500-3686
Website: http://aspp.com
Canon USA
Website: http://learn.usa.canon.com
Learn by studying great photography
tips from the pros.
International Association of
Panoramic Photographers
Website:
http://www.panoramicassociation.org
National Press
Photographers Association
120 Hooper St.
Athens, GA 30602-3018
Telephone: 706-542-3018
Website: https://nppa.org
The National Press Photographers
Association has a provision for
student membership, and http://
competitions.nppa.org has a monthly
clip contest where you can study award-
winning photographs and videos.
National Press
Photographers Foundation
Website: http://nppg.org
The National Press Photographers
Foundation funds college scholarships
for students who are enrolled in four-
year programs. See the website for
details of how to enter.
Photographic Society of America
8241 S. Walker Ave., Suite 104
Oklahoma City, OK 73139
Telephone: 855-772-4636
Website: http://psa-photo.org


PHOTOGRAPHY 75
.Photography Resources
Professional Photographers
of America
229 Peachtree St. NE, Suite 2200
Atlanta, GA 30303
Telephone: 404-522-8600
Website: http://ppa.com
Visual Storytelling
Website: http://storytellingonline.info
Dr. James Brown’s website featuring
composition tips and more, using many
Scouting examples.
White House News
Photographers Association
Website: http://whnpa.org
Acknowledgments
The Boy Scouts of America thanks the
following members of the National
Merit Badge Subcommittee, who
diligently worked to develop the merit
badge requirements and content for
this pamphlet.
James W. Brown, Ph.D.—team lead;
Eagle Scout; Silver Beaver recipient;
executive associate dean emeritus,
Indiana University School of Journalism;
scholarships chair and board member,
National Press Photographers Foundation;
recipient of many photography awards
including gold and bronze medals at
the International Film and TV Festival
of New York.
David Carlson—photography lead; Eagle
Scout; Silver Beaver recipient; member
of Camera Craftsmen of America; award-
winning master photographer with more
than 30 years of experience; advisor at
Canon USA Inc.
Randy Piland—Eagle Scout; 30-year
professional photojournalist and former
U.S. Army photojournalist; college-
level photojournalism and publication
design teacher; experience includes
covering numerous world and national
Scout jamborees.
Steve Bowen—Distinguished Eagle
Scout; Silver Buffalo recipient; chair,
New Merit Badge Task Force; member,
Advancement and Program Content
committees.
Michael Roytek, BSA staff photographer;
Master Photographer David Carlson;
Janice Downey, BSA senior strategic
innovation; Randy Piland, freelance
photographer; and Jim Brown, Ph.D.,
executive associate dean emeritus,
Indiana University School of Journalism


76 PHOTOGRAPHY
Photography Resources.
Photo and Illustration Credits
James Brown, courtesy—pages 13,
21, 23 (Civil War reenactment), 29
(blacksmith), 33 (Order of the Arrow
ceremony, mountain barn), 38, 44,
53 (Delaware Indian), 56 (all), 57
(excited Scout), 58, 68 (mules),
and 72
David Burke, courtesy—pages 6, 16, 25,
31, 32, 51, and 70 (deer)
Canon USA, courtesy—cover (camera);
pages 34 and 35
David Carlson, courtesy—pages 12,
15, 19, 22 (photographer), 23
(camera on tripod), 26 (Tooth of
Time), 27 (pilot in spiral), 40, 41, 53
(manatees), 63, 66, and 67 (plane)
Randy Piland, courtesy—page 60
Robert Rogers, courtesy—pages 7, 14,
27 (track runner), 29 (foot washing),
30 (climber), 33 (rappeller), 47, 55,
57 (Scout blowing horn), and 75
Shutterstock.com—cover (aperture,
©Vectomart); pages 9 (antique
camera, ©Gavran333), 10 (©NorGal),
24 (©Art_Photo), 36 (©TungCheung),
39 (©Oleg Belov), 42 (eye icon,
©DVARG), 43 (©mrkornflakes),
45 (color circles, ©Arcady; apple,
©olegganko), 61 (copyright symbol,
©valdis torms), 62 (underwater
photographer, ©fenkieandreas; sunset,
©Jaromir Chalabala; wedding
photographer, ©vipubadee), 65 (foren-
sics photographer, ©Couperfield; winter
shot, ©aaltair; food photographer,
©Alliance), 67 (aperture, ©Vectomart),
68 (chess pieces, ©Oleg Ivanov IL), 69
(filters, ©DeSerg; leopard, ©Villiers
Steyn), 70 (light meter, ©Carlos Yudica;
pixelated image, ©Alexey V Smirnov),
and 71 (©Grisha Bruev)
Wikipedia.org, courtesy—pages 8 and 9
(George Eastman)
All other photos and illustrations are
the property of or are protected by the
Boy Scouts of America.
Tom Copeland— cover (Scout
photographer); pages 17, 28
(boardwalk), and 49
Greg Crenshaw—page 48
Seth Gitner—page 29 (cyclist)
Jeff Hattrick—page 77
Ron Kuenstler—pages 30 (drummer)
and 61 (divers)
Greg Luer—page 46
Roger Morgan—page 54
Randy Piland—pages 20, 22 (sunset), 26
(Vietnam Veterans Memorial), 28
(hikers in woods), 37, 50, and 53
(Scouts)
Jesse Scofield—pages 5 and 27 (Scouts
on bridge)





Notes


Notes


Notes