LIFESAVING

BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES

LIFESAVING

“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”

Requirements
1. Before doing requirements 3 through 15, review with your
counselor the principles of Safe Swim Defense.
2. Before doing requirements 3 through 15:
		 a.	Earn the Swimming merit badge.
		 b.	Swim continuously for 400 yards using each of the
following strokes in a strong manner, in good form with
rhythmic breathing, for at least 50 continuous yards: front
crawl, sidestroke, breaststroke, and elementary backstroke.
3. Explain the following:
		 a.	Common drowning situations and how to prevent them.
		 b.	How to identify persons in the water who need assistance.
		 c.

The order of methods in water rescue.

		 d.	How rescue techniques vary depending on the setting
and the condition of the person needing assistance.
		 e.	Situations for which in-water rescues should not
be undertaken.
4.	Demonstrate “reaching” rescues using various items such
as arm, leg, towels, shirts, paddles, and poles.
5. D
 emonstrate “throwing” rescues using various items such
as a line, ring buoy, rescue bag, and free-floating support.
Successfully place at least one such aid within reach of a
practice victim 25 feet from shore.
6. With your counselor’s approval, view in-person or on video
a rowing rescue performed using a rowboat, canoe, kayak,
or stand up paddleboard. Discuss with your counselor how
effectively and efficiently the rescue was performed.

2    LIFESAVING

7. L
 ist various items that can be used as aids in a “go” rescue.
Explain why buoyant aids are preferred.
8.	Correctly demonstrate rescues of a conscious practice
subject 30 feet from shore in deep water using two types
of buoyant aids provided by your counselor. Use a proper
entry and a strong approach stroke. Speak to the subject
to determine his or her condition and to provide instructions and encouragement.
		 a.	Present one aid to a subject, release it, and swim at a
safe distance as the subject moves to safety.
		 b.	In a separate rescue, present the other aid to a subject
and use it to tow the subject to safety.
9. Discuss with your counselor when it is appropriate to
remove heavy clothing before attempting a swimming rescue. Remove street clothes in 20 seconds or less, enter the
water, and approach a conscious practice subject 30 feet
from shore in deep water. Speak to the subject and use a
nonbuoyant aid, such as a shirt or towel, to tow the subject
to safety.
10. Discuss with your counselor the importance of avoiding
contact with an active subject and demonstrate lead-andwait techniques.
11. Perform the following nonequipment rescues for a conscious
practice subject 30 feet from shore. Begin in the water from a
position near the subject. Speak to the subject to determine
his or her condition and to provide instructions and encouragement.
		 a.	Perform an armpit tow for a calm, responsive, tired
swimmer resting with a back float.
		 b.	Perform a cross-chest carry for an exhausted,
responsive subject treading water.
12. In deep water, show how to escape from a victim’s grasp on
your wrist. Repeat for front and rear holds about the head
and shoulders.

LIFESAVING    3

13.		 Perform the following rescues for an unconscious practice
subject at or near the surface 30 feet from shore. Use a
proper entry and strong approach stroke. Speak to the
subject and splash water on the subject to determine his
or her condition before making contact. Quickly remove
the victim from the water, with assistance if needed, and
position for CPR.
		 a.

Perform an equipment assist using a buoyant aid.

		 b.

Perform a front approach and wrist tow.

		 c.

Perform a rear approach and armpit tow.

14. Discuss with your counselor how to respond if a victim
submerges before being reached by a rescuer, and do
the following:
		 a.	Recover a 10-pound weight in 8 to 10 feet of water
using a feetfirst surface dive.
		 b.

Repeat using a headfirst surface dive.

15. Demonstrate management of a spinal injury to your
counselor:
		 a.	Discuss the causes, signs, and symptoms of a spinal
injury.
		 b.	Support a faceup subject in calm water of standing
depth.
		 c.	Turn a subject from a facedown to a faceup position in
water of standing depth while maintaining support.
16. Demonstrate knowledge of resuscitation procedure:
		 a.	Describe how to recognize the need for rescue breathing and CPR.
		 b.	Demonstrate CPR knowledge and skills, including
rescue breathing, on a mannequin under the guidance
of a current CPR/AED instructor trained by a
nationally certified provider.
17. With your counselor, discuss causes, prevention, and
treatment of other injuries or illnesses that could occur
while swimming or boating, including hypothermia,
dehydration, heat-related illnesses, muscle cramps,
sunburn, stings, and hyperventilation.

4    LIFESAVING

.Lifesaving Resources

Lifesaving
Resources
Scouting Literature
Aquatics Supervision; Scouts BSA handbooks; Deck of First Aid; Emergency First
Aid pocket guide; Fieldbook; Canoeing,
Emergency Preparedness, First Aid,
Kayaking, Motorboating, Rowing, Safety,
Search and Rescue, Small-Boat Sailing,
Swimming, Water Sports, and Whitewater
merit badge pamphlets

Organizations and Websites
American Canoe Association
Website:
www.americancanoe.org
American Red Cross
Toll-free telephone: 800-733-2767
Website: www.redcross.org
American Whitewater
Website:
www.americanwhitewater.org
International Life Saving Federation
Website: www.ilsf.org
Lifesaving Society of Canada
Website: www.lifesaving.ca

Books

National Safety Council
Website: www.nsc.org

American Red Cross. American Red
Cross Lifeguarding Manual. American
Red Cross, 2017.

Royal Life Saving Society–Australia
Website:
www.royallifesaving.com.au

Graver, Dennis. Aquatic Rescue and
Safety: How to Recognize, Respond to,
and Prevent Water-Related Injuries.
Human Kinetics, 2004.

Royal Life Saving Society UK
Website: www.rlss.org.uk

Raatma, Lucia. Water Safety. The Child’s
World, 2004.
U.S. Lifesaving Association. Open Water
Lifesaving: The United States
Lifesaving Association Manual, 2nd
ed. Pearson Learning Solutions, 2003.
YMCA of the USA. On the Guard:
The YMCA Lifeguard Manual.
YMCA of the USA, 2011.

Safe Kids Worldwide
Website: www.safekids.org
Surf Life Saving Australia
Website: https://sls.com.au
Surf Life Saving New Zealand
Website: www.surflifesaving.org.nz
U.S. Coast Guard Boating Safety
Division
Website: www.uscgboating.org
U.S. Lifesaving Association
Website: www.usla.org
YMCA of the USA
Website: www.ymca.net
LIFESAVING    13

