SOIL AND WATER
CONSERVATION

STEM-Based

BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES

SOIL AND WATER
CONSERVATION

“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”

Soil and Water Conservation
1. Do the following:
(a) Tell what soil is. Tell how it is formed.
(b) Describe three kinds of soil. Tell how they are different.
(c) Name the three main plant nutrients in fertile soil. Tell how they can be
put back when used up.
2. Do the following:
(a) Define soil erosion.
(b) Tell why it is important. Tell how it affects you.
(c) Name three kinds of soil erosion. Describe each.
(d) Take pictures or draw two kinds of soil erosion.
3. Do the following:
(a) Tell what is meant by conservation practices.
(b) Describe the effect of three kinds of erosion-control practices.
(c) Take pictures or draw three kinds of erosion-control practices.
4. Do the following:
(a) Explain what a watershed is.
(b) Outline the smallest watershed that you can find on a contour map.
(c) Then outline on your map, as far as possible, the next larger watershed
which also has the smallest in it.
(d) Explain what a river basin is. Tell why all people living in a river basin
should be concerned about land and water use in it.
(e) Explain what an aquifer is and why it can be important to communities.

230

5. Do the following:
(a) Make a drawing to show the hydrologic cycle.
(b) Show by demonstration at least two of the following actions of
water in relation to soil: percolation, capillary action, precipitation,
evaporation, transpiration.
(c) Explain how removal of vegetation will affect the way water runs off
a watershed.
(d) Tell how uses of forest, range, and farm land affect usable water supply.
(e) Explain how industrial use affects water supply.
6. Do the following:
(a) Tell what is meant by “water pollution.”
(b) Describe common sources of water pollution and explain the effects of each.
(c) Tell what is meant by “primary water treatment,” “secondary waste
treatment,” and “biochemical oxygen demand.”
(d) Make a drawing showing the principles of complete waste treatment.
7. Do TWO of the following:
(a) Make a trip to TWO of the following places. Write a report of more than
500 words about the soil and water and energy conservation practices you saw.
(1) An agricultural experiment
(2) A managed forest or woodlot, range, or pasture
(3) A wildlife refuge or a fish or game management area
(4) A conservation-managed farm or ranch
(5) A managed watershed
(6) A waste-treatment plant
(7) A public drinking water treatment plant
(8) An industry water use installation
(9) A desalinization plant
(b) Plant 100 trees, bushes, and/or vines for a good purpose.
(c) Seed an area of at least 1⁄5 acre for some worthwhile conservation purpose,
using suitable grasses or legumes alone or in a mixture.
(d) Study a soil survey report. Describe the things in it. On tracing paper over
any of the soil maps, outline an area with three or more different kinds of soil.
List each kind of soil by full name and map symbol.
(e) Make a list of places in your neighborhood, camps, school ground, or park
that have erosion, sedimentation, or pollution problems. Describe how these
could be corrected through individual or group action.
(f) Carry out any other soil and water conservation project approved by your
merit badge counselor.

231

Resources.

Resources
Scouting Literature
Fieldbook; Animal Science, Architecture
and Landscape Architecture, Backpacking,
Environmental Science, Farm Mechanics,
Fish and Wildlife Management, Forestry,
Gardening, Mining in Society, Nature,
Oceanography, Orienteering, Plant Science,
and Sustainability merit badge pamphlets
Visit the Boy Scouts of America’s
official retail website at http://
www.scoutstuff.org for a complete
listing of all merit badge pamphlets
and other helpful Scouting materials and supplies.

Books About Conservation
Bramwell, Martyn. The Environment
and Conservation. Prentice
Hall, 1992.
Crawford, Leslie, and Cathy Anderson
(ed.). Water Conservation
(Environmental Action). Dale
Seymour Publications, 1997.
DeGalan, Julie, and Bryon Middlekauff.
Great Jobs for Environmental Studies
Majors. McGraw-Hill, 2008.
de Villiers, Marq. Water: The Fate of
Our Most Precious Resource. Mariner
Books, 2001.
Doyle, Kevin, et al. The Complete Guide
to Environmental Careers in the 21st
Century. Island Press, 1998.
94

SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION

Feinstein, Stephen. Conserving and
Protecting Water: What You Can Do.
Enslow Publishers, 2010.
Fradkin, Philip L. A River No More:
The Colorado River and the West.
University of California Press, 1996.
Gardner, Robert. Soil: Green Science
Projects for a Sustainable Planet.
Enslow Publishers, 2014.
Greenland, Paul R. Career Opportunities
in Conservation and the
Environment. Ferguson, 2007.
Leinwand, Gerald. The Environment
(American Issues). Facts on
File, 1990.
Lucas, Eileen. Naturalists,
Conservationists, and
Environmentalists (American
Profiles). Facts on File, 1994.
———. Water: A Resource in Crisis.
Children’s Press, 1991.
Morgan, R.P.C. Soil Erosion and
Conservation, 3rd ed. Blackwell
Publishing, 2005.
Rothfeder, Jeffrey. Every Drop for Sale:
Our Desperate Battle Over Water
in a World About to Run Out.
Tarcher, 2004.
Stille, Darlene R. Soil: Digging into
Earth’s Vital Resource. Compass
Point Books, 2005.

.Resources

Organizations and Websites
Chesapeake Bay Program
Toll-free telephone: 800-968-7229
Website: http://www.chesapeakebay.net
EnviroLink Network
Website: http://www.envirolink.org
Environmental Protection Agency
Ariel Rios Building
1200 Pennsylvania Ave., NW
Washington, DC 20460
Telephone: 202-272-0167
Website: http://www.epa.gov and
http://water.epa.gov
Natural Resources
Conservation Service
Telephone: 202-720-3210
Websites: http://www.nrcs.usda.gov and
http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/

Acknowledgments
The Boy Scouts of America thanks Gary
M. Stolz, Ph.D., U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service, and the USDA Natural Resources
Conservation Service for their technical
expertise and guidance during the
revision of this merit badge pamphlet.
The Boy Scouts of America is
grateful to the men and women serving
on the Merit Badge Maintenance Task
Force for the improvements made in
updating this pamphlet.
The Boy Scouts of America thanks
the following for their help with previous
editions of this pamphlet, upon which
this edition is based: Jerry Bernard,
Ken Carter, Bruce Dubee, Doug Holy,
Tarleton A. Jenkins, Walter E. Jeske,
Ted Kupelian, Katherine N. Mergen,
Paul Reich, and Robert F. Tegner of the
Natural Resources Conservation Service,
U.S. Department of Agriculture, with
the counsel and technical assist-ance of
other personnel of the Natural Resources

Conservation Service. We also appreciate
Ed Partington, Environmental Protection
Agency, for his assistance.

Photo and Illustration Credits
©2000 Oregon State University/C. Daly, G.
Taylor, and J. Aiken, courtesy—page 29
Florida Department of Environmental
Protection/Dana Denson, courtesy—
page 93 (snail)
HAAP Media Ltd., courtesy—cover (ducks)
HAAP Media Ltd./Andrew Beierle,
courtesy—cover (“no dumping” sign)
Ferenc Lakatos, University of WestHungary, Bugwood.org, courtesy—
page 93 (caterpillar)
Longhorn Council, Boy Scouts of
America, courtesy—page 53
NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory,
courtesy—page 52
Natural Resources Conservation Service,
courtesy—pages 20–21 (both), 25, 35,
40, and 50 (grassed waterway)
Natural Resources Conservation Service/
Lynn Betts, courtesy—cover (contouring); pages 37 (flood erosion), 39
(sheet, gully, and rill erosion), 43, 47,
48 (contouring), 54 (duck), 56–57
(watershed dams), 67, and 79
Natural Resources Conservation Service/
Kurt Blume, courtesy—page 51
(sediment basin)
Natural Resources Conservation Service/
Erwin C. Cole, courtesy—cover
(farm community)
Natural Resources Conservation Service/
Jim Fortner, courtesy—page 17
(soil profile)
Natural Resources Conservation Service/
Fred Gasper, courtesy—page 37
(farming erosion)
SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION

95

