G
er
h
,
st ELECTRICITYSTEM-Based


ELECTRICITY
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Electricity or check Scoutbook for
the latest requirements.
35886
ISBN 978-0-8395-3408-2
©2021 Boy Scouts of America
2021 Printing
FPO


ELECTRICITY 3





ELECTRICITY 5
Contents
What Is Electricity? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
Forms of Electricity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Common Electrical Terms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
Current in Motion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
Responding to Electrical Emergencies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
Electricity Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62


6 ELECTRICITY
What Is Electricity?.
What Is Electricity?
Electricity is a powerful and fascinating force of nature. As
early as 600 B.C., observers of the physical world suspected
that electricity existed but did not have a name for it. In fact,
real progress in unraveling the mystery of electricity has come
only within the last 250 years. Important discoveries by scien-
tists such as Benjamin Franklin, who proved that lightning is a
tremendously powerful electrical spark, have given us a more
complete picture of what electricity is and how we can harness
its power.
To begin to understand electricity as an awesome force,
one must start with the basics. Electricity is a rapid transfer of
charged particles called electrons, which create levels of energy
depending upon how they transfer.
Atoms
All things are made of tiny particles called atoms. You are made
of atoms, and so are your friends, your clothes, the food you
eat, and the air you breathe. Atoms are so small that it takes
millions of them to form the period at the end of this sentence.
Every atom is made up of even tinier particles called pro-
tons, neutrons, and electrons. Protons are positively charged,
and neutrons are neutral—they have no charge. Together,
protons and neutrons form the nucleus, or core, of an atom.
Electrons, which are negatively charged, speed around the
nucleus, orbiting it in layers called shells.
The positive charge of the protons in the nucleus equals the
total negative charge of the electrons in orbit. This makes the
atom neutral, or balanced. Protons and electrons have a natural
attraction to each other, which helps to keep the atom stable.
Much as the gravitational force of the sun holds planets in their
orbits, electrical forces hold electrons around the nucleus.
The word
electricity comes
from electron,
the Greek word
for amber.


ELECTRICITY 7
.What Is Electricity?
It is important to understand the atom’s structure because
the electrical charge of the electron is the basic unit of electricity.
The position and movement of positively and negatively charged
particles cause the electric and magnetic effects you will be
working on to earn your Electricity merit badge.
Ions and Balance
The bond that holds electrons in orbit
is weakest in the atom’s outermost
shells. A free-moving electron can
bump into and knock electrons out
of an atom’s outermost shell. These
loose electrons, in turn, can bump
into still other atoms and dislodge
more electrons. Moving together, these
freed electrons form electric current.
Electrons are easily dislodged
from, or rubbed off of, an atom because they are lightweight
and, in the outermost shells, accessible. (Protons are heavy and
do not rub off easily.) Imagine electrons as grains of dust spin-
ning swiftly around a central core of iron. You can see why the
lightweight, negatively charged electrons are constantly rubbing
off or being lifted by nearby atoms and ions.
HYDROGEN ATOM OXYGEN ATOM
Outermost shell
To picture the structure
of an atom, think about
the arrangement of our
solar system. Just as
planets orbit the sun,
electrons move around
the nucleus of an atom.
Atom
NEUTRON
PROTON
ELECTRON
When an atom loses one or more of its electrons, the atom becomes
positively charged, or out of balance. If an atom gains free-moving
electrons, it becomes negatively charged, and also out of balance.
Out-of-balance atoms are called ions.





ELECTRICITY 9
.Forms of Electricity
Forms of Electricity
Have you ever watched with wonder as lightning lit up the
night sky during a thunderstorm? Have you ever combed your
hair on a cold day and heard it crackle? Have you ever pulled
a clingy sock away from your T-shirt as it was removed from a
warm dryer? All these phenomena are examples of electricity.
Static Electricity
Try this experiment. Shuffle across a thick carpet on a dry day
and then lightly touch a doorknob. You will jump. You might
even see a spark. The crackling noises and sparks indicate the
presence of static electricity.
Static electricity is electricity transferred by rubbing objects
together. It can be stored on the surface of materials like rubber,
glass, cloth, and amber. The electrical charge builds up until it
discharges, or jumps. The sparks and crackling noises are static
electricity in motion.
Thales of Miletus (625–547 B.C.), an ancient Greek
philosopher, knew rubbing amber, or fossilized tree
resin, with a piece of wool or fur would make a small,
lightweight object like a feather fly up and cling to it.
Rubbing makes the amber electrically negative and
able to exert force over a distance, like a magnet. As
the charge is lost, the amber loses its attraction and
the feather floats back down.
While Thales did not completely understand the
force that attracted a feather to rubbed amber, he
recorded some of the first observations of magnetism
and electricity.


10 ELECTRICITY
Forms of Electricity.
When you comb your hair and produce static electricity,
loose electrons are rubbing off the hair atoms and clinging to
the atoms of the comb. Losing electrons leaves the hair atoms
positively charged; gaining extra electrons makes the comb neg-
atively charged. Because different (unlike) charges attract each
other, your hair tries to stick to the comb.
Rubbing, or friction, does not create static electricity; it
merely separates negative and positive charges and transfers
them onto different bodies, or onto different parts of the
same body.
When objects out of electrical balance approach each
other, a spark may jump from one to the other, which is what
happened when you shuffled across the carpet and touched the
doorknob. Electrons jumped from an object overcharged with
electrons to an object short of electrons.
Unlike charges attract; like charges repel, similar to
the way unlike poles of magnets attract while the
like poles repel. Try this experiment: Rub two inflated
balloons against your sweater and tie them to a stick
with the rubbed sides facing each other. Because
both balloons have the same charge they will swing
away from, or repel, one another.
A static charge is an accumulated electrical charge
on an object. It is capable of producing a spark that
can cause an explosion. For example, when filling
the gas tank of a car or boat, you must keep the pump
nozzle in constant contact with the fill pipe to prevent
a static charge (a spark) from igniting gas fumes.


ELECTRICITY 11
.Forms of Electricity
Lightning
Lightning is caused by static electricity. As positive and negative
charges become separated during a thunderstorm, they build
up in different parts of the clouds. Eventually, they jump the
gap between regions of opposite charge, discharging their
buildup. The discharge is lightning—a mighty stream of
electrons leaping through the sky. Some lightning bolts strike
the ground, but most jump from one part of a cloud to another.
Electrostatic Generators
Electrostatic generators, created in England by Francis Hauksbee
(1666–1713), generated significant amounts of electrical charge.
One such machine used the friction created from leather press-
ing on a revolving glass cylinder to produce an electrical charge,
which in turn was transferred to a metal comb. The electrical
charge then traveled from the comb to an attached metal ball,
and then into a Leyden jar for storage.
Ben Franklin’s Kite
After watching lightning jump from cloud to cloud
and from cloud to ground, American statesman and
scientist Benjamin Franklin (1706–1790) determined
that an electrical charge was like a fluid seeping
through an object, and that it could jump to another
object, making a spark. To prove his point, he tied
a metal key to a kite and flew it in a sky threatening
a thunderstorm. The electrical charge from lightning
leapt to the key and produced a spark of electricity.
Franklin was lucky to survive the risky experi-
ment, but he proved that lightning is a
form of electricity. After his experi-
ment, he invented the lightning
rod, an iron rod that would
safely conduct lightning from
the top of a building to
the ground.
Ben Franklin’s
original lightning
rod, above;
modern-day
lightning
rod, below


12 ELECTRICITY
Forms of Electricity.
Magnetism
Electricity and magnetism, although they seem quite different,
are actually two forms of the same force. An electric current
produces magnetism. To put it another way, whenever electricity
moves, magnetism is produced. And whenever a magnetic force
field changes, electricity is produced.
Named for the university in the Netherlands
where it was invented, the Leyden jar was the
first storage container for electricity. The charge
could not pass through the glass so it built up
inside. If a metal rod was held near the jar, the
charge leapt from a metal ball on top through a
discharger to the outer metal coating on the jar,
causing a spark.
Modern devices that store electrical charge
are called capacitors. They are found inside
many household appliances, from washing
machines to CD players. Though most are the
size of a dime, they generally follow the same
principle as a Leyden jar.
William Gilbert (1544–1603), a doctor to England’s royal family, wrote
about magnetism and electricity in 1600. He was the first person to use
the word “electric,” and he invented what is believed to be the earliest
electrical instrument. The device had a pointer, which would swing
toward objects like straw and paper that carried an electrical charge
when rubbed. He named objects that attracted the pointer “electrics,”
and those that did not “nonelectrics.”
Gilbert believed there were two types of electricity. Glass rubbed
with silk made what he called vitreous electricity. Amber rubbed with
fur made resinous electricity. Gilbert showed that objects with the same
type of electricity repelled each other, while those containing different
kinds attracted each other.


ELECTRICITY 13
.Forms of Electricity
Electromagnetism
Italian Alessandro Volta (1745–1827) thought electricity came
only from contact between two metals; he called it metallic
electricity. He was not absolutely correct, either. But Volta did
invent the earliest electric cell, which became known as the vol-
taic pile. It used two different metals, separated by moist chemi-
cals, to produce a continuous transfer of electrical charge. When
the charge transferred along wires, the chemicals separated out
more electrical charge. By piling up lots of cells, Volta created
the first battery, with every set of cells producing slightly more
than 1 volt of electricity.
With Volta’s invention of the battery in 1800, scientists
finally had a source of steady electric current that could be
transferred. Twenty years later, Copenhagen researcher Hans
Christian Oersted (1777–1851) linked electricity and magnetism,
observing that a metal wire carrying electrical current affected
a magnetic compass needle. Instead of following Earth’s north-
south magnetic field, the needle aligned itself with the electri-
fied wire’s magnetic field. Oersted’s discovery that the electric
current had produced magnetism became known as electromag-
netism. This new scientific field would become the springboard
for development of the electric motor and the electromagnet.
Making Connections
Inspired by Oersted’s discovery, André-Marie Ampère (1775–
1836), a Frenchman, set out to explain the connection between
electricity and magnetism. Ampère’s work led to a much fuller
understanding of the relationship between electricity and magne-
tism, which eventually led to important applications such as the
telegraph and electromagnet.
Volt, the modern unit of electric potential,
is the strength or electric pressure of the
transferring charge. Today’s high-voltage
power lines operate at 500,000 volts or
more while a modern house circuit
operates at 110 or 220 volts.


14 ELECTRICITY
Forms of Electricity.
He found that when electricity passed through a metal
wire onto a card containing iron filings, and the card was
tapped lightly, the filings lined up in a circular pattern
around the magnetic field created by the electrified
wire. When the electric current was turned off, the
filings again relaxed into their random arrangement
on the card.
THE AMPERE
With further experimentation, Ampère discovered
that two parallel electric currents running in the same
direction attract each other, and that parallel currents run-
ning in opposite directions repel each other. The modern unit of
current, the ampere, was named in his honor.
Electromagnets
In 1825, William Sturgeon (1783–1850) wound a coil of wire
around an iron rod and built one of the first electromagnets.
It differed from a permanent magnet as its magnetism could
be switched on and off by electrical current.
Stephen Gray (1666–1736), a British scientist, figured out that any
object that touches an electrified object will itself become electrified.
This process—transferring a charge from one substance to another—
is known as electrical conduction.
Demonstrations of electricity’s properties were of great scientific
interest in the 18th and early 19th centuries.


ELECTRICITY 15
.Forms of Electricity
Important Safety Notes
In your experiments, always use
batteries as the power source. Do NOT
use electricity from household circuits;
it is dangerous and can cause serious injury. The only
exception is for requirement 11e, hooking a model elec-
tric train layout to a household circuit. Never work on
household circuits without first turning off the circuit
breaker or removing the fuse, and always work on
electricity with the help of an electrician or an otherwise
qualified adult.
Wires. To prepare insulated wires for experiments,
you must carefully strip some of the plastic coating
(insulation) from each end to expose the metal. Use
an electrician’s wire stripper, or gently cut the plastic
with a pocketknife. If you use stranded wire rather
than solid-core, twist the strands tightly clockwise.
Connections. Join wires and batteries together with
electrician’s tape, metal paper clips, alligator clips,
or mating crimp connectors. Make sure metal parts
touch tightly or your experiments will not work.


16 ELECTRICITY
Forms of Electricity.
Make a Simple Electromagnet
This experiment shows that a wire carrying a current is
surrounded by an invisible magnetic field, or force, and it
illustrates how closely electricity and magnetism are related.
Step 1—Wrap a length
of insulated (plastic-
coated) wire about
20 times around a
cardboard tube.
Step 2—Connect the
wire to a 4.5-volt or
6-volt battery and
to a switch.
Step 3—Slide a small
compass into the middle
of the cardboard tube.
Step 4—Swivel the
paper clip against and
away from the thumb-
tack to switch the elec-
tric circuit on and off.
Watch what happens to the compass needle as you open
and close the circuit. When you close the circuit, the electric
current produces magnetism in the coil of wire. The magnetism
all around the wire makes the compass needle swing. When
the circuit is broken (you open the paper-clip switch), no
magnetism is produced so the needle again points north.
Magnet Earth
Did you know that you live on what is essentially a huge
magnet? Earth, like any magnet, has magnetic north and south
poles. What we call the magnetic north pole is located near
Bathurst Island, north of Hudson Bay in Canada—more than a
thousand miles south of the geographic North Pole. What we
commonly call the magnetic south pole is near the Adélie Coast
of Antarctica, about 1,600 miles from the geographic South Pole.
PLASTIC-COATED WIRE
Circuit is closed.


ELECTRICITY 17
.Forms of Electricity
Natural and Artificial Magnets
Magnetic iron ore is found in different parts of Earth. This
magnetite, or lodestone, is one example of a natural magnet.
In the early Middle Ages, sailors learned that when a slender
piece of iron was rubbed on a chunk of magnetite, the iron
would become temporarily magnetized. If a piece of hard steel
is rubbed on lodestone, the steel will remain magnetized for a
long time, becoming a permanent artificial magnet.
Magnetic Attraction and Repulsion
One end of a magnet is its south pole; the other end, its north
pole. If you hang a magnet on a string, one end will always
point north. You can use a hanging magnet to demonstrate the
law of attraction and repulsion. Bring the north pole of another
magnet toward the north pole of a magnet on a string. The
hanging magnet will spin around until its south pole meets the
north pole of the magnet in your hand. Like poles repel each
other. Unlike poles attract.
Magnets are either permanent or temporary.
Permanent magnets are made of hard steel and retain
their magnetic effect for a long time. Temporary mag-
nets are made of soft iron or a soft grade of steel and
retain their magnetism only when they are in contact
with another magnet or are being energized by an
electric current.
Because of
changes in Earth’s
magnetic field, the
magnetic poles
are not specific
locations but
general areas.
Studies over a
period of many
years show that
the magnetic
poles change
location with time.
Try this experiment: Stick a magnetized
needle through a small cork, then float
it in a saucer of water. Hold another
magnet over the floating needle and
notice how you can control it, through
attraction and repulsion, by turning the
magnet in your hand.


18 ELECTRICITY
Forms of Electricity.
The Magnetic Field
In the floating needle experiment, you found what seemed like
an invisible circle of power around the needle. To actually see
this magnetic field, wedge a horseshoe magnet between some
books, with the poles facing upward. Balance a card or a piece
of stiff paper on top of the magnet, and sprinkle iron filings
on the card. Gently tap the card or paper and the filings will
arrange themselves in circular forms with a pattern of lines
running from pole to pole.
Make an Electromagnet
Now you are ready to make an electromagnet, a magnet
activated by the transfer of electricity.
Step 1—Coil a length of insulated
wire at least 20 turns around a
large metal bolt or nail. The more
turns of wire around the bolt or
nail, the stronger the magnet.
Use electrician’s tape as needed
to hold the coils of wire in place.
Iron filings scattered on an index card or stiff paper and
held over a horseshoe magnet will arrange themselves
like this. The lines are called lines of magnetic force.
When you cut
off the electric
current from an
electromagnet,
it is no longer
magnetized. An
electromagnet
with a metal
core is what
operates door-
bells, buzzers, CD
player speakers,
and telegraph
instruments.
Iron filings can be purchased at a hobby store.
Be careful not to breathe or swallow any of them.


ELECTRICITY 19
.Forms of Electricity
Step 2—Connect the wire ends to the terminals of
a 4.5-volt or 6-volt battery. The electric current will
produce a magnetic field, as you know from your
experiment with the compass and the cardboard
tube. The bolt or nail, now called the core, will
become an electromagnet.
Test your electromagnet by using it to pick up
metallic paper clips or pins. Try it first with the wire
ends connected to the battery, then disconnect the
battery. See if the bolt or nail will still pick up paper
clips or pins.
Make a Telegraph Set
To see how an electromagnet can be used to operate
devices such as buzzers and telegraphs, make this tele-
graph set. Then follow the instructions to turn it into
an electric buzzer.
INSTRUCTIONS
Step 1—Nail the two large nails into the block
of wood.
Step 2—Connect a long piece of wire to one
terminal of the 6-volt battery.
Step 3—Starting at the top of one nail, wrap the
wire around the nail, keeping the coils close together.
Coil the wire around and around until the nail is
completely wrapped.
METAL ARM
SMALL NAIL
WOOD BLOCK
CONNECTING WIRE
6-VOLT
BATTERY
SWITCH
Telegraph set
Materials Needed
Two large nails
Hammer
Wood block
Insulated wire
6-volt battery
Switch (wire
paper clip)
Thin strip of
unpainted tin
or aluminum
Small nail
TWO LARGE NAILS
WRAPPED WITH WIRE


20 ELECTRICITY
Forms of Electricity.
Step 4—Bring the wire across to the other nail. Working
from the bottom up, wrap the wire as many turns as on the
first nail.
Step 5—Connect the free end of the wire to one terminal of the
switch. To complete the circuit, connect a second, shorter wire
between the remaining terminal of the battery and the switch.
Step 6—Bend a strip of metal into a Z-shape. Use the small
nail to attach the metal strip to the block of wood, with the free
end of the strip over the two wire-wrapped nails. This piece of
metal is the receiver of the telegraph set.
Step 7—Close the switch. What does the telegraph receiver
do? (If nothing happens, adjust the space between the arm of
the metal Z and the two nails. If necessary, bring the metal arm
slightly closer to the nails.)
Step 8—Open and close the switch several times. Can you
signal a message on your telegraph set? Experiment with
tapping out short messages.
Make a Buzzer
Next, turn your telegraph into a buzzer.
INSTRUCTIONS
Step 1—Open the switch and make sure it stays open (or
disconnect the battery) as you modify the wiring to change
the telegraph into a buzzer.
Step 2—Use a hammer and a small nail to make a tiny hole in
the free end of the metal arm. (To support the metal arm as you
hammer, slide a strip of wood between it and the tops of the
large nails. Remove the protective wood strip before going to
the next step.)
Step 3—Cut the wire between the terminal of the 6-volt battery
and the first nail. Be careful to cut the wire near the nail.
Step 4—Strip the plastic coating from the cut ends of the
wire. Connect the wire from the battery to the small hole in the
metal arm.
Step 5—Curve the free end of the wire sticking out from
the top of the nail until it lightly touches the free end of the
metal arm.


ELECTRICITY 21
.Forms of Electricity
Materials Needed
Telegraph set
from above
experiment
Hammer
Small nail
Wire cutters
FREE END
ABOVE
METAL ARM
SIDE VIEW
METAL ARM
SMALL NAIL
WOOD
BLOCK
CONNECTING
WIRE
6-VOLT
BATTERY
SWITCH
Buzzer
FREE END
OF WIRE
Step 6—Close the switch. Does the buzzer buzz? If not, check
the connection of the wire to the hole in the metal arm. Adjust
the free end of the wire sticking out from the top of the nail. It
is critical that this wire lightly touch the metal arm.
Step 7—Open and close the switch several times. How does
electric current make the buzzer buzz? Think about what is
happening to the circuit—when the circuit is broken, the
current stops traveling and the electromagnet loses its power.
The Speed of Electricity
How fast does electricity travel? Electrons in an electrical current do not
travel fast as they jump from one atom to another, pushing other
electrons in front of them. But the electrical energy they create
travels at nearly the speed of light.


22 ELECTRICITY
Forms of Electricity.
Current Electricity
Current electricity is electricity in motion—the current that runs
through a wire and rings a bell or lights a light. What makes
the current move? How fast does it travel? In what direction
does it go?
Potential Difference
Every object charged with electricity has a certain potential or
electromotive force. When two objects with different potentials
are connected with a wire, electrons move from where there
are many to where there are few. This is how the transfer
of electrons takes place. This potential difference between
electromotive forces causes the electrons to travel along the
wire attempting to equalize the two potentials until the circuit
is opened.
The word circuit
refers to the path
an electric current
travels, from the
source of the
power, such as a
battery, through
some device using
electricity, such
as a lightbulb, and
back to the source.
If the circuit is
opened, or there
is no path back
to the power
source, electrons
will not transfer.
Electric Batteries
A potential difference exists in electric batteries.
In a dry-type battery, like those used in flashlights,
the battery’s outer edge, or “can,” is usually made of
zinc, which is negatively charged. A carbon rod in
the middle of the battery is positively charged. If you
connect the zinc to the carbon with wiring attached to
the battery terminals and a device such as a lamp that
will use the transfer of current, then the electrons in
the zinc will move through the wire and lightbulb
into the carbon rod, thus converting chemical
energy into electrical energy.
A simple circuit
BULB
BATTERY
POSITIVE
TERMINAL
NEGATIVE
TERMINAL
BULB
BATTERY
An incomplete circuit


ELECTRICITY 23
.Forms of Electricity
Dry Batteries
Volta’s electric battery created
a current of electrons using metal
strips to connect a row of cups
containing lye in water. One end
of each metal strip was silver,
the other end was zinc. It was
a crude battery, but it worked.
Modern dry cells—commonly
called dry batteries—actually have
a moist paste, often manganese
dioxide, inside. Sizes AAA, AA,
C, and D batteries, the sizes
used in CD players, flashlights,
and other small devices, are
1.5-volt batteries.
Designed for on-and-off use,
dry batteries wear down quickly
if they are used continuously.
Some specially designed batteries
can be recharged by passing
an electric current through the
cells. Not all dry batteries can be recharged, though. A fire or
explosion could occur if you attempt to recharge the wrong
type of battery.
Wet Batteries
Wet-storage cells, such as a car battery, should not
be used too long without being recharged. If a car
radio or headlights are left on all night, you may find
the battery dead the next morning. The voltage and
the water supply in unsealed wet batteries should be
checked regularly and the area around the terminals
kept clean. Most modern car batteries are sealed and
require no maintenance, but true wet batteries can indeed
dry out. Top them off to the fill line with distilled water.
A new type of sealed battery is the gelled electrolyte or “gel
cell” battery, which provides a lot of current for its size, is easy
to recharge, and is relatively inexpensive. Gel cells are found
most often in emergency lighting systems in schools and stores.
TERMINALS
SEALANT
EXPANSION SPACE
PASTE
POROUS PAPER
CARDBOARD
ZINC
CARBON
A dry cell is designed for on-and-off use.


24 ELECTRICITY
Common Electrical Terms.
Common
Electrical Terms
To work with electricity, you need to know some common
terms for using and measuring it. Several important terms
are defined below.
alternating current. Current that regularly reverses direction,
traveling first in one direction and then in the opposite direction.
Power companies generate alternating current to make it easier
to transmit electricity over long distances. Abbreviated AC.
ammeter. An instrument for measuring current in amperes.
ampere. A unit measuring the strength of an electrical current,
based on the number of electrons transferring past a given
point per second. Many elements of a wiring system are rated in
amperes for the greatest amount of current they can safely carry.
The ampere, abbreviated amp, is named for French physicist
André-Marie Ampère.
circuit. A loop-shaped path through which
electric current travels from the source through
some device using electricity, such as a light-
bulb, and back to the source.
circuit breaker. A safety switch installed in
a circuit to break the transfer of electricity
when the current exceeds a set amount.
Circuit breakers can be reset once “tripped.”
See also fuse.
conductor. A substance or device through
which electricity passes. Most metals are
good conductors of electricity—that is, they
allow electricity to travel through them with


ELECTRICITY 25
.Common Electrical Terms
little resistance. Gold and silver are the best conductors of
electricity but are too expensive for general use. Copper, which
is relatively cheap and plentiful, is used most often, especially
in transmission lines that carry electricity from power plants to
homes, schools, and businesses. Devices that run on electricity
have copper or aluminum wiring. Aluminum is not as good a
conductor as copper, but because it is cheaper and lighter, it is
also frequently used.
current. The transfer of electricity in one direction.
cycle. One complete reversal of alternating current; a forward
current and backward current. Ordinary household current
experiences 60 cycles per second (60 hertz).
direct current. An electric current of constant direction—
that is, the transfer of electrons goes only in one direction.
Abbreviated DC.
fuse. A safety device installed in a circuit to prevent an over-
load. Designed to melt or “blow” when current exceeds a set
amount, it opens the circuit and stops the transfer of electricity.
Fuses cannot be reused once blown. See also circuit breaker.
galvanometer. A device that detects and
determines the strength of electrical currents.
ground. To connect any part of an electrical
wiring system to the ground or to another
conducting body, such as a metal water pipe
or a metal rod driven into the earth.
grounding wire. Conductor that grounds a
metal component but does not carry current
during normal operation.
hertz. A unit of frequency equal to one cycle
per second. Abbreviated Hz.
hot wire. Ungrounded conductor carrying
electrical current. Usually identified by black
or red insulation.
insulation. Covering of nonconducting material
used on wires.
insulator. A material that does not conduct electricity, such as
rubber or plastic.


26 ELECTRICITY
Common Electrical Terms.
kilowatt. Unit of electrical power
equal to 1,000 watts. Abbreviated kW.
kilowatt-hour. Unit of energy used
for metering and selling electricity.
One kilowatt-hour equals 1,000
watts used for one hour (or any
equivalent, such as 500 watts used
for two hours). Abbreviated kWh.
load. The part of an electrical
circuit that uses the electric power.
In a lighting circuit, the load is
the lightbulb.
neutral wire. Grounded conduc-
tor that completes a circuit by providing a return path to the
source. Always identified by white or gray insulation.
ohm. A unit of measurement for electrical resistance to a
current. It is named for German physicist Georg Simon Ohm
(1787–1854), whose Ohm’s law states that the pressure of
one volt will cause a current of one ampere to flow through a
resistance of one ohm (Voltage = Current × Resistance). This
simple formula shows the relationship between volts, amperes,
and resistance in any electric circuit. Abbreviated Ω.
outlet. An electrical device where
the switch can easily be connected
to a fixture or equipment that
uses electricity.
overload. Condition in which
an electrical circuit carries more
current than it can safely handle.
receptacle. The device that you
plug electric cords into, sometimes
called an outlet.
resistance. The opposition against
the free transfer of electrons in a
conductor. Measured in ohms.
resistor. A device designed to
restrict the transfer of current in
(or introduce resistance into) an
electric circuit.
Too many cords are plugged into this outlet.


ELECTRICITY 27
.Common Electrical Terms
rheostat. A resistor built so that the current traveling through
the circuit can be adjusted at will. Volume controls and dimmer
switches are examples.
short circuit. A completed, low-resistance circuit that allows
electrons to follow a shorter, unintended path back to the
power source rather than follow the longer path that goes
through the load. Occurs when bare wires touch each other;
often results from worn insulation.
source. Point of supply, such as a generator or battery.
switch. Device to break the transfer of electricity. When the
switch is on, the circuit is closed and current may travel through
it. When the switch is off, the circuit is open and electricity
cannot transfer.
volt. A unit of potential difference, or a unit of measurement of
electrical pressure or force. Abbreviated V.
voltage. Pressure at which a circuit operates, expressed in
volts. Voltage is like the pressure in a water pipe. For example,
120 volts have twice the pushing force of 60 volts.
voltmeter. An instrument for
measuring the difference in
electric potential (electrical
pressure) between two points.
watt. Unit that measures elec-
trical power at the point where
it is used in a circuit. One watt
of power equals one volt of
pressure times one ampere of
current. Many electrical devic-
es are rated in watts according
to the power they consume.
Abbreviated W.





ELECTRICITY 29
.Current in Motion
Current in Motion
Electricity is like an army division. Sitting still, it accomplishes
nothing. To get work done, the division must start moving.
Electricity marching along a wire is a valuable servant. We can
generate it, send it over wires for great distances, and control it.
Alternating and Direct Current
There are two kinds of electric current—direct current (DC)
and alternating current (AC). Direct current is like a one-way
street—the electrons go in only one direction. Turn on a flash-
light and direct current travels. Car batteries also produce
direct current.
In alternating current, the transfer of electrons starts from
zero and builds to a peak in the positive direction, then subsides
back down to zero. Then the transfer of electrons reverses, build-
ing to a negative peak and subsiding back to zero. In this way,
electrons alternately travel in positive and negative directions,
continuously repeating until the circuit is opened.
Large generators in power plants commonly produce
alternating current for use in homes and factories. Most house-
hold and industrial power circuits in the United States have
alternating currents with a frequency of 60 cycles per second,
or 60 hertz (Hz). This means that the current alternates back
and forth, making a round-trip, or cycle, 60 times per second. To
make 60 round-trips, the current changes direction 120 times.
Power systems in some other countries operate on a frequency
other than 60 Hz. Some appliances depend on the frequency of
the alternating current and will not work properly in countries
with different frequency electricity.
Using Alternating Current
Power companies prefer alternating current because it is readily
produced by large generators, and it is easy to step its voltage
up or down. By passing it through simple transformers, operators
can easily raise or lower the voltage of alternating current.
Power line
voltages are
extremely
dangerous. If you
see a downed
power line, do not
approach or
touch it. Contact
local authorities
and the local
power company
immediately.


30 ELECTRICITY
Current in Motion.
Transformers
do not affect
the power; they
merely raise or
lower the voltage
and current.
When stepped up to a higher voltage, alternating current
is easy to transport over long wires. When it arrives at its
destination, it is stepped down to moderate voltages. Alternating
current readily operates lights, motors, and electrical appliances.
Generators in most electric power plants operate at 13,800
volts or higher. Voltage is passed through transformers that step
up the voltage to 34,500 volts or higher. Transmission voltages
typically are 115,000, 138,000, and 230,000 volts (called high
voltage or HV), and 345,000, 500,000, and 765,000 volts (called
extra high voltage or EHV).
Transformers
You can raise or lower alternating current voltages by using a
transformer. As you raise the voltage, you lower the current in a
circuit. As you lower the voltage, you raise the current.
A transformer consists of a round or square iron core.
Insulated wire wound around one side of the core is called the
primary coil. Wire is also wound around the other side, but with
a different number of turns. This is called the secondary coil.
The more turns in the secondary coil, the greater the voltage.
Current is put through the primary coil, which induces
another current in the secondary coil. If the secondary coil has
more turns than the primary coil, the voltage is stepped up. If
the secondary coil has fewer turns than the primary coil, the
voltage is stepped down.
If mishandled, the electrical current in your house can be
dangerous. Do not tamper with power lines. The result
could be a fuse blowout, tripped circuit breaker, fire,
serious injury, or even death.
Here’s a definition of voltage classes provided by the
American National Standards Institute.
Low voltage. A class of nominal system voltages less
than 1,000 volts
Medium voltage. A class of nominal system voltages
equal to or greater than 1,000 volts and less than
100,000 volts
High voltage. A class of nominal system voltages
from 100,000 volts to 230,000 volts


ELECTRICITY 31
.Current in Motion
Using Direct Current
While most current produced by large generators is alternat-
ing current, direct current can be produced for special needs.
Alternating current can be changed to direct current by putting
it through a rectifier. You probably have noticed that many
small appliances and electronic devices have little black boxes
that plug into wall sockets. The black boxes contain voltage
transformers and, usually, rectifiers for changing house current
(AC) to direct current (DC).
Cars use direct current, as do radios and television sets.
Radios and TVs have diodes that act as rectifiers to change
the alternating current in your house to the direct current
they require. Other uses for direct current include flashlights,
electroplating, charging batteries, and separating aluminum
from ore.
A transformer basically
consists of an iron core
and two pieces of wire
wound around it. To
double the voltage,
put twice as many
windings on one side
as on the other. To cut
voltage in half, reverse
the connections.
COMING OUT
240 VOLTS
1 AMP
240 WATTS
GOING IN
240 VOLTS
1 AMP
240 WATTS
COMING OUT
120 VOLTS
2 AMPS
240 WATTS
GOING IN
120 VOLTS
2 AMPS
240 WATTS
Check Your Appliances
Before connecting new appliances or motors,
read the metal plate, known as the name plate,
that shows what kind of current to use. Some
motors and appliances may be wired for direct
current or take a voltage higher or lower than
the one available. Motors wired for one kind of current can be ruined by
connecting them to a different type of current. However, some small
motors are wired for both direct and alternating current and are so marked.


32 ELECTRICITY
Current in Motion.
Lightning rods are
grounded. Can
you explain why?
Insulators, Conductors, and Grounds
You know that conductors are materials that allow electricity
to travel easily through them. Insulators are substances like
glass, porcelain, plastic, and rubber that have high resistance
and do not carry ordinary current. You have seen rubber or
plastic insulation on wires attached to electronic devices and
household appliances. Porcelain and polymer insulators are
used on high-tension wires to keep the current from getting out
of line or running into the ground.
To ground an electrical system means to provide an
electrical path to the earth. Grounding assures that all metal
parts of a circuit that you might touch stay at zero voltage
because they are connected directly to the earth. In a car, the
metal frame is the ground. Wires connected to it are considered
grounded. The outer parts of the spark plugs are grounded to
the engine. One pole of a car battery is grounded to the frame.
High-tension wires have elaborate grounding systems in case
lightning strikes them, which often happens.
It is crucial to realize that electricity will travel in con-
ductors other than wires. It can travel through any conducting
body—including a human body like your own. Make sure
electricity does not use you as a conductor on its way to the
ground. Water is a good conductor of electricity, so never turn
on a light, a radio, or an appliance such as a hair dryer while
standing in water—not even on a damp floor.
Electric Motors
Generators and motors are devices that demonstrate the chang-
ing of energy between mechanical and electrical. Generators,
like portable gasoline generators, take mechanical motion and
transfer it to electrical energy, while motors convert electrical
input to mechanical motion like turning a fan.
How an Electric Motor Works
A simple electric motor is little more than a spinning magnet.
From your earlier work with magnets, you will remember that
NEVER work on any live electrical
circuit, fixture, or appliance.
The shock could kill you.


ELECTRICITY 33
.Current in Motion
a movable magnet, such as a magnet on a string, swings around
because its north pole is repelled and its south pole is attracted
by the north pole of a nearby fixed magnet. It will stop turning
when its south pole is nearest the north pole of the fixed magnet.
Now, suppose that just as the south pole of the movable
magnet nears the north pole of the fixed magnet, we could
somehow reverse its magnetic poles. Then it would keep moving
for another half turn. If we could change its poles every half
turn, the moving magnet would spin around and around.
We cannot reverse the magnet’s poles, but we can achieve
the same results. In place of a movable bar magnet, we can use
a coil of wire wrapped around a core—an electromagnet—that
spins. Like a bar magnet, it has north and south poles, but its
poles can be instantly changed by reversing the current in the
wire. Every time the circuit is opened and closed (once every
half turn), the current reverses its direction. This is done auto-
matically as the coil of wire spins around.
FIELDS, ARMATURES, AND COMMUTATORS
Substitute another electromagnet for the fixed bar magnet,
shaped to fit around the spinning coil, and you have a simple
direct-current motor. The fixed electromagnet is called the field.
The spinning electromagnet is called the armature. The arrange-
ment for opening and closing the circuit is the commutator.
Make a Motor
You can build a motor by following the steps below.
Materials Needed
Screwdriver
Wood base
(about 12-by-
4-by-1/2 inches)
Four small screws
Two metal L brack-
ets (about 1 1/2-by-
1 1/2-by-1/2 inches)
Hammer and nail
Piece of cork (3 to
4 inches long)
Two pieces of thin
insulated copper
wire (bell wire)
Sturdy, thin
wooden or plastic
dowel (about 10
inches long)
Electrical tape
Battery (C, 6V,
or 9V)
Rubber band
Four to six small
stick magnets
Wire stripper


34 ELECTRICITY
Current in Motion.
INSTRUCTIONS
Step 1—With a screwdriver,
attach the L brackets to the wood
base. Be sure the brackets are
spaced far apart enough to allow
room for the dowel to fit through
the two holes at the top, and for
the cork-dowel assembly to spin
freely. About 1 inch of the dowel
should reach past each support.
Step 2—Use the hammer and
nail to punch a hole in the cork
crosswise, as shown. Be sure the
hole is large enough for the
dowel and wire to pass through.
With the cork in place, the dowel
must be clear of the wood base
and be able to turn freely in its
support.
Step 3—Cut a piece of the
insulated wire about 60 inches
long, and wrap it around the cork
about 15 to 20 times. Do not cover
the holes in the cork or cut the
wire—use one continuous length
of wire. (The more wraps there
are, the “stronger” the motor will be.) Leave several inches for
leads on each end of the wire, and pass both ends through the
hole in the cork.
Step 4—Using the wire stripper, remove about a half-inch of
insulation from both ends of the wire. Insert the dowel in the
cork. Tape the leads of the wire to opposite sides of the dowel,
as shown. Do not let the stripped ends touch each other or
cover them with tape.
TAPE
HOLEWIRE WRAPPED
AROUND CORK
HOLE
STRIPPED WIRE
STRIPPED WIRE


ELECTRICITY 35
.Current in Motion
Step 5—Screw two more screws
into the wood base, as shown,
but leave enough space between
the screw and base to wrap wire
around it once. Cut a piece of wire
about 12 inches long. Remove
about a half-inch of insulation from
both ends of the wire. Wrap the
wire across the top and bottom of
a C battery, as shown, and secure
in place using a rubber band. Then
wrap each end of the wire once
around the screws, and position
the ends against the dowel, on
opposite sides, so that the ends
connect with the bare wire
mounted on the dowel.
Step 6—Position the magnets as
shown, close to the connections.
Give the dowel a spin with your
fingers. The motor should now
spin on its own. If it doesn’t work,
you may need to move the mag-
nets slightly back and forth to find
the “sweet” spot. Then try again, moving the magnets slightly
back and forth, up and down, until the motor starts spinning.
MAGNETS
WRAP WIRE
ONCE AROUND SCREWS
WRAP WIRE AROUND BOTH ENDS OF
BATTERY, RUBBER BAND HOLDS WIRES
IN PLACE
POSITION ENDS TO
CONNECT WITH MOUNTED
WIRES ON DOWEL ON
BOTH SIDES
SPIN DOWEL
CONNECTORS
6V
BATTERY
If you are using a 6V
battery, connect the
wires to the terminals,
as shown here. The
same concept applies
for a 9V battery, but you
will need to use a rubber
band to secure the wire
to the battery for a
good connection.


36 ELECTRICITY
Current in Motion.
Rheostat
A rheostat is a simple device used to control the electrical current
in a circuit by inserting a length of high-resistance wire or other
resistive material. The resistance of a rheostat is measured in
ohms and determined by the size and length of the resistive wire.
Rheostats are used as volume controls in radios and television
sets. They are also used in dimmer switches to control the inten-
sity of lighting in a room. You have probably seen a dimmer
switch used in a theater or auditorium to brighten or dim the
lights gradually. A rheostat might also be used to slow down or
speed up a model electric train.
Make a Rheostat
You can make your own rheostat by following these instructions.
Materials Needed
Flashlight battery
Flashlight bulb
Full length of pencil lead
from a mechanical pencil
Thin copper wire
Transparent tape
It is important to remember three rules about resistance:
• A thin wire offers more resistance than a thick one.
Just as it is harder to force water through a small
pipe than through a big pipe, it is more difficult for
electricity to travel through a small wire than a
larger one.
• A long wire offers more resistance than a short one,
just as a long pipe slows the flow of water.
• Electricity tends to seek the path of least resistance.
Pencil lead makes a good rheostat because it is not a
good conductor of electricity. The greater the distance
between the battery and the bulb, the weaker the
current becomes. A rheostat is a variable resistor used
to control current.


ELECTRICITY 37
.Current in Motion
INSTRUCTIONS
Step 1—Attach the wire to the top of
the battery.
Step 2—Twist the other end of
the wire around the metal side of
the lightbulb.
Step 3—Holding the lightbulb by its
glass end, touch the metal bottom of
the bulb to the lead close to the battery
as shown. The bulb will burn brightly.
Step 4—Gradually slide the bulb down
the length of the lead. The bulb will
slowly grow dimmer as it is moved
away from the battery.


38 ELECTRICITY
Current in Motion.
Fuses and Circuit Breakers
Electric current comes into your home
on overhead or underground wires.
From your electrical meter, heavy,
well-insulated wires run to a main dis-
tribution center or breaker box, where
the main disconnect switch is located. If necessary, you can use
that switch to shut off all electric current in your house.
The fuse box or circuit breaker panel is typically located
in a utility room, in an electric room, in a mechanical room,
or near the main power feed to the building. Fuses and cir-
cuit breakers act as guards: They prevent currents that are too
strong from traveling into your home’s branch circuits. If the
transfer of electricity becomes greater than a fuse is designed
to handle, the metal element inside the fuse melts and the fuse
Dos
• Employ professional, licensed electricians
for major electrical work.
• Promptly replace worn cords and defective plugs.
• Open the main disconnect before replacing fuses.
• Keep electrical cords where people will not trip over them.
Don’ts
• Don’t plug in too many appliances or devices into one outlet or
one circuit. The overload may blow a fuse, trip a circuit breaker,
or start a fire.
• Don’t pull out cords by the wire. Take firm hold of the plug instead.
• Never touch electrical devices while in the tub or while touching
faucets, water pipes, or radiators.
• Don’t let Christmas tree lights touch the needles of the tree.
• Never leave Christmas tree lights burning if you are not home.
• Never work on any live electrical circuit, fixture, or appliance.
• Don’t replace a blown fuse with one that has a higher ampere rating.
• Never stand on a damp floor when replacing fuses or handling
electrical devices.
• Don’t operate fans or heaters where small children can reach them,
and don’t leave these appliances running unattended.
Keep extra
fuses handy.


ELECTRICITY 39
.Current in Motion
blows, or burns out. A circuit breaker
automatically opens and “trips”
the circuit.
Every time you switch on another
light or appliance, more current travels
through that branch circuit. The wire
is heavy enough to carry amperes
for normal use. If there are too many
amperes, the wires may get hot and
start a fire unless a fuse or circuit
breaker protects the line.
If a fuse is designed to carry up
to 15 amperes, for example, and you
try to consume 25 amperes from that
line, the fuse blows, the lights go out, and you know you have
overloaded the circuit. First, correct the problem so you will
not overload the circuit again. If you have too many appliances
plugged into one outlet or one circuit, unplug them. Toasters,
coffeemakers, irons, and heaters can use a lot of current. They
frequently are the culprits.
Short Circuits
One common cause for a blown fuse or tripped circuit breaker
is a defective or frayed cord. Insulation wears off and the bare
wires short-circuit. A flash of light and a smell of burning
insulation indicate a short circuit. In a short circuit, electrons
can follow a shorter, unintended path back to the power source
rather than the longer path that goes through the appliance
or other device using electricity. Since the current suddenly
encounters lower resistance, more current transfers, and that
blows a fuse or trips the circuit breaker.
Some circuit breakers used in homes are the push-push
type; others have a handle that must be pushed to the off
position before the breaker can be reset to the on position.
Follow the instructions on your home’s circuit breaker panel
to properly reset whatever type you have.
Fuse Boxes
Fuse boxes have not been used in home or business construc-
tion for many years. However, you might encounter a fuse
box in an older building. In a fuse box, there will be several
fuses. Before you replace one, open the main disconnect for
When a fuse
blows or a circuit
breaker opens a
line because of
excessive current,
you must first
correct the cause
of the problem.
Then replace the
fuse or reset the
circuit breaker.


40 ELECTRICITY
Current in Motion.
safety. The blown fuse probably will look black or show a gap.
Unscrew the burned one and replace it. If you can’t tell which
fuse is blown, check each one. Each fuse is marked to show
how many amperes it will carry. Never use a fuse of higher
amperage than the one you take out—it could start a fire.
Series and Parallel Circuits
In a series circuit, electric current travels along a single path,
going through each component or device. If one component is
removed or fails (as when a series-wired Christmas tree bulb
burns out), the circuit is broken and electric
current stops.
In a parallel circuit, each component or
device is connected to the power source on
its own branch of the main circuit. Even if
one bulb in a parallel circuit burns out or is
removed, the other bulbs continue to work
because each has its own complete circuit.
The wiring in a house is arranged on parallel
circuits. If you switch off one device, the
others still work.
Switches
A single-pole, single-throw switch is commonly used to turn
on electric lights and many other devices. It also is one of the
easiest electrical items you can make for a home experiment.
It is simply a strip of metal that swings, making contact with
a round-headed screw. A metal washer at the fixed end of the
switch is suggested.
Electric Bell
For part of requirement 5, you will need to draw a simple
electric bell to show how it works. Look at the drawing of the
electric bell on the following page.
Damp floors can be a shock hazard. If a room in your
home has a damp floor, power should be disconnected
and the problem fixed before returning electric power
to the room.


ELECTRICITY 41
.Current in Motion
First, follow the path the current takes. When you push the
button, the current goes through terminal A to the electromag-
net F. From there it goes to a moving contact, C, then to contact
post D, and out terminal E.
How does the current cause the bell to ring? As you push
the button, the electromagnet F attracts a small piece of iron
(the armature), B. Attached to the armature are contact C and
a hammer, H. The hammer hits the gong. As the armature is
pulled to the magnet, it pulls the contact away from post D and
the current stops—the circuit is broken. Thus, the electromagnet
loses its power and the spring G snaps the armature and contact
C back to post D. As contact C touches the post, the current
starts transferring again and the entire process is repeated. This
will happen several hundred times per minute, creating the
sound of a ringing bell or vibrating gong.
Stairways often
have lights that
can be controlled
by switches at
both the top and
bottom of the stairs.
This requires
a single-pole,
double-throw—
or three-way—
switch in
each position.
BUTTON
GONG OR
BELL
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
Single-pole,
single-throw switch
Single-pole,
double-throw switch
An electric vibrating bell. A and
E are terminals. B is the iron
armature, C the moving contact,
D the contact post, F the
electromagnet, G the return
spring, and H the hammer.


42 ELECTRICITY
Current in Motion.
Connect a Model Train to a House Circuit
If you choose requirement 11e, you must show how to safely
hook up a model electric train layout to a house circuit. You
should know several things about your electrical power supply
before you plug in the electric train transformer or attempt to
operate your electric train.
Never connect your train directly to an electrical outlet.
Always use an electric train transformer, which changes the
higher voltage electric power (usually 115 to 120 volts) found in
your home to the low voltage required for operating toy trains
(from 8 to 18 volts).
The transformer cord is plugged into any convenient wall
outlet. Low voltage is then obtained from the binding posts on
top or in back of the transformer.
Remember that household lines in different countries might
not be alike. Make certain that the voltage and frequency
(cycles) of your electric power supply correspond to the rating
of the transformer. If you have any doubt, ask the local
electric company.
Do not plug your transformer into direct current (DC) as
it will burn out immediately and may cause a fire hazard.
Most regions of the United States and Canada have alternating
current (AC). DC in household current is rare.


ELECTRICITY 43
.Current in Motion
Electrical Safety Inspection
For requirement 2, you will
need to complete an electri-
cal safety inspection of your
home. Here are some items you can check
in your home today to ensure electrical
safety. These tips come from the Electrical
Safety Foundation International and can be
found at www.esfi.org.
Make an electrical safety checklist and
walk through each room of your house,
checking on each aspect of electrical safety.
You can go over your list with your coun-
selor later and discuss what you found.
Outlets. Check for outlets that have loose-fitting plugs, which can
overheat and lead to fire. Have an adult replace any missing or broken
wall plates. Make sure there are safety covers over unused outlets that
are accessible to children.
Cords. Make sure cords are in good condition and not frayed or cracked.
Make sure they are placed out of traffic areas where people can trip
over them or small children can reach them. Cords should never be
nailed or stapled to the wall, baseboard, or another object. Do not place
cords under carpets or rugs or put furniture on top of them.
Extension Cords. Check to see that cords are not overloaded. Extension
cords should be used on a temporary basis; they are not intended as
permanent household wiring. Make sure extension cords have safety
closures to help prevent small children
from electrical burns on their mouths and
other injuries.
Plugs. Make sure your plugs fit your out-
lets. Never remove the ground pin (the
third prong) or try to make a three-prong
plug fit into a two-conductor outlet. This
could lead to an electrical fire. Never force
a plug into an outlet if it does not fit. Plugs
should fit securely into outlets. Avoid over-
loading outlets with too many appliances.


44 ELECTRICITY
Current in Motion.
Ground Fault Circuit Interrupters (GFCIs). GFCIs can
help prevent electrocution. They should be used in any
area where water and electricity may come into con-
tact. When a GFCI senses current leakage, it assumes
a ground fault has occurred. It then interrupts power
fast enough to reduce the chance of serious injury from
electrical shock. Test GFCIs frequently according to the
manufacturer’s instructions and after major electrical
storms to make sure they work properly.
Lightbulbs. Check the wattage of all lightbulbs in light
fixtures to make sure they are the correct wattage
for the rating of the fixture and any interconnecting
wires. Replace bulbs that have a higher wattage than
recommended. If you do not know the correct size,
check with the manufacturer of the device. Make
sure bulbs are screwed in securely; loose bulbs
can overheat.
Circuit Breakers/Fuses. Circuit breakers and fuses
should have the correct size current rating for the
circuit wiring and intended purpose. If you do not
know the correct rating, have an electrician identify
and label the rating to be used. Always replace a fuse
with one of the same rating. Make sure everyone in
your family knows where the main breaker is located
and how to shut off power to your entire house in
case of emergency.
Plug-In Appliances. Check to make
sure plug-in appliances such as
hair dryers are not left plugged
in where they can come into
contact with water. If a plug-in
appliance falls into water, NEVER reach in to pull
it out, even if it is turned off. First, turn off the
power source at the fuse box or breaker panel,
and then unplug the appliance. If you have an
appliance that has gotten wet, do not use it until it
has been checked by a qualified repair person.
Underwriters
Laboratories
Inc. (UL) is an
independent, not-
for-profit product
safety testing
and certification
organization.
A UL label or
stamp (above)
means that the
product meets
nationally
recognized safety
standards. Look
for this label
when purchasing
any electrical
products.


ELECTRICITY 45
.Current in Motion
Appliances. If any appliance repeatedly blows a fuse or trips a circuit
breaker, or if it has given you an electric shock, unplug it and have it
repaired or replaced.
Entertainment/Computer Equipment. Check to see that the equipment
is in good condition and working properly. Look for cracks or damage in
wiring, plugs, and connectors. Always use a surge protector bearing the
seal of a nationally recognized certification agency to protect your elec-
tronic devices from unexpected bursts of voltage that could otherwise
cause damage.
Outdoor Safety. Electric lawn mowers and electric power tools should
not be used in rain, on wet grass, or in wet conditions. Inspect power
tools and electric lawn mowers before each use for frayed power cords,
broken plugs, and cracked or broken housings. If a tool is damaged, stop
using it immediately. Repair or replace it. Always use an extension cord
marked for outdoor use and rated for the power needs of your tools.
Unplug all portable power tools when not in use. When using ladders,
stay away from overhead wires and power lines. Making contact with
power lines can cause serious injury or death.
Lightning. During electrical storms, do not use appliances such as hair
dryers, toasters, radios, or telephones, except in an emergency. Do not
take a bath or shower. Keep batteries on hand for flashlights in case of
power outages. Use surge protectors on electronic devices, appliances,
telephones, faxes, and modems. The best protection is to unplug electri-
cal equipment during an electrical storm.
Space Heaters. Space heaters are meant to supply supplemental heat.
Keep space heaters at least 3 feet away from combustible materials such
as bedding, clothing, draperies, furniture, or rugs. Do not use them in
rooms where children are unsupervised. Turn off and unplug space heaters
when they are not in use. Do not use space heaters with extension cords.
Plug the heater directly into an outlet of a relatively unburdened circuit.
Halogen Floor Lamps. Halogen floor lamps operate at much higher tem-
peratures than standard incandescent lightbulbs. Never place a halogen
floor lamp where it can come into contact with drapes, clothing, or
other combustible materials. Be sure to turn the lamp off when you
leave the room and never use these types of lamps in children’s rooms
or playrooms. Consider cooler fluorescent floor lamps.


46 ELECTRICITY
Current in Motion.
Electrical Floor Plan of a Room
For requirement 8, you will need to draw a simple floor plan
of a room in your house with lights, switches, and electrical
outlets penciled in.
First, make a drawing that shows
the outlines of a room in your house.
Then use the electrical wiring symbols
to draw in the overhead and wall lights
and to show where electric switches
and electrical outlets are located.
Next, ask a parent or guardian to go
to the main breaker box and turn off the
circuit that supplies power to the room
you have chosen. Turn on the lights in
the room before the adult flips off the circuit breaker. If there
is more than one circuit breaker that corresponds to the room,
note which breaker supplies power to what outlets, lights, and
switches by checking them while the power is off.
To the side of your room drawing, make a box and high-
light the circuit breakers that supply power to the room. Briefly
note which breaker supplies power to the various electrical
devices in the room. You may also want to note the size fuse or
fuses with which the room operates. Ask a parent to check the
fuse size at the breaker box.


ELECTRICITY 47
.Current in Motion
Ceiling outlet
Floor outlet
Two-wire cable or raceway
Three-wire cable or raceway
Four-wire cable or raceway
Push button
Buzzer
Bell
Ground connection
Chime (also CH )
MotorM
Junction box
J
Single-pole switch
Double-pole switch
Three-way switch
Galvanometer
Resistor
Single-pole,
single-throw switch
One-cell battery
Multicell battery
Bulb
Bulb in bulb holder
AmmeterAM
VoltmeterVM
Electrical Wiring Symbols
G
S2
S3
S1 OR S


48 ELECTRICITY
Current in Motion.
How to Read an Electric Meter
A watt-hour is a unit of energy. Electric companies charge
their customers on the basis of kilowatt-hours (kWh) used. Kilo
is the Greek word for one thousand. Thus, a kilowatt-hour is
1,000 watt-hours. One kilowatt-hour equals 1,000 watts used
for one hour (or any equivalent, such as 500 watts used for two
hours). The electric meter at your house measures kilowatt-
hours; an electric bill shows the cost of the number of kilowatt-
hours used in a given period of time.
As part of requirement 9, you must learn how to read
an electric meter. Locate the electric meter at your home or
apartment. It will be either the digital display type or a
traditional dial meter.
If you have a dial meter, it is not hard to learn how to
read it. Reading the dials from left to right, simply write down
the figure that the hands or pointers have just passed. When a
pointer is between two numbers, you always write down the
smaller number. If the pointer is exactly on a number, write
down that number.
A watt is a unit
of power that
measures
electrical power
flowing through
a circuit. It was
named for James
Watt (1736–1819),
a Scottish
inventor who
perfected the
steam engine.


ELECTRICITY 49
.Current in Motion
When a pointer on
any of the meter
dials is between
two figures,
always note the
smaller number.
If you are not
sure a pointer has
passed a figure,
see if the pointer
to the right has
passed zero.
Reading a Meter
Beginning with the left-hand dial in the illustration
that follows, notice that the last figure passed by
the pointer is 1. On the next dial, the pointer has
passed 7. (Some of the dials read clockwise, others
read counterclockwise. The pointer on this dial goes
counterclockwise.) The third dial has passed 5. On the
fourth dial, the pointer is between 9 and 0. Consider 9
in this case to be smaller than 0 because the 0 is really
a 10. Also, you always write down the number the
pointer has just passed, not the number it is moving
toward. The final pointer is exactly on 2. The meter
reading is 17592.
To find out how many kilowatt-hours you used
at your house in one month, subtract last month’s
reading, which can be found on your last electric bill,
from this month’s reading. For example:
Dial A B C D E
Present reading 1 7 5 9 2
Last month’s reading 1 6 6 0 2
Kilowatt-hours used 9 9 0
To figure out your electric consumption during any
period of time, simply subtract the reading taken at
the beginning of the period from the reading taken
at the end of the period.
A B C D E


50 ELECTRICITY
Current in Motion.
Determining the Cost of Electricity
To figure out how much your electricity bill will be, you must
know how much your electric company charges per kilowatt-
hour. You can find this out by looking at your family’s electric
bills. If the bill does not show a price per kilowatt-hour, you
can get a close estimate by dividing the amount of the bill by
the kilowatt-hours used.
For example, an electric bill of $124.32 divided by
1,110 kWh works out to $0.112 (slightly more than 11 cents)
per kilowatt-hour. If your electric company charges 11 cents
per kilowatt-hour, the bill for 990 kWh (in the earlier meter-
reading example) would be 990 x 0.11 = $108.90.
Note that the dials give readings in multiples of 10. The dial
farthest to the right shows kilowatt-hours in single digits, the
next dial in tens, the next dial in hundreds, then thousands,
and the leftmost dial in ten thousands.
As you saw earlier, the hands on the dials of a meter turn
either clockwise or counterclockwise. The pointer on the dial
to the right must make a complete revolution, that is, reach
zero, before the pointer on the next dial will move one space,
and so on.


ELECTRICITY 51
.Current in Motion
Conserve Energy, Reduce, Use
Consider how your family could conserve energy and reduce
your electric bill, then share your thoughts with your counselor.
The five keys to good energy management are:
1. Know your electric utility rates.
2. Know how much energy you are using.
3. Know where you are using the energy.
4. Know when you are using the energy.
5. Implement simple energy-management techniques.
Here are some ideas.
Turn off lights and electronic equipment after use. Set
the air conditioner at 78 degrees during summer months and
the furnace at 68 degrees in winter. If you are too cold or too
warm, layer your clothing up or down accordingly. Turn off the
heat and open windows on days when the temperature is over
65 degrees. On cool summer days, turn off the air conditioner.
Clean or replace heating and air-conditioning filters
at least once a month. Filters clogged with dust and air
pollutants make air-conditioning and heating your home
less efficient.
Install low-voltage outside lights. Installing 7-volt lights on
the exterior of your home will save you money.
Do full loads of laundry. You can conserve water and electricity
and lower your electric costs by washing only full loads of laundry.
Grill food outside. Using an outdoor grill in good weather will
minimize use of the electric oven and stovetop.





ELECTRICITY 53
.Responding to Electrical Emergencies
Responding to
Electrical Emergencies
Electrical outlets and wires pose the greatest danger to young
children. Preschoolers love to insert hairpins, paper clips, and
any number of other conductive objects into electrical sockets.
Toddlers often explore electrical outlets and wires by mouthing
them. Since water is an excellent conductor of electricity, there
is a danger of severe facial burns.
When not in use, electrical outlets should have protec-
tive guards plugged into them or be hidden and hard to reach
behind furniture.
Electric Shock
Electric shock is caused by electric current passing through a
human body. The victim’s breathing may stop and the person’s
body may appear stiff. The electric contact must be broken as
quickly as possible.
If someone is in contact with a live circuit, do not touch
the person. You can become “stuck” to the person and part of
the electrical field. If the service panel is nearby, quickly shut
off the house current by throwing the main disconnect switch.
If it is a long way to the service panel, or you do not know
where the main disconnect switch is, use a nonconducting
object such as a wooden chair, wooden broom handle, rug, or
rubber doormat to separate the person from the live wire. Never
use a metal or wet object.
Under no circumstances should you ever
touch a victim or an electric wire with
your bare hands while the person is still
in contact with the electrical source.


54 ELECTRICITY
Responding to Electrical Emergencies.
If you can’t separate the victim from the wire using
something like a broom handle, make sure you are standing on
a perfectly dry surface and use a dry towel, sheet, sweater, or
other heavy cloth to encircle the wire where it is not wet
or bare. Pull the wire from the victim. Never directly touch
the wire or the victim. Don’t touch grounded objects like
pipes under a sink.
If you can’t remove the wire, your final alternative is to
use a cloth to pull the victim from the wire. Without touching
the person, carefully loop a sweater or other piece of clothing
around the victim, and grasping the ends of the clothing, pull
the person away. You might have to pull some distance before
breaking contact with the wire. Do not touch the victim directly
until the victim and the wire are separated.
If the person is not breathing after the rescue, start artificial
respiration immediately. Call 911 for medical assistance.
Keep in mind that both water
and metals can conduct
electricity. If you are trying to
rescue a person touching a live
wire, stand on something dry
and nonconducting like a rubber
mat or wooden stool.
High-Voltage Power Lines
Rescuing a person in contact with a live
power line outdoors is extremely dan-
gerous and should not be attempted by
a Scout. Call 911 immediately and let
the fire department and police handle
that type of emergency. Also, do not get within 20 feet
of someone who is being electrocuted by high-voltage
electrical current until the power is turned off and a
utility or safety worker declares the area safe.


ELECTRICITY 55
.Responding to Electrical Emergencies
Treating Burns
Unless there is immediate danger, do not move a victim of
electrical injury. Do not apply ice, butter, ointments, medication,
bandages, or cotton dressings to electrical burns. Do not touch
burns, break blisters, or remove burned clothing. Electric shock
causes burns inside the body, so immediately seek medical
attention for the victim.
Once you and the victim are securely away from the
electrical source, check the person’s wrist and jugular vein
in the neck for a pulse. If the victim is not breathing, start
artificial respiration right away.


56 ELECTRICITY
Responding to Electrical Emergencies.
Life-Threatening Emergencies
The correct first aid given quickly can save a life. A person who
has stopped breathing must receive rescue breathing within
three to five minutes or brain damage will occur. People who
may need lifesaving first aid include victims of lightning strikes.
After calling for help, assess the situation to decide what you
should do and in which order.
An easy way to recall the order of treatment in a
life-threatening emergency is A-B-C-D: Airway, Breathing,
Circulation, and Defibrillation.
A is for airway. The airway is the passage that allows air enter-
ing the mouth or nose to reach the lungs. Always protect the
airway of any accident victim. If the person begins to vomit,
turn the victim onto the side so that the vomit comes out of the
mouth and is not aspirated (inhaled) into the lungs.
If a victim is unconscious, carefully place the person on
their back, protecting the head
and neck if you must roll the
person over. Then, open the
airway by pressing (or tilting) on
the forehead with one hand and
lifting the chin with the other to
tilt back the head. This action will
keep the tongue from blocking
the person’s airway.
B is for breathing. After
opening the victim’s airway, check to see if the person can
breathe normally. Place your cheek in front of the victim’s
mouth (about 1 to 2 inches away). Look, listen, and feel for
movement and breathing (signals of circulation, or “signs of
life”) for no more than 10 seconds. If the person is breathing
effectively, you will feel and hear the airflow on your cheek and
see and feel the chest rising and falling at regular intervals. If
there is no breathing or movement; give two rescue breaths, then
begin cardiopulmonary resuscitation.
Find out if the person is conscious. Tap the person on the shoulder to
see if there is a response. Ask, “Are you OK?” If there is no response, the
person is unconscious. Call or send for medical help.
If opening the
airway restores
breathing, place
the victim in a
recovery position.
Continue to moni-
tor the person’s
breathing until
help arrives.
Always use a
breathing barrier
when performing
rescue breathing.


ELECTRICITY 57
.Responding to Electrical Emergencies
Once you have opened the airway, check for
movement and breathing for no more than 10 sec-
onds. If the person still is not breathing, give two
rescue breaths.
Step 1—Place a CPR breathing barrier over the
victim’s mouth. That may protect both of you from
orally transmitted diseases.
Step 2—Give two rescue breaths. While maintain-
ing the head-tilt, pinch the nostrils, seal your mouth
over the victim’s mouth and blow into it to fill the
person’s lungs. (For an infant, seal your mouth over
both the mouth and nose, then breathe gently.)
Each breath should last about 1 second. Watch to
see if the chest clearly rises. Remove your mouth
and then give another rescue breath.
Step 3—For a child or an infant, after two
rescue breaths, check for a pulse for no more than
10 seconds. If there is still no breathing, begin
rescue breathing (1 breath about every 3 seconds)
and recheck for breathing and pulse every 2 minutes
as long as there is a pulse but no breathing. For an
adult, after two rescue breaths, begin CPR immedi-
ately if the victim does not resume breathing.
C is for circulation. Signals of circulation mean that the heart
is still beating and circulating blood through the body. Normal
breathing and movement are signals of life and that there is
a heartbeat. In the case of young children (under age 12) and
infants, feeling for a pulse for no more than 10 seconds can also
be performed. If there are no signals that the heart is beating,
begin CPR immediately.
Accidents or medical conditions that cause a person to stop
breathing can also stop the heart. If the heart is not pumping
and circulating blood through the body, the victim will not be
breathing, moving, or making normal sounds. If you have
delivered two rescue breaths and the victim does not begin
to breathe, you should perform cardiopulmonary resuscitation,
or CPR, immediately.
If the victim
revives, put
the person in a
recovery posi-
tion and treat for
shock. Monitor
the person to
make sure
breathing does
not stop again.


58 ELECTRICITY
Learning CPR requires careful instruction from a certified
teacher. Perhaps you can practice CPR at Scout meetings. The
American Red Cross and American Heart Association offer
classes, too. Your Scout leaders can help you find training to
learn this lifesaving skill.
D is for defibrillation. The heart is made up of many muscle
fibers that usually contract and relax in unison to pump blood.
During a heart attack, those muscle fibers do not work together.
A heart attack can lead to what is known as “cardiac arrest.”
Another cause of cardiac arrest is an abnormal electrical heart
rhythm, most commonly known as ventricular fibrillation.
A machine called a defibrillator can send an electrical
shock through the heart to momentarily stop all electrical activ-
ity. This pause gives the heart enough time to try to restore an
effective heartbeat (rhythm). A person whose heart has stopped
functioning can be treated with this special device, if one is
available. Ideally, this should happen within several minutes
of the victim’s collapse.
Most ambulances, hospitals, and emergency care facilities are
equipped with defibrillators for use by trained medical personnel.
Because a defibrillator must be used quickly (within several min-
utes) to save a person’s life, a new type of defibrillator called an
automated external defibrillator (AED) has been developed. Many
first responders such as police officers and firefighters carry and
are trained in the use of AEDs.
An AED is computerized. It can check a person’s heart
rhythm and recognize a rhythm that requires a shock. It can
also advise the rescuer when a shock is needed.
AEDs are very accurate and easy to use. With only a few
hours of training, you can learn how to operate an AED safely
and effectively.
While the tech-
niques for CPR
are different for
adults, children,
and infants, the
cycle of 30 chest
compressions
followed by two
rescue breaths
applies to every-
one. To receive full
and proper CPR
training, contact
your American
Red Cross chapter
or the American
Heart Association.
See the resources
section in the
back for more
information.
Adult Child (one or two hands) Infant (two or
three fingers)


ELECTRICITY 59
.Responding to Electrical Emergencies
You may need to
turn a person who
has been in a
recovery position
for 30 minutes
or longer to the
opposite side
to stimulate
circulation.
However, do not
move a person
with suspected
spinal injury
unless it is
absolutely
necessary.
Recovery Position
Place a victim who is unconscious but who is breathing normally in a
recovery position. Extend the person’s lower arm in line with their body;
support the head and neck as you grasp the victim’s hip and shoulder, and
roll the victim toward you so that the person is lying on the side. This will
prevent the person from choking on saliva, blood (from a bitten tongue),
or vomit, and will help keep the airway open. Continue to monitor the
person’s breathing until medical help arrives.
Recovery position for
a person who does
not have a suspected
spinal injury
Recovery position for
a person who may
have a spinal injury
Many public places such as airports and shopping malls now have installed
AEDs in clearly marked, designated areas much the same way that fire
extinguishers are made readily available for access in an emergency.


60 ELECTRICITY
Responding to Electrical Emergencies.
Bathroom Injuries
In the case of an electrical injury in the bathroom, be especially
careful. It is best to throw the main disconnect switch and call
911. There are many grounded objects in a bathroom. The floor
is often wet, and it might be difficult to get the victim away from
the wire in the small, enclosed space of a typical bathroom.
Electrical Fire
Electrical fires are different from other fires. Because water
conducts electricity, you should never throw water on an
electrical fire. Here is what Southern California Edison
suggests you do in the event of electrical fire.
• Never use water on an electrical fire.
• Turn off the main power to the house.
• If the fire cannot be safely put out, leave the house
immediately and take everyone with you.
• Call 911 from the nearest phone once you and your
family are safely away from your home.
If the fire can be safely put out, tell an adult to use a proper chemical fire extinguisher.


ELECTRICITY 61
.Responding to Electrical Emergencies
Electrical Storm
The draw of an open wilderness is powerful, but so are lightning
strikes that are possible during an electrical storm. If caught in
the outdoors and there is no safe shelter nearby, avoid open
fields; the tops of hills, ridges, and mountains; bodies of water;
and the bases of tall, isolated trees and other tall objects, such
as flagpoles. If you are in a forest, stay near a lower stand of
trees. Avoid wet items, such as ropes, and metal objects, such
as fences and poles. Be aware that tents offer no protection
from lightning.
The best thing to do when a storm approaches is to seek shelter
in a safe building or vehicle. A safe building is one that is fully
enclosed with a roof, walls, and floor and has plumbing or wiring.
A safe vehicle is one that is fully enclosed with a metal top.


62 ELECTRICITY
Electricity Resources.
Scouting Literature
Deck of First Aid; Chemistry, Electronics,
Energy, Engineering, First Aid,
Home Repairs, Inventing, Lifesaving,
Nuclear Science, and Safety merit
badge pamphlets
Books
Asimov, Isaac. The Kite That Won
the Revolution. Houghton Mifflin
Company, 2000.
Bartholomew, Alan. Electric Gadgets and
Gizmos. Kids Can Press, 1998.
Billings, Charlene W. Superconductivity:
From Discovery to Breakthrough.
Cobblehill Books; Dutton, 1991.
De Pinna, Simon. Electricity Science
Projects. Raintree Steck Vaughn, 1998.
DiSpezio, Michael Anthony. Awesome
Experiments in Electricity and
Magnetism. Sterling, 2006.
Dixon, Malcolm, and Karen Smith.
Electricity. Evans Brothers, 2005.
Epstein, Sam and Beryl. The First
Book of Electricity, rev. ed.
Franklin Watts, 1977.
Flaherty, Michael. Electricity and
Batteries (Science Factory). Copper
Beach Books, 2008.
Gibilisco, Stan. Teach Yourself Electricity
and Electronics. McGraw-Hill, 2011.
Good, Keith. Zap It! Exciting Electricity
Activities. Lerner Publications
Co., 2003.
Matt, Stephen R. Electricity and Basic
Electronics. The Goodheart-Willcox
Co. Inc., 2012.
Meiani, Antonella. Magnetism:
Experimenting With Science.
Lerner Publications Co., 2003.
Morrison, Ralph. Electricity: A Self-
Teaching Guide. John Wiley, 2003.
Parker, Steve. Electricity and Magnetism.
Gareth Stevens Publishing, 2007.
——. Eyewitness: Electricity. DK
Publishing, 2005.
Parsons, Alexandra. Make it Work!
Electricity. World Book Inc., 1997.
Riley, Peter D. Electricity (Straightforward
Science). Franklin Watts, 1999.
Royston, Angela. Using Electricity (My
World of Science). Heinemann, 2008.
Electricity Resources
With your parent’s permission, visit
the Boy Scouts of America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org,
for a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


ELECTRICITY 63
.Electricity Resources
Wood, Robert W. Electricity and
Magnetism FUNdamentals: FUNtastic
Science Activities for Kids. Chelsea
House, 1998.
——. Physics for Kids: 49 Easy
Experiments With Electricity and
Magnetism. TAB Books, 1990.
Organizations and Websites
Boston Museum of Science
Telephone: 617-723-2500
Theater of Electricity:
www.mos.org/live-presentations/
lightning
Energy Information Administration
1000 Independence Ave. SW
Washington, DC 20585
www.eia.gov
Energy Kids Page
www.eia.gov/kids
Home Energy Saver
hes.lbl.gov
HowStuffWorks.com
c/o Convex Group Inc.
One Capital City Plaza
3350 Peachtree Road NE, Suite 1500
Atlanta, GA 30326-1425
www.howstuffworks.com
Institute of Electrical and
Electronics Engineers
445 Hoes Lane
Piscataway, NJ 08854-4141
Telephone: 732-981-0060
www.ieee.org
National Energy Education
Development Project
8408 Kao Circle
Manassas, VA 20110
Telephone: 703-257-1117
www.need.org
North American Electric
Reliability Corporation
1325 G St. NW, Suite 600
Washington, DC 20005-3801
Telephone: 202-400-3000
www.nerc.com
Safe Electricity.org
Electric Universe
eec.electricuniverse.com
U.S. Department of Energy
1000 Independence Ave. SW
Washington, DC 20585
Telephone: 202-586-5000
energy.gov
Acknowledgments
The Boy Scouts of America is
grateful to the men and women
serving on the National Merit Badge
Subcommittee for the improvements
made in updating this pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration Credits
The Franklin Institute Science Museum,
courtesy—page 11 (lightning rod)
Shutterstock.com—cover (light bulb,
©Bizroug; digital meter, ©Pi-Lens;
power lines and lightning, ©gui jun
peng; danger sign, ©Allen Graham -
PDImages); pages 4 (©ALPA PROD),
6 (lightning, ©loflo69), 8 (electrical
discharge, ©anigoweb), 9 (feather,
©mexrix), 13 (power lines, ©Shebeko),
18 (magnetic force, ©MilanB), 23 (car
battery, ©Vereshchagin Dmitry), 24
(©topten22photo), 25 (bird on a wire,
©sundayhill), 27 (voltmeter, ©auremar),
28 (residential power lines, ©Civdis), 38
(fuses, ©imagedb.com), 44 (blow dryer,
©pukach), and 48 (meter reading,
©Pi-Lens)


64 ELECTRICITY
Electricity Resources.
The Boy Scouts of America is grate-
ful to the Components, Packaging,
and Manufacturing Technology
Society of the Institute of Electrical
and Electronics Engineers, and to
former Scoutmaster and six-time
National Scout Jamboree staff
member Ralph W. Russell II of
the IEEE Precollege Education
Coordinating Committee for
lending their time and expertise in
the 2004 edition of the Electricity
merit badge pamphlet.
The BSA also wishes to thank
the members of Mr. Russell’s peer
review committee.
• Scouter Michael N. Geselowitz,
Ph.D., director of the IEEE
History Center, who has served
as a Cubmaster, den leader,
pack committee member,
troop committee member, and
member of his council’s Jewish
Committee on Scouting
• Scouter Al Mouton, president of
AGM Systems
• Lee Reed Sr., safety specialist for
Dominion Resources Services
• Rick Tavan, retired vice
president of engineering of
TIBCO Software, and Electricity
merit badge counselor
• Dan Ward, principal engineer
for Dominion Virginia Power
• Paul Wesling, vice president of
publications for IEEE’s CPMT
Society, Eagle Scout, Scoutmaster,
Venture crew leader, and recipi-
ent of the BSA’s Silver Beaver
and Heroism awards
Wikipedia.org, courtesy—page 14
(Hauksbee demonstrating
electrostatic generator)
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of
or are protected by the Boy Scouts
of America.
Dan Bryant—pages 18 (electromagnet),
19 (6-volt battery), and 34–35 (steps
for making a motor)
John McDearmon—all illustrations on
pages 7, 12, 14, 16–17, 19, 21–23,
41, and 56–58
Brian Payne—pages 37 (steps for
making a rheostat), 39 (Scout
looking at breaker box), 40, 42, 43
(Scouts inspecting light fixture), 46
(Scouts), 48 (Scout reading electric
meter), 50, 52, 55, and 60