SMALL-BOAT
SAILING
STEM-Based


SMALL-BOAT
SAILING
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


35950
ISBN 978-0-8395-3356-6
©2022 Boy Scouts of America
2023 Printing
Note to the Counselor
Merit badge counselors are responsible for following the
requirements, procedures, and techniques presented in this
pamphlet and for ensuring that each Scout earning the merit
badge is able to demonstrate knowledge and skills at a level
consistent with the requirements. In addition, counselors must
ensure that all applicable BSA safety policies, including Safe
Swim Defense and Safety Afloat, are followed during training,
practice, and review.
Counselors for the Small-Boat Sailing merit badge must
be registered members of the Boy Scouts of America, have
current training in Safe Swim Defense and Safety Afloat, and
be approved by the local council Advancement Committee.
Councils with an Aquatics Committee should utilize that
committee to coordinate with the Advancement Committee
for approval of qualified counselors.
All counselors should have formal training in the know-
ledge and skills indicated by the requirements, experience in
teaching such skills to youth, and experience in identifying
and managing risks associated with the activities involved.
For the Small-Boat Sailing merit badge, appropriate credentials
include instructor certification with a recognized sailing
agency or school, U.S. Sailing, or the American Sailing
Association for sailing with different hull types including
the rig being used for instruction. Counselors should also
be familiar with the requirements for the Small-Boat Sailing
merit badge and be able to perform the skills associated with
each requirement. The council Advancement Committee may
approve counselors with similar experience and training in
knowledge, skill, safety, and instruction.


SMALL-BOAT SAILING 3
Requirements
Always check www.scouting.org for the latest requirements.
1. Do the following:
a. Explain to your counselor the most likely hazards you
may encounter while participating in small-boat activities
and what you should do to anticipate, help prevent,
mitigate, and respond to these hazards.
b. Review prevention, symptoms, and first-aid treatment for
the following injuries or illnesses that can occur while
sailing: blisters, cold-water shock and hypothermia,
dehydration, and heat-related illnesses, sunburn, sprains,
and strains.
c. Discuss the BSA Safety Afloat policy. Tell how it applies
to small-boat activities.
2. Before doing requirements 3 through 9, successfully
complete the BSA swimmer test: Jump feetfirst into water
over the head in depth. Level off and swim 75 yards in a
strong manner using one or more of the following strokes:
sidestroke, breaststroke, trudgen, or crawl; then swim 25
yards using an easy, resting backstroke. The 100 yards must
be completed in one swim without stops and must include
at least one sharp turn. After completing the swim, rest
by floating.
3. Describe the boat you will be using for the sailing
requirement, naming all of the major parts and the
function of those parts.*
*The skills may be demonstrated on any boat available to the Scout; sailboards
are not acceptable. While no specific sail plan is recommended, it is suggested
that the craft be smaller than 20 feet. The boat must be capsizable and have the
capability of sailing to windward.


4 SMALL-BOAT SAILING
4. Before going afloat, do the following:
a. Discuss the nine points of the BSA Safety Afloat plan.
b. Explain the rules of the road in general and any specific
rules or laws that apply to your area or state.
c. Explain how water conditions, the hazards of weather,
and heavy winds can affect both safety and performance
in sailing.
d. Discuss the warning signs of inclement weather and what
to do should heavy winds develop or a storm approach.
e. Prepare a typical float plan.
f. Discuss the proper clothing, footwear, and personal
gear required for small-boat sailing in warm weather
and in cool weather. Explain how choosing the proper
clothing, footwear, and personal gear will help keep
you comfortable and safe while sailing.
5. Discuss with your counselor how to identify the wind
direction and wind indicators. Explain the importance of this
task before setting sail.
6. Following the BSA Safety Afloat plan, show that you and a
buddy can sail a boat properly. Do the following:
a. Prepare a boat for sailing, including a safety inspection.
b. Get underway from a dock, mooring, or beach.
c. Properly set sails for a round-trip course approved by
your counselor that will include running, beating,
and reaching—the basic points of sail. While sailing,
demonstrate good helmsmanship skills.
d. Change direction by tacking; change direction by jibing.
e. Demonstrate getting out of irons.
f. Demonstrate the safety position.
g. Demonstrate capsize procedures and the rescue of a
person overboard.†
†Capsize procedures should be conducted under the close supervision of the
counselor. A rescue boat should be standing by to assist, if necessary, and to tow
the capsized craft to shore. Self-bailing boats are acceptable for this requirement.
Extreme care should be taken to avoid personal injury and damage to the boat
or equipment.


SMALL-BOAT SAILING 5
h. Demonstrate the procedure to take after running aground.
i. Accept a single line or side tow and maneuver the craft
being towed safely for 20 boat lengths.
j. Upon returning to the dock, mooring, or beach, properly
secure all equipment, furl or stow sails, and prepare the
craft for unattended docking or beaching overnight or lon-
ger.
7. Demonstrate a working knowledge of marlinespike
seamanship. Do the following:
a. Show how to tie a square (reef) knot, clove hitch, two
half hitches, bowline, cleat hitch, and figure-eight knot.
Demonstrate the use of each.
b. Show how to heave a line, coil a line, and fake down
a line.
c. Discuss the kinds of lines used on sailboats and the types
of fibers used in their manufacture. Explain the advantages
and disadvantages of each.
8. Describe how you would care for and maintain a sailboat and
its gear throughout the year.
9. With your counselor, review sailing terminology and the points
of sail. Discuss various types of sailboats in use today and
explain their differences.


6 SMALL-BOAT SAILING
Small-Boat Sailing Resources.
Scouting Literature
Deck of First Aid; Emergency First Aid
pocket guide; Be Prepared First Aid
Book; Fieldbook; Sea Scout Manual;
Canoeing, Kayaking, Motorboating,
Rowing, Scuba Diving, and Whitewater
merit badge pamphlets
With your parent’s permission, visit
the Boy Scouts of America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org,
for a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.
Books
Aarons, Richard N., ed. Small-Boat
Seamanship Manual. International
Marine/Ragged Mountain
Press, 2006.
Ashley, Clifford. Ashley Book of Knots.
Doubleday, 1944.
Bond, Bob. The Handbook of Sailing.
Knopf, 1992.
Fries, Derrick. Start Sailing Right! US
Sailing Association, 1997.
Isler, Peter, and J.J. Isler. Sailing
for Dummies, 2nd ed. Wiley
Publishing Inc., 2006.
Kantor, John. Basic Sailing.
Longshore Sailing School
(www.LongshoreSailingSchool.
com), 2004.
Maloney, Elbert S. Chapman Piloting
and Seamanship, 68th ed. Hearst
Corporation, 2017.
Rousmaniere, John. Annapolis Book
of Seamanship, 4th ed. Simon &
Schuster, 2014.
Royce, Patrick. Royce’s Sailing
Illustrated. Royce Publications, 1997.
Sleight, Steve. The Complete Sailing
Guide, 4th ed. DK Publishing, 2017.
Smith, Hervey Garrett. The Marlinspike
Sailor, 2nd ed. Martino Fine
Books, 2012.
US Sailing Association. Small Boat
Sailor Certification Record Book
(“The Little Red Book”). US Sailing
Association, 2001.
Small-Boat Sailing Resources


7 SMALL-BOAT SAILING
Small-Boat Sailing Resources.
Magazines
Blue Water Sailing
747 Aquidneck Ave., Suite 201
Middletown, RI 02842
Toll-free telephone: 888-800-7245
www.bwsailing.com/bw
Sail
PO Box 37274
Boone, IA 50037-0274
Toll-free telephone: 800-745-7245
www.sailmagazine.com
Sailing
Toll-free telephone: 800-895-2596
www.sailingmagazine.net
Sailing World
55 Hammarlund Way
Middletown, RI 02842
Toll-free telephone: 866-436-2460
www.sailingworld.com
Organizations and Websites
American Sailing Association
5301 Beethoven St., Suite 265
Los Angeles, CA 90066
Telephone: 310-822-7171
www.asa.com
Online Small Boat Sailing Course
www.asa.com/online-sailing-course
U.S. Coast Guard: Boating
www.uscgboating.org
US SAILING Association
1 Roger Williams University Way
Bristol, RI 02809
Toll-free telephone: 800-877-2451
www.ussailing.org
Acknowledgments
The Boy Scouts of America thanks
the United States Sailing Association,
better known as US SAILING, the
national governing body for the sport
of sailing in the United States, for its
generous permission to pattern our
how-to illustrations after those in its
official learn-to-sail guide, Start Sailing
Right!