TRUCK
TR ANSPORTATION


SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
TRUCK
TR ANSPORTATION
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Truck-Transportation or check
Scoutbook for the latest requirements.
35961
ISBN 978-0-8395-3371-9
©2025 Scouting America
2025 Printing


TRUCK TRANSPORTATION 3





TRUCK TRANSPORTATION 5
Contents
Trucks and Society . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Trucking Regulations and Safety . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
How Trucking Companies Operate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
Keep That Truck Running . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
Getting From Here to There . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
Careers in Truck Transportation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
Trucking Terms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
Truck Transportation Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47





TRUCK TRANSPORTATION 7
.Trucks and Society
Trucks and Society
Trucking is a large and important industry. No matter where you
live, a day is unlikely to go by when you will not see a truck.
We use these vehicles to deliver almost every material item we
buy. Without trucks, our economy would not work efficiently.
Just think for a minute of all the things that are moved by
trucks. The clothes you wear, the food you eat, the books you
read, your camping equipment, your video games—all of these
things at some point are moved on a truck.
Trucks are the main means of moving freight in the
United States. Even products moved part of the way by
another means of transportation, such as rail or ship, are at
some point carried by truck. Not surprisingly, more than 80
percent of American towns rely solely on trucks to bring in
the goods that are sold there.
Trucks are everywhere. There are about 15.5 million
trucks on the roads of the United States, not counting those
used for government and farm work. It is hard to imagine
what our lives would be like without trucks.
According to the
American Trucking
Associations, the
trucking industry
employs more
than 9 million
people. That is
more workers
than any other
private industry in
the United States.
About 3.5 million
of these employ-
ees are truck
drivers.


8 TRUCK TRANSPORTATION
Trucks and Society.
Trucks often are favored as a means of transporting goods
because they are both quick and inexpensive. Shipping by air-
plane is the fastest way to move goods, but it’s a very expensive
way to transport cargo. Railroads are economical but slower
than trucks and generally only move items in large quantities
or in bulk, such as grain, lumber, coal, and automobiles. Ships
are cost-efficient, too, but they can move goods only between
ports. So, the versatile truck offers the best combination of
cost-effectiveness and speed for moving goods within the
United States.
Trucks often work in combination with other transporta-
tion modes. For example, trucks haul large freight containers
(weather-tight steel boxes used in shipping) to oceangoing
container ships that move goods in containers all over the
world. Or, truck trailers may be loaded onto rail flatcars for
transport over long distances. When the train reaches a rail yard
near the destination, the trailer is hooked to a truck tractor again
and the goods are delivered to the customer. This is an example
of intermodal, or piggyback, transportation.
So, as you can see, trucks are important to the way we live.
There are a couple of ways you can find out which
major truck lines serve your town. Look in the yellow
pages of your local telephone directory or, if you have
a computer, search on the internet (with your parent
or guardian’s permission).
transportation mode. Method of transportation such
as truck, air, rail, ship, or pipeline.


TRUCK TRANSPORTATION 9
.Trucks and Society
History of the Truck
The world’s first motorized truck was built in Germany in
1896 by a company owned by Gottlieb Daimler (1834–1900),
a pioneer in the development of the gasoline engine and the
automotive industry. This was 10 years after the same company
built its first automobile. By World War I (1914–18), trucks were
in wide use, and by 1923, the fuel-saving diesel engine was
developed. By 1935, more than 329,000 trucks were
registered in the United States.
During World War II (1939–45), trucks were the main
method of moving troops and supplies, largely replacing horse-
drawn wagons. After World War II, the U.S. government decided
that an efficient national highway system was important to the
security of the country. The Federal-Aid Highway Act provided
money to build 42,000 miles of modern highways across the
United States. These new highways, the beginning of the inter-
state highway system, made truck transportation even more
efficient and popular.
Motor carriers
dominate the
transportation
industry, rep-
resenting the
overwhelming
majority of the
domestic trans-
portation market
in both volume
and revenue.
The introduction of the motorized truck made deliveries quicker and more efficient in
the early 1900s.


10 TRUCK TRANSPORTATION
Trucks and Society.
Types of Trucks
There are different trucks for different purposes, and you
probably have seen many different kinds at work. On the high-
way, there are tractor-trailers for general cargo, trucks that haul
dirt, trucks that deliver new cars to a showroom, and trucks
that carry bulk liquids. In your neighborhood, you may have
seen special trucks that pick up trash or recycling materials.
Refrigerated trucks deliver frozen produce to retailers. Flatbed
trucks are used to move cargo that is not easily stowed, loaded
into, or unloaded from the more common tractor-trailer.
Before meeting with your counselor, think of the different
types of trucks you have seen and what they transport. The
next couple of pages show several of the more common trucks
on the road.
Major Dates in Automobile
and Truck History
1896 First motorized truck made
1899 First automobile hauler built
1903 First windshields were used
1904 Steering wheel replaced hand
levers for steering
1912 Electric lights replaced lanterns
1919 Pneumatic (inflatable) tire first used in trucks
1922 Backup lights were first used
1924 First diesel engine used in trucks
1926 Shockproof glass used in windshields
1927 Chrome trim first used
1931 Sun visors first used
1938 Turn signals used in all new trucks
1960s Air-conditioning becomes a standard
feature in trucks
2000s Improvements in fuel efficiency
become focus


TRUCK TRANSPORTATION 11
.Trucks and Society
The tractor-trailer is the typical “big rig” used to transport most of the nation’s
freight. These are a common sight on streets and highways.
Tanker trucks are used to haul large amounts of liquid products, from milk and corn
syrup to chemicals, gasoline, and heating oil.


12 TRUCK TRANSPORTATION
Trucks and Society.
Cement mixers mix cement powder and aggregates with water in a rotating barrel
and haul the cement mixture to a construction site.
The flatbed truck typically is used to haul very large items that will not fit in a closed
truck or that cannot easily be unloaded from the back of a truck trailer.


TRUCK TRANSPORTATION 13
.Trucks and Society
Delivery vans are used by companies to deliver smaller items to businesses and homes.
They are easier to drive and more economical to operate than the bigger trucks.
Garbage trucks pick up and remove trash from neighborhood homes and businesses.
The trash is dumped into the garbage truck, then the full truck is taken to a garbage
collection point or recycling center for emptying.


14 TRUCK TRANSPORTATION
Trucks and Society.
Trucks and Commerce
Trucks play a major role in today’s world economy. They pro-
vide a smooth flow of goods through the global supply chain.
Just think for a minute about how trucks fit into U.S. commerce.
Trucks pick up raw materials at one company and deliver them
to another, where they are used to make a product. That product
may then be shipped by truck to a warehouse, where it is stored.
The product may be shipped again by truck to a retailer, where
it is sold to a consumer.
Trucks also play a large role in the importation of goods
from foreign countries. At each stage of the journey that typi-
cally is taken to import something into the United States from
another country, trucks play a part.
Say a company in the United States sells hiking boots to
camping equipment stores. These boots were made in Brazil
and transported by ship to a port on the East Coast of the
United States. The leather used to make the boots was shipped
by truck from the tanneries to the shoe factory. At the factory,
the leather was manufactured, along with other raw materials,
into hiking boots.
These finished boots were packed into cardboard boxes
and loaded into cargo containers that were transported by truck
to the seaport. The cargo containers were loaded onto enormous
container ships that brought the cargo to a U.S. seaport.
supply chain. The various companies involved in
making something from raw materials into a finished
product that is then available to the consumer.
commerce. The movement of goods, funds,
and information.
raw materials. Resources that are converted into
another product.
warehouse. A place where goods are stored.
importation. The process of buying something from
another country.


TRUCK TRANSPORTATION 15
.Trucks and Society
Upon the ship’s arrival in port, the container was off-loaded
and again moved by truck to the shoe company’s warehouse.
This movement of transporting goods to and from a seaport is
also known as cartage. Once a camping goods retailer orders
some boots, they are shipped by truck to the store.
Tannery Shoe factory
Seaport—Brazil
Seaport—USA Warehouse
Store
18-wheeler Cargo ship
18-wheeler
18-wheeler
18-wheeler


16 TRUCK TRANSPORTATION
Trucking Regulations and Safety.
Trucking Regulations
and Safety
Trucking regulations and safety go hand in hand.
The Influence of Government
As the trucking industry grew, it became so important to the
economy of the United States that the federal government
stepped in to set some rules. Through the Motor Carrier Act of
1935, the government regulated where a trucking company, or
carrier, could operate and what it could charge for its services.
An agency known as the Interstate Commerce Commission
enforced these rules, which were very helpful at the time they
were introduced.
By the 1970s, these regulations were out-of-date and an
obstacle to competition in the trucking industry. The govern-
ment recognized the situation and, starting with the Motor
Carrier Act of 1980, the trucking industry became largely
deregulated (made less restrictive). Further controls were lifted
through the 1990s, and by 1995 the ICC was eliminated.
Today, the trucking industry is monitored by several govern-
ment agencies that are primarily concerned with truck registra-
tion, driver licensing requirements, and safety issues. Here are
some of the most important agencies.


.Trucking Regulations and Safety
The Department of Transportation is responsible for
planning and coordinating federal transportation projects.
It also sets safety regulations for all major modes
of transportation. Specific agencies that
directly affect trucking fall under
the DOT’s control.
The Federal Highway
Administration is
responsible for the
improvement and safety
of the nation’s highways.
The primary mission of the
Federal Motor Carrier Safety
Administration is to help prevent
commercial motor vehicle–related
deaths and injuries by enforcing
safety regulations, improving truck-
ing equipment, and increasing safety
awareness.
The National Highway
Traffic Safety Administration is respon-
sible for finding ways to reduce deaths,
injuries, and economic losses resulting
from motor vehicle crashes. The NHTSA
sets and enforces safety
performance standards for motor vehicles
and equipment such as truck trailers.
The Pipeline and Hazardous Materials
Safety Administration governs the safe
transportation and packaging of hazardous
materials by all modes of transportation.
Commercial vehicles are monitored by the U.S. Department
of Transportation, which issues a number such as the one
shown here.
Published by J.J. Keller & Associates Inc.
TRUCK TRANSPORTATION 17


18 TRUCK TRANSPORTATION
Trucking Regulations and Safety.
The Surface Transportation Board is responsible for the
economic regulation of interstate (transportation between states)
surface transportation within the United States. Its mission is
to ensure that competitive, efficient, and safe transportation
services are provided to meet the needs of shippers (companies
that hand over freight to a trucker for transportation), receivers
(consignees), and consumers.
In addition to these federal agencies, a number of other regula-
tory agencies affect the trucking industry.
• Some state public utilities commissions are charged
with ensuring safe, reliable, and competitively priced
transportation services.
• State motor vehicle departments control licensing,
registration, and safety regulations of all motor vehicles
in operation in their state.
• State and local police departments enforce the law.
Together, all these separate agencies help ensure public safety
on our roadways.
State troopers help keep our highways safe, too, by enforcing the law.


TRUCK TRANSPORTATION 19
.Trucking Regulations and Safety
Safety and Trucking
A truck driver’s first priority is safety. A driver must always be
concerned with driving in a safe manner. A careless or reckless
driver could damage the truck, the cargo, or other people’s
property. Worse yet, such a driver could get injured or cause
injury to others. That is why trucking companies make efforts
to train their drivers well and strongly enforce safety.
Here are some important safe-driver practices.
• Watch for dangers by scanning ahead, to the sides, and to
the rear of the truck.
• Make sure other drivers understand your intention, whether
it is to change lanes, slow down, or stop.
• Understand the condition of the road and drive as slowly as
is necessary.
• Buckle up; always wear your safety belt.
• Never exceed the speed limit.
• Keep a safe distance behind the vehicle in front of you.
• For better visibility by other motorists, use running lights
when driving in daylight.
Safe drivers rarely
have accidents.
They are alert and
well-prepared,
and they try
to anticipate
dangerous
situations in
time to prevent
accidents.
The Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration
reports that the average cost of all large-truck crashes
is about $91,000 per crash. Because of concern for
people’s lives and the cost of collisions, trucking
companies work hard to make sure their equipment
is safe and their drivers operate their vehicles safely.
Don’t Hang Out in Blind Spots. Blind spots are danger areas around
vehicles where crashes are more likely to occur. These are areas where
your car “disappears” from the driver’s view (or where another vehicle on
the road “disappears” from your own view). A safe driver is a predictable
driver who stays out of the blind spots.


20 TRUCK TRANSPORTATION
Trucking Regulations and Safety.
A tired driver is much more likely to have an accident than a
well-rested one. Because the U.S. government is very concerned
about the safety of our roadways, federal laws limit the length
of time a truck driver may operate a vehicle. These regulations
are known as the hours-of-service rules.
• A driver may not operate a truck for more than 11 hours
in a day.
• A driver can take on additional responsibilities like loading
and unloading but may not work more than 14 hours
straight in a day.
• A driver must be off for 10 hours straight every day.
• Drivers cannot work more than 60 hours in a
seven-day period.
To ensure these rules are followed, every driver involved in
interstate transportation must complete a driver’s log for every
day worked. This log shows the driver’s name, the date, and
the number of miles driven that day. Drivers keep a logbook of
all their daily logs.
The Department
of Transportation
estimates that
more than 500,000
truck accidents
occur every year.
Most people’s biological clocks make
them especially likely to feel sleepy at
three specific times during the day. One
is the afternoon lull, from 2 p.m. to 5 p.m.
The others are early in the morning and
late at night, which is by far the most
dangerous time for drivers.
When you drive, pay careful attention to
the behavior of other drivers near your
vehicle. If you see them weaving, drift-
ing into another lane inexplicably, head-
ing for a ditch, or exhibiting any other
unusual behavior, actively avoid them—
slow down and stay behind them. If
you yourself start feeling drowsy while
driving, get off the road immediately.
Get out and take a brisk walk to wake
yourself up, or have someone who is
well-rested take the wheel.


TRUCK TRANSPORTATION 21
.Trucking Regulations and Safety
The driver’s daily log shows what the driver did that day while on duty.
In the end, it takes effort from trucking companies,
individual drivers, and government agencies to help make
sure highways are as safe as they can be.





TRUCK TRANSPORTATION 23
.How Trucking Companies Operate
How Trucking
Companies Operate
Trucking companies come in many different shapes and sizes.
The majority—approximately 97 percent—of all trucking com-
panies operate 20 or fewer trucks. Some trucking companies are
made up of just a driver and that driver’s truck. Such business
people are known as owner-operators—drivers who own and
operate their own truck and trucking company.
Except for the very smallest operations, most trucking
companies are organized along similar lines and have similar
departments to handle the various aspects of the business.
Generally, trucking companies operate out of a terminal, a
building where a number of activities take place. These include:
• Loading freight on and off the trucks
• Sorting freight for delivery
• Sending trucks out to pick up freight
• Repairing and maintaining the trucks
• Conducting office work related to the trucking
company’s operations
• Storing trucks when they are not out on the road
The following chart shows how the various departments and
responsibilities within a trucking terminal might be organized.
Of course, each company is different. When you visit a truck ter-
minal, ask the terminal manager how that terminal is organized.


24 TRUCK TRANSPORTATION
How Trucking Companies Operate.
Trucking Company Departments
Here are some of the departments likely to be found within a
trucking company.
Sales and Marketing. This group of people represents the
company to the public and helps keep customers happy. Sales
people call on shippers to sell the trucking company’s services.
They must have a good understanding of the company’s
services and the needs of their customers. The marketing
team is responsible for developing new services, pricing the
company’s services, and advertising.
Typical terminal organization
Sales
representatives
Office
manager
Pricing
Sales/marketing
manager
Human
resources
Customer
service
Information
technology
Billing
Rating
Accounts
receivable
Accounts
payable
Payroll
Accounting
Administrative
assistant
Dock workers
Safety
OS&D
(claims department)
Maintenance
Operations
manager
Dock supervisor
Terminal
manager
Drivers
Dispatch


TRUCK TRANSPORTATION 25
.How Trucking Companies Operate
Operations. These people “move” the freight. Within
the operations group you will find the dispatcher, drivers,
dock workers, and the safety group, maintenance team, and
cargo claims people who handle OS&D (over, short, and
damaged) goods.
Administration. These office workers handle the paperwork
associated with making a trucking company work.
• Accounting. This group maintains the company’s financial
records, bills customers, pays bills, and handles payroll.
• Information Technology. The IT people develop and main-
tain the company’s computer systems.
• Customer Service. These company representatives help
customers. They may track down a lost shipment, schedule a
pickup, answer a question on the proper way to ship some-
thing, or explain how long it will take or how much it will
cost to ship.
• Human Resources. The HR people locate, hire, and train
employees for the company. They also may settle disputes
between management and the workers.
One requirement for the Truck Transportation merit badge calls for a
visit to a trucking terminal. As you probably can tell by now, a lot of
activity happens there. Because trucking terminals are busy places, it
is important to schedule a visit for a time that is convenient to the
company, probably at least two weeks in advance.
When calling, ask to
speak to the terminal manager.
Explain who you are and
what you want to do. Most
terminal managers will be
happy to meet with you. If
you have difficulty making an
appointment, speak to your
merit badge counselor for
assistance. Your counselor
may have other suggestions,
or may have a contact at a
local trucking company.





TRUCK TRANSPORTATION 27
.Keep That Truck Running
Keep That
Truck Running
One of the keys to truck safety is proper maintenance. The
driver plays a major role in this by inspecting the truck at the
beginning and end of each run. These daily inspections are
required by government regulations and go a long way toward
making sure the truck is safe when it hits the road. The follow-
ing are among the things the driver checks to make sure the
truck is working properly: fuel, oil, and coolant levels; gauges,
brakes, horn, lights, tires, hoses, exhaust system, suspension,
fuel tank.
In addition to the driver’s daily checks, trucking companies
have fixed schedules for maintaining their trucks. Some of the
maintenance work performed by mechanics includes
• Changing the engine oil and oil filters
• Checking and adjusting tire pressure
• Checking
emergency
equipment such
as warning
devices and fire
extinguishers
• Tuning
the engine
• Changing
the brakes
• Rebuilding
the transmission
• Servicing the
cooling and
heating systems


28 TRUCK TRANSPORTATION
Keep That Truck Running.
When you visit a trucking terminal, ask the terminal manager or the
maintenance manager
• How the company maintains its vehicles
• How daily checks are made by truck drivers
• How often the maintenance department performs service on the trucks
• If you can see a schedule of preventive maintenance for the vehicles
Keeping trucks well-maintained helps ensure not only the driver’s
safety and safety on the road, but also helps keep trucks working so
that carriers can stay in business.


TRUCK TRANSPORTATION 29
.Keep That Truck Running
The Heart of the Truck: The Engine
There are two main types of truck engine—gasoline and diesel.
The gasoline engine in a truck is similar to that used in most
automobiles and is typically found in smaller trucks such as
pickups, vans, and sport utility vehicles (SUVs). Most large
trucks are powered by diesel engines. While diesel engines are
used in some cars and small trucks, they are most commonly
found in big trucks.
Diesel and gasoline engines have much in common.
• They are both internal combustion engines, which means
the power they produce is a result of explosions occurring
within cylinders inside the engine block.
• They both use a mixture of air and fuel as part of the
process of creating an explosion.
• They both have pistons and valves.
There are some differences between the diesel and gasoline
engine, primarily in the way the fuel and air mixture is
ignited. Gasoline engines use a device called a spark plug to
ignite the fuel-air mixture; diesel engines rely on heat made by
air compression.
Diesel engine
parts are
exposed to higher
temperatures
and compression
pressure than are
gasoline engines.
Therefore, diesel
engine parts must
be more durable.
Keeping a truck clean helps prolong the life of the truck and
ensure the company maintains a “clean” image.


30 TRUCK TRANSPORTATION
Keep That Truck Running.
Diesel engines have some advantages over gasoline engines.
• They have more power than gasoline engines.
• They operate more efficiently.
• They last longer and are more reliable.
• They require less service.
Here are the advantages of gasoline engines over diesel engines.
• They cost less to produce than diesel engines.
• More local service locations are available, making servicing
more convenient.


TRUCK TRANSPORTATION 31
.Keep That Truck Running
Diesel engines work like this.
• The starter turns the engine and sets the crankshaft in motion.
• The crankshaft begins a process that pushes the pistons down in
the cylinders.
• Air is pulled in as the pistons travel down in the cylinders.
• When the pistons start to move up in the cylinders, the air is
compressed and made very hot.
• When the pistons are near the top of the cylinders, diesel fuel is
injected into the cylinders, where they meet with the super heated
air. This creates an explosion called combustion. The temperature
and pressure in the cylinder becomes higher as the diesel fuel burns.
• The combustion
pushes the pistons
down in the cylinders.
• As the pistons reach
the bottom of the
cylinders, exhaust
valves open.
• The pistons move up
in the cylinders and
burned gases are
pushed out.
This process continues
with each explosion,
passing power through
the transmission and
drive shaft to the wheels.





TRUCK TRANSPORTATION 33
.Getting From Here to There
Getting From Here
to There
Making a shipment via truck transportation involves a number
of steps. There are many things a shipper should be aware of
before making a shipment.
• What is being shipped. This affects the cost of shipping
and how the cargo will be packaged for protection.
• Where the cargo is going. The destination will affect the
cost of shipping. Generally, the farther you ship something,
the more it will cost to ship.
• The weight of the shipment. The weight will affect the
cost to ship and how it is packaged. In general, the more
something weighs, the more it will cost to ship.
• The estimated time of arrival (ETA). Some carriers can
deliver freight to certain locations faster than others. You
need to know when the receiver needs the shipment to
arrive, then pick a carrier that can meet that date.
• How the goods should be packaged. Items need to be
packaged so they arrive intact. Some items may be fragile or
require special packaging or handling. Everything does not
get packaged the same way. A computer monitor needs to
be packaged differently from a tent.
• How much it will cost to ship your cargo. Freight is not
shipped free of charge; this is how trucking companies make
a profit. It’s important to find out the cost of shipping
up front.
After you have found several reliable and reputable carriers that
meet your requirements, choose the one with the best value.
Not all trucking
companies charge
the same price
nor offer the same
services. Be sure
to choose one
that is reliable,
reputable, and
can deliver your
shipment on time.


34 TRUCK TRANSPORTATION
Getting From Here to There.
Now let’s try to “ship” something by truck. Let’s say you
have 12 unassembled bicycles to ship from New Jersey to
California. As the shipper, you are responsible for preparing
the goods for shipment. You pack the unassembled bicycles
carefully in strong cardboard boxes and then secure the boxes
to a pallet—kind of like the one you see here—so it is easy to
load and unload the cargo.
Next, weigh the pallet of bicycles so you know the total
weight of your shipment. You will need to give this information
to the trucking company. Now check your local yellow pages
or search the internet for three trucking companies near you.
Call each one and ask for customer service. Give the customer
service representative the details of your shipment, including
the following.
• Explain what you are shipping.
• Tell how much it weighs.
• Tell where it is going.
• Ask when it will be available for pickup.
• Say when it needs to be delivered.
After providing these details, ask if the trucking company can
meet your needs, when someone will pick up the shipment,
when the shipment will be delivered, and what it will cost
to ship your cargo. Make your choice based on whether your
shipment can be picked up and delivered on time. If all three
trucking companies can perform the delivery when it is needed,
choose the least expensive one.
Before you use the
internet, always
get your parent or
guardian’s
permission.


TRUCK TRANSPORTATION 35
.Getting From Here to There
When the carrier arrives to pick up your shipment, you
must give the driver a bill of lading. This document tells the
driver what is being picked up, where it is going, how much it
weighs, and who is paying the freight charge—you (the shipper)
or the consignee. The driver will sign this bill of lading and
give you a copy as a receipt. It is important to keep this
document in case the shipment is lost or
damaged. The bill of lading serves
as your proof that the
goods have
been shipped.
Truck freight
prices are set by
using the class rate
system. This is a
way of taking the
thousands of differ-
ent possible products
and grouping them
into similar classes to
simplify freight pricing.
There are 18 different
freight classes, ranging
from class 50 to class 500.
The higher the class rating
of a product, the more it
will cost to ship.
In general, inexpensive
items that are heavy, dense,
and unlikely to be damaged
during shipping have a lower
class rating than items that are
expensive, lightweight, bulky, and easily damaged. Freight
charges are listed at a cost per 100 pounds. As the weight of a
shipment increases, the cost per 100 pounds decreases.
These charges are found in tariffs, which are a schedule
of rates. Almost every carrier has its own set of rates, so it is
important to compare different carrier prices to get the best one.
No one wants a shipment to get lost or damaged while it
is in transit, but that sometimes happens. All reputable carriers
have insurance to protect the value of freight if it is lost or
damaged. However, the level of protection offered varies from
carrier to carrier.
Bill of lading


36 TRUCK TRANSPORTATION
Getting From Here to There.
Check with your carrier on the limitations of the coverage
offered. If the value of your shipment exceeds the basic coverage
offered, you should tell the carrier what the value is and advise
the carrier that you want to buy extra insurance.
Extra insurance coverage is, in many cases, charged as a cost per
$100 of value. So if you want to buy insurance for something valued at
$1,000 and the cost for insurance is $1 for every $100 of value, insuring
the shipment will cost $10. Many large shippers have their own insur-
ance policies, which protects the value of their goods beyond what the
carrier provides.
All drivers—not only truckers—must be familiar with and follow these common
road signs.
Road Signs
The driver
must come to a
complete stop.
The driver must
let the oncoming
traffic go first.
Do not enter.
WRONG
WAY
Indicates the driver
is going in the wrong
direction. Used many
times along with the
Do Not Enter sign.
Indicates a
pedestrian crosswalk.
Indicates a school
crossing.
Indicates an area
where there is
construction and
workers may be
present; be careful.
Warns the driver
of an area where there
may be falling rocks;
be careful.


07304 Jersey City, New Jersey, to 94404 Foster City, California
Class
Rating
Less than
500 lbs.
More than
500 lbs.
More than
1,000 lbs.
More than
2,000 lbs.
More than
5,000 lbs.
More than
10,000 lbs.
More than
20,000 lbs.
500 684.61 554.60 472.28 397.12 345.33 283.06 248.51
400 547.69 443.68 377.82 317.69 276.27 226.45 198.81
300 410.77 332.76 283.37 238.27 207.20 169.84 149.10
250 342.31 277.30 236.14 198.56 172.67 141.53 124.25
200 273.85 221.84 188.91 158.85 138.13 113.22 99.40
175 239.62 194.11 165.30 138.99 120.87 99.07 86.98
150 205.38 166.38 141.68 119.14 103.60 84.92 74.55
125 171.16 138.65 118.07 99.28 86.34 70.77 62.13
110 150.61 122.01 103.90 87.37 75.97 62.27 54.67
100 136.92 110.92 94.46 79.42 69.07 56.61 49.70
92 128.02 103.71 88.32 74.26 64.58 52.93 46.47
85 118.77 96.21 81.93 68.89 59.91 49.11 43.11
77.5 108.98 88.28 75.18 63.21 54.97 45.06 39.56
70 101.28 82.04 69.86 58.75 51.09 41.87 36.76
65 95.26 77.17 65.71 55.25 48.05 39.38 34.58
60 90.28 73.14 62.28 52.37 45.54 37.33 32.77
55 85.31 69.11 58.85 49.48 43.03 35.27 30.97
50 80.25 65.01 55.36 46.55 40.48 33.18 29.13
This sample tariff shows the cost per 100 pounds for all weights and all classes covering shipments from Jersey City,
New Jersey, to Foster City, California.





TRUCK TRANSPORTATION 39
.Careers in Truck Transportation
Careers in Truck
Transportation
Truck transportation offers a variety of interesting careers,
and the U.S. Department of Labor predicts that the number of
positions in truck transportation will increase 10 percent by
2018. This means good career prospects for all positions within
the industry, although most openings will be for drivers and
diesel mechanics.
Here are some of the career opportunities in truck transpor-
tation. One of these positions might interest you.
Truck Driver
About 44 percent of all people employed in truck transportation
are drivers, making it the industry’s single largest occupation.
Truck drivers not only pilot their trucks but also are responsible
In order to get their commercial driver’s license, truck drivers need to be trained, too.
If you have a knack for teaching others, you might want to think about becoming a
commercial driving instructor.


40 TRUCK TRANSPORTATION
Careers in Truck Transportation.
Some drivers must load and unload their own trucks.


TRUCK TRANSPORTATION 41
.Careers in Truck Transportation
for the truck’s cargo and for making deliveries on time. Drivers
have responsibility to other users of the road, too. They must
always put safety first when driving.
Local truck drivers, often called city drivers, generally work
about 50 hours per week. Most of them have regular routes
and return home each night.
Long-distance truck drivers, or over-the-road drivers, are
often on the road for long periods of time. Their trips can run
from overnight to a stretch of a week or two. Many of these
drivers are away from home for much of the year. Many long-
distance drivers share the driving duties with a partner; these
are called teams.
Some over-the-road drivers have sleeper cabs that come with a bunk bed, refrigerator,
and even TV.
Before starting their route, by law, drivers must inspect their trucks
thoroughly to ensure that everything is in proper working order. They
make sure that the cargo on the truck is properly loaded to prevent
damage. While driving, they must always be alert.


42 TRUCK TRANSPORTATION
Careers in Truck Transportation.
The U.S. Department of Transportation requires that truck
drivers in interstate commerce be at least 21 years old. To drive
a big truck (with a total weight of 26,000 pounds or more), an
operator must have a commercial driver’s license, or CDL. Such
drivers must pass a special test and have a safe driving record.
Sales Representative
The sales representative is responsible for finding new
customers and for maintaining the accounts of customers who
are already on the company’s books. Sales representatives
must understand all of the trucking company’s services so
they can describe and sell these services to customers. They
must be familiar with prices, types of services offered, rules
and regulations, and whether the company can meet the
customers’ needs. To match the trucking company’s services
with a customer’s needs, the sales rep must also have an
understanding of the customer’s business.
Sales reps maintain regular contact with customers and
help ensure that customers are satisfied with the carrier’s
service. They must be comfortable making presentations and
speaking in front of groups of people. They also must be able
to negotiate, or bargain, well. Part of their responsibility is
to obtain the best or most competitive price they can for the
company’s services.
Truck drivers are
paid well for their
hard work. The
average pay for a
driver of a heavy
truck is about
$18 per hour.


TRUCK TRANSPORTATION 43
.Careers in Truck Transportation
Dispatcher
Dispatchers are responsible for coordinating the carrier’s trucks
with the customers’ freight. They tell drivers where the freight
is and when it will be ready for pickup. Dispatchers give drivers
their assignments, schedules, and routes.
Years ago, dispatchers communicated with their drivers
by two-way radio—and this may still be the case with some
very small trucking companies. But today, dispatchers at larger
companies usually rely on mobile phones to keep in contact
with their drivers. Quite a few companies use global positioning
satellite (GPS) tracking systems, which allow dispatchers to
pinpoint the location of their trucks and predict with some
accuracy when a truck will reach its destination.


44 TRUCK TRANSPORTATION
Trucking Terms.
Trucking Terms
bill of lading. A shipping document that lists the goods in
the shipment.
carrier. A trucking company.
cartage. The action of moving freight to and from an airport
or seaport.
commerce. The movement of goods, funds, and information.
consignee. The company receiving a shipment.
container. A steel box, normally 20 to 40 feet long, used
primarily in ocean freight transportation. Freight is stored
inside the container, which is weathertight.
ETA. Estimated time of arrival; the time when a shipment
should be delivered.
importation. The process of buying something from another
country and bringing it to the United States.
intermodal. The practice of moving freight stowed in
truck trailers or ocean containers via rail. This is also
known as piggyback service, trailer-on-flat-car (TOFC),
or container-on-flat-car (COFC).
internal combustion engine. An engine that produces power
as a result of explosions occurring within the engine itself.
logbook. The book maintained by a truck driver showing the
hours driven and the places the driver has been.
OS&D. Over, short, and damaged (goods). This is the claims
department within a trucking company.
owner-operator. A very small trucking company where the
owner of the company and the truck is also the driver.
piggyback. See intermodal.


TRUCK TRANSPORTATION 45
.Trucking Terms
raw materials. The things that go into making something else.
shipper (also referred to as consignor). The company that
gives freight to a trucker for transportation.
supply chain. The various companies involved in making
something from the basic raw materials into the completed
product, which is then available to the consumer.
tariff. A schedule of prices for transporting freight.
transportation mode. Means of transportation such as truck,
air, rail, ship, or pipeline.
warehouse. A place where goods are stored.





.Truck Transportation Resources
TRUCK TRANSPORTATION 47
Scouting Literature
American Business, Auto Mechanics,
Aviation, Engineering, Railroading, and
Traffic Safety merit badge pamphlets
Books
Byrnes, Mike, & Associates. Bumper
to Bumper: The Complete Guide
to Tractor-Trailer Operations. Mike
Byrnes & Associates Inc.,
1st Edition, 2015.
Ouellet, Lawrence J. Pedal to the
Metal: The Work Life of Truckers.
Temple University Press,
1st Edition, 1994.
Professional Truck Driver Institute.
Trucking: Tractor-Trailer Driver
Handbook/Workbook 3. Thomson
Delmar Learning, 3rd Edition, 2010.
Scharnberg, Ken. Opportunities in
Trucking Careers. McGraw-Hill, 1999.
Woltman, Jeffrey J., and Sheena P.
Woltman. Trucking Simplified:
Tools and Strategies for Running
a Successful Trucking Operation.
Boogaloo Press, 2000.
Organizations and Websites
American Trucking Associations
950 N. Glebe Road, Suite 210
Arlington, VA 22203-4181
Telephone: 703-838-1700
trucking.org
Federal Motor Carrier
Safety Administration
1200 New Jersey Ave. SE
Washington, DC 20590
Toll-free telephone: 800-832-5660
fmcsa.dot.gov
National Transportation Library
1200 New Jersey Ave. SE
Washington, DC 20590
Toll-free telephone: 800-853-1351
ntl.bts.gov
U.S. Department of Transportation
1200 New Jersey Ave. SE
Washington, DC 20590
Telephone: 202-366-4000
dot.gov
Truck Transportation Resources
With your parent or guardian’s per-
mission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


48 TRUCK TRANSPORTATION
Truck Transportation Resources.
Acknowledgments
Scouting America is grateful to Michael
Stroh, the writer of this revised edition
of the Truck Transportation merit badge
pamphlet. A logistics practitioner since
1979, Mr. Stroh currently operates a
consulting company called Logistics
Network Inc. He is the author of
A Practical Guide to Transportation
and Logistics, a contributor to Traffic
World magazine, and a member of the
faculty of the Institute of Logistical
Management and the World Trade
Institute of Pace University.
Thanks also to George Downs
and Mike Burner for their assistance
with this revision. Scouting America
is grateful to the American Trucking
Associations, in particular Elizabeth
Barna and Joy Howells, for the use of
many of the photos in this edition. We
also are grateful to Pete Robinson of
Jevic Transportation for the use of the
company’s photos.
We appreciate the assistance
of Herman Fauss Jr., vice president
of Safety Program Development for
Landstar System Inc. Mr. Fauss is an
active Scouter with Scouting America’s
North Florida Council in Jacksonville.
Scouting America is grateful to
the men and women serving on the
National Merit Badge Committee for
the improvements made in updating
this pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration Credits
American Trucking Associations,
courtesy—pages 11 (bottom), 12
(top), 28, 31, 39–43 (all except page
40 bottom right), and 45
©Comstock—page 29
Ford Motor Company, courtesy—page 9
Getty Images—pages 20 and 40
(bottom right)
HAAP Media Ltd., courtesy—cover
(both trucks)
Jevic Transportation Inc., courtesy—
page 11 (top)
©Jupiterimages.com—pages 6 and 32
©Photos.com—cover (sign); pages 4,
22, and 46
Wikipedia.org—page 41
All other photos and illustrations
not mentioned above are the
property of or are protected by
Scouting America.
Tom Copeland Jr.—page 13 (bottom)
Daniel Giles—pages 17 (top), 18, 25,
27, 30, 34, 38, 43 (left), and 46
John McDearmon—all illustrations on
pages 15 and 19
Brian Payne—cover (air gun, bolts,
wheel, engine, CB radio, steering
wheel); pages 7 and 12 (bottom)