NUCLEAR
SCIENCE
STEM-Based


NUCLEAR SCIENCE
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


168
Nuclear Science
1. Do the following:
(a) Tell what radiation is.
(b) Describe the hazards of radiation to humans, the environment, and
wildlife. Explain the difference between radiation exposure and contamina-
tion. In your explanation, discuss the nature and magnitude of radiation
risks to humans from nuclear power, medical radiation (e.g., chest or dental
X-ray), and background radiation including radon. Explain the ALARA
principle and measures required by law to minimize these risks.


169
(c) Describe the radiation hazard symbol and explain where it should
be used. Tell why and how people must use radiation or radioactive
materials carefully.
(d) Compare the amount of radiation exposure of a nuclear power plant
worker to that of someone receiving a chest and dental X-ray.
2. Do the following:
(a) Tell the meaning of the following: atom, nucleus, proton, neutron,
electron, quark, isotope; alpha particle, beta particle, gamma ray, X-ray;
ionization, radioactivity, radioisotope, and stability.
(b) Choose an element from the periodic table. Construct 3-D models for
the atoms of three isotopes of this element, showing neutrons, protons, and
electrons. Use the three models to explain the difference between atomic
number and mass number and the difference between the atom and nuclear
and quark structures of isotopes.
3. Do ONE of the following; then discuss modern particle physics with
your counselor:
(a) Visit an accelerator (research lab) or university where people study the
properties of the nucleus or nucleons.
(b) Name three particle accelerators and describe several experiments that
each accelerator performs.
4. Do TWO of the following; then discuss with your counselor the different
kinds of radiation and how they can be used:
(a) Build an electroscope. Show how it works. Place a radiation source
inside and explain the effect it causes.
(b) Make a cloud chamber. Show how it can be used to see the tracks caused
by radiation. Explain what is happening.
(c) Obtain a sample of irradiated and non-irradiated foods. Prepare the two
foods and compare their taste and texture. Store the leftovers in separate con-
tainers and under the same conditions. For a period of 14 days, observe their
rate of decomposition or spoilage, and describe the differences you see on
days 5, 10, and 14.
(d) Visit a place where radioisotopes are being used. Using a drawing,
explain how and why they are used.


170
5. Do ONE of the following; then discuss with your counselor the principles
of radiation safety:
(a) Using a radiation survey meter and a radioactive source, show how
the counts per minute change as the source gets closer to or farther from
the radiation detector. Place three different materials between the source
and the detector, then explain any differences in the measurements per
minute. Explain how time, distance, and shielding can reduce an individ-
ual’s radiation dose.
(b) Describe how radon is detected in homes. Discuss the steps taken for
the long-term and short-term test methods, tell how to interpret the results,
and explain when each type of test should be used. Explain the health
concern related to radon gas and tell what steps can be taken to reduce
radon in buildings.
(c) Visit a place where X-rays are used. Draw a floor plan of this room.
Show where the unit, the unit operator, and the patient would be when
the X-ray unit is operated. Explain the precautions taken and the impor-
tance of those precautions.
6. Do ONE of the following; then discuss with your counselor how nuclear
energy is used to produce electricity:
(a) Make a drawing showing how nuclear fission happens, labeling all
details. Draw another picture showing how a chain reaction could be started
and how it could be stopped. Explain what is meant by a “critical mass.”
(b) Build a model of a nuclear reactor. Show the fuel, control rods, shielding,
moderator, and cooling material. Explain how a reactor could be used to
change nuclear energy into electrical energy or make things radioactive.
(c) Find out how many nuclear power plants exist in the United States.
Locate the one nearest your home. Find out what percentage of electricity in
the United States is generated by nuclear power plants, by coal, and by gas.
7. Give an example of each of the following in relation to how energy from an
atom can be used: nuclear medicine, environmental applications, industrial
applications, space exploration, and radiation therapy. For each example,
explain the application and its significance to nuclear science.
8. Find out about three career opportunities in nuclear science that interest
you. Pick one and find out the education, training, and experience required
for this profession and discuss this with your counselor. Tell why this
profession interests you.


78 NUCLEAR SCIENCE
Nuclear Science Resources.
Scouting Materials
Archaeology, Astronomy, Chemistry,
Dentistry, Electricity, Energy, Engineering,
Environmental Science, Geology,
Medicine, Plant Science, and Space
Exploration merit badge pamphlets
Books
Contemporary Physics Education
Project. Nuclear Science—A Guide to
the Nuclear Science Wall Chart, 3rd
ed. CPEP, 2003.
Fox, Karen. The Chain Reaction:
Pioneers of Nuclear Science.
Scholastic Library Publishing, 1998.
Gallant, Roy A. The Ever-Changing
Atom. Marshall Cavendish, 2000.
Goldstein, Natalie. How Do We Know
the Nature of the Atom? Rosen
Publishing Group, 2001.
Halpern, Paul. Collider: The Search for
the World’s Smallest Particles. John
Wiley & Sons, 2009.
Hamilton, Janet. Lise Meitner:
Pioneer of Nuclear Fission. Enslow
Publishers, 1997.
Heilbron, J. L. Ernest Rutherford and the
Atoms. Oxford University Press, 2003.
Kirkland, Kyle. Atoms and Materials.
Facts on File, 2007.
Mander, Lelia, ed. Nuclear Energy.
Gareth Stevens, 2003.
Oxlade, Chris. Atoms. Heinemann, 2007.
Pasachoff, Naomi E. Niels Bohr:
Physicist and Humanitarian.
Enslow Publishers, 2003.
Richardson, Hazel. How to Split
the Atom. Scholastic Library
Publishing, 2001.
Stux, Erica. Enrico Fermi: Trailblazer in
Nuclear Physics. Enslow, 2004.
Townsend, John. Using Nuclear Energy.
Heinemann-Raintree, 2009.
DVDs
The Atom Smashers. PBS Home Video,
2009.
e2 Energy. PBS Home Video, 2007.
Organizations and Websites
ABCs of Nuclear Science
Lawrence Berkley National Laboratory
Website: http://www.lbl.gov/abc
Nuclear Science Resources
For more information about or to
order Scouting-related resources,
see http://www.scoutstuff.org—
with your parent’s permission,
of course.


NUCLEAR SCIENCE 79
.Nuclear Science Resources
American Nuclear Society
555 N. Kensington Ave.
La Grange Park, IL 60526
Toll-free telephone: 800-323-3044
Website: http://www.ans.org
American Physical Society
1 Physics Ellipse
College Park, MD 20740
Telephone: 301-209-3100
Website: http://www.aps.org
EPA Radiation Protection
Students’ and Teachers’ Pages
Website: http://www.epa.gov
/radiation/students.html
Health Physics Society
1313 Dolley Madison Blvd., Suite 402
McLean, VA 22101
Telephone: 703-790-1745
Website: http://hps.org
International Atomic Energy Agency
United Nations Liaison Office
1 United Nations Plaza,
Room DC-1-1155
New York, NY 10017
Telephone: 212-963-6010
Website: http://www.iaea.org
Nuclear Energy Institute
1776 I Street NW, Suite 400
Washington, DC 20006-3708
Telephone: 202-739-8000
Website: http://www.nei.org
Office of Nuclear Energy
U.S. Department of Energy
1000 Independence Ave. SW
Washington, DC 20585
Toll-free telephone: 800-342-5363
Website: http://www.ne.doe.gov
The Particle Adventure
Website: http://particleadventure.org
U.S. Nuclear
Regulatory Commission
Washington, DC 20555-0001
Toll-free telephone: 800-368-5642
Website: http://www.nrc.gov
Acknowledgments
For expert assistance in updating
the requirements and revising
the text of the Nuclear Science
(formerly Atomic Energy) merit badge
pamphlet, the Boy Scouts of America
gratefully acknowledges
• Dennis E. Showers, Ph.D.,
Eagle Scout and director, Center
for Science, Mathematics and
Technology Education, and
professor, Science Education,
State University of New York
(SUNY) at Geneseo; author of
the former Atomic Energy merit
badge pamphlet
• Howard Matis, Ph.D., Eagle Scout
and staff physicist, Nuclear Science
Division, Lawrence Berkeley
National Laboratory
• Jolie Cizewski, Ph.D., professor
and vice dean, Physics Department,
Rutgers University
• Lynn Yarris, science writer,
Lawrence Berkeley
National Laboratory
• The American Nuclear Society, in
particular Sharon Kerrick and the
Outreach Department
• Candace Davison, research and
education specialist/supervisor
of reactor operations, Radiation
Science and Engineering Center,
Pennsylvania State University