CITIZENSHIP IN
SOCIETY
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”
For a Spanish version of this document, click here
Para obtener una versión en español de este documento, haga clic aquí


2 CITIZENSHIP IN SOCIETY.
Overview for Scouts
The focus of the Citizenship in Society merit badge is to provide you with
information on diversity, equity, inclusion, and ethical leadership. You’ll learn why
these qualities are important in society and in Scouting, as well as how to help
other people at all times and serve as a leader and an upstander. The Boy Scouts
of America continues to be committed to developing a culture in which every
youth, volunteer, and employee feels included and welcomed — and to building
communities where every person feels respected and valued.
• We welcome families and individuals of all backgrounds and identities to
help prepare young people to serve as successful members and leaders of our
nation’s increasingly diverse communities.
• We are committed to creating inclusive environments and promoting a culture
of respect and belonging for all.
• We expect all members to be guided by the Scout Oath and Scout Law.
o As found in the definition of “reverent” in the Scout Law, we expect our
Scouts to “respect the beliefs of others,” both within and outside of Scouting.
• We want everyone who follows the values of the Scout Oath and Scout Law to
feel welcomed and able to take advantage of the many opportunities Scouting
provides, and we want every Scout to feel a sense of acceptance and inclusion
in their unit and in Scouting.
• We expect and appreciate that our Scouts do their best to make all feel
welcomed.
o Learning about and understanding different identities and abilities will help
each Scout understand what to do to help make other Scouts feel welcomed
and find a sense of belonging in Scouting.
35976
©2021 Boy Scouts of America


3 CITIZENSHIP IN SOCIETY.
Instructions for Scouts
By now in your journey as a Scout, you have probably completed other merit
badges and become familiar with using the merit badge pamphlet that usually
accompanies the requirements. The process of earning this merit badge will be
different, as it intentionally places the responsibility of research and identification
of resources on you instead of using a merit badge pamphlet.
• You are encouraged to explore as deeply and broadly as you see fit for your
personal learning and growth.
• Your merit badge counselor may, for certain requirements, ask you to
identify your sources.
• Your counselor will not be providing you with answers or resources, but will
be engaging you in conversation to ask about what you have learned and
how you plan to apply your new knowledge to your life as a Scout and as a
good citizen in society.
• As you undertake these learnings, think about how you can demonstrate the
values of the Scout Oath and Scout Law in your daily life.


4 CITIZENSHIP IN SOCIETY.
Requirements
“Discussion” requirements will be either with a counselor and another
individual (in accordance with Youth Protection Guidelines https://www.
scouting.org/health-and-safety/gss/gss01/), or with your counselor and a
small group (of Scouts), depending upon your preference.
1. Before beginning work on other requirements for this merit badge:
a. Research the following terms, and then explain to your merit badge
counselor how you feel they relate to the Scout Oath and Scout Law:
• Identities • Inclusion
• Diversity • Discrimination
• Equity • Ethical Leadership
• Equality • Upstander
2. Document and discuss with your counselor what leadership means to you.
Share what it means to make ethical decisions.
a. Research and share with your counselor an individual you feel has
demonstrated positive leadership while having to make an ethical decision.
(It could be someone in history, a family member, a teacher, a coach, a
counselor, a clergy member, a Scoutmaster, etc.)
b. Explain what decision and/or options that leader had, why you believe they
chose their final course of action, and the outcome of that action.
3. Consider ethical decision-making.
a. Think about a time you faced an ethical decision.
• Discuss the situation, what you did, and how it made you feel.
• Share if you would do anything differently in the future and if so,
what that would be.


5 CITIZENSHIP IN SOCIETY
b. List three examples of ethical decisions you might have to make in the
future at school, at home, in the workplace, or in your community, and
what you would do.
• Share how your actions represent alignment with the Scout Oath
and Scout Law
c. Explain to your counselor how you plan to use what you have learned to
assist you when that time comes, and what action(s) you can take to serve
as an upstander and help other people at all times.
4. Repeat the Scout Oath and Scout Law for your counselor. Choose two of
the three following scenarios and discuss what you could do as a Scout to
demonstrate leadership and your understanding of what it means to help others
who may seem different from you:
a. Scenario 1: While at camp, a youth accidentally spills food on another
camper. The camper who gets spilled on gets angry and says something that
is offensive to people with disabilities; their friends laugh. What could/
should you do?
b. Scenario 2: Your friend confides in you that some students in school are
making insulting comments about one of their identities, and that those
same students created a fake social media account to impersonate your
friend online and post messages. What could/should you do?
c. Scenario 3: A new student in your class was born in another country (or
has a parent who was born in another country). Your friends make rude
comments to the student about their speech or clothes and tell the student
to “go back home where you came from.” What could/should you do?
5. Document and discuss with your counselor:
a. Ideas on what you personally can do to create a welcoming environment in
your Scouting unit.
b. An experience you had in which you went out of your way to include
another Scout(s) and what you did to make them feel included and
welcomed.
c. Things you can do to help ensure all Scouts in your unit are given an
opportunity to be heard and included in decision-making and planning.


6 CITIZENSHIP IN SOCIETY
6. With your parent’s or guardian’s approval, connect with another Scout or youth
your own age who has an identity that’s different from yours. (This means a
trait, belief, or characteristic different from you.)
a. Share with each other what makes the different aspect of your identity
meaningful/special to you.
b. Share with each other either one of the following:
i. A time you felt excluded from a group.
• What was the situation?
• How did it make you feel?
• What did you do?
• Did anyone stand up for you?
• What did you learn?
• Would you do anything differently today?
ii. This imaginary situation:
• You’re attending a new school and don’t know anyone there yet. You
notice they dress very differently than you do. At lunchtime, you
decide you’ll try to sit with a group to get to know other students.
People at two tables tell you there is someone sitting at the currently
empty seat at their table, so you end up eating by yourself.
o How would that make you feel?
o What could the students have done?
o If that happened at your school, what would you do?
c. Discuss with your counselor what you learned from the discussion with the
other Scout or youth.
7. Identify and interview an individual in your community, school, and/or
Scouting who has had a significant positive impact in promoting diversity,
equity, and inclusion. If you feel your community, school, or local Scouting
group does not have such an individual, then research a historical figure who
meets these criteria,and discuss that person with your counselor.
a. Discover what inspired the individual, learn about the challenges they faced,
and share what you feel attributed to their success.
b. Discuss with your counselor what you learned and how you can apply it in
your life.


7 CITIZENSHIP IN SOCIETY
8. With the help of your parent or guardian, study an event that had a positive
outcome on how society viewed a group of people and made them feel more
welcome. Describe to your counselor the event and what you learned.
9. Document and discuss with your counselor three or more areas in your
life outside of Scouting where you feel you can actively provide stronger
leadership in.
a. Making others feel included.
b. Practicing active listening.
c. Creating an environment where others feel comfortable to share their ideas
and perspectives.
d. Helping others feel valued for their input and suggestions.
e. Standing up for others.
10. Discuss with your counselor how stereotyping people can be harmful, and
how stereotypes can lead to prejudice and discrimination. Share ideas you have
for challenging assumptions and celebrating individuality.
11. Scouting strives to develop young people to be future leaders in their
workplaces, schools, and community environments. As you look at your current
involvement in school, your family, Scouting, your job, and/or community,
think about how you can have a positive impact in diversity, equity, and
inclusion.
a. Describe your ideas on how you can and will support others with different
identities to feel included and heard at your school, workplace, and/or
social settings in your community.
b. Explain how including diverse thoughts and opinions from others with
different identities can:
• Make your interactions more positive.
• Help everyone benefit by considering different opinions.
c. Give three examples of how limiting diverse input can be harmful.
d. Give three examples of how considering diverse opinions can lead to
innovation and success.