DENTISTRY

STEM-Based

BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES

DENTISTRY

“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”

Requirements
1. Using X-ray (radiographic) films and with your counselor’s
guidance, study the tooth structure and look for decay.
Then do the following:
		 a.	Using the radiographs as a guide, draw a lower molar.
Label its parts and surfaces. Show surrounding structures
such as bone and gum tissues.
		 b.	Show on your drawing where the nerves and blood
vessels enter the tooth.
		 c.	Show on your drawing where bacterial plaque is most
likely to be found.
2. Do the following:
		 a.	Tell or write about what causes dental decay and gum
disease. Tell how each of the following contributes to
dental decay and gum disease: bacterial plaque, sugars,
and acid.
		 b.	Tell the possible causes for traumatic tooth loss, describe
the types of mouth guards used to help prevent tooth
trauma, and list the athletic activities during which a
person should wear a mouth guard.
		 c.	Explain the first-aid procedure for saving a tooth that has
been knocked out.
		 d.	Discuss how the use of tobacco products can negatively
affect your oral health.

35882
ISBN 978-0-8395-3394-8
©2016 Boy Scouts of America
2016 Printing

3. Arrange for a visit with a dentist. Before you go, ask
whether your visit can include a dental examination and
a plaque-control demonstration. Afterward, ask questions
about things you want to know. Then tell your counselor
what the dentist does during a checkup examination.
4. Do TWO of the following:
		 a.	Name at least five instruments and five pieces of
equipment a dentist uses.
		 b.	With the help of a dentist, prepare a dental stone
cast using a vibrator, a mixing bowl, a water measure,
a plastic measure, model stone, and a spatula.
		 c.	Keep a record of everything you eat for three days. Circle
those items that may provide the sugars that bacterial
plaque needs to make acid. List snacks that you should
avoid to help maintain the best oral health.
5. Discuss with your merit badge counselor the following:
		 a.	How fluorides help prevent tooth decay and the ways
fluorides can be provided to the teeth.
		 b.	How the mouth is related to the rest of the body.
Topics might include chewing, saliva, enzymes,
nutrition, and speech.
6. Do TWO of the following:
		 a.	Make a model tooth out of soap, clay, papier-mâché,
or wax. Using a string and a large hand brush, show
your troop or a school class proper toothbrushing and
flossing procedures.
		 b.	Make a poster on the prevention of dental disease.
Show the importance of good oral health.
		 c.	Collect at least five advertisements for different
toothpastes. List the claims that each one makes.
Tell about the accuracy of the advertisements.

DENTISTRY    3

		 d.	Write a feature story for your school newspaper on the
proper care of teeth and gums. Include in your story
how the use of tobacco products can negatively affect
a person’s oral health.
		 e.	Make drawings and write about the progress of dental
decay. Describe the types of dental filling and treatments
a dentist can use to repair dental decay problems.
7. Learn about career opportunities for both Doctor of Dental
Surgery (D.D.S.) and auxiliary dental professions. Pick
either general dentistry OR a dental specialty, plus one
auxiliary dental profession. Find out about the education,
training, and experience required for these two professions.
Discuss these with your counselor, and explain why these
professions interest you.

Dentistry Resources.

Dentistry Resources
Scouting Literature
First Aid, Medicine, and Public Health
merit badge pamphlets
For more information about
or to order Scouting-related
resources, visit the BSA’s
online retail cataolog at
http://www.scoutstuff.org.

Books
Betancourt, Jeanne. Smile!
How to Cope with Your Braces.
Alfred A. Knopf, 1982.
Brazis, D.D.S., Steven J. Your Children’s
Teeth: A Parent’s Guide to
Saving Money at the Dentist.
CreateSpace, 2010.

Klatell, Jack, Andrew Kaplan, and
Gray Williams Jr. The Mount Sinai
Medical Center Family Guide to
Dental Health. Macmillan Publishing
Company, 1991.
Kulacz, D.D.S., Robert, and Thomas E.
Levy, M.D., J.D. The Roots of
Disease: Connecting Dentistry &
Medicine. Xlibris, 2002.
Lee, McHenry, Joleen Jackson, and
Vicki J. Audette. I Hate Dentists!
The Feel Good Guide to Going to
the Dentist. IHD Publishing, 1999.
Marsoli, Lisa Ann. Things to Know
About Going to the Dentist. Silver
Burdett Company, 1984.
Ring, Malvin. Dentistry: An Illustrated
History. Harry N. Abrams Inc., 1992.

Breiner, Mark A. Whole-Body Dentistry:
Discover the Missing Piece to Better
Health. Quantum Health Press, 1999.

Taintor, Jerry F., and Mary Jane Taintor.
The Oral Report: The Consumer’s
Common Sense Guide to Better
Dental Care. Ballantine, 1989.

Friedman, Jay W. Complete Guide to
Dental Health. AuthorHouse, 2002.

Ward, Brian R. Dental Care. Franklin
Watts, 1986.

Ichord, Loretta Frances. Toothworms
and Spider Juice: An Illustrated
History of Dentistry. The Millbrook
Press, 2000.

Wynbrandt, James. The Excruciating
History of Dentistry: Toothsome Tales
and Oral Oddities From Babylon to
Braces. St. Martin’s Press, 2000.

62    DENTISTRY

.Dentistry Resources

Organizations and Websites
Academy of Comprehensive Esthetics
Website: http://www.ACEsthetics.com
Academy of General Dentistry
Toll-free telephone: 888-243-3368
Website: http://www.agd.org
American Academy of
Cosmetic Dentistry
Toll-free telephone: 800-543-9220
Website: http://www.aacd.com

American Association of Public
Health Dentistry
Website: http://www.aaphd.org
American College of Prosthodontists
Website: http://www.prosthodontics.org
American Dental
Assistants Association
Website: http://www.dentalassistant.org
American Dental Association
Website: http://www.ada.org

American Academy of
Dental Sleep Medicine
Website: http://www.aadsm.org

American Dental
Education Association
Website: http://www.adea.org

American Academy of Oral and
Maxillofacial Pathology
Toll-free telephone: 888-552-2667
Website: http://www.aaomp.org

American Dental
Hygienists’ Association
Website: http://www.adha.org

American Academy of Oral and
Maxillofacial Radiology
Website: http://www.aaomr.org
American Academy of
Pediatric Dentistry
Website: http://www.aapd.org
American Academy
of Periodontology
Website: http://www.perio.org
American Association
of Endodontists
Toll-free telephone: 800-872-3636
Website: http://www.aae.org
American Association of Oral
and Maxillofacial Surgeons
Website: http://www.aaoms.org
American Association
of Orthodontists
Website: http://www.braces.org

American Dental Society of
Anesthesiology
Website: http://www.adsahome.org
American Society of Dentist
Anesthesiologists
Website: http://www.asdahq.org
Dentalsite
Website: http://www.dentalsite.com
HealthWeb
Website: http://www.healthweb.org

Acknowledgments
The Boy Scouts of America is grateful
to Kent Smith, D.D.S., for his expertise
and assistance with this merit badge
pamphlet. Thanks to Dr. Smith and
Dr. Jeff Roy for the use of their facilities
at 21st Century Dental in Irving, Texas.
We thank Dr. Smith, Dr. Roy, and
their staff members, who went beyond
the call of duty to help make possible
the photography in this edition of the
Dentistry merit badge pamphlet.
DENTISTRY    63

