SPORTS


SPORTS
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


35954
ISBN 978-0-8395-0151-0
©2023 Boy Scouts of America
2023 Printing
FPO
Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Sports or check Scoutbook for
the latest requirements.


SPORTS 3





SPORTS 5
Contents
What Is a Sport? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Your Body—Your Engine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .18
Playing Sports . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
Personal Training. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
Avoiding and Treating Sports Injuries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
Sports Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 94





SPORTS 7
.What Is a Sport?
What Is a Sport?
Millions of people participate in sports every year. For some the
appeal is the close friendships that come with being part of a
team. Some revel in the joy of victory and lessons of defeat. For
some, the personal fitness is so important that exercise becomes
a daily need. And still others desire the feeling of achievement,
that feeling of measurable improvement that comes with dedi-
cation to a sport. Regardless of the reasons you play, sports are
a fun way to get the exercise your body needs.
Athletics becomes a sport when it is organized into a com-
petition. Running through your neighborhood is athletics, great
exercise. But running in a cross-country championship, compet-
ing against other runners with an official to enforce the rules, is
a sport. Swimming to cool off for the afternoon is exercise. Swim-
ming at an organized swim meet for your team, competing
against another team, is a sport.





SPORTS 9
.Your Body—Your Engine
Your Body—Your Engine
Think of your body as a race car preparing for the Indianapolis
500. Your training is similar to the fine tuning of the engine. Your
medical examination is like checking the air pressure on the tires.
Eating is adding the fuel needed for every speeding lap around
the track. During the weeks before the big race, everything
possible is done to prepare the car for top performance.
Your Health Habits:
The Key to Sport Success
Your body during training is a race car preparing for the big race.
Healthy habits, including sleep and diet, can have a major impact
on your strength, agility, and endurance. During training, your
body is building stronger muscles and bone tissue, while being
tested to the limit of endurance. Serious athletes cannot ignore
the need to maintain healthy habits, such as eating well and
getting enough sleep.
How tall will you
be? The human
growth hormone
is produced by
the pituitary gland
during sleep.
When your body
doesn’t get
enough sleep,
it produces less
growth hormone.
To grow to your
full height
potential, you
should sleep
eight to 10 hours
each night.


10 SPORTS
Your Body—Your Engine .
An athlete needs a good night’s sleep before practice and
games for strength, endurance, mental focus, and quick reflexes.
Have you ever stayed up late and felt physically and mentally
sluggish the next morning? That sluggish feeling doesn’t disap-
pear when you step on the court or field—the problem intensi-
fies. And what about the night after a practice, game, or even
working out with weights? While you are sawing logs the night
after exercise, your body is busy rebuilding itself, repairing and
strengthening muscles, and growing—so don’t cut sleep short!
First Step: The Physical
Most middle schools and high schools require students to
have an annual physical examination before they participate
in a sports season. In the exam the physician will measure
your heart rate, blood pressure, height, and weight; listen to
your heart and lungs; and test your reflexes and vision. Your
physician may also ask about your nutritional habits, physical
activity, and family life.
Your physician keeps records of your health history, growth,
immunizations, and other information. Ask to see your physical
growth percentiles chart.


.Your Body—Your Engine
Explain to your physician the sports you plan to play.
During the physical exam, the physician can then look for
underlying conditions or symptoms that need treatment or
correction before or during training. The physician may also
advise you on nutrition and how to train safely. Once you
have the physician’s green light, you are ready for sports!
Feed Your Engine—A Healthy Diet
Eating a healthy diet is especially important when competing
in sports. Your body burns food to produce energy and build
muscles and bones. Better choices at the dinner table will
increase your energy and improve your performance.
With all the advertising for low-carbohydrate foods,
you may wonder if carbohydrates are bad for you. Your body
needs carbohydrates for energy, but not all carbs are the same.
Limit eating simple carbohydrates—foods with refined
sugar and white flour, such as soft drinks, cookies, cakes,
and doughnuts.
Make a list of questions for your physician before your
appointment. For example, if you have a sore muscle,
ask about it. Training may increase the pain. Ask about
vitamins and nutrition. What injuries are common for
your sport, and how can you prevent them? If you are
attending BSA summer camp or participating in school
sports, you may need to have the physician sign a
physical form.
Remember for
your BSA popcorn
sales that popcorn
is a whole grain
product. If you
limit the salt and
butter, popcorn is
a healthy snack!


12 SPORTS
Your Body—Your Engine .
The food pyramid—considered by many
to be confusing and hard to read—has
been replaced by the “food plate” as the
nutritional guide for Americans. “MyPlate”
is designed to convey simple, key messages
concerning diet:
• Enjoy food but eat less and avoid
oversized portions.
• Make half your plate fruits and vegetables.
• Drink water instead of sugary drinks, and drink fat-free or low-fat
(1 percent) milk.
• Make at least half your grains whole grains.
• Choose foods lower in sodium by comparing labels.
Desserts are not mentioned because they have little to no nutritional value.
Every person’s nutritional needs vary, based on age, health, and other
factors. If you are 13 years old, 5 feet 5 inches tall, weigh 105 pounds,
and exercise 30 to 60 minutes a day, the U.S. Department of Agriculture
recommends the daily diet shown in the table and food plate.
To check your average daily needs, visit www.choosemyplate.gov/
resources/MyPlatePlan. (Get your parent’s permission first.)
Food Group
Daily Recommended
Amount Healthy Choice Tips
Grains 8 ounces (boy)
6 ounces (girl)
A slice of bread is
1 ounce.
Substitute white bread with whole-wheat
bread and brown rice or whole wheat pasta.
Vegetables 3 cups (boy)
2½ cups (girl)
Try prewashed baby carrots and grape
tomatoes.
Fruits 2 cups Keep a bowl of fresh fruit on the table for
snacks.
Milk 3 cups Drink a glass of fat-free or low-fat milk
with your meals.
Protein 6½ ounces (boy)
5½ ounces (girl)
A 4-ounce piece of
meat fits on the palm of
your hand.
Choose broiled, roasted, or grilled meat
instead of fried.


SPORTS 13
.Your Body—Your Engine
Look for energy builders, complex carbohydrates, like
whole grains, fruits, and vegetables. Make part of your pregame
plan a big carbohydrate dinner the night before, and a good
night’s sleep.
Growing bodies also need extra protein. Protein helps
build and repair damaged tissue. It also helps the body make
antibodies to fight disease. For protein, eat foods like fish,
poultry, pork, beef, eggs, beans, and nuts.
You may find it hard to believe, but fat is also important
for energy and health. It helps the body use carbohydrates
and insulates you in cold weather. Certain fats, however, are
healthier than others. You should limit foods high in saturated
fats, made of meat and dairy fats. These saturated fats increase
cholesterol and the risk of heart disease. Most unsaturated
fats, which are good for you, come from plant oils.
A third type of fat is trans fat. When vegetable oils are
made into margarine or shortening, the resulting trans fats are
difficult for the body to use. Trans fats are used to make french
fries, doughnuts, crackers, and cookies. You will need to read
the nutrition facts label on the food package to see if trans fats
are in the food. The goal is to not consume any trans fats!
What is in this? The large print
on a food box can often be
misleading. Read the list of
ingredients to learn what is
inside, before it is inside you!
When looking for grains, find
foods with the following
ingredients listed first on
the ingredient list: brown rice,
oatmeal, whole-grain corn,
whole oats, whole wheat,
or wild rice.
A good rule of
thumb is to eat
plant oils instead
of meat and dairy
fats. Also, try
to choose fats
that, at room
temperature, are
in liquid rather
than solid form.


14 SPORTS
Your Body—Your Engine .
Keep your body hydrated by drinking at least eight to 10
glasses of water every day. Water helps you stay energized, deal
with hot and cold temperatures, and digest food. By the time you
feel thirsty, you’re already dehydrated, which means your body
doesn’t have as much water as it needs and can’t perform to its
full potential. During training, practice and games take a water
break every 20 minutes to drink 8 ounces of water. Water is the
best choice, but you can drink fruit juices or sports drinks.
Calcium
Broken bones can leave you on the sidelines for a whole
season. Make sure you are getting four servings of calcium
every day so your bones will grow and stay strong. An
8-ounce glass of milk is a serving. Without sufficient
calcium, the insides of bones look like sponges
with little holes throughout. Calcium is found in
dairy products such as milk, cheese, and yogurt.
Calcium is also in some surprising places like nuts,
beans, and broccoli. Look for calcium-fortified
orange juice, too!
Too Much Water?
Especially if you are an athlete who prefers distance
training and events such as cycling, marathons, and
duathlons, be aware of the condition called hyponatre-
mia, or over-hydration. This condition, also called “water
intoxication,” occurs when the body’s water and sodium
(electrolyte) levels get off-balance. As you work out,
your body loses fluids and electrolytes such as sodium
and potassium. Whenever you exercise, be sure you
not only drink plenty of fresh water throughout the day
(instead of all at once), but also consume sports drinks
to help replenish the electrolytes lost through sweating
and physical activity. Be careful, though. Sports drinks
often contain a lot of sugar—empty calories.
Fiber is another
important ingredi-
ent in your diet.
Fiber is sometimes
called roughage
because it cannot
be digested but
instead helps
push food through
the intestine.


SPORTS 15
.Your Body—Your Engine
What’s on Your Plate?
Vegetables may be raw or cooked, fresh, frozen, canned,
or dried/dehydrated. They can also be whole, cut up, or
mashed, and include dark green and leafy vegetables
(broccoli, spinach, collard greens), red and orange
vegetables (carrots, acorn squash, sweet red peppers),
beans and peas (black-eyed peas, chickpeas, lentils,
soybeans), starchy vegetables (green peas, potatoes),
and many others (asparagus, cabbage, cauliflower, celery,
eggplant, green beans, and zucchini, to name a few).
Any fruit—fresh, canned, frozen, dried, pureed, or
100 percent fruit juice—counts as part of the fruit
group. You may be familiar with apples, bananas,
berries, cherries, kiwi, mangoes, melons, nectarines,
oranges, pears, pineapple, and tangerines.
A grain is any food made from barley, cornmeal,
oats, rice, wheat, or another cereal grain. Bread,
pasta, oatmeal, breakfast cereals, tortillas, and grits
are examples.
The protein food group includes those made from meat, poultry,
seafood, beans and peas, eggs, processed soy products, nuts,
and seeds. Beans and peas are also part of the vegetable group.
Remember: Meat and poultry options should be lean or low fat.
The dairy food group includes milk and anything made from milk:
cheese, cottage cheese, ice cream, puddings, sour cream, whip-
ping cream, and yogurt.
Oils are fats that become liquid at room temperature, such as vegeta-
ble oils used in cooking. Solid fats come from animals and also can be made
from vegetable oils—butter, lard, margarine, shortening. Sweets can be included
in this group because they often contain high levels of fats and oils. To help
maintain a healthy lifestyle, limit your consumption of fats and sweets.
Healthful Tips
• A diet rich in fruits and vegetables may reduce risk for heart disease, certain
types of cancers, obesity, and type 2 diabetes.
• Try eating seafood at least twice a week as the main protein food—especially
those rich in omega-3 fatty acids, such as salmon and trout.
• Limit foods and drinks with “empty calories” that offer very little or no
nutritional value. This includes cakes, cookies, donuts, candies, sodas and
energy drinks, fruit drinks, pizza, hot dogs, bacon, sausage, and ice cream.


16 SPORTS
Your Body—Your Engine .
Healthy for Life—Avoid Harmful Substances
To be a strong, healthy performer in sports and in life, avoid
tobacco, alcohol, and other harmful substances.
Tobacco smoke interferes with proper lung growth and func-
tion. It coats the lungs with sticky tars and injures the airways
and air sacs of the lungs. Athletes need their lungs working at
peak capacity. Smoking makes you cough and wheeze. Using
tobacco can leave you gasping for air when you need it most.
Smoking not only reduces athletic performance and stam-
ina, it damages nearly every organ in the body. The blood car-
ries the poisons from smoking to all parts of the body, from the
brain to the bladder. Scientists now know that smoking causes
cancers of the mouth, the larynx (voice box), the lungs, and the
kidneys. It can also cause a type of leukemia, which is a cancer
of the blood. You might have heard that smoking causes heart
disease, but did you know that it raises the risk for stroke, and
damages the body’s ability to fight infection? Smokers are at
high risk of dying from any number of tobacco-related diseases.
Cigarettes can contain dozens of dangerous and cancer-
causing chemicals, including arsenic (used in pesticides and
weed killers), benzene (a toxic solvent), formaldehyde (used to
embalm corpses), and polonium 210 (a highly radioactive ele-
ment). Smoking “casually” or “occasionally” is the same as tak-
ing poison occasionally. If you wouldn’t drink embalming fluid
now and then, why would you smoke, even once in a while?
Alcohol is a depressant. It interferes with reflexes and
coordination. It slows an athlete’s reaction time and impairs
balance, vision, hearing, and judgment. Alcohol dehydrates tis-
sues in the body. Drinking water or a sports drink will hydrate
the body during competition or workouts. Drinking beer or
other alcoholic beverages has the opposite effect—alcohol
makes the drinker thirstier.
If you smoke,
you choke.
Being tobacco-free gives you the stamina to play
sports. As Clint Dempsey, professional soccer player
and member of the U.S. men’s national soccer team,
puts it: “There is no way that if I smoked I’d be able
to perform at even one-tenth of the level I need to.
Even if I [weren’t] a pro, and I [were] just kicking [the
ball] with my friends in a men’s league, smoking
would take away from my game.”


SPORTS 17
.Your Body—Your Engine
A hangover—the “day-after” effect of consuming alcohol—
is marked by headaches, nausea, diarrhea, dehydration, fatigue,
and body aches that can diminish athletic performance. The
long-term harmful effects of alcohol abuse can include damage
to brain and nerve function, weakening of the heart muscle,
abnormal blood clotting, and liver failure leading to death.
Steroids mimic the effects of the natural male hormone
testosterone. Testosterone triggers the maturing of the male
reproductive system in puberty. Taking steroids disrupts the
body’s natural hormone balance, causing dangerous physical
and mental abnormalities.
Steroids are sometimes called “performance-enhancing”
drugs, but they do not improve agility, skill, or cardiovascular
capacity. They act to artificially increase muscle mass at a high
cost to the user’s health. Side effects range from acne, bloating,
and rapid weight gain to weakened tendons, blood-clotting
disorders, liver damage, and premature heart attacks and stroke.
Young people who take steroids may stop growing. The
drugs prevent young bones from lengthening, so that a steroid
user may fail to grow as tall as he or she should. In addition,
the damage to a user’s health can be irreversible and may
not show up for months, years—even decades—after the
abuse ends.
Athletes who start using steroids often have trouble stop-
ping. Evidence suggests that steroid abusers show the classic
symptoms of addiction, including cravings, difficulty quitting,
and withdrawal pains.
Amphetamines are stimulants. Commonly called “uppers,”
these highly addictive drugs create false feelings of power,
strength, and assertiveness. They do not give a user extra physical
or mental energy; they impair judgment and distort the user’s
view of reality. An athlete on uppers may ignore an injury and
do permanent harm to the body. Amphetamines suppress appetite
and may cause extreme, life-threatening weight loss.
Other side effects include nerve damage, uncontrollable and
abnormal movements of the face and jaw muscles, convulsions,
hallucinations, and mental disorders such as paranoia and delu-
sions similar to schizophrenia. Amphetamines damage blood
vessels throughout the body. Users may die from ruptured blood
vessels in the brain or from heart attacks.
Steroids can
cause severe
mood swings,
from deep
depression to
extreme irritability.
’Roid rage is
a term for
the explosive,
out-of-control
aggressiveness
associated with
steroid use.


18 SPORTS
Training.
Training
Look at the life of any Olympic athlete and you will find years
of training to reach their level of play. Training includes warming
up and stretching your muscles, weight training, and ending each
session with a cooldown. Each of these steps is important—let’s
find out why.
Warming Up
Imagine millions of little fibers bundled together, contracting
and expanding every time you move—your muscles. A warm-up
literally warms the muscles, ligaments, and tendons in your
body. It also stretches your muscles and connecting tissues so
they will be less likely to be strained or sprained. The first 10
to 15 minutes of every workout should begin with a warm-up.
This is important not just on the big game day but also in the
routine daily practice. The most important reason to warm up
is to avoid injury, but it also prepares the body for physical
exertion with:
• Increased flexibility
• Faster nerve impulses for faster reflexes
• More oxygen in your muscles
• Increased heart rate
Muscle Buzzwords
Quadriceps—front of the thigh
Hamstring—behind the thigh
Bicep—front of the upper arm
Tricep—behind the upper arm
Calf—behind the lower leg
While important,
weight training
should be one
element of a
comprehensive
workout regimen.
Other aspects of
conditioning, such
as cardiovascular
exercise and
agility, are just as
essential to health
maintenance.


SPORTS 19
.Training
Example Warm-Up
You will want to warm up the muscle groups specifically used
in your sport. A typical warm-up should include 10 minutes of
low to moderate aerobic activity, followed by a few minutes of
stretching. Stretching as part of a warm-up won’t improve your
flexibility but may help reduce your risk of injury. Here are
some 10-minute aerobic warm-up examples:
• Soccer—Jog around the field and then pass the ball with
a partner.
• Cycling—Cycle at a slow pace.
• Running—Walk at a brisk pace.
• Swimming—Take several strokes in the air before getting
in the pool for several slow laps.
• Tennis—Use your racquet and gently practice your strokes
without using a ball.
Five-minute stretching activity: Using the stretches included
in this merit badge pamphlet, stretch your legs, arms, and torso.
By making your own routine sequence of stretches, or by having
the team captain lead the stretches, this part of the warm-up can
be done the same way each time—no thinking required.
Chest stretch


20 SPORTS
Training.
Tricep stretch
Quadriceps (“quad”) stretch
Lower back stretch


SPORTS 21
.Training
Inner thigh stretch
Calf stretch
Hamstring stretch


22 SPORTS
Training.
Why Bother Cooling Down?
So you have had a great workout or practice. Now all you
want is to hit the shower. But wait—you still have to cool
down. Why bother?
Cooling down is an extremely important part of your
workout for your muscles. Not only will cooling down help
you avoid soreness, but there are other benefits:
• Reduces the chances of injury
• Allows your heart rate and breathing to return to normal
• Improves flexibility
Who Needs Weight Training?
Weight training will help you in almost any sport you pick.
Don’t confuse this with body builders, who weight-lift heavier
and heavier weights to make their muscles look bigger. As an
athlete competing in your chosen sport, you would want to lift
lighter weights with more repetitions in a controlled movement
to increase your strength and power in the movements required
in your sport.
You may say, “Why spend time pumping iron when I could
be practicing my goal kick for soccer?” Although repeating this
type of kick would eventually increase your distance and speed,
you could get faster results by spending some of your practice
time exercising your leg muscles with weights to improve their
current ability.
What is a good cooldown? It’s the warm-up in
reverse! Begin your cooldown by doing about
10 minutes of stretching. Stretching after a workout
is the most effective way to improve your flexibility.
Finish your cooldown with a few minutes of mild
aerobic activity, such as walking. Following this
routine will help reduce any soreness you will have
the day after an intense workout.


SPORTS 23
.Training
“If you don’t have a gym [for weight training], try lunges, push-ups,
sit-ups, bench dips, body weight squats, squat jumps. Just lifting your
own weight is enough sometimes.“
—Amanda Cromwell, professional soccer player
Am I a Professional Athlete?
The answer is probably not. People who compete in sporting
events are either amateurs or professionals. You are probably
an amateur athlete, which is nothing to be ashamed of. An
amateur athlete competes for the physical, mental, and social
benefits—the joy of playing the sport. Although professional
athletes also love playing their sport, they, unlike amateurs,
receive money or other tangible rewards (gifts) for playing.
An easy way to remember it is: for a professional athlete,
playing a sport is their profession or job.
High school rules usually differ from state to state,
but the governing bodies of most high schools limit
the type and value of an award a student can receive
for participating in a sport. So if you plan to compete in
an athletic event apart from a school activity, check with
officials about school and state rules. By accepting an
inappropriate gift, even free tickets for your parents to
watch you compete, you could be deemed ineligible
to participate in your school’s athletics.
The Olympic Games
once featured the
world’s best
amateurs. But
in 1986 the
International
Olympic Committee
changed the rules
to allow “all the
world’s great male
and female athletes
to participate,”
which included
professionals.


24 SPORTS
Training.
Colleges and universities may consider an athlete a profes-
sional, and therefore ineligible to compete, if he or she receives
payment for participation in a particular sport; accepts a prom-
ise of payment for participation; signs a contract or written
agreement to participate in a professional sport; accepts finan-
cial assistance from a professional sports organization to play
a sport; knowingly competes on a professional sports team; or
enters into an agreement with a sports agent. However, a col-
lege student who was deemed a professional in one sport, but
who no longer competes as a professional, may participate in
a different sport as an amateur.
Sportsmanship and You
When participating in sports, you should practice good sports-
manship. The traits of sportsmanship include treating opponents,
teammates, coaches, officials, and spectators with respect. Good
sportsmanship and etiquette isn’t always easy. After the game,
whether you have won or lost, use good sportsmanship with your
opponent by shaking hands and saying “good game.”
Always congratu-
late the opponent
after the game.
Humbly celebrate
in front of the
other team. Be
encouraging to
teammates and
opponents during
the game. Do not
use trash talk or
obscene gestures.
Play to win, but be
a polite loser.


SPORTS 25
.Training
Sometimes good sportsmanship means accepting what
might be a poor decision made by an official, referee, or
umpire. Remember, when you are struggling to be a good sport,
that you have promised to exhibit the Scout spirit. You show
your Scout spirit with a cheerful smile and living by the Scout
Oath, which includes helping other people at all times. It can
be hard to be a good sport but you can always take pride in it.
If you are having difficulty with the officials’ rulings, try to put
yourself in their shoes. From the official’s point of view, the
decision was consistent and fair.
If you truly disagree with the officiating after the game,
it is acceptable to write a letter to the league commissioner or
officiating coordinator expressing your concern. Also consider
taking a course to qualify as an official. Not only will you learn
more about the sport you love, you may actually earn a salary.
There is more to playing in a sporting event than winning.
Learning how to be a good sport; how to play with the proper
form, technique, and strategy; and how to be a team leader all
give amateur athletes a sense of pride. That feeling of accom-
plishment can outlast any winning score.
For example, even if your coach wants you to play center field
and you had your heart set on pitching, play the best you can at
center field. Flexibility and the ability to play several positions in
a team sport makes you a valuable player, and coaches appreciate
cooperation. If your coach offers advice, don’t waste time trying
to decide if you agree; make the adjustments as your coach
suggested. The best players are not only talented but coachable—
able to learn through a coach’s corrections, which requires
humility. Humility is an important quality of a good sport.
Some players may kick the ground, mumble bad words,
and lose their temper during a game. This is not being a
good sport. Maintain your cool—win or lose.
Team Leaders
Leadership is not just the coach’s responsibility. A strong team will
have a member who also leads, a team captain. A leader influences
team members to work toward a common team goal. A powerful way
to lead is by example. If you think the team should play more confi-
dently, then do it yourself. The most effective leaders not only motivate
the team in their playing, but are also a friend to all teammates and
practice good sportsmanship whether the team is winning or losing.
Although there
will be times it is
difficult, never
argue with the
referee. It is
permissible to ask
for clarification
as long as you
make it clear you
are not trying to
debate the call.





SPORTS 27
.Playing Sports
Playing Sports
After all the training, practice, tryouts, and picking uniforms
and equipment comes your big day—game day. The crowd
gathers. You lace your shoes. You stretch and warm up.
The referee blows the whistle. Your heart races and the
game begins.
In this chapter, 13 of the sports listed in the requirements
are discussed in alphabetical order, except similar sports are
clustered, like baseball and softball. Your counselor may
approve other sports organized by a school or local league.
Several other popular high school-level sports are golf, gymnas-
tics, swimming, track and field, and wrestling. In addition, the
following sports merit badge pamphlets are available: Archery,
Canoeing, Climbing, Cycling, Golf, Horsemanship, Kayaking,
Rowing, Skating, Swimming, Snow Sports, Water Sports, and
Whitewater. If you choose one of these sports to complete your
requirement, be sure to read the merit badge pamphlet about it.
Sports Etiquette
In all sports there are unwritten rules called etiquette. The ref-
eree is not going to call a foul if you break one of these rules,
but they are important nonetheless.
The complete rules for one sport would fill this book.
In this chapter the basic rules for each sport are listed
so you can begin playing the sport—and have fun.
Remember to ask your coach, trainer, or counselor
about rules specific to your league and age bracket.
Also check with your counselor about making sure the
sports you choose for requirement 5 are not ones that
are unauthorized and restricted by the Boy Scouts
of America.


28 SPORTS
Playing Sports.
Sports spectators also need to follow rules of etiquette.
Clap with respect for your team but never boo the opposing
team. When an injured player who was down on the field
recovers or is carried off, then it is polite to clap in appreciation
of the player’s effort. Never throw anything at the players or try
to enter the playing field during the game.
Baseball
Known as an American sport, baseball has its roots in the
streets and fields of small-town America. Playing baseball will
build quick reflexes, coordination, and a keen anticipation—
being able to guess what the other team is going to do. Baseball
players develop their arms, shoulders, and back for throwing
and hitting. Because speed is of the essence when running the
bases, baseball players strengthen their lower body also.
Possession is
a term used in
many sports. If a
player is carrying,
dribbling, passing,
or in any other
way controlling
the ball (or puck),
then that player’s
team is in
possession. In
general, you must
have possession
in order to score,
so having
possession of
the ball is to your
team’s advantage.
The coin toss is used to begin baseball, basketball, field
hockey, football, ice hockey, lacrosse, soccer, softball,
table tennis, tennis, volleyball, and water polo games.
The visiting team captain will call “heads” or “tails”
while the coin is in the air. The winner of the coin toss
chooses either which side of the field or court to defend
or whether to have possession of the ball for the kickoff
or serve. In baseball and softball, the coin toss winner
picks the first team up to bat.


SPORTS 29
.Playing Sports
Basic Baseball Rules
Nine players make up a baseball team: a pitcher, a catcher,
a first baseman, a second baseman, a third baseman, and
the shortstop (an additional player between second and third
bases), and three outfielders. The pitcher throws the ball from
the center of the infield—the pitcher’s mound. The team at bat
sends batters to home plate to bat, in a set batting order. The
pitcher throws the ball over the plate, and the batter tries to hit
it between first and third base.
A ball is deemed hittable by the umpire if it passes through
the strike zone, an area from the batter’s knees to chest over
the plate. When a batter misses a hittable ball, as decided by
the umpire, it is called a strike. You probably know the phrase,
“three strikes and you’re out.” The batter who gets three strikes
is then out and returns to the dugout.
The umpire will call “ball” on an unhittable ball. If a batter
receives four unhittable balls, then the umpire has the player
“walk” to first base.


30 SPORTS
Playing Sports.
If the ball is hit, the batter drops the bat and runs to first
base. The batter or any other base runner is “out” if touched
by the team holding the ball while not safely touching a base.
As long as the team in the field is attempting to recover the
ball, the batter may run to second, then third, or possibly all
the way to home plate for a home run. Assuming the first bat-
ter stayed on first base, when the second batter hits the ball,
the runner on first runs to second base or beyond, depending
on the play.
A team scores a run, or point, when a runner safely
touches all the bases and returns to home plate without being
called out. In each inning, both teams have a turn at bat and in
the field. A game is complete after the ninth inning if the game
is not tied, which requires extra innings to break the tie.
With your parent’s permission, you can find the latest rule
changes for baseball and softball on the Little League Baseball
website: www.littleleague.org.
OUTFIELD
INFIELD
SHORTSTOP
ON-DECK CIRCLE
DUGOUT
FIRST BASE
FOUL
LINE
COACH’S BOX
CATCHER
FIRST
BASEMAN
SECOND
BASEMAN
THIRD
BASEMAN
RIGHT FIELDER
CENTER FIELDER
LEFT FIELDER
90 FEET
90 FEET
PITCHER
HOME PLATE
THIRD BASE
SECOND BASE
60 FEET
6 INCHES
DUGOUT
COACH’S BOX
L
E
F
T
F
I
E
L
D
C
E
N
T
E
R
FI
E
L
D
RIGHTFIELD
PITCHER’S
MOUND
BATTER’S BOX Baseball diamond
Bunt the ball to
surprise the
opposition by
tapping instead
of swinging
the bat.


SPORTS 31
.Playing Sports
In 1974, major
leaguer Nolan
Ryan set a world
record for the
fastest pitch ever
at 100.9 mph.
Even though
pitches won’t be
coming at you
that fast, be sure
to wear a batting
helmet when on
deck or up to bat.
For every position you play, you need a good pair of
cleats to grip the ground. Most leagues require rubber,
not metal, spiked cleats. Pick a batting helmet that fits
snuggly and comfortably. Shake your head and be sure
it does not slip on your head. Some leagues require a
face shield, too.


32 SPORTS
Playing Sports.
Player (minimum height, weight) Bat Length
4 feet, 50 pounds 29 inches
4 feet 5 inches, 60 pounds 30 inches
5 feet, 70 pounds 31 inches
5 feet 5 inches, 80 pounds 32 inches
Buy a glove designed for the position you play most often.
The first baseman,
pitcher, and outfielders
all need a larger glove
to scoop up the ball.
For other infield
positions, try a
smaller glove so you
can quickly catch and
throw the ball.
The catcher’s mitt has a
special padded palm for
stopping fast pitches.
Try several different bats during practice to find that cor-
rect feel. Professionals cannot use aluminum bats, but your
league probably allows them. Aluminum bats are lighter, they
hit the ball farther, and they don’t break. To give you a general
idea of where to start in picking a bat, use the table below.
Realize that for your individual swing style, like if you like to
choke up on the bat, you may need a different length.


SPORTS 33
.Playing Sports
Babe Ruth never had a batting glove, but you may like
them for the grip and avoiding blisters. Typically batters wear
the batting glove on their lower hand, or left hand if you hit
right-handed. Some even wear them on both hands.
The catcher squats behind home plate, catching sometimes
more than 100 pitches a game and sometimes being hit by the
ball. So a catcher needs special protective equipment not used
by other players. A mask, skullcap, and throat protector slip
over the catcher’s head. A chest protector should fit comfort-
ably and extend from the throat protector to the waist. Shin
guards must cover the feet, shins, and knees. An athletic sup-
porter and cup should also be worn. Last but not least, a catcher
needs a special glove with extra padding to protect the glove
hand from high-speed pitches—a catcher’s mitt.
Baseball and Softball Etiquette
When warming up before the game, never use the infield of the
baseball diamond to do so. Instead, use only designated areas.
During the game, refrain from arguing calls with the umpires.
Players should never use any foreign substances (petroleum
jelly, sandpaper, and so on) to alter the surface of a baseball.
Also, if your team is winning the game with a comfortable lead
(say 10 runs), don’t embarrass the opposing team by excessively
and unnecessarily widening that margin. This means you should
think twice before stealing bases and bunting.


34 SPORTS
Playing Sports.
Softball
Softball is a sport much like baseball, but with a smaller field
and a bigger ball. Sometimes called mushball, the original
softball was softer than today’s. Although enjoyed by many
amateurs, softball is played professionally by women.
Basic Softball Rules
As in baseball, the object of the game is to bat the ball onto
the fair field so that players can circle the bases and score runs.
A run is scored when a batter runs the three bases and returns
home without being tagged with the ball. A team is allowed
three outs, then the opposing team is up to bat and the batting
team covers the field. The umpire will call an out for three strikes,
two strikes followed by a foul ball, and when a batted ball is
caught in the field before touching the ground. Both teams take
a turn at bat for each inning. The team with more runs wins!
The rules of softball may be found under baseball with the
following two exceptions:
• The game consists of seven innings.
• The pitcher must throw underhanded.
A softball with a circumference of 12
inches can be thrown and hit hard enough
that players need to use their gloves. Softball gloves
have a larger pocket than baseball gloves, which helps
in catching the larger ball.
The softball field
is two-thirds the
size of a baseball
field, with 60 feet
between home
plate and first base.


SPORTS 35
.Playing Sports
Basketball
James Naismith, a physical education instructor, had been chal-
lenged for years to come up with an indoor sport for the cold
winter months in Massachusetts. Like most inventors, he tested
several ideas that failed. He thought a goal with an opening that
faced up versus facing the players like hockey or soccer would
be fun. In December 1891, Naismith coached a game using a
soccer ball thrown into two peach baskets nailed to the gym
balcony—the fast-paced game of basketball was born.
Basic Basketball Rules
The simplicity of basketball equipment with two hoops and a
basketball makes it an excellent pick-up game. The five-player
teams have a single objective to shoot the ball through the
opponent’s basket to score. Players have the advantage if they
can dribble, bounce the ball with one hand, and pass while not
looking at the ball but instead at the position of the other play-
ers. Once a player stops dribbling, by catching the ball in one
or two hands, he or she must either attempt to pass or shoot
the ball.
The goal of a dribbling player is to move closer to the
basket for a shot, or to pass to a player who is in a position to
take a shot. Of course at any skill level the closer to the hoop the
2 FEET
RADIUS
6 FEET
RADIUS
19 FEET 9 INCHES
50 FEET
15 FEET
84 FEET FOR HIGH SCHOOL
12 FEET
BACKBOARD
MIDCOURT LINE
BASKET (HOOP)
FREE THROW LANE
BASELINE
FREE THROW LINE
THREE-POINT LINE
SIDELINE
CENTER CIRCLE
KEY
Basketball court


36 SPORTS
Playing Sports.
easier the shot. As you have probably seen in the final seconds
of a game, a player may shoot from anywhere on the court. If
a shot misses, maybe bounces off the hoop, it often rebounds
back into play. A team must attempt to shoot a goal within
a predetermined number of seconds of gaining possession on
the playing court.
• Most basketball teams have 10 players on their roster at
a time; the NBA allows 12.
• Most high school games consist of four quarters of 8-minute
periods. If the game is tied, then overtimes, ranging from two
to five minutes, are added until the tie is broken.
• A goal is made when a live ball enters the basket from above.
Goal scores are one point for a free throw, two points from
inside the three-point line, and three points from outside the
three-point line.
• The ball is played only with hands. It is a violation to kick
the ball. A player in possession of the ball may take one step
and pivot on the other foot. If moving when the ball is caught,
the player may take two steps before dribbling or passing.
• Dribbling is with one hand only. When a dribbling player
places two hands on the ball, the dribbling is done; that
player cannot dribble again until after another player has
handled the ball.
• Depending on the league, a team with possession of the
ball has a set amount of time in which they must take a
shot. For the NBA the time is 24 seconds.
• Free throws are taken from the free throw line with no
other players allowed in the key while the shot is taken.
If an opponent fouls you while you are shooting, then the
referee can give you as many as three free throws from
the free throw line.
• Jump ball is used to begin the game, called a tip-off. A jump
ball also can be used when two players catch the ball at the
same time and it is difficult to see which team should have
possession. A player from each team stands facing each other
on either side of the ball the referee holds. The referee
throws the ball straight up in the air and it is back in play.
Both players jump to gain possession of the ball. Instead of a
jump ball, many leagues use an alternating possession sys-
tem, which allows teams to control possession equally.


SPORTS 37
.Playing Sports
• Ten-second rule: Once a team has possession of the ball,
it has 10 seconds to move the ball to its front court.
• Three-second rule: When a player’s team has possession
of the ball, that player cannot be in the free throw lane for
more than three seconds at a time.
• The referee may call a foul on a player for intentional contact
with an opponent.
• After an opponent scores a basket, possession changes to
the other team, whose designated player steps out of bounds
and passes the ball to a teammate on the court. Then both
players race to the other end of the court while dribbling or
passing the ball, and play resumes.
Basketball Etiquette
In all sports, and especially basketball, it is important to be
encouraging toward your teammates and opponents. It is an
unwritten rule, but important in the close-contact game of
basketball, to hold back any negative comments and instead
give encouragement like “good shot.”
Your goal should be for your team to excel, not to set a new
record for the number of baskets made by an individual. If you
can safely pass the ball to another player who is in a better posi-
tion, don’t be a ball hog—pass the ball.
Equipment
Truly all you need to play basketball are two hoops, a basket-
ball, and a flat surface for dribbling the ball. A regulation
basket is 10 feet above the ground, and the inside diameter
of the hoops is 18 inches.
Basketballs in the approved shade of
orange are made of leather, rubber, or syn-
thetic material. To meet regulations, your
basketball when dropped from a height
of 6 feet should bounce back at least 4
feet high. Basketballs come in different
sizes. For players 9 to 11 years of age, a
junior or youth basketball (size 5)
should be about right. For players ages
11 to 14 try a size 6 ball. You can play
basketball in any sneaker, but when
buying basketball shoes, look for high-
tops with ankle support and good grip.


38 SPORTS
Playing Sports.
Bowling
The object of bowling is to roll a bowling ball down the lane
and knock over as many of the 10 pins as possible. Sounds easy,
but this sport requires practice and skill to master. Bowling is
enjoyed by many because it can be played by people young
and old, tall and short, and male and female.
What is the maximum score? Knocking down all 10 pins
is called a strike. If you have a perfect game, with all strikes,
it would be 100, right? No, a perfect score is 300! Read on to
learn the tricks of counting your bowling score.
On a bowling scorecard there are 10 boxes called frames.
In the top left of each frame you write the number of pins
knocked down on your first rolled ball. In the box in the top
right corner of each frame record the number of pins that fall
with the second ball. The total score is written in the bottom
of the box. For each frame you get two chances to knock down
all the pins, with a bonus ball in the tenth frame if you make
a spare with the first two balls, or two bonus balls if you make
a strike on the first ball. A spare, marked with a slash (/), is
when all 10 pins are knocked down with the second delivery
in one frame. A strike is marked with an “X” in the small
square and is worth 10 points plus the number of pins in
the next two deliveries.


SPORTS 39
.Playing Sports
Basic Bowling Rules
A player, either as a team or as an individual, rolls a bowling
ball aiming to knock down as many of the 10 pins as possible
at the end of the 60 foot lane. Cheers go up for a spare, when
all 10 pins are knocked down with the second bowl. And even
louder cheers are given for a strike, when all 10 pins are knocked
down with the first bowl. An automatic machine called a pin-
spotter resets the pins after a player’s second bowl or strike.
Players or teams alternate turns bowling until all 10 frames
on the scorecard are filled. The rare and perfect game is
all strikes.
• Bowling is played either as an individual or as teams with
up to five players on a team. On teams the players take turns
bowling one frame at a time. Players must bowl in the order
they have chosen each time. Teams or individuals alternate
between two lanes with every frame. For example, team one
would have all five players bowl frame one, while team two
bowls their frame one on an adjacent lane. Then the teams
would switch lanes before beginning frame two and bowl in
the same order.
• Bowling 10 frames is a complete game.
Bowl only two balls per frame, except
bowl only one ball in a frame when a
strike is scored, and three in the tenth
frame after either a strike or a spare.
A spare is when
all the pins are
knocked down with
two consecutive
bowled balls.
A strike is when
all the pins are
knocked down with
the first bowled
ball of a frame.
Sample bowling scorecard


40 SPORTS
Playing Sports.
• You are not allowed to step on or pass over the foul line
when bowling. If you do, it is counted as a foul, with an “F”
on the score. If it is your first delivery, you are allowed your
second delivery after all the knocked down pins are respot-
ted, or set up.
• Pinfalls count when they are knocked down by the ball or
other pins but not when knocked down by a ball rebounding
from the rear cushion, mechanical pinsetting equipment, or
a bowler who fouls.
The ball is considered “dead” when:
• A player bowls out of turn.
• A player is interfered with during delivery.
• A pin falls after delivery but before the ball rolls to the pins.
• If after delivery it is noted that one or more pins is missing
in the setup.
When a dead ball is called, the delivery does not count, any
knocked down pins are respotted, and the player is allowed to
redeliver the ball.


SPORTS 41
.Playing Sports
Bowling Etiquette
As in many other sports, it is poor etiquette to distract another
player. Bowlers should remember this and remain quiet and
still when around another bowler before and during the
player’s delivery. If you are bowling at the same time
as someone in a lane on your right, allow the other
player to bowl first. Wait until the pinsetting
machine is done and the sweep bar is raised.
To help keep the fun pace of the game,
be ready to bowl when it is your turn.
After your delivery, return to
the settee area. It is also
good etiquette to not use
someone else’s ball
without asking first.
Bowlers wear special
bowling shoes with
leather slide padded
soles. All bowling
balls are the same
size—27 inches in
circumference. The ball weighs
between 6 and 16 pounds and
typically is made of plastic. It has three holes for finger
grips. When picking a ball, make sure your thumb
will insert all the way in the finger hole. A male
teen might want to start with a 10-pound ball.
To test the ball to make sure it is not too
heavy for you, hold it out in front of you
with one hand and count for five seconds.
If you can easily hold the ball up, it should
be fine.
HEAD PIN
GUTTER
ARROWS
FOUL LINE
SECOND SET OF APPROACH DOTS
FIRST SET OF APPROACH DOTS
60 FEET3 FEET 12 FEET
15 FEET
Bowling lane
42 INCHES


42 SPORTS
Playing Sports.
Cross-Country
If you like running but find running around the same track
too boring, cross-country may be for you. Cross-country races
are run over difficult and sometimes hilly ground that often
vary in distance from 3 to 12 kilometers (less than 2 miles
to more than 7 miles). Most high school courses are about
5 kilometers long.
Every course is different, but usually the course is shaped in
a loop so that the start and finish lines are the same place. Today
some cross-country organizations are leaving the obstacles of the
countryside for stadiums. Yet for many the fun of cross-country
running is the experience of the beautiful countryside scenery
and challenge of uneven running surface.
Cross-Country Etiquette
When running in an event or for team practice, exercise good
etiquette by always passing on the left. Announcing “On your
left” will alert another runner before you pass. Part of the
experience of running cross-country is enjoying the beauty
of the outdoors, so remember never to litter.
For more information on cross-country events, get your
parent’s permission and visit the USA Track and Field website:
www.usatf.org.
Cross-country cleats
have a maximum of
11 cleats.
How many miles
is a 3-kilometer
cross-country
event? To convert
kilometers to miles,
simply multiply the
kilometers by 0.62.
So a 3-kilometer
run is 3 X 0.62 =
1.86 miles.


SPORTS 43
.Playing Sports
START AND
FINISH LINES
800 M 1200 M
400 M
1600 M N
In cross-country
there are two
placings, one for
individual and
one for teams.
Teams, usually
consisting of
four runners,
have their times
totaled. The team
with the lowest
total time wins.
Cross-country course


44 SPORTS
Playing Sports.
Football
Football is an extremely popular high school, college, and pro-
fessional game in the United States. The mix of hard-hitting
physical contact and complex tactics and formations, sometimes
compared to chess, appeals to the masses. The highlight of the
professional National Football League season is battled out in
the Super Bowl each year.
53 YARDS 1 FOOT
END LINE
DEFENSIVE FORMATION
FREE SAFETY
SAFETY
OUTSIDE LINEBACKERS (2)
CORNERBACKS (2)
MIDDLE LINEBACKER
TACKLES (2)
ENDS (2)
LINE OF SCRIMMAGE
OFFENSIVE FORMATION
WIDE RECEIVER (END, ON LINE)
TACKLES (2)
GUARD (2)
CENTER
QUARTERBACK
FULLBACK
HALFBACK
TIGHT END (ON LINE)
WIDE RECEIVER (BACKFIELD)
GOAL LINE
END ZONEGOAL POST
10
YARDS 10
YARDS
100
YARDS
5-YARD LINE
15-YARD LINE
25-YARD LINE
35-YARD LINE
45-YARD LINE
45-YARD LINE
35-YARD LINE
25-YARD LINE
15-YARD LINE
5-YARD LINE
SIDELINES
Football field


.Playing Sports
Basic Football Rules
Football is played between two teams on a 100-yard field with
goal posts at either end. The object of the game is to move the
ball by passing and/or running the ball over the opponent’s
goal line—touchdown! Sometimes a touchdown happens after
one play, but usually it requires several plays. A touchdown is
worth six points. After the touchdown the ball is placed close
to the goal line. The scoring team has two choices for a point
after touchdown (PAT). They can score one point by kicking
the ball between the uprights—the extra point. Or they can
score two points if they advance the ball across the goal line—
known as a two-point conversion.
• A football team usually plays 11 on the field at a time, but
the complete team sometimes consists of 45 players.
• Football is played in four quarters, at varying time lengths
depending on the level. The professional National Football
League and colleges play 15-minute quarters; high schools
play 12 minutes; and lower levels play less than that. A game
often lasts three hours because the clock stops after an
incomplete pass, for a change of possession, or if a player
with the ball goes out of bounds. Teams change ends with
each quarter. A kickoff begins each half.
• Other than kickoffs and free kicks, each play begins with
both teams facing each other along the line of scrimmage,
which runs through the ball and straight to each sideline.
• Players can run with the ball or pass it. Offensive players
may forward only one pass per play from behind the line
of scrimmage.
• Offensive players may use their arms and hands to block
opponents, but they cannot hold on to them. For offensive
holding the referee can give a 10-yard penalty—move the
ball back 10 yards.
Because of the
potential for injury,
the Boy Scouts of
America does not
authorize football
as an activity to
be played during
Scouting activi-
ties. However,
football can be
used as one of the
sports for this
merit badge if
participation is
as part of an
organized school
activity or
municipal parks-
and-recreation
program.


46 SPORTS
Playing Sports.
A football’s pebble-grained leather cover and laces make it easier
to grip. Its bounce comes from the inflated rubber bladder inside.
Football players are some of the most heavily padded athletes
with pads protecting shoulders, hips, thighs, and knees. While
no helmet can prevent all head injuries, today’s helmets, with
a polypropylene plastic padded shell and face mask, do protect
better than the previous generations of plastic helmets and
leather helmets.
Flag football is for
those who love
the game but
prefer to reduce
the risk of injury.
In flag football a
player wears two
flags made of
narrow strips of
nylon hanging
from a belt. A ball
carrier is “tackled”
when a defender
simply pulls off the
flag. A player’s
speed and tactics
outweigh the
importance of the
player’s size in
flag football.
• If a defender unfairly attempts to stop an opponent from
catching the ball, the defender is given a first down at the
spot of violation. If an offender unfairly interferes with a
defender attempting to intercept a pass, the offender will
lose yardage.
• In some leagues, a tied game at the end of the fourth quarter
goes into overtime with another 15-minute quarter that ends
in “sudden death” when either team scores. If neither team
scores in overtime, the game is declared a tie.
Football Etiquette
Football might be a contact sport, but pushing, shoving, and
other acts of aggression are strictly forbidden when the play is
over. Help teammates and opponents up from the ground
whenever possible, and never jump or “pile on” another player
once the whistle has blown. At the end of the game, remember
to shake hands with opponents.


SPORTS 47
Ice Hockey
Ice hockey is a fast game. The players skate up and down the
rink in nonstop motion and the rubber puck skims across the
ice at more than 100 miles per hour. With the puck flying faster
than a car, no wonder the players wear protective padding and
helmets. Even the spectators are protected by a wall of
shatterproof glass.
Equipment
Pick a hockey stick with a small lie for better
control of the puck when it is close to you.
Pick a larger lie to control the puck in
a larger area. Notice that goalies use
a special stick with the shaft narrower
at the top and then wider before
the blade, to help stop the
flying puck.
If you play right-handed,
you will grab the hockey stick
with your right hand one-
third of the way down.
Then use your left hand
to hold the top of the
shaft. Left-handed
players do the
opposite with a
left-handed stick.
Hat Trick
The term hat trick started with the game of cricket
when a player made three consecutive wickets. Today
the term means three goals by one player in one game
in several sports, including ice hockey, field hockey,
soccer, and lacrosse. In baseball it is jokingly called a
hat trick when a batter strikes out three times in a sin-
gle game. Hat tricks can also mean three significant
accomplishments, like three championships in basket-
ball. Have you ever had a hat trick?
Skater’s
stick The angle
between the shaft
and blade is
called the lie.
TAPE KNOB
SHAFT
HEEL
BLADE
TOE
.Playing Sports


48 SPORTS
Playing Sports.
Goalies wear special gloves and additional padding
to protect them from a speeding puck.
Did You Know?
• The hard rubber puck used in a professional hockey game measures
1 inch thick and 3 inches in diameter.
• To reduce friction, players sharpen the 1
⁄6-inch-thick blades on
their skates.
• Ice hockey has been an Olympic event since 1920.
• A hockey puck can race through the air at 100 mph.
• Ice hockey jerseys are traditionally called sweaters.


SPORTS 49
.Playing Sports
Basic Ice Hockey Rules
The fast game of ice hockey is played by two teams skating
on mechanically frozen or natural ice, and hitting a rubber puck
with sticks. The object is to defend your goal from the opponent’s
attack and to score by hitting the puck in the opponent’s goal.
Teams battle over the puck with six players: three forwards, two
defenders, and a goalie. The puck stays in play even when it hits
a barrier board that encircles the rink to protect spectators. The
action halts only when the puck sails over the barrier, when an
official calls an infringement, or after a goal.
Ice Hockey Etiquette
Maybe you have heard the funny saying, “I was at a
fight and a hockey game broke out.” Unfortunately this
sometimes seems true. Don’t let it happen to your game.
Show good sportsmanship by not getting in a fight and
by discouraging your teammates from doing so.
Spectator etiquette for any sport is only to cheer
for your team. It is poor spectator etiquette to throw
anything onto the ice—not to mention dangerous for
the skaters.
Ice hockey
originally was
played outdoors
on frozen lakes or
ponds, but today
it is more often
played indoors
on artificial ice.
Hockey rink
GOAL LINE
GOAL LINE
GOAL
GOAL
FACE-OFF
SPOT
FACE-OFF
CIRCLES
FACE-OFF
CIRCLES
BLUE LINE
BLUE LINE
RED LINE
CENTER
FACE-OFF
CIRCLE
REFEREE’S CREASE
GOALIE
60 FEET
85 FEET
FACE-OFF
SPOT
FACE-OFF
SPOT
FACE-OFF
SPOT
CENTER
FACE-OFF
SPOT
FACE-OFF
SPOT
FACE-OFF
SPOT
FACE-OFF
SPOT
FACE-OFF
SPOT CENTER
LEFT WING RIGHT WING
LEFT DEFENSE RIGHT DEFENSE
44 FEET
BOARDS (40 TO 48 INCHES HIGH)
NEUTRAL ZONE
ATTACKING OR
DEFENDING ZONE ATTACKING OR
DEFENDING ZONE
60 FEET
12 FEET
12 FEET
5 FEET
15 FEET
GOAL
CREASE
END ZONE


50 SPORTS
Playing Sports.
To restart play, the official drops the puck in a face-off. For
a goal to count, the puck must be played fairly off a stick.
It cannot be thrown or kicked into the goal.
• A game consists of three periods, each about 20 minutes long.
• Each team sends six players on the ice at a time.
• Skaters advance the puck by skating with it or passing it.
Players must keep the puck in motion and advance toward
their opponent’s goal with the puck. The only exception is
players may take the puck behind their own goal one time.
• Penalties include offsides and icing. An offsides is called
when a player passes the puck forward to a teammate in
the attacking zone, over the blue line. Icing is when a player
shoots the puck from his or her side of the red (center) line
all the way across the red goal line on the attacking side, but
not into the goal, and the puck is first touched by a member
of the attacking team.
• Each period begins with a face-off. Teams line up on their
side of the red (center) line with the centers from each team
in the center face-off circle.
Players who commit a penalty are sent to the penalty box. After
a minor penalty, a player spends two minutes, or until the other
team scores, in the penalty box. After a major penalty, a player
spends a full five minutes in the penalty box regardless of
whether the other team scores. The team with a player in the
penalty box has to play shorthanded, with fewer than six
players on the ice. The opposing team with a player advantage
has a “power play” and a significant opportunity to score.
Violations other than offsides and icing include hooking,
slashing, high-sticking, spearing, tripping, checking from behind,
and fighting.
A shutout—every
goalie’s dream—is
when no goals are
scored on a team
the entire game.
What sports other
than ice hockey
have shutouts?
Ice hockey, field hockey, and lacrosse all use the face-off.
In ice hockey, the official blows the whistle and drops
the puck between the sticks of the two players, who
immediately try to gain possession of the puck. Face-offs
are used to begin a game and to restart play (after a
goal; when a puck is hit out of the rink; or after offsides,
icing, or other violations).


SPORTS 51
.Playing Sports
Game Strategy
Imagine there are five minutes left on the clock and
your team is down 1-0. If you could tie, your team has
a chance to advance; if you lose, your team is out of the
run for the championship. What would you do if you
were coach? You might pull your goalie out of the game
and send in another forward. With more attackers, your
odds of scoring increase. If the opposing team makes
another goal first, your team is no worse off, since they
were already losing. This strategy is used in many other
sports, including soccer.
Delayed Penalty
Sometimes a team
commits a penalty
and the opposing
team immediately
gains possession
of the puck. In this
case, in order not
to penalize the
nonoffending
team by stopping
play, the official
will raise an arm
to signal a penalty
but will not blow
the whistle.
Depending on the
outcome of the
play, the official
may waive the
penalty or simply
delay it.
RED GOAL LINE
OFFSIDES
ICING
BLUE LINE
A
B
C
D
RED LINE
(CENTER)
PUCK
Offsides
and icing


52 SPORTS
Playing Sports.
Field Hockey
Games with balls and sticks date back to ancient Egyptian,
Greek, and Roman civilizations. In time, field hockey branched
into two other games, on horseback as polo and on ice as ice
hockey. The International Hockey Federation (FIH) approved
the first World Cup Hockey Tournament to be held in 1971.
With your parent’s permission, look for upcoming field hockey
events at the FIH website: www.fih.ch/?redirect=internal.
Basic Field Hockey Rules
Field hockey is played usually on grassy fields with two teams
hitting a ball with hockey sticks. The object of the game is to
score by hitting the hockey ball from within the shooting circle
into the opponent’s goal. The team scoring the most goals wins.
Unique to field hockey, players other than the goalie are not
allowed to play the ball off any part of their body. Players hit,
push, flick, and scoop the ball with the flat face on the curved


SPORTS 53
.Playing Sports
end of the stick. Players attack the goal by dribbling—moving
the ball down the field with their stick—or by passing the ball
to a teammate. To add to the challenge of passing and drib-
bling, the opponent tries to intercept the ball or tackle the
player with the ball.
• Each team fields 11 players.
• A game is two halves of 35 minutes each.
• An attacking player hits the ball completely across the goal
line to score a goal. Goals count only when the shot is taken
from inside the shooting circle.
• For the safety of both teammates and opponents, players may
not play the ball with their sticks above shoulder
height. Players also are not allowed to charge, kick, or
hold an opponent.
• If a player is called on a penalty, the umpire awards a free
hit, a penalty stroke, or a penalty corner to the opposing
team. In extreme cases, an umpire may make a violating
player sit out for at least five minutes. During this time,
the team must play shorthanded, with fewer than 11 players
on the field.
• If both teams break the rules at the same time or if the
game is stopped for an injury, the umpire will call a face-off
to resume play. A player from each team will face each other
with the ball on the ground between their sticks. Then they
tap their sticks on the ground and hit their sticks together
three times. Next they both quickly try to gain possession
of the ball.
Field Hockey Etiquette
If an opponent hits you, remember that “flopping”—pretending
to get hit harder than you actually are—is not allowed and
could result in a penalty. Use only the flat side of your stick,
and never obstruct the ball from your opponent using your
stick or body. All players should have an equal chance to play
the ball and gain control of the ball.


54 SPORTS
Players make contact with the ball with the flat side of the curved
end of the wooden field hockey stick. Forwards tend to choose
lighter sticks (18 to 19 ounces) for quick ball control. Defenders
often prefer heavier sticks (22 to 25.9 ounces) for hard hits. Play
with a stick length you are comfortable with, but in general if
you are shorter than 5 feet tall, use a 32- or 34-inch stick, and if
you are taller than 5 feet, try a 35-, 36-, or 37-inch stick. A goal-
keeper wears a different colored jersey and protection from the
hard plastic ball, including a helmet with face guard, body
protector, padded gloves, and shin guards.
PENALTY CORNER
DEFENDER’S MARK PENALTY CORNER
ATTACKER’S MARK
LONG CORNER
ATTACKER’S
MARK
GOAL
PENALTY SPOT
SHOOTING CIRCLE
25-YARD LINE
CENTER LINE
25-YARD LINE
16 YARDS
4 YARDS
5 YARDS
7 YARDS
Field hockey field
Playing Sports.


SPORTS 55
.Playing Sports
WING AREA
WING AREA
SIDELINE
END LINE
110 YARDS
60 YARDS
20 YARDS
15
YARDS
20 YARDS
20 YARDS
50 YARDS
LIMIT LINE
35 YARDS
40 YARDS
3-YARD RADIUS 10 YARDS
10
YARDS
20 YARDS
6 YARDS5 YARDS
BENCH
TEAM AREATEAM AREA
COACH’S
AREA
COACH’S
AREA
BENCH
Lacrosse field
20 YARDS
Lacrosse
American Indians, like the Sioux, Cherokee, and Choctaw, played
a game that was the inspiration of today’s lacrosse. Although the
sticks’ shape would remind you of today’s sticks, there were
many differences in the game. Games often covered miles and
lasted for several days. The games served many religious and
ritual purposes, and they helped prepare the tribes for war.


56 SPORTS
Playing Sports.
Basic Lacrosse Rules
The almost acrobatic game of lacrosse is played by batting,
carrying, or throwing the ball, not with the player’s hands
but with the lacrosse stick. Only the goalie can use hands in
touching the ball. To begin play, two players face-off in the
center spot. Once a player has possession of the ball, the rest
of the team enters the game. Attempting to gain possession
of the ball, players intercept the ball during a pass, charge the
ball in ground scuttles, and within the rules, check their
opponent’s lacrosse stick.
• A lacrosse game is four quarters, each 15 minutes long with
two teams of 10 players each. The team positions are three
attackers, three midfielders, three defenders, and a goalkeeper.
• To begin the game, the referee places the ball between the
sticks of the two center attackers, who at the sound of the
referee’s whistle try to gain possession of the ball.
• The ball is either carried in the stick, passed with a wrist-
flipping motion or kicked to the goal. Opposing players
attempt to block or intercept the ball.
• After each goal, the team scored upon returns to midfield
and has possession of the ball at the whistle.
• Only goalies can use their hands to block or catch the ball.
• For a personal foul, a referee can award a one-minute sus-
pension or go as far as removing the offending player for the
remainder of the game. A personal foul includes checking
(hitting) an opponent with the part of the stick between the
hands or from behind, above the shoulders, or below the
knees when the person is not in possession of the ball.
• Technical fouls include a player interfering with the free
movement of an opponent (interference), except when
the opponent has possession of the ball or each is
within 5 yards of a loose ball; or when a team
does not have at least four players on its defen-
sive side of the midfield line; or at least three
players on its offensive side (offsides).


SPORTS 57
.Playing Sports
Lacrosse Etiquette
Because teamwork is so critical to lacrosse, it is considered
good etiquette to pass to an open player, not hog the ball, and
not show favoritism in your passing. It is also considered good
etiquette to shoot at the goal only when it is an open or clear
shot. Shooting to increase your personal chance of more goals,
when you do not have an open shot, shows poor etiquette and
usually results in giving possession of the ball to the other team.
Team players make decisions based on what is best for their
teams, not for themselves.
Modern lacrosse sticks are crafted of molded plastic heads, nylon nets, and aluminum
shafts. The rubber ball is just smaller than a baseball. Players prefer cleated shoes to
grip the ground on grass fields. Don’t forget your safety equipment for this aggressive
sport, including a mouthpiece, face mask, helmet, and padded gloves.


58 SPORTS
Playing Sports.
Soccer
Soccer scores as the world’s most popular game to play and
watch. Only in the last 20 years has the United States joined
the European obsession with soccer. Today soccer is the num-
ber one youth participation sport in America with more than
19 million youth between the ages of 5 and 19 participating.
Basic Soccer Rules
Soccer is played with two teams on an open grass field with
goal posts at each end. The object of the game is to move the
soccer ball down the field by kicking, passing, or heading. To
score a point, a player must put the ball into the opponent’s
guarded goal. With only two exceptions, players are not allowed
to use their arms. Goalies, inside their goalie boxes, may use
CORNER KICK
CIRCLE
TOUCHLINE
GOALIE
FULL-
BACK
HALFBACK HALFBACK HALFBACK
TOUCHLINE
OUTSIDE-RIGHT
FORWARD
PENALTY ARC
PENALTY SPOT
PENALTY AREA
GOAL AREA
INSIDE-RIGHT
FORWARD
CENTER
FORWARD INSIDE-LEFT
FORWARD
OUTSIDE-LEFT
FORWARD
44 YARDS
GOAL KICK
PENALTY AREA
8 YARDS
8 FEET
100 TO 130 YARDS
50 TO 100 YARDS
20 YARDS
12
YARDS
FULL-
BACK
GOAL AREA
6
YARDS Soccer field


SPORTS 59
.Playing Sports
their arms to block, grab, and throw the ball. If the ball passes
over the sidelines, then the opponent to the last team that
touched the ball throws the ball back into play. After each goal,
the team that was scored on kicks off the ball from the center
of the field. Soccer, known as football in European countries,
has a growing number of fans who love the nonstop action.
• A team has 11 players
on the field, including
the goalkeeper.
• A game is two equal
halves of 45 minutes.
After the referee gives
the signal, the game
begins with a kickoff.
• A goal is scored when
the whole ball crosses
over the goal line
between the goal posts
and under the cross-
bar—when the ball
goes in the goal.
• After a goal, the team
scored on takes the
kickoff. After halftime,
the teams change ends
and the team that did not take the starting kickoff takes the
kickoff for the second half.
• The ball is in play except if it completely crosses the goal line
or sideline or if the referee stops the game.
• A player committing an offsides is penalized by awarding the
opposing team with an indirect kick. An indirect kick must
be kicked by two players before scoring a goal. A referee can
also call a foul and award an indirect kick to penalize the
opposing team for playing dangerously, tackling when not
playing the ball, or charging the goalie out of play.
• A foul is called and a kick awarded for a “hand ball,” which
occurs when a player deliberately touches the ball with a
hand or arm. Of course, the goalie is an exception in being
allowed to use hands and arms inside the penalty box.


60 SPORTS
Playing Sports.
• If a player fouls for misconduct or argues with a referee,
he can receive a yellow card, or warning. For more serious
offenses like violent behavior or foul language, a referee
can raise a red card, sending the player off the field for
the remainder of the game.
• The team committing the foul for dangerous play is penal-
ized by the award of a direct kick to the opposing team.
The direct free kick is taken from the point where the foul
occurred. The advantage of a direct kick is that it can be
kicked directly into the goal to score.
A throw-in is taken when the whole ball crosses the side-
line. The player on the opposing team who last touched the ball
takes the throw-in. If the whole ball passes over the goal line,
other than between the goal posts, then it is a goal kick or a cor-
ner kick. If the last player to touch the ball was on the attacking
team, it is a goal kick. If the last player to touch the ball is on
the defending team, it is a corner kick.
With your parent’s permission, you may find the
complete official soccer rules used in Major League Soccer
at www.mlssoccer.com/league/official-rules/competition-
rules-and-regulations.
The required
technique for a
throw-in is two
hands on the ball,
thrown from over
the head with two
feet on the ground
at the time the ball
is released.
OFFSIDES
CENTER FORWARD
DEFENDER
GOALIE
LEFT FORWARD
NOT OFFSIDES
CENTER FORWARD
DEFENDER
GOALIE
LEFT FORWARD
TWO OPPOSING
PLAYERS
BETWEEN THE
ATTACKER AND
GOAL LINE
A player is offsides when receiving the ball and being nearer to
the opponent’s goal line than the ball, unless two opponents are
nearer the goal line.


SPORTS 61
.Playing Sports
Soccer Etiquette
If a player is down because of an injury,
a courteous player will knock the ball out
of play over a sideline to stop play so that
the injured player may be given first-aid
attention. In return, the team given the
opportunity to take the throw-in, as a
returned favor, should give it to the team
who kicked the ball out.
Another rule of soccer etiquette is for an
attacking player to jump over a goalie sliding for
the ball. Don’t charge the goalie if they have won
the race for the ball. This also is a safety measure
for both players.
The traditional
soccer ball has white
hexagons and black
pentagons sewn
together over an
inflatable bladder.
When purchasing
soccer cleats,
remember to
wear your soccer
socks and
shin guards.


62 SPORTS
Playing Sports.
Table Tennis
Table tennis, which is often called ping-pong, is believed to
have begun when people wanted to miniaturize tennis as an
indoor game. Regardless of its history, table tennis is a fun, fast-
paced game using two or four players that helps develop quick
reflexes, agility, timing, and tactics.
Basic Table Tennis Rules
For those who prefer indoor sports, table tennis is played on a
table by two for singles, or four for doubles. The players face
each other on opposite sides of the table and hit the ball back
and forth over the net to bounce once before being returned.
There are many similar rules between table tennis and the
parent sport, tennis.
• To serve, the ball must be thrown from the palm of the free
hand at least 6 inches in the air before it is hit with the
racket. A strike is when the racket hits a ball that is in play.
• The server must hit the ball so it bounces once in the
server’s court before passing over the net and touching the
opponent’s court. A player or pair serves until two points
9 FEET
6 INCHES
5 FEET
NET
HEIGHT OF TABLE = 30 INCHES
Table tennis table


.Playing Sports
have been scored, and then the opponent becomes the
serving player. Serving continues to alternate throughout the
game unless both sides score 10 points, at which time the
sequencing continues but alternates on one point scored.
• In singles, the two players take turns hitting the ball after
it has bounced one time on their side. Failure of a player
to strike the ball and return it, or striking the ball twice
or bouncing twice before the strike, results in a point for
the opponent.
• In doubles, the four players have a set striking order. The ball
travels from the server to the first receiver, then to the serv-
er’s partner, and then to the first receiver’s partner.
• The first player to score 11 points wins the game, unless both
players tie at 10 points, then the first player with a two-point
lead wins. A match is the best of any odd number of games,
but usually is the best of three or five.
• The player or pair trade sides of the table with each game
and in the last game of a match, the players or pairs trade
ends when one side scores five points.
A table tennis racket, often called a ping-pong paddle, has an
elliptical wooden surface, often covered with pimpled rubber.
The hollow plastic balls come in one-, two-, and three-star types,
with three being the highest quality.


64 SPORTS
Playing Sports.
Table Tennis Etiquette
Treat the other player with respect by shaking hands before and
after the match. Never use verbal or physical confrontation. If
your opponent is not treating you with respect, discuss it with
your coach. Regardless of how frustrated you may feel, never
throw your racket or hit it against the table. If a point is decided
by the ball hitting a corner of the table or is difficult to return
after hitting the net either raise an index finger or say “sorry.”
When watching a table tennis match, never do anything that
would distract the players. That includes never walking around
the table during the match. Do have a good time and clap after
a point is made.
For more information, with your parent’s permission,
check the International Table Tennis Federation website,
www.ittf.com, or the USA Table Tennis website, www.usatt.org.
Put a backspin on the ball by hitting downward with the racket
angled up. Put topspin on the ball by hitting in a downward
motion with the racket angled down.


SPORTS 65
.Playing Sports
Tennis
Tennis is worldwide popular sport that builds quick reflexes,
agility, timing, and stamina. You can enjoy this sport with just
a solid wall to bounce off of, a tennis racket, and a tennis ball.
Basic Tennis Rules
Tennis players, either two for singles or four for doubles, hit
the ball with a long-handled racket over a net so it will bounce
within the boundaries of an opponent’s side of the court. Points
are won by returning balls over the net so that your opponent
cannot hit them back to your side of the court. To begin a game,
a player serves, the ball bounces once in the opponent’s court-
side, and the opponent returns the ball. The rally continues
until a player misses the ball, or hits it into the net or out of
bounds. One player serves for the entire game. A player with
a powerful, accurate serve can dominate the game.
• The server stands behind the baseline on the right-hand side
of the center mark. The serve must clear the net and land in
the receiver’s right-hand service court to be considered “in”
or “good.” If the serve is not good, the server has one more
chance to make a good serve, a second service, before the
point is lost and the opponent is allowed to serve.
• The ball may bounce only one time in the player’s court
before it is hit or returned. It must bounce one time after
being served, but for the remainder of the rally it does not
have to bounce before being returned. If the ball does bounce,
it must bounce inside the opponent’s court boundaries.
• If the ball hits the net before landing in the receiver’s court
it is called a let. A let is a rally in which the players agree
that no one scores, usually because it was difficult to agree
on which player earned the point.
• The server’s score is always announced first. The score for
tennis is as follows:
A rally is a time
when the ball is
in play. In tennis
it would last
from the time
of a serve until the
time a ball goes
out of play, for
instance bouncing
out of bounds.
Rallies happen in
volleyball and
racket sports like
tennis, table
tennis, badminton,
and squash.
No points Love
First point 15
Second point 30
Third point 40
Fourth point Game


66 SPORTS
Playing Sports.
• If tied at 40 it is called “40 all” or deuce. A player must then
score two successive points to win. The first player to win
six games wins a set. A match is no more than five sets for
men and three sets for women. How many games could be
in a match?
Play is nonstop. Players trade off both on who is the first to
serve and on which ends of the court they play on the odd
numbered games, like the first, third, and fifth games of set.
If both players have won six games, “six-all”, then a
tie-break game is played to find the winner of the set.
SINGLES COURT
BASELINE
BACKCOURT
RIGHT
SERVICE
COURT
LEFT
SERVICE
COURT
FORECOURT
THE ALLEY
DOUBLES COURT
TRAM LINE OR SINGLES SIDELINE
DOUBLES SIDELINE
CENTER LINE
3-FOOT
NET HEIGHT
NET
POST POST
27 FEET
21 FEET
4 FEET
6 INCHES
13 FEET
6 INCHES
78 FEET
SERVICE LINE
36 FEET
CENTER
MARK
42 FEET18 FEET
Tennis court


SPORTS 67
.Playing Sports
Tennis Etiquette
Few sports enjoy the etiquette of tennis. Even the crowds show their
respect to the players’ concentration by clapping and cheering only at
the correct time. Follow these basic rules of etiquette:
• If you are close to the players, speak softly and don’t walk behind
the court.
• Retrieve balls for your partner, opponent, and neighboring court.
When returning balls to neighboring courts, they must be rolled at
a time when play is not in progress.
• Wear sneakers and a tucked-in collared shirt.
• Call your own lines and respect your opponent’s line calls.
The tennis racket’s frame holds the tightly woven strings in place.
The correct string tightness allows the racket to return the energy
to the ball at impact, resulting in better ball speed. A tennis
racket frame cannot exceed 29 inches in length or 121⁄2 inches in
width. New lightweight aluminum and graphite frames have
replaced the traditional wooden frames. With these high-tech
metal tennis rackets, some professionals can send a serve at
over 130 mph. Wow, that’s fast!
To meet regulation, a tennis ball must
bounce 53 to 58 inches when dropped
from 100 inches. Now you can check to
see if your tennis ball is “flat.” Their
bounce comes from a hollow rubber core
wrapped in a flannel nylon shell. This
nylon shell is traditionally yellow but
now comes in a variety of colors.


68 SPORTS
Playing Sports.
Volleyball
It is no surprise that a sport that can be played inside a gym,
on an outside court, or on the beach by anyone, young and
old—even coed teams—has become so popular. From the pick-
up game on the beach to the highly competitive Olympics,
volleyball builds teamwork, upper-body strength, and
quick reflexes.
Basic Volleyball Rules
Volleyball is a sport in which two teams pass a ball (volley)
across a tall net stretched midway across the court. The object
is to make the ball touch inside the boundaries of the court
on the opposing team’s side. The volley starts with one team
member serving the ball from behind the far end of the court,
and after that, each team has up to three hits to return the ball
to the other side. If a team fails to return the ball or makes an
error, the other side scores a point.
• The server stands behind the end line and hits the ball with
one hand or arm. Before and during the serve, the players
must be in two rows of three. After the serve the players
are free to move about.
• A team has a maximum of three hits to get the ball back
over the net. The team that wins a point serves for the next
point. If this team served the previous point, then the same
player serves again. If this team did not serve the previous
point, then the players rotate clockwise on the court, and
the next player serves.
• The ball may be hit with any part of the player’s body, but
it must be a clean hit, not carried in the follow-through as
judged by the referee. No player can hit the ball two times in
a row, even if one touch is unintentional. The exceptions are
when making the first of the team’s three hits or when
blocking at the net.
• The teams alternate court ends and serving, after each set
and after a team has eight points in the fifth set.
• A set is 25 points (using the rally point system). A match is
the best of three or five sets. If a fifth set is necessary, it is
usually played to only 15 points.


SPORTS 69
.Playing Sports
• The serving team scores a point if the opponent hits the ball
out of bounds or if the ball touches the opponent’s court. If
the ball touches the court on the serving team’s side, then
the rally is over, but no points are scored.
• A player may not penetrate into the opposing team’s side of
the court.
• If back-row players move into the front-row area, then they
cannot jump and can hit the ball over the net only when the
ball is below the level of the net. If a back-row player hits a
ball above the height of the net, then he must jump from
behind the 10-foot line, the line that divides the front and
back row.
With your parent’s permission, learn more about volleyball at
www.teamusa.org/USA-Volleyball.
The person who
is right-back
after a rotation
is the server.
When facing the
net, rotation is
clockwise.
SERVING AREA
RIGHT BACK
CENTER
BACK
CENTER
BACK
LEFT
BACK
LEFT
BACK
RIGHT
FRONT
RIGHT
FRONT
CENTER
FRONT
CENTER
FRONT
LEFT
FRONT
LEFT
FRONTNET
CENTER LINE
29 FEET 6 INCHES
ROTATION
ROTATION
29 FEET 6 INCHES
RIGHT BACK
SERVING AREA
ROTATION
ROTATION
10-FOOT LINE
DIVIDES FRONT AND
BACK COURT
10-FOOT LINE
DIVIDES FRONT AND
BACK COURT
Volleyball court


70 SPORTS
Playing Sports.
Beach volleyball
has become an
Olympic sport.
It is played on the
same size court
as volleyball only
the court is made
of sand.
Volleyball Etiquette
Accidents can happen in volleyball, but it is basic
etiquette to never aim the ball at another player’s face.
When a rally ends with your team scoring because
of your team’s good shot, then you may
clap, but when your team scores
because of the opposing team’s
error, then you should not applaud.
It shows good etiquette to slap
hands with the opposing
team when passing under
the net to change sides.
Also, players must never
touch the net or poles.
The dig is used to field a
spike or a fast-moving hit.
The ball, made of real or
synthetic leather, contains
an inflated rubber bladder.
Class Act
These rules of etiquette apply to all sports.
• When the national anthem plays before the game, show your respect
by standing, removing your hat, and placing your hand over your heart.
If you are walking when the anthem begins, face the flag and stand still
until the completion of the anthem.
• Spectators should refrain from talking and using mobile phones while
in the stands. If you must keep your phone turned on, put it in the
“vibrate” mode so you won’t disturb others.
• Treat the opposing team and fans of the opposing team with respect;
refrain from jeering and from throwing objects in the stands.
• After the game, players should exchange a friendly handshake.


SPORTS 71
.Playing Sports
Water Polo
During the 1800s a new game started in rivers and lakes. Like
polo on horses, players rode astride floating barrels pushing a
ball toward a goal with paddles. Today, water polo is more like
soccer with players dribbling and passing the ball with one
small difference—water polo is played while swimming or
treading water.
Basic Water Polo Rules
Two teams move a ball across the pool while treading water
or swimming. The object of the game is to score by throwing
the water polo ball into your opponent’s goal. Players move the
ball across the water with a crawl swim stroke, yet keeping
their heads above water to watch other players’ positions.
Players also move the ball by throwing it to their teammates.
• A team consists of seven players. Players other than the
goalkeeper must stay in the water without touching the
bottom or supporting themselves by touching the sides.
Players either swim or tread water to stay afloat. Junior
Olympic competitions (18 years old and under) consist
of four quarters of five minutes each.
• To begin the game, the referee blows the whistle and tosses
the ball in the water at the middle of the pool.
• To score, a player must make the ball pass completely over
the goal line and into the goal.
• After a goal, the team that was scored on puts the ball back
in play.
• Only goalkeepers may hold the ball with two hands and hit it
with their fists.
• Once a team takes possession of the ball, it has 35 seconds
to throw it at the opposing goal.
• If a player commits an ordinary foul, like pushing off from
the pool side or holding the ball under water while being
tackled, then the referee may award a free throw to the
opposing team. A free throw is taken from the place
where the foul occurred.
Men’s water polo
holds the title
as the longest
standing team
sport in Olympic
history.


72 SPORTS
Playing Sports.
Water Safety
Whenever you enter a pool, remember what you know
as a Scout about water safety. Verify that the swimming
will be supervised by a responsible adult, coach, or
lifeguard. Before entering a pool, look at the varying
depths. If possible, use the buddy system, where each
swimmer is responsible for the safety of their buddy.
• If a player commits a penalty foul, like unsportsmanlike
conduct or physical action against another player, then
depending on the foul the referee may award a penalty,
free, goal, corner, or neutral throw. If a player commits
three fouls, the referee removes that player for the rest
of the game.
Since water polo players don’t wear
jerseys with numbers, they use caps
numbered 1 to 13 with soft ear protectors.
Both goalkeepers wear red caps with the
number 1. The rest of the team wear
matching caps that contrast the color
of the other team.
Dribbling in water polo, like soccer,
moves the ball toward the goal while
keeping it close to the player protecting
it from the opposing team. To dribble
in the water, players swim the crawl
stroke with raised heads, pushing the
ball forward between their arms and
in front of their faces.


SPORTS 73
.Playing Sports
Training for water polo has three main parts: muscle warm-up and
strength training outside the pool, swimming laps, and practicing passing
and receiving the ball. Want to swim like a water polo swimmer? Swim
the crawl, used in the freestyle event, with your back arched, your head
held out of the water, and short rapid arm strokes.
Water Polo Etiquette
In water polo it is a policy not to beat the opposing team by more
than 10 points. Players must change clothes only in the locker room,
and should not enter the deck area to warm up until the previous game
is finished, unless a warm-up area is provided.
NET
TEAM BENCH
TEAM BENCH
NET
GOAL LINE
2 METERS
4 METERS
7 METERS
Water polo pool
NET
NET





SPORTS 75
.Personal Training
Personal Training
Now you have chosen a sport in which to compete for a season
or at least four months. Where do you go from here? With your
counselor, and maybe also your coach, work out a personal
train-ing program. Every athlete is an individual starting at a
different level, with a different schedule and different gifts. Set
goals for yourself in your development and realize that even the
professionals practice and train for years to get where they are.
Track Your Progress
By writing down your training, practice, and development,
you will have the reward of looking back on how far you have
come and be able to set new goals to work toward. It is hard
to get somewhere in life without a written plan of where you
are going and how you are going to get there. Mastering a sport
is no different. Fill in these charts or make your own charts by
hand or using spreadsheet software.


1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31
January
February
March
April
May
June
July
August
September
October
November
December
Personal Training Chart
Name _________________________________ Sport ___________________________ Year ________
Pencil in these single letters to track your schedule:
G=Game P=Practice W=Weight training D=Development check


SPORTS 77
.Personal Training
You may find that the season you lost the most games
is the season you progressed most in your sport. Track your
season. In every sporting event you will have a highlight, some-
thing that went right, something you have not done before, or
some way you even surprised yourself—take pride and write it
down. Also don’t forget to note the lessons, as they say, you
learned the hard way.
Date Opponent My Highlight Score What I Learned
Win/Loss/Tie Record for Season
Name _______________ Team name _______________ Season ________________
Win _________________ Loss______________________ Tie ___________________


78 SPORTS
Personal Training.
You know muscles have to be worked to be strengthened.
They need to work against some kind of weight—even if it is
your own body weight. Weight training actually breaks down
the muscle fibers and then, in your day of rest, they build back
up stronger than before. This is why it is critical to take at least
one day of rest between workouts with weights.
Tracking your progress to heavier weights is rewarding.
In weight training there are two buzz words you will want
to know:
• Repetitions—the number of times a single exercise is done.
Often the number of repetitions is an even dozen. If you are
doing pushups, it would be the number of pushups.
• Sets—A group of repetitions of each exercise. Then to do
a second set you repeat all the exercises. When you exercise
in sets, one muscle group is allowed to rest while the other
muscle groups are exercised. Although the following guide-
lines may seem simple, they are only a suggestion, and even
with this information it is very important to work with a
knowledgeable trainer whenever you participate in weight
training.
Two sets will increase your strength grad-
ually with a low risk of injury. Remember,
you should not feel a strain until the end of
the set. On a day that you increase your
weight, you may not be able to complete a
set. That is OK. Try not to increase your
weight in all areas at once—that makes it
hard to even walk the next day. Limit your-
self to two or three repetitions when you feel
the strain. Strength training will help you in
agility, reflexes, and strength in sports; this is
not bodybuilding that builds bulky muscles
that may look impressive but would not help
you perform your chosen sport.
Try to always give yourself one or two
days’ rest between weight training workouts
to allow your muscles time to recover.
The American
College of
Sports Medicine
recommends eight
to 12 reps for
muscular strength
and 10 to 15 reps
for muscular
endurance.


Date Date Date Date Date Date
Set 1 Set 2 Set 1 Set 2 Set 1 Set 2 Set 1 Set 2 Set 1 Set 2 Set 1 Set 2
Aerobic
three minutes
Leg curls
Leg extensions
Tricep press—down
Aerobic
three minutes
Bicep curl
Pushups
Aerobic
three minutes
Bench press
Squats
Abdominal curl
Interval Weight Training Chart


80 SPORTS
Personal Training.
Track your development. With your counselor’s help, find five
ways to test your level of ability for your chosen sport. If your
speed is timed at meets as in track or swimming, then the results
of these events will be a good gauge of your progress. If you
have also used a weight program, use one of your repetitions
as an indicator of your strength. Don’t forget technique. Work
with your counselor to find a particular technique you want
to improve and a way to monitor your progress in that area.


SPORTS 81
.Personal Training
Beginning Date: Midseason Date: End of Season Date:
Measure 1
Measure 2
Measure 3
Measure 4
Measure 5
Your Development
Name ______________________________


82 SPORTS
Personal Training.
Technique
Mastering a sport is not all brute strength—proper
technique can turn a loss into a win. Technique is not
something you concentrate on in one training session
but for a lifetime in your chosen sport. Do you know
the best grip for your racket, bat, or stick? Do you
change the grip for serves or scoops? What about your
stance in batting, a face-off, or throw-in? Try teaching
your technique to another player or Scout to further
cement your understanding and knowledge before
presenting it to your merit badge counselor.
Bonus to Sports: Mentally and Physically
Those who participate in sports develop a better self-image
and ability to work with others, in addition to the ability to
work hard and have fun at the same time.
Review your completed “Your Development” chart with
your counselor. What other benefits have you gotten from
playing a sport that would be hard to quantify? There are
lots of mental benefits from sports. Read these ideas below
to see if they apply to you.
• Learn how to work with a team and how to think of the
team’s needs before your own. Also learn how to take turns
and share.
• Learn how to respect others, the coach, the referee, your
teammates, and the other team.
• Learn how to win gracefully and lose undaunted. Learn to
limit your cheering after a win in front of the losing team.
Learn to keep your chin up after a loss by thinking about
the good plays and positive teamwork.
• Develop a positive self-image. You have monitored your
progress and cannot help but feel proud of what you
have accomplished.
Now that you have worked so hard to develop your
physical fitness you have a new appreciation for the work
your sport requires and the rewards it brings.








SPORTS 85
.Avoiding and Treating Sports Injuries
Avoiding and Treating
Sports Injuries
You probably know from playing sports that it is worth your
time and effort to avoid and treat injuries to keep you on the
field and off the sidelines. Proper training, conditioning, warm-
up, cool-down, stretching, and protective equipment can go a
long way to keep you safe from injury and enjoying sports.
Common Sports Injuries
If you are injured, you should not try to play through
the pain. Ignoring an injury could make it worse.
Treat injuries until they are healed before you return
to training or games. Teens should be especially
careful with injuries because their bodies are
growing. A neglected or mistreated injury
could become a lifetime problem and
limit your sports participation.
Four Steps
to Prevent Injury
1. Warm up and stretch.
2. Wear proper equipment,
including supportive
shoes.
3. Drink water.
4. Cool down
and stretch.
Noncontact sports
have a lower risk
of injury. Among
these are bowling,
cross-country
running, golf,
swimming, table
tennis, tennis, and
track and field.


86 SPORTS
Avoiding and Treating Sports Injuries.
A strain is an injury to a muscle or tendon, caused by over-
stretching, overexertion, heavy lifting, sudden movement, or
a twisting or wrenching action. A strain may cause you to
feel immediate, intense pain. However, you might not feel
pain until hours after the injury occurred. There may be
tenderness, swelling, and some discoloration or bruising.
Moving the injured area will be difficult and painful.
A sprain is caused by a twisting, wrenching, or lifting movement
that tears or stretches tissues surrounding a joint. Just like a strain,
the injury is to tissue, but a sprain—which is more serious—
injures ligament tissue. Ligaments hold bones together at the
joints. A sprain can happen when you are walking, running,
or jumping, especially on an uneven surface. You may know
someone who twisted and sprained their ankle slipping off a curb.
If you have a sprain you will feel sudden pain. The area will feel
tender to the touch and painful when moved, so try to keep still.
You may experience some swelling and discoloration.


SPORTS 87
.Avoiding and Treating Sports Injuries
Reduce the pain and swelling of both sprains and strains
by applying an ice pack to the injured area (try a bag of frozen
peas for 20 minutes). To limit mobility, minimize swelling, and
protect the spot, wrap the area firmly with an elastic bandage
(but not so tightly that circulation is restricted). Rest and ele-
vate the injured area. After 24 hours, you may use a heating
pad or hot pack for treatment. If you have persistent or severe
pain, seek medical attention.
Contusions, which you probably call bruises, are caused
by an impact that starts internal bleeding but doesn’t break the
skin. A bruise discolors the skin with black-and-blue marks.
Bruises usually are not serious, but they can be, especially if
there are possible fractures or unseen injuries to internal organs.
Most bruises can be treated easily. Keep a cold, wet towel
over the bruise for 30 to 60 minutes, and rest the injured area.
This will prevent more blood from leaking into the tissues. To
help the bruise fade, apply a warm, wet cloth to the area the
next day.
RICE
For sprains and strains remember RICE:
R = Rest
I = Ice
C = Compression
E = Elevation
Players may become frightened or anxious after an
accident. Some do not handle the sight of blood easily.
They might breathe too heavily or too shallow, which
can result in hyperventilation. Stay calm yourself, and
encourage the player to relax and breathe slowly.


88 SPORTS
Avoiding and Treating Sports Injuries.
Abrasions, or scrapes, are caused when skin is rubbed
or scraped off. A skinned knee is an abrasion. Abrasions often
happen when the skin is scraped against a hard, unyielding
surface such as a basketball court or running track. The
greatest danger with these injuries is possible infection.
Treat an abrasion as you would a minor cut. Wash the
area with mild soap and water. Allow the wound to dry, and
then cover it with a dry, sterile dressing. If fluid oozes from
an abrasion, gently dab on an antiseptic solution.
Fractures, or broken bones, are often caused by a blow or
fall. A stress fracture can be a small crack in the bone. In a dis-
placed fracture, the bone separates along the crack. With a frac-
ture, you may hear the bone snap or see a deformity, swelling,
or discoloration, and most often it is very painful. If you are
unsure if it is broken, treat it as if it is, and contact medical
help immediately. Ice packs will reduce the swelling and pain
until medical assistance is available.
You can get
tetanus bacteria
from something as
minor as a scratch
or pinprick on a
dirty nail or knife.
The tetanus
bacteria affects
the nervous
system and can
eventually lead
to muscle spasms
where the person
is unable to open
the mouth, hence
it is often called
“lockjaw.” Tetanus
immunization
requires a booster
shot every 10
years. Are you
up-to-date? Ask
your physician.


SPORTS 89
.Avoiding and Treating Sports Injuries
Blisters are usually caused by continual rubbing against
the skin. This friction will cause a hot spot, which signals the
beginning of a blister. Blisters on the feet are the most common
and troublesome type. So be sure that you wear properly fitting
shoes and appropriate socks. If you feel a hot spot developing,
stop immediately and protect the tender area by applying an
adhesive bandage or moleskin.
If a blister must be drained, first wash the blister with mild
soap and water. Dry it and apply an antiseptic solution. Prick
the edge of the blister with a needle that has been sterilized in
a flame. Gently press out the fluid. Reapply antiseptic. Cover it
with an adhesive bandage or other sterile dressing. If a blister
has already broken, treat it like an abrasion.
Muscle cramps are believed to be caused mainly by
inadequate stretching or overuse, resulting in uncontrolled
muscle contractions. When you have a muscle cramp, stop
your activity, gently stretch the cramping muscle, then massage
it. Applying heat will ease tight muscles. To avoid future
cramps, spend extra time stretching the cramping muscle before
and after your workout.
Dehydration is caused by a lack of water in the body. It
can occur in cold weather as well as hot. The first signs will
usually be dark-colored urine, thirst, dry lips, and a slightly dry
mouth. As dehydration advances to the moderate level,
you may have a very dry mouth, sunken eyes, and pale
skin. Signs of progressed dehydration include fatigue,
headache, body aches, a rapid but weak pulse, rapid
and shallow breathing, cold hands and feet, and
confusion. Left untreated, severe dehydration can
lead to shock and even death.
If you are mildly dehydrated, drink plenty of
water. Seek medical help if you are moderately
dehydrated. Severe dehydration requires
hospitalization for intravenous fluids.
Heat reactions include heat exhaustion
and heatstroke—problems that can occur
when the body becomes overheated
because it no longer is able to maintain
a normal temperature. Heat exhaustion
is quite common and less serious
than heatstroke. However, it is still
a serious condition.
Don’t wait until
you feel thirsty
in hot or cold
weather to drink.
Being thirsty is a
sign you are
already mildly
dehydrated!
Always drink at
least eight ounces
of water every
20 minutes during
exercise. Call
“Water break!”
16 ounces of water = two water
breaks


90 SPORTS
Avoiding and Treating Sports Injuries.
Heat exhaustion occurs when the body becomes over-
heated and cannot sufficiently cool itself. The person will have
a body temperature between 98.6 and 102 degrees. They may
also have pale clammy skin, heavy sweating, dizziness and
fainting, pronounced weakness, nausea, headache, or
muscle cramps.
Help lower the person’s body temperature by having them
lie down in a shady, cool spot with feet raised. Loosen clothing
and apply cool, wet cloths or use a fan. Have the
person sip water. Recovery should be rapid, but if symptoms
persist, seek medical attention.
Heatstroke, sometimes called sunstroke, is much more
serious than heat exhaustion. If heat exhaustion is left untreated
it can develop into heatstroke. It occurs when extremely high
temperatures overwhelm the body’s cooling mechanisms, which
become so overworked that they simply stop working. As a
result, the person’s temperature shoots upward and becomes
life-threatening. The victim will have a temperature above 102
degrees; red, hot, and dry skin; and an extremely rapid pulse.
Other signs include confusion, fainting or unconsciousness, and
convulsions.
If you suspect heatstroke, call 911. Move the person to a
shaded spot, face up with head and shoulders elevated. Follow
the treatment methods for heat exhaustion to help cool the vic-
tim. If possible, help the victim to a tub of cool (not ice-cold)
water. Once the body temperature drops below 101 degrees,
dry the skin and encourage them to drink water.
Body
Temperature
Normal 98.6 degrees
Heat Exhaustion 98.6 to 102 degrees
Heatstroke 102 degrees and above


SPORTS 91
.Avoiding and Treating Sports Injuries
Cold reactions occur when a body is not able to maintain
a warm enough temperature. The signs include uncontrollable
shivering, poor muscle coordination, shallow breathing, metal
confusion, drowsiness, numbness, and even unconscious. Call
for medical help and then warm the person. Take the victim to
shelter, remove any wet clothing, and wrap in warm blankets
or coats. Offer the victim a warm drink. Remember, your own
body heat is another resource. Frostbite is an advanced cold
reaction where the numb skin turns white or grayish-yellow
and feels extremely cold. Frostbite is more common on fingers,
toes, cheeks, ears, and the nose. Call 911 for frostbite, and then
soak affected area in water that is from 100 to 104 degrees.
Clothing
To guard against the effects of heat and cold, remem-
ber clothing and water. Athletes should wear appropri-
ate clothing to help keep them cool or warm when
training and competing. Acclimate yourself to the
weather by training for short periods
of time to begin with, then gradually
increasing the length
of time each day.
During the heat of
the summer, try to
plan your strenuous
activities for the
cooler hours in
the morning
or evening.
One of the most
important pieces
of equipment
for any outdoor
sport is too
often forgotten—
sunscreen. Use a
sunscreen with a
sun protection
factor (SPF)
of at least 15.
Don’t forget your
nose, ears, and
neck. Offer some
to your friends.


92 SPORTS
Avoiding and Treating Sports Injuries.
Injured teeth are often caused by an impact with another
player or sport equipment. An injured tooth can be chipped,
loosened, cracked, or even knocked out. In all cases, except a
chipped tooth, contact a dentist immediately.
Realign a loose tooth in its original position. For a knocked
out tooth, hold it by the crown, not the roots. If it
is dirty, rinse it off. Next, carefully replace the tooth in its
socket and hold it there. If that isn’t possible, put the tooth in a
cup of milk or under your tongue. Do not let the tooth dry, or it
will die. See a dentist immediately.
Nausea, or the sensation before vomiting, is often caused
by exercising too soon after eating. Nausea is worse if the exer-
cise is more intense or closely follows a meal. Try to eat your
meal one to three hours before you start your exercise. Since
your stomach digests liquids faster than
solids, you can have a liquid meal closer to an event.
Head, neck, and back injuries are caused by an impact to
the area. With a severe injury, the player may become dizzy
and suffer from headache, bleeding, nausea, or vomiting. The
player may even lose consciousness. If the person is uncon-
scious, do not move them. Call 911. In a nonemergency case,
the player may have slight weakness, stinging, numbness, or
tingling. Apply RICE and seek medical attention.


SPORTS 93
.Avoiding and Treating Sports Injuries
Concussions
Concussions are increasingly recognized as being seri-
ous injuries. The signs and symptoms typically show up
soon after the injury, but some may not appear for
hours or days. Sometimes, people say they “don’t feel
right” or “feel down” after a hit or a fall. The Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention suggests checking to
see if the victim:
• Can’t recall events that happened prior to or after
the incident
• Seems to be stunned or dazed
• Seems confused, can’t concentrate, or forgets details
of the game, score, etc.
• Moves clumsily
• Answers questions slowly
• Loses consciousness (even briefly)
• Shows changes in mood, behavior, or personality
• Complains of a headache or “pressure” in the head
• Feels nauseous or is vomiting
• Feels dizzy, can’t stay balanced, or complains of
double or blurry vision
• Seems bothered by lights or noises
• Feels sluggish, weak, or unsteady on foot
If these signs and symptoms appear—or if you
suspect a concussion for other reasons—the victim
should be taken immediately to the nearest hospital
emergency room.


94 SPORTS
Sports Resources.
Scouting Literature
Scouts BSA Handbook for Boys and
Scouts BSA Handbook for Girls;
Emergency First Aid pocket guide;
Be Prepared First Aid Book; Archery,
Athletics, Canoeing, Climbing, Cycling,
First Aid, Golf, Horsemanship, Kayaking,
Personal Fitness, Rowing, Safety, Scuba
Diving, Skating, Small-Boat Sailing,
Snow Sports, Swimming, and Water
Sports merit badge pamphlets
Books
Bauer, Gerhard. New Soccer Techniques,
Tactics & Teamwork. Sterling
Publishing, 2002.
Dearing, Joel. Volleyball Fundamentals,
2nd ed. Human Kinetics, 2003.
Dintiman, George Blough. Speed
Improvement for Young Athletes:
How to Sprint Faster in Your Sport in
30 Workouts. National Association
of Speed and Explosion, 2006.
Driver, Bruce. The Baffled Parent’s
Guide to Coaching Youth Hockey.
International Marine/Ragged
Mountain Press, 2004.
Faigenbaum, Avery D., and Wayne L.
Westcott. Youth Strength Training:
Programs for Health, Fitness and
Sport. Human Kinetics, 2009.
FB Plays. Unbeatable Flag Football
Plays. Kindle Edition, 2011.
Fortin, Francois. Sports: The Complete
Visual Reference. Firefly Books, 2003.
Greene, Larry, and Russ Pate. Training
Young Distance Runners, 3rd ed.
Human Kinetics, 2004.
Hammond, Tim. Sports. Dorling
Kindersley Eyewitness Books, 2005.
Heitzmann, Ray. Careers for Sports
Nuts & Other Athletic Types, 3rd ed.
McGraw-Hill, 2004.
Lancaster, Scott, and Radu Teodorescu.
Athletic Fitness for Kids. Human
Kinetics, 2008.
McIntosh, Ned. Managing Little
League, 3rd ed. McGraw-Hill, 2008.
Micheli, Lyle, and Mark Jenkins. The
Sports Medicine Bible for Young
Athletes. Source Books Inc., 2001.
Sports Resources
With your parent’s permission, visit
the Boy Scouts of America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org,
for a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


SPORTS 95
.Sports Resources
Paye, Burrall, and Patrick Paye.
Youth Basketball Drills, 2nd ed.
Human Kinetics, 2000.
Werner, Doug. Bowler’s Start-up: A
Beginner’s Guide to Bowling. Tracks
Publishing, 1995.
Organizations and Websites
American College of Sports Medicine
Telephone: 317-637-9200
www.acsm.org
American Council on Exercise
Toll-free telephone: 888-825-3636
www.acefitness.org
Human Kinetics Coach Education
Telephone: 217-351-5076
www.asep.com
Heads Up
Information on brain injuries from
the Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention
www.cdc.gov/HeadsUp
Institute for International Sport—
National Sportsmanship Day
www.internationalsport.org/
national-sportsmanship-day
National Federation of State High
School Associations
Telephone: 317-972-6900
www.nfhs.org
National Youth Sports Health &
Safety Institute
Telephone: 317-637-9200, ext. 130
www.nyshsi.org
United States Olympic &
Paralympic Committee
Telephone: 719-632-5551
www.teamusa.org
Acknowledgments
The Boy Scouts of America is grateful to
Warren Franke, Ph.D., for his assistance
in preparing this revised and updated
edition of the Sports merit badge
pamphlet and to the following for
their assistance with previous editions:
• Lynn Harmon, ACE-certified
personal trainer
• Benone “Ben” Cristian Grigore,
technical/coaching development
director, USA Table Tennis
• Tom Tracey, director of officials,
Collegiate Water Polo Association
The Boy Scouts of America is grateful
to the men and women serving on the
National Merit Badge Subcommittee
for the improvements made in updating
this pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration Credits
All other photos and illustrations are
the property of or are protected by the
Boy Scouts of America.
John McDearmon—all illustrations on
pages 30, 35, 41, 43–44, 49, 51,
54–55, 58, 60, 62, 64, 66, 69, and 73
Brian Payne—pages 19–21 (all), 31,
60 (photo), 70, 82, and 86
Doug Wilson—page 83


96 SPORTS
Notes.