“Up and Away”
This award explores the world of fluid dynamics, and how it affects your everyday life. Fluid
dynamics is the study of how fluids (liquids, gases, and plasmas) behave and interact with other
materials.
1. Choose A or B or C and complete ALL of the requirements.
A. Watch not less than three hours total of shows or documentaries that discuss fluid
dynamics, or a show related to fluid dynamics. Then do the following:
(1.) Make a list of at least five questions or ideas from the show(s) you watched.
(2.) Discuss two of the questions with or ideas with your counselor.
Some examples of shows to watch include—but are not limited to; documentaries
produced by PBS (such as “NOVA”), the Discovery Channel, Science Channel, National
Geographic Channel, and the History Channel; or lectures or presentations focused on
science, technology, engineering, or math (such as TED Talks www.ted.com) using some
search terms you might think such as “fluid dynamics for kids” or “the science of flight.”
You may watch online productions with your counselor’s approval and under your
parent’s or guardian’s supervision. You may choose to watch a live performance,
demonstration or movie at a museum or other venue where fluid dynamics is being
highlighted instead of watching a media production.
B. Read not less than three hours total about a topic related to fluid dynamics. Then do the
following:
(1.) Make a list of at least two questions or ideas from the article(s) you read.
(2.) Discuss two of the questions with or ideas with your counselor.


Examples of magazines include—but are not limited to—Odyssey, Popular Mechanics,
Popular Science, Science Illustrated, Discover, Air & Space, Aviation Week, Science
News, and Scientific American.
C. Do a combination of reading and watching (not less than three hours total). Then do the
following:
(1.) Make a list of at least two questions or ideas from each article or show.
(2.) Discuss two of the questions with or ideas with your counselor.
2. Complete ONE merit badge from the following list. (Choose one that you have not already
used toward another Nova Award). After completion, discuss with your counselor how it
relates to fluid dynamics.
Archery Oceanography Scuba Diving
Aviation Plumbing Shotgun Shooting
Canoeing Rifle Shooting Space Exploration
Chemistry Rowing Swimming
Kayaking
3. Complete two activities from A or B or C or D. Complete all of the items under each activity.
A. Investigate terminal velocity.
1. With your counselor, fill an empty tennis ball tube, or other clear plastic tube at least
12” tall, with clear corn syrup or another liquid.
2. Drop two round objects with the same diameter but different masses, that will
sink, into the liquid (example: a steel ball and a glass marble).
3. Define terminal velocity. Note when the two balls reach terminal velocity (it should
happen quickly). Did both objects have the same terminal velocity? Try the
experiment again to see if it’s repeatable.
4. Discuss your investigation and findings with your counselor.
B. Test Fluid Dynamics in liquids and gases,
1. The study of fluid dynamics can include both liquids and gases. On Earth, two of
the most common are air and water. With your parents’ permission or working with
your counselor, look at how a golf ball or other sphere would travel through the air
and through water. What would be the standard equations for a sphere to travel
through air? Through water? What is the key difference between the two?
Remember both are fluids.
2. After looking at the math behind the motion of a sphere through a fluid perform an


experiment to support what you have learned.
3. Drop a sphere from a height of between one and two feet in both air and in water.
Your height will likely be dependent on what you have to hold water since you want
the height to be the same for dropping your sphere or ball in water and in air.
4. Perform your test several times in each fluid.
5. About how long did it take for your object to hit the ground in air? In water? What
did you notice as you dropped the object in each fluid?
6. Show and discuss with your counselor your findings regarding the difference in the
equations used for the motion of the sphere and the results of your experiment.
C. Develop a parachute delivery system.
1. Use lightweight recycled materials or snap-together building blocks to construct a
crate or harness to contain your payload, an egg or other object approved by your
mentor. Using an egg would test the survivability of the system given the nature of
an egg. To reduce mess and complexity you may want to use a hard boiled egg
which will show damage but not be as fragile.
2. Use common household materials, such as trash bags, plastic tablecloth, string,
paperclips, rubber bands, etc. to design a parachute that will safely deliver your
payload safety to the ground from an appropriate height. The Guide for Safe
Scouting should be followed regarding ‘dropping’ of your payload.
3. Design your parachute first on paper, then create a prototype and test it. You may
want to fist use a ‘dummy’ payload to simulate your package since the package is
easy damaged. It is advisable to test your system outdoors due possible failure in
your designs.
4. Record how long it took to land and the condition of the payload.
5. What could you do to slow the descent even further? Modify your design and test it
out again. Record the results then modify and test again.
6. Conduct a final test (at least three tests total) and record your best (slowest) time.
7. Show your system, parachute and harness, to your counselor and explain how you
designed and modified it. Talk about how the system worked and how both the
parachute and the harness contributed to a successful delivery of your package.
What were some of the key factors that contributed to the success or failure of your
design. Could what you designed be scaled up for large payloads both in size and
weight?


D. Test out different airfoils.
1. Construct simple airfoil shapes using sheets of plain paper secured with tape.
2. Make a “testing apparatus” that allows the airfoil to move freely in the vertical
direction using drinking straws and skewers.
3. Using a fan or hair dryer, direct a flow of fast-moving air across the airfoil
and observe how high it lifts off from the testing apparatus. Use a ruler
marked with centimeters to measure results. Repeat changing the test
parameters, e.g., how fast the air flows, the direction of the air flow, etc.
4. Research the Bernoulli Effect and discuss how this phenomenon applies to your
observations of the airfoils.
5. Discuss the results with your counselor.
4. Complete one of the following A or B or C.
A. Visit a research facility, other facility where fluid dynamics is studied or takes
place such as iFLY. This could include but is not limited to facilities such as a
waste treatment plant, bottling plant, airport, or a government or private
research center. During your visit, talk to a staff member about flight or fluid
dynamics concepts covered at the site. Discuss what you learned with your
counselor.
B. Visit a museum that highlights flight, aviation, or space. During your visit, talk to
a docent or staff member about flight and fluid dynamics concepts covered at
the site. Discuss what you learned with your counselor.
C. Take a real or online tour of a wind tunnel facility. A real tour may be obtained by
contacting a local university that offers a degree in aerospace engineering or similar
field. Virtual tours could include, but are not limited to, NASA wind tunnel facility tours:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bpRc9I8LMXo and https://www.nasa.gov/image-
feature/hypersonic-tunnel-facility/ Discuss with your counselor the science and
engineering concepts associated with the facility, e.g., what are the parts of a wind
tunnel, what a wind tunnel is used for, what are the advantages of testing with a wind
tunnel, how precise are they, etc.
5. Discuss with your counselor how fluid dynamics is present in your everyday life and what
you learned by working on this Nova.


May 21, 2022