SAFETY


SAFETY
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Safety
1. Explain what safety is and what it means to be safe. Then prepare a notebook
to include:
(a) Newspaper, internet (with parent’s or guardian’s permission), or other arti-
cles, facts, and statistics showing common types and causes of injuries in the
home and in the workplace, and how these injuries could be prevented
(b) Newspaper, internet (with parent’s or guardian’s permission), or other
articles, facts, and statistics showing common types of crime and ways to
avoid being a crime victim
(c) A paragraph or more, written by you, explaining how a serious fire, acci-
dent, or crime could change your family life
(d) A list of safe practices and safety devices currently used by your family,
such as safety practices used at home, while working, and while driving
2. Do the following:
(a) Using a safety checklist approved by your counselor, make an inspection
of your home. Identify any hazards found and explain how these can
be corrected.
(b) Review and develop your family’s fire prevention plan. Review your family’s
emergency action plan for fire in your home. As you develop these plans with
family members, share with them facts about the common causes of fire in the
home, such as smoking, cooking, electrical appliances, and candles.
3. Do the following:
(a) Discuss with your counselor how you contribute to the safety of yourself,
your family, and your community.
(b) Show your family members how to protect themselves and your home
from accidents, fire, burglary, robbery, and assault.
(c) Discuss with your counselor the tips for online safety. Explain the steps
individuals can take to help prevent identity theft.
(d) Discuss with your counselor the three R’s of Youth Protection and how to
recognize child abuse.
4. Show your family the exits you would use from different public buildings
(such as a theater, municipal building, library, supermarket, shopping center,
or your place of worship) in the event of an emergency. Teach your family what
to do in the event that they need to take shelter in or evacuate a public place.


5. Make an emergency action plan for five family activities outside the home (at
your place of worship, at a theater, on a picnic, at the beach, and while traveling,
for example). Each plan should include an analysis of possible hazards, proposed
action to correct hazards, and reasons for the correction you propose in each plan.
6. Plan and complete a safety project approved by your counselor for your home,
school, place of worship, place of employment, or community.
7. Explain what the National Terrorism Advisory System is and how you would
respond to each type of alert.
8. Learn about three career opportunities in the field of safety. Pick one career
and find out the education, training, and experience required for this profes-
sion. Discuss this choice with your counselor, and explain why this profession
might interest you.


78 SAFETY
Safety Resources.
Safety Resources
Scouting Literature
Boy Scout Handbook (including How to
Protect Your Children From Child Abuse);
Safe Swim Defense; Safety Afloat; Climb
On Safely; Fieldbook; Crime Prevention,
Emergency Preparedness, Fingerprinting,
Fire Safety, First Aid, Lifesaving, Public
Health, Search and Rescue, Traffic Safety,
Weather, and Wilderness Survival merit
badge pamphlets
Books
Allman, Toney. Hot Topics: Distracted
Driving. Lucent Books, 2015.
American Red Cross. First Aid/CPR/
AED Participant’s Manual.
Staywell, 2014.
American Red Cross. Responding to
Emergencies. Staywell, 2012.
American Red Cross. Wilderness and
Remote First Aid. Staywell, 2010.
Are You Ready? An In-Depth Guide
to Citizen Preparedness (IS-22).
FEMA, 2013. Order a free copy
at 800-480-2520.
Dadd, Debra Lynn. Home Safe Home.
Penguin Publishing Group, 2005.
Heberle, David, and Richard Scutella.
The Complete Guide to Making Your
Home Safe. Betterway Books, 1998.
Morkes, Andrew, ed. Careers in
Focus: Public Safety, 3rd ed.
Ferguson Publishing, 2007.
Vacca, John, and Mary E. Vacca.
Cybersafety: Identity Theft. Chelsea
House Publishing, 2012.
Warde, John. The Healthy Home
Handbook: All You Need to Know to
Rid Your Home of Health and Safety
Hazards. Three Rivers Press, 1997.
Organizations, Government
Agencies, and Websites
AAA Foundation for Traffic Safety
Telephone: 202-638-5944
Website: http://www.aaafoundation.org
American Association of Poison
Control Centers
Toll-free hotline: 800-222-1222
Website: http://www.aapcc.org
Visit the Boy Scouts of America’s
official retail website at http://
www.scoutstuff.org for a com-
plete listing of all merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


SAFETY 79
.Safety Resources
American Red Cross
Toll-free telephone: 800-733-2767
Website: http://www.redcross.org
American Society of
Safety Engineers
Telephone: 847-699-2929
Website: http://www.asse.org
ASTM International
Toll-free telephone: 877-909-2786
Website: http://www.astm.org
Church Mutual Insurance
Toll-free telephone: 800-554-2642
Website: http://www.churchmutual.com
Federal Emergency
Management Agency
Toll-free hotline: 800-621-FEMA
Website: http://www.fema.gov
FM Global (FM)
Website: http://www.fmglobal.com
National Fire Protection Association
Toll-free telephone: 800-344-3555
Website: http://www.nfpa.org
National Highway Traffic
Safety Administration
Toll-free telephone: 888-327-4236
Website: http://www.nhtsa.gov
National Safety Council
Toll-free telephone: 800-621-7615
Website: http://www.nsc.org
Occupational Safety and
Health Administration
Toll-free telephone: 800-321-OSHA
Website: http://www.osha.gov
Ready Campaign
FEMA/U.S. Department
of Homeland Security
Website: http://www.ready.gov
Safe Kids
Telephone: 202-662-0600
Website: http://www.safekids.org
Underwriters Laboratories Inc. (UL)
Telephone: 877-854-3577
Website: http://www.ul.com
U.S. Consumer Product
Safety Commission
Toll-free hotline: 800-638-2772
Website: http://www.cpsc.gov
U.S. Department of
Homeland Security
Website: http://www.dhs.gov
U.S. National Library of Medicine
Website: http://www.nlm.nih.gov
Acknowledgments
The Boy Scouts of America is grateful
to the following for their assistance in
preparing the 2006 edition of the Safety
merit badge pamphlet.
• Members of the Safety merit badge
review committee, in particular
Sven Rundman (chair), Norman
Butman, Mike Donaghue, Ed
Haywood, Glen Henderson;
Tom Seymour, and Tom Watson
• Members of the BSA Health and
Safety Committee, in particular
David Bell, Ph.D.; William W.
Forgey, M.D.; John E. Hendrickson,
American Red Cross National
Headquarters; Charles Mitchell,
National Rifle Association of
America; Arthur H. Mittelstaedt Jr.,
Ph.D., Recreation Safety Institute;
and Paul Young, R.S., M.P.H.
Thanks also to Bryan Caldwell,
retired captain, Hawaii County Fire
Department; Michele Campbell and
Kevin Fearn, Research and Statistics
Department, National Safety Council;
and Ralph W. Russell II, Institute of
Electrical and Electronics Engineers.