GEOCACHING

STEM-Based

BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES

GEOCACHING

“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”

Geocaching
1. Do the following:
(a) Explain to your counselor the most likely hazards you may encounter
while participating in geocaching activities, and what you should do to
anticipate, help prevent, mitigate, and respond to these hazards.
(b) Discuss first aid and prevention for the types of injuries or illnesses that
could occur while participating in geocaching activities, including cuts, scrapes,
snakebite, insect stings, tick bites, exposure to poisonous plants, heat and cold
reactions (sunburn, heatstroke, heat exhaustion, hypothermia), and dehydration.
(c) Discuss how to properly plan an activity that uses GPS, including using
the buddy system, sharing your plan with others, and considering the weather,
route, and proper attire.
2. Discuss the following with your counselor:
(a) Why you should never bury a cache
(b) How to use proper geocaching etiquette when hiding or seeking a cache,
and how to properly hide, post, maintain, and dismantle a geocache
(c) The principles of Leave No Trace as they apply to geocaching
3. Explain the following terms used in geocaching: waypoint, log, cache, accuracy,
difficulty and terrain ratings, attributes, trackable. Choose five additional terms
to explain to your counselor.
127

4. Explain how the Global Positioning System (GPS) works. Then, using
Scouting’s Teaching EDGE, demonstrate to your counselor the use of a GPS
unit. Include marking and editing a waypoint, changing field functions, and
changing the coordinate system in the unit.
5. Do the following:
(a) Show you know how to use a map and compass and explain why this
is important for geocaching.
(b) Explain the similarities and differences between GPS navigation and
standard map-reading skills and describe the benefits of each.
6. Describe to your counselor the four steps to finding your first cache. Then
mark and edit a waypoint.
7. With your parent’s permission*, go to www.geocaching.com. Type in your city
and state to locate public geocaches in your area. Share with your counselor the
posted information about three of those geocaches. Then, pick one of the three
and find the cache.
8. Do ONE of the following:
(a) If a Cache to Eagle® series exists in your council, visit at least three of the
locations in the series. Describe the projects that each cache you visit highlights,
and explain how the Cache to Eagle® program helps share our Scouting service
with the public.
(b) Create a Scouting-related Travel Bug® that promotes one of the values of
Scouting. “Release” your Travel Bug into a public geocache and, with your parent’s permission, monitor its progress at www.geocaching.com for 30 days. Keep
a log, and share this with your counselor at the end of the 30-day period.
(c) Set up and hide a public geocache, following the guidelines in the Geocaching
merit badge pamphlet. Before doing so, share with your counselor a three-month
maintenance plan for the geocache where you are personally responsible for those
three months. After setting up the geocache, with your parent’s permission, follow
the logs online for 30 days and share them with your counselor. You must archive
the geocache when you are no longer maintaining it.
(d) Explain what Cache In Trash Out (CITO) means, and describe how you
have practiced CITO at public geocaches or at a CITO event. Then, either create
CITO containers to leave at public caches, or host a CITO event for your unit or
for the public.
9. Plan a geohunt for a youth group such as your troop or a neighboring pack, at
school, or your place of worship. Choose a theme, set up a course with at least
four waypoints, teach the players how to use a GPS unit, and play the game.
Tell your counselor about your experience, and share the materials you used
and developed for this event.
*To fulfill this requirement, you will need to set up a free user account with www.geocaching.com. Before doing so,
ask your parent for permission and help.

128

Geocaching Resources.

Geocaching Resources
Scouting Literature
Boy Scout Handbook; Fieldbook;
National Youth Leadership Training
Syllabus; Cub Scout Fun With GPS;
Backpacking, Camping, Cycling, First
Aid, Hiking, Nature, Orienteering,
and Search and Rescue merit
badge pamphlets
Visit the Boy Scouts of America’s
official retail website at
http://www.scoutstuff.org for
a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other
helpful Scouting resources.

Books
Cameron, Layne. The Geocaching
Handbook. Falcon Press
Publishing, 2004.
DK Publishing. Boys’ Life Series: Let’s Go
Geocaching. DK Publishing, 2008.
Dyer, Mike. The Essential Guide to
Geocaching. Fulcrum Publishing, 2004.
G & R Publishing. It’s a Treasure Hunt!
Geocaching & Letterboxing. CQ
Products, 2007.
Geocaching.com. The Complete Idiot’s
Guide to Geocaching. ALPHA, 2012.

78

GEOCACHING

Gillin, Paul, and Dana Gillin. The Joy of
Geocaching. Quill Driver Books, 2010.
Kelley, Margot Anne. Local Treasures:
Geocaching Across America. Center
for American Places Inc., 2006.
Long, Cully. How to Puzzle Cache.
lulu.com, 2015.
McNamara, Joel, and K. Feltman.
Geocaching for Dummies. John Wiley
& Sons, 2004.
Sherman, Erik. Geocaching: Hike and
Seek With Your GPS. Apress, 2004.
Stevens, Mary E. Geocaching for the Boy
Scout Program. CreateSpace, 2010.
Available from www.geoscouting.com.
———. Geocaching for the Cub Scout
Program. CreateSpace, 2010. Available
from www.geoscouting.com.

Organizations and Websites
(For other geocaching-related websites,
see “Geocaching and the Internet”
earlier in this pamphlet.)
Cache In Trash Out
Website: http://www.cacheintrashout.org
Geocachers’ Creed
Website: http://www.geocreed.info
Geocaching.com
Website: http://www.geocaching.com

.Geocaching Resources

Geoscouting®
Website: http://www.geoscouting.com
Leave No Trace Center for
Outdoor Ethics
Website: http://www.lnt.org
Maptools.com
Website: http://www.maptools.com
U.S. Geological Survey
Website: http://www.usgs.gov

Acknowledgements
The Boy Scouts of America is grateful to
Mary E. Stevens and Brad Stevens, San
Rafael, California, for their assistance with
development of the Geocaching merit
badge and the creation of the manuscript
for this pamphlet. We appreciate their
help during the review and production of
the Geocaching merit badge pamphlet.
Some material in this publication
is reprinted by permission of
Mary E. Stevens, Ph.D. For more
information about Scouting
and geocaching, visit
www.GeoScouting.com, or
e-mail info@geoscouting.com.

Photo and Illustration Credits
Digital Vision—page 55
©2010 Google Map/Google Earth/Google
Inc.—page 37
©Groundspeak Inc., courtesy; used with
permission—pages 49 (attribute
icons) and 75 (attribute icons)
Maptools.com, courtesy—pages 35
(grid overlay tool) and 36

Shutterstock.com, courtesy—pages 14
(©Patricia Hofmeester), 29 (©Songchai
Premprasopchok), 38 (©Monkey
Business Images), 62 (nest,
©Mr.Alex), 68 (©Mihai Simonia),
70 (bee, ©irin-k), and 80 (blue geocache, ©R. Fassbind; geocache with
logo, ©Aigars Reinholds; ammo box
geocache, ©Peteri)
U.S. Geological Survey, courtesy—
pages 26 (background) and 28
USDA Agricultural Resource Service/
Scott Bauer, Bugwood.org, courtesy—
page 71 (tick)
Wikipedia.org, courtesy—
page 71 (rattlesnake)
Wikipedia.org/Evrik, courtesy—
page 31 (BSA national office)
Wikipedia.org/Roger Griffith, courtesy—
page 76 (geocoin)
Wikipedia.org/Jeffness, courtesy—
page 41
Wikipedia.org/Miaow Miaow,
courtesy—page 48
Wikipedia.org/Edward J. Wozniak,
D.V.M., Ph.D., courtesy—
page 71 (copperhead)
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of
or are protected by the Boy Scouts
of America.
John McDearmon—cover (global
satellite illustration); all illustrations
on pages 10, 32 (map projection),
33–34, 35 (grid map), and 70
Brian Payne—pages 18, 44 (backpack),
45 (Scouts), 49 (hikers), and 70
(boots)
GEOCACHING

79

