GEOCACHING
STEM-Based


GEOCACHING
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


35836
ISBN 978-0-8395-5836-1
©2024 Scouting America/Boy Scouts of America
2024 Printing
Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Geocaching or check Scoutbook for
the latest requirements.


GEOCACHING 3





GEOCACHING 5
Contents
What Is Geocaching? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
The Global Positioning System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Using Your GPS Receiver . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
Using Your Map and Compass . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
Geocaching and the Internet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
Getting Started With Public Geocaching . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
Setting Up Your Own Geocaches. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
Geocaching and Your Troop . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
First Aid and Managing Risk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
Geocaching Terms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
Geocaching Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72





GEOCACHING 7
.What Is Geocaching?
What Is Geocaching?
The word geocache is a combination of “geo,”
which means “earth,” and “cache,” which means
“a hiding place.” Geocaching describes a hiding
place on planet Earth—a hiding place you can find
using a GPS unit. A GPS (Global Positioning System)
unit is an electronic tool that shows you where to go
based on information it gets from satellites in space.
The History of Geocaching
On May 1, 2000, President Bill Clinton announced that
a limitation called “Selective Availability” would be
removed from the U.S.-sponsored GPS satellite system.
This meant that civilian users of the Global Positioning
System would be able to pinpoint locations up to 10
times more accurately than they did before.
GPS enthusiasts celebrated, because now anyone
with a GPS receiver could, as the White House put it,
“precisely pinpoint their location or the location of
items left behind for later recovery.”
Two days later, on May 3, a GPS enthusiast named Dave
Ulmer set out to test the accuracy of the upgraded navigational
technology. He hid a bucket of trinkets in the woods outside
Portland, Oregon, and announced the bucket’s location in an
internet posting.
Dave called the idea the “Great American GPS Stash Hunt.”
The idea was simple: Hide a container outdoors and note the
coordinates with a GPS unit. Then invite people to locate the
container, using only their GPS receivers. The rules for the finders
were equally simple: “Take some stuff, leave some stuff.”
Think of setting
off on a treasure
hunt and using
a GPS device to
find the location
of the hidden prize
or “cache.”


8 GEOCACHING
What Is Geocaching?.
This first high-tech treasure hunt began as a hobby that is
still active today, including the basic parts of geocaching: a con-
tainer, a logbook for the finders to sign, and the concept of a prize
with the “take something–leave something” guideline.
The original cache (then called a “stash”) was quickly found,
and more caches were hidden in California, Kansas, and Illinois
that same week. Within a month, a cache had been hidden as far
away as Australia, and geocaching was soon a worldwide sport.
Today there are more than a million caches hidden around the
world in over 200 countries.
Here is Dave Ulmer’s
original posting:
From: Dave (news2yousNOneSPAM@hotmail.com.invalid)
Subject: GPS Stash Hunt... Stash #1 is there!
Newsgroups: sci.geo.satellite-nav
Date: 2000/05/03
Well, I did it, created the first stash hunt stash
and here are the coordinates:
N 45° 17.460
W122° 24.800
Lots of goodies for the finders. Look for a black
plastic bucket … Take some stuff, leave some stuff!
Record it all in the log book. Have Fun!


GEOCACHING 9
.What Is Geocaching?
So many public geocaches are hidden now that you are likely
to find caches close to your troop meeting location. Geocaches
may be hidden in your neighborhood close to where you live. The
search for many of these will take you on beautiful hikes and may
give you challenging puzzles to solve to find the treasure.
Geocaching is great for fun and exercise. You can use this sport to liven
up troop meetings, to encourage others to join Scouting, and for public
service. It’s a sport that’s a perfect fit for Scouting, and it’s a great way
for Scouts and non-Scouts to share their enjoyment of the outdoors.
Use your Scout skills and follow the Scout Oath and Scout Law as you
embark on this new pastime.





GEOCACHING 11
.The Global Positioning System
The Global
Positioning System
The Global Positioning System (GPS) is an electronic navigation
network that uses signals from satellites orbiting Earth to determine
specific locations on or near Earth’s surface. GPS technology can be
used anywhere in the world 24 hours a day because the system of
satellites circles Earth all the time, and some number of them are
always above you. The system works in any kind of weather and
does not require any setup fee or subscription charge.
How Does a GPS Receiver Work?
A GPS receiver (GPSr) calculates its position by carefully timing the
signals sent by the 24 to 30 GPS satellites high above Earth. At any
given time, there are usually several satellites over any given place
on Earth. Each satellite continually transmits data that indicates its
location and the current time. All GPS satellites transmit signals at
the same instant, but the signals arrive at a GPS receiver at slightly
different times. The farther the receiver is from a satellite, the
longer the signal takes to reach the receiver.
The receiver uses the arrival time
of each signal to measure the distance
to each satellite. Once the receiver has
detected signals from a minimum of
four satellites, the GPSr can calculate the
receiver’s location and altitude and display
these coordinates on the GPSr screen. The
more satellites the receiver has tracked and
acquired, the better the accuracy of the
GPSr calculations.
Basically, GPS
lets you determine
your location
and find other
locations on Earth,
and helps you
navigate to and
from those places.


12 GEOCACHING
The Global Positioning System.
You can also enter a location into the GPS receiver, and
the unit will calculate how far you are from that point
as well as what direction you need to travel to reach
that destination. Many GPS units have a screen that
serves as an electronic map to show the user’s location
or where the final destination is.
What Can Go Wrong?
If anything blocks or interferes with the satellite signals reaching
the GPS receiver, the GPS can give inaccurate information or just
not work at all. Trees, buildings, canyons, or valleys can affect the
signal strength or modify the time it takes for signals to reach the
receiver, thereby degrading the ability
of the GPSr to calculate the location
accurately.
In addition, no civilian GPS
receiver has 100 percent accuracy.
A GPSr will rarely lead you to the
“exact spot.” This means that you get
close but not quite on target most of
the time, even if the GPSr says you are
within a foot of the hidden geocache
that you are seeking.
A common error for beginning
geocachers is to try to get the number
in the GPS unit’s “distance” field to
go to zero. It almost never does, and
even then it’s unlikely to be correct.
The accuracy is often at least a 20-foot
radius, and sometimes greater, which
means the geocache could be 20 feet or
more from you in any direction. Quite
a bit of searching for “ground zero” or
the exact final spot is required in most
cases. As new geocachers soon learn, it’s
necessary to use your head at that point
and begin searching.


GEOCACHING 13
.The Global Positioning System
A basic GPS receiver (the simple, handheld type typically
used for geocaching) gives you the shortest route of
travel. It does not look at topography or at rivers, roads,
or other obstacles you may come across on the way. This
is one reason that a map is helpful in geocaching. Maps
give you the big picture of the area.
Like any electronic device, a GPS receiver will not work if
it loses power. A GPSr also depends on you to input correct
information. A small mistake when entering coordinates can
send you a few miles—or hundreds of miles—off course.
Always remember these things about your GPS receiver:
• The GPS compass arrow points to a direction
that may not be the best route. Look where
you are going and what is ahead of you to
choose the best way to get there.
• You may lose the signal from the satellites.
• Your unit’s accuracy may be very low due
to interference.
• Your unit’s batteries can be low or die.
• You may have input the wrong information.
A Scout is
trustworthy. Your
GPS unit is not!
Be aware of the
pitfalls and
be prepared.


14 GEOCACHING
The Global Positioning System.
Types of GPS Units
Among the many different types of GPS units, some cost as little
as $50, or up to $10,000. Some are better for geocaching than
others. Several GPS receivers are dedicated to the sport.
When you consider all of the uses you may find for a GPS
receiver, you may decide you want a general navigation tool
that is useful beyond geocaching and practical for other outdoor
purposes. Think of all the things you may want to do with your
GPS unit and buy accordingly. While an inexpensive, no-frills unit
is fine for geocaching games and for public geocaching, you do
want the ability to quickly download data from your computer.
You may also want to create custom geocache courses.


GEOCACHING 15
.The Global Positioning System
There are many entry-level GPS receivers that have a
wide variety of functions. Many good GPS units can
be found at sporting goods retailers and discount
stores. With your parent or guardian’s permission and
assistance, you may also find good deals on used or
discontinued models from online sources.
The most important features in any GPS receiver are basic
functionality and ease of use. Advanced features are tempting and
helpful, but they can be expensive. A unit with a color screen and
lots of maps can cost hundreds of dollars, so think about how
often you will use these features.
If you are planning to buy a GPS receiver, first decide
which type you need: a car navigation system or handheld
outdoors device?
Automobile GPS units and smartphone navigation apps
are useful for driving and routing by car. However, they are often
not what you want for geocaching, as they tend to route you onto
major roads and freeways, and they don’t have the compass and
arrow capability needed to zero in on the cache.


16 GEOCACHING
The Global Positioning System.
Many smartphones have GPS and geocaching capabilities, and several
geocaching applications are available for these phones. While the apps
do not have all of the features of a dedicated GPS unit and could be less
accurate, they can be used for casual geocaching. Note, however, that you
may have to have internet service or a data plan for this function to work.
A smartphone with GPS may be useless if you can’t connect to the data
network—and a good connection is not always available. For a Scout or a
troop, a dedicated GPS receiver is generally a better choice than a smart-
phone. A GPSr is more durable and has many additional functions that are
useful for Scouting activities.
Handheld outdoors devices are designed to be lightweight
and rugged for outdoor use for hiking, camping, and geocaching.
These are good for Scouting activities. Most geocaching can be
done with an inexpensive, simple, handheld unit.


GEOCACHING 17
.The Global Positioning System
Before you buy, decide what func-
tions or features are essential to you.
In a car system, for example, spoken
navigation instructions may be essen-
tial, but this feature is not needed
for geocaching. People who run or
bicycle might want a fitness and
cycling GPS device that can track the
wearer’s speed, distance, and calories
burned. That type of GPS unit is not
really useful for geocaching, however.
It lacks the compass and arrow fea-
ture of a dedicated geocaching unit.
For a hiker or backpacker, rugged
construction, small size, light weight,
and backlighting for nighttime view-
ing are important features.
Enthusiasts who do a lot of geocaching find that having a unit that can
download detailed information such as cache type, hints, and logs from
geocaching.com is a real plus. This allows “paperless caching”
and avoids the need to print out descriptions and clues from the
geocaching.com listings. (The kinds of cache information that are
posted at geocaching.com are covered in detail in “Getting Started
With Public Geocaching” later in this pamphlet.)
Note the types of batteries the unit can use.
Does it come with its own special recharge-
able battery? Can you convert to regular bat-
teries if necessary?





GEOCACHING 19
.Using Your GPS Receiver
Using Your GPS Receiver
To list all the functions of every GPS receiver on the market
would be impossible. The overview in this section covers the
basic functions of a generic GPSr. Each GPS unit comes with
detailed instructions to help you, but much of your knowledge
will come from giving the various screens and buttons a try.
Basic Functions of a GPS Receiver
Basic geocaching will require you to be able to switch between
different function screens, to enter coordinates, to mark a
waypoint, and to know how to use the compass screen and
its data fields.
Be sure to read
the manual that
comes with your
GPS unit.
After locating the device’s on/off button, next learn
where the battery-level indicator is, and how to either
recharge or change the batteries. Then you can begin
to explore the features of your GPS receiver. Always
check your battery levels before going geocaching or
setting up a geocaching event. It’s also a good idea
to carry an extra set of fresh batteries—just in case.


20 GEOCACHING
Using Your GPS Receiver .
The Basic Buttons
Your unit will likely have an escape or back button, a page button,
an enter button, a goto button, a mark button, and a series of
buttons or a toggle key for moving left and right and up and
down within the GPS receiver’s functions. Using your manual,
learn where these buttons are and what they do. Some of the
function buttons may be on the face of the unit; others are on
the side. Touchscreen GPS receivers have few physical buttons on
the device—most navigation and other functions are accessed
through tapping touch-sensitive icons on the screen display.
The nav or page Button. Next, look for the nav
(navigation) or page button or other means to
change from screen to screen. Most GPS
receivers have several screens: a screen to
show how many satellites the GPSr can see
and has acquired (meaning it has picked up
the satellite signal), a compass screen, a screen
with a map display, and perhaps a screen that
displays fields of information.
The enter Button. The enter button allows you
to accept or select an option or a menu choice.
The escape or quit or back Button. The
escape (or quit or back) button has a simple
function: You use it to leave the screen you
are on (and the functions you are using) to
return to the previous screen and function.
Pushing escape repeatedly scrolls you through
the GPS receiver’s various functions.
The up, down, left, and right Buttons. The
up, down, left, and right buttons usually are
located on the face or side of a GPSr or within
its screen displays. These buttons allow you
to move around within your GPS receiver’s various functions or
menus to accomplish such tasks as naming, choosing, creating,
editing, and deleting waypoints, routes, landmarks, etc.


GEOCACHING 21
.Using Your GPS Receiver
The mark Button. mark is a useful function key that records
where you are—data the GPS receiver will store, variously, as
positions, fixes, landmarks, or waypoints. To mark a position
accurately, your unit needs satellite contact. This means you
need to be outdoors with a clear view of the sky.
The zoom Buttons. The zoom buttons allow you to zoom in or
out while viewing the map screen. Usually a map will display
finer levels of detail the more you zoom in on it.
The menu Button. The menu button displays a list of options for
functions and configurations that usually allow for customizing
the GPS receiver.
The goto or find Button. The goto or find button lets you
search your programmed waypoints or geocache locations that
are stored in the GPS unit’s memory. This function may give
you the option to display the listings alphabetically or by the
listing nearest your current location.
A waypoint is a location recorded in a GPS receiver. Waypoints are
extremely useful as you set out in search of a geocache and as you
return home.
• Pencil your route on a topographic map. (See “Using Your Map and
Compass” in the next section.) Mark several waypoints—trail intersec-
tions, stream crossings, hilltops, etc. Determine the coordinates of the
waypoints and enter those coordinates into your GPS receiver. Then
bring up the waypoints on the GPSr
screen as you travel. These will guide
you along your route.
• During a trip, stop at recognizable
landmarks (a large tree, a cabin,
a bridge, etc.) and use your GPS
receiver to determine your location.
Program that spot into the GPS unit’s
waypoint memory. On your return
journey, those GPS waypoints will
provide guidance so you can find your
way even if visibility is poor or your
memory of the route is unclear.


22 GEOCACHING
Using Your GPS Receiver .
Using a Garmin eTrex®
With so many different kinds of GPS units available, it is impossible
to describe how to program and use each brand and model. This
section details one basic model that is a common entry-level unit
for geocaching and other outdoor use.
Directions for the Garmin eTrex®
1. Turn it on. The power button is on the right side of the unit.
Be sure you have installed good batteries.
2. Locate the enter button and the up and down buttons on
the left side. These are used to change the menus and screens.
3. Push the page button repeatedly to get to the “menu”
page. The page button is on the right side of the unit.
4. Press the down button and highlight waypoints.
5. Press enter. The “waypoints” page appears.
6. Press enter and the highlight should move to a waypoint. You
may need to enter a few waypoints if your unit is brand new.
You can do this using the “mark” function. Read your unit’s
instruction manual for more information on your specific unit.
7. Press enter again and then highlight goto.
8. Press enter again and the “pointer” page should appear for
the waypoint.
Not all units
come with
preprogrammed
waypoints.
Units like these handheld GPS receivers work well for the beginner geocacher. There
are many others, so do your research and shop around to find the one that meets your
needs and fits your budget.


GEOCACHING 23
.Using Your GPS Receiver
The screen should have the waypoint’s name or number
at the very top. The default waypoint “name” is a number—
001, 002, etc. Waypoints are numbered in the order they are
marked. The numerical designation can be changed, if desired,
to letters or words: CAMP, LAKE, CABIN, etc.
Immediately below the waypoint’s name or number, you
will see the distance to that destination, given in feet or miles.
Below that, a compass ring should be displayed with an arrow
pointing in a particular direction.
You may be able to set up your GPSr so that it provides
an estimated time of arrival.


24 GEOCACHING
Using Your GPS Receiver .
You then follow the arrow and change direction as it
changes direction. The arrow will change direction only
when you begin moving. This is important. If you are stand-
ing still, the compass arrow will not be pointing in the correct
direction. You must move at least 10 to 20 feet before the arrow
will swing around to the correct direction of travel. At that time,
you start walking the way the arrow points until the distance
gets close to zero.
The pointer arrow moves only when you do.
Many GPS units do not have a built-in electronic compass. A GPS receiver’s
compass will not point north like a magnetic compass. The GPSr can only
determine your direction of travel by comparing your calculated location
with the location just calculated a second ago. In other words, the compass
will not display the correct direction of travel until you are moving.


GEOCACHING 25
.Using Your GPS Receiver
Some units require you to hold the GPS unit just like you
would hold a regular magnetic compass, level and with the top
of the GPS receiver pointing straight ahead (see the picture).
Otherwise it will think it is going backward. Check the manual.
When the arrow is pointing straight ahead, you are on the
correct track.
At some point the arrow may begin to flip, first one
direction and then another. This means you are close to your
destination. At this point, stop moving and start hunting. Use
your eyes and brain instead of your GPS receiver.
Your GPS unit will only get you so close. The rest is up to
you. The hunt is the exciting part of the game, because YOU are
required to do the final search and discovery.





GEOCACHING 27
.Using Your Map and Compass
Using Your Map
and Compass
Why do you need to know how to use a map and compass
when the GPS receiver’s arrow tells you where to go? Because
your GPS unit can—and will—fail, and it won’t tell you
what is between you and your objective.
Many things can go wrong. Your batteries may die. You
may be in a location where you can’t get good satellite reception.
Heavy tree cover, nearby power lines, tall buildings, a narrow
canyon—all of these can reduce your satellite reception to such
an extent that your GPS unit simply does not work. Or you might
accidentally program in the wrong coordinates and be heading
in the wrong direction entirely.
SCALES
DIRECTION-OF-TRAVEL ARROW
INDEX LINE
BEARING INDEX
ORIENTING ARROW
ORIENTING LINES
BEZELBASEPLATE
COMPASS
MAGNETIC
NEEDLE
Carry a map and
compass and
know how to use
them, especially if
you are out in the
wilderness. See
the Scouts BSA
handbook and the
Orienteering merit
badge pamphlet.


28 GEOCACHING
Using Your Map and Compass.
Topographic Maps
Remember, the GPS unit is only going to tell you how far you need
to go and in what direction. It is not always going to tell you about
the obstacles that may lie between you and your destination. Can
you imagine the frustration and disappointment after a three-mile
hike when you find yourself 200 yards from a cache that sits on
the other side of that swamp or hundred-foot gorge
in front of you?
Topographic maps use contour lines to show elevation and colors to represent water,
forested areas, roads, and other features. A map provides precise details and a large
view of the area.


GEOCACHING 29
.Using Your Map and Compass
Using a topographic (topo) map of the area can help you
plan your best route. Most GPS receivers today offer the option
to upload topographic maps directly to the unit. If your device
does not, you can find several sources online from which to
print a map of the area. Sporting goods shops and camping
stores also often sell topo maps.
The Latitude/Longitude Coordinate System
A convenient way to describe a position on Earth’s curved
surface is with the system of reference lines called
parallels of latitude and meridians of longitude.
You are probably familiar with a standard globe
representing Earth and with the series of lines on
the globe that show latitude and longitude.
Most GPS receivers come out of the box
preset to use latitude/longitude (lat/lon) coordi-
nates. Therefore, most new GPS users start out
using lat/lon coordinates and need to understand
how to relate those coordinates to points on
a map.
A good topographic map, or quadrangle map, is
needed in the backcountry, just as a street map is
essential in the city. What about that freeway that runs
between you and the cache? For the best route, look at
the big picture.


30 GEOCACHING
Using Your Map and Compass.
Latitude
Lines of latitude circle the globe in a horizontal direction and
measure north-south position between the poles. The equator is
defined as 0 degrees, the North Pole is 90 degrees north, and the
South Pole is 90 degrees south. Lines of latitude are all parallel
to each other and are often referred to as parallels.
Longitude
Lines of longitude, or meridians, run vertically, dividing Earth into
segments that meet at the North and South Poles. Meridians mea-
sure east-west position. The prime meridian, which runs through
Greenwich, England, is assigned the value of 0 degrees. Meridians
to the west of the prime meridian are measured in degrees west;
those to the east of the prime meridian are measured by their
number of degrees east.
To show precise
locations, each
degree of
longitude and
latitude is divided
into 60 minutes,
and each minute of
longitude and latitude is divided into 60 seconds. Here are
the symbols used for units of measure:
° = degrees ' = minutes " = seconds
A position on the globe is stated latitude first,
followed by longitude. For example, the coordinates of lat-
itude and longitude for the summit of Baldy Mountain in
New Mexico may be given as 36°37'45" N, 105°12'48" W.


GEOCACHING 31
.Using Your Map and Compass
Common Formats
For expressing latitude and longitude, here are the three most
common formats:
Degrees and decimal minutes (DDD° MM.MMMM') is the
format most commonly used with GPS devices and is the format
used by default on geocaching.com, which shortens the format to
DDD MM.MMM. In this format, the coordinates of the Scouting
America national office are N 32° 53.137', W 096° 58.218'.
Degrees, minutes, and seconds (DDD° MM' SSS") is the
most common format used to mark maps. In this format, the
Scouting America national office is at 32° 53' 08.27" N, 096° 58'
13.13" W. This format can be cumbersome to work with; just
remember that it is similar to telling time.
There are 60 seconds in a minute 60" = 1'
There are 60 minutes in a degree 60' = 1°
Decimal degrees (DDD.DDDDD°) is the format that most
computer-based mapping systems display. Often the N-S and E-W
designators are omitted. Positive values of latitude are north of
the equator; negative values are to the south. Most often, negative
values for longitude indicate a west longitude; a positive value
is an east longitude. In the decimal degrees format, the Scouting
America national office is located at 32.88563 -096.97031.
Be mindful of a few simple conversions between
seconds and decimal minutes when working with
maps that use degrees, minutes, and seconds:
• 15 seconds is one-quarter minute or 0.25 minutes
• 30 seconds is one-half minute or 0.5 minutes
• 45 seconds is three-quarters of a minute or
0.75 minutes
DDD° MM' SS.SS" Degrees, minutes, and seconds
DDD° MM.MMMM' Degrees and decimal minutes
DDD.DDDDD° Decimal degrees


32 GEOCACHING
Using Your Map and Compass.
Which Format Should You Use?
You can set a GPS receiver to
display any one of these three
formats. Locations can be entered
into the GPS unit with the selected
format, and then by switching
the position format setting, you
can view the coordinates in the
different format.
If your main GPS activity
will be geocaching, then degrees
and decimal minutes will be your
preferred format. But if you are
teaming up with other people
who have agreed to use a
different format, then you should
probably use that format.
You will also want to look at the maps and lists of coor-
dinates you are using. If you find a consistent format among
them, using it will make your location-finding easier. Select a
position format that matches the method in which your map
coordinates are measured.
Coordinates for Scouting America’s national office in Irving, Texas,
are N 32° 53.137', W 096° 58.218'.
Most GPS
receivers have
a simple setting
to switch between
various coordinate
systems.


GEOCACHING 33
.Geocaching and the Internet
Geocaching and
the Internet
Since the first geocache in May 2000, the internet has played a
major role in the sport. Several websites offer information about
geocaching, and you can search for a wide variety of public
geocaches. Just remember that no one controls the information
put onto the web. Much of what you see posted there may be
incorrect or misleading. You should always consider the source of
the information to help you evaluate how accurate it might be.
Basic Internet Safety
Internet use has its risks and requires common sense as well as a
parent or guardian’s permission. Follow these guidelines and use
your noggin!
1. Follow your family’s rules for going online. Respect any
limits on how long and how often you are allowed to be
online and what sites you can visit. Do not visit areas that
are off-limits. Just as there are places you don’t go to in real
life, there are places to avoid on the internet.
2. Protect your privacy. Never exchange emails or give out
personal information such as your phone number, address,
last name, school, or where your parents or guardians work
and their phone numbers, without first asking permission.
Do not send anyone your picture or any photographs unless
you have your parent or guardian’s permission.
3. Do not open emails or files you receive from people you
don’t know or trust. If you get something suspicious, trash
it just as you would any other junk mail.
4. If you receive or discover information that makes you
uncomfortable, leave it and tell your parent or guardian.
Do not respond to any message that is disturbing or hurtful.


Geocaching and the Internet.
34 GEOCACHING
5. Never agree to get together with someone you “meet”
online, unless your parent or guardian approves of the meet-
ing and goes with you.
6. Never share your internet passwords with anyone (even
if they sound “official”) other than your parents, guardians
or other responsible adults in your family.
7. Never shop online unless you have your parent or
guardian’s permission to do so.
8. Do not believe everything you see or read online. Along
with lots of great information, the internet has lots of junk.
Learn to separate the useful from the useless. Talk with
your parent or guardian, merit badge counselor, or an experi-
enced web user about ways to tell the difference.
9. Be a good online citizen. Do not do anything that harms
others or is against the law.
Google Earth or Google Maps
“Following the arrow” on a GPS receiver may add “high tech” to a
geocaching adventure, but another piece of technology lets you
geocache even if you don’t own a GPS unit. Google Earth and
Google Maps allow you to put in coordinates and then zoom in for
a detailed satellite view of the location. Using this technology,
along with a description of the cache and other clues, is often
enough to find a geocache. You can almost see the exact bush the
cache is hidden under.
Be careful who you communicate with online. People online
may not be who they say they are. For instance, an adult
could be posing as a kid.
Using Google Earth or
Google Maps is a novel
way to combine geocach-
ing with map skills. You
can use both a detailed
topographic map and
a Google Earth map to
bring the map symbols
alive in a fun way.


GEOCACHING 35
.Geocaching and the Internet
Geocaching With a Twist
Here are some different types of GPS-related
activities and the websites where you can find
more information.
Letterboxing (letterboxing.org) is a form of trea-
sure hunting that uses clues to direct the seekers
to a hidden container. Each container has a unique
stamp that you use to mark your logbook, and you
leave your own unique stamp in the letterbox log-
book. Letterboxes may also be geocaches (a letter-
box-hybrid cache). The coordinates of some letter-
box-hybrid caches take you to a spot where clues
to the final container may be hidden or will
become obvious (“under the second big tree to the
west of where you are standing,” for example). A
common mistake is for geocachers to think the
stamp is a trading item; it is not. Leave the stamp
in a letterbox-hybrid cache.
Waymarking (waymarking.com) involves posting the
coordinates of places that you may want to visit in specific
categories. The website is also a tool for adding information
about that location.
Wherigo® (wherigo.com) combines an adventure game with a
geocache search. The website includes tools to build location-
based game “cartridges” (interactive tours, adventure games,
puzzles) on your computer that can be played with a Wherigo-
compatible GPS unit. You physically move from one location to
the next to advance the story, then log the results at
wherigo.com and geocaching.com.
EarthCache™ (geosociety.org/earthcache) provides informa-
tion on locations people can visit to learn about a unique geosci-
ence feature or aspect of our planet. Visiting EarthCache sites
will show you how our planet has been shaped by geological
processes, how we manage the resources, and how scientists
gather evidence to learn about Earth.
Geoscouting® (geoscouting.com) is a resource for the
Scouting community that strives to combine the usefulness of
geocaching.com (see below) with ideas that can be included in
Scouting activities. The Geoscouting website focuses on Scout-
related interests and discussions of ways to use the sport for the
Scouting community.
Navicache.com
is a geocaching
website with rules
and an audience
slightly different
from the popular
geocaching.com
website.


Geocaching.com
Geocaching.com is the most popular website for the public
sport of geocaching. The site lists more than three million active
caches and has millions of users worldwide. Basic membership
is free. For a small yearly fee, you can get the bonus features of
a premium membership.
While all of the site’s pages are informative and worth
exploring, the “Geocaching 101” pages at geocaching.com/guide
are must-reads for beginning geocachers. Note that all caches
posted on geocaching.com must adhere to the guidelines of
Geocaching HQ. This includes where the cache is hidden, as well
as what geocachers can and cannot say in their public postings.
Volunteer reviewers ensure that caches are hidden according to
the rules, and follow up on any issues with a cache. (Guidelines
for public geocaching are covered in more detail in the next chap-
ters of this pamphlet, “Getting Started With Public Geocaching”
and “Setting Up Your Own Geocaches.”)
Geocaching and the Internet.
36 GEOCACHING


GEOCACHING 37
.Getting Started With Public Geocaching
Getting Started With
Public Geocaching
Are you ready to find a cache? Before you go search for it, you
need to prepare. Geocaching.com lists four basic steps to finding
your first public geocache. The four steps are summarized here;
more details are available online.
Step 1—Research
At geocaching.com, register for a free basic membership. Then
click “search.” To locate the geocaches nearest you, enter your
city and state and click “search.”
The list that appears will give you information on how far
away a cache is, what type it is, how difficult it is to find, and
how difficult the terrain is (how hard the cache is to get to).
Choose a geocache from the list and click on its name.
Enter the coordinates of the geocache into your GPS device.
Also study maps of the area. You will need the right maps to help
you search. If you choose an urban cache to hunt for, a road map
may be all you will need. For a
rural cache, however, you may
need a topographical map that
will tell you what terrain you
will encounter.
For your first
geocache hunt,
choose one that
has a difficulty
and terrain
rating (D/T) of
1/1. Start with
an easy-to-find
cache so
you can learn
how geocaches
are placed.
Read the owner’s manual to
learn how to manually enter
coordinates into your GPS
device. Or ask an experienced
GPS user to show you how.


38 GEOCACHING
Getting Started With Public Geocaching.
Step 2—Safety
Before you head out, be sure to tell someone where you are
going and when you expect to return. Use the buddy system.
Pack your pack. Bring a personal first-aid kit, a compass,
maps, and extra batteries for your GPS receiver. Bring water. It is
always a good idea to pack along food and extra clothing, too.
Step 3—The Hunt
Your starting point may take you beyond walking distance. If you
must drive to the location, as you leave your car or a well-marked
trail or trailhead, be sure to mark its location as a waypoint. Once
you are focused on the hunt for the cache, you can easily get
disoriented. Mark your starting place as a waypoint to guide
your return.
Use your GPS device to help you find the hidden geocache.
From the research you did before you set out, you should know
the best approach for getting near the cache location. When you
get within 300 feet or so (the length of a football field), check
your GPS receiver’s signal strength and accuracy. The accuracy
may be low. As you get closer to the final location, don’t rely too
much on the GPS receiver’s pointer arrow. Concentrate more on
the overall distance decreasing.
During the hunt, pay attention to your surroundings. It’s
easy to focus on your GPS receiver and forget to look
around. Be conscious of where you are walking, both
for your own safety and to respect the environment. Be
mindful of potential hazards such as poisonous plants
or venomous animals that may live in the area.


GEOCACHING 39
.Getting Started With Public Geocaching
When you get close to a cache, it’s time to take a good look
around. The cache might be so “easy” to find that you walk
right past it.
The final 30 feet
to 100 feet can be
the most difficult.
At this stage, look
around for likely
hiding spots.
Remember: A
cache may be
cleverly hidden
and camouflaged.


40 GEOCACHING
Getting Started With Public Geocaching.
Step 4—The Actual Find
You’ve found it! But you’re not
done yet.
Sign the cache’s logbook with
your name or “handle,” the date,
and a few words about your experi-
ence. Along with the logbook, caches
often have “swag” inside—prizes to
be traded. If you trade for items, the
proper etiquette is to leave an item of
at least equal value to what you take.
Remember, Scouts always leave it
better than we find it!
Use the waypoint you created
to guide your return. When you
get home, log your visit online by
going back to the cache’s page at
geocaching.com. Share your
geocaching stories. The cache
owner will enjoy hearing about
your adventure, the condition of the
cache, and any special challenges
you may have met along the way.
Geocaching Etiquette
• Practice Cache In Trash Out (CITO). Always carry a trash bag and
remove litter along your route.
• Follow Leave No Trace guidelines in the natural environment.
• Be careful of the area around the cache—don’t trample the grounds,
rip up sprinkler heads, etc., in your frenzy to find the cache.
• Follow all laws and regulations. Never enter private property
without permission.
• Write an entry in the logbook at the cache.
• Cache items are there for fun and for trade. Try to leave something
of equal value to what you take for yourself.
• Respect other visitors around the area.


GEOCACHING 41
.Getting Started With Public Geocaching
More Tips on Using Geocaching.com
Once you have typed in your city and state at geocaching.com,
you will find a variety of caches near you. Click on any of the
links, and if you have your basic membership you will see not
only the coordinates for that cache displayed, you will also get
other useful information, such as:
• The name of the cache. Each cache has a name, which is
searchable, as well as a unique identifier code, usually starting
with GC followed by a series of numbers and letters. Names
can be hints in and of themselves. The name might also use
Scouting terms for instant Scouting recognition.
• The size of the cache. Geocaches can be any size and any
shape. It often helps to know this ahead of time to guide
your search.
Nano caches are tiny and they often have only a strip of paper for a log.
Be polite and don’t fill the entire strip with your signature! These are
officially listed online as micro caches but the description or hint will
often tell you to look for a tiny nano cache. Micros are often film-canister
size. Small caches (typically a sandwich-sized plastic container) can hold
a few smallish trade items or Travel Bugs (see “Trackables,” below).
Regular caches (shoebox-sized) are large enough for prizes and most
Travel Bugs. Occasionally you will find a large cache (the size of a five-
gallon bucket), which can hold very big items.
Be sure to
reseal the cache
container and
put it back exactly
where and how
you found it.
Replace any
rocks, sticks, or
other camouflage
you may
have moved.


42 GEOCACHING
Getting Started With Public Geocaching.
Types of Caches
The many types of caches include the following.
Traditional. This is an ordinary “hide” with a single cache
found at the given coordinates. In its simplest form, a traditional
cache consists of a container and logbook.
Multi. As the name implies, this type of cache has more than
one part. You may find the coordinates of the second cache in
the first, the coordinates of the third cache in the second, and so
on. Or they may all be listed in the cache description. This type
of cache often leads you on a trail to different interesting places.
Mystery or Puzzle. The actual cache is not at the coordinates
that are listed on the website. Instead, there is a puzzle that
must be solved. Some puzzle caches require a lot of research.
They can be extremely challenging, whereas others are more
straightforward. All of them keep a Scout “mentally awake.”
Virtual. A virtual cache does not have any container to find. It
exists in the form of a location that you visit, find out informa-
tion, and send that information to the cache owner to log (get
credit for) the find. These can no longer be created other than
on the waymarking.com site, but some old virtual-cache sites
make for great Scouting visits.
Event (regular, mega, or giga). Events are gatherings set up
by local geocachers and geocaching organizations to meet play-
ers and to discuss geocaching. Attending an event that is posted
on geocaching.com counts as a “find.”
CITO. A Cache In Trash Out (CITO) type of service event also
counts as a “find.”
Other Information
The geocaching.com listing for a cache may also include the
following information:
Difficulty. How hard is the cache to find? This scale is from
1 (very obvious) to 5 (very devious).
Multis are great
for use in
Scouting games.
Wherigo®, letterbox, and EarthCache™ are discussed in
“Geocaching and the Internet” earlier in this pamphlet.


GEOCACHING 43
.Getting Started With Public Geocaching
Terrain. How hard is it to get to? A rating of 1 means the cache
is reachable by wheelchair; a rating of 5 usually means that
special equipment or expertise will be required.
Attributes. Attributes give additional information, such as what
is permitted in the area (whether dogs are allowed, for example),
any special equipment needed, what to watch out for, and other
details. Are the facilities wheelchair accessible? Can you camp
nearby? Are there thorny bushes? Look for this information
before you begin to search for a cache (and don’t forget to list
attributes when you place a cache for others to find).
Description. Often you can learn useful information about the
location through the description of the cache. This is also a way
to tell others about your troop or Scouting experiences as long as
you are careful not to violate the “no soliciting” rules. You can’t
advertise for troop members, or ask for money, or post links to
other Scouting websites such as your troop’s home page.
Scouting America
recommends that
Scouts do not go
after caches that
have a terrain
rating higher than
3.5, unless an
adult has checked
the cache ahead
of time for age-
appropriateness
and safety.
Short hike
Special tools
required


44 GEOCACHING
Getting Started With Public Geocaching.
Clue or hint. Many caches include a clue or hint, which you
may or may not want to decode. If you hide a cache (see the
next chapter, “Setting Up Your Own Geocaches”), you should
always give a hint even if the location seems easy to you. Ask
yourself: Do you want people to find your cache? Nothing is
more frustrating than a long hike, with a GPS receiver that won’t
settle down, only to be thwarted at the last by a hint that reads:
“Too easy for a hint.”
Trackables
A trackable is anything with a tracking number
or other identifier that can be followed as the
item travels from cache to cache. Trackables
are cool for Scouts to find and release (and
they’re good for informing the public about
Scouting America). Several trackables have
their own websites.
PathTags (pathtags.com) are small metal
coins for trading and sharing. Each has a
unique number that can be tracked on the
PathTags website.
Try decoding this hint:
N FPBHG VF URYCSHY!
Decryption Key (substitute each letter for
the one above or below it)
A|B|C|D|E|F|G|H|I|J|K|L|M
N|O|P|Q|R|S|T|U|V|W|X|Y|Z
E
N
D
U
C


GEOCACHING 45
Geocoins and Travel Bugs are the main trackable items at
geocaching.com. Travel Bugs are like dog tags with a unique code
that you can attach to any item of your choice. At geocaching.com,
the coins (geocoins) and Travel Bugs each have a page with the
object’s “mission,” or what the owner wants to have happen with
the traveling object. Both log miles traveled, and each time an
object is moved from cache to cache, the person who moves
it posts a note about it on the geocaching.com site.
Geoscouting.com has a forum feature.
A forum is a way to share comments
on the internet under specific topic
headings. People read the posts
and reply. It’s a great way to
have a conversation, exchange
information, and learn new things.
Geoscouting.com is focused on
Scouting interests. You can find
geocaching-related news there, as well
as links to useful information about geocaching and
Scouting. Get your parent or guardian’s permission
before going online.
Remember
internet safety.
In a forum,
never post any
sort of identifying
information about
yourself.
Geocoin
Travel Bug
E S T I A S
V E N E C





GEOCACHING 47
.Setting Up Your Own Geocaches
Setting Up Your
Own Geocaches
When you place your own caches, it is important to follow the
rules. “Be prepared” by reading and understanding the
guidelines at geocaching.com/play/guidelines before you hide
your cache. The guidelines cover the safety rules as well as
environmental concerns. Geocaching.com has a quick guide to
hiding your first geocache (geocaching.com/play/hide). More
information is available at the site’s Help Center: (geocaching.
com/help).
Think about what people might do when searching for
your cache. You don’t want the public tearing up gar-
dens looking for that fake sprinkler head. This is
one reason you never bury a cache. Since the accuracy
of a GPS receiver never gets you to the exact spot
(ground zero), too many holes would be dug searching
for a container.
A muggle is
someone who
doesn’t know
about the sport
of geocaching.
When you are
looking for a
public geocache,
you want to
be careful that
people don’t see
what you are
doing, as they
might just take
the cache. When
someone has
broken into a
cache and ruined
it, that is called
“being muggled.”


48 GEOCACHING
Setting Up Your Own Geocaches.
The Four Steps
Think of the four steps to finding a cache, and use those steps to
guide you in hiding a geocache.
1. Research. Carefully research where you want to place your
cache. Are there adequate places to hide your caches without
risk to the environment when people are seeking them?
Are there too many other caches nearby? Geocachers are
encouraged to seek out new places to hide caches rather
than put them where others already exist. Areas that are not
suitable for geocaches include schools, government build-
ings, cemeteries, airports, military installations, or similar
sites. Geocaches can only be placed at Scout camps if the
location is on a portion of the property that is available to
the general public to seek the cache.
2. Safety. Your cache must be in a location that is safe to get to.
It’s essential to get permission from the landowner or land
manager, and to avoid placing caches anywhere the seekers
might encounter danger. Don’t put caches near busy intersec-
tions, near railroad tracks, on electric utility boxes, or up high
in trees. Avoid places overgrown with poisonous plants.
3. The Hunt. Make sure geocachers can find your cache. Post
a hint online. When you place the cache, can you get a good
satellite signal so that you are posting accurate coordinates
for others to follow? Also be sure your cache can easily
be identified as a geocache. Write
“Geocache” on the outside of the
container. Consider using a clear
plastic container so the contents
are easily identifiable.
4. The Actual Find. Put your logbook in
a waterproof bag along with a pencil
and a note to welcome the cache
finder. Preload the cache with enough
prizes (small toys, perhaps, or trackable
items) for the first few people to find.
Geocaching is a family activity, and
cache contents should be suitable for
all ages. Do not include food items.


GEOCACHING 49
.Setting Up Your Own Geocaches
Submitting Your Cache
When you have your cache in place and you are certain it meets all
the requirements for placement, log on to geocaching.com and fill
out the online form on the “Hide a Geocache” page at geocaching.
com/play/hide. Write a description and add descriptive attributes
to tell others about your cache.
Maintaining Your Cache
Once you place a public geocache, you have an obli-
gation to maintain the cache and the area around
it, for as long as it is active. Monitor the online
logs that are sent to you, the cache owner,
and act on any reports that your cache
needs maintenance. You will need to return
to the site as often as you can to check
that the container is in good condition and
to be sure visitors to your cache are not
harming the area.
Does the area look disturbed? Are visi-
tors damaging the landscape? If so and you
need to change the cache’s location, be sure to
also change your online listing.
Dismantling a Cache
Geocaches should not be placed unless you can actively maintain
them for at least three months. If you find you can’t or don’t want
to maintain your geocache longer than three months and do not
have another geocacher to “adopt” the cache for you, you need to
remove it. This includes physically removing the cache container
and any litter that may be around your hiding spot. Be sure
to leave the location exactly as it would have been without a
geocache. You also need to go online and “archive” your
cache listing.
Before your cache is posted on geocaching.com, a
volunteer will review the cache to make sure the GPS
coordinates are correct and it meets the requirements
for listing. If your cache passes review, it will be posted
for the general public to seek.
Remember, a
Scout geocacher
who doesn’t
follow the rules
and etiquette of
the sport risks
tarnishing the
reputation of
all Scouts.





GEOCACHING 51
.Geocaching and Your Troop
Remember to use the Teaching EDGE. National Youth
Leadership Training (NYLT) and the National Advanced
Youth Leadership Experience (NAYLE) both use a
GPS-based activity to illustrate the Teaching EDGE.
• Explain how it is done.
• Demonstrate the steps.
• Guide learners as they practice.
• Enable them to succeed on their own.
Geocaching and
Your Troop
To fulfill requirement 9 for the Geocaching merit badge, you are
to organize a geocaching game for a youth group such as your
troop or a Cub Scout pack, and you must teach the players how
to use a GPS unit. Here are some tips you may find helpful.
Teaching GPS Use to Your Patrol or Troop
All Scouts from Tenderfoot to Eagle Scout rank can use
a GPS unit and geocache. Younger Scouts may need help
programming a GPS receiver, but older Scouts can program
the units themselves, or play games that require solving
challenging puzzles. You know your troop, so use the skill
level that is right for each member or patrol.


52 GEOCACHING
Geocaching and Your Troop.
Teaching GPS Use to Cub Scouts
or Younger Children
All ages of Cub Scouts can also use a GPS unit to geocache.
Younger children love to follow the arrow and are thrilled when
they make “the find.” However, they may not be able to program
a GPS receiver. It is best to have all the waypoints preloaded into
each unit and to have the units already set to the compass screen
so all the Scouts have to do is walk and learn to look at the
distance remaining and the direction.
Younger children will also require very easy finds with an
actual prize in the box. They are prone to boredom if the event
lasts longer than 45 to 60 minutes. Older Cub Scouts like more
challenge and can often change the GPS unit from one waypoint
to another by themselves, or play games that require solving
simple puzzles.
Match the skill level to the age of the Cub Scouts and
the size of the group. Be prepared to travel with the
Cub Scouts as they search for the cache, or keep the
distances short so you can watch their progress. Even
the youngest Scouts can appreciate a themed game.


GEOCACHING 53
.Geocaching and Your Troop
Geoscouting®: Geocaching and Scouting
You will discover many ways to use the sport of geocaching with
your patrol or troop. Use geocaching to make your troop meetings
more exciting, to showcase Scouting to the public, and to do
service events with a high-tech twist. This blending of geocaching
and Scouting—“Geoscouting®”—is a rapidly expanding program
with many resources to help you and your troop. Here are two
ways you can use Geoscouting in your troop:
• Make rank advancement fun. You can theme a geocaching
game around rank requirements or the path to Eagle.
• Recruit new members. How do you get your non-Scouting
friends to want to join Scouting? By showing them how much
fun your troop is! You can use geocaching to recruit new
members. These may be Webelos Scouts who are looking at
which troop to join, or they may be youth who are old enough
for Scouts BSA but are not yet in the program. Many schools
and churches would love to have you organize a geocaching
activity for their members, and those members may end up
wanting to join your troop.
How to Plan and Run a Geocaching Game
When setting up a game, consider the following steps.
1. Plan ahead. Decide what the game is for, who will take part, where it
will be, what safety precautions must be followed, what you need to
set up the game, and how you will clean up after the game.
2. Get any permissions that are needed, including permission slips
for the youth participants, permission from the property owner,
and the permission of your senior patrol leader, Scoutmaster, or
troop committee.
3. Set up the game ahead of time. Design and load the appropriate number
of cache containers for your game, and hide them before people arrive.
4. Have clear rules and objectives for your game. Be sure each participant
understands the safety rules and the principles of Leave No Trace.
5. Play the game!
6. Afterward, debrief the activity (that is, explain what the game was about).
7. Clean up the area and be sure to pick up all cache containers from
their hiding places.


54 GEOCACHING
Geocaching and Your Troop.
Geocaching and Leave No Trace
Leave No Trace is a basic Scouting ethic. You learn to follow
Leave No Trace principles in all that you do in the outdoors,
from hiking to camping to geocaching.
As long as geocaching is done responsibly, Leave No Trace
is a natural fit with the sport. To ensure that you minimize your
impacts when geocaching, follow the seven Leave No Trace
principles. (The following information has been adapted from
the Leave No Trace Center for Outdoor Ethics and is reprinted
here with permission.)
Leave No Trace—Outdoor Ethics
for Geocaching*
1. Plan Ahead and Prepare
• Know and comply with the geocaching policies of the land-
owners or land management agencies where you wish to seek
or place caches.
• Prepare for your trip with proper equipment and clothing
for the weather, terrain, and environmental conditions, and
for emergencies.
Be sure to read
about Leave No
Trace in your
Scouts BSA
handbook before
you begin to
geocache.
*The member-driven Leave No Trace Center for Outdoor Ethics teaches
people how to enjoy the outdoors responsibly. This copyrighted infor-
mation has been reprinted with permission from the Leave No Trace
Center for Outdoor Ethics: lnt.org.


GEOCACHING 55
.Geocaching and Your Troop
• Be safe. Let someone know where you will be going and
when you expect to return.
• Know how to use your GPS unit. Carry extra batteries and
have a map and compass as backup.
A plan is important for any Scouting outing. Know where
you are going and let someone else know, as well. Always go
with a buddy. Watch out for the weather, and dress accordingly.
Take plenty of water. Always have an appropriate map and
a compass to supplement your GPS receiver if signal
reception deteriorates.
2. Travel and Cache on Durable Surfaces
• Travel on designated trails and roads. Comply with posted signs.
• If permitted and you must travel off-trail, choose durable
surfaces such as rock, sand, gravel, and dry grass, and spread
out to avoid creating new paths.
• Use maps to find a route that will minimize impacts. Note way-
points during your journey to assist you on your return trip.
• After you have finished searching for a cache, the area should
look as though you were never there.
• Do not place a cache in sensitive locations such as fragile
vegetation or soils, critical wildlife habitat, wetlands,
lakeshores, alpine areas, or caves.
• Do not place a cache in protected areas such as designated
wilderness areas or wild and scenic river corridors, or near
historic and cultural sites.
• If you notice a path has
started to wear in the vicinity
of a cache, notify the cache
owner to move the cache.
Always walk on established
or designated trails and paths
and watch out for park or private
landscaping. No one likes to
see “geotrails” that cut across
a nice lawn or garden. When
hiding your own caches, put
them so they can be found with-
out destroying the vegetation to
get to them.
Why waste your
time on a cache
that has not been
maintained or
has gone missing,
been moved, or
been archived?
Before you
hunt for public
geocaches, it
makes sense to
read the online
logs first. (See
“Getting Started
With Public
Geocaching.”)


56 GEOCACHING
Geocaching and Your Troop.
3. Dispose of Waste Properly
• Cache In, Trash Out. Carry an extra trash bag for trash,
leftover and dropped food, and litter left by others.
• Use established bathrooms when available. If not available,
deposit solid human waste in catholes dug 6 to 8 inches deep at
least 200 feet from water sources, campsites, trails, and caches.
• Pack out toilet paper and hygiene products in a double
plastic bag.
4. Leave What You Find
• Preserve the past. Observe,
but do not touch, cultural
or historic structures and
artifacts. Never use
artifacts as cache items.
• Leave rocks, plants,
and other natural
objects for others
to enjoy.
• Practice the “lift, look,
replace” technique. If you
lift a rock to look under it,
replace it exactly as you found it.
Never destroy any natural setting, whether you are hiding
or seeking a geocache. Don’t cut branches or remove leaves to
use for cache materials or to hide caches. Don’t place caches
in locations that may cause others to disturb the natural setting
when searching for them. A good clue can go a long way to
avoid damage to the wrong “container.”
5. Minimize Campfire Impacts
If you plan to have a fire, know the fire regulations and current
guidelines for the area you plan to visit. (This is not often
relevant for geocaching, but it’s good to remember.)
Never leave trash behind. Always carry a trash bag
with you and practice Cache In Trash Out (CITO) each
time you go geocaching.


GEOCACHING 57
.Geocaching and Your Troop
6. Respect Wildlife
• Observe wildlife from a distance. Do not follow or
approach animals.
• Never feed wild animals. Feeding wildlife damages the
animals’ health, alters natural behaviors, and exposes animals
to predators and other dangers.
• Protect wildlife and your food by storing rations and
trash securely.
• Never leave food of any kind in a cache. Wildlife may find
and destroy the cache, and animals may be harmed by
consuming food wrappers.
• Respect wildlife when traveling to and from cache locations.
Avoid locations with significant wildlife traffic, such as
water sources.
• Keep pets on a leash for their safety and the safety of wild
animals. Consider leaving pets at home.
7. Be Considerate of Other Visitors
• Be courteous. Yield to other users on the trail.
• Take breaks on durable surfaces away from the trail.
• Let nature’s sounds prevail. Avoid loud voices and noises.
• Respect the rights and experiences of other
visitors. Geocaching is only one of many outdoor
recreational activities.
• Don’t trespass. When traveling to and from caches,
take notice of private property signs.
• Practice the principles of Leave No Trace. The future
of geocaching lies in the hands of geocachers.
If you encounter
wildlife while
geocaching, leave
it alone and use
proper precau-
tions. The same
holds true with
people’s pets
or livestock.
Leave them be.


58 GEOCACHING
Geocaching and Your Troop.
Geocaching and the Public
Scouting America information may be shared with the public
in many ways. You can set off Scout-related Travel Bugs with a
“mission” that describes some aspect of Scouting America
program or your troop. You can set up public geocaches that
are related to your troop. Although you cannot advertise for
Scouting in your online postings, you can talk about the fun
activities that your troop does.
Geocaching Rules in Parks
and Open Spaces
Many parks and open spaces have special rules for
geocaching. With limited exceptions, no geocaches are
allowed in national parks or national wildlife refuges.
State parks and open-space districts often allow geo-
caches but expect the public to follow Leave No Trace
principles when hiding or finding them.
Land managers may have special rules, like an
increased distance between caches or a mandatory
shorter time that a public geocache can remain active.
This is to prevent permanent geotrails from devel-
oping. Contact park, open space, or land manager
personnel to get permission before hiding any
geocaches on public or private land.
Use the same
courtesy when
geocaching that
you would show
during any other
Scout activity.
Don’t run, yell,
or shout.


GEOCACHING 59
.Geocaching and Your Troop
Cache to Eagle®
You can visit or set up caches, called “Cache to
Eagle®” geocaches, at the sites of Eagle Scout
service projects. (Cache to Eagle® has been
rolled out nationwide and was a part of the
100th Anniversary Get in the Game! activi-
ties.) When Cache to Eagle geocaches are
posted on the internet, other geocaching
enthusiasts read about our Eagle service
projects and go to visit them in person. This
is a great way to let people know how much
service Scouts provide to the community. Tips on how
to set up a Cache to Eagle series are available on geoscouting.com.
Cache In Trash Out (CITO)
The Cache In Trash Out program gives geocachers a way to
repay the public parks and other locations that have allowed
us to place geocaches on their property. The easiest way to use
CITO is to simply carry a trash bag with you whenever you
geocache and use it to clean up the areas where
the caches are located.
You can even make small containers with
trash bags inside them to leave in geocaches.
These containers move from cache to
cache. People pick up the container, use the
bag inside to clean up the immediate area,
and then replace the bag with a clean one
from home and drop off the container at the
next cache they find. Old film canisters make
great CITO containers. You can create custom-
decorated CITO labels for the containers by yourself
or with your patrol or troop.
You can also hold a larger community CITO event—a
community service project in which public geocachers work
side by side with Scouts. Work with an agency or a community
organization to decide on a good service project. Then create an
event listing on geocaching.com.
Scouting provides service to the community.
Geocaching-related programs may be used in many
ways to help with service events.





GEOCACHING 61
.First Aid and Managing Risk
First Aid and
Managing Risk
Geocaching is not an inherently dangerous sport. As with all
Scout activities, however, a little planning and common sense
will help keep you and your geocaching friends safe.
Managing Risk
Here are a few guidelines to help you manage risk along the way.
Use the buddy system. As described in the
Scouts BSA handbook, this is part of Tenderfoot
rank requirement 9. When you geocache
with a buddy, you not only watch out for
each other, you also have more eyes to
spot the cache!
Plan ahead. All activities run more
smoothly with a plan. Know where you
are going and what to expect. Read
ahead about any public geocaches you
may be searching for, and be sure to let
someone know where you are going and
when you plan to return.
Watch the weather. Whether you are geocach-
ing, hiking, or just outdoors for some reason, you
need to avoid dangerous weather situations such as lightning
storms. Dress appropriately and take plenty of water along on
any geocaching activity.


62 GEOCACHING
First Aid and Managing Risk.
Weather Watch
Always be alert to the weather. The National Weather Service says if you
can hear thunder, you are close enough to the storm to be struck by
lightning. During thunderstorms, take these precautions.
• Avoid open areas and lightning targets such as trees, flagpoles, or
wire fences.
• Avoid contact with anything metal, such as metal-framed backpacks.
In tents, stay away from metal tent poles.
• If you are near a mountaintop, get downhill. If a storm catches you,
take shelter in a cave or low spot in an area that is not likely to flood.
• Take shelter in a steel-framed building or hard-topped motor vehicle
(not a convertible) if you can, and avoid touching the metal parts.
Avoid water, and avoid using or any contact with electronic devices
such as GPS receivers, mobile phones, and computers.
• If you cannot find shelter, get small. Do not lie flat on the ground,
which makes you a larger target. Instead, crouch low with only the
soles of your shoes touching the ground, and at least 100 feet from
your companions. If you have one, use your sleeping pad for insula-
tion by folding it and crouching upon it.


GEOCACHING 63
.First Aid and Managing Risk
Personal First-Aid Kit
The items you carry in your first-aid kit will handle
most of the medical problems you are likely to
encounter while geocaching. Common injuries such
as blisters, scrapes, scratches, and sunburn are not
usually difficult to treat.
Pack these items into a self-sealing plastic bag to
carry along when you’re out-of-doors.
❏ Adhesive bandages (6)
❏ Sterile gauze pads, 3-by-3-inch (2)
❏ Adhesive tape (1 small role)
❏ Moleskin, 3-by-6-inch (1)
❏ Soap (1 small bar) or alcohol-based hand sanitizing
gel (1 travel-size bottle)
❏ Triple antibiotic ointment (1 small tube)
❏ Scissors
❏ Nonlatex disposable gloves (1 pair)
❏ Mouth-barrier device
❏ Pencil and paper
For detailed
information about
first aid, see the
First Aid merit
badge pamphlet,
the Scouts BSA
handbook, and
the Fieldbook.


64 GEOCACHING
First Aid and Managing Risk.
Being First-Aid Prepared
When you are out geocaching, you should be prepared to han-
dle some typical first-aid situations that may arise.
Blisters. Blisters on the feet are the most common injury for
hikers. A “hot spot” signals the beginning of a blister. Stop
immediately and protect the tender area by covering the skin
with a piece of moleskin slightly larger than the hot spot.
Blisters are best left unbroken. If a blister does break, treat it as
you would a minor cut or abrasion. To prevent blisters, wear
boots that fit properly and are broken in well. Keep your feet
clean and dry; change your socks frequently.
Cuts and Scrapes. Treat a minor cut or scrape by flushing the
area with clean water to wash out any foreign matter. Apply
antibiotic ointment and cover with a dry, sterile dressing or an
adhesive bandage. To help prevent cuts and scrapes, dress
appropriately for the activity (long pants, a long-sleeved shirt,
sturdy boots).
Sprains and Strains. If you sprain your ankle while hiking and
you need to keep walking, leave your boot on to support the
injury. Reinforce your ankle by wrapping it, boot and all, with a
triangle bandage. To prevent a sprain, watch where you step.
Don’t get so absorbed in following the arrow of your GPS
device that you fail to pay attention to where you are walking.
Insect Stings. To treat a bee sting, scrape away the stinger with
the edge of a knife blade but don’t squeeze the sac attached to
the stinger—that might force more venom into the skin. For
bee, wasp, or hornet stings, an ice pack may help reduce pain
and swelling.


GEOCACHING 65
.First Aid and Managing Risk
Tick Bites. Protect yourself in tick-infested woodlands
and fields by wearing long pants and a long-sleeved
shirt. Button your collar and tuck your pant legs into
your boots or socks. Inspect yourself daily, especially
the hairy parts of your body; immediately remove
any ticks you find. To remove a tick that has
attached itself, grasp it with tweezers close to the
skin and gently pull until it comes loose. Do not
squeeze, twist, or jerk the tick. Wash the wound with
soap and water and apply an antiseptic. Thoroughly wash
your hands after handling a tick.
Snakebite. The two types of venomous snakes in the United
States are the pit vipers (rattlesnakes, copperheads, and cotton-
mouths) and coral snakes. The bite of a nonvenomous snake
causes only minor puncture wounds and can be treated as such.
For any snakebite injury, get the victim under medical care
immediately. Remove jewelry in case of swelling. If the
victim must wait for medical attention to arrive, wash the
wound. Restrict the victim’s movement as much as possible,
and keep the bite site at the approxi-
mate level of the heart. Do not
apply ice or attempt to cut the
skin or suck out the venom. Do
not apply a constricting band
or elastic bandage. Treat for
shock and do not elevate
the affected limb.
Rattlesnake
Copperhead
If you are not
certain whether
a snake
is venomous,
assume that it is.
Do not make
any cuts on or
apply suction to
the bite, or use a
tourniquet on the
affected limb.
Do not apply ice
to the snakebite.
Ice will not help
the injury but
could damage the
skin and tissue.


66 GEOCACH- ING
First Aid and Managing Risk.
Poisonous Plants
Learn how to recognize—and avoid—the poison-
ous plants in your area, such as poison ivy,
poison oak, and poison sumac. If you
think you have touched a poisonous plant,
immediately wash the affected skin with
soap and water. Wipe with rubbing alco-
hol and apply a soothing skin treatment
such as calamine lotion. The oily sap
from the leaves and stems can get on
your clothing, so change clothes, keep the
contaminated clothing separate from your
other clothes, and wash it separately
back home.
Sunburn. Prevent sunburn by limiting exposure to
the sun, covering up, and wearing a broad-brimmed hat.
Use a sunscreen with a sun protection factor (SPF) of at least
15. Apply it liberally and often. Treat a painful sunburn by
applying cool, wet cloths. Stay in the shade if possible, and
cover up (long pants, long-sleeved shirt, a brimmed hat) to
avoid further overexposure to the sun.
Heat Exhaustion. Heat and dehydration can lead to heat
exhaustion. Symptoms can include pale, clammy skin; nausea
and headache; dizziness and fainting; muscle cramps; and
weakness or lack of energy. A victim of heat exhaustion should
cool down as quickly as possible. Get in the shade and drink
small amounts of fluids, such as cool water or a sports drink.
Apply cool, wet cloths to the skin, dampen the clothing, and
fan the person to hasten cooling.
Heatstroke. Left untreated, heat exhaustion can develop into
life-threatening heatstroke. Signals of heatstroke can include
any of those for heat exhaustion as well as hot, sweaty, red
skin; confusion and disorientation; and a rapid pulse.
Prevent dehydration by drinking plenty of fluids. Do not wait
until you feel thirsty—thirst may signal that you are already
becoming dehydrated. Drink enough to keep your urine clear.
Be aware if you or your companions begin to feel fatigued or
confused, or develop a headache, body aches, or dizziness.


.First Aid and Managing Risk
Dehydration is
a common
contributing factor
to hypothermia.
Wind, rain, hunger,
and exhaustion
can compound
the danger.
Hypothermia. Temperatures do not have to be frigid for some-
one to develop hypothermia. Anyone caught in a cool, windy
rain shower without proper rain gear can be at risk. A victim
of hypothermia might feel cold, numb, fatigued, irritable, and
increasingly clumsy. Uncontrollable shivering, slurred speech,
poor judgment, and unconsciousness might also occur. Get the
person out of the cold and into dry, warm clothes. Wrap the
person in blankets or whatever is handy. Position water bottles
filled with warm fluid in the armpit and groin areas. If the person
is fully conscious and able to swallow, offer a warm drink (no
caffeine or alcohol). To help prevent hypothermia, carry spare
clothing in case you get wet or temperatures drop. Be alert for
early symptoms in yourself and others. Act to keep full-blown
hypothermia from developing. Take shelter, put on layers of
warm clothing, eat something, and have a warm drink.
For victims of heatstroke, summon medical help immediately. While await-
ing help, work to lower the victim’s temperature. Move the person to a
shady or air-conditioned area. Loosen tight clothing and cool the victim
by fanning and applying wet cloths or towels. If you have ice packs, wrap
them in a thin barrier (such as a thin towel) and place them under the
armpits and against the neck and groin. If the person is able to drink, give
small amounts of cool water.
Wearing the right clothing for the weather
will keep you comfortable.
Do not rewarm a victim of
hypothermia too quickly (by
immersing in warm water,
for instance). Doing so can
cause irregular and danger-
ous heartbeat. Instead, help
warm the body gradually to
its normal temperature.


68 GEOCACHING


GEOCACHING 69
.Geocaching Terms
Geocaching Terms
Here are some common words and acronyms in the world of geocaching.
accuracy. No civilian GPS receiver has perfect accuracy (freedom from error). The
accuracy of a GPSr may be low due to interference from trees, power lines, build-
ings, cliffs, or other features of the landscape that affect the strength of the satellite
signals reaching the receiver.
archive. If you want to remove your cache from the public listing (or if a reviewer
does this for you for lack of maintenance), it is “archived.” You can also temporar-
ily disable a cache if you need to inactivate it for a short time.
attributes. These icons on a cache detail are intended to provide helpful
information to geocachers who wish to find specific types of caches. The
icons represent unique cache characteristics, whether the cache is kid
friendly, if it is available 24 hours a day, if you need special equipment, etc.
cache. Short for “geocache.”
Cache to Eagle®. A series of public geocaches that have been set up at the sites of
Eagle Scout service projects.
camo (camouflage). You can disguise your cache container in many clever ways.
CITO (Cache In Trash Out). In this geocaching event, people do
cleanup or service for parks or the community.
clue (hint). Clues or hints give the person seeking the cache a little
more information to help find it. The cache name, part of the
description, or an official hint can all be clues.
difficulty. A ranking system to describe how hard the cache is to
find. A cache that can be found quickly is ranked 1 (easiest to find); a cache that
is exceptionally well hidden is ranked 5 (hardest to find).
DNF (Did Not Find). Geocachers use this acronym to state that they did not find a
cache. If you get many DNF responses for a cache you set up, it’s time to check on it!
FTF (First to Find). This acronym is used when logging cache finds to denote being
the first to find a new geocache.
GC (geocache) code. Each code assigned to public geocache listings is unique.


70 GEOCACHING
Geocaching Terms.
geocache. A container, or cache, hidden at specific coordinates that includes, at
minimum, a logbook for geocachers to sign when they find the cache. Caches often
also contain “treasure,” or items to trade.
geocaching. A worldwide game of hiding and seeking “treasure.”
geocoin. Trackable coins with unique ID numbers engraved on them.
They can be collected or travel the world from cache to cache.
geohunt. A game involving geocaching to hunt for clues
or caches.
GPS. Global Positioning System is a system of satellites that
work with a GPS receiver to determine location anywhere on Earth.
GPS receiver (GPSr). This electronic device calculates its position by carefully
timing the signals received from at least four of the GPS satellites that circle Earth.
ground zero (GZ). The point where your GPS device shows that you have reached
the exact cache location is known as ground zero. In practice, you almost never
reach true “ground zero.” (See “accuracy.”)
hide. A shorthand term for a cache that is hidden.
log. The logbook, notebook, or log sheet inside a cache contains information from
the cache owner and provides a place for
geocachers to write their name and the date
they visited the cache. Space may also
be available for visitors to write notes or
leave comments for the cache owner.
A virtual logbook for the cache may be
available online.
log-in name (“handle”). When you sign
up for a geocaching.com account to use
the public website, you need to create an
ID to use as your geocaching name or “handle.” Pick a name you like,
and if it’s not already taken, that will be who you are to the rest of the
geocaching community.
map datum. A model used to match the location of features on the ground to
coordinates and locations on a map. In general, a GPSr will be set to WGS 84
for geocaching.
marking a waypoint. This is how you put a location into your personal GPS unit. If
you are standing still, you will be at a specific latitude and longitude. Go to the screen
that says mark or mark waypoint to add those coordinates into the list in your GPS
device’s memory. That way, you can come back to the same exact spot later.


GEOCACHING 71
.Geocaching Terms
reviewer. Volunteers from all over the world check
new listings for various issues (making sure the
cache follows the guidelines, for example) and then
publish the cache listings on geocaching.com.
spoiler. Information that gives away the location
of the find.
swag. “Stuff We All Get” refers to the toys and
other trade items in a cache.
terrain. This describes the land features and how
hard the cache is to get to. Terrain that can be traversed in a wheelchair has a rating of 1.
A 1 rating means “flat and easy and not too far.” A 5 rating probably means you
shouldn’t try it, as it will likely require special equipment, like scuba gear or
mountaineers’ ropes.
TFTC. Often written in logs, TFTC stands for “Thanks for the Cache.” Other
common acronyms include TFTH (“Thanks for the Hide”), TNLN (“Took Nothing
Left Nothing”), and TNSL (“Took Nothing Signed Log”). However, some geocache
owners prefer a personal note, and some even consider these acronyms to be rude.
trackable. Anything with a tracking number or
other unique identifier that can be followed as the
item travels from cache to cache.
Travel Bug®. An item that travels from cache location
to cache location with a trackable number written
on a metal tag so you can record on the geocaching.
com website where you picked it up and where you
dropped it off. Travel Bugs often have a “mission”—
getting to a certain state, for example.
WAAS. Wide Area Augmentation System is a combination
of satellites and ground stations that increases GPSr accuracy.
watch list. A list of users who are watching a specific Travel Bug or cache.
waypoint. A reference point for a physical location on Earth. It may be a land-
mark, a destination, or a point along a route on the way to reaching the destina-
tion (hence its name). Waypoints are defined by a set of coordinates that typically
include latitude and longitude (or UTM coordinates), and sometimes altitude.


72 GEOCACHING
Geocaching Resources.
Geocaching Resources
Scouting Literature
Scouts BSA Handbook for Boys; Scouts
BSA Handbook for Girls; Fieldbook;
National Youth Leadership Training
Syllabus; Cub Scout Fun With GPS;
Backpacking, Camping, Cycling, First
Aid, Hiking, Nature, Orienteering,
and Search and Rescue merit
badge pamphlets
Books
Cameron, Layne. The Geocaching
Handbook. Falcon Press
Publishing, 2017.
DK Publishing. Boys’ Life Series: Let’s Go
Geocaching. DK Publishing, 2008.
Dyer, Mike. The Essential Guide to
Geocaching. Fulcrum Publishing, 2004.
G & R Publishing. It’s a Treasure Hunt!
Geocaching & Letterboxing. CQ
Products, 2007.
Geocaching.com. The Complete Idiot’s
Guide to Geocaching. ALPHA, 2012.
Gillin, Paul, and Dana Gillin. The Joy of
Geocaching. Quill Driver Books, 2010.
Kelley, Margot Anne. Local Treasures:
Geocaching Across America. Center
for American Places Inc., 2006.
Long, Cully. How to Puzzle Cache.
lulu.com, 2015.
McNamara, Joel, and K. Feltman.
Geocaching for Dummies. John Wiley
& Sons, 2004.
Sherman, Erik. Geocaching: Hike and
Seek With Your GPS. Apress, 2004.
Stevens, Mary E. Geocaching for the Boy
Scout Program. CreateSpace, 2010.
Available from geoscouting.com.
———. Geocaching for the Cub Scout
Program. CreateSpace, 2010. Available
from geoscouting.com.
Organizations and Websites
(For other geocaching-related websites,
see “Geocaching and the Internet”
earlier in this pamphlet.)
Cache In Trash Out
geocaching.com/cito
Geocachers’ Creed
geocreed.info
Geocaching.com
geocaching.com
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


GEOCACHING 73
.Geocaching Resources
Geoscouting®
geoscouting.com
Leave No Trace Center for
Outdoor Ethics
lnt.org
Maptools.com
maptools.com
U.S. Geological Survey
usgs.gov
Acknowledgments
Scouting America is grateful to Mary E.
Stevens and Brad Stevens, San Rafael,
California, for their assistance with devel-
opment of the Geocaching merit badge
and the creation of the manuscript for this
pamphlet. We appreciate their help during
the review and production of the
Geocaching merit badge pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration Credits
Garmin Ltd, courtesy—page 22
©2020 Google Map/Google Earth/Google
Inc.—page 34
©Groundspeak Inc., courtesy; used with
permission—pages 43 (attribute
icons) and 69 (attribute icons)
U.S. Geological Survey, courtesy—
pages 26 (background) and 28
USDA Agricultural Resource Service/
Scott Bauer, Bugwood.org, courtesy—
page 65 (tick)
Wikipedia.org, courtesy—
page 65 (rattlesnake)
Wikipedia.org/Evrik, courtesy—
page 32 (Scouting America national
office)
Wikipedia.org/Roger Griffith, courtesy—
page 70 (geocoin)
Wikipedia.org/Jeffness, courtesy—
page 37
Wikipedia.org/Miaow Miaow,
courtesy—page 42
Wikipedia.org/Edward J. Wozniak,
D.V.M., Ph.D., courtesy—
page 65 (copperhead)
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of
or are protected by the Boy Scouts
of America.
John McDearmon—cover (global
satellite illustration); all illustrations
on pages 10 and 64
Brian Payne—pages 18, 38 (backpack),
and 64 (boots)
Randy Piland—pages 38 (first-aid kit),
50, 54 (geocachers), 57 (deer), and
66 (poison ivy)
Steve Seeger—page 57 (wren)
Some material in this publication
is reprinted by permission of
Mary E. Stevens, Ph.D. For more
information about Scouting and
geocaching, visit geoscouting.com
or email info@geoscouting.com.


Geocaching Resources.


Notes


Get ahead in Scouting with Scout Life magazine. It’s loaded with the
latest news on merit badges and other advancement tools. Plus, it’s got
outdoor adventure, games and comics, leadership tips, life skills, stories
about other Scouts and more. It’s just what you need to succeed.
Subscribe today at go.scoutlife.org/subscribe
Use promo code SLMBP15 to get a special
print + digital bundle offer priced just for Scouts.