EXPLOR ATION


EXPLOR ATION
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


35779
ISBN 978-0-8395-0057-5
©2016 Boy Scouts of America
2020 Printing
Note to the Counselor
Thank you for offering your talents as a merit badge counselor.
The merit badge program succeeds because of the dedication
and generosity of people like you.
A glance down the list of merit badges a Scout may earn
reveals that exploration has long been central to Scouting.
From Archaeology to Oceanography to Space Exploration
and Weather, opportunities abound for Scouts to go exploring
and make discoveries to satisfy their natural curiosity. Now the
Exploration merit badge provides a framework for grounding
the adventures of Scouting in the real-world scientific work of
21st century exploration.
FPO


EXPLORATION 3
The requirements for this merit badge are written to accom-
modate Scouts’ various individual interests as well as their
different age-appropriate abilities. A candidate for this merit
badge is to make a science-based expedition to an area the Scout
has not previously explored. The area might be remote, or it may
be someplace nearby, as the Scout chooses. The expedition might
be a troop activity, or the Scout may undertake a small-scale or
individual excursion.
Any troop expedition to a remote location requires a tour
and activity plan, submitted for council review, for trips of 500
miles or more; trips outside council borders; or expeditions that
involve aquatics (boating, scuba, etc.), climbing and rappelling,
or motorized vehicles (snowmobiles, all-terrain vehicles, etc.).
No tour plan is necessary, however, for a Scout’s individual
expedition. For more information about the requirements
for a tour plan, please see Tour and Activity Plan FAQs at
http://www.scouting.org/healthandsafety/tourplanfaq.aspx.
Remember that at all times, BSA Youth Protection
policies apply for all Scouting activities. For more
information about the BSA’s Youth Protection program,
training requirements, and opportunities, see http://
www.scouting.org/Training/YouthProtection.aspx.
Whether a Scout undertakes a remote expedition or
chooses to explore locally, qualified supervision is a must.
Expeditions may be supervised directly by the merit badge
counselor or alternatively by a counselor-approved person.
Qualified expedition advisors may be drawn from the ranks
of school science teachers, museum educators, park rangers,
nature instructors, and others with scientific knowledge as well
as outdoor skills and expertise. Exploration merit badge coun-
selors may wish to consult the science departments of local
community colleges or universities, and get involved with the
local chapters of organizations that have exploration interests.
These scientists often can serve as mentors and consultants to
Scouts’ exploration ventures.
Thank you again for your time. Now, let’s go exploring!


4 EXPLORATION
Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Exploration or check
Scoutbook for the latest requirements.


EXPLORATION 5
As you work on the Exploration merit badge, remember to always use
the buddy system. Whether you are out in the field or meeting with your
merit badge counselor, having a buddy will help ensure everyone’s safety.
You and your buddy can watch out for each other wherever you may be or
whatever you may be doing.


6 EXPLORATION


EXPLORATION 7
Expeditions are widely variable. You do not have to climb
Mount Everest or go to a jungle to be an explorer. For this
merit badge, an expedition should be viewed like a field
trip or science project. While you cannot just hike some
place and call it an expedition, you can hike to a location
and study an aspect that interests you.
The major difference between an expedition and
a field science trip is that you (with your counselor’s
guidance) have to plan everything. You have to formulate
objectives and plan an agenda. As needed, you will
need to do things like confirm transportation, arrange
communication, plan for food and medical supplies,
acquire all food and other supplies, construct safety and
possible evacuation procedures, manage any adverse
events, and prepare a report after the expedition.
Evaluating the effects of a storm on the local forest or
nature preserve, the effects of a drought on a field used
by birds and mammals, changes in butterfly populations
due to loss of wildflower habitat, incursions by invasive
plant or animal species, insect diversity, and presence
or absence of amphibians or fish are just some of the
examples that can be studied and reported. Your imagina-
tion is your only limitation.


8 EXPLORATION
Eagle Scout Alex Houston joined this 2014 expedition in Antarctica as part of the
National Eagle Scout Association’s World Explorer program.


EXPLORATION 9
Contents
What Is Exploration? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
History of Exploration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
Diversity of Exploration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
Becoming an Explorer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
Preparing for an Expedition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
Going on an Expedition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
Glossary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74
Exploration Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76
Since its commissioning
in 1964, Alvin has taken
scientists on more than
4,800 dives to explore the
deep sea. This submersible
vehicle can carry up to
three passengers at depths
up to 4,500 meters—nearly
2.8 miles.


Eric Simonson, a certified Alpine and ski guide, uses a ladder to cross crevasses as he
ascends Mount Everest.


EXPLORATION 11
.What Is Exploration?
What Is Exploration?
Have you ever wondered about your surroundings and wanted
to learn more about them? Have you thought about the natural
world and its interactions? Have you wanted to know why a
machine works or how an insect flies, or what triggers some
animals to hibernate? Maybe you are intrigued by the invisible
world around us: bacteria, viruses, molecules, wind currents,
tides, X-rays. Perhaps you have you taken a walk in the woods
just to see what is over the next ridge. If so, then you are inter-
ested in exploration. Exploration is what you do when you want
to discover what is out there in—and beyond—the world.
A balloon flies past a new
skyscraper, carrying a camera
to help evaluate the energy
efficiency of the building.


12 EXPLORATION
What Is Exploration?.
Exploration: A Key to Discovery
Exploration has been defined as the act of searching, with its
goal being the discovery of information or resources. Exploration
is the engine that drives innovation, whether in science, eco-
nomics, or business. We need exploration to spur medical
discoveries that help people live healthier lives, to seek ways of
being more energy efficient, to protect our planet’s resources, to
better understand Earth’s oceans and atmosphere, and to learn
about worlds other than our own. The reasons—and the oppor-
tunities—for exploration are virtually endless.
Explorer and Distinguished Eagle Scout Michael Manyak
uncovers early human footprints in Tanzania.
Exploration is adventurous, but it is much more than an
adventure. Many adventures may be quite exhilarating but are
not exploration. Exploration is the actual search to discover
information. Taking a sailing trip in the Caribbean, hiking in the
mountains, or joining a guided tour of ancient ruins is exciting,
but it is not exploration. However, if you took a sailing trip to
the Caribbean to study reef ecology or you hiked in the moun-
tains to survey wildlife, then that would be exploration.
Exploration has a scientific basis, and information is col-
lected and usually shared. The actual trip is secondary to the
purpose of discovering information and contributing to scientific
knowledge. This distinction is what sets exploration apart from
adventure travel, eco-tours, and similarly adventurous activities.
In scientific
research, the
three guiding
principles are
discovery,
description, and
explanation.
Exploration
(discovery)
lies at the heart
of research.


EXPLORATION 13
.What Is Exploration?
Exploring Our World: Paleoanthropology
“So many young people I meet feel that the great Age of Exploration has
passed. That it was the centuries of sailing ships setting off for uncharted
shores, or the first ascents of mountains, or the first journeys into uninhabited
wilderness that were hallmarks of such an age, and that our world has practi-
cally been completely discovered and explored. I hear people say any person
entering the fields of exploration or the sciences will only be adding small
amounts of information through discovery, effectively contributing only by
standing on the shoulders of giants. But I differ strongly with that opinion.
“Living and exploring in Africa over the past 25 years has led me to
understand that the rise of technology and the ability to crowdsource skills
and expertise from around the world means the greatest Age of Exploration
has just begun. Yes, we humans indeed may have walked over every inch
of this planet, but we have only just begun to understand what we have
found there. We need to inspire a generation of modern explorers willing to
combine technology with good
old-fashioned exploration on
the ground, and I am certain
such a combination will make
this generation’s explorers truly
participants in the greatest
Age of Exploration the world
has ever seen.”
—Lee R. Berger, Ph.D.,
professor and director,
Institute for Human
Evolution, University
of the Witwatersrand,
Johannesburg, South Africa;
Distinguished Eagle Scout
and Fellow,
The Explorers Club
Paleoanthropologist and
archaeologist Lee Berger with
his discovery of early human
Australopithecus sediba.


Cultural anthropologist William Thomas studies the biological diversity of remote
areas and then teaches local people such as this resident of Papua New Guinea how
to conserve their lands.


EXPLORATION 15
.History of Exploration
History of Exploration
Human beings have a natural tendency to explore. Every genera-
tion produces people who crave movement, change, and
adventure. To help satisfy their curiosity about the world, these
people seek new places, ideas, foods, and other experiences.
This innate or instinctive urge to explore is one reason human
ancestors left Africa in prehistorical times to eventually populate
the rest of the planet.
Also since the beginning of recorded history, various peo-
ples and groups have gone exploring. The ancient Phoenicians,
Greeks, and other Mediterranean civilizations explored at
least as far as Britain and northern Africa. More than 2,000
years ago, Chinese voyagers explored the eastern parts of the
Northern Hemisphere, describing several countries that were
then unknown to them, including places in northern India.
25,000
1,500
Homo Sapiens
Homo Erectus
Homo Neanderthalensis
40,000
200,000
100,000 70,000
50,000
30,000
1,500
12,000
15,000 45,000


16 EXPLORATION
History of Exploration.
Later, the Chinese also made extensive voyages to explore
Southeast Asia and the Indian subcontinent, and went as far as
the eastern African shore. Around A.D. 1000, Viking explorers
roamed throughout the western Northern Hemisphere and
likely were the first Europeans to arrive in the New World.
Much of the Pacific was explored, with its islands settled by
seafaring Polynesian people over a few thousand years. Their
explorations lasted into the Middle Ages, about A.D. 1300.
The Viking Ship Museum in Oslo, Norway, houses attractions including the Oseberg
Ship. The figurehead of the ship dates from around A.D. 800, but archaeologists
believe that the ship itself is older.


EXPLORATION 17
.History of Exploration
The Explorer Gene
While not all of us want to jump in a kayak and paddle the length of the
Amazon, the evidence suggests that humans move around more than any
other mammal. Scientists are researching the human genome (complete
set of genes) to see if there is a genetic basis for this urge in our species.
This research in itself is exploration, and it is being done in a laboratory.
Anthropologists (who study human beings and their ancestors),
neuroscientists (who study the human brain and its relation to behavior
and learning), and other researchers have linked a variation of a gene to
certain characteristics of explorers. This gene controls a chemical messen-
ger within our brains known as dopamine, which is important for learning.
Studies have shown this variation of the dopamine gene to be strongly
related to curiosity and restlessness. About 20 percent of all people have
this gene variation, which makes them more likely to explore new places,
ideas, foods, and other new things. These people tend to seek movement,
change, and adventure.
This genetic variation has been strongly linked to human migration,
and it occurs frequently in nomads—people who move around a lot and
seldom settle in one place. While this variation has sometimes been
called the “explorer gene,” the urge to explore is likely more complicated.
Certainly there are people without this variation who have an interest in
exploration. But for some, this gene may be an added influence and a
stimulus to go exploring.


18 EXPLORATION
History of Exploration.
The Age of Discovery
In European history, a period of long-distance exploration began
in the 15th century with the first Portuguese discoveries of scat-
tered islands in the Atlantic Ocean, as well as the 1492 discovery
of the Americas by Christopher Columbus, funded by Spain.
This “Age of Discovery” (also known as the Age of Exploration)
continued into the 17th and 18th centuries, with European naval
expeditions crossing the Atlantic and later the Pacific Ocean.
Small bands of people moved over large areas of the European
continent during the last ice age.
An oil painting
by 19th-century
artist John
Vanderlyn depicts
Christopher
Columbus landing
in the West Indies
in 1492.


EXPLORATION 19
.History of Exploration
During this time, Europeans explored large areas of the
Americas, Africa, Asia, and the islands of the tropical Pacific.
After this age, further explorations brought knowledge of some
of the remaining unknown areas of the world, including remote
Pacific islands and the regions of the North and South Poles.
Modern Exploration
The history of exploration up until the early 20th
century focused largely on geographical description:
finding, exploring, mapping, and giving an account
of unknown regions of planet Earth. Then came the
explorations of the Space Age, which were made
possible by the development of rocket-ship technology
during World War II and which took humans to the
moon (1969–1972).
Today, explorers are expanding on these earlier
ventures and are also exploring new frontiers like the
deep ocean and molecular biology. New technologies
have spurred and are contributing to these 21st century
efforts. As you will see in the next section of this
pamphlet, there is still much to explore.
The last voyage of English
explorer Henry Hudson in the
early 1600s is imagined in a
painting by John Collier.
A statue of Antarctic
explorer Robert Falcon
Scott (1868–1912) in
Christchurch, New Zealand
Astronaut Buzz Aldrin walks on the surface of the
moon in a photo taken by mission commander Neil
Armstrong during the historic Apollo 11 mission in 1969.


The Butterfly Nebula, discovered in 1947 by astronomer Rudolph Minkowski, has the
peculiar form of two lobes that emanate from a central star, resembling the wings of a
butterfly. This image was captured by the Hubble Space Telescope in 2009.


EXPLORATION 21
.Diversity of Exploration
Diversity of Exploration
Exploration happens everywhere on Earth and beyond, in a wide
variety of subjects, specialties, environments, and circumstances.
Actual exploration might be limited by cost, technology, or the
environment, but the concepts are limited only by your imagina-
tion and curiosity. Many areas remain to be explored, whether
you are interested in subatomic particles or invisible life such as
viruses, or you long to discover new planetary systems or travel
beyond our solar system and out into the universe.
Space Exploration
Space explorers discover new celestial bodies—including stars,
planets, moons, asteroids, and comets—and observe the known
ones. New technologies for human spaceflight and robotic
probes are constantly expanding the possibilities for the physical
exploration of space.
Subterranean Exploration
Below ground, discoveries of new animals and microscopic
life-forms are helping us understand the complex interactions
of living things underground and how species adapt to lower
levels of light and oxygen. Physical exploration is extending our
knowledge of large underground cave systems, some of them
newly discovered.
In space exploration, amateur observers as well as pro-
fessional astronomers can make important discoveries.
For example, scientists found in 2013 that a rock sample
collected by Curiosity, NASA’s Mars rover, contained
sulfur, nitrogen, hydrogen, oxygen, phosphorus, and
carbon—elements that mean ancient Mars could have
supported life.


22 EXPLORATION
Diversity of Exploration.
Aerospace Exploration:
To Infinity, and Beyond
“We as humans have an innate sense of curiosity and a thirst for taking on
great challenges, and this is certainly at the core of America’s greatness,
past, present, and future. Each time we press the limits of human endur-
ance and technological capability a bit further, remarkable benefits are
returned to our society in terms of new knowledge, advanced capabilities,
novel industries, and inspiration to press even further.
“The story of America overcoming its underdog status in the early space
race with the Soviet Union is well-known, ultimately achieving crewed lunar
landings in the late 1960s and early 1970s. What came as a huge surprise to
‘second generation astronauts’ like myself is that the U.S. and Russian space
programs would eventually come together to build and operate the International
Space Station, along with partners from Europe, Canada, and Japan.
“What’s taking place in space today is no less exciting, with commercial
enterprises like SpaceX and Virgin Galactic aiming to make space accessible
for more than a select few astronauts. NASA and space agencies around the
world are targeting a human presence on Mars in the coming decades.
“I’ve had to retire and hang up my spacesuit, but they’ll be looking for
bright, well-rounded, and well-prepared astronauts for these missions in a
few years. Will you be onboard?”
—Scott Parazynski, M.D.
Astronaut; Distinguished Eagle Scout; Fellow, The Explorers Club
Dr. Parazynski, anchored to a
foot restraint, prepares to work
on a damaged solar array at the
International Space Station.
Astronaut and physician Scott Parazynski
aboard the space shuttle


EXPLORATION 23
.Diversity of Exploration
Cave Exploration
“In 1980 I was co-leader of an expedition which explored the first cave
outside of Europe over 1,000 meters deep (3,280 feet). It was the seventh
one in the world that deep. Today there are over 100 caves [known to be]
that deep. I am still co-leader of the international project exploring that
cave in Mexico, the deepest cave in the Western Hemisphere.
“There are an unknown number of more caves to be discovered,
explored, and studied. It will take many lifetimes before all of the caves
on Earth are explored and mapped. In them live new species of life-forms
including organisms that live in low oxygen or other conditions impos-
sible for us to live in. These extremophiles are of great interest to science
because of how they have adapted and for the products they produce.
“Caves are not all small and confining. Some are vast in length and
dimensions. Some have single rooms larger than giant sports stadiums.
Others have underwater passages requiring sophisticated scuba gear and
cautious procedures. Some even await new technologies to be able to
explore them.”
—C. William Steele
Distinguished Eagle Scout; Fellow, National Speleological Society;
Fellow Emeritus, The Explorers Club
Cave explorer Bill Steele in a tight spot,
above, exploring Twinkie’s Cave, Comal
County, Texas, where he and others have
found the remains of prehistoric beasts,
such as the skull of a saber-toothed tiger.
At right, inside Mexico’s Sistema Huautla,
the Western Hemisphere’s deepest cave
system, he sketches a map of the cave.


24 EXPLORATION
Diversity of Exploration.
Polar Exploration
Polar exploration of both the Arctic region and Antarctica has a
long and exciting history and continues today. Environmental
science studies are being done in both polar regions. Permanent
international research stations in Antarctica study marine life,
environmental changes, the effects of ocean currents, and other
topics and sciences including weather, geology, and paleontol-
ogy (fossils). Antarctica has nearly 400 lakes trapped under its
ice, and their unique ecosystems are being explored. Nearly
4,000 new bacterial species have been discovered in just one
subglacial (below-the-ice) lake.
Scientists use weather balloon soundings to measure the ozone
layer at the South Pole.


EXPLORATION 25
.Diversity of Exploration
Polar Exploration and Dentistry:
Understanding the Narwhal Tusk
“Why would a dentist travel 2,000 miles north to a latitude between the
North Pole and Arctic Circle to understand the tooth of an arctic whale?
First, the knowledge gained about an extraordinary sensory organ system
gave insight into all mammalian teeth including our own. [Also], insights
from traditional Inuit knowledge and science could be integrated to better
understand this whale and its ecosystem.
“The function of the narwhal tusk has eluded scientific discovery for over
500 years. A harsh arctic environment with forbidding weather conditions and
ice, the elusive behavior of the narwhal, and the novel methods of conducting
scientific experiments in frigid waters on live captured-and-released narwhals
provided formidable obstacles. The rewards and lessons are great. Patience
and persistence were among the key attributes for success. Innovation,
creativity, and interdisciplinary study of the various fields of science needed
for such research were essential to a successful outcome.
“[This work showed] how teams of scientists from different disciplines
could integrate ideas with the traditional knowledge of Inuit elders and hunt-
ers to solve one of nature’s most perplexing mysteries. Results have changed
the perceptions and understanding for this whale, for other toothed mammals,
and sensory organs as well as providing insights into a changing arctic. There
is much exploration yet to do.”
—Martin T. Nweeia, D.M.D., D.D.S.
Harvard School of Dental Medicine; Fellow,
The Explorers Club
Dentist and polar marine biologist Martin
Nweeia, left, examines a narwhal tusk
up close.
Narwhals, a type of arctic whale


26 EXPLORATION
Diversity of Exploration.
Exploration in the Treetops
“Whereas astronomers explore outer space, arbornauts explore the tree-
tops. The exploration of forest canopies is relatively new. Scuba gear to
explore coral reefs was developed in the 1950s, rockets to reach the moon
were designed in the 1960s, but ropes and harnesses were rigged to
explore the treetops as late as 1979. Only in the last 30 years have scien-
tists discovered that almost half of Earth’s biodiversity lives in the tops of
trees. This makes forest canopies one of the last unexplored regions of the
planet. Today, canopy scientists use ropes, hot-air balloons, walkways, lad-
ders, or even construction cranes to explore the tops of trees.
“Anyone can discover something new in a forest canopy, because it is
a new frontier. By climbing trees or even by reaching the lower branches,
new species of insects, fungi, mosses, orchids, or tardigrades (also known
as water bears) inhabit the leaf and bark surfaces. Because the treetops are
where sunlight hits Earth, most of the leaves and flowers of trees and vines
grow vigorously up there; and thus, many organisms gather up there to
eat, or be eaten! By learning single rope techniques, or locating a canopy
walkway or tree platform in a state park, you too can become an arbornaut,
making observations and sometimes discoveries in the treetops!”
—Margaret Lowman, Ph.D.
Chief of Science and Sustainability at the
California Academy of Sciences; Fellow, The Explorers Club
Tropical canopy biologist Meg Lowman on
an afternoon swing
Dr. Lowman on her way to work


EXPLORATION 27
.Diversity of Exploration
Tropical Exploration
Up to two-thirds of all known plants and animals live in the lush
rain forests of the tropics. Tropical rain forests are the world’s
most diverse and interdependent ecosystems. (Interdependent
means the living things rely on each other for survival.) New
discoveries are constantly added to the millions of species
that are known to live in rain forests. The rain forest canopy
(treetops) is an area of tremendous biological activity. Increasing
deforestation, or destruction of forests, poses problems that
require significant research and exploration to understand the
effects of the destruction and to find practical solutions to
balance or prevent such loss.
Bioprospecting
Bioprospecting is the search for plant and animal species from
which commercially valuable and marketable new products
can be obtained. Bioprospecting also includes the search for
previously unknown compounds in organisms that have never
before been used to make medicinal drugs.
FPO
1532181392
Denis Moskvinov


28 EXPLORATION
Diversity of Exploration.
Bioprospecting in the
Kamchatka Peninsula
“Diversa (today part of BASF), the company I cofounded, mounted a
microbial diversity research expedition to the Kamchatka Peninsula with
the Russian Government and the U.S. Department of Energy. The region
is a land of extremes best suited for hardy adventurers and scientists and
contains unique fauna.
“Our search for unexplored microbes sought novel proteins in the
microbes that might reduce the need for chemicals and, thereby, make
cheaper and more environmentally friendly products. This expedition
targeted the unearthly Geyser Valley, a boiling canyon of hot springs and
calderas that belched bacteria and primitive bacteria-like organisms of
unimaginable alien designs. The waters there are steaming and can exceed
boiling temperatures in the superheated vents. Microbial populations
there are referred to as hyperthermophiles, [and these organisms] have
difficulty growing at [158 degrees Fahrenheit] since it is too cold for them.
They grow best at temperatures ranging from [176 to 235 degrees].
“We collected water and mud samples among the geysers with a
Russian soldier to protect us from unwanted bear visits. It was exhilarating
to work in this most beautiful and pristine environment … and we made
breakthrough discoveries that led to products on the market today, likely
used in the paper of this book. We have had other expeditions to areas of
extreme conditions leading to other exciting discoveries. There is huge
potential in this type of exploration.”
—Jay M. Short, Ph.D.
Molecular biologist and entrepreneur; Fellow, The Explorers Club
Jay Short bioprospecting in the
steaming calderas (volcanic craters)
of the Kamchatka Peninsula, Russia


EXPLORATION 29
.Diversity of Exploration
Marine Exploration
Some ocean explorers search beneath the waves to locate and
identify historic shipwrecks. Other marine researchers seek
sustainable fishing and food sources, track the environmental
effects of ocean pollution, study the effects of ocean currents
on climate, seek to understand and protect coral reefs, or do
geological research on the seafloor. Underwater exploration is
also done in freshwater lakes, rivers, and marshes.
Ocean Exploration
“The ocean covers nearly three-quarters of our planet. We rely on the sea for
food, medicine, minerals, jobs, and untold hours of wonder and enjoyment,
not to mention billions of dollars in economic revenue. The ocean is also part
of Earth’s life-support system, producing oxygen while absorbing carbon
dioxide and heat. Yet less than 10 percent of the ocean has been explored!
“Through ocean exploration we have discovered unimagined eco-
systems thriving in habitats devoid of sunlight, new mineral deposits, and
features that reflect the inner workings of Earth. It is through this process of
discovery that we gain critical information about our planet, the life living on
it, and how to better our own lives.
“From a simple net dragged behind a ship to a high-tech remotely oper-
ated vehicle or free-swimming robot, we now have a multitude of tools to
explore and study the ocean. Computer models, amazing visualizations, and
satellite tracking tags are opening up new views of the sea and revealing more
than ever before about the behavior of marine organisms. Many mysteries
remain in the sea, but the future of ocean exploration is bright and exciting.”
—Ellen Prager, Ph.D.
Marine scientist and author; Fellow, The Explorers Club
Ocean scientist and explorer Ellen Prager
introducing herself to a grouper
The crewed submersible Triton
©2016 Stephen Frink/StephenFrink.com


30 EXPLORATION
Diversity of Exploration.
Marine Research
“Modern science is always on the move. Every day, new tasks that were
always done by people in the oceans and seas (and lakes and rivers, and
even research tanks) can be done by underwater robots or other equip-
ment. But there will always be that ‘special something’ that an actual
human can bring to the equation that can never be replaced.
“It’s critical that we keep developing new equipment and better ways
of exploring underwater without putting a person in harm’s way. But just as
importantly, we need to continue research and development that improves
how we can keep [humans] physically in the loop when we need to. Just
two examples are improvements in diving techniques using mixed gases
that allow people to explore deeper depths without risk, or which keeps
divers warmer, longer so they can spend more time underwater to see and
do more. Imagine yourself deep on a coral reef finding never-before-seen
species of fish in the Northwest Hawaiian Islands. Or way back in a cold,
dark cave finding remnants of previously unknown ancient civilizations!
“Our planet is full of new things to find and places to explore; we
need smart scientists and engineers to do the research and develop the
technology to get there. Why not be one?”
—Karin Lynn
Captain, Civil Engineer Corps, U.S. Navy (retired); Trustee and member,
Women Divers Hall of Fame (WDHOF); Fellow, The Explorers Club
Karin Lynn in a
bathysphere,
a steel diving
sphere for deep-
sea observation


EXPLORATION 31
.Diversity of Exploration
Ocean Exploration and Conservation
“We know more about the surface of the moon than our own oceans.
It is the oceans that our planet depends on to maintain a normal climate
and make our life on land possible. We depend on the ocean for food for
billions of people. These are just a few of the reasons it is critical for us to
explore and discover new knowledge about our ocean planet.
“Four hundred years ago the first explorers sailed their ships to
discover new lands and people. Today researchers still go to sea to
discover unknown facts and locations. With these discoveries we can
understand more about climate change, discover new drugs for use in
medicine, discover better ways to fish, and provide food, among many
other things. It is our duty to conserve these precious assets, and the
health of our reefs and oceans is essential.
“While making these discoveries is our most important goal, to be
the person who made the discovery is extremely exciting and rewarding.
To be the first person to explore a new reef or discover a new species is
something that will always be your achievement—something that no one
else has done. This is what being an explorer is all about.”
—R. Craig Cook, M.D.
Medical director, Sport Dive magazine; Fellow, The Explorers Club
Dive medicine specialist and explorer Craig Cook studying a coral reef


32 EXPLORATION
Diversity of Exploration.
High Altitude Exploration
High-altitude explorers may identify and analyze mineral
resources in the mountains, weather patterns and their effects
on environment, or better methods for growing crops and
livestock in high-altitude climates. Working at great heights is
physically challenging. Researchers in this field study the
effects of thin air on the human body and brain to discover
how physical and mental performance is affected by low levels
of oxygen and reduced atmospheric pressure. The knowledge
gained from high-altitude research can medically benefit
“lowlanders” as well as members of the military.
Mountain Exploration
“Do you want to go somewhere unfamiliar, or accomplish a new challenge
in the mountains? To be successful, you must prepare well. Learn all you can
about where you want to go, and the skills that will be required. Talking to peo-
ple who have been there before provides valuable information. Reading stories
about explorers is a great way to understand the challenges of the mountains
and how you must adapt to survive, when everything around you is changing.
“For over 40 years I have explored the world’s great mountains, lead-
ing over 100 high-altitude expeditions. In 1999 I led the team that found
the remains of the famous British climber George Mallory high on Mount
Everest. Mallory and his partner Andrew Irvine had disappeared June 8, 1924,
on their way to the summit. Did they really reach the top? We now have
some clues to explain the events of that fateful day, but the final answer
awaits a future explorer.
“The skills you develop close to home
are the same skills you will use to accomplish
future adventures in faraway places. Practice,
practice, practice!”
—Eric Simonson
Distinguished Eagle Scout; American
Mountain Guides Association (AMGA) certified
Alpine and ski guide; Seven Summits; Fellow,
The Explorers Club
Mountaineer and explorer Eric Simonson on the
summit of Mount Everest


EXPLORATION 33
.Diversity of Exploration
Atmospheric Exploration
“Since the early days of the 20th century explorers have contributed to
our knowledge of how the world’s weather and climate work. This work
continues today. Scientist-explorers and others who support their
atmospheric science studies are in Antarctica, on land and at sea in the
Arctic, aboard oceanographic research ships on the oceans, on airplanes
flying into and around violent storms, and in trucks equipped with portable
radar and other instruments chasing tornadoes across the Great Plains.
Their work has provided great improvements in weather forecasts in
recent years. But many questions remain.
“Scientist-explorers help answer important questions about how
Earth’s climate works and how it is changing. While the Arctic and Antarctic
and much of the world’s oceans are far from where most people live, what
happens in these remote places affects both the day-to-day weather and
the climate—the long-term average weather—for all of Earth as it changes.
“Explorer-journalists often accompany explorer-scientists to chronicle
their work in print and online publications, books, television and film
reports and documentaries, and pod casts. As weather editor for USA
Today and USAToday.com, I was privileged to report about scientific
research and daily life from Antarctica, Greenland, and northernmost
Alaska, on a research icebreaker in the Arctic Ocean, in airplanes in
hurricanes, and with scientific tornado chasers on the U.S. Great Plains.”
—Jack Williams
Eagle Scout; Fellow, The American Meteorological Society;
Fellow, The Explorers Club
Jack Williams cooking
dinner at a U.S. Antarctic
Program survival school


34 EXPLORATION
Diversity of Exploration.
Geological Exploration
Early geological explorers were mostly interested in describing
geographic features and searching for riches. The emphasis
now, however, is on greater understanding of our world and
more efficient, sustainable use of natural resources. Oil and
mineral exploration continues to be of vital importance, and
more exploration is happening in developing countries. Learning
about plate tectonics (how Earth’s crust moves), searching for
groundwater, studying glaciers for environmental clues, and
searching for alternative energy sources all fit under the wide
umbrella of geological exploration.
Energy Exploration
“Exploration in the most remote parts of the world has been part of the oil and
gas industry since its beginning. Intrepid geologists and engineers traveled the
world looking for locations of the next great oil or gas discovery to help power
the energy needs of the world’s economy. Today, exploration takes place from
the Arctic sea to the jungles of South America. Wells are drilled in 10,000 feet
of water and hydrocarbons are produced utilizing multi-billion-dollar facilities
that are among the greatest engineering projects in the world.
“To understand petroleum systems, energy scientists travel to field loca-
tions to observe and study rock sequences. They look for rock outcrops in river
valleys and on mountain sides, cliffs, and road cuts. They dive into the waters of
the oceans to study modern seafloor depositional systems (living reefs and river
deltas) using Earth’s surface
as a natural laboratory to
understand what happened
millions of years ago.”
—Glenn A. Adams
Distinguished Eagle Scout
and leader in the field of
shale gas exploration
Glenn Adams with fellow
Eagle Scout Bill Steele,
caving in Oklahoma at
Jester Cave, the longest
gypsum cave system in
the Americas


EXPLORATION 35
.Diversity of Exploration
Anthropology and Exploration
Anthropology is the study of humans, both ancient and modern.
Anthropology connects to the social and biological sciences
and commonly is divided into broad categories of cultural
anthropology, biological or physical anthropology, archaeology,
and linguistics.
Exploring Human Origins
“Where did we come from? What can we discover about the ancient roots
of our species?
“All exploration begins with curiosity. And curiosity leads to all sorts of
interesting questions that make us get off our seats, travel, and find out new
things about the world. Understanding our own beginnings—the origin of
human beings as a species—offers one of the greatest adventures of all time.
My own part in it involves travels to the Great Rift Valley of East Africa where
my team of scientists and excavators slowly dig up the excitement of fossil-
ized bones and the oldest Stone Age tools made by our ancestors.
“Many different people have a place in this adventure. Geologists study
layer upon layer of dirt where the bones of our ancestors became embedded.
Physicists measure how old the layers are back through time, and chemists
figure out the long-ago changes in vegetation and climate. Digging is a matter
of great care and skill, so excavators play a big role. Archaeologists explore
how earlier species made tools, while paleontologists have clever ways of
studying bones and discovering how our ancestors changed over time.
“Piecing these clues together, a picture of the past comes into view.
At that amazing point, traveling the world to remote places becomes a
way of traveling back through time to
discover the great survival story that
led to our own species being here, all
over the globe.”
—Richard Potts, Ph.D.
Director, Smithsonian Institution
Human Origins Program,
National History Museum;
Fellow, The Explorers Club
Paleoanthropologist Rick Potts
examining early human artifacts


36 EXPLORATION
Diversity of Exploration.
Cultural anthropologists examine social patterns and how
people live together in particular places, and study differences
and similarities of race, class, gender, and nationality. This type
of research and exploration often involves living among the group
being studied and observing their practices in everyday life.
Cultural Anthropology
“Cultural anthropologists study the customs, traditions, values, and ideas
of a particular group of people. Anthropologists gain insights by living
within the culture and working with a key informant who helps them
interpret what they observe. I am interested in traditional environmental
knowledge and its potential for conserving biodiversity. I have had the
privilege of living with the Hewa people of New Guinea and traveling in
their unexplored lands for over 25 years.
“My principal informant, a man named Tama, was a master naturalist
who taught me the workings of the rain forest—information new to science.
Tama knew over 300 trees and 200 pollinators/seed dispersal agents, and
how human activity affected each of them. My explorations have led to the
discovery of 50 new species, as well as a conservation plan for this region
based on traditional knowledge.”
—William H. Thomas, Ph.D.
Anthropologist, Montclair State University; Fellow, The Explorers Club
Anthropologist Bill Thomas and a native of Papua-New Guinea


EXPLORATION 37
.Diversity of Exploration
Biological (or physical) anthropologists are interested in how
humans adapt to various environments, how biological and cultural
processes shape human behavior, and what causes disease and
early death. They are interested in human biological origins, evolu-
tion, and variation. They study other primates (primatology), fossils
(paleoanthropology), prehistoric people (bioarchaeology), and the
biology and genetics of living populations.
Archaeologists study past peoples and cultures through the
artifacts and architecture the people left behind. Pottery, stone
tools, animal bones, and remains of structures are evaluated to
learn about and understand the cultures of those ancient civili-
zations. Linguistic anthropologists study how language reflects
and influences social life. Language and communication affect a
wide variety of cultural behaviors and activities.
Paleolithic Archaeology
“Have you ever stopped to wonder if another person may have once stood
in the very same place you are right now? Humanity has a deep and complex
past, and the study of this past is called archaeology. Archaeologists unlock
the clues to human history and prehistory by exploring the material remains
of human behavior. Some archaeologists study artifacts like ancient texts,
architecture, coins, or pottery.
“Paleolithic archaeologists study even older forms of technology, when
humans used tools made of stone to hunt and fish. In order to study these
items, archaeologists first have to find them, and we do that by exploring.
Our excavations can take us to the most remote parts of the world, across
Africa, Asia, and South America. Exploration is key to understanding our past
and where we fit in the world, and it can begin in our own backyard.”
—Kathryn Ranhorn, Ph.D.
Paleolithic archaeologist, The
George Washington University;
Fellow, The Explorers Club
Paleolithic archaeologist Katie
Ranhorn excavating artifacts


38 EXPLORATION
Diversity of Exploration.
Exploration in Linguistics
“The ability to use and understand language is one of the few things
that makes humans different from every other creature on Earth.
Through linguistics (the study of languages), linguists aim to uncover
how the human mind works.
“Some languages, like English, French, and Japanese, have huge
amounts of recorded materials (including books, songs, and movies)
and many thousands of speakers, but many languages do not. In fact,
of the 7,000 languages spoken across the world today, more than half
remain undocumented, meaning there are no books or recordings for
linguists to even begin to understand how these languages work. In
many cases, these undocumented languages are spoken in parts of
the world that are not commonly visited, or are poorly understood
by outsiders.
“Linguists wishing to broaden our understanding of human lan-
guage must travel to these remote areas, often spending long periods
living with people whose cultures are very different from their own,
recording, describing, and even learning to speak the local language.
Today, our understanding of how the languages of the world work
depends heavily on linguists willing to be explorers, and willing to be
partners with people from diverse cultures all around the world.”
—Andrew Harvey
Linguist; Fellow, The Explorers Club
Linguistic anthropologist and explorer Andrew Harvey (center, above left) travels to
remote areas around the world to record the languages of isolated peoples.


EXPLORATION 39
.Diversity of Exploration
Imaging in Exploration
“While planes, satellites, and rockets have flown over huge areas of our
planet, most of the areas directly above our dense cities remain relatively
unexplored. This layer of airspace is found just above the tallest buildings
in our cities. It extends up to about 1,000 feet because the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA) does not want pilots to get any lower than that for
reasons of safety.
“Though you can easily see this space by looking up from the sidewalk,
few people are able to get cameras and other scientific sensors up that high
for very long. We explore this aerial layer with a tethered aerostat—a minivan-
sized helium balloon tied to a long cable. It can lift a variety of cameras,
blinking lights, radios, or antennas to get sophisticated images.
“Lifting various special cameras lets people like city planners and security
officials see interesting patterns in the landscape from a really exciting per-
spective. When the cameras get to about 800 feet above ground level, we need
to invent ways to aim and take many pictures while standing on the ground.
This requires us to create most of our own equipment from existing technol-
ogy. First, you draw your ideas and dreams in a sketchbook and then refine
them once you understand what your requirements are. Then you have crafts-
men help you build your customized equipment. These are actually inventions
because they are unique.
“It is important to keep learn-
ing each time you make a mistake.
Designing these fascinating tools
and flying them above sites is a cre-
ative form of exploration. It helps
you get close to interesting things
that are just out of reach in an area
not covered by more conventional
imaging. This is exploration!”
—Curt Westergard
Digital Design and Engineering;
Explorers Club member
Remotely controlled aerial cameras
survey invasive seaweed in the
Potomac River.


40 EXPLORATION
Diversity of Exploration.
Exploration Technology
New technologies give explorers state-of-the-art tools to study
existing data or to search for fresh information in new ways. For
instance, the latest imaging technology may be used remotely
and in the field at exploration sites. Laser surface scanning
allows sites to be rapidly mapped, and thermal scanning is
used to detect animal migration patterns in remote areas.
Lidar (the word combines “light” and “radar”) is similar
in operation to radar but uses reflected light from a laser with
radar to make high-resolution maps. Lidar is used in archaeol-
ogy to detect sites for exploration. It is also used for geography,
geology, seismology, forestry, atmospheric physics, airborne
laser swath mapping (ALSM), laser altimetry, and contour
mapping. Small lidar units using optical coherence tomography
(OCT) can map ancient human and primate teeth.
Aviation Exploration
“One important area of aviation exploration involves investigating
aircraft accidents. The goal of every accident investigation is to
discover why it happened and to prevent another similar tragedy.
Aircraft crash investigators analyze the three components of every
accident: the human (pilot, mechanic, crew member); the machine
(the airplane and its components); and the elements (weather).
Information from this type of exploration contributes heavily to
making commercial planes the safest form of travel.
“Aviation exploration does not begin at the tip of a massive
rocket ship pointed into space. It actually starts with design and
building plastic or wooden models. The explorer can discover in
his own backyard how to answer questions about how to make
something fly straight, turn correctly, reach its destination …
and return.
“Besides aircraft design and function, many other aspects
of aviation also require exploration such as finding lighter, more
efficient fuels and improving communications. Exploration in
aviation, like all exploration, is limited only by one’s imagination.”
—Harry Brooks, Esq.
Aircraft accident investigator;
former United States Marine Corps fighter pilot;
Fellow, The Explorers Club


EXPLORATION 41
.Diversity of Exploration
Aviation explorer Harry Brooks, top, searches for clues at airplane and other
types of aviation crash sites.


42 EXPLORATION
Diversity of Exploration.
Molecular Exploration
Exploration in molecular sciences is a rapidly growing area of
scientific discovery. Molecular biology deals with biological inter-
actions at the molecular level; biochemistry studies the chemical
processes in living organisms. Together they provide the tools to
study our molecular living environment.
The continued development and improvement of technology
to probe biological and chemical systems has unlocked many
mysteries of how cells function and interact and what happens
with abnormal function, known as disease. Molecular explora-
tion has led to the production of vaccines, provided ways to
rapidly make large amounts of drugs needed to treat illnesses,
and allowed the creation of tests to detect diseases. We can now
use molecular techniques to identify victims of disasters as well
as crime suspects.
Applying the molecular sciences to discoveries in the
field is a huge area of exploration that continues to grow. For
example, molecular biological techniques are used to evaluate
samples from teeth to determine the diet of early humans and
to study the blood cells found in the bone marrow of dinosaurs.
Remember the story of Jurassic Park, where dinosaurs were
created from prehistoric DNA? Though fictional, it may not be
as far from the truth as we first believed.
Molecular exploration in a laboratory


EXPLORATION 43
.Diversity of Exploration
Exploration and Molecular Biology:
The Next Frontier
“We normally think of exploration as traveling in or through a geographic
area in order to learn about it. Today we can use sophisticated technology to
travel into and through the cells of living organisms and even deeper into
their molecular inner workings. Molecular biology is the branch of biology
that deals with the nature of biological phenomena at the molecular level
through the study of DNA, RNA, proteins, and macromolecules involved in
genetic information and cell function.
“Molecular science is in the midst of an exciting revolution in compu-
tational biology using ‘big data’ approaches to gain unprecedented insight
into biological functions at the most fundamental levels of life, which affect
diseases and medical treatments, environmental science, agriculture, and
human origins.
“Molecular biological research is sometimes classified as ‘basic’ or
‘translational.’ Basic research focuses purely on discovering new knowledge
about biological systems. Translational research is focused on applying the
newly discovered knowledge for the betterment of the planet and its inhabit-
ants. Whole new worlds await discovery and exploration!”
—Steven Patierno, Ph.D.
Deputy director, Duke Cancer Institute; Eagle Scout
Immunofluorescent image of a human melanoma cell line





EXPLORATION 45
.Becoming an Explorer
Becoming an Explorer
How does someone start to explore? As you have seen, explora-
tion is incredibly diverse with many different areas in which to
work and many ways to approach exploration in a given area of
study. However, explorers seem to have certain traits in common
regardless of what or how they explore. For example, explorers
are almost universally inquisitive, and just being observant can
stimulate that interest.
Biologist Edward O. Wilson atop a mangrove tree in the Florida
Keys, looking for ants in the nest of an osprey, circa 1968


46 EXPLORATION
Becoming an Explorer.
A perfect example comes from the story of famed Harvard
biologist Edward O. Wilson, Ph.D., whose expertise is the study
of ants. He has spent much of his professional life exploring
forests and jungles. However, he claims one of his most exciting
discoveries occurred one day while at a meeting in the office of
Kathryn Fuller, then president of the World Wildlife Fund.
During this meeting on the environment, Dr. Wilson’s idle
gaze was drawn to some ants marching down the trunk of a
small, bushy, locally purchased potted plant. Something about
the ants looked a bit different. He excused himself to examine
the ants more closely. Imagine his surprise when he determined
they were a previously unknown species, right under his nose.
Exploration can happen in your own backyard—even in an
office building!
Passion and Persistence
Another characteristic most explorers have is passion. Explorers
are often passionate about the subjects of their exploration and
are driven by a desire to learn, understand, explain, and share
their findings. They are persistent in their quest, driven some-
times to go against conventional thought while standing by
their convictions.
A good example is that of Australian doctors Barry
Marshall and J. Robin Warren, who first noted and then proved
in 1982 that ulcers of the stomach and duodenum (the first part
of the intestine) were actually caused
by a previously unknown bacterium
now known as Helicobacter pylori.
The formation of ulcers leads to
chronic infection, which can cause
emergencies from bleeding and
the perforation of the stomach
or intestine.
Most people considered stress
and spicy foods to be the major
causes of digestive ulcers. When
Marshall and Warren suggested such
diseases were actually bacterial,
many in the medical community
scoffed at the idea because they
believed no bacteria could survive
in stomach acid, which is strong
Helicobacter pylori, a form of bacteria
that causes stomach ulcers.


EXPLORATION 47
.Becoming an Explorer
enough to dissolve some very hard substances. However,
Marshall and Warren persisted in their explorations, and now
it is firmly established that antibiotics and some medications—
instead of extensive surgery—can cure most people who have
ulcers. These doctors, one a pathologist and the other a clinical
physician, were awarded the Nobel Prize in 2005.
Few explorers will have such major and important results
as this example. But discovery is highly rewarding, whether
you advance the knowledge of humankind or just fulfill a
personal quest.
Access to Resources
Although not everyone will have opportunities to use the latest
exploration technologies, you might be surprised by what is
available in your local high school science department, commu-
nity college, or university. Also, you do not have to go to Mount
Everest or to the moon to explore. The pond in the woods near
your house may produce some extremely interesting findings.
Talking with your local science teacher or college professor
might provide you with stimulating ideas or expose you to
exploration activities that are happening near your home. Most
explorers and researchers are delighted to share their passion
with an interested person.
FPO
Michael Roytek


48 EXPLORATION
Becoming an Explorer.
NESA World Explorer Program
The Boy Scouts of America’s STEM (science, technology, engineering,
mathematics) initiative gives Scouts an opportunity for exposure to
relevant occupations. These experiences will help them develop skills
critical for the competitive world market.
Sending a Scout to a remote location dates back to the first Richard
E. Byrd Antarctic expedition in 1928. NESA has now developed the World
Explorer program. Selected, highly qualified Eagle Scouts can go on
expeditions to remote areas and contribute to a specific scientific project
in an area of great interest to the individual. NESA program destinations
include the Amazon, Arctic, Galapagos, and South Africa, with expansion
to other areas under development.
• In the Amazon, the NESA Eagle Scout Amazon biologist will work in a
restricted-access biodiverse science station in the pristine jungle.
• The NESA Eagle Scout Galapagos biologist will join existing scientific
conservation and research projects in this unique setting.
• The NESA Eagle Scout arctic marine biologist will study rare marine
mammals in the Smithsonian Institution’s highly restricted Narwhal
Tusk Research program.
• The NESA Eagle Scout paleoanthropologist will participate in evalua-
tion of a spectacular finding of new early human species at a site in a
national game preserve in South Africa.
The program continues to
grow and is likely to include
more equally exciting
destinations. For more
information, go to
www.nesa.org, email
nesa@scouting.org, or
contact the NESA office
by calling 972-580-2000.
Eagle Scout Alex Houston
tested the frigid waters
of Antarctica during his
adventure there.


EXPLORATION 49
.Becoming an Explorer
Eagle Scouts lucky enough to be picked for the NESA World Explorer program
have visited faraway places such as the Galapagos Islands, Amazon rain forests,
Antarctica, and the Arctic Circle, among other adventurous locations.





EXPLORATION 51
.Preparing for an Expedition
Preparing for
an Expedition
Every exploration expedition begins with a carefully detailed
plan. Before you go on any expedition, use the following steps
to plan and prepare.
Develop a Concept
The concept may arise from a longstanding interest or from
something that suddenly piques your curiosity. An initial
concept needs to be further defined for the explorer to have a
realistic view of the goal and whether it can be accomplished.
Keep in mind that a successful expedition does not necessarily
require that you meet your predetermined goal—you may
actually learn more from failure. However, you need a basis for
pursuing the exploration, and a concept is required for direction.
What is your objective? What are you hoping to learn?
Do Your Research
Do research about your objective to more fully understand what
you are trying to achieve and how to go about it. To determine
the best timing for an expedition, you must know about the
geography and climate of your destination. If you are going to
an unfamiliar area, find out about cultural issues in the region
and get current information about local controversies or unrest.
Check on local laws or restrictions that might limit your access
to the area. Determine what resources you will have with you
and which you can obtain at the site.
Knowing about your intended destination will help you
determine potential partners, sponsors, and advocates for your
work who may be able to provide funding or give you on-the-
ground support. Gathering as much information as possible about
your proposed exploration is highly useful and strongly advised.


52 EXPLORATION
Preparing for an Expedition .
Select Your Team
Unless your proposed exploration is to be an individual effort—and
you are certain you have every skill necessary to accomplish your
goal alone—you will need to put together a smoothly functioning
team. This is a key requirement and an important responsibility.
Consider what skills are necessary for your endeavor and
determine who can provide the expertise needed. The skills that
each individual brings to the team will help you determine how
many expedition members you must have. Limit the group size
by seeking out people with multiple skills. For example, one
team member might have cooking skills or medical knowledge
in addition to his or her primary expertise.
Team behavior and chemistry are important considerations.
If a brilliant scientist on your team lacks the social skills to get
along with others, you might reevaluate that person’s role to
avoid friction later on. Everyone at some time or another has
been on a team that was not functional. Poor behavior might be
only an annoyance in your normal environment, but it becomes
a critical issue and more difficult to deal with in the field. A
team member usually cannot just leave an expedition without
creating consequences for the mission.
You must also realize that an expedition can be stressful,
and how someone reacts under stress may affect your activities.
Although it may be hard to guess their responses ahead of time,
you should get to know your companions before setting out so you
have an idea of their personalities and can spot any warning signs.
Finally, make sure that everyone will be available at the
time proposed for the exploration.


EXPLORATION 53
.Preparing for an Expedition
Create the Exploration Agenda
Once you have your team selected and have
blocked out dates for the activity, then create an
agenda. The agenda serves as a guide during
preparation, provides a framework for the activities
on-site, and outlines what needs to be done after
you return. The agenda will help organize your
exploration, identify areas where obstacles may
arise, and assist in dealing with unexpected delays.
Be sure to allow enough time for each step
in your preparations. Assign tasks, as appropriate,
so that all the team members share in this work.
Before leaving, give a copy of your agenda to
your family or close friends so they can follow
your schedule and help if problems arise.
Secure Expedition Financing
Considering the financial requirements—how to pay for an expedi-
tion—is an essential part of preparation. Expeditions have become
stranded due to inadequate funds. Every exploration activity
should have at least a rough budget within which to work, and
alternate sources of funding should be lined up in case your
primary source falls through or cannot meet your requirements.
Except for major exploration that involves expensive
equipment and many people, the cost of a field expedition will
generally range from a few hundred to a few thousand dollars,
depending on the location and the cost of travel. One strategy
to cover expenses is to seek organizations or private individuals
who may be interested in your work and will assist financially in
the form of a gift or grant. Supporters might also provide equip-
ment or services that can help you stay within your budget.
Gather Equipment and Supplies
The equipment required for your expedition will vary with the
location, climate, season, altitude, and number of personnel.
Discuss items with the expedition members so that all are in
agreement and know about specific gear. Scientific instruments,
photographic and video equipment, computers, and portable
electric supply need to be carefully chosen and calculated as to
weight and volume limitations—how much you can carry.


54 EXPLORATION
Preparing for an Expedition .
Consider extra batteries, bulbs, digital camera memory, cords, and
other essentials. Plan to “pack it out” to avoid leaving any non-
biodegradable supplies at the location. Above all, be practical.
Suggested Personal Items
for an Expedition
Each person should bring personal supplies
customized for the expedition. Start with the Scout
Basic Essentials (from the Scouts BSA Handbook for
Boys and Scouts BSA Handbook for Girls) and also
use the following checklist:
o Adhesive bandages, assorted sizes
o Liquid soap
o Lip balm with sunscreen
o Sunscreen (at least 30 SPF)
o Sunglasses
o Hat with brim for shade
o Insect repellent containing DEET
o Iodine tablets or ultraviolet light source and
portable filters for water purification if bottled water
is not available; filtration straws are also good
o Flashlight
o Headlamp
o Binoculars
o Camera
o Batteries for all devices
o Duct tape
To help you
take only what
you need on an
extended field
expedition,
consult the
Group Camping
Gear Checklist
in the Scouts
BSA Handbook for
Boys and Scouts
BSA Handbook
for Girls.


EXPLORATION 55
.Preparing for an Expedition
Make a Communications Plan
A communications plan is important for even a simple local hike.
For exploration in a remote area, communication equipment is
essential. Terrain is the major factor to be considered. Common
personal communication equipment is designed for urban envi-
ronments and clear lines of sight but remote places have sparse
cellular coverage, and steep terrain can block overhead satellite
networks. Satellite phones have advantages but they require
triangulation with satellites, which might be obstructed in a
canyon or under a rain forest canopy. GPS units are useful but
require the same clearance for satellite connection.
No single device is perfect for all conditions, but a mobile
phone configured for the local mobile network is the most
common and versatile communications tool. Texting may
work when connections for calls will not. Mobile phones not
only provide communication but also act as a homing beacon,
potentially giving search-and-rescue teams a way to find you.
However, mobile phones are limited by terrain and atmospheric
conditions. New technologies combining both cell and satellite
capabilities are emerging.
Another aspect of communications you may need to consider
is dealing with the media. If media outlets will want to com-
municate with your team, make sure to select a spokesperson in
advance and determine how messages will be communicated.
This can prevent confusion and inaccurate reports, and it will
demonstrate your leadership ability.


56 EXPLORATION
Preparing for an Expedition .
Establish Safety and First-Aid Procedures
Make safety a priority in preparing for an expedition. One early
decision you must make is whether you will have a trained
medic on the trip. If so, as the leader you should work with
this person to screen participants for medical conditions that
could cause trouble later on. These may include asthma,
severe allergies particularly to foods or insect stings, recent
surgery, and use of medications—especially aspirin, blood
thinners, treatments for a heart condition or diabetes, and
drugs for anxiety or mental disorders. Require all potential
members of the expedition to be open about their medical
needs. Remember that if someone is injured or becomes ill
on the road, they may need to be evacuated and the trip might
be cut short or delayed.
For relatively short trips to an area where medical
assistance is easily available, carrying a personal medical kit
will likely be sufficient. (See the checklist of recommended
medical supplies in this section.)
Regardless of whether a health care professional is going
on the trip, all expedition members with conditions requiring
physician oversight must provide written medical clearance
from their doctor. This clearance should also confirm that
the participant has had all appropriate vaccinations. If your
activity will be strenuous or stressful, a waiver of liability for
each participant is advisable.
Few people have medical evacuation coverage included
in their health insurance, so it is vital that each expedition
member obtains an insurance policy for medical evacuation.
This insurance is relatively inexpensive and, without it, the
cost of medical evacuation would be enormous. Such a
policy usually provides for trained personnel to coordinate
the patient’s medical needs as well as evacuation once they
are stable.
Do not forget dental care. Travelers to a remote area
should have a dental checkup within six months of
departure. A tooth abscess is excruciatingly painful and
can almost always be avoided with a recent dental visit.


EXPLORATION 57
.Preparing for an Expedition
Expedition Medicine
“Everyone who travels to a remote area is concerned about health and
safety. Most people are able to get help in the developed world where many
resources are readily available, but remote areas have few resources. Safety in
a remote area can be quite different than in an urban setting.
“Wilderness medicine is defined as medical care where access to stan-
dard resources is difficult or absent. Medical care on a Scouting trip is a good
example of wilderness medicine. Search-and-rescue missions and medical
missions in underdeveloped countries are other examples.
“Expedition medicine is a subset of wilderness medicine that deals with
medical care while on scientific or educational events. Doctors, nurses, and
emergency medical technicians all can be involved in expedition medicine.
Preparation includes screening expedition members for existing medical
conditions that may cause a problem, vaccination recommendations, selecting
emergency medical supplies, and arranging for possible medical evacuation
and proper insurance. Only minor problems may arise, but you must plan for
serious events.
“One great aspect of expedition medicine is that its practitioners are not
restricted to one geographical area or environment but may go to jungles,
mountains, the ocean, deserts, polar areas, and outer space. The health care
professional is an important part of any expedition.”
—Michael Manyak, M.D.
Expedition medicine specialist; Distinguished Eagle Scout;
Fellow, The Explorers Club
Expedition medicine
expert and explorer
Michael Manyak (center,
with patient), treats and
arranges evacuation of
an injured patient from a
remote expedition.


58 EXPLORATION
Preparing for an Expedition .
Medical Supplies
Medical supplies for an expedition must be practical, weigh as
little as possible, and take up minimal space. To help your team
choose wisely, use a checklist of recommended group supplies.
Recommended Supplies for a
Team Medical Kit
The following suggestions may be modified depending
on the number of expedition members, length of travel,
and destination. A health-care professional who is
familiar with the remote surroundings can help you cus-
tomize items for the trip. It’s safe to say that the more
extensive and remote the expedition, the more elabo-
rate the kit will need to be. If individual team members
will be carrying prescribed controlled substances or
injectable medications, certain legal requirements apply.
Consult with your merit badge counselor, who can help
you find out more about those requirements.


EXPLORATION 59
.Preparing for an Expedition
Medications
Medication Supply Unit Dosage Total
Aspirin (acetylsalicylic acid) 500 mg,
100 per bottle
2
Antibiotic ointment (bacitracin) 1-ounce tube 2
Allergy medicine
(diphenhydramine)
25 mg 1 every
6 hours
60 tablets
Broad spectrum antibiotic
(for respiratory or urinary tract
infection, bacterial diarrhea, etc.)
Variable Variable 60 tablets
Ibuprofen 600 mg,
100 per bottle
3
Anti-diarrheal (loperamide
hydrochloride)
2 mg,
24 tablets
1–2 tablets 10 bottles
Clove oil (for dental pain) 60 ml
Acetaminophen (e.g., Tylenol) 100 per bottle 3 bottles
Supplies
Supplies Unit Total
Elastic bandages 2-inch and 4-inch 5 of each
Adhesive tape, cloth 2 inches x 10 yards 4 rolls
Sterile cotton balls
Eye patch
Gauze pads 2 x 2 inch and
4 x 4 inch
1 box
Triangular bandage for wrap-
ping injuries and making an
arm sling
Adhesive bandages,
cloth preferred
Assorted sizes
Sterile gauze pads
(2 to 5 per packet)
4 x 4 inch 1 box
Rolled waterproof
adhesive tape
2 inches x 10 yards 1 roll
Liquid soap 1 bottle


60 EXPLORATION
Preparing for an Expedition .
Sterile cotton-tipped swabs, or
applicators (2 per package)
1 box
Scissors 1
Tweezers 1
Sterile hypoallergenic or latex
surgical gloves
Size 7.5 1 box
Non-sterile latex gloves Large 1 box
Water purification tablets or
iodine crystals 3
Resealable plastic bags Large and small 1 box of each
Moleskin padding 41
⁄8 x 33
⁄8 inch 1 box or 5 rolls
Safety pins 1 package
Throat lozenges 100
Lip balm for sunscreen 10
Individuals should pack a small medical kit with their
personal supplies. Expedition members are responsible for bring-
ing their own personal medicines with enough extra supply to
cover travel delays. They should not be dependent on the team
medical kit or any health care professionals in the group to meet
their specific needs.
Personal first-aid kit


EXPLORATION 61
.Preparing for an Expedition
Any expedition member with a
medical condition should carry a medical
history including any medications used,
even if the condition is under control.
This allows for quick reference in case
of an emergency. Medical histories can be
stored on a computer memory stick. This
confidential personal information is not to
be shared except with appropriate medical
authorities in an emergency. Make sure to
get simple written permission from the
traveler, in advance, so this information
can be shared in an emergency.
Recommended Personal Medical Supplies
for an Expedition
o Personal prescription medications (including the generic names for
medications and doses, with a note from the prescribing physician on
letterhead stationery for controlled substances and injectable medications)
o Anti-diarrheal (loperamide hydrochloride)
o Antibiotic for self-treatment of moderate to severe diarrhea or
infections (discuss with your doctor)
o Antihistamine
o Decongestant, alone or in combination with antihistamine
o Motion sickness medication if you are susceptible
o Acetaminophen or aspirin for fever
o Ibuprofen for pain
o Acetaminophen with codeine for strong pain
o Cough suppressant/expectorant
o Throat lozenges
o Antacid
o 1 percent hydrocortisone cream
o Bacitracin ointment or similar antibacterial cream
o Antifungal cream
If the expedition will require traveling by plane, carry medications in their
original containers in your carry-on luggage. All liquids and gels must be
less than 3 ounces and carried together in a resealable plastic bag.


62 EXPLORATION
Preparing for an Expedition .
The Sweet Sixteen of BSA Safety
The “Sweet Sixteen” of BSA safety procedures for physical activity—16 points
that embody good judgment and common sense—are applicable to all activities.
1. Qualified Supervision. Every BSA activity should be supervised by a consci-
entious adult who understands and knowingly accepts responsibility for the
well-being and safety of the children and youth in his or her care. The supervi-
sor should be sufficiently trained, experienced, and skilled in the activity to be
confident of his/her ability to lead and to teach the necessary skills and to
respond effectively in the event of an emergency. Field knowledge of all
applicable BSA standards and a commitment to implement and follow BSA
policies and procedures are essential parts of the supervisor’s qualifications.
2. Physical Fitness. For youth participants in any potentially strenuous activity,
the supervisor should receive a complete health history from a health-care
professional, parent, or guardian. Adult participants and youth involved in
higher-risk activity (e.g., scuba) may require professional evaluation in addition
to the health history. The supervisor should adjust all supervision, discipline,
and protection to anticipate potential risks associated with individual health
conditions. Neither youth nor adults should participate in activities for which
they are unfit. To do so would place both the individual and others at risk.
3. Buddy System. The long history of the buddy system in Scouting has shown
that it is always best to have at least one other person with you and aware at
all times as to your circumstances and what you are doing in any outdoor or
strenuous activity.
4. Safe Area or Course. A key part of the supervisor’s responsibility is to know
the area or course for the activity and to determine that it is well-suited and
free of hazards.
5. Equipment Selection and Maintenance. Most activity requires some special-
ized equipment. The equipment should be selected to suit the participant and
the activity and to include appropriate safety and program features. The super-
visor should also check equipment to determine that it is in good condition for
the activity and is properly maintained while in use.
6. Personal Safety Equipment. The supervisor must ensure that every partici-
pant has and uses the appropriate personal safety equipment. For example,
activity afloat requires a life jacket properly worn by each participant; bikers,
horseback riders, and whitewater kayakers need helmets for certain activities;
skaters may need protective gear; and all need to be dressed for warmth and
utility depending on the circumstances.
7. Safety Procedures and Policies. For most activities, there are common-sense
procedures and standards that can greatly reduce the risk. These should
be known and appreciated by all participants, and the supervisor must
ensure compliance.


EXPLORATION 63
.Preparing for an Expedition
8. Skill Level Limits. There is a minimum skill level requirement for every
activity, and the supervisor must identify and recognize this minimum
skill level and be sure that no participants are put at risk by attempting an
activity beyond their ability. A good example of skill levels in Scouting is the
venerable swim test, which defines conditions for safe swimming based on
individual ability.
9. Weather Check. The risk factors in many outdoor activities vary substan-
tially with weather conditions. These variables and the appropriate response
should be understood and anticipated.
10. Planning. Safe activity follows a plan that has been conscientiously developed
by the experienced supervisor or other competent source. Good planning
minimizes risks and also anticipates contingencies that may require
emergency response or a change of plan.
11. Communications. The supervisor needs to be able to communicate effectively
with participants as needed during the activity. Emergency communications
also need to be considered in advance for any foreseeable contingencies.
12. Plans and Notices. BSA tour and activity plans, council office registration,
government or landowner authorization, and any similar formalities are the
supervisor’s responsibility when such are required. Appropriate notification
should be directed to parents, enforcement authorities, landowners, and
others as needed, before and after the activity.
13. First-Aid Resources. The supervisor should determine what first-aid sup-
plies to include among the activity equipment. The level of first-aid training
and skill appropriate for the activity should also be considered. An extended
trek over remote terrain obviously may require more first-aid resources and
capabilities than an afternoon activity in the local community. Whatever is
determined to be needed should be available.
14. Applicable Laws. BSA safety policies generally run parallel or go beyond
legal mandates, but the supervisor should confirm and ensure compliance
with all applicable regulations or statutes.
15. CPR Resource. Any strenuous activity or remote trek could present a cardiac
emergency. Aquatics programs may involve cardiopulmonary emergencies.
The BSA strongly recommends that a CPR-trained person (preferably an adult)
be part of the leadership for any BSA program. Such a resource should be
available for strenuous outdoor activity.
16. Discipline. No supervisor is effective if he or she cannot control the activity
and the individual participants. Youth must respect their leader and follow
his or her direction.


64 EXPLORATION
Preparing for an Expedition .
Obtain Necessary Documents
All travelers must have valid identification for domestic or inter-
national travel. Valid passports are necessary to travel outside
the United States. Visas required for most countries are issued at
the destination airport, but some countries require a visa ahead
of time for U.S. citizens. In some cases, obtaining a visa can take
several weeks, so plan ahead.
Before departure, be sure to obtain any necessary permits
to enter restricted areas, to do photography or specimen col-
lection, or to bring certain kinds of technical equipment into
a country. Getting all the permits ahead of time will prevent
delays and ensure you have the necessary permissions. All of
this information should be available from the embassy of the
destination country.
Make photocopies of passports, visas, and vaccination
records in case of loss or theft. One good way to keep copies
of documents is to put them on a computer memory stick or
thumb drive in addition to having hard copies.
Understand the Legal Considerations
Travel and exploration always pose some risks. Everyone should
understand that unplanned events and sudden surprises may
trip up even the most prepared individual. All participants must
be fully informed of risks. They also must understand that they
are voluntarily accepting these risks.
Countries that
require vaccina-
tion for yellow
fever will inspect
the traveler’s
vaccination
record before
allowing entry
and may require
vaccination on-
site, or else deny
the unvaccinated
person entry into
the country.


EXPLORATION 65
.Preparing for an Expedition
An understanding of basic legal liability and definitions
is useful for comprehending documents you may be required
to sign. Legal aspects should be discussed with an attorney or
legal advisors for the specific circumstances, if necessary.
Be aware that laws and legal issues in foreign countries
can be very different from those in the United States. Fines and
imprisonment can be severe. If you have a legal problem over-
seas, immediately contact the American embassy.
Establish Recordkeeping Procedures
Keeping a personal journal is an excellent way to record your
experiences on an expedition and will help you later to recall the
details. A personal journal serves as a log of your thoughts and
impressions, gives a chronological order of events, and is of
great use when later preparing a presentation or discussion of
your findings.
Documentation is also important for other areas. Supply
lists help keep track of inventory and alert you to possible
shortages. A list should be kept of medications used from the
team medical kit with a log of any individual who was given
medication, along with the symptom, date, and time. Also be
sure to document any adverse events or problems that arise.
Such documentation will help to provide an accurate account of
the event, assist in questions involving legal issues, and provide
information to resolve any insurance issues.
Besides captur-
ing your personal
impressions, you
will need to record
your data, likely
in a separate
document or
notebook. It is
important to back
up any data that
is logged into a
computer. Photos
are certainly part
of the record.


66 EXPLORATION
Preparing for an Expedition .
Follow Outdoor Ethics Guidelines
Much like hikers, cyclists, and kayakers, explorers understand
the importance of being responsible stewards of the outdoors.
Explorers may be on land, in a cave, below or above water, or in
space. Wherever they may be, they share the positive environ-
mental ethic that helps keep our waters, mountains, air, and
other locales enjoyable for generations to come.
By practicing the Principles of Leave No Trace and Tread
Lightly!, and by following the Boy Scouts of America’s
Outdoor Code, you can help minimize impacts and enjoy
the outdoors responsibly.
The Principles of Leave No Trace*
1. Plan ahead and prepare. Consider your group’s size, age,
and skill level. Gather information (geography, weather,
regulations) about the place you will be visiting, and allow
enough time to get there.
2. Travel and camp on durable surfaces. Follow and use
established trails and campsites.
3. Dispose of waste properly. Pack it in, pack it out. Pack
out all leftover food and trash—this may include human
waste, toilet paper, and hygiene products. Keep water
sources clean.
4. Leave what you find. Examine cultural or historic
structures, artifacts, rocks, plants, and other natural
objects—but leave them alone.
5. Minimize campfire impacts. Use lightweight stoves for
cooking and battery-operated lanterns instead of campfires.
If fires are permitted, use established fire rings, keep them
small, and put them out cold.
6. Respect wildlife. Enjoy wildlife during the right time of
year, from afar, and never feed them. Store rations and
trash securely.
7. Be considerate of other visitors. Respect their privacy and
property, and allow them to enjoy the outdoors peacefully.
*The member-driven Leave No Trace Center for Outdoor Ethics teaches people how to enjoy
the outdoors responsibly. This copyrighted information has been reprinted with permission
from the Leave No Trace Center for Outdoor Ethics: www.LNT.org.


EXPLORATION 67
.Preparing for an Expedition
As an amateur explorer, consider how exploration
activities and their associated scientific goals may
affect historical artifacts or pristine environments
and ecosystems, which belong to all of humanity and
history. Practice the highest level of outdoor ethics
possible early on, and those good habits will become
exactly that—habits!
Tread Lightly! Principles**
Travel responsibly. Stay on designated roads, trails, and
areas. Cross streams and launch your watercraft only in
designated areas.
Respect the rights of others. This includes private property
owners, all recreational trail users, campers, and others.
Educate yourself. Plan for your trip by obtaining maps,
regulations, and other information from public agencies. Know
how to operate your equipment safely.
Avoid sensitive areas. Many of these areas, such as historical,
archaeological, and paleontological sites, are also protected
by law.
Do your part. Be a model user of the outdoors; leave the area
better than you found it.
The Outdoor Code
The BSA’s Outdoor Code reminds Scouts of the impor-
tance of caring for the environment. It has special
meaning wherever you may be exploring.
Outdoor Code
As an American, I will do my best to—
Be clean in my outdoor manners,
Be careful with fire,
Be considerate in the outdoors, and
Be conservation-minded.
For more informa-
tion about outdoor
ethics, Leave
No Trace, and
Tread Lightly!,
see the Scouts
BSA Handbook
for Boys, Scouts
BSA Handbook
for Girls,
and Fieldbook.
**Tread Lightly! is a powerful campaign to promote responsible recreation through steward-
ship, communication, and education. This copyrighted information has been reprinted with
permission from Tread Lightly!: www.treadlightly.org.


68 EXPLORATION
Preparing for an Expedition .
Prepare a Report
After you return, you will share the data and findings of your
exploration. It is useful to compile a report about your expedi-
tion including objective, preparation activities, findings, and
conclusions about your findings.
A conclusion could be very simple. You should note
whether the expedition was a success and whether it accom-
plished its goals. For formal scientific expeditions, leaders may
need to summarize findings in formal reports, and individual
scientists will document their findings and their interpretation
or ideas about what they found, what the discovery means, and
its importance.
Hold an After-Action Review
After you return, you will want to conduct a review of your
expedition, paying special attention to how well-equipped you
were, what actions were successful, and how efficiently your
team performed. It is also important to reflect on what did not
work well or what could be improved. This review can be
recorded if desired, but the important thing is to evaluate the
positives and negatives of your expedition. This honest reflec-
tion will be of great value the next time you plan an expedition.
In addition to a written report, you might give a talk or
make a presentation of your findings. If a problem or
dispute arose, you may be required to provide informa-
tion. These are all reasons why accurate record keeping
is important.


EXPLORATION 69
.Preparing for an Expedition
Exploration and Documentary Production
“Documentary production plays an important role in exploration because
it captures visual testimony of events and discoveries. It supplements
written reports of expeditions, documents research in remote areas, and
provides real-time environments and circumstances.
“A perfect example of documentary value occurred recently when
I was dropped by helicopter atop the isolated mountain range of Cape
Melville on Australia’s northeastern Cape York Peninsula, along with National
Geographic photographer Tim Laman and herpetologist Conrad Hoskin.
With peaks composed of boulders the size of school buses, Cape Melville’s
seemingly perilous summits had been largely unexplored for science before
the team traveled there in search of unknown species. The upland of Cape
Melville is a thoroughly isolated rain forest. … Within just two days the team
found five new reptile and amphibian species, including a magnificent leaf-
tail gecko living in what headlines around the world subsequently dubbed a
‘Lost World’—just miles from human habitation. These rain forest-associated
inhabitants have been completely isolated up there for millions of years.
“Verbal reports could not do justice to these discoveries. So go
explore … and don’t forget your video camera!”
—Nancy Donnelly
National Geographic producer; Fellow, The Explorers Club
Nancy Donnelly at Cape Melville,
Australia, “Lost World” camp
A new species of leaf-tail gecko found
on an expedition with documentary
producer and explorer Nancy Donnelly


FPO
1530961733
Ilona Titova


EXPLORATION 71
.Going on an Expedition
Going on an Expedition
In working to earn the Exploration merit badge, you will prepare
for an expedition (requirement 7) and then go on the expedition
(requirement 8). You are to make an expedition to an area you
have not previously explored.
Whether you choose a remote area or someplace nearby,
plan and prepare carefully and thoroughly, using the steps and
the skills you have learned in completing requirements 6 and 7.
Your expedition must be supervised by your merit badge coun-
selor or by a counselor-approved person. Qualified expedition
advisors might be recruited from the ranks of school science
teachers, museum educators, park rangers, nature instructors,
and others with scientific knowledge as well as outdoor skills
and expertise.
Packing an Animal?
Any expedition traveling into a remote and rugged area
where the use of pack animals (horses, mules, llamas,
etc.) might be required calls for appropriate planning
to include attention to the health and welfare of these
animals. This includes food, water, medical supplies,
vaccinations, health
certificates, and
so on. Similarly,
if one’s expedi-
tion included only
a companion pet,
that animal’s needs
must be planned
for, as well (water,
food, leashes, etc.).


72 EXPLORATION
Going on an Expedition.
Exploration Organizations
Several organizations make exploration a key part of their func-
tion and membership. Studying their websites and perhaps
contacting the organization may give you insights for your expe-
dition and also connect you with people who can serve as
resources for information.
A good way to begin your efforts in exploration is to
volunteer with one of these organizations or to get to know
scientists within your community. Become acquainted with
museums, local high school science teachers, the science
departments of community colleges or universities, and the
local chapters of organizations that have exploration interests.
These scientists often can serve as mentors and consultants to
an exploration project.
Some of the best known exploration-related organizations are
• National Geographic Society
• The Explorers Club
• Alpine Club
• Smithsonian Institution
• World Wildlife Fund
• National Science Foundation
• National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA)
• National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)


EXPLORATION 73
.Going on an Expedition
Getting Started:
Join The Explorers Club
If you are 16 years old or have earned the Exploration
merit badge, you are eligible for student membership
in The Explorers Club, where you can network with
explorers from all over the world and many areas of
interest. With your parent’s permission, download
the application from www.explorers.org; contact the
National Eagle Scout Association to find an Explorers
Club sponsor for the required letter of recommendation.
No exploration experience is necessary to become a
student member.
Become an Explorer!
“Each of us can be an explorer, every day of our lives. Exploration is
investigating the world around us—wherever it is. We may think of
Meriwether Lewis and William Clark, who mapped and documented the
American West; or Ernest Shackleton in search of the South Pole. However,
exploration doesn’t require a trip halfway around the world. We can each
be an explorer in our own neighborhood—investigating the animals,
plants, soils, weather, stars, and other parts of the environment. We can
be an explorer in the city—learning about the people—perhaps doing a
service project in a school or senior facility.
“Exploration is learning something new by doing. Along with curiosity
and some creativity, exploration requires a careful plan, implementation,
documentation, and an after-action review. Learn about the world around
you. Become an explorer!”
—Rear Admiral (retired) Joyce Johnson,
D.O., U.S. Public Health Service Former chief medical officer and surgeon
general, U.S. Coast Guard; Fellow, The Explorers Club
Physician and explorer Dr. Joyce Johnson
undergoing polar survival training with
the U.S. Coast Guard


74 EXPLORATION
Glossary.
Glossary
aerospace. Space including Earth’s
atmosphere and the space beyond.
alpine. Mountainous or high; relating to
or resembling lofty mountains.
anthropology. The study of human
beings, past and present.
archaeology. The study of the human
past using material remains such as
structures, artifacts, and monuments.
biochemistry. Chemistry that deals with
the chemical compounds and processes
occurring in living things.
biodiversity. The biological diversity (va-
riety) in an environment as indicated by
the numbers of different species of plants
and animals that live in that ecosystem.
bioprospecting. The search for plant
and animal species from which medicinal
drugs and other commercially valuable
products can be obtained.
canopy. The uppermost spreading branch
layer of a forest; the treetops.
concept. A general idea or understanding
of something; or a plan or intention.
cultural anthropology. The study of
human culture, especially social structure,
language, law, politics, religion, art, and
technology.
deforestation. The clearing or destruction
of forests.
dopamine. A chemical that is responsible
for transmitting signals between the nerve
cells of the brain.


EXPLORATION 75
.Glossary
ecosystem. A community of living
organisms (plants, animals, and microbes)
interacting with the nonliving parts of
their environment (things like air, water,
and soil).
extremophile. An organism that lives
under extreme environmental conditions
(as in a hot spring or an ice cap).
fauna. Animal life.
findings. The results of an investigation.
gene. A unit of heredity that is passed
from parent to offspring.
genome. The complete set of genes or
genetic material of an organism.
hyperthermophile. An organism that
lives in extremely hot environments.
interdependent. Mutually dependent;
depending on each other.
interdisciplinary. Involving two or more
scientific or artistic disciplines (fields
of study).
interpretation. Explanation, analysis,
clarification, or understanding.
latitude. Distance north or south from
Earth’s equator measured through
90 degrees.
linguistics. The study of human speech
and language.
logistics. The handling of the details of
an operation.
macromolecule. A very large molecule
(as of a protein).
mammalian. Of a class of warm-blooded
backboned animals that have hair, nourish
their young with milk produced by
mammary glands, and include humans.
microbe. An organism of microscopic
size; microorganism.
migration. Moving from one place to
another; roaming (often at set times) from
one region or climate to another for feed-
ing or breeding.
molecular biology. The branch of biology
that deals with the structure and func-
tions of the proteins and other molecules
essential to life.
molecule. The smallest particle of a
substance that retains all the properties of
the substance and is composed of one or
more atoms.
neuroscientist. One who studies the
function of the nervous system.
oceanography. The science dealing with
Earth’s oceans, marine biology, marine
resources, and the physics and chemistry
of seawater.
paleoanthropology. The study of
extinct and prehistoric human ancestors,
mainly through examining their fossils
and artifacts.
Paleolithic. A prehistoric period when
human ancestors first made and used
primitive stone tools.
paleontology. The study of the fossil
remains of animals and plants.
physical anthropology. The study of
human evolution and physical variation.
plate tectonics. The theory that Earth’s
outer shell or crust is divided into several
plates that glide over the mantle, the rocky
inner layer above the central core.
species. A group of animals, plants, or
other living things that all share common
characteristics; are of a distinct kind or
sort and are classified alike; and usually
interbreed only among themselves.
speleology. The study or exploration
of caves.
subatomic. Smaller than an atom.
subglacial. Beneath a glacier (a large
body of ice).
subterranean. Underground.
terrain. The physical features of an area
of land.


76 EXPLORATION
EXPLORATION RESOURCES.
Exploration Resources
Scouting Literature
Scouts BSA Handbook for Boys; and Scouts
BSA Handbook for Girls; Fieldbook;
Archaeology, Astronomy, Aviation, Bird
Study, Chemistry, Environmental Science,
First Aid, Fish and Wildlife Management,
Forestry, Geology, Insect Study, Inventing,
Mammal Study, Medicine, Mining in
Society, Nature, Nuclear Science, Ocean-
ography, Photography, Plant Science, Reptile
and Amphibian Study, Robotics, Scuba
Diving, Signs, Signals, and Codes, Soil and
Water Conservation, Space Exploration,
Veterinary Medicine, Weather, and
Wilderness Survival merit badge pamphlets
Books
Aronson, Marc, and John W. Glenn.
The World Made New: Why the Age
of Exploration Happened and How
It Changed the World. National
Geographic Children’s Books, 2007.
Ballard, Robert D., and Rick Archbold.
The Lost Ships of Robert Ballard: An
Unforgettable Underwater Tour by the
World’s Leading Deep-Sea Explorer.
Thunder Bay Press, 2005.
Dickmann, Nancy. Exploring Beyond the
Solar System. Rosen Central, 2015.
Douglas, Ed. Mountaineers: Great Tales
of Bravery and Conquest. DK
Publishing, 2011.
Hanbury-Tenison, Robin. The Great
Explorers. Thames & Hudson, 2010.
———. The Modern Explorers. Thames &
Hudson, 2013.
———. The Seventy Great Journeys in
History. Thames & Hudson, 2006.
Knauer, Kelly. Great Discoveries:
Explorations That Changed History.
Time, 2009.
Lansing, Alfred. Endurance: Shackleton’s
Incredible Voyage. Basic Books, 2014.
MacLeod, Alasdair. Explorers: Great Tales
of Adventure and Endurance. DK
Publishing, 2010.
Manyak, Michael J., M.D., Joyce J.
Johnson, D.O., and Warren J. Young.
Lizard Bites & Street Riots. WindRush
Publishers, 2014.
With your parent’s permission, visit
the Boy Scouts of America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org,
for a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


EXPLORATION 77
.EXPLORATION RESOURCES
Matthews, Rupert. DK Eyewitness Books:
Explorer. DK Publishing, 2012.
Miller, Ron. Curiosity’s Mission on Mars:
Exploring the Red Planet. 21st
Century, 2014.
Porti, Andrea. Explorers: The Most
Exciting Voyages of Discovery—From
the African Expeditions to the Lunar
Landing. Firefly Books, 2011.
Ross, Stewart. Into the Unknown: How
Great Explorers Found Their Way by
Land, Sea, and Air. Candlewick, 2014.
Multimedia
Alien Deep with Bob Ballard (DVD).
National Geographic, 2012.
Burns, Ken. Lewis & Clark: The Journey
of the Corps of Discovery (DVD).
PBS, 1997.
NASA Videos (various topics),
http://www.nasa.gov/multimedia/
videogallery/
National Geographic Live! The Explorers:
Paul Sereno & Phillip Manning
(DVD), National Geographic, 2008.
Nautilus Live (live streaming).
Ocean Exploration Trust,
http://www.nautiluslive.org
NOVA: The Vikings (DVD). PBS, 2006.
The Polar Explorer (DVD). PBS Home
Video, 2012.
Organizations and Websites
American Alpine Club
710 10th St., Suite 100
Golden, CO 80401
Telephone: 303-384-0110
Website:
http://www.americanalpineclub.org
American Museum of Natural History
Central Park West at 79th Street
New York, NY 10024-5192
Toll-free telephone: 800-462-8687
Website: http://www.amnh.org
The Explorers Club
46 E. 70th Street
New York, NY 10021
Telephone: 212-628-8383
Website: http://explorers.org
National Aeronautics and
Space Administration
NASA Headquarters
300 E. Street SW, Suite 5R30
Washington, DC 20546
Telephone: 202-358-0001
Website: http://www.nasa.gov
National Eagle Scout
Association (NESA)
Boy Scouts of America
1325 West Walnut Hill Lane
P.O. Box 152079
Irving, TX 75015-2079
Telephone: 972-580-2000
Website: http://www.nesa.org
Visit the NESA website to learn
more about its exciting World
Explorers Program for Eagle Scouts.
National Geographic Society
1145 17th Street NW
Washington, DC 20036-4688
Toll-free telephone: 800-647-5463
Website:
http://www.nationalgeographic.com/
explorers
This web address does not appear
on the Nat Geo website. There is
an Explorer Academy page with a
different address. Should the listing
be revised in any way?


78 EXPLORATION
EXPLORATION RESOURCES.
National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration
1401 Constitution Avenue, NW
Room 5128
Washington, DC 20230
Telephone: 301-713-1208
Website: http://www.noaa.gov
National Science Foundation
4201 Wilson Blvd.
Arlington, VA 22230
Telephone: 703-292-5111
Website: http://www.nsf.gov
Smithsonian Institution
P.O. Box 37012
SI Building, Room 153, MRC 010
Washington, DC 20013-7012
Telephone: 202-633-1000
Website: http://www.si.edu
World Wildlife Fund
P.O. Box 97180
Washington, DC 20090-7180
Telephone: 202-293-4800
Website: http://www.worldwildlife.org
Acknowledgments
The Boy Scouts of America is extremely
grateful to the following individuals who
helped develop the Exploration merit
badge and pamphlet, and for providing
many of the photos herein. We appreciate
their time, expertise, and involvement
very much.
Expedition medicine: Michael J. Manyak,
M.D., Exploration merit badge lead;
Distinguished Eagle Scout and vice presi-
dent, National Eagle Scout Association;
chief medical advisor to Accenture PLC
and Global Rescue LLC; National
Geographic consultant for medicine;
Sweeney Medalist, The Explorers Club;
coauthor, Lizard Bites & Street Riots
Paleoanthropology: Lee R. Berger,
Ph.D., Exploration merit badge co-
developer; Distinguished Eagle Scout;
professor and director, Institute for
Human Evolution, University of the
Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South
Africa; National Geographic Explorer-in-
Residence; Fellow, The Explorers Club
Aerial forensics: Harry Brooks, attorney
and aircraft accident investigator; former
U.S. Marine fighter pilot; Fellow, The
Explorers Club
Aerospace: Scott Parazynski, M.D.,
Distinguished Eagle Scout; astronaut
with seven space shuttle flights and
five space walks, and the only astronaut
who has both flown in space and
summited Mount Everest; Fellow,
The Explorers Club
Anthropology: Andrew Harvey, Ph.D.,
linguist, The George Washington
University; Fellow, The Explorers Club;
William Thomas, Ph.D., director, New
Jersey School of Conservation; noted for
ethno-ecology, conservation, and tradi-
tional ecological wisdom of indigenous
peoples; Lowell Thomas Awardee and
Fellow, The Explorers Club
Archaeology: Kathryn Ranhorn, Ph.D.,
Paleolithic archaeologist, The George
Washington University; Fellow, The
Explorers Club
Dive medicine: R. Craig Cook, M.D.,
dive medicine specialist and explorer,
specializing in pristine seas; medical
director, Sport Diver magazine
Diving technology: D. Karin Lynn,
captain, Civil Engineer Corps, U.S. Navy
(retired); trustee and member, Women
Divers Hall of Fame; Fellow, The
Explorers Club


EXPLORATION 79
.EXPLORATION RESOURCES
Imaging technology: Curt Westergard,
aerial imaging, thermography, and 3D
visualizations for cell tower, power line,
and skyscraper design; president, Digital
Design and Engineering; The Explorers
Club member
Marine biology: Ellen Prager, Ph.D.,
chief scientist, undersea research station
Aquarius Reef Base program, Key Largo,
Florida; marine scientist consultant for
“Good Morning America”; author and
frequent media guest; Fellow, The
Explorers Club
Marine mammal biology: Martin T.
Nweeia, D.M.D., D.D.S., Harvard School
of Dental Medicine; scientist, National
Science Foundation; Fellow, The
Explorers Club
Medicine: Joyce Johnson, D.O., rear
admiral (retired), U.S. Public Health
Service; former chief medical officer
and surgeon general, U.S. Coast Guard;
coauthor, Lizard Bites & Street Riots;
Fellow, The Explorers Club
Meteorology: Jack Williams, Eagle
Scout; founding weather editor of
USA Today and author of several books
on climate and weather; Fellow, The
American Meteorological Society;
Fellow, The Explorers Club
Microbiology: Jay Short, Ph.D., molecu-
lar biologist and entrepreneur; founder,
BioAtla and Diversa (now BATF); widely
published with more than 100 patents;
a pioneer in extremophile discovery;
Fellow, The Explorers Club
Molecular biology: Steven Patierno,
Ph.D., Eagle Scout; molecular oncologist
and pharmacologist; deputy director,
Duke Cancer Institute; expert in cancer
causation and molecular carcinogenesis;
multiple patents and widely published
Mountaineering: Eric Simonson,
Distinguished Eagle Scout; climbed the
Seven Summits and discovered the body
of famous mountaineer George Mallory;
certified alpine and ski guide, American
Mountain Guides Association; Fellow,
The Explorers Club
Multimedia exploration production:
Nancy Donnelly, National Geographic
producer; Fellow, The Explorers Club
Oil and gas exploration: Glenn A.
Adams, Distinguished Eagle Scout;
leader in the field of shale gas explora-
tion; named a Texas Discoverer 1994
by the Texas Railroad Commission for
his leadership in oil exploration
Paleoanthropology: Richard Potts,
Ph.D., director, Smithsonian Institution
Human Origins Program, National
History Museum; widely published
author; Lowell Thomas Awardee and
Fellow, The Explorers Club
Speleology: C. William Steele,
Distinguished Eagle Scout; highly
decorated speleologist who has explored
more than 2,000 North American
and Asian caves; Fellow, National
Speleological Society; Fellow Emeritus,
The Explorers Club
Tropical canopy biology: Margaret
Lowman, Ph.D., tropical canopy
biologist and chief of Science and
Sustainability, California Academy
of Sciences; widely published author;
Fellow, The Explorers Club


80 EXPLORATION
EXPLORATION RESOURCES.
Photo and Illustration Credits
Glenn Adams, courtesy—page 34
(Glenn Adams with Bill Steele)
Harry Brooks, courtesy—page 41 (all)
Craig Cook, courtesy—page 31
Nancy Donnelly, courtesy—page 69
(Nancy Donnelly)
Brett Eloff and Lee R. Berger, courtesy—
page 13
©2016 Stephen Frink/StephenFrink.
com—page 29 (grouper)
Andrew Harvey, courtesy—page 38 (both)
Conrad Hoskin, courtesy—page 69
(leaf-tail gecko)
Liam Huber, courtesy—page 49 (spider)
Joyce Johnson, courtesy—page 73
Meg Lowman, courtesy—page 26 (both)
John Luck, courtesy—pages 8 and 49
(boat in icy waters)
Karin Lynn, courtesy—page 30
Zygmunt Malinowski, courtesy—page 57
Michael J. Manyak, courtesy—pages 12,
28, and 49 (monkey)
NASA, courtesy—pages 19 (Buzz
Aldrin), 20, and 22 (both)
Jason Nichols, courtesy—page 35
Martin Nweeia, courtesy—page 25 (both)
Kathryn Ranhorn, courtesy—page 37
Jack Robert-Tissot, courtesy—pages 48
and 49 (humpback)
Shutterstock.com—cover (helmet,
©Kriso; compass, ©Bplanet;
astronaut, ©siraphat; 3D DNA,
©minifilm); pages 17 (©ktsdesign),
18 (early human migration, ©Este-
ban De Armas), 19 (Henry Hudson
painting, ©Everett Historical;
Robert Falcon Scott, ©Tupungato),
24 (©Mette Fairgrieve),
42 (©PolakPhoto), 43 (©Dlumen),
44 (©Paul Laubach), 46 (©decade3d -
anatomy online), 54 (flashlight,
©ra3m), 55 (©Poprotskiy Alexey),
61 (©Angela Schmidt), 64 (©Ryan R
Fox), and 71 (©Alex Brylov)
Eric Simonson, courtesy—pages 10
and 32
Bill Steele, courtesy—page 23 (both)
William Thomas, courtesy—pages 14
and 36
Triton Submersibles, courtesy—cover
and page 29 (submersible)
Curt Westergard, courtesy—pages 11
and 39
Wikipedia.org/Eigenes Werk—page 16
Wikipedia.org/National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration—page 9
Jack Williams, courtesy—page 33
Edward O. Wilson, courtesy—page 45
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property
of or are protected by the Boy Scouts
of America.
Mark Humphries—page 58
John McDearmon—page 15
Shane Noem—pages 27 and 65
Brian Payne—page 47
Randy Piland—page 60
Vernon Tate—page 70
Photo credits to be updated by copy
editor before final proofing stage.