PUBLIC
HEALTH


BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
PUBLIC HEALTH
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Requirements
1. Explain what public health is. Explain how Escherichia coli
(E. coli), tetanus, AIDS, encephalitis, salmonellosis, Lyme
disease, and coronavirus (COVID-19) are contracted. Then,
pick any four of the following diseases and explain how
each one is contracted and possibly prevented: gonorrhea,
West Nile virus, botulism, influenza, syphilis, hepatitis,
emphysema, meningitis, herpes, lead poisoning. For all
10 diseases, explain the type or form of the disease (viral,
bacterial, environmental, toxin), any possible vectors for
transmission, ways to help prevent exposure or the spread
of infection, and available treatments.
2. Do the following:
a. Explain the meaning of immunization.
b. Name eight diseases against which a young child should
be immunized, two diseases against which everyone
should be reimmunized periodically, and one
immunization everyone should receive annually.
c. Using the list of diseases and conditions in requirement
1, discuss with your counselor those which currently
have no immunization available.
3. Discuss the importance of safe drinking water in terms of the
spread of disease. Then, demonstrate two ways for making
water safe to drink that can be used while at camp. In your
demonstration, explain how dishes and utensils should be
washed, dried, and kept sanitary at home and in camp.
35935
ISBN 978-0-8395-0120-6
©2021 Boy Scouts of America
2021 Printing


PUBLIC HEALTH 3
4. Explain what a vector is and how insects and rodents can
be controlled in your home, in your community, and at
camp. Tell why this is important. In your discussion, explain
which vectors can be easily controlled by individuals and
which ones require long-term, collective action.
5. With your parent’s and counselor’s approval, do ONE of
the following:
a. Visit a municipal wastewater treatment facility or a
solid-waste management operation in your community.
(1) Describe how the facility safely treats and disposes
of sewage or solid waste.
(2) Discuss your visit and what you learned with
your counselor.
(3) Describe how sewage and solid waste should be
disposed of under wilderness camping conditions.
b. Visit a food service facility, such as a restaurant or
school cafeteria.
(1) Observe food preparation, handling, and
storage. Learn how the facility keeps food from
becoming contaminated.
(2) Find out what conditions allow microorganisms to
multiply in food, what can be done to help prevent
them from growing and spreading, and how to
kill them.
(3) Discuss the importance of using a thermometer to
check food temperatures.
(4) Discuss your visit and what you learned with
your counselor.
6. Do the following:
a. Describe the health dangers from air, water, and
noise pollution.
b. Describe health dangers from tobacco use and alcohol
and drug abuse.
c. Describe the health dangers from abusing illegal and
prescription drugs.


4 PUBLIC HEALTH
7. With your parent’s and counselor’s approval, do ONE of
the following:
a. Visit your city, county, or state public health agency.
b. Familiarize yourself with your city, county, or state
health agency’s website.
After completing either 7a or 7b, do the following:
(1) Compare the four leading causes of mortality
(death) in your community for any of the past
five years with the four leading causes of disease
in your community. Explain how the public health
agency you visited is trying to reduce the mortality
and morbidity rates of these leading causes of
illness and death.
(2) Explain the role of your health agency as it relates
to the outbreak of diseases.
(3) Discuss the kinds of public assistance the agency
is able to provide in case of disasters such as floods,
storms, tornadoes, earthquakes, and other acts of
destruction. Your discussion can include the cleanup
necessary after the disaster.
8. Pick a profession in the public health sector that interests
you. Find out the education, training, and experience
required to work in this profession. Discuss what you
learn with your counselor.


PUBLIC HEALTH 5
.Resources
Scouting Literature
Scouts BSA Handbook for Boys; Scouts
BSA Handbook for Girls; Fieldbook;
Animal Science, Camping, Citizenship
in the Community, Citizenship in
the Nation, Citizenship in the World,
Cooking, Dentistry, Emergency
Preparedness, Environmental Science,
First Aid, Medicine, Safety, Search and
Rescue, and Soil and Water Conservation
merit badge pamphlets
Books
Altman, Linda Jacobs. Plague and
Pestilence: A History of Infectious
Disease. Enslow, 1998.
American Medical Association. Health
Care Almanac: Every Person’s Guide
to the Thoughtful and Practical
Sides of Medicine. American
Medical Association, 1998.
Friedlander, Mark P. Outbreak: Disease
Detectives at Work. Lerner, 2000.
Giblin, James Cross. When Plague
Strikes: The Black Death, Smallpox,
AIDS. HarperCollins, 1995.
Gittleman, Ann Louise. Guess What
Came to Dinner? Parasites and Your
Health. Avery, 2001.
Grant, Pamela. Water. Thameside
Press, 2000.
Marrin, Albert. Dr. Jenner and the
Speckled Monster: The Search for the
Smallpox Vaccine. Dutton, 2002.
Nardo, Don. Vaccines. Lucent, 2001.
Pickett, George E. Opportunities in
Public Health Careers. VGM Career
Horizons, 1995.
Stewart, Gail. Teens With Cancer.
Lucent, 2001.
White, Katherine. Everything You Need
to Know About AIDS and HIV.
Rosen, 2001.
Yount, Lisa. Disease Detectives. Lucent,
2001.
Resources
With your parent’s permission, visit
the Boy Scouts of America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org,
for a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


6 PUBLIC HEALTH
Resources.
Organizations and Websites
Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention
1600 Clifton Road
Atlanta, GA 30333
Toll-free telephone: 800-311-3435
Website: www.cdc.gov
Environmental Protection Agency
Ariel Rios Building
1200 Pennsylvania Ave. NW
Washington, DC 20460
Telephone: 202-272-0167
Website: www.epa.gov
National Institutes of Health
9000 Rockville Pike
Bethesda, MD 20892
Telephone: 301-496-4000
Website: www.nih.gov
Office of Disease Prevention and
Health Promotion
1101 Wootton Parkway, Suite LL100
Rockville, MD 20852
Telephone: 240-453-8280
Website: www.health.gov
U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services
200 Independence Ave. SW
Washington, DC 20201
Telephone: 202-619-0257
Website: www.hhs.gov
U.S. Food and Drug Administration
10903 New Hampshire Ave.
Silver Spring, MD 20993
Toll-free telephone: 888-463-6332
Website: www.fda.gov
U.S. Public Health Service
Commissioned Corps
1101 Wootton Parkway, Suite LL100
Rockville, MD 20852
Toll-free telephone: 800-279-1605
Website: http://www.usphs.gov
World Health Organization
Website: http://www.who.int
Acknowledgments
The Boy Scouts of America is
thankful to Dr. William C. Reeves for
his help in updating the 2014 printing
of the Public Health merit badge pam-
phlet. The BSA also thanks the follow-
ing subject experts for their assistance
with updating the 2005 edition: Eric J.
Pyle, Ph.D., Department of Education
Theory and Practice, West Virginia
University; Gerald F. Pyle, Ph.D.,
Department of Health Promotions
and Kinesiology, University of North
Carolina–Charlotte; and Richard W.
Klomp, Information Management
Team, Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention.
Thanks to the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, Atlanta,
Georgia, for providing the informa-
tion found in the “Recommended
Immunization Schedule.”
The Boy Scouts of America is
grateful to the men and women serv-
ing on the National Merit Badge
Subcommittee and the subject experts
on the BSA Health & Safety Support
Committee for the improvements made
in updating this pamphlet.