R ADIO
STEM-Based


R ADIO
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


35938
ISBN 978-0-8395-3361-0
©2024 Scouting America/Boy Scouts of America
2024 Printing
Requirements
Always check www.scouting.org for the latest requirements.
1. Explain what radio is. Then discuss the following:
a. The differences between broadcast radio and hobby radio
b. The differences between broadcasting and
two-way communications
c. Radio station call signs and how they are used in
broadcast radio and amateur radio
d. The phonetic alphabet and how it is used to
communicate clearly
2. Do the following:
a. Sketch a diagram showing how radio waves travel locally
and around the world.
b. Explain how the radio stations WWV and WWVH can be
used to help determine what you can expect to hear
when you listen to a shortwave radio.
c. Explain the difference between a distant (DX) and a
local station.
d. Discuss what the Federal Communications Commission
(FCC) does and how it is different from the International
Telecommunication Union.
3. Do the following:
a. Draw a chart of the electromagnetic spectrum covering
300 kilohertz (kHz) to 3,000 megahertz (MHz).
b. Label the MF, HF, VHF, UHF, and microwave portions
of the spectrum on your diagram.


RADIO 3
c. Locate on your chart at least eight radio services, such
as AM and FM commercial broadcast, citizens band (CB),
television, amateur radio (at least four amateur radio
bands), and public service (police and fire).
4. Explain how radio waves carry information. Include in
your explanation: transceiver, transmitter, receiver, amplifier,
and antenna.
5. Do the following:
a. Explain the differences between a block diagram and a
schematic diagram.
b. Draw a block diagram for a radio station that includes
a transceiver, amplifier, microphone, antenna, and
feed line.
c. Discuss how information is sent when using amplitude
modulation (AM), frequency modulation (FM),
continuous wave (CW) Morse code transmission, single
sideband (SSB) transmission, and digital transmission.
d. Explain how NOAA Weather Radio (NWR) can alert you
to danger.
e. Explain how cellular telephones work. Identify their
benefits and limitations in an emergency.
6. Explain the safety precautions for working with radio
gear, including the concept of grounding for direct current
circuits, power outlets, and antenna systems.
7. Visit a radio installation (an amateur radio station, broadcast
station, or public service communications center, for example)
approved in advance by your counselor. Discuss what types
of equipment you saw in use, how it was used, what types
of licenses are required to operate and maintain the equip-
ment, and the purpose of the station.


4 RADIO
8. Find out about three career opportunities in radio. Pick one
and find out the education, training, and experience required
for this profession. Discuss this with your counselor, and
explain why this profession might interest you.
9. Do ONE of the following (a OR b OR c OR d):
a. AMATEUR RADIO
(1) Tell why the FCC has an amateur radio service.
Describe activities that amateur radio operators can
do on the air, once they have earned an amateur
radio license.
(2) Explain differences between the Technician, General,
and Extra Class license requirements and privileges.
Explain who administers amateur radio exams.
(3) Explain at least five Q signals or amateur radio terms.
(4) Explain how you would make an emergency call on
voice or Morse code.
(5) Explain the differences between handheld trans-
ceivers and home “base” transceivers. Explain the
uses of mobile amateur radio transceivers and
amateur radio repeaters.
(6) Using proper call signs, Q signals, and
abbreviations, carry on a 10-minute real
or simulated amateur radio contact
using voice, Morse code, or digital
mode. (Licensed amateur radio opera-
tors may substitute five QSL cards as
evidence of contacts with five amateur
radio operators.) Properly log the real
or simulated ham radio contact, and
record the signal report.


RADIO 5
b. RADIO BROADCASTING
(1) Discuss with your counselor FCC broadcast
regulations. Include power levels, frequencies,
and the regulations for low-power stations.
(2) Prepare a program schedule for radio station “KBSA”
of exactly one-half hour, including music, news,
commercials, and proper station identification.
Record your program on audiotape or in a digital
audio format, using proper techniques.
(3) Listen to and properly log 15 broadcast stations.
Determine the program format and target audience for
five of these stations.
(4) Explain to your counselor at least eight terms used in
commercial broadcasting, such as segue, cut, fade,
continuity, remote, Emergency Alert System, network,
cue, dead air, PSA, and playlist.
(5) Discuss with your counselor alternative radio plat-
forms such as internet streaming, satellite radio,
and podcasts.
c. SHORTWAVE AND MEDIUM-WAVE LISTENING
(1) Listen across several shortwave bands for four
one-hour periods—at least one period during daylight
hours and at least one period at night. Log the
stations properly and locate them geographically on
a map, globe, or web-based mapping service.
(2) Listen to several medium-wave stations for two one-
hour periods—one period during daylight and one
period at night. Log the stations properly and locate
them on a map, globe, or web-based mapping service.
(3) Compare your daytime and nighttime shortwave logs;
note the frequencies on which your selected stations
were loudest during each session. Explain differences
in the signal strength from one period to the next.
(4) Compare your medium-wave broadcast station logs
and explain why some distant stations are heard at
your location only during the night.


6 RADIO
(5) Demonstrate listening to a radio broadcast using
a smartphone/cellphone. Include international
broadcasts in your demonstration.
d. AMATEUR RADIO DIRECTION FINDING
(1) Describe amateur radio direction finding and explain
why direction finding is important as an activity and
in competition.
(2) Describe what frequencies and equipment are used
for ARDF or foxhunting.
(3) Build a simple directional antenna for either of the
two frequencies used in ARDF.
(4) Participate in a simple fox hunt using your antenna
along with a provided receiver.
(5) Show, on a map, how you located the “fox” using
your receiver.


RADIO 91
.Radio Resources
Radio Resources
Scouting Literature
Digital Technology, Electricity, Electronics,
Emergency Preparedness, Energy,
Engineering, Geocaching, Orienteering,
Programming, Robotics, Search and
Rescue, Signs, Signals, and Codes, and
Space Exploration merit badge pamphlets
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.
K2BSA
The non-profit K2BSA Amateur Radio
Association is dedicated to extending
the reach of amateur radio within the
Scout movement. To assist in this, they
provide a great deal of Radio Scouting
information for Amateur Radio
Operators, Scout leaders, and Scouts at
www.k2bsa.net.
Books and Other Resources
Many of the books, CDs, and other
resources listed here are available from
the American Radio Relay League.
See page 95 for contact information.
AMATEUR RADIO
The ARRL Ham Radio License Manual,
5th ed. ARRL Inc., 2022. A
beginners’ guide to amateur radio
and preparation for the Technician
Class ham-radio license exam.
Brownstein, Rob and Jim Talens.
Morse Code Operating for Amateur
Radio. ARRL Inc., 2013. Introduction
to Morse code along with
operating techniques.
Hallas, Joel, W1ZR. Basic Radio:
Understanding the Key Building
Blocks. ARRL Inc., 2005. An
introduction to radio with simple,
build-it-yourself projects.
Silver, H. Ward. Ham Radio for
Dummies, 4th ed. John Wiley &
Sons, 2021.
BROADCAST RADIO AND
SHORTWAVE LISTENING
Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S.
Department of Labor. Occupation
Outlook Handbook. Bernan Press,
2022. See “Media and Communi-
cation,” at www.bls.gov/ooh/


92 RADIO
Radio Resources.
Chuday, Liz. National Association of
Broadcasters Guide to Careers in
Radio. 2nd ed. Thorough discussion
of each role within a radio broadcast-
ing station. Online at www.nab.org/
documents/radio/NABRadioCareers
SecondEdition.pdf
World Radio TV Handbook: The
Directory of Global Broadcasting.
WRTH Publications. Published
annually, a guide to the world
of radio including domestic
radio services and broadcasters
transmitting internationally.
AMATEUR RADIO
DIRECTION FINDING
Titterington, Bob, G3ORY; David
Williams, M3WDD; and David
Deane, G3ZOI. Radio Orienteering:
The ARDF Handbook. Radio Society
of Great Britain, 2007. Available
through www.arrl.org/shop/.
Homing In: The Art and Science of
Radio Direction Finding. Website
hosted by Joe Moell, K0OV, at
www.homingin.com
The Joe Leggio Tape Measure Antenna
on the Xenia Skywarn webpage:
xwarn.net/2022/01/04/joe-leggio-
wb2hol-tape-measure-antenna/
The Tape Measure Antenna. Webpage
by jcoman at www.instructables.
com/The-Tape-Measure-Antenna/
Acknowledgments
Jim Wilson, K5ND, for overall
coordination and writing
National Radio Scouting Committee for
their work in making suggestions
and reviewing the pamphlet: Mark
Abramowitz, NT3V; Bill Bode,
N4WEB; Doug Cook, KX5DC; Ed
Dudley, WA4ISA; Scott Hooper,
KTOP; Christian Ingerslev, AB2SN;
Keith Kaiser, WA0TJT; Frank
Kisselbach, W7PAQ; Frank Krizan,
K5HS; Grant Laughlin, W5XJ; Russ
Mickiewicz, N7QR; Brian Walker,
K9BKW; Gary Wilson, K2GW; Ron
Wood, K0BRO
Skip Arey, N2EI, for Shortwave and
Medium-Wave Listening review
and update
Michael Thorp for Radio Broadcasting
review and revision recommendations
For ARDF requirements development,
manuscript suggestions, and review:
Brian Coleman, KB0MAP; Dick
Arnett, WB4SUV; Joe Moell, K0OV;
Harley Leach, KI7XF; Marvin
Johnson, KE6HTS
Scouting America thanks the staff and
volunteers of the American Radio Relay
League for many contributions over the
years, and for those materials reprinted
with the permission of the ARRL from
its publications and website.
Acknowledgments are due to the
following for their contributions to
previous versions of the book, which
were incorporated into this revision:
Scott Hooper, KT0P; Mike Brown,
WB2JWD, Harford, New York, who


RADIO 93
.Radio Resources
coordinated the overall revision of 2008;
Bill Burns, WA6QYR, Ridgecrest,
California; Allan Koch, KA8JJN, Clinton
Township, Michigan; and Larry
Wolfgang WR1B, Newington,
Connecticut, for contributing to the
Amateur Radio section and related
portions of the pamphlet. Thanks to
Donald L. Perkins, N2IVW, operations
manager and engineer, Central New
York Radio Group, for his help in
revising the Broadcast Radio section.
Thanks also to Mike Brown,
WB2JWD, and Laurence A. Eichel,
K2NA, for the original 1989 version; and
to Rosalie White, K1STO; Mary Carcia,
N7IAL; Robin M. Micket, N1WAL; Karen
A. Leyton; Jean Wolfgang, WB3IOS; and
Labron Morgan of Westwood One,
Dallas, Texas, for their assistance with
the 1996 revision.
Scouting America is grateful to the
men and women serving on the
National Merit Badge Subcommittee for
the improvements made in updating this
pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration Credits
Amateur Radio on the International
Space Station (ARISS)—page 48
(NA1ss QSL card)
American Radio Relay League,
courtesy—page 57
Jeffrey Bail, NT1K—pages 85–86
Mike Brown, WB2JWD, courtesy—
page 26
Joe Moell—page 81
NASA, courtesy—page 40 (astronaut)
Pixabay.com, courtesy—pages 5 and 59
Stu Turner—page 84
Wikipedia.org, courtesy—pages 11
(shortwave receiver), 18, 20 (FCC
seal), 34 (cellphone tower, NOAA
logo), 42 (QSL card), 48 (Mongolia
QSL card), 52 (ARRL logo), 72
(boat), 82 (map and compass),
and 94
Jim Wilson—pages 9 (Scouts with direc-
tional antennas), 80, 82 (directional
antenna and transmitter), and
83 (both)
WMSC Radio, Montclair State
University—page 9
(broadcast console)
WZ6BSA, League of Gentleman
Scouters—page 54
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of
or are protected by Scouting America.
Evan H. Esaki—page 9
(boy on microphone)
Daniel Giles—pages 22, 44, and 53
F. Harvell—page 42 (ham operator)
Benjamin Kuo—page 3
John McDearmon—pages 14, 17, 24
(electromagnetic spectrum), 29–30
(all), 37, and 50
Brian Payne—page 23
Randy Piland—pages 63, 65, and
72 (main)
Emery Shepard—page 47 (boy speaking
into radio microphone)


Subscribe today at go.scoutlife.org/subscribe
Use promo code SLMBP15 to get a special
print + digital bundle offer priced just for Scouts!
Get ideas
for your next
merit badge
adventure in
every issue
of Scout Life
magazine.