ENVIRONMENTAL
SCIENCE
STEM-Based


ENVIRONMENTAL
SCIENCE
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


35892
ISBN 978-0-8395-3363-4
©2025 Scouting America/Boy Scouts of America
2025 Printing
Note to the Counselor
We enjoy our environment, especially during Scouting activities.
There is so much to learn about the science behind our
environment.
Scouts are strongly encouraged to discuss the badge with
their counselor before starting the requirements.
Scouts have a choice between Environmental Science and
Sustainability merit badges on their Trail to Eagle. These brief
descriptors may help you explain to the Scout so they can
decide which to pick:
• Environmental Science: is about our place in the ecosystem
and that our actions have impacts on all other living things.
It’s about the science of our place in and interrelationships
within the ecosystem. (Science)
• Sustainability: is about social responsibility, knowing that
we share the planet with 8 billion other people. Our respon-
sible actions can ensure that we continue to use resources
in ways that allow others to have that ability in the future.
(Ethics)
Our environment is a whole connected network of life
around us. Our neighborhoods, our camps, our communities,
and our world. We are responsible for protecting the
environment and leaving it better for future generations.
Environmental science seeks to understand and protect our
environment. In this merit badge, Scouts will learn to
appreciate various aspects of Environmental Science.
In the requirements, “living organisms” include both
animals and plants, where “animals” include insects, birds,
vertebrates, and worms; “plants” include trees, ferns, mosses,
grasses, flowers, and crops, as well as mushrooms and other
fungi. Microscopic organisms are environmentally important,
but Scouts are not asked to consider them for this badge.
Scouts are encouraged, but not required, to involve their
family in some of the requirements.
If this merit badge is done at camp, it’s helpful to get
water- and air-quality reports for the camp ahead of time for
the Scouts’ use.





4 ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE
Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Environmental-Science or
check Scoutbook for the latest requirements.


ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE 5


6 ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE


ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE 7
Contents
What Is Environmental Science? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
The Roots of Environmental Science . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
Principles of Ecology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
Human Impact on the Biosphere . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
Taking Action . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
Careers in Environmental Science . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76
Activities in Environmental Science . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78
Environmental Science Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 96





ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE 9
.What Is Environmental Science?
What Is
Environmental Science?
Scientists ask questions about things they observe and then try
to find out the answers. An environmental scientist asks ques-
tions about the environment and tries to learn the answers by
observing and experimenting. While earning the Environmental
Science merit badge, you will get a taste of what it is like to be
an environmental scientist, as you make observations and carry
out experiments to complete the activities and projects required
for the badge.
From Nature Study to Ecology
People have always been curious about the natural world and
have studied it in order to survive. Early humans learned which
plants were good to eat and which ones made them sick. They
learned the habits of animals that they hunted for food and
how to avoid those animals that preyed upon humans.
Today, many people observe plants and
animals in the wild as a hobby. Some go
hiking to find rare wildflowers. Others keep
binoculars and field guides near a window so
they can identify the birds that visit backyard
bird feeders. Because many people over the
centuries have studied nature closely, much is
known today about the natural history of
plants and animals.
Plants and animals, however, do not live alone
in the environment. A living thing’s environment is made
up of all of the living and nonliving materials around it,
including plants, animals, air, soil, heat, light, food, water,
and anything else that plays any role in its life. In addition,
all plants and animals are connected to other living things.
The natural
development of
a living thing over
time is its natural
history. People
who study
natural history
are naturalists.


10 ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE
What Is Environmental Science?.
They interact with one another and with the nonliving parts of
their environment. Living things depend upon the materials
found in their environment to survive. Anything that disturbs
the environment may affect the living things found there.
Using This Pamphlet
An environmental scientist needs to know a great deal about
living things, about their ways of life, and about the environment
and its effect on life. For instance, an environmental scientist
might study how the chemistry of soil affects ant behavior.
Some other things that an environmental scientist might study
include plants in a forest, makeup of rainwater, purity of air,
and how many living things are found in a given environment.
The activities in this pamphlet will introduce you to the wide
range of subjects that environmental scientists study.
The study of
living things and
their interactions
with one another
and with their
environments is
known as ecology.
Scientists
who study the
interactions
among organisms
and their
environments
are ecologists.


ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE 11
.What Is Environmental Science?
Steps in the
Scientific Method
Imagine that you are watching a line of ants
carrying pieces of food from a picnic site to an
anthill. If you push the ants aside, they soon line up
again. You want to know how the ants know where to
line up. To try to answer that question, you follow a
series of steps known as the scientific method.
• First, you state the problem you want to solve—
how ants know where to line up. Then you gather
information about ants. Perhaps you do some
research on ants in the library.
• Next, you form a hypothesis, that is, you formulate
a statement or question that can be tested. Your
hypothesis might be a statement such as: Ants know
where to line up because they can see one another.
• You test your hypothesis by performing an experiment.
In your experiment, you place food in one corner of
a box and ants at the other end. When the ants have
found the food and have formed a line to carry it, you
disrupt the line, and then turn off the lights.
• Now you analyze your results. Did the ants line up
again? If the ants lined up even in the dark, you might
draw a conclusion that they do not need to see one
another in order to line up, so your hypothesis is
wrong. Your conclusion would be that ants must use
some sense other than sight to line up. Sometimes,
when the results of an experiment do not support a
hypothesis, you can use what you learned to formu-
late a new hypothesis and carry out a new experiment
to test the new hypothesis.
Not all hypotheses can be tested by doing an experi-
ment in a laboratory. Some hypotheses are tested by
observing events and collecting facts. You could test
which kinds of birdseed a particular type of bird prefers
just by observing what birds eat at several feeders.


12 ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE
The Roots of Environmental Science.
The Roots of
Environmental Science
For thousands of years, American Indians lived in harmony
with the diverse environments of North America, using
natural resources like forests for food, shelter, and tools.
Tribes in the Pacific Northwest utilized cedar for building
strong houses, boats, and clothing, while those in the
Northeast and upper Midwest crafted birch-bark canoes.
Forests also provided a bounty of food, both from the plants
themselves and the wildlife they sustained.
American Indians practiced controlled burns in some
areas to clear land for farming, encourage the growth of
certain plants, or create better hunting grounds. If a
particular area became depleted, they would relocate,
allowing the forest to recover.
The arrival of European settlers marked a significant
shift in resource use. Unlike the sustainable practices of
American Indians, European settlers tended to exploit the
land for immediate gain, with less concern for long-term
consequences. They hunted wildlife to near extinction,
cleared vast swaths of forests, and polluted waterways. As
resource pressure grew in one area, settlers simply moved
westward, repeating the cycle of depletion.


ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE 13
.The Roots of Environmental Science
Early on, however, some colonists recognized the limita-
tions of this approach. For instance, Plymouth Colony passed a
law in 1626 to control timber harvesting, and Newport, Rhode
Island, instituted seasonal deer hunting restrictions in 1639.
These examples highlight a growing awareness of the need for
responsible resource management, a concept that remains vital-
ly important today.
People dedicated to environmen-
tal protection and wildlife conserva-
tion founded groups such as the
Appalachian Mountain Club (1876),
the New York Audubon Society
(1886) and the Sierra Club (1892).
Government management of
special areas can be traced back to
the creation of the first national
park—Yellowstone—created in 1872.
The Forest Reserve Act of 1891
followed, changing forest reserves to
national forests and charging their
managers with improving and
protecting the nation’s long-term
supply of wood and water. In 1916,
Congress established the National
Park Service to preserve natural and
cultural resources for the enjoyment,
education, and inspiration of current
and future generations.
The Bureau of Land
Management, the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers, the Fish and Wildlife
Service, the Natural Resources
Conservation Service, and other pub-
lic agencies also strive to manage
public lands that fall within their
administrative boundaries. State and local agencies oversee
smaller acreages of public lands. Private landowners with for-
ested properties—from large forest-product companies to fami-
lies with a few acres of trees around their homes—have a stake
in the proper management of forest resources, too.


14 ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE
The Roots of Environmental Science.
From Conservation to Environmentalism
During the late 1800s and early 1900s, people began to speak
out about human activities that were causing serious
environmental problems such as air and water pollution. In
1907, a scientific study by M.C. Marsh showed how fish were
hurt by industrial wastes released into water sources. In 1962,
Rachel Carson published Silent Spring, a book that discussed
the dangers to the environment from using the
pesticide DDT.
Carson and others who wrote about the
environmental effects of human activities
helped make the public aware of environmental
concerns. This public awareness led to the
designation of April 22 as Earth Day. The first
Earth Day in 1970 focused the environmental
movement in the United States.
During the 1970s and 1980s, the US created
environmental protection laws, notably, the Clean
Air Act (CAA, 1963), National Environmental
Policy Act (NEPA, 1970), Clean Water Act (CWA,
1972), Endangered Species Act (ES, 1973), Safe
Drinking Water Act (SDWA, 1974), the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA, 1976), the Toxic
Substances Control Act (TSCA), 1976), and the
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and
Liability Act (CERCLA, also known as Superfund, 1980).
Congress also created the Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA, 1970) to enforce these and other
environmental laws.
Today, Scouts can follow in these pioneers’
footsteps by earning the Scouting America
Distinguished Conservation Service Award.
Over the centuries, and especially in the past
few decades, we have solved various
environmental problems. We have discovered new
issues and addressed more subtle pollution issues in
our air, water, soil, waste and other environmental
compartments. We have many challenges remaining and
new ones emerging as our society changes and the science
continues to find new problems. We now address trace
pollutants, climate change, microorganisms, complex ecological
balances, and other problems.


ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE 15
.The Roots of Environmental Science
Today, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA),
and other federal and local environmental agencies work to
help protect our air, water, land, and wildlife resources.
Environmental organizations, companies, and citizens all help
in the effort. Our environmental science, policy, and
enforcement have demonstrably cleaned up our air, water, soil,
oceans, and ecosystems. We humans breathe easier, drink pure
water, enjoy uncontaminated food, swim in lakes, and enjoy
nature. But the job is not done!
In recent decades, the decline of the honeybee population
worldwide has attracted the attention of scientists and many
others. They continue to study the phenomenon called honeybee
colony collapse disorder to find an explanation and resolution for
this issue. The dramatic decline in honeybees and other
pollinators could potentially have a dramatic effect on our food
supply. We don’t yet know how extensively the consequences
will affect humankind and our food chain, but we are learning.
Environmental science is a broad topic with many fields of
study to explore. There is still much to discover. Who knows?
Your interest in earning this merit badge may lead to something
bigger and more far-reaching than your general locale.
Scouts and the Environment
In the early 1900s, as the conservation movement grew, the Boy
Scouts of America was founded in 1910 with a strong
foundation of woodcraft, nature study, and conservation. Many
of the principles that Scouts uphold, such as nature,
conservation, and outdoorsmanship, come from the
conservation ethics of our founders. Now, Scouting America has
Activities
designed to help
you earn the
Environmental
Science merit
badge can be
found toward
the back of
this pamphlet.


16 ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE
The Roots of Environmental Science.
taught more than 45 million young environmentalists
throughout its history. Today, Scouting America continues to
train American youth in principles of conservation and
environmental science.
Scouts contribute to our efforts to clean up pollution,
create a sustainable environment, and maintain nature for
Scouts’ camping and hiking and for our feathered and furry
friends. In addition to this merit badge, there are more than a
dozen environmental science-related badges, including:
• Animal Science
• Architecture
• Chemistry
• Citizenship in the Community
• Citizenship in the Nation
• Citizenship in the World
• Energy
• Engineering
• Fish and Wildlife Management
• Forestry
• Gardening
• Landscape Architecture
• Mammal Study
• Mining in Society
• Nature
• Oceanography
• Plant Science
• Public Health
• Pulp and Paper
• Soil and Water Conservation
• Sustainability
• Weather
Environmental Science is an important part of STEM—
Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics. Scouting
America encourages the natural curiosity of youth members to
enjoy the wide range of STEM-related activities.
Scouts BSA offers several opportunities to earn
environmental science-related awards, including
• Distinguished Conservation Service Award Program
• Conservation Good Turn
• Keep America Beautiful Hometown USA Award
• Nova and Supernova STEM Awards
• World Conservation Award
Conservation
Good Turn
World Conservation
Award


ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE 17
.The Roots of Environmental Science
Scouts have been environmentalists since the beginning of
Scouting. You continue that tradition as you earn this badge,
leave no trace, and shepherd our environment as a Scout. You
will contribute to environmental stewardship as you continue
your life whether or not you choose an environmental science
career.


18 ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE
Principles of Ecology.
Principles of Ecology
Although laws and agencies have been established to help protect
and preserve nature, much more needs to be done. Before you
can help protect nature, you must understand how it works.
Understanding Ecology
Imagine that you are standing on the bank of a quiet river
in Florida. Along the banks of this river you see a great blue
heron, an alligator, a rat snake, and a raccoon. On a rock in
the river, a Florida red-bellied turtle basks in the sun. Looking
down into the water, you see the long body of a fish called a
gar gliding through slender leaves of eelgrass. Snails feed as
they travel among the water plants. Here and there, whirligig
beetles dot the water surface. Tiny duckweed plants float near
the quiet banks. A bullfrog jumps from the river’s edge and
disappears into the water.
All of the living things in and around the river are connected
in some way. Bullfrogs eat whirligig beetles. Herons eat bullfrogs,
rat snakes, gars, and hatchling red-bellied turtles. Raccoons eat
The organisms that live in and around a river in Florida include
fish, amphibians, reptiles, birds, mammals, and plants.


ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE 19
.Principles of Ecology
bullfrogs, insects, worms, and snails. Snails and adult turtles
eat aquatic (water) plants. In nature, living things interact in
many ways.
Living Things in the Environment
Snails, red-bellied turtles, and eelgrass are living things. All living
things have the ability to reproduce, that is, to make more of
the same kind of living thing. Living things also change during
their lifetimes. They grow and develop and have a life span that
eventually ends in death. Another important characteristic of
living things is that they can usually adjust to their surroundings.
They can respond to changes in their environments.
Scientists call living things organisms. Think of all the
millions of organisms that inhabit Earth. Organisms can be
found in the deepest oceans and on the highest mountains.
Some bacteria can even be found high in Earth’s atmosphere.
The part of Earth that contains and supports living things is
known as the biosphere. The biosphere is all parts of Earth
where life exists on land, in water, or in the air.
Within the biosphere are many different kinds of environ-
ments. Beaches, forests, glaciers, deserts, and rivers are
environments. Every environment on Earth includes both
the living things found there and the physical, or nonliving,
environment in which living things exist. Think about the
living things in your own environment. No matter where you
live, organisms surround you. You, the bacteria on your skin,
your pet, the fleas on your pet, the spider in a corner, and the
plants growing outside are organisms in your environment.
HYDROSPHERE
LITHOSPHERE
ATMOSPHERE
The regions that form Earth’s biosphere include the atmosphere
(air), hydrosphere (water), and lithosphere (land).


Principles of Ecology.
You have interactions with the bacteria, your pet, its fleas,
the spider, and the plants, but these interactions are not the
only ones in your environment. There also are nonliving things
that influence the organisms in every environment.
Nonliving Things in the Environment
Let’s go back to that Florida river you imagined before and
think of nonliving things. You probably know that the water in
the river is nonliving, but what about the wind? The sunlight?
Rocks in the river? The soil that supports the plants growing at
the river’s edge? These are all nonliving things that interact
with the living organisms in the river environment.
In your environment, the weather affects you and your
pets. The soap you use when you shower affects the bacteria
on your skin. Sunlight, temperature, rainfall, and minerals in
the soil affect the plants outside. The important interactions
between nonliving and living things determine which living
things can share an environment with which nonliving things.
Let’s look at four nonliving factors to find out how they
affect the living things in an environment.
Water. Life on Earth would be impossible without water.
The bodies of most organisms are 50 to 95 percent water.
Water is necessary for many life processes, including
respiration, photosynthesis, and digestion.
Water covers more than 70 percent of Earth’s surface.
But about 97 percent of the water on Earth is salt water
contained in oceans. That means only about 3 percent is
freshwater. Most of the freshwater is not available to living
things, because it is frozen in the ice caps or glaciers. In fact,
only a tiny fraction of Earth’s water is freshwater that is available
to organisms. This freshwater is in rivers, ponds, lakes, streams,
underground water supplies (aquifers), or water vapor.
Soil. Soil is formed by the physical and chemical breakdown
of rocks and by the actions of living things. The breakdown
of rock into soil releases minerals that organisms need for
their life processes. These minerals return to the soil when
organisms die and decay. Decayed material that once was
living is called organic matter. The more organic matter in
soil, the more fertile it is.
20 ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE


ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE 21
.Principles of Ecology
Soil determines the type of plant life that can grow in cer-
tain environments. Therefore, soil has an effect upon the other
organisms that can live there, too. Among the factors that deter-
mine which organisms can live in a particular soil environment
are the mineral and organic matter content, air content, and
soil texture.
In photosynthesis,
green plants,
algae, and some
other organisms
capture the
energy of sunlight
and change it into
a form of energy
that they can use
or store. Most
of the energy
that powers
life in Earth’s
biosphere is made
available through
the process of
photosynthesis.
TOTAL WATER ON EARTH
SALT WATER
(OCEANS)
97.2
PERCENT FRESHWATER (LAKES,
RIVERS, STREAMS)
0.022 PERCENT
ICE CAPS AND GLACIERS
2.38 PERCENT
GROUNDWATER
0.397 PERCENT
ATMOSPHERIC
WATER VAPOR
0.001 PERCENT
100 PERCENT
26 GALLONS
3 PERCENT
0.8 GALLONS
0.003 PERCENT
1⁄2 TEASPOON
How much of Earth’s freshwater is available for organisms? If you
imagine that Earth has a total of 26 gallons of water, less than
one gallon of that would be freshwater, and only half a teaspoon
would be readily available to living things.


22 ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE
Principles of Ecology.
Factors such as
rainfall, sunlight,
temperature,
the nearness of
large bodies of
water (oceans),
and elevation
determine the
climate (the
general weather
pattern) in
an area.
Sunlight. Nearly all living things depend upon the sun for
energy, either directly or indirectly. Plants, algae, and some
other organisms “trap” sunlight and capture its energy in the
process of photosynthesis. Plants use this energy to power their
life processes, or they store it. When a snail eats a plant, for
example, the snail uses the stored energy in the plant to carry
out life processes such as breathing and moving. When a rac-
coon eats the snail, the energy is passed along. Green plants,
algae, and other photosynthetic organisms must live where
there is sunlight. In aquatic environments, photosynthetic
organisms can live only in the top layer of the water, where
sunlight can reach the organisms.
Temperature. In general, the temperature of an environment
depends on the amount of sunlight it gets. Air is heated more
at the equator than at the poles. This is why tropical areas near
the equator are hot, the polar regions are cold, and the regions
in between have moderate temperatures. Temperatures also
are affected by Earth’s rotation, by winds and ocean currents
created by that rotation, by the tilt of Earth on its axis (see
the illustration), and by elevation. As you hike up a mountain,
the air temperature drops. That is why it is possible to have
a snowball fight on top of Mount Baldy at Philmont Scout Ranch
in New Mexico in July!
Earth’s orbit
SPRING
SUMMER
WINTER
AUTUMN
SUN
S
U
N
S
U
N
S
U
N
S
U
N
N N N N
S S S S
S
N
S
N
S
N S
N


ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE 23
.Principles of Ecology
Interactions Among Living Things
Think again of the organisms living in a Florida river. There are
several different species of turtles living there. A species is a
group of organisms that has characteristics in common and can
breed to produce offspring. For example, red-bellied turtles can
mate with other red-bellied turtles to produce baby red-bellied
turtles. In the river, there are at least three species of turtles—
red-bellied turtles, cooters, and common snapping turtles. All
the individual red-bellied turtles living in the river make up
a population of red-bellied turtles. All the cooters make up a
population of cooters, and all the snapping turtles make up
a population of snapping turtles. You can see that the river
environment contains many different populations of organisms.
Populations of organisms, of course, do not live alone in
the environment. Most interact with other populations in a
given area. The red-bellied turtles interact with the eelgrass
(by eating it). The eelgrass provides hiding places for young
fish and tadpoles. The great blue herons eat the bullfrogs.
Populations are constantly changing in size, density, and
age as they respond to changes in their environment. If the
herons eat all of the adult bullfrogs in the river, for example,
the population of bullfrogs will include only tadpoles and eggs.
A pond ecosystem


24 ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE
Principles of Ecology.
Groups of populations that interact with one another
in a given area form a community. All the populations in a
community depend upon one another for needs such as food
and shelter. The populations of organisms that live together
and interact with one another—such as herons, alligators,
bullfrogs, insects, and turtles—form the Florida river’s living
community. The river, the soil along the bank, the rocks in
the river, and the sun shining on the river are some of the
nonliving factors in the environment.
The living community of the river, and the nonliving
factors that affect it, form relationships that together make
up an ecosystem. Ecosystems, such as a river, pond, forest,
or desert, may be treated as separate parts of the environment.
Relationships Within Ecosystems
Within an ecosystem such as a Florida river, the actions of
every species affect other species, populations, and communi-
ties. A rat snake feeds on small rodents, keeping the rodent
population small enough that they do not eat all the plant seeds
available. An alligator stirs up bottom mud, releasing worms
and organic matter that other organisms use for food. Both rat
snakes and alligators help maintain their ecosystems.
The living community in a Florida river includes many populations
that live together and interact with one another. The river, the
soil along its bank, and the sun shining on the water are some
nonliving factors in the environment.


ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE 25
.Principles of Ecology
Niches and Habitats
A niche is the role of a species in its community. The niche
of fungi such as mushrooms, for example, is not simply to get
nutrients (food) from dead or dying trees but also to release
those nutrients back into the environment in a form that other
organisms can use.
Besides having a role within a community, organisms
occupy space. For instance, you live in a house, an apartment,
or some other type of shelter. In a river ecosystem, great blue
herons roost high in trees along riverbanks. Common snapping
turtles burrow into the mud at the bottom of a river. The place
in which an organism lives is its habitat. An organism’s habitat
provides the organism with nourishment (food and water),
shelter, protection from enemies, and the space needed for
that organism to survive.
Within any habitat, the food, shelter, and other resources
are divided into separate niches. For example, a Florida river is
a habitat for both red-bellied turtles and bullfrogs. Adult turtles
eat only water plants. Bullfrogs eat insects, snails, fish, and
frogs. Because these two species eat different foods, they
occupy different niches within the same habitat.


26 ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE
Principles of Ecology.
Feeding Relationships
Many of the relationships within a community are feeding rela-
tionships. That is because animals must eat to get the energy
they need for life. Almost all the energy on Earth begins with
the sun. Organisms such as green plants and algae trap the
sun’s energy during the process of photosynthesis. These organ-
isms are called producers. All other organisms depend upon
producers for energy.
Some organisms get the energy they need by eating plants
and other producers. Mice and rats, for example, get their ener-
gy by eating plant seeds. Other living things get energy by eat-
ing organisms that eat plants. Rat snakes, for example, eat the
mice and rats that eat plant seeds. Organisms such as mice,
rats, and rat snakes are called consumers.
Organisms that break down dead plant and animal matter
and absorb energy and nutrients from them are called decom-
posers. Bacteria, earthworms, and most fungi are decomposers.
When they break down the bodies of dead organisms, they use
some of the energy and nutrients for their own life processes
but also return energy and nutrients to the soil as organic matter.
Producer, consumer, and decomposer are terms ecologists
use for different niches within an ecosystem. These roles are
important for an ecosystem to function. Ecologists further divide
these niches into feeding relationships. You probably are already
familiar with a feeding relationship known as the predator-prey
relationship. Rat snakes, herons, alligators, and frogs all are


ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE 27
.Principles of Ecology
predators that eat prey. Other feeding relationships include
parasite-host relationships, such as a mosquito (the parasite)
feeding upon your blood (you are the host).
There are many other types of relationships within and
between ecosystems. Sometimes, organisms of different species
live together but do not feed upon each other. This is called
symbiosis, which means “living together.” Clown fish, for
example, live among the stinging tentacles of sea anemones.
These two animals have a symbiotic relationship. Scientists
believe a clown fish develops immunity to the sting of a
particular sea anemone. Yet predator fish are not immune,
so the clown fish is protected from predators when it swims
between the stinging tentacles of the sea anemone. The sea
anemone benefits because the orange-striped clown fish,
which is very noticeable and apparently safe swimming
among the poisonous tentacles, lures in other species of fish.
The sea anemone stings and eats the unsuspecting fish that
come too close.
The sea anemone and clown fish have a symbiotic relationship—
they are partners, helping each other survive.
Producer,
Consumer, or
Decomposer?
Which of these
organisms are
producers?
Which are
consumers?
Which are
decomposers?
Why?


28 ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE
Principles of Ecology.
Cycling of Matter Through Ecosystems
Every living and nonliving thing is made of matter. Matter is
the physical material that moves through an ecosystem and is
recycled in an ecosystem.
The Water Cycle
Energy from sunlight is constantly renewed or replenished in an
ecosystem. Matter is not replenished. All of the physical mate-
rial in your body and in the bodies of all organisms is the same
matter that has been on Earth since life began. Let’s see how
these physical materials are recycled naturally in ecosystems.
Water circulates through the environment in a process
known as the water cycle. Heat from the sun evaporates water
from oceans, lakes, and streams that forms clouds of water
vapor in the atmosphere. Eventually, the vapor condenses
and falls as rain, snow, sleet or hail—called precipitation.
Of all the natural resources necessary to the existence
and comfort of all living things on Earth, water is the
arguably the most important.


ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE 29
.Principles of Ecology
Some precipitation percolates into the soil where plant
roots can absorb it. Some of the water seeps down through
the soil and finds its way into aquifers (underground layers
of porous rock that serve as natural storage areas for
groundwater). Some rainwater finds its way into surface
water such as streams and lakes. Surface water eventually
evaporates, enters the atmosphere, condenses, and falls
again as precipitation. Water is not used up; it is just reused
over and over.
Living organisms also play a role in the water cycle.
Plants absorb water from the soil through their roots and
release water vapor into the air through a process called
transpiration. Animals drink water directly from lakes and
streams or get it from the foods they eat. Animals lose water
through excretion. Both plants and animals also lose water to
the atmosphere through respiration. When organisms die, their
bodies release water to the environment as they decompose.
PRECIPITATION (RAIN)
CLOUD
FORMATION
TRANSPIRATION
EVAPORATION
SURFACE RUNOFF
GROUNDWATER
PERCOLATION (SOAK-IN)
S T R E A M T O O C E A N
The water cycle


30 ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE
Principles of Ecology.
The Oxygen-Carbon Cycle
All living things need carbon. Plants use carbon dioxide
and water in the process of photosynthesis to make a type of
sugar that living things use for energy. Consumers get carbon
when they eat the producers and then use the carbon in their
life processes. By breathing, animals release carbon dioxide
into the atmosphere. Decomposers release carbon as they
break down the bodies of dead organisms. The cycle begins
anew as producers use the carbon from the air to make food.
Organisms do not always decay right away. They may fall
into swampy or boggy areas with little oxygen. If decay happens
without oxygen, eventually carbon may be bound into a fossil
fuel—such as coal, oil, or natural gas. Scientists believe that tiny
plants and animals that died thousands of years ago are what
formed the fossil fuels we use today. The burning of fossil fuels
returns carbon to the atmosphere in large amounts.
SUN
ENERGY
PLANT
GROWTH
SOIL
NUTRIENTS
DECAYING
MATTER
FOOD FROM
ANIMALS
AND OTHER
PRODUCTS
OXYGEN
FOOD FROM
PLANTS
ANIMAL
FOODC A R B O N D I O X I D E
C
A
R
B
O
N
D
I
O
X
I
D
E
The oxygen-carbon cycle
P L A N T
F
O
O
D
Carbon, like other
matter, must be
recycled through
the biosphere for
use by organisms.


ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE 31
.Principles of Ecology
The Nitrogen Cycle
Air is nearly 78 percent nitrogen. All living things need nitro-
gen, but most cannot use nitrogen in the air. Organisms need
nitrogen in a form called nitrates, in which nitrogen is bonded
to oxygen and another element. Nitrogen in the air is changed
into nitrates by lightning and by certain soil bacteria or plants.
Plants then take up the nitrates from the soil and pass them
along to consumers.
Some environments may have so little moisture or
bacteria that they require an outside influence, such
as a fire, to begin the decomposition process.
When organisms die and decompose, they release nitrogen into the atmosphere,
soil, and water, and the cycle begins again.
The nitrogen cycle


32 ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE
Human Impact on the Biosphere.
Human Impact on
the Biosphere
Think about the things you do every morning to get ready for
school. You wake up as the sun filters through the window.
You take a shower and put on your clothes.
Do you realize that you use natural resources every morn-
ing? The sun’s energy is a natural resource. The water for your
shower is also a natural resource, as is the soil that grew the
cotton used to make your clothes.
What Are Natural Resources?
Natural resources are all of the living and nonliving factors in the
biosphere, including nutrients, minerals, soil, water, organisms,
and other resources made by natural processes on Earth. They
are the materials that you and all living things use every day.
Some natural resources can be used over and over. Such
resources are known as renewable resources. Natural processes
replenish renewable resources. Renewable resources include
fresh water, fresh air, soil fertility, forests, and elements such as
carbon and nitrogen. Nonrenewable resources exist in limited
amounts and are not replaced through natural processes. They
include petroleum, coal, natural gas, copper, aluminum, and
the products made from these resources.


ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE 33
.Human Impact on the Biosphere
Renewable or Nonrenewable?
Here are some items made from natural resources. Can you identify which
of these are made from renewable resources and which are made from
nonrenewable resources?
Some resources are replaced so slowly by natural
processes that they can be thought of as nonrenewable.
Topsoil (the most fertile layer of soil) is an example of a
resource that is renewable by natural processes, such as
weathering, but topsoil formation takes so long that we
think of topsoil as nonrenewable. It may take 500 to 1,000
years for one inch of topsoil to form.
Problems With Resource Use
All organisms produce waste products. During photosynthesis,
plants take in carbon dioxide and give off oxygen as a waste
product. You breathe in oxygen and breathe out carbon dioxide
as a waste product. When you eat a hardboiled egg or an orange,
the eggshell and the orange peel are waste. Decomposers in the
soil can break down eggshells and orange peels into the nutri-
ents plants need. Orange peels, eggshells, oxygen, and carbon
dioxide all are waste products, but they can be recycled in the
biosphere by natural processes.
What happens when waste products are produced too
quickly or in amounts too great to be recycled naturally? When
waste products build up faster than they can be broken down,
they become pollutants.


34 ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE
Human Impact on the Biosphere.
Air and Air Pollution
When you breathe, you exchange gases with the air. Animals,
including humans, take in oxygen and breathe out carbon dioxide.
Air
The two most abundant gases in Earth’s atmosphere are nitrogen
and oxygen. Nitrogen makes up about 78 percent and oxygen
another 21 percent. The remaining 1 percent consists of trace
amounts of other gases, including carbon dioxide at 0.036
percent. Air also holds water vapor. Most of Earth’s air is
in the inner layer of the atmosphere, called the troposphere.
Above the troposphere is the stratosphere.
Sea
Level
10
20
30
(48 km)
(32 km)
(16 km)
50
(80 km)
120
(200 km)
The layers of the atmosphere include the troposphere, stratosphere, mesosphere,
and thermosphere. Beyond the thermosphere is open space. The ozone layer is in
the stratosphere.
ALTITUDE (IN MILES)
MOUNT EVEREST
AIR TRAFFIC
Thermosphere —
ALSO CALLED IONOSPHERE;
THE AURORA BOREALIS,
OR NORTHERN LIGHTS,
HAPPEN HERE.
Mesosphere — VERY COLD,
-173 DEGREES
FAHRENHEIT.
Stratosphere —
THIS LAYER CONTAINS
THE OZONE LAYER;
WEATHER BALLOONS
REACH THIS LAYER.
Troposphere —
THIS LAYER CONTAINS
80 PERCENT OF THE
ATMOSPHERE’S MASS;
IT CONTAINS DUST, WATER
VAPOR, AND CLOUDS.


ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE 35
.Human Impact on the Biosphere
The Ozone Layer
A gas called ozone forms in the stratosphere when oxygen
interacts with lightning and ultraviolet radiation from the sun.
Ozone is a form of oxygen that consists of three oxygen
molecules bonded together; the oxygen we breathe consists of
two molecules bonded together. Ozone is important because it
prevents harmful ultraviolet radiation from reaching Earth’s
surface. Ultraviolet radiation harms humans and other animals
by damaging the skin, eyes, and immune system. Excessive
ultraviolet radiation also harms plants and aquatic organisms.
The Greenhouse Effect
Our climate is regulated by the greenhouse effect. Heat energy
from the sun passes through Earth’s atmosphere and heats
Earth’s surface. Some of this heat energy is radiated back up
into the atmosphere, where greenhouse gases such as carbon
dioxide in the troposphere absorb heat from the sun near
Earth’s surface. This heat is then reflected back to Earth.
This natural phenomenon is known as the greenhouse effect,
because the gases act like the panes of glass in a greenhouse,
trapping the sun’s warmth. Without the greenhouse effect, the
whole world would be about the temperature of the North Pole.
REFLECTED
RADIATION
ESCAPING
HEAT
ATMOSPHERE
SHORT
WAVELENGTH
RADIATION
LONG
WAVELENGTH
RADIATION
TRAPPED
BY
ATMOSPHERE
EARTH
The ozone layer
occurs between
6 and 25 miles
above Earth.
The greenhouse effect


36 ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE
Human Impact on the Biosphere.
Air Pollutants
Some pollutants enter the atmosphere naturally. Volcanic
eruptions, dust storms, and forest fires produce natural
pollutants. For example, when Mount Pinatubo in the
Philippines erupted, the ashes reduced the amount of
sunlight that could pass through the atmosphere and
slightly reduced Earth’s average temperature for three years.
Human activities also cause air pollution. Most air pollution
created by humans comes from burning fossil fuels for energy.
For example, the smoke that comes from the exhaust pipe of
a car or bus contains soot, ash, carbon monoxide, arsenic,
sulfur, and nitrogen oxides as gases and particulates—tiny, solid
particles of dust, ash, soot, or other visible pollutants in the air.
Particulates interact with nitrogen oxides and other chemicals in
the air to form a dangerous type of air pollution called smog
(from “smoke” and “fog”). In cities with heavy traffic, the gases
released by cars and trucks produce smog. Smog is especially
dangerous for people with respiratory problems.
When studying sources of air pollution, such as the smoke
from a factory, environmental scientists are concerned not only
about the area immediately surrounding the factory, but also
with a much larger area known as an airshed. An airshed is
an area that, due to geography, weather patterns, and climate,
shares the same air. Air pollutants travel. For example, a
chemical you spray in your garden may be transported on air
currents throughout the airshed around your house. In addition,
how a pollutant is
distributed through an
airshed depends on the
type of pollutant. For
example, the way
pollutants in car exhaust
are distributed will be
different from the way
the pollutants from a
forest fire are distributed.
Scientists use computer
models to try to deter-
mine how various
pollutants affect airsheds.


ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE 37
.Human Impact on the Biosphere
Acid Rain
Acidity is a property measured on a scale called the pH scale.
The scale has a range of 0 to 14, with 7 being neutral. Pure
water has a pH of 7. If a substance has a pH below 7, it is an
acid. Rain is naturally slightly acidic, with a pH of about 5.6,
because carbon dioxide in the atmosphere reacts with water
vapor to become carbonic acid.
Sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxides are the primary causes
of acid rain. When vehicles and power plants that burn fossil
fuels emit sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxides into the air, these
gases interact with water vapor to form sulfuric and nitric acids.
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14
ACID NEUTRAL BASE
BATTERY
ACID
LEMON
JUICE
TOMATOES MILK PURE
WATER
SOAP
SOLUTIONS
HAIR
REMOVER
OVEN
CLEANER
The pH of some common substances is shown on this scale.
Acid rain can deplete the soil of the nutrients that plants need
to grow. When acid rain falls, it filters down through the soil and
dissolves soil nutrients and other materials, moving them down
to layers out of reach of plant roots.
SULFURIC ACID
NITRIC ACID
S
U
L
F
U
R
D
I
O
X
I
D
E
N
I
T
R
O
G
E
N
O
X
I
D
E
A
C I D
P
A
R
T
I C
L
E
S
A
C
I
D
S
N
O
W
ACIDRAIN
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14


38 ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE
Human Impact on the Biosphere.
These acids then mix with rain and fall to Earth’s surface as
acid rain. According to the U.S. Geological Survey, acid rain is
rain (or any other type of precipitation) with a pH lower than 5.
Plants may die from acid rain or be weakened so that
they are more easily harmed by other kinds of stresses in the
environment, such as cold temperatures, insect damage, or
droughts. Acid rain damages aquatic ecosystems by changing
the pH of the water. Many aquatic organisms may die when
acid rain falls into lakes and ponds.
Acid rain is a worldwide problem because the gases that
make it may be produced in one state or country and be blown
to another state or country by winds. Acid rain that falls in
southeastern Canada and the northeastern United States, for
instance, may begin with pollutants emitted by coal-burning
power plants as far south as Tennessee.
Climate Change
Earth’s temperature is affected by various factors. We add
heat to the air and water through thermal pollution. Increased
particulates in the air reduce the amount of heat from the sun
that can reach us, and increased greenhouse gases trap more
heat on Earth. As described earlier in this pamphlet, warming
occurs when light from the sun hits Earth’s surface, warming it.
The warmth radiating back toward space is absorbed and held


ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE 39
.Human Impact on the Biosphere
by greenhouse gases, which act as a blanket over Earth,
warming its atmosphere. Since the mid-20th century, most
scientists agree that human activities have released more and
more greenhouse gases—particularly carbon dioxide, methane,
and nitrous oxide—into the atmosphere.
• Carbon dioxide is released during the burning of fossil
fuels—coal, natural gas, gasoline and diesel fuel. Forest fires
make a very small contribution to carbon dioxide.
• Methane occurs naturally as a component of natural gas.
It also is produced as bacteria decompose organic waste in the
absence of oxygen. This gas traps more than 20 times as much
heat as does carbon dioxide. Landfills, which contain large
amounts of organic waste, are a major source of methane.
Livestock such as cattle also produce methane during their
digestive processes. The breakdown of animal manure from
cattle, hogs, and poultry is another source of methane.
• Nitrous oxide is a pollutant that forms during forest fires,
when coal is burned, and when nitrogen fertilizers break
down in soil. Nitrous oxide traps about 230 times as much
heat as does carbon dioxide.
• Chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) were once used as propellants in
spray cans and as coolants in refrigerators and air conditioners.
CFCs trap thousands of times more heat than does carbon
dioxide. Most uses of CFCs are now banned. However, since
it takes 10 to 20 years for CFCs to reach the stratosphere and,
once there, they may persist for decades, CFCs will continue
to affect the environment for some time.
All these greenhouse gases have increased in the atmosphere
due to human activities. Scientists who study global climate trends
have records that show Earth’s average temperature has risen 1.8
degrees Fahrenheit in the past 100 years. We are on track for at
least a +1.5 °C (2.7 °F) average warming, even if we stop fossil
fuel and other human caused greenhouse gas emissions now. Most
scientists agree that global warming is occurring and the
documented effects of this are as follows:
• Heat waves. Higher temperatures create higher temperature
events that last longer than in the past.
• Heavy precipitation. Higher temperatures allow the
atmosphere to absorb more water, leading to greater amounts
of precipitation.


40 ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE
Human Impact on the Biosphere.
• Sea-level rise. High temperatures warm the ice in arctic and
Antarctic regions, raising seal levels.
• Threats to plants, habitats and animals. Rapidly changing
temperatures do not allow plants and animals to adapt quickly
enough, thereby losing habitat and threatening their existence.
• Ocean acidification. Increased carbon dioxide in the atmosphere
increases the acidity of the oceans, making shell forming more
difficult which in turn disrupts the ocean food chain.
• Drought. Increased temperatures cause more evaporation
from land areas and water bodies along with greater
transpiration from plants.
• Wildfires. Higher temperatures and drought create more
favorable conditions for more extreme wildfires and a longer
wildfire season.
CFCs and the Ozone Layer
Many scientists agree that CFCs also destroy ozone in the stratosphere,
thus thinning the ozone layer and allowing additional harmful ultraviolet
radiation to reach Earth. Increased amounts of ultraviolet radiation can
damage or kill plant and animal cells. All organisms on Earth are at risk
from the thinning of the ozone layer.
The amounts of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere have shown a
general upward trend from the 1960s to the present.
PARTS PER MILLION
370
360
350
340
1957 1970 1980 2000


.Human Impact on the Biosphere
It is very important that all Scouts understand how our
present stewardship of the planet is affected by our need for
energy and how we must continue to invest in renewable sources
of energy such as solar, wind and others described later in this
pamphlet. Meanwhile, new technologies must be developed to
lessen our reliance on fossil fuels.
Solutions to Air Pollution
The Clean Air Act of 1970 created federal air pollution regulations
that each state must enforce. Since this enactment, the United States
has significantly lowered the levels of six major air pollutants
including sulfur dioxides, nitrogen oxides, and particulates.
There are several ways that the nitrogen oxides, sulfur
dioxides, and particulates that power plants and industries
release into the air have been lowered. Some plants burn coal
that has a lower sulfur content. Others remove the sulfur from
coal or convert coal to a liquid or gas before it is burned. A third
way to reduce greenhouse gas emissions is to use alternative
sources of power, such as wind, water, or solar energy.
An added benefit of using alternative energy sources is that
they can produce electricity without producing thermal pollution.
When electricity is produced at either a fossil fuel– or nuclear-
powered power plant, more than two-thirds of the energy in the
source material is released as heat and not converted into
electricity. This is a major source of thermal pollution in the world
today. In addition, much study has gone into designing equipment
such as filters, separators, and scrubbers that can be used inside
smokestacks and exhaust systems to remove particulates.
Because cars and trucks produce high levels of nitrogen oxides,
laws restrict the amount of air
pollutants that vehicles may emit.
A device known as a catalytic
converter converts pollutants
created from the burning of
gasoline into safer substances.
States with smog problems require
that cars undergo annual
inspections to test emissions and
fuel efficiency. Today, 99 percent
of cars in the United States burn
only unleaded gasoline, which has
significantly reduced the amount
of toxic lead in the air.
DIRTY WATER
DIRTY GAS
CLEAN
WATER
WET GAS
CLEANED
GAS
A wet scrubber removes hazardous particulates
and sulfur dioxide gas from power plant emissions.


42 ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE
Human Impact on the Biosphere.
A growing number of people are buying hybrid vehicles.
Hybrid vehicles use two different sources to produce energy.
Currently, most hybrid vehicles use a small gasoline-powered
engine and an electric motor with a special battery. Hybrid cars
get significantly better mileage than most conventional gasoline-
only vehicles, so they help conserve fuel resources. In addition,
they emit only a fraction of the smog-producing pollutants that
conventional vehicles emit.
Some auto manufacturers are developing zero-emission
vehicles—vehicles that do not produce any air pollution.
Vehicles powered by a fuel cell operate on electricity produced
through a chemical reaction. The most common type of fuel
cell relies on a chemical reaction between hydrogen and oxy-
gen. The only by-products of the reaction are heat and water.
An easy way to reduce air pollution from vehicles is to not
use them as much. You can practice pollution prevention by
walking, biking, or carpooling.
Trip Chaining
Remember when you trip chain, you can help save the air in addition
to time. Chances are, you and your family members already combine
errands, which helps cut down on traffic congestion and saves gasoline.
If you can, try cycling or using public transportation whenever possible.
How much mileage would you save by going from A ➔ B ➔ C ➔ D ➔ E ➔ F ➔ A
rather than from A ➔ B ➔ A ➔ C ➔ A ➔ D ➔ A ➔ E ➔ A ➔ F ➔ A?
3 MILES 1 MILE
1.75 MILES
2 MILES
2.5 MILES
1.5 MILES
1 MILE
OFFICE
SUPPLY
STORE
B
GROCERY
STORE
F
YOUR
HOME
A
SISTER’S
SCHOOL
D
LIBRARY
C
FRIEND’S
HOUSE
E
2 MILES
1.25 MILES


ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE 43
.Human Impact on the Biosphere
Reducing the amount of fossil fuels we burn can have
wide-ranging positive effects on the environment including
cleaner air and water. It may also help reduce acid rain and
slow global warming. Scientists suggest that using less fossil
fuel, changing to renewable and alternative energy sources,
protecting forests and replanting harvested trees, and slowing
human population growth will all benefit the environment in
the long run.
Water and Water Pollution
Pollution may enter a body of water directly or indirectly as
runoff from a point anywhere in a body of water’s watershed.
A watershed is the region draining into a river, river system,
or other body of water. Small watersheds make up larger ones.
For example, the Mississippi River drains a watershed of about
1,243,000 square miles. Precipitation that falls at any point within
a body of water’s watershed will eventually drain into that body
of water. Many kinds of pollutants can diminish water quality,
including toxic metals, industrial waste, agricultural chemicals,
household products, petroleum products, and heat.
Wind energy, the fastest growing energy source, can reduce the
need for power plants that burn fossil fuels.


44 ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE
Human Impact on the Biosphere.
Fertilizers
Chemicals used to fertilize lawns and crops may be carried
by rainwater into lakes, streams, and other bodies of water.
Pollutants such as fertilizers and pesticides that enter our water
system from runoff are called nonpoint source pollution because
the sources of the pollution cannot be traced to a single
identifiable point. The phosphates in fertilizers are plant
nutrients that crops need, but if they get into ponds and lakes,
they cause overgrowths, or “blooms,” of algae. The algae can
cover the water surface, blocking life-supporting sunlight and
killing some forms of pond life. When the algae die and decay,
the decay process takes oxygen from the water, which in turn
may kill fish and other organisms.
Pesticides
Chemicals that farmers, homeowners, and others use to control
pests, such as insects, are called pesticides. Some pesticides
kill only particular species, but others are toxic to many living
things. Many of these toxic chemicals end up in the air, surface
water, and groundwater. Pesticides in rainwater runoff kill
millions of fish each year. Traces of pesticides can be found
in nearly all of the freshwater fish in the United States.
DDT in the Food Chain
A pesticide called DDT was widely used in the 1950s and 1960s to kill
mosquitoes and insects that harmed crops. But DDT also killed many
beneficial insects and washed into bodies of water, where it was absorbed
by tiny water organisms. Small invertebrates that fed on the contaminated
organisms were affected next. Fish ate the contaminated invertebrates,
and the fish were in turn eaten by birds. In this way, the DDT moved its
way up the food chain. At each level, the pesticide became more
concentrated as a result of a phenomenon known as biomagnification.
DDT killed many insects, invertebrates, fish, and songbirds. The buildup
of the pesticide in the bodies of larger birds, such as brown pelicans,
bald eagles, and peregrine falcons, caused their eggs to develop thin,
fragile shells. These thin-shelled eggs tended to break in the nest before
the young were hatched, causing a rapid and drastic decline in the
populations of these species. DDT’s effect on birds received wide public
attention when Rachel Carson published her book Silent Spring (1962),
which helped rally public support for the ban of most uses of DDT.


ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE 45
.Human Impact on the Biosphere
Toxic Metals and Industrial Pollutants
Mercury, lead, and other toxic metals that are mined or used in
industry have contaminated bodies of water. These toxic metals as
well as PCBs (synthetic chlorine compounds once used in paints,
adhesives, lubricants, and electrical equipment) are also examples
of waterborne pollutants that become more concentrated as they
move up the food chain. Many states have issued health warnings
because of the toxic metal content of native fish.
Household Products
Some chemicals used in household products also cause water
pollution. When you clean the bathtub, for instance, the
cleaning solution goes down the drain. What happens to the
water then? If you live in a city or suburban area, that
wastewater is piped to a water-treatment plant, where it is
filtered and treated so that the pollutants can be removed and
the water reused. In rural areas, wastewater may be piped into
a septic tank. Eventually, water leaves the septic tank and filters
down into the soil and back into the groundwater. When this
wastewater contains more toxic chemicals than the soil can
absorb, the chemicals also enter the groundwater.
SEPTIC TANK
HOUSEHOLD WASTEWATER
PERFORATED
PIPE
DISTRIBUTION
BOX
(OPTIONAL)
DRAIN
FIELD
VENT PIPE
GRAVEL OR
CRUSHED
STONE
NONPERFORATED PIPE
MANHOLE (FOR
CLEANOUT)
Household
septic system
Household sewage may be disposed of through a septic tank and leach field. Water
and wastes spread over the leach field, where the soil filters out some chemicals
and decomposers break down organic matter.
Hazardous
household
products include
pesticides, paints,
solvents, drain
cleaners, oil,
gasoline, and
car batteries.


46 ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE
Human Impact on the Biosphere.
Petroleum Products
Petroleum (oil), gasoline, kerosene, and other petroleum prod-
ucts are a major source of water pollution. You probably have
heard about oil spills at sea. Oil can devastate ocean ecosys-
tems. It kills some organisms immediately. Others die more
slowly as oil coats their feathers, fur, or skin. Some oil sinks
to the ocean floor, where it kills bottom-living creatures. Even
with expensive cleanup efforts, it takes three to 10 years for
marine life to recover from the effects of an oil spill.
Thermal Pollution
Thermal water pollution occurs when water is taken from a
river to cool a power plant. If the heated water is released back
into the river, it raises the river’s temperature. Thermal
pollution of the water harms many aquatic organisms. It may
hurt them directly or lower the amount of dissolved oxygen in
water and make organisms more prone to the effects of
damaging chemicals and attacks by parasites or disease.
Solutions to Water Pollution
Suppose you are out playing basketball. You get thirsty and
run inside to get a glass of water from the kitchen tap. Where
does that tap water come from? In the United States, most
communities get their water supply from rivers and lakes or
from underground aquifers. Before the water gets to you, it
must undergo a treatment process to make sure it meets the
standards for safe, clean drinking water that are set by the
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). Because water is so
important to all life, we must protect water resources and
prevent and clean up water pollution whenever possible.
An oil spill or
the emissions
from a factory
are considered
point source
pollution because
the source of the
pollution can
be identified.


ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE 47
.Human Impact on the Biosphere
When waterfowl
fall victim to oil
spills, immediate
action is often the
only thing that
will save them.
Specially trained
and licensed
wildlife rescue
crews “shampoo”
individual birds
to remove the
oil from their
feathers. They
also give the birds
food, medical
care, and a warm
place to stay
until it is safe to
release them
back into the
wild. Such rescue
efforts, however,
can be very
labor-intensive
and costly.
Methods of Oil-Spill Cleanup
Here are some of the ways oil spills can be cleaned up.
• Bioremediation uses fertilizers to increase the
population of oil-eating microbes. This process is
very harmful to humans and animals in the first
24 hours after application. If animals cannot be
restricted from the cleanup area, bioremediation
should not be used.
• Booms are floating barriers used to contain
and absorb oil spills. Their high-maintenance
requirements can sometimes outweigh
their effectiveness.
• Burning reduces large amounts of oil to a tarry
residue. It requires favorable weather conditions and
must be done within 72 hours after the spill occurs.
Unfortunately, burning produces smoke that is
poisonous to humans and animals.
• Chemical dispersants help scatter oil into larger
volumes of water and help prevent oil from reaching
shorelines. Dispersants must be mixed with oil,
which requires good wave action.
• Hot-water washing works best on heavily oiled
beaches, but hot water “cooks” all plant and animal
life in its path, leaving beaches sterile.
• Skimmers collect oil from the water’s surface.
Under the right conditions, skimmers serve as one
of the most environmentally sound forms of oil
collection. However, like booms, skimmers are
difficult to maintain.
• Oil-absorbing products and chemicals soak up oil.
When they are removed from the area, the oil is
removed with them. These products are often used
to clean up oil on land but have also proved effective
for oil spills in water.


48 ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE
Human Impact on the Biosphere.
Reducing Water Pollution
There are many ways to reduce water pollution. Farmers can
keep fertilizer out of runoff by using only small amounts at
a time or by switching to farming practices that require less
fertilizer. They can cut their use of pesticides or switch to
biological controls. For example, they might use natural
predators, such as ladybugs, to eat insect pests.
There have been improvements in water quality in the
United States thanks to the Clean Water Act. For example, it is
against the law to discharge any toxic pollutants into surface
waters. In addition, most states have now passed laws that
require power plants and other factories to cool water before
releasing it back into rivers and streams. Even though some
sources of water pollution have been addressed, much
more can be done.
Protecting Water Resources
One way to protect water resources is through conservation.
We can conserve water by cutting the amount we use daily.
Some scientists estimate that about 60 percent of the water
people use is wasted through leaks, evaporation, and other
losses that could be prevented. For example, the average leaky
faucet can waste as much as 2,000 gallons of water a year—
that’s enough water to fill 40 bathtubs!
Industries and farms also waste water. Water used in crop
irrigation is often not used efficiently. For example, irrigating
crops in the heat of the day is wasteful because a significant
amount of water evaporates before plant roots can take it up.
To save water, everyone needs to use less water in daily
life. Installing low-flow showerheads and toilets and fixing
leaky pipes and faucets are few ways you can conserve water.
Farmers are switching to drip-irrigation systems, in which tubes
deliver water directly to plant roots. Gardeners who live in arid
climates might consider growing native plants that are adapted
to dry conditions.
Land Degradation and Pollution
If you look closely at a shovelful of soil, you will notice that there
is a lot more to it than you might have thought. Soil contains
eroded rock, organic matter, water, air, minerals, nutrients, and
organisms such as earthworms and other kinds of decomposers.
Currently,
40 percent of
the world’s people
live with serious
water shortages.


ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE 49
.Human Impact on the Biosphere
Soil
Soil has layers. The top layer, or litter layer, consists of leaves,
twigs, fungi, animal wastes, and partially decomposed organic
materials. The litter layer is thin and usually dark brown
or black.
The next layer—the most fertile—is called topsoil.
The depth and fertility of topsoil are factors that determine
what kinds of plants can grow in a particular environment.
Topsoil contains most of the roots of plants and most of the
soil’s organic matter and is the storehouse for water that
plants need to grow. Decomposers, such as mushrooms and
other fungi, in topsoil make nutrients available to plants.
Underneath the litter layer and topsoil is the subsoil.
This layer consists of broken-down rock materials including
sand, silt, clay, and gravel. This layer does not contain any
nutrients or organisms that can support plant growth. Below
the subsoil is bedrock, the unweathered rock that was broken
down to make the soil.
OAK TREE
WOOD SORREL
EARTHWORM
MOLE
LEAF LITTER
TOPSOIL
SUBSOIL
ROOT
SYSTEM
RED
EARTH
MITE SPRINGTAIL BACTERIA
FUNGUS
ACTINOMYCETES
NEMATODE
PSEUDOSCORPION
HONEY FUNGUS
MILLIPEDE
FERN
BEDROCK
Soil layers
In most soils, the layers include the litter layer, topsoil, subsoil, and bedrock.


50 ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE
Human Impact on the Biosphere.
Soil Erosion
Soil erosion is a natural process. Wind wears down mountains.
Sediments, carried in rivers, build up deltas. Wind, water, and
ice all contribute to natural soil erosion. However, the litter and
topsoil layers of soil help prevent erosion because they contain
plant roots and air spaces that absorb water. When plowing
digs up roots or logging removes trees from the soil, topsoil
becomes exposed to the natural forces of erosion. When topsoil
is lost, the soil beneath it is often less fertile and unable to
absorb water. Farming, logging, mining, construction,
overgrazing by livestock, and burning forests all destroy the soil
plant cover and speed up erosion. Today, soil is eroding faster
than it forms on about one-third of Earth’s croplands.
Land Pollution
Paper and plastic bags, aluminum cans, glass bottles, orange
peels, eggshells, old tires, old homework assignments, and
worn-out clothing are just some of the trash, or solid waste,
that people throw away every day. Garbage trucks across the
United States collect 132 million tons of solid waste every year.
Most solid wastes are dumped in sanitary landfills and
then covered with a layer of soil. Wastes such as grass clippings
and spoiled food are biodegradable, that is, they were once liv-
ing organisms, so natural processes can break them down.
Wastes such as plastics or glass bottles are nonbiodegradable—
natural processes cannot break them down. Nonbiodegradable
Signs of erosion and land
degradation include the following:
• Mud and silt on sidewalks and
driveways after a rain
• Exposed tree roots where the
soil has been washed away
• Roadside ditches filled
with sediment
• Muddy water in a stream
or river
• Caved-in stream banks


ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE 51
.Human Impact on the Biosphere
wastes may last for hundreds or thousands of years. Sometimes,
even biodegradable wastes in landfills do not decay because the
oxygen that most decomposers need to begin the decay process
does not reach the buried trash.
Currently in the United States, about 55 percent of solid
waste goes into landfills; about 30 percent is recycled;
and about 15 percent is incinerated, or burned.
Hazardous Wastes
You might think the garbage that households and businesses
throw out makes up the largest percentage of solid waste,
but more than 98 percent of solid waste actually comes from
industries such as mining, agriculture, and oil and natural gas
production. The solid waste produced by mining and many
industries can pollute the air, water, and soil. Some solid wastes
are hazardous because they contain toxic compounds or release
toxic fumes.
Sometimes, hazardous wastes are buried in metal
containers. Improperly contained, toxic substances can
corrode through the metal and seep into the soil, eventually
contaminating groundwater. Much of the groundwater in the
United States has been contaminated with agricultural or
industrial chemicals, or with oil and other petroleum products
that have seeped into the soil and then into the groundwater.
These wastes may be toxic to both animals and plants.
With funding from the federal Superfund program, the
Environmental Protection Agency is investigating and cleaning
up more than 85,000 hazardous waste sites across the country.
Each year,
American office
workers discard
about 4 million
tons of paper.
That’s enough to
build a 12-foot
wall from New
York City to
Los Angeles.
Hazardous
wastes are any
solid wastes that
contain toxic
compounds, are
unstable, catch
fire easily, or
corrode metals.


52 ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE
Human Impact on the Biosphere.
An abandoned piece of commercial or industrial land that
is contaminated (or is suspected of being contaminated) by a
hazardous substance is known as a brownfield. Abandoned
factories and gas stations are examples of brownfield sites. A
real or perceived health danger makes it more complicated to
redevelop the site for new uses. A new law, however, allows
communities and developers to reclaim brownfields by working
with the EPA to clean up the sites. The EPA determines how
much cleanup needs to be done to make the site safe for its
new use. Cleaned-up brownfields have been redeveloped for
offices and stores. Some have even been turned into parks
with bike paths and playgrounds.
Solutions to Land Degradation
and Pollution
Loss of topsoil is one of the most serious land degradation
problems today. Most of the topsoil that erodes in the United
States comes from land used to raise crops or graze cattle.
According to the Natural Resources Conservation Service of
the U.S. Department of Agriculture, more than 5 billion tons of
soil erode from pasture, rangeland, and cropland in the United
States every year. Nearly five times as much soil erodes from
cultivated cropland as from uncultivated land.
Soil Conservation
Farmers around the world have learned to use a variety of
methods to conserve soil and prevent soil erosion on their
fields. In the past, bare, newly plowed soil was often left
exposed to winds and rain for months at a time. More recent
farming practices, however, recommend that farmers leave a
plant cover on the soil at all times. In no-till farming, special
machines poke holes through the layer of organic matter left
over from the previous crop and plant new seeds into the
unplowed soil. Other kinds of sustainable farming practices
reduce the need for fertilizers and pesticides and also improve
the soil’s ability to hold water.
Farmers in very hilly or mountainous areas conserve soil
with terracing. Terracing creates level fields along the slope of
a hill, preventing soil erosion and holding water for the crops.
On more gently sloping lands, farmers conserve soil by contour
farming. They plant crops in rows that go across the sloped land
If you take used
motor oil to an oil
recycling center,
it can be cleaned
and reused, which
saves energy.
Recycled oil
can be used
to generate
electricity for
homes and
businesses.


ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE 53
.Human Impact on the Biosphere
Terracing (left) and contour strip-cropping are soil conservation practices that farmers
use to help prevent soil erosion on fields.
rather than up and down. In strip-cropping, farmers plant
different crops in strips that alternate. Sometimes they plant
crops that are grown as feed for livestock between rows of trees.
Stream banks can be protected against erosion by using
plants, rocks, or structural measures. In woodlands, planting,
thinning, pruning, and proper harvest techniques can help pro-
tect the soil and climate, maintain beauty, improve conditions
for wildlife, and maintain cover for erosion control.
Using compost to help control erosion is a new technology being
implemented in the United States.


54 ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE
Human Impact on the Biosphere.
Reduce, Reuse, Recycle
The three R’s—reduce, reuse, and recycle—can be applied to
decrease the amount of solid waste that human activities generate.
REDUCE
To reduce the amount of solid waste you throw out, simply do not
bring home those materials in the first place. Buy loose fruits and
vegetables rather than produce packaged in a plastic-wrapped foam
tray. Choose items that do not use excess packaging materials.
To reduce the amount of organic matter that you throw
away, put kitchen scraps and grass clippings into a compost
pile. Over time, the material will decompose and become a
nutrient-rich, organic fertilizer.
We all can change our habits to produce less waste just
by being mindful of the things we buy. Industries, businesses,
and government agencies have all begun to change the way
they buy supplies and dispose of wastes. Reducing waste
saves money and helps the environment.
REUSE
Every time you turn a piece of paper over to write on the back
instead of using a new piece, you are reusing a resource. If you
bring food home in plastic bags, you can reuse the bags to
carry your gym clothes. If you use a paper cup to get a drink,
you can reuse it to plant seeds for your garden. Plastic and
glass bottles and containers that held food can be washed and
reused over and over.
Industries and businesses also reuse materials. Some stores
sell drinking water in reusable plastic jugs. Many hotels and
motels offer guests the option to not have their sheets and towels
washed every day, which saves water and energy.
RECYCLE
Paper, plastics, glass, and aluminum can be
recycled—collected and used to make new
products. Newspapers can be recycled into new
newspaper. Glass can be crushed, melted, and
molded into other glass items. Aluminum can be
melted and formed into new cans. Plastics can be
broken up, melted, and reformed into new plastic
products. These recycling processes conserve our
resources and reduce waste in landfills.
About 65
percent of all
the aluminum
beverage cans
sold in the
United States
are recycled. It
takes the same
amount of energy
to make one can
from aluminum
ore as it does to
make 20 cans
from recycled
aluminum.


ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE 55
.Human Impact on the Biosphere
Because paper products are made from trees, you help reduce the number
of trees that need to be cut when you recycle paper. In the United States,
about 40 percent of all used paper is recovered and recycled. Mexico,
Thailand, Denmark, South Korea, and Taiwan all recycle at least 70 percent
of their waste paper.
The Problem With Plastics
Most plastics are made from petroleum and are nonbiodegradable. Plastic
items make up about 20 percent of all municipal solid waste. Plastics are
more difficult to recycle because there are so many different types, and they
must be separated according to type. Currently, it is cheaper to make new
plastics from petroleum than to recycle most plastics. In addition, recycling
often uses more energy than making new plastics. Therefore reusing plastic
containers or, better yet, purchasing fewer plastic items reduces the amount
of plastics in landfills more efficiently than recycling them.
Hazardous Wastes
Because of the dangers hazardous wastes pose to the
environment and the difficulties associated with their disposal,
reducing the production of hazardous wastes is the most
desirable goal. Various local, state, and federal laws regulate the
disposal of hazardous wastes.
Some hazardous wastes can be treated to remove the toxic
materials with biological controls such as bioremediation. When
bioremediation processes are used, organisms such as plants
and bacteria destroy hazardous wastes or make them harmless.
Bioremediation is sometimes used to help clean up oil spills
and to clean up streams and groundwater contaminated with
hazardous waste.


56 ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE
Human Impact on the Biosphere.
Endangered and Threatened Species
During Earth’s history, many species have become extinct, that is,
all the individuals of a given species have died, and the species
has disappeared from Earth. Scientists estimate that 99 percent of
all species that have ever lived on Earth are now extinct. Some
species, such as the giant ground sloth, died out gradually as the
environment changed and the species was unable to adapt to the
new conditions. Others, such as the Carolina parakeet, have
become extinct because of human activities.
A species that has so few individuals left that it is in danger of
extinction is called an endangered species. Some endangered species
include the giant panda of China (only 1,600 left in the wild), the
black rhinoceros of Africa (3,100 remain), and the whooping
crane of North America (fewer than 500 are left). About
500 species, both plant and animal, are endangered
in the United States.
Three species that have become extinct are (1) the giant ground
sloth, (2) the hairy mammoth, and (3) Indricotherium, the largest
land mammal that ever lived.
1 2 3
In recent years, thanks to efforts by
wildlife workers, the whooping crane
population has enjoyed some growth.


ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE 57
.Human Impact on the Biosphere
Threatened species are species that are losing members at such
a rate that they will become endangered if nothing is done to
change the situation. African elephants are an example of a
threatened species. Even though there may still be 500,000
elephants in the wild, this number is down from the 3 to 5 million
of the 1930s. If people continue to illegally hunt African elephants
for their ivory tusks, the elephants may become endangered.
The Last
Passenger Pigeon
In 1810, an ornithologist (a
scientist who studies birds)
named Alexander Wilson saw
a flock of passenger pigeons
one mile wide and 240 miles
long. He estimated that the
flock was composed of more
than 2 billion birds. Over the
next 100 years, settlers
destroyed much of the pigeons’
forest habitat when they cut down trees to make farms and home sites.
Hunters killed millions of the birds for food. The last passenger pigeon in
existence died in 1914 in a zoo in Cincinnati, Ohio.
Many species of manatee are endangered or threatened.


58 ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE
Human Impact on the Biosphere.
Causes of Extinction
Many scientists believe that the fossil record indicates that many
species have arisen, dominated land or sea, and then become
extinct. They believe that several times during Earth’s history,
there have been mass extinctions in which some catastrophe
wiped out most of the then-existing species. During one such
episode, scientists say, the dinosaurs died. Scientists believe
that an outside event, such as the impact of a huge asteroid,
caused most mass extinctions by changing Earth’s climate.
On Earth today, however, extinctions are happening at an
alarming rate as a result of human activities. Scientists estimate
50 to 200 species become extinct daily. Humans are severely
damaging some of our critical ecosystems, such as tropical rain
forests and coral reefs. Unfortunately, these two ecosystems
have the greatest biodiversity of any ecosystems on Earth.
Extinction Solutions
Laws are now in place to preserve and manage endangered
species’ natural habitat. Recovery programs also have been
developed to capture some of the individuals, help them
reproduce in captivity, and then put them back into a suitable
habitat. This approach is often used when there are only a
few individuals of an endangered species remaining. Such
programs have saved animals such as the American alligator
and the California condor.
In addition, legally protected wilderness areas that preserve
entire ecosystems have been set aside. National, state, and inter-
national parks and wildlife refuges have been established to
protect wildlife. In the United States, the National Wildlife Refuge
system includes more than 500 protected ecosystems. Most of
these refuges are wetlands that are managed to protect migratory
waterfowl, but every other organism in these ecosystems
benefits from protection as well. Even so, protected wild-
life sanctuaries make up only 6 percent of the land area
worldwide. Regulated wildlife management programs
protect species where hunting is allowed. They make sure
populations of wild animals are not overhunted.
The dodo was a flightless bird that lived only on the island
of Mauritius, near Madagascar. It was abundant there when
sailors first arrived in the 1400s. The dodo was hunted for its
meat and became extinct in 1680, less than 200 years after
sailors first saw it.


ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE 59
.Human Impact on the Biosphere
Threats to Biodiversity
The World Wildlife Fund has identified five key threats that contribute to de-
creases in biodiversity and increases in threatened and endangered species.
Habitat loss. The clearing of forests, prairies, and other wild lands for
home building, farming, and other construction forces animal species that
once lived in these places to move deeper into the remaining natural areas.
With limited habitat remaining, significant population declines occur that
threaten species’ survival.
Introduced species. Introduced species are plant or animal species that are
not native to a particular area. Introduced species compete with native spe-
cies for nutrients, water, and space and may crowd out the native species.
For example, during the 1930s farmers in the southeastern United States
planted kudzu, a vine native to Asia, to control erosion. The kudzu vines
choked out native plants and were so difficult to control they soon covered
telephone poles and abandoned buildings.
Pollution. Pollution can damage an ecosystem and harm organisms. For
example, an oil spill near a coastal area may wipe out entire populations of
plants and animals in the affected area.
Population growth. Each year more than 90 million people are born, placing
increasing strain on the natural resources that all life on Earth rely upon.
Overconsumption. Overconsumption refers to using up natural resources
faster than they can be replenished. For example, if we use forest products
such as paper faster than the forests can regrow, forest habitat that is criti-
cal for the survival of many species of plants and animals is lost.
PEREGRINE FALCON BLACK-FOOTED FERRET
Endangered species in
the United States that are
being bred in captivity and
released to the wild include
the peregrine falcon and
black-footed ferret.


60 ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE
Human Impact on the Biosphere.
Pollination: The Engine of Life on Earth
Imagine a world without vibrant flowers, luscious fruits, barren
grocery store shelves, and no honey. This could become a
reality if we don’t address the decline of pollinators, the unsung
heroes of our planet’s ecosystem. Pollination, the transfer of
pollen grains from the male part of a flower (anther) to the
female part (stigma), is essential for plant reproduction. It’s a
magical dance between plants and a diverse cast of pollinators,
ensuring the continuation of countless plant species and the
intricate web of life they support.
The Importance of Pollination
Pollination is crucial for the survival of countless plant species
and the ecosystems they support. It’s not just about our food
supply; it’s about maintaining healthy ecosystems that provide
clean air, water, and habitats for diverse wildlife.
The Power of Pollen
Pollen, a fine powder produced by flowering plants, contains
the male reproductive cells needed for fertilization. Without
successful pollination, flowers wouldn’t develop into fruits and
seeds, disrupting entire food chains. This simple act of pollen
transfer ensures that the next generation of plants thrives.
What Gets Pollinated?
• Flowering Plants: Most plants that get pollinated are
flowering plants (angiosperms). These plants attract
pollinators with bright colors, nectar, or scents.
• Gymnosperms: Some gymnosperms, like pine trees, rely
on wind pollination.
The Convention on International Trade in Endangered
Species (CITES) is an agreement that went into effect
in 1975. CITES bans commercial international trade
of endangered species and regulates trade of other
species that might become endangered. Some
28,000 species of plants and 5,000 species of animals
are protected by CITES. More than 160 countries
uphold this agreement.


ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE 61
.Human Impact on the Biosphere
• Wind-Pollinated Grains: Plants like wheat, barley, oats,
rye, and corn disperse pollen through the air.
Food Crops
• Fruits and Vegetables: Apples, blueberries, strawberries,
peppers, tomatoes, and some squashes require pollination
to develop their seeds and fleshy parts.
• Nuts and Seeds: Almonds, cashews, sunflower seeds, and
coffee beans come from pollinated flowers.
Non-Food Plants
• Fiber Crops: Cotton, used for textiles, relies on pollination
to produce fibers.
• Biofuel Crops: Canola and other plants grown for biofuels
often require pollination.
• Wildflowers and Ornamentals: Wildflowers and many
ornamental plants depend on pollination to reproduce.
• Trees: Many trees, including fruit trees, nut trees,
and timber trees, rely on pollination.
The Diverse Pollinator Brigade
Nature has assembled a remarkable team of
pollinators:
• Honeybees: Known for their
efficient pollen collection and
honey production.
• Butterflies: Their colorful
wings and long tongues
help them reach nectar deep
within flowers.
• Bumblebees: Important
pollinators, especially in colder
climates.
• Hummingbirds: These tiny birds transfer pollen while
feeding on nectar.
• Moths: Active at night, moths pollinate night-blooming
flowers.
• Bats: Essential pollinators for plants that bloom at night.


62 ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE
Human Impact on the Biosphere.
There are over 350,000 species that aid pollination,
including over 20,000 species of bees. However, human
activities and environmental changes threaten this vital
ecological process.
Pollinator Pairs
Pollinator pairs refer to the specific partnerships between
flowering plants and the creatures that help them reproduce
through pollination. There are over 350,000 pollinator species
worldwide, and each may have its own specific pollinator pairs
with various plant species. On the other hand, some pollinators
are not so choosy. For example, honeybees are generalist and
contribute to 80% of the commercially pollinated crops.
Many plants and pollinators have coevolved over long
periods, developing a mutually beneficial relationship. Plants
offer nectar, pollen, or other rewards to attract pollinators,
while the pollinators inadvertently transfer pollen between
flowers, ensuring plant reproduction.
Some pollinator pairs exhibit a high degree of specificity.
For example, a particular flower species may have a unique
shape, color, or scent that specifically attracts a particular
pollinator. The pollinator, in turn, may have a body shape
or feeding apparatus that allows it to access nectar or pollen
efficiently from that specific flower.
EXAMPLES OF POLLINATOR PAIRS:
Here are some classic examples of pollinator pairs, showcasing
the diversity of these partnerships:
• Honeybee and Apple: Honeybees are attracted to the
sweet nectar and abundant pollen of apple blossoms. As
they forage, they carry pollen grains between apple trees,
facilitating fertilization and fruit production.
• Hummingbird and Trumpet Vine: The long, trumpet-
shaped flowers of the trumpet vine are perfectly suited for
the hummingbird’s long beak. As the hummingbird sips
nectar, it brushes against pollen grains and transfers them
to other trumpet vine flowers it visits.
• Bumblebee and Clover: The sturdy bodies of bumblebees
allow them to force open the tightly packed florets of
clover plants. While feeding on nectar, they become dusted
with pollen, which they then carry to other clover plants.


ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE 63
.Human Impact on the Biosphere
Pollinator Pairs: Diverse Partnerships
Bumblebee on an apple blossom
Bat on saguaro cactus
Moth on jasmine (look closely!) Hummingbird and trumpet vine
Honeybee covered in pollen


64 ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE
Human Impact on the Biosphere.
• Moth and Night-Blooming Jasmine: Night-blooming
jasmine releases its fragrant scent at night, attracting
moths. The moth’s body is often dusted with pollen from
one jasmine flower, which it then transfers to another
jasmine flower it visits at night.
• Bat and Saguaro Cactus: The saguaro cactus has large,
white flowers that open at night and produce a strong odor
that attracts bats. As bats feed on nectar, they become
covered in pollen, which they carry to other saguaro cacti,
ensuring pollination.
IMPORTANCE OF POLLINATOR PAIRS:
These pollinator pairs highlight the vital role that different
creatures play in plant reproduction and the health of
ecosystems. Understanding these partnerships is crucial for
conservation efforts aimed at protecting both pollinators and
the plants they rely on.
Beyond Food
Pollination also impacts the production of fibers (cotton)
and biofuels. Healthy ecosystems with thriving pollinator
populations provide other benefits like improved water quality
and pest control.
Threats Facing Pollinators
Several factors contribute to the decline of honeybee
populations, a phenomenon known as colony collapse disorder:
• Parasites: Mites, such as the varroa mite, can weaken and
kill honeybees.
• Pesticides and Chemicals: Insecticides and other
chemicals harm honeybees and contaminate their food
sources.
• Malnutrition: Habitat loss or poor nutrition in pollen and
nectar can weaken bee colonies.
• Stress: Extreme weather and transportation between
pollination sites can stress honeybees.
• Loss of Forage: Habitat destruction reduces the
availability of flowering plants.


ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE 65
.Human Impact on the Biosphere
Understanding these threats is crucial for developing
conservation strategies to protect our pollination ecosystem.
Supporting Pollinators
You can support pollinators by:
• Planting Pollinator-Friendly Gardens: Choose native
flowering plants that provide nectar and pollen.
• Reducing Pesticide Use: Opt for organic gardening
practices and alternatives to chemical pesticides.
• Supporting Local Beekeepers: Buy local honey to help
beekeepers maintain healthy bee populations.
• Advocating for Pollinator Conservation: Support policies
that promote habitat protection and sustainable agriculture.
By taking these steps, we can all help support pollinators and
ensure a healthy future for our food supply and ecosystems.
The Agricultural Connection
Pollinators play a crucial role in agriculture. Over three-
quarters of the world’s leading food crops rely on animal
pollination. This includes apples, blueberries, almonds, and
coffee beans. Honeybees contribute to an estimated 80% of
commercially pollinated crops and over $20 billion to the
U.S. economy alone.


66 ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE
Human Impact on the Biosphere.
A decline in pollinator populations would lead to reduced
crop yields and food shortages, highlighting the critical
connection between healthy ecosystems, thriving pollinator
populations, and a secure food system for humanity.


ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE 67
.Human Impact on the Biosphere
Invasive Species
Threaten Global Ecosystems
Invasive species are major threats to both the numbers and
kinds of animal and plant species in the United States. These
invaders also can be a threat to human health and cost our
economy billions of dollars. They can harm rangelands, reduce
the productivity of our agricultural lands and commercial
fisheries, and clog water pipes. Climate change probably will
worsen the impact of invasive species on our native wildlife
and plant ecosystems.
What Are “Invasive” Species?
You most likely walk by or see invasive species any time you
take a hike, go to a pond or lake, or walk around your
neighborhood. An invasive species is any kind of living
organism—tree, shrub, annual or perennial plant, insect, fish,
mammal, fungus, bacteria, or even an organism’s seeds or
eggs—that is not native to an area and causes harm there. They
You might not see an invasive species like the
emerald ash borer, but the damage it causes,
like these trunk etchings, often is easy to spot.


68 ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE
Human Impact on the Biosphere.
“naturalize,” meaning they can reproduce and grow on their
own without human assistance. Because they grow and
reproduce quickly and might spread aggressively with potential
to cause harm, they are considered “invasive.”
How Invasive Species Spread
Humans spread invasive species, often unintentionally.
Sometimes it is the result of importing plants from other
countries or other parts of this country, as they might be
beautiful ornamental plants or we might like having this new
animal in our environment (such as importing non-native fish
for anglers). Other species are transported by mistake by
importing products that have the seeds, plant, or animal on or
in the product. Some invasive species are pets that have
intentionally or accidentally been released—such as Burmese
pythons, a big problem in the Florida Everglades.
Climate change also can improve the ability of certain
native species to occupy new areas due to higher temperatures
and modified precipitation patterns. For example, increased
drought can make native pine trees more susceptible to native
populations of pine beetles.
Threats to Habitat and Native Wildlife
While some introduced species do not naturalize and therefore
do not become invasive, those that do usually do so because
they have no natural predators or controls. They can reproduce
quickly and take over an area, and the native populations of
wildlife will not have time to develop defenses.
Direct threats of invasive species to native wildlife include:
preying on native species, outcompeting native species for food
or other resources, causing or carrying disease, preventing native
species from reproducing, or killing a native species’ young.
Indirect threats of invasive species include: destroying or
replacing native food sources, replacing native food-value species
with non-food-value invasive species, reducing the biodiversity of
the ecosystem (as noted earlier in this pamphlet with the
example of kudzu), or changing the conditions in an ecosystem
such as changing soil chemistry or the intensity of wildfires.
Examples of Invasive Species
• Cogongrass is an Asian plant that is now spreading
through the southeastern United States, displacing native


ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE 69
.Human Impact on the Biosphere
plants. It is a weed of 35 crops worldwide and considered
to be the worst perennial grass weed of southern and east
Asia. Millions of hectares of farmland are abandoned in
West and Central Africa each year. It negatively impacts
biodiversity, as it is an inferior forage grass.
• Feral pigs have huge appetites will eat almost anything,
and compete with native wildlife for food sources such as
acorns, other nuts, roots of longleaf pine and other trees.
They can spread diseases, such as brucellosis, to people
and livestock.
Invaders Come in All Shapes and Sizes
Cogongrass Feral pigEmerald ash borer
Water hyacinthChinese privet


70 ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE
Human Impact on the Biosphere.
• Emerald ash borer is a beetle native to Asia and was
brought into the United States near Detroit, Michigan, on
wood-packing material in the early 2000’s. It bores into all
species of ash trees and kills them by destroying the trees’
ability to transport water and nutrients.
• Chinese privet is an aggressive shrub found in the
southeastern United States, especially in bottomland areas.
Introduced as a spring ornamental because of its fragrant
flowers, it outcompetes many native shrubs and plants.
• Water hyacinth was introduced to the United States from
South America as an ornamental plant. It forms dense
mats, reducing sunlight for submerged plants and aquatic
organisms, crowding out native aquatic plants, and
clogging waterways and intake pipes.
What You Can Do To Stop the Spread
And Help Eradicate Invasive Species
You might not realize how many invasive plant and animal
species are already present in your community or camp.
Knowledge about and identification of invasive species is the
first step toward controlling them. Most states and the federal
government have produced easy-to-use guides with color
pictures and life histories of the more common species. Your
merit badge counselor can also be a good source. In many parts
of the United States, a short hike in a variety of habitats (forest,
field or pond) will reveal many easy-to-identify species.
Learning to identify them can not only be interesting and fun,
but it can also make you an expert in pointing them out to the
other members of your troop.
If you want to learn more about how they became invasive,
you can do some research and learn about their origin, life
history and how they can be eradicated. You can organize or be
part of an eradication program in your school, community, or
camp. If you do any eradication, especially in the growing
season, make sure you wear proper clothing,
are able to properly identify the invasive species
you plan to remove, and are aware of other
plants like poison ivy or poison oak that might cause a
severe skin reaction. Removing plants manually might
require you to use sharp tools that require supervision and
skills that must be reviewed before you begin the eradication.


ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE 71
.Human Impact on the Biosphere
If selective herbicides (weed killers) are used to treat the plants,
only qualified adults should apply them, and those who did the
cutting should be away from the area. Finally, be aware of bees
and snakes that might be living among the invasive plants.
Assessing Environmental Impacts
Now that you have seen how human activities affect the
biosphere, you can begin to understand how hard it is to
predict all the environmental effects of any construction
project or disruption of a natural habitat. What might seem
like a simple project—building a new house, for example—
may have many environmental impacts beyond simply
disturbing the soil on-site. What happens to the moles and
shrews that live in the soil? Or the hive of honeybees that once
perched in the felled tree? What happens to the red fox and
the great horned owl that prey upon the moles and shrews?
How will soil erosion from the site be controlled? Will the
topsoil be saved and put back after construction?
Environmental Impact Statements
When a federal agency proposes new regulations or actions
that may affect the environment, it is required by law to
prepare an environmental assessment (EA) or an environmental
impact statement (EIS). Federal, state, and local agencies and the
general public may review the proposed activity before it begins.
An EIS, which may be as long as 1,000 pages, must discuss five
environmental concerns:
• The environmental impact of the proposed action
• Any harmful environmental effects that cannot be avoided
• Alternatives to the proposed action
• Short-term use of the environment versus maintaining and
enhancing the environment’s long-term productivity
• Any permanent commitment of resources.


72 ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE
Taking Action
Now that you have completed most of the requirements for the
Environmental Science merit badge, think about what you have
learned. How are organisms and their environments connected in
your community? What are some sources of air and water
pollution in your community? What are some ways you can
prevent pollution and conserve resources at home and at school?
Think Globally, Act Locally
As a Scout, you are expected to leave your campsite cleaner
than you found it. Wouldn’t it be great if everyone on Earth felt
the same way about protecting the environment?
Sometimes it may seem that environmental problems are
too big for any one person to solve. But if each person starts
doing things that will help the environment, it can make a huge
difference. The more people become involved in preventing
pollution and conserving resources, the better it will be for
the environment.


ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE 73
.Taking Action
Ten Ways to Reduce Pollution
• Walk, bike, or
arrange to carpool
with friends to cut
down on air pollution.
• Pack your lunch in
reusable containers
instead of using foil or
plastic wrap. Carry your
lunch in a reusable
nylon bag or lunch box
instead of using a new
paper bag each day.
• Use rechargeable batteries. Recycling programs for disposable alkaline
are not widely available, so batteries end up as solid waste in landfills.
• Use environmentally friendly cleaning solutions such as baking soda
and vinegar instead of chemical cleaning products.
• Recycle used clothing and household items by having a garage sale or
taking them to resale shops.
• Volunteer to pick up trash in a park, at a beach, or along a river.
• Encourage your family to buy locally grown fruits and vegetables.
Since locally grown food does not have to travel great distances, fewer
greenhouse gases and other pollutants are emitted as the produce is
transported from field to market.
• If you live in a house with a yard, suggest that your family not use
chemical fertilizers on the lawn. Pull weeds by hand instead of using
chemical weed killers.
• Use a rake instead of a leaf blower. Gas-powered leaf blowers produce
as much air pollution as some cars.
• Keep organic matter out of landfills by making compost. Place leaves,
grass clippings, raw kitchen scraps, and other plant material in a pile or
a bin. Keep the pile moist and mix it regularly. Over a period of about
six months, the material will break down and can be used in the garden
as a replacement for chemical fertilizers.


74 ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE
Taking Action.
Ten Ways to Conserve Resources
• Turn off lights, fans,
radios, and televisions
when leaving a room—
even if you are going
to be gone only a
few minutes.
• Shut off the faucet
when you are brushing
your teeth or washing
your face.
• Reduce, reuse, and
recycle paper products,
glass, aluminum, steel,
and plastic items.
• Save water and energy by running the dishwasher and the washing
machine only when they are full.
• If you wash dishes by hand, rinse them in a sink or dishpan of water
rather than under running water.
• Ask your family’s permission to lower the thermostat. If each American
household were to lower its average heating temperature by 6 degrees
over a 24-hour period each day, the equivalent of 500,000 barrels of oil
would be saved.
• Suggest that your family eat fewer meals that include meat.
The production and processing of grains requires far less water
and land than does meat.
• If you notice leaky faucets or pipes, ask if you can help fix them.
• Ask your parent or guardian about installing water-saving showerheads
in your home if you don’t already have them.
• Have your family consider replacing incandescent lightbulbs with
compact fluorescent lightbulbs. CFLs use 75 percent less energy and
last 10 to 13 times longer than standard bulbs.


ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE 75
.Taking Action
One very important thing
you can do that will have long-
range benefits for the environ-
ment is plant trees. Planting trees
helps conserve forest resources
and provide habitat for wildlife.
Planting trees also helps counter
air pollution. Like all plants, trees
take in carbon dioxide for photo-
synthesis. More trees means
less carbon dioxide enters the
atmosphere. Contact a local
conservation group and find
out if your troop could help with
tree plantings in a natural area
that is being restored. Or ask permission to plant trees at your
school or at a local park. You might even organize a class or
school fundraiser to protect tropical rain forests in Central and
South America. Doing positive things like these makes you an
environmental activist.
Environmental Activism
Suppose you organized your troop to clean up a local creek or
plant 100 trees? You can make a difference.
How much of an impact would you make? Every time one
person starts an environmental project, talks about it, advertises
it, and then completes it, other people notice. They figure that
if you can do it, so can they. This is how an environmental
movement begins.
Even though
laws restrict
pollution, there
are not enough
law enforcement
officers to watch
every potential
polluter. That
is why private
citizens, like you,
must help protect
the environment.
After all, it is the
air you breathe,
the water you
drink, and the
land you inhabit.
The Outdoor Code
As an American, I will do my best to—
Be clean in my outdoor manners.
Be careful with fire.
Be considerate in the outdoors.
Be conservation-minded.


76 ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE
Careers in Environmental Science.
Careers in
Environmental Science
Thinking about a career in environmental science? Environ-
mental science is the study of how humans and all living things
interact with one another and with the nonliving environment,
so just about every scientific field involves environmental science.
To have a career in science, you must go to college and
earn at least an associate’s degree for a technical position, a
bachelor’s degree for a professional position, and a master’s
degree or doctorate degree for a research or teaching position.
To work in environmental science, you may want to explore a
career in the natural sciences, physical sciences, or engineering.
Occupations You
Might Choose
Companies and agencies working in the
fields of environmental science or conserva-
tion hire employees for a great variety of
occupations. Government agencies from
the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers to the
Environmental Protection Agency hire
scientists and managers to write and review
environmental impact statements. Scientists
and engineers work in government and
industry laboratories to develop wind,
solar, geothermal, and other alternative
fuels to reduce our need for fossil fuels.
Environmental lawyers help companies
follow environmental laws. Environmental
engineers design projects that are environ-
mentally sound.


ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE 77
.Careers in Environmental Science
Manufacturers hire chemists, engineers, physicists, mathema-
ticians, planners, and managers to develop more efficient manu-
facturing technologies, new environmentally safe products,
and technologies to reduce, reuse, and recycle waste products.
Other companies employ people to properly transport and
dispose of municipal, agricultural, and industrial wastes.
Scientists working in ecology, toxicology, physiology,
meteorology, geology, and many other sciences develop
products that are more environmentally friendly. They also
research the environmental impacts of human activities.
Farmers, agronomists, entomologists, geneticists, water-
resource managers, soil scientists, foresters, wildlife managers,
and range managers help conserve wildlife, soil, and water
resources through improved farming techniques and manage-
ment of wildlife resources. They also help reduce the environ-
mental hazards of pesticides by developing and testing
pest-control techniques.
Oceanographers, fishery biologists, and fishery managers
work on developing ways to maintain fish stocks and avoid
overfishing and water pollution. Wildlife managers, zoologists,
game managers, and naturalists work to preserve wildlife
populations, breed endangered species, protect natural habitats,
and reintroduce recovering species into the wild.
Landscape architects, land-use planners, and developers
work to balance the needs of ever-growing urban and suburban
populations with the need for wilderness and natural recreational
areas. Teachers, writers, illustrators, television reporters, journalists,
and many others who promote environmental education also
are environmentalists.
Being an Environmentalist
Even if you do not choose a career as an environmental scientist,
you can and should be a conservationist and environmentalist
in your own life and in any career you pursue. You can bring
an environmental awareness to the choices you make every day
as a citizen, an employee, and a consumer. You can choose the
environmentally friendly option when shopping, using resourc-
es, and disposing of wastes.
No matter what vocation you choose, remember to leave
“your campsite”—our planet Earth—cleaner than it was when
you arrived.
The USDA Forest
Service maintains
the world’s
largest natural
science research
organization.





ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE 79
.Activities in Environmental Science
Activities in
Environmental Science
These activities will help you fulfill requirements for earning
the Environmental Science merit badge.
How Does the Environment Affect
Living Things?
You have learned that the nonliving parts of the environment
have important effects on living things. In this experiment you
will learn how light affects earthworms.
PROCEDURE
Step 1—Cut the shoe box lid in half. Put
half of the lid on the shoe box so that it
shades one side of the box.
Step 2—Place a lamp next to the middle of
the shoebox, close enough that it shines on
the uncovered part of the box.
Step 3—Place 10 earthworms on the
centerline of the bottom of the box so that
the worms are half in the dark and half in
the light.
Step 4—Observe the worms for five
minutes. Note their behavior in
your notebook.
Step 5—When your experiment is over,
take the worms outside and return them to
the soil.


80 ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE
Activities in Environmental Science.
OBSERVATIONS
1. What did the worms do at the beginning of the experiment?
2. How much time did the worms spend in the lighted part of
the box? In the shaded part of the box?
3. What nonliving environmental factor does the lamp represent?
CONCLUSIONS
An organism’s response to light is called phototropism. An
organism that responds to light by moving toward it is said to
be positively phototropic. An organism that moves away from
light is negatively phototropic. Which type of response did your
worms show? Why would earthworms react this way to light?
An Ecosystem Study
Every ecosystem involves complicated interactions between
the environment and the organisms that live there. You have
learned about some of these interactions. In this project you
will use this knowledge to study an ecosystem.
Locate a beach, pond, lake, forest, meadow, undeveloped
land, or other natural area outdoors. Choose two outdoor study
areas that are different from one another. For example, a forest
and a grassy meadow, or a sandy beach and scrub woodland,
or a desert and a wetland.
Once you have selected your study areas, visit the sites and
write your general observations in your notebook. Record the
types of ecosystems, the weather, soil types, dominant species,
and the season.
After making general observations about your study
areas, select ONE of the following two projects to complete
requirement 4. Before you begin your ecosystem study, get
permission from the landowner. Tell your parent, guardian, or
counselor the location of your study area and when you are
going to visit it. Consider going with a buddy.


ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE 81
.Activities in Environmental Science
Study Plots Activity
PROCEDURE
Step 1—In your chosen study areas, identify the ecosystem types.
Step 2—Begin at one of the two ecosystems you have selected.
Using a yardstick, stakes, hammer, and a piece of string, mark
out a shape, such as a square, that contains 4 square yards
inside its boundaries. This is study plot 1.
Step 3—Sit beside plot 1. Begin your study by writing in your
notebook information about all the nonliving factors around
you. Note the date, time of day, temperature, and whether it is
sunny or cloudy, windy or calm, rainy or dry. If any of these
factors change as you observe the plot, make note of the
change. Note also whether the plot is flat or on a slope.
Step 4—Next, look at the living things in the plot. If you can
see any nonplant species (fungi, insects, birds, etc.), note their
common names or draw pictures in your notebook for later
identification. Identify the dominant plant species you see. Use
a field guide to identify each dominant species by name, or make
a drawing of each in your notebook. Use a magnifying glass, if
needed, to see the features of each plant and nonplant species.
Step 5—Estimate how much space each plant species occupies
in the plot. For example, in a grassy meadow, one species of
grass might occupy about 90 percent (nine-tenths) of the space
in the plot. Record this estimate next to the name of each species
in your notebook.
Side view of a study plot
STAKE STRING
PLANT 1
36 INCHES PLANT 3
24 INCHES PLANT 5
24 INCHES
PLANT 2
8 INCHES
PLANT 4
4 INCHES
PLANT 6
12 INCHES GROUND
LEVEL


82 ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE
Activities in Environmental Science.
Step 6—Using a yardstick, measure the height range of identi-
fied plant species and add the data to your notes. Use these
measurements to draw a side view of your study plot. Try to
draw the plants to scale. (See the illustration.)
Step 7—Go to the second ecosystem. Repeat steps 1 through 6
for plot 2.
OBSERVATIONS
1. How many nonplant species did you identify in each study
plot? How many plant species?
2. What was the difference between the number of nonplant
and plant species in the study plots?
3. Which plot was more biodiverse?
4. What, if any, species did you find in both plots?
Nature Study Activity
In this activity, you will make three visits to each of the two
study areas, staying for at least 20 minutes each time to observe
the living and nonliving parts of the ecosystem. Your results
will vary depending upon when you choose to observe the
area. Your visits must be spread out enough that your observa-
tions show differences between your visits.
PROCEDURE
Step 1—Decide on your schedule for visiting each of the
study areas. Make sure your parent, guardian, or counselor
agrees with your plan.
Step 2—On your first visit, arrive quietly, making as little noise
as possible. Find a good place to observe wildlife. Make yourself
comfortable and have your notebook and pen or pencil handy.
Note the date, time of day, temperature, and other information
such as whether it is windy, calm, sunny, cloudy, rainy, or dry.
Note whether your study area is flat or on a slope. Draw a small
map of the area in your notebook, showing how it looks from
where you are sitting.
Step 3—Once you are settled and have noted the environmental
conditions, begin your observation period. Identify any plants
you see (by using field guides or by drawing them in your note-
book for later identification). Note the stage of life cycle for each
plant species—that is, look for buds, leaves, flowers, seeds, and
so on. Record these data in your notebook.


.Activities in Environmental Science
Step 4—Each time you see another species, write down its
common name and describe its appearance or behavior. If you
do not know its common name, make a drawing of it and note
its size and color so that you can identify it later. If you have
a camera (one that takes photographs quietly!), you may
take photographs.
Step 5—Note and describe any sounds you hear. If you have
a battery-operated recorder, turn it on and let it run for the
20-minute observation period. When an animal makes a sound,
note the time in your notebook so that you can identify the
taped sound later.
Step 6—If you have binoculars, try to identify nonplant species
that are far away. For tiny organisms such as insects and worms,
use a magnifying glass. Do not pick up or disturb any organisms.
Your role is to observe, not to interact with living things.
Step 7—After your observation period of at least 20 minutes is
over, mark your spot with a natural trail marker such as crossed
sticks or a stone cairn. Collect your materials and leave quietly.
Complete your notes by writing any other observations that you
were not able to note during the study period.
Step 8—Visit the area and repeat your observations two more
times, according to the schedule you set up in step 1. Be sure
to observe from exactly the same spot each time.
OBSERVATIONS
1. During your study periods, which changes did you observe
in the plant species that you identified?
2. At which times did you see more nonplant species
(e.g., birds, insects, fungi) during your observation period?
3. How did the time of day or season affect your observations?
4. How did environmental conditions affect your observations?
CONCLUSIONS
Write a report, based on your observations. Include your
general observations about the ecology of your study
areas. Also include your findings and conclusions
from your detailed study.


84 ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE
Activities in Environmental Science.
The Greenhouse Effect
This activity demonstrates how the atmosphere traps the sun’s
energy to warm Earth’s surface.
PROCEDURE
Step 1—Using scissors, cut the tops off of two 2-liter soda bottles.
Make your cut about 4 inches from the top. Label one bottle “A”
and the other bottle “B.”
Step 2—Pour 2 cups of garden soil or potting soil
into each bottle.
Step 3—Place a thermometer inside each bottle.
Make sure the thermometers are placed at the
same distance above the soil in each bottle.
Step 4—Cover the top of bottle B with clear
plastic wrap and secure it with a rubber band
or tape.
Step 5—Place a lamp on a table, removing the
lampshade to expose the lightbulb. Position each
bottle exactly 1 inch from the exposed bulb. Be
sure to turn the bottles so that the thermometers
face away from the lightbulb. (You may need to
shade the thermometers from direct light to get
accurate readings of air temperatures.)
Step 6—With the light off, record the tempera-
ture in each bottle in your notebook.
Step 7—Turn on the lamp.
Step 8—Using a watch, wait three minutes, and then record
the temperatures again. Record the temperatures in each bottle
every three minutes for 15 minutes.
OBSERVATIONS
1. Did the temperature in each bottle change during
your experiment?
2. Explain what the lightbulb and the plastic wrap represent
in this model of the greenhouse effect.
CONCLUSIONS
Compare your experimental setup to real conditions on Earth.
Using your data, explain why the greenhouse effect makes it
possible for life to exist on Earth.


ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE 85
.Activities in Environmental Science
Air Pollution
In this experiment, you will observe some of the particulates
that pollute air.
PROCEDURE
Step 1—Spread a thin film of petroleum jelly on two paper
plates or two white 3-by-5-inch index cards. These will serve
as your air pollution collectors.
Step 2—Place one collector in an urban environment, such
as near a busy street. Place the other collector in a nonurban
environment, such as in a field or a forested area.
Step 3—Protect each collector from precipitation by placing a
cover above it or placing it underneath an overhanging roof or
tree limb.
Step 4—Leave both collectors in place for one week.
Step 5—Retrieve the collectors. Using a magnifying glass, look
at the surface of each collector to identify any particulates.
Step 6—Place a sheet of clear plastic, marked off
in a grid of 1-inch squares, over one collector.
Using the magnifying glass, count the number
of particulates in four of the squares. Find the
average number of particulates in a square and
record this number.
Step 7—Repeat step 6 for the other collector.
OBSERVATIONS
1. What was the average number of particulates
on the collector left in an urban environment?
In the nonurban environment?
2. What do the particulates on the two collectors
suggest about the level of air pollution in
each environment?
CONCLUSIONS
Using your data, report what you learned about
how particulates contribute to air pollution in urban
and rural environments.


86 ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE
Activities in Environmental Science.
Cleaning Up Oil Spills
When an oil spill occurs in an aquatic environment, the first
step in the cleanup process is trying to control the oil and keep
it from spreading to coastal areas where it would affect many
wildlife species. Waterfowl are especially vulnerable to oil spills.
The oil coats the birds’ feathers, causing their feathers to clump
together and lose the ability to keep the birds insulated from
the cold. Oil-soaked birds often freeze to death. Others die after
consuming the toxins from the oil as they attempt to rid their
feathers of the oil. At least a half million waterbirds die each
year as a result of oil spills. In this experiment you can examine
several methods that are used to clean up oil spills at sea and
speculate upon which methods might work best to reduce the
effects of the spill on waterfowl.
PROCEDURE
Step 1—Label four aluminum pie pans “A,” “B,” “C,” and “D.”
Step 2—Using a measuring cup, pour 1 cup of tap water into
each pie plate.
Step 3—Measure 4 tablespoons of vegetable oil. Add 1 table-
spoon of vegetable oil to the water in each pie plate.
Step 4—In pan A, use a plastic spoon to stir the oil into the
water. Then, using a straw, try to blow the oil into one part of
the pan. Be careful not to touch the water with the straw.
Step 5—In pan B, stir the oil and use a piece of string to try to
collect the oil and contain it in one area.
Step 6—Stir the oil in pan C. Using a paper towel, try to
absorb the oil. Then use strips of newspaper, cotton balls, and
fabric scraps to try to absorb the oil. Record and compare how
well each material worked.
Step 7—Stir the oil in pan D, then add 1 teaspoon of liquid
dishwashing detergent to the water in the pan.
OBSERVATIONS
1. What happened to the oil and the water when you used a
straw to blow the oil away? What conditions at sea might this
represent that would make cleaning an oil spill more difficult?
2. How well did the string work to contain the oil in pan B?


ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE 87
.Activities in Environmental Science
3. Which of the materials used in pan C worked best to absorb
the oil?
4. What happened when you added liquid dishwashing
detergent to pan D? Can you explain why?
CONCLUSIONS
Scientists have developed many methods to clean up oil spills. In
this experiment, you explored several. Explain which treatment
worked best to clean up your oil spill. Would this type of treat-
ment be practical in an actual spill at sea? Consider how cleanup
methods might affect waterfowl and other organisms. Is a
treatment better or worse for them than the effects of the
spill itself? Compare the methods you used with the methods
explained in the box about methods of oil-spill cleanup in the
section “Human Impact on the Biosphere.”
Thermal Pollution of Water
Recall that thermal pollution occurs when a source of heat
raises air or water temperature above normal. The normal
temperature ranges for our lakes and rivers are: above
68 degrees Fahrenheit for warm water where most bass like
to live; between 68 and 55 F for moderate water where
salmon like to live; and below 55 F for cold water where
most trout like to live. In this experiment you will discover
if algae are sensitive to thermal pollution.
PROCEDURE
Step 1—Set up two 10-gallon aquarium tanks or other clear
large containers. Place one of them in a location where it will
not get above 60 degrees Fahrenheit. Fill them both with tap
water. Be very careful if you attempt to move a tank after you
have filled it with water.
Step 2—Place a thermometer in each tank and add a heat
source (aquarium heater, external lightbulb, or direct sunlight)
to one of the tanks. This tank should be raised to a temperature
over 70 degrees Fahrenheit.
Step 3—Feed each of the tanks with enough fish food or liquid
plant fertilizer to feed several fish or plants in the tanks. Record
the date, time, and temperature of each tank in your notebook.


88 ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE
Activities in Environmental Science.
Step 4—Repeat step three several times each day for the next
seven days. In addition to the above information also record
any presence of algae growing on the sides of the tank in your
notebook. Describe the algae and make a sketch or take pic-
tures to show the growth of the algae.
Step 5—At the end of the experiment, be sure to clean the
containers and remove the algae buildup.
OBSERVATIONS
1. Why did you feed the water in both tanks at the beginning
and throughout the experiment? Why not just feed the
heated tank?
2. What was the difference in temperature of the two tanks?
What activities would increase the temperature of a river or
lake near you by this much?
3. Did you notice any change (color, appearance, pattern, etc.)
in the algae during the experiment? What do you think might
have caused this?
CONCLUSIONS
Using your data, explain how thermal pollution may affect
aquatic organisms. Recall what you learned about how fertiliz-
ers can promote algae blooms. Why is increased growth of
algae bad for an aquatic environment? How would thermal
pollution affect fish, water plants, or other organisms that
cannot escape from the source of the heat? Can you speculate
about the effects of thermal pollution in the air?
Soil Erosion
In this experiment you can find out how soil
erosion happens and learn about one way to
prevent soil erosion.
PROCEDURE
Step 1—Get permission before you dig up any
soil for this experiment.
Step 2—Place cut-up strips of newspaper into
a bucket and fill the bucket with water. Stir
occasionally. Leave the newspaper in the


ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE 89
.Activities in Environmental Science
water until it falls apart and becomes a mushy mix of paper
and water. This may take a few days.
Step 3—Build three long, narrow boxes out of wood, shoe
boxes, or plastic or metal pipe. If you use cardboard, line the
boxes with plastic bags or foil and cover any seams with
adhesive or duct tape to prevent leaking.
Step 4—At one end of each box, cut a large V-shaped notch
about half as deep as the end wall of the box. Label the boxes
“1,” “2,” and “3.”
Step 5—Fill boxes 1 and 2 with garden soil so that the surface
of the soil is about half an inch below the top edges of the boxes.
Step 6—Fill box 3 with soil that has grass growing on it. Make the
soil surface about half an inch below the top edge of the box.
Step 7—Drain off the water from the newspaper mix. Take a
handful of the mush, squeeze out more water, and spread this
on top of the soil in box 2. Continue to do this until the surface
of the soil in box 2 is covered with the newspaper mixture. Let
it sit overnight.
Step 8—The following day, line up the three boxes in a row.
Place a brick, large rock, or book under the uncut end of each
box. Place a collecting pan, jar, or cup under the lower end of
each box below the cutout V. Photograph or make a drawing of
each box.
Step 9—Fill the watering can with a measured amount of tap
water. Standing at the higher end of box 1, sprinkle the water
on the soil surface until the can is empty. Wait about three min-
utes until the water stops running from the V notch, and then
observe the water that collects in the pan, jar, or cup. Measure
the amount of water and note its color. Record the data in
your notebook.
Step 10—Repeat step 9 for boxes 2 and 3, using the same
amount of water each time. Photograph or make a drawing
of each box to show the changes.
OBSERVATIONS
1. Describe the differences in the path the water took in each
of the three boxes.


90 ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE
Activities in Environmental Science.
2. How much water ended up in each collecting pan after
three minutes? What was the color of the water in each
collecting pan?
3. How did the color and the amount of water differ in each
collecting pan after three minutes?
4. How much soil ended up in each collecting pan?
5. The newspaper mixture used in box 2 resembles a mixture
sprayed on bare soil at construction sites to prevent erosion.
Based on your experiment, why do you think this is a
good idea?
CONCLUSIONS
Using your experimental data and photographs (or drawings),
show your results on a poster. Present your poster to
your counselor.
Biodegradable Packing Materials
Items purchased online or from mail-order catalogs are shipped
in boxes and protected with packing materials that range from
plastic bubble wrap to popcorn. Packing materials sometimes
end up as litter along roadsides or take up space in landfills.
In this experiment, you will find out which packing materials
are biodegradable.
PROCEDURE
Step 1—Label four resealable plastic bags “1,” “2,” “3,” and “4.”
Step 2—Pour a cup of sand into each plastic bag. Then add a
cup of garden soil to each bag. Carefully mix the sand and soil
by squeezing the mixture in each bag.
Step 3—In bag 1, place six small strips of newspaper.
Step 4—In bag 2, place six foam packing peanuts.
Step 5—In bag 3, place six pieces of unbuttered, unsalted
popped popcorn.
Step 6—In bag 4, place a small piece of plastic bubble wrap.
Step 7—Fill each bag almost to the top with garden soil.
(Leave enough space to allow the bag to be closed.)
Step 8—Pour half a cup of tap water into each plastic bag.


ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE 91
.Activities in Environmental Science
Step 9—Close each bag. Place all four bags near a sunny window.
Step 10—After two days, open the plastic bags, stir the
soil, add half a cup of tap water, and reclose the bags.
Step 11—Wait three more days, then empty each bag onto a
sheet of newspaper and look for the packing materials in each.
Use a magnifying glass to examine each material.
OBSERVATIONS
1. Which packing materials showed signs of decomposition?
2. Which do you think were biodegradable? Which
were nonbiodegradable?
3. Explain the differences between the materials that are
biodegradable and the ones that are nonbiodegradable.
CONCLUSIONS
Based on the results of this experiment, make a statement about
which kinds of packing materials are biodegradable and would
create less solid waste. What other kinds of biodegradable pack-
ing materials would protect fragile items during transport?
Oil Pollution on Land
What happens to the oil that leaks out of engines onto asphalt
parking lots? When it rains, that oil is washed onto the soil,
where it seeps down toward plant roots. Do this experiment
to find out how oil pollution on land affects plants.
PROCEDURE
Step 1—Set out a pitcher of tap water for 24 hours. Obtain four
small potted plants, such as pansies or another fast-growing
annual flower. Label the pots “A,” “B,” “C,” and “D.”
Step 2—On day 1, place the four plants in a sunny window.
Water each plant with the same amount of tap water from
your pitcher.
Step 3—Use a ruler to measure each plant. In your notebook,
record their heights, number of leaves, and any other important
characteristics you observe.
Step 4—Pour 1 teaspoon of motor oil on the soil of plant B,
making sure not to get any oil on the leaves. Pour 2 teaspoons of


92 ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE
Activities in Environmental Science.
oil on the soil of plant C. Pour 3 teaspoons of oil on the soil of
plant D. Do not put any oil on the soil of plant A.
Step 5—On day 2, water each plant with half a cup of water
from the pitcher. Do not overwater the plants.
Step 6—Examine each plant daily for the next three days.
Write your observations in your notebook. On day 3, again
measure the height of each plant and record the number of
leaves. Also record in your notebook any color changes.
Step 7—At the end of your experiment, dispose of the soil
contaminated with oil. Contact your local EPA offices or
hazardous waste agency to find out where to take the soil
for proper disposal.
OBSERVATIONS
1. Why was it necessary not to put any oil on the soil of plant A?
2. Why water the plants after pouring oil on the soil? What
environmental conditions did this action imitate?
3. What kinds of effects did you see in the plants that were
treated with oil?
CONCLUSIONS
Oil is one of many toxic substances that can be absorbed by
soil. Explain why it is important to keep cars maintained so
they do not leak oil, and to collect used oil from gas stations
and garages for recycling.
Endangered Species
Endangered species can be found in every state and in most
countries around the world. Find out about endangered species
by doing this activity.
PROCEDURE
Step 1—To research the endangered and threatened species in
your state, contact your state’s departments of fish and game,
wildlife, or parks and recreation, or your environmental protec-
tion agency. The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Department reports the
endangered and threatened species by state. For more informa-
tion, see the resources section at the end of this pamphlet.


ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE 93
.Activities in Environmental Science
Step 2—List the endangered or threatened species in your
state. Choose one species to study.
Step 3—Go to the library or access the internet (with your
parent or guardian’s permission) to find information about your
chosen species. Use at least four different reference sources.
Research hint: Ask your librarian if the library offers access to
magazine-article databases such as ProQuest or EBSCOhost.
Step 4—Find out what the natural habitat of the species is,
why it is endangered or threatened, and how many individual
organisms of the species are estimated to still live in the wild.
If the species is now protected by state or federal law, explain
how this protection has helped the species survive and what
else needs to be done to protect the species.
Step 5—Prepare a 100-word report on your endangered species.
Make a drawing of your species to include in your report.
Step 6—Present your report to your patrol or troop.
How Does an Endangered Species Recover?
Sometimes a commitment of time, money, and other resources
can bring a species back from the edge of extinction. In this activ-
ity, you will research one such species and learn its recovery story.
Bald eagle


94 ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE
Activities in Environmental Science.
PROCEDURE
Step 1—Using resources you have found at the library, at home,
or on the internet (with your parent or guardian’s permission),
make a list of endangered species that have recovered. You could
write to the World Wildlife Fund and other organizations that
focus on plant or wildlife conservation. See the resources section
at the end of this pamphlet for more information.
Step 2—Choose one species that has recovered from near-
extinction and research how it recovered. Find out what is
the status of the species today.
Step 3—Write a 100-word report on the species.
Step 4—Discuss your report with your counselor.
Environmental Impact Assessment
In this activity, you will identify the items that would need
to be included in an environmental impact statement for a
hypothetical (imaginary) construction project.
PROCEDURE
Step 1—In your notebook, describe a construction project that
might be proposed for your community by your local or state
government. Suggested projects include building a new high-
way or bridge in a rural area; building a new school or library
on farmland; building a bicycle path or nature trail in a wooded
area; or paving over a vacant lot for parking cars. Include a
description of the size and nature of the project and how the
community will benefit from it.
Step 2—Choose a suitable site for your project and visit it.
(The project is imaginary, but the site must be a real place.)
Record the following data for the project site:
a. What types of plant and animal life are at the site?
b. What type of ecosystem (forest, grassland, desert, etc.) is it?
c. Has it been disturbed before?
d. Is it a habitat for an endangered or threatened species?
e. Does it slope? Would the soil be in danger of erosion
during construction?
f. Are there streams or wetlands such as swamps at the site?


ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE 95
.Activities in Environmental Science
g. Is there reason to believe important fossils or artifacts are
at the site?
h. Are there activities on lands next to the site?
Step 3—Describe how the proposed project fits into existing
plans for the area. For example, is the site the last empty lot in
a housing subdivision? If you are planning a highway, would it
cut through a state or local park? Will a bike path allow area
residents to bicycle to school or work rather than drive cars?
Step 4—Suggest ways the proposed project will likely affect the
environment. Answer the following questions:
a. Will the project cause soil erosion?
b. Will it disturb forests, grasslands, deserts, or
other ecosystems?
c. Will it disturb any habitats of endangered or
threatened species?
Step 5—Identify any effects of the project that probably will
be harmful but cannot be avoided. A bridge over a river to
connect two existing roads, for example, probably cannot be
built elsewhere, so the project’s negative effects may have to
be accepted.
Step 6—Suggest alternatives to the proposed project that
would protect the environment, yet still meet the needs of
people. Alternatives may include different project designs at
the same site or the same project built at a different site.
Step 7—Discuss the trade-offs between the short- and
long-term environmental losses and the short- and long-term
benefits of the proposed project.
Step 8—Determine how the proposed project would
permanently prevent other uses of the site. If a vacant lot
is paved, for example, then that land could not be used
for a community garden.
CONCLUSIONS
Based on your review of the proposed project, tell your
counselor what information would need to be included in
an environmental impact statement and whether you think
the project should go ahead as designed or be stopped. If
you recommend stopping the project, tell why and suggest
any alternative designs or projects that you would support.


96 ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE
Environmental Science Resources.
Scouting Literature
Conservation Handbook; Fieldbook;
Animal Science, Architecture, Chemistry,
Citizenship in the Community,
Citizenship in the Nation, Citizenship in
the World, Energy, Engineering, Fish
and Wildlife Management, Forestry,
Gardening, Landscape Architecture,
Mammal Study, Mining in Society,
Nature, Oceanography, Plant Science,
Pulp and Paper, Soil and Water
Conservation, Sustainability, and
Weather merit badge pamphlets
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.
Buchman, Stephen L. What a Bee
Knows: Exploring the Thoughts,
Memories, and Personalities of Bees.
Island Press, 2023.
The Carbon Almanac Network. The
Carbon Almanac: It’s Not Too Late.
Portfolio. 2022.
Carson, Rachel. Silent Spring.
Houghton Mifflin, 1962.
Gates, Bill. How to Avoid a Climate
Disaster: The Solutions We Have and
the Breakthroughs We Need. Vintage,
2022.
Goodall, Jane. The Book of Hope: A
Survival Guide for Trying Times.
Celadon Books, 2021.
Jane Goodall Institute, Local Voices,
Local Choices: The Tacare Approach
to Community-Led Conservation,
Esri Press, 2022.
Judge, John. The Outdoor Citizen: Get
Out, Give Back, Get Active. Apollo
Publishers, 2022.
Kaye, Cathryn Berger, and Philippe
Cousteau. Going Blue: A Teen Guide
to Saving Our Oceans, Lakes, Rivers,
& Wetlands. Free Spirit Publishing,
2010.
Leopold, Aldo. A Sand County
Almanac With Essays on
Conservation from Round River.
Ballantine Books, 1949.
McDonough, William, and Michael
Braungart. Cradle to Cradle:
Remaking the Way We Make Things.
North Point Press, 2022.
Shufer, Vickie, The Forager’s Handbook:
A Seasonal Guide to Harvesting
Wild, Edible & Medicinal Plants.
Skyhorse, 2022.
Thunberg, Greta. The Climate Book.
Penguin Press, 2023.
Wilson, Edward O. The Diversity of
Life. Gardners Books, 2001.
Organizations and Websites
American Chemical Society
Green Chemistry Institute
acs.org/greenchemistry.html
Earth 911
Telephone: 480-889-2650
earth911.com
Environmental Science
Resources


ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE 97
.Environmental Science Resources
Environmental Protection Agency
Telephone: 202-272-0167
epa.gov
Keep America Beautiful
Telephone: 203-323-8987
kab.org
National Air and Space Association
Earth Observatory
earthobservatory.nasa.gov/on-this-day
National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Association Air Quality
airquality.weather.gov
National Water Prediction Service
water.noaa.gov
Natural Resources
Conservation Service
Telephone: 202-720-3210
nrcs.usda.gov
The Partnership Project
partnershipproject.org
Sierra Club
Telephone: 415-977-5500
sierraclub.org
U.S. Department of Energy
energy.gov/science-innovation
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
Endangered Species
fws.gov/endangered/
USDA Forest Service
Science and Technology
fs.usda.gov/science-technolog
U.S. Geological Survey Science
Explorer
usgs.gov/science/science-explorer
World Wildlife Fund
Telephone: 202-293-4800
worldwildlife.org
Acknowledgments
Scouting America thanks Mitchell D.
Erickson of Patriots’ Path Council in
New Jersey for his work in revising
this 2025 edition of the Environmental
Science merit badge requirements. We
also thank Harry L. Allen III, Scott
Anderson, Jeff Birkby, Timothy P.
Farrell, Andrew V. T. Hauser, Michael
Huneke, Jeffrey D. Huppert, Douglas
E. Johnson, Linda Morris Kelley,
Andrew McKeon, David E. Setzer,
Thomas Temple, Jeana Wirtenberg,
Ph.D., and Les Wu for their comments
and advice.
Scouting America is grateful to
the men and women serving on the
National Merit Badge Subcommittee
for the improvements made in
updating this pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration Credits
Getty Images—pages 3, 63, 66, and 99
HAAP Media Ltd., courtesy—cover
(recycle bin)
Library of Congress Prints and
Photographs Division, courtesy—
page 12
National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration/Department of
Commerce, courtesy—page 27
(clown fish)
Natural Resources Conservation
Service, courtesy—page 10
Natural Resources Conservation Service/
Lynn Betts, courtesy—page 53
(terracing and strip cropping)
Natural Resources Conservation
Service/Tim McCabe, courtesy—
page 28


98 ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE
Environmental Science Resources.
New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation,
courtesy—page 38
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service,
courtesy—page 76
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service/Dick
Bailey, courtesy—page 18
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service/Lee
Emery, courtesy—page 93
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service/
Luther Goldman, courtesy—
page 57 (pigeon)
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service/Ryan
Hagerty, courtesy—page 56 (crane)
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service/Paul
Marinari, courtesy—page 59 (ferret)
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service/Debbie
McCrensky, courtesy—page 24
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service/Phil
Million, courtesy—page 59 (falcon)
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service/
Gaylen Rathburn, courtesy—
page 57 (manatees)
Wikipedia.org/Andrew Dunn,
courtesy—page 53 (compost)
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of
or are protected by Scouting
America.
Jack Brown—page 73
Tom Copeland—page 88
Daniel Giles—page 78
John McDearmon—all illustrations on
pages 21–23, 29–31, 35, 37, 41, 45,
49, 56, 58, and 81





100 ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE
Notes.


ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE 101
.Notes


102 ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE
Notes.


ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE 103
.Notes


Get ahead in Scouting with Scout Life magazine. It’s loaded with the
latest news on merit badges and other advancement tools. Plus, it’s got
outdoor adventure, games and comics, leadership tips, life skills, stories
about other Scouts and more. It’s just what you need to succeed.
Subscribe today at go.scoutlife.org/subscribe
Use promo code SLMBP15 to get a special
print + digital bundle offer priced just for Scouts.