american
cultures


AmericAn
cultures
BOY scOuts OF AmericA
merit BADGe series
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Requirements
Choose THREE groups that have different racial, cultural,
national, or ethnic backgrounds, one of which comes from
your own background. Use these groups to meet requirements
1, 2, and 3.
1. Do TWO of the following, choosing a different group
for each:
a. Go to a festival, celebration, or other event identified
with one of the groups. Report on what you see
and learn.
b. Go to a place of worship, school, or other institution
identified with one of the groups. Report on what you
see and learn.
c. Talk with a person from one of the groups about the
heritage and traditions of the group. Report on what
you learn.
d. Learn a song, dance, poem, or story that is traditional
to one group, and teach it to a group of your friends.
e. Go to a library or museum to see a program or exhibit
featuring one group’s traditions. Report on what you
see and learn.
2. Imagine that one of the groups had always lived alone in
a city or country to which no other groups ever came. Tell
what you think the city or country might be like today. Now
tell what you think it might be like if the three groups you
chose lived there at the same time.
35851
ISBN 978-0-8395-3399-3
©2013 Boy Scouts of America
2014 Printing


american cultures 3
3. Tell about some differences between the religious and social
customs of the three groups. Tell about some ideas or ways
of doing things that are similar in the three groups.
4. Tell about a contribution made to our country by three
different people, each from a different racial, ethnic, or
religious background.
5. Give a talk to your Scout unit or class at school on how
people from different groups have gotten along together.
Lead a discussion on what can be done to help various
groups understand one another better.


62 american cultures
resources.
Resources
scouting literature
American Heritage, American Labor,
Archaeology, Architecture, Citizenship in
the Community, Citizenship in the Nation,
Citizenship in the World, Communication,
Family Life, Genealogy, Indian Lore, Law,
Music and Bugling, Reading, Scouting
Heritage, and Stamp Collecting merit
badge pamphlets
Books
Bial, Raymond. Lifeways Series. Benchmark
Books. A 25-book series on the original
lifeways of North American Indians.
Bode, Janet. The Colors of Freedom:
Immigrant Stories. Franklin Watts, 2000.
———. New Kids in Town: Oral Histories of
Immigrant Teens. Scholastic, 1995.
Budhos, Marina Tamar. Remix:
Conversations With Immigrant Teenagers.
Henry Holt, 1999.
Chelsea House Publishers. The Immigrant
Experience. Separate books on American
Indians, Puerto Ricans, and Czech,
Greek, Jewish, Mexican, Polish, and
other Americans.
———. Immigrants in America. A six-book
series telling the stories of the Chinese,
German, Irish, Italian, Japanese, and
Swedish Americans through immigrants’
own words and contemporary photo-
graphs and illustrations.
———. Junior Library of American Indians.
A series of 23 books covering American
Indian tribes.
Freedman, Russell. Immigrant Kids.
Puffin, 1995.
Hall, Loretta, Anan Ameri, and Dawn
Ramey, eds. Arab American
Encyclopedia. Gale, 1999.
Haskins, Jim. Against All Opposition: Black
Explorers in America. Walker, 2003.
———. One More River to Cross: The
Stories of Twelve Black Americans.
Scholastic, 1994.
Hirschfelder, Arlene B. Native Americans: A
History in Pictures. DK Publishing, 2000.
Lawlor, Veronica. I Was Dreaming to Come
to America: Memories From the Ellis
Island Oral History Project. Puffin, 1997.
Lucent Books. Immigrants in America.
Sixteen titles on cultures includ-
ing Russian Americans and
Vietnamese Americans.
Mareno, Barry, ed. Coming to America.
Barron’s. Separate titles on African, Irish,
Italian, and Jewish Americans.
———. We Came to America. Mason Crest.
Sixteen books depicting the unique
challenges facing various ethnic groups
as they came to the New World.
Visit the Boy Scouts of America’s
official retail website at http://www.
scoutstuff.org for a complete listing
of all merit badge pamphlets and
other helpful Scouting materials
and supplies.


american cultures 63
.resources
Mason Crest Publishers. North American
Indians Today. Fifteen books on modern-
day American Indians, from Apache and
Cherokee to Seminole and Sioux.
Meltzer, Milton. Bound for America:
The Story of the European Immigrants.
Benchmark Books, 2001.
Moore, John Allphin, and Jerry Pubantz.
Encyclopedia of the United Nations.
Facts on File, 2002.
Nava, Julian. Julian Nava: My Mexican-
American Journey. Arte Publico, 2002.
Renick, Barbara. Genealogy 101: How to
Trace Your Family’s History and Heritage.
Rutledge Hill Press, 2003.
Sandler, Martin W. Immigrants.
HarperCollins, 2000.
Strom, Yale. Quilted Landscapes:
Conversations With Young Immigrants.
Simon & Schuster, 1996.
Takaki, Ronald T. Strangers From a Different
Shore: A History of Asian Americans.
Little, Brown, 1989.
Telushkin, Joseph. The Golden Land: The
Story of Jewish Immigration to America.
Harmony, 2002.
Thomas, David Hurst. The Native Americans:
An Illustrated History. Turner, 1993.
Warren, Paula Stuart. Your Guide to the
Family History Library. Betterway
Books, 2001.
Organizations and Websites
Use the websites listed here as starting
points for your research, or find informa-
tion on particular cultures by searching for
“______ Americans” (replacing the blank
with the ancestry group of interest, such as
Cambodian, Pakistani, Welsh, etc.). Be sure
to get your parent’s permission before you
begin to surf.
american indian studies
Website: http://www.csulb.edu/colleges/
cla/departments/ais
america’s story From america’s library
The Library of Congress
Website: http://www.americaslibrary.gov
arab american institute
1600 K St. NW, Suite 601
Washington, DC 20006
Telephone: 202-429-9210
Website: http://aaiusa.org
asian-nation
Website: http://www.asian-nation.org
Digital History
Website: http://www.digitalhistory.uh.edu
immigration: the living mosaic of
People, culture, and Hope
Website: http://library.thinkquest.org/20619
immigration: stories of Yesterday
and today
Website: http://teacher.scholastic.com/
activities/immigration/
Jewish-american History Foundation
P.O. Box 760325
Lathrup Village, MI 48076
Website: http://www.jewish-history.com
the statue of liberty–ellis island
Foundation inc.
Attention: History Center
17 Battery Place, Suite 210
New York, NY 10004-3507
Telephone: 212-561-4588
Website: http://www.ellisisland.org
test of courage
Public Broadcasting Service
Website: http://www.pbs.org/itvs/
testofcourage/diversity4.html
u.s. census Bureau
4700 Silver Hill Road
Washington, DC 20233
Website: http://www.census.gov