SCUBA
DIVING

BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES

SCUBA DIVING

Requirements
1. Do the following:
a. Show that you know first aid for injuries or illnesses
that could occur while scuba diving, including hypothermia, hyperventilation, squeezes, decompression
illness, nitrogen narcosis, motion sickness, fatigue,
overexertion, heat reactions, dehydration, injuries by
aquatic life, and cuts and scrapes.
b. Identify the conditions that must exist before performing CPR on a person, and explain how to recognize
such conditions. Demonstrate the proper technique
for performing CPR using a training device approved
by your counselor.
2. Before completing requirements 3 through 6, earn the
Swimming merit badge.
3. Discuss the Scuba Diver’s Code with your merit badge
counselor, and explain the importance of each guideline
to a scuba diver’s safety.
4. Earn an Open Water Diver Certification from a scuba
organization recognized by the Boy Scouts of America
scuba policy.
The Boy Scouts of America is not a dive certification
agency. Your merit badge counselor can help you find a
scuba agency recognized by the Boy Scouts of America
scuba policy so that you can fulfill requirement 4.
Scouts who have already earned an Open Water
Diver Certification outside of a BSA activity from a
scuba agency recognized by the Boy Scouts of America
scuba policy may still earn the Scuba Diving merit
badge by earning the Swimming merit badge and
completing all other listed requirements.

4    SCUBA DIVING

5. Explain what an ecosystem is, and describe four aquatic
ecosystems a diver might experience.
6. Find out about three career opportunities in the scuba
industry. Pick one and find out the education, training,
and experience required for this profession. Discuss this
with your counselor, and explain why this profession
might interest you.

Minimum Course Content for Open Water
Diver Certification
The following abbreviated list represents the RSTC “Minimum Course
Content for Open Water Diver Certification.” It is not intended as a complete
outline of learning objectives for an Open Water Diver course. Development
of learning objectives is left to the respective training agencies.
During the Open Water Diver course you can look forward to learning
basic scuba theory and developing entry-level scuba skills required for certification. All scuba instruction must meet the minimum training standards
for Entry-Level Scuba Certification set by the Recreational Scuba Training
Council (RSTC). Your course will consist of the topics and scuba skills
required by the training organization and as outlined in this section.
At a minimum, the following will be covered.
1. Equipment. Learn the physical description,
operating principles, maintenance, and use of
the following equipment items—face mask,
fins, snorkel, BCD, exposure suit, weights
and weight system, float and flag, cylinders,
valves, regulators/air-delivery system,
submersible pressure gauge, alternate
air source, timing device, compass,
depth gauge, dive table or dive
computers, knife.
2. Physics of Diving. Learn the physical
principles of matter and their application
to diving activities and hazards.

SCUBA DIVING    5

3. Medical Problems Related to Diving. Learn the causes, symptoms,
prevention, and first-aid and treatment of diving medical problems.
4. Decompression Theory and Use of Dive Tables and/or Dive Computers.
Learn how to determine no-decompression limits for single and
repetitive dives, plus how to use dive tables and/or dive computers
to properly plan and execute a dive.
5. Dive Environment. Learn information on the local and general
conditions of the diving environment and their
possible effects on the diver.
6. General Topics. Learn information on dive planning,
underwater and surface communications, diver assistance,
recommended diving practices
(including safety stops),
procedures for diving from
boats, proper use of personal
diving logbook, and local dive
regulations and protocols.
7. Pool/Confined Water Scuba Skills.
Learn and practice the following scuba skills in a pool or confined water.
• Diving system assembly and disassembly
• Equipment inspection (at water’s edge)
• Entries and exits
• Proper weighting
• Mouthpiece clearing—snorkel and regulator
• Regulator/snorkel exchanges at the surface
• Controlled descents and ascents
• Underwater swimming
• Mask-clearing, including removal and replacement
• Underwater exercises—with and without mask
• Buddy-system techniques
• Underwater and surface buoyancy control
• Underwater problem-solving (regulator recovery/retrieval, etc.)
• Surface-snorkel swimming with full diving system
• Surface operation of the quick release/emergency function of the
weight system
6    SCUBA DIVING

• Underwater removal and replacement of scuba system
• Underwater removal and replacement of the weight/ballast system
• Out-of-air emergency alternatives, including at least one dependent
procedure and one independent procedure
• Equipment care and maintenance (at water’s edge)
8. Open Water Scuba Skills. Perform the following scuba skills
while diving in open water.
• Equipment inspection (at water’s edge)
• Entries and exits
• Proper Weighting
• Mouthpiece clearing—snorkel and regulator
• Regulator/snorkel exchanges at the surface
• Controlled descents and ascents
• Underwater swimming
• Mask-clearing
• Buddy-system techniques
• Underwater and surface buoyancy control
• Diver assistance techniques (self/buddy)
• Surface-snorkel swimming with full diving system
• Removal and replacement of weight/ballast system
• Removal and replacement of scuba system
• Out-of-air emergency alternatives
• Equipment care and maintenance (at water’s edge)
• Underwater navigation

Scuba BSA is an introductory scuba experience. It introduces qualified Boy Scout, Venturing, and registered
adult participants to the special skills, equipment,
and safety precautions associated with scuba diving.
The Scuba BSA experience consists of two parts—
knowledge development and water skills development.
There are no open water training dives included in Scuba BSA.
A scuba instructor teaching through a BSA-recognized scuba agency
conducts water skills development in a clear, confined water environment.
Certain portions of the Scuba BSA experience may apply to the Scuba
Diving merit badge at the discretion of the merit badge counselor and
open water scuba instructor.
SCUBA DIVING    7

Scuba Diving Resources.

Scuba Diving Resources
Scouting Literature

Organizations and Web Sites

Archaeology, First Aid, Lifesaving,
Oceanography, Swimming, Water Sports,
and Weather merit badge pamphlets

Historical Diving Society
Web site: http://www.hds.org

Visit the Boy Scouts of America’s
official retail Web site (with
your parent’s permission) at
http://www.scoutstuff.org for a
complete listing of all merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.

Books
Shreeves, Karl. Open Water Diver Manual.
PADI, 2007.

International Diving Educators
Association (IDEA)
Web site: http://www.ideascuba.com
National Association of Underwater
Instructors (NAUI)
Web site: http://www.naui.org
Professional Association of
Diving Instructors (PADI)
Web sites: http://www.padi.com
http://www.projectaware.org
http://www.currentpublishingcorp.com
http://www.emergencyfirstresponse.com

Shreeves, Karl. Adventures in Diving
Manual. PADI, 2007.

Professional Diving Instructors
Corporation (PDIC)
Web site: http://www.pdic-intl.com

PADI. Encyclopedia of Recreational
Diving (third edition). PADI, 2005.

Scuba Diving International (SDI)
Web site: http://www.tdisdi.com

Wohlers, Robert. Life on an Ocean
Planet. Current Publishing, 2010.

Scuba Schools International (SSI)
Web site: http://www.divessi.com

Periodicals

(World) Recreational Scuba
Training Council (RSTC)
Web site: http://www.wrstc.com

Dive Training
Web site: http://www.dtmag.com
Scuba Diving
Web site: http://www.scubadiving.com
Sport Diver Magazine
Web site: http://www.sportdiver.com
94    SCUBA DIVING

