RG
is
ner
h
s,
estPUBLIC
SPEAKING


PUBLIC SPEAKING
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


35936
ISBN 978-0-8395-3373-3
©2013 Boy Scouts of America
2020 Printing FPO
Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Public-Speaking or check
Scoutbook for the latest requirements.


PUBLIC SPEAKING 3
Contents
You Are a Public Speaker! . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
Getting Started . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Organizing Your Speech . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
Delivering Your Speech . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
How to Speak Persuasively. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
The Impromptu Speech . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
Come to Order—Parliamentary Procedure Made Easy . . . . . . 42
Public Speaking Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47





PUBLIC SPEAKING 5
.You Are a Public Speaker!
Learning to carry
yourself well,
speak effectively
in public, listen
carefully, and
understand the
needs of the
audience are
important skills
that can help
you throughout
your life.
You Are a
Public Speaker!
You might not think of yourself as a public speaker, but every
time you speak to a group of your friends, classmates, or at a
Scout meeting, you are presenting yourself and your views in
public. Even if you haven’t stood at a lectern on the stage and
find the whole idea scary, sooner or later, someone is going to
ask you to get up and say a few words. If you are prepared, it
won’t be scary. It can even be fun.
One day you might be asked to give a toast at your best
friend’s wedding or speak in front of your local community
about something you believe in strongly. You might have to
lead a formal business meeting or speak at the worst of times,
such as someone’s funeral. A lot happens during the course of
every person’s life, and your ability to communicate your feel-
ings and ideas is the best way to connect to the larger world.
After you have earned the Public Speaking merit badge,
you can go further into the field by earning the Communication
merit badge. But for now: “Thank you for being here, Scouts
and Venturers. Our topic today is public speaking. …”


6 PUBLIC SPEAKING
You Are a Public Speaker!.
Four Main Types of Speeches
The four main types of speeches are: informative, entertaining,
convincing, and persuasive.
Inform Them
An informative speech presents the facts. It informs and
instructs the audience on a topic it might not know much
about without attempting to change the audience’s opinions
of the topic.
Let’s say you are giving an informative speech to your
troop on no-trace guidelines. Telling a story about the history
of your topic is a good way to begin. You could explain that
no-trace techniques have always been a part of Scouting. Then
explain the importance of no-trace guidelines, particularly
when you are trekking in pristine wilderness areas. In the
body of the speech, present detailed information about how
to camp, cook out, and observe nature for an extended period
without leaving even a footprint behind.


PUBLIC SPEAKING 7
.You Are a Public Speaker!
Visual aids help the audience understand what you mean.
For example, to make a big impression with the guidelines for
no-trace camping, you might take your presentation outdoors.
You can show Scouts how to observe nature (sketch, take
photos) and leave what they find for others to enjoy instead of
collecting items and taking them home (which may be illegal
in many places, anyway).
Finally, end your speech with a quote by a famous
naturalist or wildlife photographer that drives home your
point: Leave nothing behind except memories.
Entertain Them
To entertain doesn’t necessarily mean to be funny, but most
entertaining speeches are. Studies show that audiences like
speakers who use humor, and information that is presented in
a funny way, such as a joke or personal anecdote, tends to be
remembered longer. Humor also helps build rapport with the
audience. But, to use it successfully, keep your joke or funny
story short and relevant to your speech. In other words, use
humor to make a point.
Funny quotes are a great way to get attention. A quote by
an important person who boldly made a prediction that turned
out to be, well, dead wrong, makes a point about how things
change. Take for instance, Charles H. Duell, director of the U.S.
Patent Office in 1899, who was rumored to have said more
than 100 years ago, “Everything that can be invented has been
invented.” Or Lord Kelvin, president of The Royal Society, who


8 PUBLIC SPEAKING
You Are a Public Speaker!.
predicted in 1895 that “heavier-than-air flying machines are
impossible.” Quotes like these drive home the difference between
then and now. You could even take the joke a step further by
saying, “Of course, I was just a child at that time. …”
Some people like to use Murphy’s Law: “Anything that
can go wrong, will go wrong.” You can use this funny observa-
tion to your advantage in telling a joke.
Poking a little fun at yourself is another way to score
points with audiences. But don’t go overboard or put yourself
down. For example, put people at ease by teasing them about
how long you plan to talk: “When I asked Scoutmaster Martin
what I should talk about today, he said, with a fierce gaze,
‘Talk about five minutes.’”
Convince Them
A speech to convince attempts to influence the audience’s atti-
tude toward the material presented. The speech seeks to make
the audience believe or accept your point of view, or stimulate
or inspire your audience. For instance, let’s say you live in an
urban neighborhood. Your city council wants to turn your only
neighborhood basketball court into a much-needed parking lot.
You decide to give a speech to your class about how much the
basketball court means to you and your friends.
Every element you put into this speech should aim to
convince youths your age, regardless of whether they play
basketball, that losing this play space would be harmful to
your whole community. Your goal is to call attention to this
issue and inspire the audience to care about the basketball
court as much as you do.
Relate how many youths play hoops there daily and present
statistics from the local police department that show how much
petty crime among local youth has declined since the basketball
court was built. Cite the lack of playground facilities in your
area, or how many students who once played at the local court
went on to play high school and/or college basketball. Tell about
someone you know (without using a real name) who might
have gotten involved with the wrong crowd if not for the respect
and self-confidence learned on the basketball court.
If you are passionate about an issue, regardless of what
it is, the key to convincing others is to be honest and find
intelligent ways to make your point through research, personal
stories, humor, quotations, statistics, and facts.


PUBLIC SPEAKING 9
.You Are a Public Speaker!
Persuade Them to Action
A speech that persuades to action seeks an active response.
The goal is to motivate listeners to do more than merely
believe in the topic being presented—they should act on it!
This could mean voting a certain way, signing a petition, or
changing a behavior.
Think about the immediacy and sheer power of the
following seven words: “Give me liberty or give me death!”
Those “fighting words” were shouted defiantly by Colonial
American statesman Patrick Henry in 1775. The zeal with
which his message spread throughout the country inspired col-
onists to unite against an oppressive British monarchy. There
was a price to pay in blood, yet the 13 colonies became some-
thing new: the free and democratic United States of America.
Your persuasive speech need not be this dramatic or cover
this big a subject. For example, write a speech to persuade
people to clean up a local creek, or to rally your troop to help
build a ramp for a neighbor who is disabled. You could ask
people to raise funds for a local skateboard park or encourage
youths to volunteer in your community.
But for the moment, consider Patrick Henry an expert on
persuading people to action. Here is the last paragraph of his
rallying speech that called a nation to arms:
“Gentlemen may cry, Peace, Peace—but there is no peace.
The war is actually begun! The next gale that sweeps from
the north will bring to our ears the clash of resounding arms!
Our brethren are already in the field! Why stand we here idle?
What is it that gentlemen wish? What would they have? Is
life so dear, or peace so sweet, as to be
purchased at the price of chains and
slavery? Forbid it, Almighty God!
I know not what course others
may take; but as for me, give me
liberty or give me death!”





PUBLIC SPEAKING 11
.Getting Started
Getting Started
Now think about the purpose of the speech you will give. The
first step is to gather ideas and jot them down. Don’t just sit
down and try to write a speech cold turkey. Once you get your
ideas down, you will be able to flesh out the details of your
speech—no problem! Here are eight different ways to organize
your ideas.
Chronological Order
A talk organized into past, present, and future categories is
easy to follow. If you are speaking about yourself or a series of
events, try organizing your ideas chronologically.
Problem and Solution
Simply state a problem and offer a solution. When a speech
is organized this way, what you say depends on how much
the audience already knows about the issue. For example, if
the audience is well-informed, focus most of your speech on
the solution.
Analogy or Metaphor
When you compare your ideas to a similar object or idea,
you create a picture that helps the audience understand how
your ideas are related. For example, author Malcolm Kushner
compares giving a speech to the flight of an airplane, complete
with the takeoff, or introduction; the flight, or body of the
speech; the passengers, or audience; the pilot, or speaker; and
the landing, or conclusion.
Cause and Effect
This organizational pattern is useful for scientific discussions.
Just state a problem or situation, what caused it to happen,
and trace what the impact has been.


12 PUBLIC SPEAKING
Getting Started.
Divide a Word
Find a word that mirrors your ideas in such a way that you can
use it as an acronym, or mnemonic device, to make your main
points easy to remember. For example: “Take the word ‘Life.’
L stands for love of family, I stands for the question of infinite
wisdom, F stands for forgiveness, a very important quality to
possess, and E stands for the energy to do great things.”
Mine a Phrase
Here is an example of how you can mine a phrase to introduce
your ideas: “Comedian Groucho Marx once said, ‘I don’t want
to belong to any club that will accept me as a member.’ I felt
that way, too, until I found Scouting, or rather, until Scouting
found me. You see, my parents signed me up for Scouting
when I was 9, and since then, I’ve had such a great time and
learned so much being a member of this troop. …”
Segment a Topic
Divide your topic into segments based on your own organiza-
tional pattern. Suppose you are giving a speech on how
a Scout camp is laid out. You might divide the topic into
(1) waterfront area, (2) campsite, (3) trading post, (4) archery
area, and (5) Scoutcraft area.
Brain Strain
If you can’t seem to get
started, brainstorm ideas with
friends, family members, your
Scoutmaster, teachers, or
local experts. No matter what
your topic, there are probably
people you can ask for advice
on the subject. And don’t for-
get librarians. The reference
desk at your local library is
always a great (and free!) place to ask about any subject.


PUBLIC SPEAKING 13
.Getting Started
Numerical List
Some experts believe numerical lists are the most powerful way
to organize information. Magazine editors also recognize the lure
of lists. Just look at the following magazine headlines: “The Top
10 Electronic Gadgets You Should Have,” “Top Five Classic Sports
Cars of All Time,” “The Best Six Little Toys for Under $10.”
If you organize your speech this way—“I have four good
ideas to present to you today”—you will grab the audience’s
immediate attention. As long as you keep the list short, the
audience will count the points as you make them.
Keep your numerical list and tips short.
Here are a few ways to organize ideas for the body
of your speech. Remember, each idea you write
down should be related to the next idea and to your
topic. As you jot things down, you will find that
ideas group naturally. Once your ideas are divided
into the various points you want to cover, you can
build the speech from there.


14 PUBLIC SPEAKING
Getting Started.
Use Quotes, Anecdotes, and Statistics to
Drive Home Main Points
No matter what the topic is, once you have the main points,
you need to find a good angle or angles for fleshing out the
information in an interesting way. Mining reference materials
is a good way to find quotes, statistics, offbeat facts, and
other tools to spice up your speech. Basic reference tools at
the library include almanacs, dictionaries, and encyclopedias.
• Check out what other intelligent people have said about
your topic in Bartlett’s Familiar Quotations.
• For statistics, try The New York Times Almanac. For gen-
eral information, browse the Readers’ Guide to Periodical
Literature or The New York Times Index.
• Need offbeat facts? How about the Guinness World
Records book?
Now get in gear and build the body of your speech with the
same integrity as you would build a model airplane. Go to the
library or connect to the internet. Interview experts or mine
yourself for information, insights, and observations. Read books
and articles, or visit a museum. In other words, leave no
stone unturned.


PUBLIC SPEAKING 15
.Getting Started
Research the Web
Online, check out the following helpful websites (with your parent‘s
permission, of course):
• Yippy puts a new spin on searching the web. It merges results from
several leading search engines and creates a list of the best of the
best based on a comparative ranking. It goes one step further
by grouping like results into what it calls “clouds” so that you can
pinpoint what you are trying to find even more efficiently. Go to
http://www.yippy.com.
• Looking for a powerful search engine to find information on a topic?
Dogpile (http://www.dogpile.com) scours several top search engines
and displays the top listings. Other popular search engines include
Google (http://www.google.com), Bing (http://www.bing.com), and
Yahoo (http://www.yahoo.com).
• Bartlett’s Familiar Quotations is online at http://www.bartleby.com/100.
• Need a myth or legend to make a point? Story Arts Online
(http://www.storyarts.org) is a good place to search for stories
from around the world.
• Do you want to see what famous Americans said in their speeches?
The U.S. Department of Defense keeps a vault of military speeches
at https://www.defense.gov/Newsroom. Also check out American
Rhetoric’s Top 100 Speeches at http://www.americanrhetoric.com/
top100speechesall.html; the History Place’s Great Speeches Collection
at http://www.historyplace.com/speeches/previous.htm; and History.
com at http://www.history.com/speeches.


16 PUBLIC SPEAKING
Getting Started.
When to Use an Outline
The longer the speech, the more you need an outline. Think
of an outline as a map to guide you through each part of your
speech. A speech naturally divides into three parts: the intro-
duction, body, and conclusion. You can start outlining any
one of these three sections; it isn’t necessary to tackle them in
chronological order. Generally it is best to work on the body
first, then on the introduction and the conclusion. Here is the
order of presentation so you can see how each part of the
speech fits in.
INTRODUCTION
During your introduction, accomplish the following three things:
1. Recognize the person who introduced you.
2. Voice your appreciation for the chance to speak before
the group.
3. Arouse interest in the subject by letting the audience know
where you hope to take them.
The introduction should be long enough to do the job but no
longer. If your audience is familiar with you and your subject,
you hardly need any introduction at all.
BODY
This is the main part of the speech. Develop each idea on your
list, illustrating the main points with a variety of information,
including facts, opinions, reasons, quotes, examples, personal
stories, analogies, or statistics—these are the building blocks of
any good speech.
CONCLUSION
The conclusion rounds off your speech and gets you back to
your seat. Keep it short and simple, and use it to sum up
arguments and appeal for action from the audience. This is
not the only way to conclude a speech, but it is the most
frequently used way.


PUBLIC SPEAKING 17
.Getting Started
Sample Outline
Let’s say you are giving a speech to youths who are not Scouts on the
value of Scouting. Your purpose is to convince them to join your troop
by telling them how fun and exciting Scouting is. Your topic will be, in
one sentence, “Scouting is fun and helps youth become valuable citi-
zens and leaders in their community.” Begin working on your idea list,
adding all of your thoughts on the values of Scouting. When you have
them written down, eliminate the weakest arguments.
Next comes the outline, which might look like the following:
Introduction
Thank the person who introduced you.
State your appreciation for the chance to speak.
State your argument or topic briefly.
Body
I. Scouting provides citizenship training
a. By teaching youth to work together in community
b. By teaching skills useful in helping others, such as first aid
c. By stressing our American heritage in its activities
d. By teaching respect for patriotic symbols such as the flag
II. Scouting develops character
a. By teaching Scouts to live by the Scout Oath and Scout Law
b. Through service projects and Good Turns
c. By teaching skills that emphasize self-reliance
and preparedness
III. Scouting develops physical and mental fitness
a. Through outdoor activities
b. By patrol competition
c. By providing standards of physical fitness by which Scouts
can measure themselves


18 PUBLIC SPEAKING
Getting Started.
Get Rid of Stage Fright
Gulp. Stage fright. Everyone goes through it. Even some well-
known celebrities have struggled through bouts of stage fright.
What if you feel you can’t do it? What if you get in front of an
audience and seize, and can’t say a word, or you shake like a
leaf in a strong wind?
Relax. The first step to overcoming stage fright is to real-
ize everyone—from presidents to film stars to preachers—goes
through it. And you can overcome it. The Advanced Public
Speaking Institute in Virginia Beach, Virginia, recommends the
following techniques for overcoming your fears:
• Before you go on stage, take a few deep breaths and
yawn to relax your throat. Close your eyes and picture
the audience listening, laughing, and applauding.
Notice that this speech was developed so that the most important
point—“Scouting is fun!”—comes last. This way, the best ammuni-
tion is saved for last so that the audience is still thinking about it
before the speaker calls them to action: Join up!
Remember, the outline is not the speech. It’s just the skeleton
on which you can hang all the supporting facts, personal stories,
opinions, and examples.
IV. Scouting is fun!
a. It offers camping and hiking.
b. Scouts learn many outdoor skills.
c. It offers swimming, canoeing, and boating.
d. It gives youth a chance to do things with their friends.
Conclusion
Summarize the four main points.
Make an appeal for youth to join.


PUBLIC SPEAKING 19
.Getting Started
• Concentrate on how good you are at public speaking.
• Pretend you are just chatting with a group of friends.
• Be prepared—memorize your opening lines so you can
recite these on autopilot if you must.
• Practice, practice, practice! Practice enough so that no matter
how nervous you are, you can spit out a few minutes of
your program.
• If you feel shaky on stage, don’t hold the notes in your
hands: the audience can see them fluttering. Instead, hold
on to the lectern. If your legs start to wobble, lean one knee
against the lectern while you hold on to the top part of it
with your hands.
Here are more tips to banish stage fright, from professional
speaker Chris Widener.
• Focus on getting through the first five minutes of your
speech. Rarely do you see anyone who is afraid through the
entire speech. Usually the speaker settles in and becomes
comfortable after the first few minutes.
• Remember that you are your own
worst critic. Widener recalls seeing
a group of his friends who played
in a band perform at a popular
club in New York City. Afterward,
the band members moaned that
they had played “terribly.” Widener
didn’t think so and neither did the
audience. Most people are not com-
ing to hear you speak with the goal
of picking you apart. So don’t pick
yourself apart either!
• Understand that most people in
the audience would be scared to
death to get up and give a speech,
and they are glad it is you and not
them. For the occasional speaker,
it’s OK to say, “Excuse my nerves,
I’m not used to this.” It’s one way
to get the audience on your side.





PUBLIC SPEAKING 21
.Organizing Your Speech
Organizing Your Speech
It’s time to write your speech. If you have thought about the
topic clearly, jotted down your ideas, and possibly prepared an
outline, you are ready to write.
Introduction: The Most Important Part
When you first get up to speak, you will receive better attention
from the audience than at any other time until you finish. The
first and last sentences or paragraphs in a speech are the easiest
for the audience to remember, so make your introductory
comments memorable.
A question has an unfinished feeling that demands
further attention. It creates an air of expectancy. For instance,
you might begin a speech about Scouting by asking, “Could
you go into the deep woods tonight with just a pocketknife, a
couple of matches, and a blanket, and live fairly comfortably
Seven Keys
Here are some ways you can unlock an audience’s interest
from the get-go. Use one to introduce your subject.
1. A question
2. A startling statement
3. A personal experience
4. Something familiar
5. Humor
6. A historic survey
7. A myth, legend, quote, or short story


22 PUBLIC SPEAKING
Organizing Your Speech.
A typical speech
contains three to
five main points.
The audience
will judge the
importance a
speaker places
on a particular
point by how
much time is
spent on that
point. You should,
too, in planning
the time you will
spend on each
main point.
for a week or more?” You don’t really expect an answer: This
is what is known as a rhetorical question. Your point in ask-
ing the question is to heighten interest in Scouting by implying
that if the listeners were Scouts, they would know this impor-
tant set of survival skills.
Startling or far-fetched statements quickly seize the
audience’s interest, too. A dramatic opening has the same
effect, as long as the story is relevant to the subject. Let’s say
you live in an area of the Midwest known as Tornado Alley
for its deadly tornadoes. You have decided to give a speech
to your class about the history of these killer storms in your
area and important ways people can stay safe.
You could begin with a dramatic story about the last tor-
nado that touched down in your county: “Calvin and Doris
Denny had just curled up on the couch to watch TV the stormy
night of September 4, 1999. Suddenly the house went dark,
their living room window shattered into a thousand pieces of
jagged shrapnel, and their truck, which moments before had
been parked in the street, was hurled into their kitchen like a
matchbox toy.”
This startling story contrasts sharply with the audience’s
immediate situation. Sharp contrasts increase curiosity among
listeners and makes them sit up and take notice.
Recounting a personal experience relevant to the subject
can bring you and the audience closer together.
Start with a familiar quotation or saying—“What goes
up must come down!”—and the audience will finish it almost
audibly for you, without your asking.
Humor is another good way to introduce a subject, as long
as your joke is funny and relevant. Stay clear of ethnic slurs,
off-color remarks, and anything offensive. Often, humor aimed
gently at yourself is the best way for folks to identify with you.
A brief historical survey can be an effective opening
when the speech is about new developments in a specific field.
For example, if you were talking about the hazards of space
flight, you might begin by pointing out that Orville and Wilbur
Wright faced no hazards much worse than broken bones at
Kitty Hawk in 1903. Today’s astronauts face countless dangers.
Everyone loves a good story well-told. If you can find a
story connected to your topic, it can be an excellent way to
lead into the body of your speech.


PUBLIC SPEAKING 23
.Organizing Your Speech
Body: The Meat and Potatoes
Develop the main points in this section. Each idea, as it is
presented, must be supported by facts, reasons, examples,
or opinions gathered in your research.
Typically, each point should be supported by three examples.
Use statistics, personal stories, analogies, quotes, or whatever best
illustrates the point you want to make.
The main points should be presented in logical order.
They also should be tied together. When moving from one
point to another, use a transitional phrase to pull your listener
along to the next part of the speech. Make smooth transitions
using phrases such as the following:
• “On another point …”
• “To summarize …”
• “Now let’s take a look at …”
• “In addition …”
• “The next point is …”
• “Turning to …”
• “Another area for consideration is …”
Conclusion—Bring
It Home, Make
It Memorable!
The introduction is the first impres-
sion you make. The conclusion
is almost as important because
it’s your last chance to leave an
imprint. How well the audience
remembers you and what you had
to say largely depends on how you
wrap things up.
Experts suggest that a good
conclusion should do three things:
Briefly summarize your speech,
give the audience a feeling of closure (nobody likes to be left
hanging), and make a good final impression. Use words that
help people know you are close to the end, such as “In closing,”
“To wrap up,” or “I have one final thought. …”


24 PUBLIC SPEAKING
Organizing Your Speech.
Make your last words memorable and help you connect
solidly with the audience; make them shine. Whether you ask for
help to support a good cause, make a prediction, recite a short
poem or quote, or tell a story, the main thing is to do it with style.
Practice Makes Perfect
Now that you have written your speech, read it out loud at
a comfortable pace. Time yourself with a watch to make sure
the speech is just the right length. If it’s too long, cut it now.
If it’s too short, do more research and put some meat on that
skinny skeleton!
Some speakers like to memorize their speech so they can
present it without looking at their notes. Try this when you are
giving a short speech, but always take your notes with you to
the stage so you don’t get off track.
For longer speeches, plan to refer to your notes more often.
However, the less you do this, the more attention you can pay to
connecting to the audience. Small note cards work well and are
less obtrusive than sheets of paper. It’s safe to say the better you
know your material, the more at ease you will feel.
Once you have memorized the first few minutes of your
speech, stand before a mirror, look directly at yourself, and deliver
the lines without using your notes. If you have a full-length
mirror, this is an even
better place to practice.
Speak clearly without
rushing. Don’t be afraid
to pause, and take steady
breaths at natural breaks
in your lines.
Look at your posture
first. Are you standing
straight? You don’t want
the audience to see you
slumped over. Your carriage
should be erect and proud.
Have confidence in who
you are and what you have
to say.


PUBLIC SPEAKING 25
.Organizing Your Speech
What are your hands doing while you are speaking? Relax
your hands, keeping them mostly at your sides and outside of
your pockets. It’s OK to gesture to make a point, but too much
and you will appear to be flailing around. It takes a little prac-
tice, but you can become comfortable with your hands relaxed
at your sides and gesturing only when you want to draw the
audience in to your subject at key points.
Are you having a hard time with some of the words you
memorized in the opening lines? Sometimes, things that look
good on paper can be a lot harder to say. Rewrite anything that
keeps tripping you up or leaves you feeling tongue-tied.
Listen to your voice. Keep it even and speak with modula-
tion. Give vocal emphasis to parts of the speech you want the
audience to remember.
Practice the entire speech in front of the mirror every day
until you look and sound like someone you would like to hear.
Once your speech starts coming easy enough that you don’t
have to look at your notes a lot, it’s time to add a friendly
practice audience.
R-E-L-A-X
Keep your shoulders relaxed. Clenching them will increase your
nervousness and make you look uncomfortable and feel tense.
Before you begin, relax the muscles in your back, shoulders, and
hands by consciously taking several slow, deep breaths.


26 PUBLIC SPEAKING
Organizing Your Speech.
Friends and Family Make Good Practice
Before giving your speech in public, present it at home to
your family or a few trusted friends. Have someone time your
speech and keep track of how many times you say “um” or
“ah” or anything else that is simply filler. Tell your “audience”
that you will welcome comments and constructive criticism
after you finish the speech and that whatever they say will
only help you improve.
Chances are you don’t have a lectern in your living room
so this will give you an opportunity to speak without a barrier
between you and the audience. If you can keep your cool
holding your notes and without the comfort of hiding behind
a lectern, speaking in front of a lectern will be a snap.
Sit down in the living room and ask someone to stand up
and introduce you and your topic by saying something like,
“Now I’d like to introduce you to our speaker, Steve Bergen,
who is going to tell us a little more about the topic of … .”
Stand up straight and walk to the center of the room. Face
your practice audience with confidence, shoulders squared,
and back straight. Thank the person who introduced you,
calling the person by name, and then thank your audience for
coming. Holding your notes casually in your hands, deliver
the speech, looking from one person to another as you speak.
Focus especially on the smiling, friendly, or attentive faces in
front of you—your life preservers that can keep you afloat and
boost your confidence.
When you are finished, walk confidently and quietly
back to your seat and sit down. Don’t throw yourself in the
chair like you just escaped a hail of rocks. Then ask politely
how much time the speech took and how many “ums” and
stammers you made.
Attention!
Shuffling is for the dance floor, slouching is for hanging out
with friends. For public speaking engagements, keep your
legs straight, feet slightly apart, and face your audience. If
you are using visual aids, you will be moving around a little,
but don’t give the audience the impression you are “travel-
ing” or flopping around. That’s distracting!


PUBLIC SPEAKING 27
.Organizing Your Speech
Fish for Feedback
Now it’s time to put on your thickest skin. Take comments
and criticism from your practice audience and turn it to your
advantage. Listen carefully to the feedback and don’t take it
personally, even if it seems hurtful or inappropriate. Thank
each person who expresses an opinion, no matter how
outlandish you might think it is.
Ask specific questions about the level of eye contact you
achieved, how your body language looked, and how you might
use your hands more effectively to make a point. Ask if you
looked relaxed. Did anyone think you moved around too much,
or find the number of times you looked at your notes distracting?
Review the comments and make changes to your speech
based on those suggestions you think are important. If your
presentation needs a number of corrections, practice some more.
Then ask your family or a friend to listen to the speech again.
Refining a speech and your presentation skills in this way is a
lot less intimidating than doing it in front of a real audience.





PUBLIC SPEAKING 29
.Delivering Your Speech
Delivering Your Speech
Now that you have prepared your speech and practiced in
front of friends and family, you are ready to deliver your
speech to the intended audience.
Prepare the Room
Your first task is to prepare the room where you plan to speak.
Arrive at least an hour early. Give yourself plenty of time to
prepare mentally, and correct any mistakes in lighting, the
sound system if you are using a microphone, the seating
arrangements, and any audiovisual equipment.
If your equipment uses electrical outlets, be prepared!
Bring a three-prong/two-prong outlet adapter and an extension
cord with you. You never know when you will need one. Also
bring a small flashlight or penlight in case you have to darken
the room and still need to refer to your notes.
Check the seating arrangement before anyone arrives.
If you expect 10 people and you have 40 chairs, move 30 of
them away from the area where you will be speaking. Arrange
small-group seating in a semicircle so that all participants can
see you and one another. For larger groups, seating arranged in
straight rows works best.
Sit in a chair in the front row, back row, and at the sides
of the seating arrangement. If you can, have someone stand
for a minute where you will be speaking so you can check for
distractions. Anything that looks weird or busy might draw the
audience’s attention and should be removed. If you are using
visual aids, check that nothing will block the view of your
slideshow or overheads, and adjust the projector accordingly.


30 PUBLIC SPEAKING
Delivering Your Speech.
Make sure the equipment works.
Check everything twice. Be sure you
know how to operate the projector
and the microphone. If the projector
takes a bulb, have a spare nearby in
case it burns out. Use a screen as the
backdrop for slideshows instead of
the wall: The images will show up better.
If you are using a lectern and you aren’t quite tall
enough to be seen over it, stand on a sturdy box or step stool.
While you are on stage, before people arrive, look around
for anything that distracts you. Is there a window? Close the
drapes. You don’t want to find yourself or the audience day-
dreaming or gazing outside during the presentation. How is
the temperature in the room? If it’s too hot or too cold, adjust
it so that both you and the audience can stay focused on
the presentation.
Check the lighting. If there is a dimmer switch, turn the
lights on low only during the slideshow or when using over-
heads. The images will still show up and you won’t be left in
the dark without your notes. If there is no dimmer switch, use
your small flashlight.
Go to the restroom before you speak. Take a few deep
breaths while you are there and relax your shoulders and
back muscles.


PUBLIC SPEAKING 31
.Delivering Your Speech
The trick is not to be fussing around with anything when
the audience arrives. You should make a good impression
before you start to speak. Greet each person and shake hands.
Introduce yourself if you don’t know someone. The preparation
process should help you feel relaxed and in control because
you will know the room and will have prepared the equipment
and presentation from every angle.
Making—and Leaving—a Good Impression
When the Scoutmaster or teacher introduces you, stand up and
smile as you walk toward the place where you will give the
speech. Shake hands with and look directly at the person who
introduced you, if this is appropriate. If not, thank the person
and then smile as you establish eye contact with the audience.
You don’t need to look like the Cheshire cat up there, but there is
some truth to the phrase, “Smile and the world smiles with you.”
Stand up straight with your feet slightly apart and arms
relaxed at your sides ready to emphasize a point with a gesture.
Lean slightly toward your audience to show you are engaged
and confident. If you still feel a little shaky, hold on to the
lectern, but not so tight you look like you might bench-press
it through the floorboards.
A sincere and
confident smile
and an upbeat
introduction
can melt the
coldest hearts.


32 PUBLIC SPEAKING
Delivering Your Speech.
Your facial expressions should
reflect your position on the points
you want to make. Are you telling
the audience a side of the story with
which you don’t agree? Then frown.
Are you perplexed by an argument
that disagrees with your point of
view? Look confused. Does some-
thing strike you as silly or overblown?
Give a look of disbelief.
Did you fumble a line along
the way? Slow down. Pause. Smile.
Resist the urge to move on too fast.
As a general rule, don’t apologize.
Just keep going at an even pace
and regain your momentum slowly.
You’re human. No one expects you
to be perfect, so don’t expect it
from yourself.
If you are giving an informative
or persuasive speech, questions will
likely follow. At the start of your conclusion, tell the audience
that you will take questions after your concluding remarks. This
will get the audience to start thinking of questions to ask. The
audience will clap as soon as it’s clear you are finished. After
the applause, smile and stride confidently off the stage and back
to your seat. This is the last impression you will make. Don’t let
the audience know you were scared by the experience. Leave
the impression that you enjoyed speaking to them.
Hand Check
Don’t rock back and forth—your audience will get
seasick. Standing with your hands on your hips or
folding your arms across your chest are also no-win
propositions—it will look as though you are about
to tell them what’s what. Casually putting your hand
in your pocket is fine as long as you aren’t doing it
too frequently.


PUBLIC SPEAKING 33
.Delivering Your Speech
Visual Aids
Coordinate the content and timing of visual aids—slides,
drawings, or product and equipment examples—with your
main points. Concentrate on one slide, chart, or object at a
time. The audience will need about 20 seconds to view each
item to register what they have seen. Don’t use too many
visual aids, and keep them simple.
Slides that display words should use clean, readable type.
Use uppercase letters when it is appropriate to capitalize a
word; otherwise, use lowercase letters because these are easier
to read than blocks of uppercase type. If you discuss a point
that is not covered in your slides, turn the machine off or put
a blank slide in place while you talk about that information.
(The blank slide will look dark on the screen.) This way, the
audience won’t focus on a slide that has nothing to do with
what you are saying.
On flip charts, use thick blue or black markers and
make sure your writing is neat. Don’t put too many words on
any one slide or chart. If the audience can see it, don’t read
it to them word for word, but do refer to the information.
Remember to check and recheck the spelling and accuracy
of all information you
present beforehand.
Use bar graphs to compare
data and line graphs to show
change over time. Flow charts
can help walk the audience
through a series of steps
necessary to effect change.
Computers and the
internet have made slides and
overheads easier to produce
and use. Just be certain to
number slides and overheads
in advance. Drop a tray of
slides or a stack of overheads
before a presentation and
you will quickly realize why
numbering is a good practice.
Remember,
visual aids are to
supplement your
remarks. Don’t try
to put too many
words or your
entire talk on
the slides.


34 PUBLIC SPEAKING
Delivering Your Speech.
Designing Your Own Visual Aids
You don’t have to be a graphic designer to create stunning visual
aids. If you can use a computer, you probably have access to
simple software that can make your visual aids look professional.
Word processors such as Microsoft Word include clip art and fonts
that you can use to create interesting overheads. Or try software
programs designed for creating slides and overheads, such as
Microsoft PowerPoint.
May I, Please?
One important consideration before you use
graphics, cartoons, or logos downloaded from
the internet, or illustrations taken from published
sources: Make sure it is OK to download and use
the object or that you have secured permission
from the copyright holder to use it.


PUBLIC SPEAKING 35
.Delivering Your Speech
Visual aids don’t
need to be fancy.
If it is neat and to
the point, a simple
poster board with
a few words and a
hand-drawn picture
can be just as
effective as a more
elaborate chart.
Desktop publishing programs intended for creating
newsletters and business brochures can make overheads
and slides, too. These include but aren’t limited to Microsoft
Publisher and Adobe InDesign.





PUBLIC SPEAKING 37
.How to Speak Persuasively
How to Speak
Persuasively
Do you want your words to move people to action? Change their
minds? Persuade them! These powerful speaking techniques can
help accomplish your goal.
Deductive Approach
State up front what you want listeners to do—vote for a
candidate, save a river, host a foreign exchange student, sign
up for Scouting. Then spend the rest of the speech giving
reasons or arguments for doing so.
Inductive Approach
Use reasons and arguments to lead up to the conclusion,
where you will tell the audience what you want them to do.
This might be called the rolling thunder approach, followed by
the ka-BOOM at the end.


38 PUBLIC SPEAKING
How to Speak Persuasively.
One-Sided Approach
State the side of the issue for which you stand. Instead of talk-
ing about opposing views, focus on your side alone. Support
your position with plenty of reasons and examples. State clearly
what you want the audience to do.
Two-Sided or Multi-Faceted Approach
Most issues have more than one side. This approach addresses
both sides, or perhaps, three or four different facets of an issue.
Champion your side and argue against others by using fact and
reason. Your chances of winning folks over to your side greatly
increase when you ask them to make a small change rather
than a big one.
Let Your Body Language Do the Talking
Regardless of your approach, use body language to encourage
change and call people to action. In a persuasive speech, it’s good
to move around a little on stage and use gestures to emphasize
major points. You don’t want to pound the lectern with your fist,
but you can, for example, put your hands together in a triangle
shape to draw attention to a main point. Or number the points
and check them off using your fingers.


PUBLIC SPEAKING 39
.How to Speak Persuasively
Any number of natural open gestures where your arms and
hands reach out toward the audience can help draw people’s
attention toward you. If you can get someone to video your
presentation during a practice run, watch the recording and
take special note of your body language. How genuine do your
gestures look? Does anything look wooden, forced, or just plain
odd? Think about ways to improve your body language so it
matches or enhances your message. The main thing to remember
is that you must believe sincerely in your subject before you can
persuade others to join your cause.





PUBLIC SPEAKING 41
.The Impromptu Speech
The Impromptu Speech
An impromptu speech can’t really be compared with a traditional
speech. It is simply a brief talk on a subject the speaker knows
something about but for which he or she has had little time to
prepare. Chances are, you may find yourself in this situation a
couple of times a week in school.
Suppose you are at a Scout meeting and the Scoutmaster
asks you, without warning, to tell the troop about plans for
an upcoming campout to Three Rivers State Park. Think for
a moment what you know about the campout, then quickly
organize your thoughts.
Don’t be afraid to pause for a second and reflect on the
question or topic you have been asked to present. It will make
you seem intelligent and reflective, like you are living up to the
old adage, “Think before you speak.” People who take a little
time to ponder a response often speak wiser words than those
who launch into a topic without engaging their brain first.
If you need a little time to organize your thoughts on the
fly, mirror the question or topic by restating it. “You’ve asked
me to talk to the troop about our upcoming October campout
to Three Rivers State Park. …”
When you begin, speak clearly and concisely about the
various plans for the campout. Your impromptu speech might
cover what to bring, who will do the meal planning beforehand
and the cooking on the trip, who is assigned to cleanup, various
safety issues to consider inside the park, and lastly, where and
what time to meet for departure, and what time the Scouts will
return home. Remind Scouts at the end of your speech to check
with their folks about volunteering as chaperones. You probably
won’t be asked to talk about a topic you don’t know something
about. Whatever the subject, keep your focus, quickly decide
your purpose, make your main points, and finish up.
Conclude with a brief summary or by stating the most
important information the audience should remember.
Don’t ramble on
like a lonesome
cowboy out on the
prairie singing 79
verses of the same
song to his horse.


42 PUBLIC SPEAKING
Come to Order—Parliamentary Procedure Made Easy.
Come to Order—
Parliamentary Procedure
Made Easy
The specific ground rules applied to formal meetings are known
as parliamentary procedure. This method allows a group, rather
than an individual, to make decisions. Proper meeting procedures
are essential to official meetings of groups as diverse as:
• Boards of directors
• Corporate committees or association members (such as
youth sports or environmental awareness)
• Government entities (school boards, city councils,
county commissions)
• Legislative bodies
• Places of worship
• Community associations (such as homeowner associations)
• Civic and volunteer groups (such as Rotary or Lions clubs or
parent-teacher organizations)
The most common set of rules is called Robert’s Rules of
Order, recognized as a fair, proper, and democratic way to
run meetings. Many large and formal groups, such as the U.S.
Senate and the United Nations, establish their own procedural
rules. Some fraternal, social, civic, and business organizations
accept Robert’s Rules in general but provide specific exceptions
in their constitutions and bylaws.
Consider the circumstances where parliamentary procedure
could come in handy. In informal meetings, when individuals
have something to say, they merely speak. An informal meeting
operates under the rules of common courtesy.
If you learn
Robert’s Rules,
you will never
be out of order
because most sets
of parliamentary
procedure vary
little from this set.
You can find a
copy at your local
library. The chart
at the end of this
chapter also
can help.


PUBLIC SPEAKING 43
.Come to Order—Parliamentary Procedure Made Easy
In formal meetings, the chair, or leader, conducts all busi-
ness. While the leader of an informal meeting may participate
in the discussion, the chair of a formal meeting only conducts
the meeting. Speakers must be recognized by the chair and
technically, all remarks are directed to the chair. Questions
from individual to individual also are directed via the chair.
The formal meeting is more a debate of opposing ideas, each
of which strives for audience approval.
The chair enforces the rules equally on all participants to ensure that
each person has a fair opportunity to present his or her point of view.


44 PUBLIC SPEAKING
Come to Order—Parliamentary Procedure Made Easy.
Leading Informal Discussion
While informal discussions do not have rules, the chair must
apply commonsense ideas for a successful meeting to take
place. No one insists that the chair apply these ideas as with
more formal meetings. They just make the meeting worthwhile
and productive.
Parliamentary procedure may seem arbitrary. Yet it would be
impossible for a group to act without having a set procedure for
deciding what the group action will be. Simply having the rules,
no matter how good or poor they are, can be more important
than the question of what rules to have. Fairness comes from
having a standard procedure decided beforehand and applied
equally to all parties.
The chair or leader of the meeting—in this case, you—
should be prepared. Study the topic and prepare an opening
statement briefly outlining the reason for the session. You
have to get things started so always have two or three starter
questions ready. Once the discussion is underway, you have
completed a major portion of your task.
Your continuing responsibility is to keep the discussion
going. You should not have to talk much yourself, but you
can encourage presentation of new ideas and seek out friendly
disagreement. Try to draw out less talkative members of the
group and discourage long-winded or aimless speeches that
dominate the discussion.
Note key points people make and write down who
made them. Also keep track of disagreements. Occasionally
summarizing the discussion can prevent repetition or leaving
plans half-completed. It also provides an opportunity to credit
individual members of the group for their ideas.
As the chair, you are responsible for making a closing
statement. The summary should include not only points the
group agreed upon, but a statement of disagreements, too.
Responsibility
for keeping the
meeting going
also means
keeping it
focused. When
the discussion
begins to roam,
bring the group
back to the point.
When necessary, state that a subject is too big and
would best be discussed later.


PUBLIC SPEAKING 45
.Come to Order—Parliamentary Procedure Made Easy
Simplified Parliamentary Motions Guide
Below are some of the rules governing the most frequently used
motions. More detailed information can be obtained from Robert’s Rules
of Order Newly Revised (11th edition).
The following motions are listed in order of precedence. A motion
can be introduced if it is higher on the list than the pending motion.
The following motions have no order of precedence and are
decided immediately:
Motion Second? Debatable? Amend? Vote?
Point of
Order No No No None
Appeal Yes Varies No Majority
Suspend
Rules Yes No No 2 ⁄3
Division No No No None
Request for
Information No No No None
Motion Second? Debatable? Amend? Vote?
Adjourn Yes No No Majority
Recess Yes No Yes Majority
Table Yes No No Majority
Previous
Question Yes No No 2 ⁄3
Limit
Debate Yes No Yes 2 ⁄3
Postpone Yes Yes Yes Majority
Refer Yes Yes Yes Majority
Amend Yes Yes Yes Majority
Main
Motion Yes Yes Yes Majority





PUBLIC SPEAKING 47
.Public Speaking Resources
Public Speaking Resources
Scouting Literature
Journalism and Communication merit
badge pamphlets
Books
Andrews, Robert. The Concise
Columbia Dictionary of Quotations.
Columbia University Press, 1989.
Applewhite, Ashton, et al. And I Quote:
(Revised Edition) The Definitive
Collection of Quotes, Sayings
and Jokes for the Contemporary
Speechmaker. St. Martin’s Press, 2003.
Detz, Joan. It’s Not What You Say, It’s
How You Say It. St. Martin’s, 2000.
———. Can You Say a Few Words?
2nd rev. ed. St. Martin’s Press, 2006.
Esposito, Janet E. In the Spotlight:
Overcome Your Fear of Public
Speaking and Performing. In the
SpotLight, 2005.
Griffin, Jack. How to Say It Best: Choice
Words, Phrases and Model Speeches for
Every Occasion. Prentice Hall, 2005.
Gottesman, Deb, and Buzz Mauro.
Taking Center Stage: Masterful
Public Speaking Using Acting Skills
You Never Knew You Had. Berkley
Books, 2001.
Kourdi, Jeremy, and Simon Maier. The
100: Insights and Lessons From
100 of the Greatest Speakers and
Speeches Ever Delivered, 2nd ed.
Marshall Cavendish Business, 2011.
Kushner, Malcolm L. Public Speaking
for Dummies. Wiley Publishing, 2004.
Osborn, Michael, Suzanne Osborn, and
Randall Osborn. Finding Your Voice,
9th ed. Pearson, 2011.
Otfinoski, Steven. Speaking Up,
Speaking Out: A Kid’s Guide to
Making Speeches, Oral Reports, and
Conversation. Millbrook Press, 1997.
Robert III, Henry M., Daniel H.
Honemann, and Thomas J. Balch.
Robert’s Rules of Order Newly Revised,
11th ed. De Capo Press, 2011.
Safire, William. Lend Me Your Ears:
Great Speeches in History. W.W.
Norton & Company Inc., 2004.
With your parent’s permission, visit
the Boy Scouts of America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org,
for a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


48 PUBLIC SPEAKING
Public Speaking Resources.
Slaughter, Jim, Gaut Ragsdale, and Jon
L. Ericson. Notes and Comments on
Robert’s Rules, 4th ed. Southern Illinois
University Press, 2012.
Standard Deviants. Learn Public Speaking
(DVD). Cerebellum Corporation, 2001.
Steele, William R. Presentation Skills
201: How to Take It to the Next Level
as a Confident, Engaging Presenter.
Outskirts Press, 2009.
Zeoli, Richard. The 7 Principles of
Public Speaking: Proven Methods
From a PR Professional. Skyhorse
Publishing, 2008.
Zimmerman, Doris P. Robert’s Rules in
Plain English. HarperCollins, 2005.
Organizations and Websites
National Speakers Association
Telephone: 480-968-2552
Website: http://www.nsaspeaker.org
American Institute of
Parliamentarians
Toll-free telephone: 888-664-0428
Website: http://www.aipparl.org
National Association of
Parliamentarians
Toll-free telephone: 888-627-2929
Website: http://parliamentarians.org
Toastmasters International
Telephone: 949-858-8255
Website: http://www.toastmasters.org
Words That Shook the World
Telephone: 310-273-5787
Website: http://www.wordsthat
shooktheworld.com
Acknowledgments
The Boy Scouts of America greatly
appreciates the assistance of Forrest C.
Greenslade, Ph.D., D.T.M., and free-
lance writer Shannon Lowry, a former
associate editor of Boys’ Life magazine,
with this edition of the Public Speaking
merit badge pamphlet.
Many thanks to Malcolm Kushner,
author of Public Speaking for Dummies,
a funny, comprehensive guide to public
speaking. For the tips on stage fright,
the BSA acknowledges Chris Widener,
author, speaker, and president of Made
for Success and Extraordinary Leaders,
and public speaking authority Tom
Antion (www.antion.com).
The Boy Scouts of America is
grateful to the men and women serv-
ing on the National Merit Badge
Subcommittee for the improvements
made in updating this pamphlet.
Photo Credits
Shutterstock.com—cover (notebook
with pen, ©Thep Urai); cover and
page 29 (microphone, ©studioVin);
cover and page 35 (projector,
©nyasha; easel, ©Africa Studio); pages 10
(©PRPicturesProduction), 19 (©Monkey
Business Images), 20 (©Arieliona),
27 (©.shock), 33 (©Mr.Whiskey), 35
(young men, ©Martin Allinger), 37
(©michaeljung), and 46 (©Nigita)
All other photos not listed above are
the property of or are protected by the
Boy Scouts of America.
Dan Bryant—pages 25 (both), 30–31
(all), 38, and 40
Darrell Byers—pages 23 and 28
Tom Copeland—pages 3 and 9
Doug Knutson—page 12
Mary Oakes—pages 4 and 40
Randy Piland—page 39