ASTRONOMY

STEM-Based

BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES

ASTRONOMY

“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”

Astronomy
1. Do the following:
(a) Explain to your counselor the most likely hazards you may encounter while
participating in astronomy activities, and what you should do to anticipate, help
prevent, mitigate, and respond to these hazards.
(b) Explain first aid for injuries or illnesses such as heat and cold reactions,
dehydration, bites and stings, and damage to your eyes that could occur
during observation.
(c) Describe the proper clothing and other precautions for safely making
observations at night and in cold weather. Then explain how to safely
observe the Sun, objects near the Sun, and the Moon.
2. Explain what light pollution is and how it and air pollution affect astronomy.
3. With the aid of diagrams (or real telescopes if available), do each of the following:
(a) Explain why binoculars and telescopes are important astronomical tools.
Demonstrate or explain how these tools are used.
(b) Describe the similarities and differences of several types of astronomical
telescopes, including at least one that observes light beyond the visible part of
the spectrum (i.e., radio, X-ray, ultraviolet, or infrared).
(c) Explain the purposes of at least three instruments used with
astronomical telescopes.
(d) Describe the proper care and storage of telescopes and binoculars both
at home and in the field.
4. Do the following*:
(a) Identify in the sky at least 10 constellations, at least four of which are in
the zodiac.
(b) Identify in the sky at least eight conspicuous stars, five of which are of
magnitude 1 or brighter.
(c) Make two sketches of the Big Dipper. In one sketch, show the Big
Dipper’s orientation in the early evening sky. In another sketch, show its
position several hours later. In both sketches, show the North Star and the
horizon. Record the date and time each sketch was made.
(d) Explain what we see when we look at the Milky Way.
*If instruction is done in a planetarium, Scouts must still identify the required stars and constellations outside under
the natural night sky.

5. Do the following:
(a) List the names of the five most visible planets. Explain which ones can
appear in phases similar to lunar phases and which ones cannot, and
explain why.
(b) Using the internet (with your parent’s permission) and other resources, find
out when each of the five most visible planets that you identified in requirement 5a
will be observable in the evening sky during the next 12 months, then compile
this information in the form of a chart or table.
(c) Describe the motion of the planets across the sky.
(d) Observe a planet and describe what you saw.
6. Do the following:
(a) Sketch the face of the Moon and indicate at least five seas and five
craters. Label these landmarks.
(b) Sketch the phase and position of the Moon, at the same hour and place,
for four nights within a one-week period. Include landmarks on the horizon
such as hills, trees, and buildings. Explain the changes you observe.
(c) List the factors that keep the Moon in orbit around Earth.
(d) With the aid of diagrams, explain the relative positions of the Sun, Earth,
and the Moon at the times of lunar and solar eclipses, and at the times of new,
first-quarter, full, and last-quarter phases of the Moon.
7. Do the following:
(a) Describe the composition of the Sun, its relationship to other stars, and
some effects of its radiation on Earth’s weather and communications.
(b) Define sunspots and describe some of the effects they may have on
solar radiation.
(c) Identify at least one red star, one blue star, and one yellow star (other
than the Sun). Explain the meaning of these colors.
8. With your counselor’s approval and guidance, do ONE of the following:
(a) Visit a planetarium or astronomical observatory. Submit a written report,
a scrapbook, or a video presentation afterward to your counselor that includes
the following information:
(1) Activities occurring there
(2) Exhibits and displays you saw
(3) Telescopes and other instruments being used
(4) Celestial objects you observed
(b) Plan and participate in a three-hour observation session that includes
using binoculars or a telescope. List the celestial objects you want to observe,
and find each on a star chart or in a guidebook. Prepare a log or notebook.
Discuss with your counselor what you hope to observe prior to your observation session. Review your log or notebook with your counselor afterward.*
(c) Plan and host a star party for your Scout troop or other group such as
your class at school. Use binoculars or a telescope to show and explain
celestial objects to the group.
*To complete this requirement, you may use the Scout Planning Worksheet at
http://troopleader.org/wp-contentuploads/2016/03/512-505_16_Wksht_WEB.pdf.

(d) Help an astronomy club in your community hold a star party that is open
to the public.
(e) Personally take a series of photographs or digital images of the movement of
the Moon, a planet, an asteroid, meteor, or a comet. In your visual display, label
each image and include the date and time it was taken. Show all positions on a
star chart or map. Show your display at school or at a troop meeting. Explain the
changes you observed.
9. Find out about three career opportunities in astronomy. Pick one and find out the
education, training, and experience required for this profession. Discuss this with
your counselor, and explain why this profession might interest you.

.Astronomy Resources

Astronomy Resources
Scouting Literature
Deck of Stars; Night Sky pocket guide;
Chemistry, Computers, Geology, Nuclear
Science, Photography, Radio, Space
Exploration, and Weather merit
badge pamphlets
Visit the Boy Scouts of America’s
official retail website at http://
www.scoutstuff.org for a complete
listing of all merit badge pamphlets
and other helpful Scouting materials and supplies.

Books
Consolmagno, Guy, and Dan M. Davis.
Turn Left at Orion: Hundreds of
Night Sky Objects to See in a Home
Telescope—and How to Find Them.
Cambridge University Press, 2011.
Davis, Kenneth C. Don’t Know Much
About Space. HarperTrophy, 2001.
———. Don’t Know Much About the
Solar System. HarperCollins, 2001.
Dickinson, Terence. The Backyard
Astronomer’s Guide, 3rd ed. Firefly
Books, 2008.
———. Hubble’s Universe: Greatest
Discoveries and Latest Images.
Firefly Books, 2014.

———. NightWatch: A Practical Guide
to Viewing the Universe. Firefly
Books, 2006.
Hall, Allan. Getting Started: Long
Exposure Astrophotography.
CreateSpace Independent Publishing
Platform, 2013.
Harrington, Philip, and Edward
Pascuzzi. Astronomy for
All Ages. Globe Pequot Press, 2000.
Lambert, David. The Kingfisher Young
People’s Book of the Universe.
Kingfisher Books, 2001.
Lang, Kenneth R. The Life and Death
of Stars. Cambridge University
Press, 2013.
Legault, Thierry. Astrophotography.
Rocky Nook, 2014
Mellinger, Axel, and Ronald Stoyan.
The Cambridge Photographic Star
Atlas. Cambridge University
Press, 2011
Moche, Dinah L. Astronomy: A SelfTeaching Guide. Wiley, 2009.
Price, Fred W. The Planet Observer’s
Handbook. Cambridge University
Press, 2000.
Schaaf, Fred. 40 Nights to Knowing the
Sky: A Night-by-Night Skywatching
Primer. Owl Books, 1998.
ASTRONOMY

77

Astronomy Resources.

CDs, DVDs, and Videos
Amazing Universe III. Hopkins
Technology, 1995; CD-ROM.
High Resolution Astrophotography.
DamianPeach.com, 2015; DVD.
IMAX Cosmic Voyage. Warner Home
Video, 1996; DVD.
NOVA: Secrets of the Sun. PBS Home
Video, 2012; DVD and Blu-ray.
Wonders of the Solar System. BBC
Home Entertainment, 2010; DVD
and Blu-ray.

Magazines
Astronomy
Kalmbach Publishing Co.
21027 Crossroads Circle
P.O. Box 1612
Waukesha, WI 53187-1612
Toll-free telephone: 800-533-6644
Website: http://www.astronomy.com
Sky & Telescope
Sky Publishing
90 Sherman St.
Cambridge, MA 02140
Toll-free telephone: 866-644-1377
Website:
http://www.skyandtelescope.com

Organizations and Websites
The Astronomical League
9201 Ward Parkway, Suite 100
Kansas City, MO 64114
Telephone: 816-333-7759
Website: http://astroleague.org
International Dark-Sky Association
Website: http://www.darksky.org
NASA Eclipse
Website: http://eclipse.gsfc.nasa.gov/
eclipse.html
78

ASTRONOMY

National Aeronautics and
Space Administration
NASA Headquarters
Suite 2R40
Washington, DC 20546
Telephone: 202-358-0001
Website: http://www.nasa.gov
National Optical
Astronomy Observatory
950 North Cherry Ave.
Tucson, AZ 85719
Telephone: 520-318-8000
Website: http://www.noao.edu
National Radio
Astronomy Observatory
520 Edgemont Road
Charlottesville, VA 22903-2475
Telephone: 434-296-0211
Website: http://www.nrao.edu
The Planetary Society
60 S. Los Robles Ave.
Pasadena, CA 91101
Telephone: 626-793-5100
Website: http://planetary.org
Sky Maps
Website: http://www.skymaps.com
Solar System Exploration: Planets
Website: http://solarsystem.nasa.gov/
planets/index.cfm
Space Telescope Science Institute
3700 San Martin Drive
Baltimore, MD 21218
Telephone: 410-338-4700
Website: http://www.stsci.edu
SpaceWander.com
Website: http://www.spacewander.com
spaceweather.com
Website: http://www.spaceweather.com

.Astronomy Resources

Acknowledgments
The Boy Scouts of America thanks
William Cress, Beaver Falls,
Pennsylvania, who is a longtime
Astronomy merit badge counselor and
an experienced amateur astronomer.
We appreciate immensely his knowledge,
advice, and support in helping to update
the Astronomy merit badge pamphlet.
He gathered an impressive group of fellow astronomers to assist in this effort,
and we thank them here, as well:
• Jane Konrad, Pittsburgh Regional
Center for Science Teachers and
the Pennsylvania NASA Educator
Resource Center
• Dan Malerbo, Buhl Digital Dome,
Carnegie Science Center, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania
• Tim Manka, retired science instructor, an Astronomy merit badge counselor since 1966
• Jean Philpott, Buhl Digital Dome,
Carnegie Science Center, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania
• Pat Plunkett, Wheeling (West
Virginia) Jesuit University

The Boy Scouts of America thanks
Chris Martin, associate professor of
physics at Oberlin (Ohio) College, for
reviewing the Astronomy merit badge
pamphlet and providing updates.
We are grateful to Marcus Valdez,
Fanwood, New Jersey, who serves as
assistant Scoutmaster of Troop 33, and
to the Amateur Astronomers of William
Miller Sperry Observatory at Union
County College in Cranford, New Jersey,
for their assistance with photography.
The Boy Scouts of America is
grateful to Al Dorn and the Omaha
Astronomical Society for their expertise,
assistance, and guidance in updating
requirements for the Astronomy merit
badge and support in developing the
2004 edition. The Society’s website,
found at http://www.omahaastro.com,
provides a wealth of information for the
beginner amateur astronomer as well
as those who have developed a more
serious interest.
The Boy Scouts of America is
grateful to the men and women serving
on the Merit Badge Maintenance Task
Force for the improvements made in
updating this pamphlet.

• Tom Reiland, founder, Wagman
Observatory, western Pennsylvania

ASTRONOMY

79

Astronomy Resources.

Photo and Illustration Credits
Scott Berger, courtesy—pages 25, 54,
68, and 70
Brand X Pictures—page 61
Digital Vision™ Astronomy & Space
CD—page 51
Gemini Observatory/NOAO*/
AURA†/National Science
Foundation, courtesy—page 64
Goodshoot—page 5
NAIC—Arecibo Observatory, a facility
of the National Science Foundation,
courtesy—page 58
NASA, courtesy—pages 27 (Mercury),
28 (Earth), 47, 59 (telescope), 74
(two people), and 76
NASA, ESA, and the Hubble Heritage
Team, courtesy—pages 29 (Saturn)
and 59 (plumes)
NASA, Jet Propulsion Laboratory,
courtesy—pages 27 (Venus),
30, and 36 (asteroid)
NASA, Marshall Space Flight Center,
courtesy—page 72
National Optical Astronomy
Observatory/Association of
Universities for Research in
Astronomy/National Science
Foundation, courtesy—
page 74 (woman)
NOAO/AURA/NSF, courtesy; photo by
David Talent—page 23

*National Optical Astronomy Observatory
†Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy

80

ASTRONOMY

Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences,
courtesy—page 49 (sunspots)
Shutterstock.com, courtesy—cover
(solar system model, ©Best_photo_
studio; galaxy, ©Igor Chekalin;
Earth with sunrise and moon, ©Alan
Uster; satellite dish, ©JoeFotoSS);
pages 9 (©Drop of Light), 24 (©Yury
Dmitrienko), 26 (©iofoto), 28
(Mars, ©Tristan3D; Jupiter, ©Byron
W.Moore), 29 (Uranus, ©Vadim
Sadovski, elements of this image
furnished by NASA), 36 (comet,
©Triff), 38 (©Flashinmirror), 44
(solar eclipse, ©Juergen Faelchle),
46 (©solarseven), 52 (©pockygallery),
60 (©sdecoret), 66 (©chungking), 69
(©Chubykin Arkady), and 76 (©Triff)
SOHO Project, NASA Goddard Space
Flight Center, courtesy—
page 49 (solar flares)
Wikipedia.org/Dante Alighieri,
courtesy—page 37
All other photos are the property of
or are protected by the Boy Scouts
of America.
Dan Bryant—page 6
John McDearmon—all illustrations on
pages 7, 12, 15, 17, 19, 21, 31–32,
34, 40–42, 44–45, 48, 50, and 55–57
Brian Payne—page 10

