ASTRONOMY
STEM-Based


ASTRONOMY
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Astronomy or check Scoutbook for
the latest requirements.
35859
ISBN 978-0-8395-3303-0
©2024 Boy Scouts of America
2024 Printing
FPO


ASTRONOMY 3


4 ASTRONOMY


Contents
Introduction: Reach for the Stars . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Getting Ready to Observe. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
Stars and Constellations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
The Planets and Our Solar System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
The Moon—Our Nearest Neighbor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
The Sun and Stars . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
Tools of the Trade . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
Light Pollution. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
You and Astronomy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
Careers in Astronomy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
Astronomy Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
ASTRONOMY 5





Just as you enjoy
looking up at the
stars and finding
the Big Dipper,
ancient stargazers
had fun naming
the patterns of
stars they saw
every night. The
word astronomy
literally translates
to “naming
the heavens.”
Introduction: Reach
for the Stars
Spectacular shows can be seen in the night sky. From Earth,
we can see nebulae, or giant clouds of gas and dust. We can
see stars dying and exploding. Sometimes it is rare to see
sights like meteor showers or dramatic eclipses. But on any
clear night of the year, you usually can see the Moon and, if
your skies are clear and mostly free from light pollution, you
can see our whole galaxy stretching across the sky.
In learning about astronomy, you will study how activities
in space affect your own planet. Your daily schedule—daytime
and nighttime—is dictated by Earth’s rotation. Earth’s orbit
around the Sun takes a year and gives us the changing seasons.
The Sun’s energy affects the weather, and the gravitational pull
between Earth and the Moon creates and controls ocean tides.
We still have much to learn about space. It wasn’t until
2011 that NASA’s Kepler spacecraft discovered two Earth-sized
planets beyond the solar system. Instruments such as the
Hubble Space Telescope enable us to see visions today that
earlier observers could not have imagined.
We know much about space and its effects on us, but
there is a great deal we don’t yet know. Someday you might
be among the scientists or the serious amateur observers
who make important new discoveries.
An axis is the imaginary line around which a rotating
body, such as Earth, turns. Earth’s axis is a straight
line between the geographic (not magnetic) north
and south poles. Earth’s orbit is the curved path it
follows on its yearly trip around the Sun.
REVOLUTION
ROTATION
.Introduction: Reach for the Stars
ASTRONOMY 7


Getting Ready
to Observe
Know how to protect yourself before you go out in
search of the next great astronomical discovery.
Protect Your Body
When you go stargazing, dress appropriately for the weather—
hot or cold. To help protect yourself against bites and stings
when you go outside, wear clothes that cover all exposed skin,
and be sure to button and tuck them in. Wear shoes or boots—
not sandals—and socks. Insect repellent sprayed on your body,
clothing, and shoes provides added protection.
Moving in the Dark
During the day before a stargazing
outing, survey the area where you
will be observing. Look for drop-offs,
holes, crevices, or other objects like
large rocks or tree roots that you
might not see at night. Take care to
avoid the hazards when you return
at night to observe. Bring red-filtered
flashlights to illuminate the area.
Many insect repellents contain chemicals that may corrode plastic.
Whenever you are applying insect repellent, do so where it won’t affect
your equipment. Afterward, clean your hands before handling a telescope.
It takes about 30 minutes for the human eye
to adjust to darkness. To help preserve
your night vision, use a red filter with your
flashlight. Simply secure a piece of red
cellophane over an ordinary flashlight.
Getting Ready to Observe.
8 ASTRONOMY


Protect Your Eyes
Never stare directly at or near the Sun, even for a few moments.
Never look at the Sun through binoculars or a telescope unless
your equipment has the proper solar filters. Looking directly at
the Sun—even while wearing sunglasses—can cause permanent
blindness or other damage to your eyes that might not be imme-
diately noticeable. The safest way to observe the Sun is indirectly
by projection, which is explained in the chapter called “The
Moon—Our Nearest Neighbor.” Projection is the recommended
method for safely viewing the sun. In any case, always do so
only under the supervision of a knowledgeable adult.
Observing Objects Near the Sun
Mercury, the planet nearest the Sun, always lies close to the
Sun in the sky. Look for Mercury only when the Sun’s disk is
entirely below the horizon. Don’t risk getting the Sun in the
view. This could cause permanent eye damage or blindness.
Heat Exhaustion and Heatstroke
Heat exhaustion occurs when the body overheats because its
cooling methods fail. Watch for these signs: body temperature
between 98.6 and 102 degrees; skin pale, clammy, and sweaty;
nausea, dizziness, and fainting; pronounced weakness and
tiredness; headache; muscle cramps. To treat heat exhaustion,
have the victim lie down in a cool spot with the feet raised.
Loosen the clothing. Apply cool, damp cloths to the skin or use a
fan. Have the victim sip water.
If you are
observing the
Sun and you or a
companion
experience eye
discomfort, cover
the eyes and
seek medical
attention
immediately.
The Moon at new-moon phase also lies in the
direction of the Sun. The new Moon is in the sky all
day, but it is not visible in the Sun’s glare. Do not
look at or near the Sun while trying to view a new
moon. Wait a couple of days after the new moon,
then look for a thin crescent moon in the evening sky
just after sunset.
ASTRONOMY 9
.Getting Ready to Observe


Heatstroke (sunstroke) is life-
threatening because the body’s heat
control system has been overworked
and overwhelmed, resulting in its
failure. Signs include body temperature
above 102 degrees; red, hot, and
dry skin; extremely rapid pulse;
confusion or disorientation; fainting or
unconsciousness; convulsions.
Cool the victim immediately. Place
the victim in a cool spot face-up with
head and shoulders raised. Remove
outer clothing, sponge the bare skin
with cold water, and soak underclothing
with cool water. Apply cold packs, use
a fan, or place the victim in a tub of
cold water. Dry the skin after the body temperature drops to 101
degrees. Obtain medical help immediately.
Sunburn
Sun exposure can catch you by surprise when you are outside,
preoccupied with setting up your equipment or viewing a
solar eclipse. Wear loose-fitting clothing that completely covers
the arms and legs, and a brimmed hat. Apply sunscreen with
a sun protection factor (SPF) of at least 15 to exposed skin.
Don’t forget your ears and the back of your neck. Reapply sun-
screen often and as needed.
Cold-Related Problems—Hypothermia
Hypothermia occurs when the body’s core temperature drops
so low that it is no longer able to keep warm. The key to
preventing hypothermia is to keep warm and stay dry, and—if
you will be outside for extended periods—eat plenty of energy
foods (nuts, dried fruits, peanut butter). Don’t push yourself to
a dangerous point of fatigue.
A person in the early stages of hypothermia may be
shivering. As the victim gets colder, the shivering will stop.
Other symptoms may include irritability, sleepiness, incoher-
ence, disorientation, and the inability to reason or think clearly.
10 ASTRONOMY
Getting Ready to Observe.


Immediately prevent further heat loss. Move the victim to a
shelter, remove damp clothing, and warm the person with
blankets until body temperature returns to normal. Cover the
head with a warm hat or other covering, and offer hot drinks.
If the condition progresses, actively warm the victim’s body.
Place the victim into a sleeping bag with one or two other people.
All should be stripped of most clothing so that skin-to-skin
contact can hasten the warming—and perhaps save a life.
Severe hypothermia requires immediate medical attention.
Dehydration
Dehydration is caused by lack of water in the body.
A person who loses more water than consumed can
become dehydrated—in hot or cold weather. Astronomical
observers should stay well-hydrated while in the outdoors.
Do not wait to drink until you feel thirsty.
Whenever you participate in astronomy activities, taking
a few precautions can help make your outing a fun, safe, and
comfortable one. By anticipating what can happen (such as
exposure to cold or windy conditions), you can help prevent
and mitigate (lessen the impact of) just about any type of
mishap. You will also be in a better position to respond quickly
and appropriately should a mishap occur. Remember to:
• Dress appropriately for the weather.
• Take and use the proper equipment, such as solar filters.
• Drink plenty of water; stay hydrated in warm and
cool weather.
In cold weather, wear layers to keep in the heat.
Bring along a woolen cap, scarf, gloves, extra socks,
and a coat. Keep your arms and legs covered.
Always carry rain gear.
ASTRONOMY 11
.Getting Ready to Observe


Circumpolar star chart


Stars and Constellations
People have always enjoyed studying the stars. To help them
keep track of the stars, ancient Greeks creatively drew imaginary
lines between stars to form images of mythological characters
or other familiar creatures. These star groups are known as
constellations. Today, astronomers recognize 88 constellations.
Year-Round Constellations
Some constellations are visible any time of the year. These
constellations are known as circumpolar because they never
set below the horizon. As Earth rotates on its axis, the stars
seem to circle a point called the celestial north pole. A mod-
erately bright star, Polaris, currently lies close to the pole.
Knowing the circumpolar constellations is a big help in
locating Polaris in the sky.
A star is a hot,
glowing ball of
gas that produces
energy by nuclear
reactions in its
core. In fact, our
sun is a star.
A constellation
is a pattern of
stars in the sky.
Once you can
identify a few of
the bright
constellations,
such as Ursa
Major or Orion,
you can use them
to find fainter and
less obvious
constellations.
Star charts, which you can see on the following pages,
help us find constellations. When using star charts,
remember:
a. The direction you are facing should be at the bottom
of the chart. If you are facing south, hold the star
chart with south at the bottom. If you are facing east,
turn the chart so that east is at the bottom.
b. On a star chart, east and west are reversed! This is
because we are looking up into the sky rather than
down onto Earth.
c. Brighter stars have larger symbols on the map.
d. The sky changes during the night, as the stars rise
and set due to the rotation of Earth, and the sky
changes with the seasons as Earth orbits the Sun.
Thus, a star map is usually only accurate for a certain
day and time.
ASTRONOMY 13
.Stars and Constellations


Ursa Major. The Big Dipper is part of Ursa Major (the Great
Bear), a constellation that includes a few less-visible stars.
The outer stars on the bowl of the Big Dipper always point to
Polaris. Every six hours, the Big Dipper appears to have moved
a quarter of the way around Polaris.
Ursa Minor. The Little Dipper, with stars fainter than the Big
Dipper, is part of the constellation Ursa Minor, or the Little
Bear. Polaris is the end of the Little Dipper’s handle.
Cassiopeia. If you follow the line from the middle star of the
Big Dipper’s handle through Polaris, you will find Cassiopeia.
Its five main stars form an M when they’re above the North
Star and a W when they are below it.
Draco. Draco, the dragon, winds around Polaris between the
Big and Little Dippers. None of its more than 80 visible stars
is very bright; the four stars that form the dragon’s head are
easiest to see.
Seasonal Constellations
Some constellations are visible in the night sky only at certain
times of the year. Twelve seasonal constellations known as
zodiacal constellations are centered on the ecliptic, the path
that the Sun, the Moon, and the planets all appear to follow
through the sky. The zodiacal constellations you can see at
night—Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra,
Scorpius, Sagittarius, Capricornus, Aquarius, and Pisces—
change as Earth follows its yearly path around the Sun.
Spring Constellations
Leo. You can see Leo, the Lion, in the evening sky around
10:00 p.m., from January through June. You can use the Big
Dipper to find Leo. Locate the two stars at the back of the
bowl, next to the handle of the dipper. A line drawn from the
star at the top of the bowl to the one at the bottom will point
to Leo’s brightest star, Regulus.
Some people believe the positions of the Sun, Moon,
and planets among the zodiacal constellations affect
human behavior. This belief is known as astrology.
However, there is no scientific evidence to support
this belief.
14 ASTRONOMY
Stars and Constellations.


Spring star chart—around midnight in mid-April and 10 p.m. in mid-May


Virgo. Virgo, the Virgin, is the largest constellation and is
visible from April through July. To use the Big Dipper to find
Virgo, follow the arc of the handle to Arcturus, a bright star
in the constellation Boötes (arc to Arcturus), then “drive a
straight spike” down to the bright star Spica (spike to Spica),
the bottom of Virgo’s Y shape.
Libra. Libra, the Balance Scale, is a late-spring and summer
constellation with four fairly dim stars. It is one of the most
difficult zodiacal star patterns to spot. Look halfway between
Spica and Antares (in Scorpius).
Cancer. Cancer, the Crab, is visible from January to May,
but it is the faintest constellation in the zodiac. To find it,
follow a line from Leo’s Regulus to the Gemini constellation
(a winter constellation described below). Cancer is between
Leo and Gemini.
Summer Constellations
Lyra. You can see Lyra, the Lyre, from May through November.
In late summer at about 10 p.m., if you look straight up, you
may see a very bright blue-white star. This star, Vega, is Lyra’s
brightest star.
Cygnus. Often called the Northern Cross, Cygnus the Swan
is visible from June through November. Follow a line from
Vega slightly east to another star, Deneb, which is Cygnus’
brightest star.
Aquila. South of Lyra and Cygnus is Aquila, the Eagle. Its
brightest star is Altair, which forms the Summer Triangle with
Deneb and Vega.
Scorpius. In July and August, you can see Scorpius, the
Scorpion, very close to the southern horizon. Its brightest star
is Antares, a red supergiant star near the scorpion’s heart.
A galaxy is an
enormous group
of millions or
billions of stars,
bound together
by gravity. Earth
is in the Milky
Way galaxy.
Part of Aquila lies along the path of the Milky Way
where there are dense star fields.
Of the conspicuous (easy-to-see) stars, only Sirius
and Arcturus are brighter than Vega.
16 ASTRONOMY
Stars and Constellations.


Summer star chart—around midnight in mid-July and 10 p.m. in mid-August


Sagittarius. In July and August you can see Sagittarius, the
Archer, just east of Scorpius. Its main stars form a pattern that
resembles a teapot. When you look at Sagittarius, you’re look-
ing toward the center of the Milky Way galaxy. Scorpius and
Sagittarius may be difficult to view if you live in the North.
Autumn Constellations
Pegasus. Pegasus, the Flying Horse, is best seen from August
through October, southeast of Cygnus. Part of the constellation
is known as the Great Square, an easy shape to recognize.
Andromeda. Pegasus shares one of its stars with Andromeda,
which is visible from September to January. Look eastward
from the Great Square of Pegasus. The Andromeda galaxy—the
most distant object visible to the naked eye—is visible on clear
nights as a faint, misty spot in the Andromeda constellation.
Perseus. You can see Perseus in the autumn and winter, east
of Andromeda. It lies between the constellations of Auriga
(described later in this chapter) and Cassiopeia. Perseus con-
tains the double star Algol. As the stars of Algol pass in front
of each other, Algol appears alternately fainter and brighter.
Aries. Three fairly bright stars make up the main part of Aries, the
Ram. It appears south of Andromeda from October through March.
Pisces. The main part of Pisces, the Fishes, is a string of stars
below Andromeda and Pegasus. Pisces appears in the sky from
October to December, but it is faint and can be hard to find.
Capricornus. Look straight down from the star Altair in
Aquila. Capricornus, the Sea Goat, is a faint constellation,
but when visibility is good you can see it from August
through October.
Aquarius. On dark, clear nights from August through October,
you may be able to see Aquarius, the Water Bearer, south of
Pegasus. One end of Aquarius stretches above Capricornus and
the other is below the Circlet of Pisces.
To locate the
Circlet, an
interesting star
group in Pisces,
look just south of
the Great Square
of Pegasus.
A double star is a pair of stars that are close
together and hold each other captive by the force
of gravity. Each one orbits around the other. In
most cases they are so close together, they look
like single stars.
18 ASTRONOMY
Stars and Constellations.


Autumn star chart—around midnight in mid-October and 10 p.m. in mid-November


Winter Constellations
Orion. Orion, the Hunter, usually is easy to find from October
through April. It is large and distinctive with two very bright
stars—the reddish-orange giant Betelgeuse and bluish-white
Rigel—as well as five other bright stars and several less visible
ones. The Orion Nebula, a cloud of dust and gas several light-
years across, is visible to the naked eye as a fuzzy patch just
below Orion’s belt.
Canis Major. Southeast of Orion is Canis Major, the Great Dog,
which you can see from December through April. Sirius, the
night sky’s brightest star, is a part of Canis Major. Orion’s three
belt stars point downward toward Sirius.
Gemini. From December through May you can see Gemini,
the Twins, which are above and to the left of Orion in the
northern hemisphere. Two bright stars, Castor and Pollux, are
the heads of the Gemini twins.
Auriga. Visible from November through April, Auriga, the
Charioteer, is north of Orion. Capella, a double star in Auriga,
is one of the brightest lights in the sky.
Taurus. Orion’s belt stars point up toward Aldebaran, a bright
orange-red star. Aldebaran is the eye of Taurus the Bull, a
constellation you can see from November through March.
Betelgeuse,
Orion’s shoulder
star, is so huge
that if it were at
the center of our
solar system, its
edges would
extend beyond
the orbit of Mars.
Taurus has two star groups: one a cluster of
stars known as the Pleiades, and the other a
larger, more scattered, V-shaped group known
as the Hyades.
20 ASTRONOMY
Stars and Constellations.


Winter star chart—around midnight in mid-January and 10 p.m. in mid-February


Star Light, Star Bright
Another word astronomers use to describe a star’s brightness
is magnitude.
• Absolute magnitude refers to a star’s true brightness—that is,
the brightness if all stars were viewed from the same distance.
• Apparent magnitude means the brightness of a star as we see
it from Earth. Astronomers give a star a number to refer to this
magnitude. The lower the magnitude number, the brighter the
star. Stars that are brighter than a magnitude 1 have a zero or
negative number. The unaided human eye can see stars with a
magnitude number as high as 6.
Listed here are some of the brightest stars in the sky, the
constellations where they are found, and their apparent magnitude.
Star Constellation Magnitude
Sirius Canis Major -1.46
Arcturus Boötes -0.04
Vega Lyra 0.03
Capella Auriga 0.08
Rigel Orion 0.12
Procyon Canis Minor 0.38
Betelgeuse Orion 0.5
Altair Aquila 0.77
Aldebaran Taurus 0.85
Antares Scorpius 0.96
Spica Virgo 0.98
Pollux Gemini 1.14
Deneb Cygnus 1.25
22 ASTRONOMY
Stars and Constellations.


The Milky Way
When we look at the Milky Way in the night sky, we see our
own galaxy. Apart from other galaxies, everything we see in the
night sky—the stars, star clusters, nebulae, the Sun, the Moon,
and the planets—is part of the Milky Way. Just as its name
implies, it appears as a whitish band of light. For observers in
the northern hemisphere, it is easiest to see during the summer
months in the constellations Aquila and Cygnus.
The Milky Way is our home galaxy, a gigantic disk of
hundreds of billions of stars and vast quantities of dust and
gas. It is about 100,000 light-years across and some 10,000
light-years thick at its center. Stars, dust, and gases fan out
from the hub of this huge whirling disk in long, curving arms
that make a spiral or pinwheel shape. Our solar system is
about halfway out from the center, on a small spur between
two of the arms.
If you live outside a major city, you probably have seen the Milky Way, which can be
viewed without the aid of a telescope or binoculars.
Every one of the
billions of galaxies
in the universe
has millions or
billions of stars.
The Milky Way
appears to
be an average
spiral galaxy.
ASTRONOMY 23
.Stars and Constellations


You can see another galaxy with the unaided eye on a
clear night in the fall—the Andromeda Galaxy. It also is the
most distant object you can see with the naked eye. It appears
as a misty patch of light in the constellation of Andromeda.
Astronomers call the Andromeda Galaxy “M31” and place it
at about 2.5 million light-years from Earth. M31 appears to
be half again as big as our galaxy—150,000 light-years across.
The Andromeda Galaxy is approximately 2.5 million
light-years away. A light-year is the distance
light travels in one year, equal to approximately
5.9 trillion miles.
24 ASTRONOMY
Stars and Constellations.


Some galaxies can be seen through backyard
telescopes at distances of 100 million light-years
or more—distances almost unimaginable.
Using a Planisphere
A planisphere is a flat, circular map of the stars with an overlay
that you can set to show what stars and constellations are visible
at any time of the night and any night of the year. It can be adjusted
to match the exact month, day, and hour when you are looking at
the sky.
ASTRONOMY 25
.Stars and Constellations





The Planets and
Our Solar System
The planets of our solar system travel around the Sun,
each in its own orbit. The four planets closest to the
Sun—Mercury, Venus, Earth, and Mars—are called the
terrestrial (earthlike) planets because they have solid,
rocky surfaces. The four large planets beyond the
orbit of Mars—Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune—
are the gas giants, made mostly of hydrogen and
helium, probably with no solid surfaces.
Mercury is the small, rocky planet nearest
the Sun. It completes a trip around the Sun every
88 Earth-days, speeding in its orbit faster than any
other planet in the solar system. If you could stand
on Mercury, you would see a bloated sun creep
at a snail’s pace through a black sky. Mercury
rotates extremely slowly on its axis—once in about
59 Earth-days. Because Mercury is so close to the
Sun, temperatures on the planet’s surface can reach
a searing 800 degrees. Mercury’s cratered surface
looks much like the surface of Earth’s moon.
Venus, second planet from the Sun, is only slightly
smaller than Earth. The thick clouds of carbon dioxide
and sulfuric acid that cover Venus reflect sunlight,
making it bright but also trapping heat at the planet’s
surface. At 880 degrees F., it’s hotter on Venus than
on Mercury, even though Mercury is nearer the Sun.
The thick, heavy atmosphere creates enormous
pressure on Venus. Space probes that have landed there
have lasted only a few hours before the pressure
crushed them. Venus spins in the opposite direction of
its orbit around the Sun.
Venus is a
scorched world
with temperatures
hot enough to
melt lead.
Mercury
.The Planets and Our Solar System
ASTRONOMY 27


Life on Earth survives beneath a
thin layer of atmosphere that shelters us
from the dangers of space. “Ocean”
might be a more appropriate name for
this planet, because oceans cover nearly
70 percent of Earth’s surface.
Mars, the Red Planet, is the fourth
terrestrial planet. A day on Mars lasts
24 hours, 37 minutes—only slightly
longer than an Earth-day. But Mars
takes almost twice as long as Earth to
orbit the Sun, going around once in 687
Earth-days.
Though Mars is a world with
no rivers, it has winding valleys that
look like dry riverbeds. Scientists
believe that powerful floods once
deluged Mars. Today the planet is too
cold and its atmosphere too thin for
liquid water to exist at the surface.
In 2008, the Mars Phoenix lander
confirmed the presence of ice on the
surface, with more water frozen in
the polar ice caps.
Jupiter, more than 300 million
miles from Mars, is the largest planet
in the solar system. If Jupiter were a
hollow ball, more than a thousand
Earths would fit inside. Despite its
size, Jupiter spins faster than any
other planet, rotating every 10 hours.
However, it takes Jupiter nearly
12 Earth-years to orbit the Sun.
Like the other gas giants, Jupiter
is mostly hydrogen and helium. The
temperature at the top of its colorful
clouds is minus 220 degrees. Down in
the clouds, the temperature reaches 70
degrees at a depth where the atmospheric
pressure is about 10 times as great as it is
on Earth. Jupiter has at least 60 moons.
Earth
Mars
Jupiter
28 ASTRONOMY
The Planets and Our Solar System.


Saturn, the second largest planet, is the farthest from
Earth of the five planets known to early stargazers. Galileo,
in 1610, was the first astronomer to see Saturn and its rings
through a telescope. Up to 1977, astronomers thought Saturn
was the only planet with rings. We now know the other gas
giants—Jupiter, Uranus, and Neptune—also have ring systems,
but Saturn’s is by far the largest, most visible, and most com-
plex. Its rings are made mostly of ice. Saturn also has at least
80 moons. The largest, Titan, is a little bigger than Mercury
and is blanketed with a thick, nitrogen-rich atmosphere.
Uranus (pronounced YOOR-un-nus), a large gas planet,
blue-green in color, was discovered in 1781 by astronomer
William Herschel; its rings
were not discovered until
1977. Uranus is twice as far
from the Sun as Saturn—so far
away that it takes sunlight
about 2 hours, 40 minutes to
reach it. Uranus orbits the Sun
tipped on its side, the result of
what many astronomers think
was a collision with a planet-
sized body long ago.
Saturn with its
rings would just fit
in the distance
between Earth
and the Moon.
Three Earths could fit across Jupiter’s Great Red
Spot, a storm like a hurricane that has raged for
centuries in Jupiter’s southern hemisphere.
Uranus
Saturn
ASTRONOMY 29
.The Planets and Our Solar System


Neptune, the
eighth planet from the
Sun, is so far away that
it takes 165 years to
orbit the Sun. Like
Earth, Neptune has
seasons, but each
season lasts for 41
Earth-years. Neptune is
too distant to be seen
with the unaided eye. In
1989, the Voyager 2
spacecraft tracked a
large dark storm like a
hurricane in Neptune’s southern hemisphere and discovered
great geysers of nitrogen on Triton, Neptune’s largest moon.
Triton is one of the coldest bodies yet visited in our solar
system, with surface temperatures reaching minus 390 degrees.
How the Planets Move
From our home planet, the Sun appears to circle Earth, rising
in the east and setting in the west. But Earth really is the body
that is moving. To understand the movements of the night sky,
keep in mind Earth’s two main motions: It circles the Sun,
going around once in about 365 1
⁄4 days (a year), and it spins
on its axis, making one complete rotation in 24 hours (a day).
From night to night, each planet shifts its position slightly
eastward in relation to the stars, traveling “through” various
constellations as it circles the Sun. Mercury, Venus, and Mars
show this motion most clearly. Distant Jupiter and Saturn
travel so slowly, it’s harder to see their eastward shift against
the stars.
On July 12, 2011,
Neptune completed
its first full orbit of
the Sun since its
discovery in 1846.
Earth’s counterclockwise spin—from west to east—
makes the sky overhead seem to rotate in the
opposite direction, from east to west.
Neptune
30 ASTRONOMY
The Planets and Our Solar System.


Sometimes, a planet exhibits retrograde motion—it appears
to stop its eastward drift and loop back toward the west before
resuming its normal west-to-east movement. For example,
because Earth takes less time to orbit the Sun than outer planets
like Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn, it occasionally overtakes an outer
planet, like a fast car passing a slower one on the highway. As
Earth approaches, the other planet appears to stop its eastward
drift and loop back toward the west. As Earth swings past the
planet, we see the planet resume its normal west-to-east drift in
the night sky.
As Earth overtakes a planet that is farther from the Sun, the planet’s movement
appears to change direction. This phenomenon is known as retrograde motion.
LEO
CANCER
The retrograde motion of the planets puzzled early
astronomers, who named these bodies “planets,”
which in Greek means “wanderers,” because of the
complicated ways the planets move.
ASTRONOMY 31
.The Planets and Our Solar System


Never look at the
Sun to locate
Mercury, as
blindness could
result. Make sure
the Sun’s disk
is completely
below the horizon
before looking in
its direction.
Observing the Planets
Five planets are visible from Earth with the unaided eye:
Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn. Uranus may be
dimly viewed on very clear nights, but only with powerful
telescopes can we view Neptune even faintly.
The Inferior Planets
Mercury and Venus orbit the Sun inside Earth’s orbit, so they
are known as inferior planets. When these planets are between
Earth and the Sun, the side where they are lighted faces away
from us, making them difficult to see. Behind the Sun, they
are out of sight. The best time to see these planets, therefore, is
when they are on either side of the Sun.
Because Mercury is so close to the Sun, it is never seen in
a fully dark, nighttime sky. It is visible only in bright twilight,
either very low in the western sky just after sunset or very low
in the east just before sunrise.
Late winter and early spring are usually the best times for
observers in the northern hemisphere to spot tiny Mercury in
the evening sky, about half an hour after sunset. To find it in
the early morning sky, about half an hour before sunrise, look
in the direction of sunrise during the late summer and fall.
Mercury’s phases
EVENING
VISIBILITY
TO EARTH
MORNING
VISIBILITY
32 ASTRONOMY
The Planets and Our Solar System.


Venus also appears only in the early evening or early
morning sky, but it is much easier to see than Mercury.
Sometimes called the morning or the evening star, diamond-
white and brilliant Venus is the brightest planet as seen from
the Earth. If Venus is in the evening sky, you can’t miss it.
Because different parts of their sunlit areas are visible
from Earth at different times, Mercury and Venus have phases
similar to the Moon’s. At different times, they appear full, gib-
bous (three-quarters full), half-full (like a first-quarter or last-
quarter moon), as a crescent, or anywhere in between.
When Mercury or Venus is on the same side of the Sun as
Earth, the planet’s unlit side faces Earth. As the planet moves
around the Sun away from Earth, its sunlit side becomes vis-
ible as a thin crescent and grows gradually as the planet moves
along. When Mercury or Venus is near the other side of the
Sun, we can see almost all of its sunlit face—the full phase.
The Superior Planets
The planets beyond Earth’s orbit are known as the superior
planets. Unlike the inferior planets, which are always close to
the Sun in our sky, the superior planets can appear anywhere
in the sky on the ecliptic, and they always appear full. Mars,
Jupiter, and Saturn can be seen high in the night sky, long
after the sun has set.
The best time to view a superior planet is when it is in
opposition—when Earth is directly between it and the Sun.
When a planet is in opposition, it rises at sunset and sets when
the Sun rises.
A conjunction occurs when two or more planets
appear near each other in the sky. Major conjunc-
tions—when several planets align—are rare
celestial events that may occur decades apart.
ASTRONOMY 33
.The Planets and Our Solar System


The zodiac is centered on the ecliptic, the path
the Sun appears to follow among the stars.
GEMINI
TAURUS
PISCES
ARIES
TAURUS
ECLIPTIC
CAPRICORNUS
AQUARIUS
SCORPIUS
LIBRA
ECLIPTIC
VIRGO
LEO
CAN-
CER
SAGITTARIUS
SOUTH CELESTIAL POLE
GEMINI
EARTH
NORTH CELESTIAL
POLE
SCORPIUS
SAGITTARIUS
Tracking Visible Planets
All the planets travel within the narrow band of the zodiac,
although they wander around a bit, so they can be easy to
miss. Even if you have a pretty good idea about the location
of the zodiac, you may still have trouble finding the planets.
For help, look at a sky map, which you can download from
the internet (with your parent’s permission) or find at the local
library. Here are a few tips on recognizing the planets.
Mercury. This small planet is hard to spot, but it is visible
without a telescope, either just after sunset or just before
dawn, always in the general direction of the Sun and never
far from it.
34 ASTRONOMY
The Planets and Our Solar System.


Venus. After the Sun and Moon, Venus is the brightest object
in the sky. It can sometimes be seen in daylight, but it is never
more than three hours ahead of or behind the Sun.
Mars. Mars is called the Red Planet with good reason, but
its brightness varies. Check its position in an astronomical
almanac or guidebook.
Jupiter. Among the planets, Jupiter is second only to Venus for
brightness. Its progress across the sky can seem so slow that
you might mistake it for a star unless you track its movement
for several nights.
Saturn. You will not see Saturn’s famous rings with the unaided
eye, but the planet is bright enough to find. Like Jupiter,
Saturn takes a long time to show movement, so consult an
almanac or guidebook before scanning the heavens for it.
Uranus. This distant planet is barely visible to the naked
eye under even good viewing conditions. It moves very slowly,
so to the unaided eye it looks like an average star. Through a
telescope it appears pale green.
Planets do not twinkle like stars because they have
a measurable disk, and more light reaches Earth.
So, the steadiness of the light is a good indication
that you are looking at a planet.
Pluto was discovered in 1930 by U.S. astrono-
mer Clyde Tombaugh. In 2006, the International
Astronomical Union decided Pluto should no
longer be considered the ninth planet in our solar
system because it meets only two of the three
criteria for an object to be considered a full-fledged
planet. Although Pluto orbits our Sun just like the
other planets, and it has enough gravity to pull itself
into a spherical (round) shape, it is now referred to
as a “dwarf” planet because it is smaller and cannot
clear other objects out of its path. Remarkably, even
with its small size, we have learned through the use
of the Hubble Space Telescope that Pluto has five
moons of its own.
ASTRONOMY 35
.The Planets and Our Solar System


Asteroids, Comets, and Meteoroids
Other members of the Sun’s family include asteroids, comets,
and meteoroids—sometimes considered “cosmic debris.”
Asteroids
Asteroids are minor planets of the Sun. Estimates
of their number range into the millions. Some are
only a few feet in diameter. The largest, Ceres, is
about 580 miles across.
Most asteroids orbit the sun in the huge expanse
of space between Mars and Jupiter known as the
asteroid belt or main belt. Sometimes the gravity of
massive Jupiter changes the orbit of an asteroid
so that it crosses the orbits of the inner planets.
Asteroid fragments strike Earth every day, and
scientists believe several large asteroids have
slammed into Earth over the years.
Comets
Comets are often described as dirty snowballs because they are
largely made up of ice embedded with rock and dust particles.
Most comets travel in long, elliptical orbits around the Sun.
When a comet nears the Sun, the intense heat causes the
gases and particles that were frozen together to “melt” and
vaporize. The vapor forms a “tail” that may be millions of
miles long.
Ida the asteroid
Comets that are bright enough to be seen without a telescope
are so rare that only two or three comets may be visible from
Earth every 10 or 15 years.
Some scientists
believe that a
huge asteroid
many years ago
struck near
Mexico’s Yucatán
Peninsula, setting
off a chain of
events that
doomed Earth’s
dinosaurs to
extinction.
36 ASTRONOMY
The Planets and Our Solar System.


Meteoroids, Meteors,
and Meteorites
These three are different aspects of the
same members of the solar system. They
start as meteoroids—stony or metallic
materials in space. Some are microscopic,
others are huge.
Every day, Earth’s atmosphere collides
with millions of meteoroids that burn in the
tremendous heat created by the collision.
If a meteoroid is large enough, the collision
is visible as a streak of light across the
sky—a meteor, or shooting star.
Some meteoroids survive the flaming
fall to Earth without burning up completely.
Those that make it to the ground are
meteorites. Most meteorites are small,
but the largest meteorite ever discovered
weighs about 66 tons. It fell on a farm in
South Africa.
Meteor Showers
Some meteoroids are believed
to be clusters of comet
fragments that continue to
orbit along the comet’s old
path, creating showers that
blaze through the sky as
they pass through Earth’s
atmosphere. Most meteor
showers are strongest in
the early morning hours,
between midnight and 4 a.m.
Some noteworthy meteor
showers, named for the
constellations from which
they come, are listed here.
The Willamette Meteorite was found
in 1902 in Oregon’s Willamette Valley.
It weighs 15.5 tons and measures 9.8
feet long and is the largest meteorite
ever found in the United States.
Shower Date of Maximum
Quadrantid January 3–4
Eta Aquarid May 6–7
Perseid August 12–13
Leonid November 17–18
Geminid December 12–13
ASTRONOMY 37
.The Planets and Our Solar System





The Moon—Our
Nearest Neighbor
The Moon was humankind’s first target in exploration beyond
Earth. People first studied the Moon with just their eyes, then
with Earth-based telescopes, then with robots in space. In
1968, explorers flew to the Moon and studied it from orbit.
The following year, U.S. astronauts landed on the Moon and
brought back rock and soil samples.
Six times between 1969 and 1972, U.S. astronauts explored
the lunar surface and left behind scientific instruments to help
scientists learn more about Earth’s natural satellite. A few
robotic probes have studied the Moon in the decades since,
but the Moon remains a fascinating place with many
unanswered questions.
The Face of the Moon
The Moon’s surface is highly uneven, covered with mountains,
plains, and valleys, and pitted with craters. The Moon is barren,
without vegetation. It has no atmosphere and there are only
traces of water. There are no clouds, no fog, and no snow to
block our view of its surface.
These conditions also cause extreme surface temperatures.
During a typical lunar day, which lasts two weeks, the Moon’s
surface becomes much hotter than water’s boiling point on
Earth. During lunar nights, which also last two weeks, the
surface temperature plummets to more than 300 degrees
below freezing.
The soil samples
astronauts brought
back from the
Moon lack many
essential minerals,
but they are not
poisonous to plants.
Researchers
mixed a tray of
lunar soil with
dirt and grew
plants in it.
Even though one side of the Moon always faces away from Earth, both
the near side and the far side of the Moon receive the same amounts
of sunlight. There really is no “dark side of the Moon.”
.The Moon—Our Nearest Neighbor
ASTRONOMY 39


Mountains, Seas, and Craters
Go out at night and take a good look at the Moon. You will see
lighter areas and darker areas. The darker areas were called
maria (MAHR-ee-ah), or seas, because the astronomers who
pointed the first crude telescopes at the Moon in the 17th
century thought these were large bodies of water. The lighter
areas were called terrae (TEH-ray), or lands. Look at the
Moon through binoculars and you can easily see how early
astronomers might have reached that conclusion.
We now know that the bright lunar lands are rough,
mountainous highlands. The dark seas are broad, level plains.
They are lowlands filled by ancient lava flows.
Millions of bowl-shaped cavities or pits, called craters,
pockmark the Moon’s surface. Some craters span more than
100 miles wide. Some are thousands of feet deep. The Moon’s
broadest craters often are called walled plains because their
sides are much like steep cliffs rising up to mountain height.
COLD SEA
SEA OF RAINS
OCEAN OF STORMS*
SEA OF VAPORS
SEA OF CLOUDS
SEA OF MOISTURE
SEA OF SERENITY
SEA OF CRISES
SEA OF TRANQUILITY
SEA OF FERTILITY
SEA OF NECTAR
*This big plain is called an “ocean” because of its size—1,550 miles across.
Seas on the Moon
Most lunar craters carry the names of astronomers,
explorers, or ancient scientists and mathematicians, but
several craters were named for mythological figures.
40 ASTRONOMY
The Moon—Our Nearest Neighbor.


Your sketch of the Moon for requirement 6a does not have
to show a full moon, but you should select a phase that shows
at least five seas and five craters. Draw the contours of visible
features and label seas and prominent craters. If you have
trouble identifying craters, most public libraries have astronomy
books with lunar maps.
The Moon’s Phases
Due to the rotation of the Earth, the Moon appears to travel
westward since we see it rise in the east and set in the west. If
you watch the Moon’s position against the background stars,
you will see that it also moves slowly eastward due to its orbit
around the Earth. This eastward motion means that the Moon
rises about 50 minutes later each day.
The Moon takes an average of 27¼ days to make one
trip around Earth. But this is not the actual time from new
moon to new moon. Earth also is moving, traveling in its orbit
around the Sun. It takes the Moon about 2¼ more days to
return to a position directly between Earth and the Sun, so the
average time for the Moon to make one complete circuit from
new moon to new moon is about 29½ days.
The Sun always illuminates one half of the Moon, but,
as the Moon orbits the Earth, we cannot always see all of
the illuminated face. Just after new moon we see a slender
crescent. At the first-quarter phase we see the Moon half-
illuminated. During the following week, a gibbous (more than
ARISTARCHUS
PLATO
ARCHIMEDES
HIPPARCHUS
PTOLEMAEUS
ALBATEGNIUS
ALPHONSUS
COPERNICUS
KEPLER
GRIMALDI
TYCHO
CLAVIUS
Craters and mountains on the Moon
ASTRONOMY 41
.The Moon—Our Nearest Neighbor


half-illuminated) moon grows larger still. At full moon, the
Moon is opposite the Sun in the sky so we see a completely
illuminated disk. After the full moon, it becomes a gibbous
moon, then shrinks to half-illuminated as a third-quarter or
last-quarter moon, then becomes a crescent moon again.
Finally it returns to the new-moon phase, where it is invisible
in the Sun’s glare.
The Moon’s position in the sky is slightly different each
night, and it rises later each night, too. With each day, the
Moon rises an average of about 50 minutes later, and it drops
about 13 degrees farther behind in relation to the Sun.
A moon growing
to full is said to
be waxing. As it
shrinks from full to
new, it is waning.
Even as it moves through its phases, the Moon is always a big
rocky ball, roughly 2,200 miles across. Its appearance changes
because half of the lunar surface always faces the Sun, but that
lighted portion does not always face Earth.
NEW MOON
WAXING
CRESCENT
FIRST
QUARTER
WAXING
GIBBOUS
FULL MOON
WANING
GIBBOUS
LAST
QUARTER
WANING
CRESCENT
42 ASTRONOMY
The Moon—Our Nearest Neighbor.


One of the easiest ways to sketch the phases and daily
positions of the Moon is to start your observations when the
Moon is somewhere in the southwestern sky. On your first
night of observing, draw a couple of the constellations that are
visible. Next, draw in the Moon and write the date beside it on
your sketch. At the same hour on other nights, add the Moon’s
new position.
The Moon’s Orbit
The Moon orbits Earth in an ellipse, or slightly flattened circle,
at an average speed of 2,300 miles per hour. Its average distance
from Earth is 238,857 miles.
If the Moon traveled in a straight line, it would leave
orbit and shoot off into space. The force that holds the Moon
in its orbit is gravity, the same force that pulls a ball to the
ground when you drop it. Because the Moon is much nearer to
Earth than any other body, its motion is mainly determined by
Earth’s gravity, and it continuously “falls” around Earth.
Gravitational attraction exists between every pair of
objects. So just as Earth’s gravity tugs on the Moon, the Moon’s
gravity pulls on Earth with an equal force. That pull causes
Earth to waver slightly as it revolves around the Sun. Lunar
gravity also strongly affects Earth’s ocean tides.
The Moon travels
faster at its
perigee, when it is
closest to Earth—
221,000 miles away.
It travels slower at
its apogee, when it
is farthest from
Earth—about
253,000 miles away.
Remember that Earth’s surface is curved. If you could throw a ball
fast enough so that it would land thousands of miles away, Earth
would curve away from the speeding ball just as fast as the ball was
dropping. When that happened, the ball would keep on falling and
never strike the ground—it would be orbiting our planet.
MOON
gravity
tangential velocity
EARTH
The Moon’s orbit
ASTRONOMY 43
.The Moon—Our Nearest Neighbor


The Moon’s Role in Eclipses
An eclipse happens when the Moon moves directly into line
with Earth and the Sun. Eclipses can occur only at new moon
or full moon, and then only when the Moon is crossing Earth’s
orbital plane. Eclipses usually occur several times a year.
There are two types of eclipses: solar and lunar.
A solar eclipse can be a dramatic event. It happens when
the Moon passes directly between Earth and the Sun, so that
the Moon’s shadow strikes Earth. During a total solar eclipse,
the Sun is completely blotted from
view for everyone in the path of the
Moon’s shadow. A partial solar eclipse
is visible off to one side of the path of
total eclipse. The Moon appears to take
a bite out of the Sun instead of fully
blocking it.
When the Moon is at a far point in its orbit, an annular
eclipse may occur. In this case, the Moon appears smaller
because it is farther away, and it blocks only the center of the
Sun’s disk, allowing sunlight to blaze all around its edges.
A lunar eclipse happens when the Moon moves directly
behind Earth, passing into Earth’s shadow. There are several
types of lunar eclipses:
• Partial lunar eclipse—The Moon does not travel completely
into Earth’s shadow.
• Penumbral eclipse—The Moon is completely within the
brighter, outer portion (penumbra) of Earth’s shadow.
TOTAL ECLIPSE
MOONSUN UMBRA PENUMBRA
PARTIAL ECLIPSE ANNULAR ECLIPSE
Solar eclipse
The orbital plane
is the imaginary
flat surface (the
plane) that Earth
marks out in
space as it orbits
the Sun. With few
exceptions, all the
other planets orbit
in or near this
same plane.
NASA has a
helpful website
devoted to
eclipses past,
present, and
future. Go to
eclipse.gsfc.nasa.
gov/eclipse.html.
44 ASTRONOMY
The Moon—Our Nearest Neighbor.


Viewing a Solar Eclipse
Seeing a solar eclipse can be an unforgettable experience—but don’t let
that be the last thing you ever see. Never stare directly at the Sun, even
for a few moments. Doing so can cause permanent blindness. Projection
is the safest way to observe solar activity. However, when using the
projection method, you should never look through the eyepiece.
One way to safely view the Sun’s
image is by projecting it through the
objective lens (the large end) of a
telescope or binoculars and holding
a piece of paper under the eyepiece
like a screen. An image of the Sun will
display on the paper. Never look into
the eyepiece.
If you don’t have a telescope or
binoculars, use the pinhole projection
method. You will need two pieces of
flimsy cardboard. Using a straight pin,
make a small hole in the center of one
piece. Hold this first piece of cardboard
above the second one, lining the cards
up with the Sun as shown. The light
will project an image of the Sun’s
eclipse through the hole in the first
card onto the second card.
SCREEN
STAR DIAGONAL
AND EYEPIECE
CARDBOARD
SHADE
• Umbral eclipse—The Moon passes
into the darkest inner portion (umbra)
of the shadow.
• Total lunar eclipse—The Moon moves
completely within the umbra. It is the
rarest of lunar eclipses.
You don’t need any special equip-
ment to view a lunar eclipse. Lunar
eclipses often go unnoticed, even though
they are visible over a great area. Most
people fail to notice a slight shadow,
dimming, or discoloration of the full moon.
SUN EARTH MOON
PENUMBRAUMBRA
Lunar eclipse
ASTRONOMY 45
.The Moon—Our Nearest Neighbor





The Sun produces
enough energy
every second to
meet the needs of
the whole world
for more than
600,000 years.
The Sun and Stars
The Sun is a huge ball of hot gas about 93 million miles from
Earth. It contains 99.86 percent of the mass of the entire solar
system. If you imagine Earth as the size of a grape, then the
Sun is about 5 feet high—the size of a small refrigerator.
The Sun is made mainly of hydrogen and helium. Energy
is released at the Sun’s core as hydrogen changes into helium
during nuclear fusion reactions. Every second, the Sun converts
564 million tons of hydrogen into 560 million tons of helium.
Four million tons of matter are converted into energy that the
Sun then radiates into space.
ASTRONOMY 47
.The Sun and Stars


The Sun From the Inside Out
The core is the center of
the Sun, where nuclear
reactions take place. The
temperature at the core is
close to 29 million degrees.
The core occupies 2 percent
of the Sun’s volume but
has 60 percent of its mass.
The radiative
zone is the
section where
energy leaves
the core.
Above the photosphere lies the hot gas of the chromosphere (“sphere of
color”), which is in violent motion. The chromosphere may be seen briefly
during total solar eclipses as a reddish rim around the Sun.
Above the chromosphere is the corona (“crown”), which extends outward
from the Sun in the form of the “solar wind.”
In the convective
zone, energy
is carried by
rising and falling
currents of hot
gas called
convective cells.
The photosphere
is the Sun’s outer
surface—the visible
layer from which
most of the Sun’s
radiation and
light escape.
48 ASTRONOMY
The Sun and Stars.


Sunspots
Sunspots are cooler areas
on the Sun (but still about
7,000 degrees F). They
appear in the photosphere
as pairs or groups of dark
spots that can measure
more than 20,000 miles
across. When sunspots
are numerous, the total
energy coming from the
Sun increases slightly. Hot
material near a sunspot
can burst out from the
Sun in what is known as
a solar flare.
Sunspots can cause static and drown out radio signals on Earth.
If the energetic flow from the Sun is strong enough, it can cause
power surges, damage sensitive electronics, and overload power
systems on Earth.
Particles, radiation, and magnetic fields from solar flares bombard Earth.
Sunspots are not permanent features of the Sun’s
surface. They come and go in cycles, usually over a
period of about 11 years.
ASTRONOMY 49
.The Sun and Stars


The Sun and Earth’s Weather
The Sun’s energy drives weather and climate on Earth. It burns
off Earth’s moisture by evaporation, heats the atmosphere, and
creates wind when one air mass becomes hotter than another.
Clouds condense from water vapor that has evaporated from the
oceans, and rain from these clouds returns water to the oceans.
The Reason for Our Seasons
Earth has seasons because of its tilted axis, which keeps the
northern hemisphere tipped toward the Sun for half the year
and away for the other half. The northern hemisphere gets
more direct sunlight in summer, and less sunlight six months
later in winter. Thus, our region receives and retains less heat
from the Sun during the winter.
From our viewpoint on Earth, the Sun seems to rise in
the east and set in the west. But that is actually true only
on the first day of spring and the first day of fall. In the winter,
the Sun rises southeast and sets southwest. During summer,
it rises northeast and sets northwest.
SPRING
FALL
SUMMER WINTER
50 ASTRONOMY
The Sun and Stars.


The average
distance from
Earth to the Sun
is 93 million miles.
Viewing the Sun
It bears repeating: Never view the Sun directly;
your eyesight is too precious to risk. Telescope filters
are not recommended because you are still looking
in the Sun’s direction, so part of your line of vision
falls outside the telescope lens. Also, filters can
shatter, leaving the eyes unprotected, which can
blind the observer instantly. View the Sun only
by projection.
93 MILLION
MILES
ASTRONOMY 51
.The Sun and Stars


Star Quality
Stars are divided into color categories, from hottest to relatively
coolest: blue and blue-white, white, yellow, orange, and red.
Stars are referred to this way because they appear to be these
colors when observed through a telescope.
Blue and Blue-White Stars. The hottest of all stars appear blue
or blue-white. Their temperatures range from 18,000 degrees F
to more than 45,000 degrees F. An example of a hot, blue-white
star is Rigel in Orion. Others include Altair in Aquila and Deneb
in Cygnus (both are in summer constellations).
White Stars. White stars have temperatures from 13,500
degrees F to about 18,000 degrees F. Sirius in Canis Major—the
brightest star in our sky (not counting our Sun)—is a white star.
So are Polaris in Ursa Minor and Procyon in Canis Minor.
Yellow Stars. Yellow stars are cooler, at temperatures of about
9,000 to 13,500 degrees F. The Sun is a yellow star, and so is
Capella in Auriga. For historical reasons, astronomers refer to
these yellow stars using the letter “G,” and thus our Sun is a
“G star.” Other yellow stars include Lambda in Sagittarius (top
of the “teapot”) and Zeta in Cygnus (part of the swan’s wing).
Orange Stars. Orange stars are between 6,000 and 9,000
degrees F. Arcturus in Boötes is an orange star, as is Dubhe
in Ursa Major.
Red Stars. Red stars, the “coolest,” are cooler than 6,000
degrees F. One of the brightest stars, Betelgeuse, is a red star.
Antares in Scorpius also is a red star.
Brightness
The true brightness of a star is determined by its absolute
magnitude or luminosity. A star’s brightness in our sky
depends on both its true brightness and its distance from us.
A star can be really bright and yet, if it is an enormous
distance from Earth, it may appear faint in our sky.
52 ASTRONOMY
The Sun and Stars.


The opposite also is true: A nearby star that is not terribly
bright can shine brilliantly in our sky. Sirius, for example, is
just nine light-years from Earth. It shines more brightly in our
sky than does Rigel, which actually is a much brighter star but
so far away (about 800 light-years) that it appears fainter to
observers on Earth.
A bright star is not necessarily large, either. Some of the
brightest stars are smaller than other, fainter stars.
ASTRONOMY 53
.The Sun and Stars





Tools of the Trade
You can observe objects in the night sky with your unaided
eye. However, with binoculars or a telescope, the images you
see will appear brighter and larger.
Binoculars
Binoculars are perfect for stargazing. They collect more light than
the human eye, so you can see many more stars with binoculars
than with the unaided eye. They also improve the clarity and
intensify the colors of the stars you see.
Unlike a telescope, binoculars allow you to use both eyes
to view. Binoculars show an image the right way up, whereas
telescopes show objects upside down. Binoculars are easy to
transport and less expensive than many telescopes.
Because of their wide field
of view, binoculars are
perfect for studying the
surface of the Moon, scan-
ning the Milky Way, spot-
ting Jupiter’s large moons,
and viewing star clusters.
An ideal size is 10×50,
which means the image
is magnified 10 times
and the main lenses are
50 millimeters in diameter.
The 8×40 and 7×35 are
also good choices.
OBJECTIVE
LENS
PATH OF
LIGHT
Standard binoculars
PRISM
PRISM
EYEPIECE
LENSES
The increased
light-gathering
power of their
wide lenses makes
binoculars ideal
for astronomy.
.Tools of the Trade
ASTRONOMY 55


Principle of a refracting telescope
LIGHT
ENTERS
OBJECTIVE LENS TUBE
FOCUS
FOCAL PLANE EYEPIECE
Refracting telescopes use
a system of lenses. At the
large end of the telescope,
the objective or front lens
collects and focuses light. The
eyepiece, the smaller lens you
look through, is at the other
end. Refracting telescopes
produce sharp images.
Refracting telescope
Some giant binoculars have lenses of
70 millimeters or more and magnifications of
15x to 20x. Wider lenses allow you to see more
stars, but these giant binoculars are so heavy
that they must be mounted on a tripod, like
a telescope, for viewing.
Telescopes
Like binoculars, telescopes gather more light than the
human eye. The two main types of optical telescopes—
those that collect visible light—are refracting and reflect-
ing. A third type, the catadioptric, combines features of
the refractor and the reflector.
56 ASTRONOMY
Tools of the Trade.


LIGHT
ENTERS
DIAGONAL
MIRROR
PRIMARY MIRROREYEPIECE
FOCUS
FOCAL PLANE
TUBE
Principle of a reflecting telescope
In the reflecting telescope, a
concave (bowl-shaped) mirror
at the base of an open tube
collects and reflects light to a
second, smaller mirror near the
top of the tube. The eyepiece
magnifies the image that the
mirrors have formed. The reflec-
tor is the most common type of
telescope and a popular choice
for backyard astronomers.
Reflecting telescope
Radio and X-Ray Telescopes
Radio telescopes pick up images that astronomers would not
be able to see otherwise. Radio waves from space reflect off of
the telescope’s large bowl-shaped (dish) antenna, and the radio
receiver picks up the signals. A computer converts the signals
into images. Radio signals reveal details, including temperature
and composition, of objects in space that give off radio waves.
ASTRONOMY 57
.Tools of the Trade


X-ray telescopes help scientists determine the galaxy’s
hot spots. Cosmic X-rays—the invisible radiation emitted
from very hot objects—captured by telescopes above Earth’s
atmosphere help scientists study dying stars, colliding galax-
ies, and quasars, extremely bright starlike objects that give off
enormous amounts of energy.
NASA’s most sensitive X-ray telescope, the Chandra
X-ray Observatory, captures X-rays from the edge of the
observable universe.
X-rays from distant galaxies are absorbed by
Earth’s atmosphere, making them impossible to
study from the ground.
The dish antennas of radio telescopes are much larger than the lenses or mirrors of
optical telescopes. The Green Bank Telescope in West Virginia is one of the world’s
largest radio telescopes. Its dish measures over 330 feet across.
58 ASTRONOMY
Tools of the Trade.


The Hubble Space Telescope is an
example of an ultraviolet telescope.
The solar-powered reflecting
telescope in an observatory that
circles outside Earth’s atmosphere
is the size of a school bus. Its
sophisticated equipment is operated
by remote control and can get
spectacular images of space.
The Hubble
Space Telescope
captured this
image of plumes
of interstellar gas
and dust, called
“elephant trunks,”
in the Eagle Nebula,
some 7,000 light-
years from Earth.
Ultraviolet and Infrared Telescopes
Ultraviolet and infrared telescopes detect light outside the visible
electromagnetic spectrum. A rainbow represents the visible
spectrum, with infrared light beyond the red end and ultraviolet
light beyond the violet end.
Ultraviolet telescopes help astronomers study the formation
of stars and galaxies. Because most of the ultraviolet waves from
the Sun are blocked from Earth’s atmosphere, these telescopes
have to be placed in space in order to capture the ultraviolet
light from the Sun, stars, galaxies, and other objects in space.
Infrared telescopes detect infrared light emitted by objects in
space. Scientists use this data to detect brown dwarfs and distant
galaxies. Infrared telescopes in space can see the coldest and
dustiest objects in the universe.
ASTRONOMY 59
.Tools of the Trade


Care of Binoculars
and Telescopes
Following the manufacturer’s recommendations and
a few simple tips will help you keep your viewing
equipment in good shape for many years.
• Handle binoculars and telescopes carefully
and with respect. Repeated bumping, shaking,
and dropping can cause the lenses to break or
become misaligned.
• Keep your equipment clean. Keep lenses free
from dirt, debris, fingerprints, and moisture.
Use a cloth (such as a microfiber cloth) and
cleaner made especially for lenses. Apply
cleaner very sparingly to the cloth and never
directly to the lenses.
• Keep dust from building
up on lenses. Aside from
normal cleaning, you may
use a very soft brush (such
as camel’s hair), or com-
pressed air if you take some
precautions. You want to
avoid any contact with the
lenses and any liquid from
the can. Before use, avoid
shaking the can. Always
hold the can upright and
never tilted or directly
overhead while spraying.
Use a few short (a second
or two) bursts of air; stop
immediately if the can starts
to feel cold.
60 ASTRONOMY
Tools of the Trade.


Whenever your
binoculars or
telescope are
not in use, be sure
to leave on the
lens caps.
• Keep water away. Protect equipment from the
elements such as rain, snow, and—in particular—
saltwater, which is corrosive. Repeated use in high
humidity will also have a negative effect
on equipment.
• In the field, use and wear the strap that comes
with your binoculars to keep them safely around
your neck.
• Store binoculars and telescopes in a cool (not
cold), dry place, away from humidity and extreme
temperatures, which will have a negative effect
on the lens coatings and housing. Use the storage
or carrying case and rubber eyecups (in the “up”
position) that came with your equipment.
ASTRONOMY 61
.Tools of the Trade


Other Instruments Used in Astronomy
A spectrometer separates light coming from an object into a
pattern of colored lines, much like a rainbow, called a spectrum.
Each element, such as hydrogen, oxygen, or carbon, gives off
or absorbs particular colors of light. So the unique color pattern
can be used to identify the elements that make up the object.
The colors can be shifted slightly if the object is moving toward
or away from the Earth. Thus, a spectrum can also be used
to measure the speed with which objects are approaching or
receding from us.
Astrophotography
Astronomical photography allows you to keep a record of your
observations of the sky and to share your experiences with
friends and family. Modern digital cameras are very sensitive
to light, and objects appear brighter and clearer in photographs
than through a telescope or binoculars. In addition, you can
adjust and process digital images to bring out even more details
and colors that you cannot see with the eye.
There are many ways to photograph the sky. You can
capture images of the Moon, planets, stars, constellations,
nebulae, and galaxies with a digital single-lens reflex (DSLR)
camera, a film camera, a specialized astronomical digital
camera, or even the digital camera in a smartphone.
Taking Images Through A Telescope
Taking images through a telescope will allow you to see more
details than photographing the objects with a standard lens.
The Moon and planets are so bright that only a
short exposure (usually much less than 1 second) is
needed. It is possible to photograph the Moon and
planets by holding the camera up to the eyepiece, but
it can be difficult to get the object in the center of the
camera and hold it still while you trigger the exposure.
A smartphone adapter or camera adapter will hold the
camera still and keep the object centered. You could also
mount the camera on a separate tripod and aim it
into the eyepiece. A camera remote control (or the
headphones on many smartphones) will allow you
to trigger the exposure without shaking the camera.
You can connect a smartphone
to a telescope using a special
adapter that will keep the object
centered and hold the camera still.
62 ASTRONOMY
Tools of the Trade.


To photograph faint nebulae and galaxies, long exposures
are needed. The telescope will need a drive to track the sky and
keep the object centered. You can download astrophotography
apps for smartphones that allow you to take long exposures or
use the “B” shutter speed setting on a DSLR.
Taking Images of
Stars and Constellations
It is also possible to use just a smartphone camera or digital
camera without a telescope to take wide-field images of the
stars and constellations. You can even capture the International
Space Station passing overhead or an occasional meteor!
You can take a short exposure to see the brightest stars,
or you can take a long exposure to see the stars trail across
the sky. You can also set your camera to take a series of short
exposures, one after another, and “stack” them to simulate
a long exposure. A tripod is necessary to keep the camera
steady during the exposure. If you don’t have a tripod, lean the
camera against a steady object.
On a very dark
night you can
leave the shutter
open for minutes
—or even hours—
to capture the
stars’ movement
or even a meteor.
Photos taken with a digital camera
can be downloaded very quickly
and easily to your computer.
ASTRONOMY 63
.Tools of the Trade


As the stars move across the sky, longer exposures will give you star trails, a
record of the path in the sky taken by the stars.


Processing the Image
After you have obtained the image, you can use photo-editing
software to increase the brightness, change the contrast, and
adjust the colors. You can use software to automatically align
and stack many short exposures to simulate what you would
have seen in a long exposure. Processing your image can bring
out details that were not obvious at first look. But be careful.
Too much processing can make an image look unnatural!
Astronomical Research Cameras
Today, almost all research in astronomy is done with digital
detectors. Just like consumer-type digital cameras, they use a
charge-coupled device (CCD) or a complimentary metal-oxide
semiconductor (CMOS) device to record images. Professional
research cameras are custom built. One of the largest, at the
Vera C. Rubin Observatory in Chile, is the size of a small car
and has 3.2 gigapixels (3.2 billion pixels)! In order to see
objects 100 million times fainter than you can see with
your eyes, the camera is cooled to a temperature of
minus 150 degrees F.
The digital camera in the Vera C. Rubin Observatory in Chile has 189 individual
CCD sensors and is more than 2 feet wide. Rubin Observatory is operated by the
National Science Foundation’s NOIRLab and SLAC (originally the Stanford Linear
Accelerator Center).
ASTRONOMY 65
.Tools of the Trade


Light pollution is a serious energy waste that concerns professional astronomers
and amateur observers alike. In the United States, electricity that wastefully
illuminates the night sky costs an estimated $2 billion a year. The International
Dark-Sky Association works to help provide energy-efficient options that direct
light where it is wanted, not needlessly up into the sky.


During the last
few thousand feet
of its journey to
Earth, starlight that
has traveled
trillions of miles
through deep
space gets
washed out by
bright city lights.
Light Pollution
Light pollution is, very simply, too much artificial light
concentrated in urban areas (areas around cities). The glare
of streetlights, outdoor signs, parking-lot lights, dusk-to-dawn
security lights, and outdoor fixtures around private homes
creates glowing domes over cities and towns. It also can
spoil your view of the night sky.
The Air Up There
Air currents also can affect observing. Turbulent air can ruin
views of the Moon, planets, and faint nebulae. Windless nights
are better for studying the Moon and planets. Other conditions
that can affect observing are clouds, high or low humidity, and
air pollution such as dust and chemicals. Faint stars may be
visible only on clear, dark nights.
Seeing in a Bright Night
If light pollution interferes with your stargazing, try
these tricks.
• Cover your head down to your shoulders with
a dark, opaque (nontransparent) cloth. This will
help prevent light from streetlights, passing cars,
and the glowing sky itself from ruining your
night vision.
• Observe the skies as late at night as you can.
As businesses close and people go to bed, less
light pollution will intrude on your stargazing.
• Look for the bright objects. Urban sky glow will
not keep you from seeing Sirius, Vega, Spica,
Aldebaran, or similarly strong shiners. You should
also be able to spot the brightest star clusters—
the Pleiades, Hyades, and Beehive clusters, for
example—and the spectacular Orion Nebula.
ASTRONOMY 67
.Light Pollution





You and Astronomy
Plan activities to have some fun with your newfound
knowledge of astronomy. Invite friends, and share your
knowledge with them.
Visit a Planetarium or Observatory
Check the activity schedule of a planetarium,
science museum, or observatory in your area
and round up some friends to visit. While
there, pay close attention to the presenta-
tions and displays. At an observatory, find
out about the telescopes in use. Most of all,
ask lots of questions! The people on staff not
only know about astronomy, they know about
practical observing in your area.
Plan an Observing Session
Develop an observing plan for a session when
you will set up a telescope or observe with
binoculars. Assemble the charts and guide-
books you will need. Prepare a red-filtered
flashlight so you can view your charts without
impairing your night vision. Get a notebook or
create an observing log.
Be sure to check the weather forecast and dress appropri-
ately. Even in mild seasons like the spring, nights can get cold.
It pays to have extra layers as well as gloves, a scarf, and a hat.
Scout out the area beforehand to make sure you
are aware of any conditions or potential hazards on
the ground that you might miss when you come
back at night. Before leaving, let someone know
where you will be and when you will return.
.You and Astronomy
ASTRONOMY 69


Throw a Star Party
Plan to do everything you did for your own observing session,
plus more. Find a good date and a place with plenty of room
for the number of people you want to invite. Considering the
time of year and how far north you live, develop a list of space
objects you wish to find during the star party.
Consider inviting Scouts in your troop, your neighbors,
family and friends, classmates, and teachers. When you invite
them, be sure to cover such subjects as weather and proper
dress, observing etiquette, and safety. Encourage those who
have binoculars to bring them.
Contact a local astronomy organization or club
to volunteer to help with a public star party. If you
are unsure whom to contact, ask at a college in
your community.
70 ASTRONOMY
You and Astronomy.


Moon Observation
Date: _________________________________ Time: __________________________
Telescope: _____________________________ Power: __________________________
Crater(s): _______________________________________________________________
Notes: _________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
Write a summary of your observing session and share it with your counselor.





Careers in Astronomy
If you have enjoyed earning the Astronomy merit badge,
you might want to consider a career in the science. To be an
astronomer, you must be observant, logical, imaginative,
intuitive, and curious—your goal is nothing less than to under-
stand the nature of the universe. It helps to be patient and to
have the determination to stick with a difficult problem or long
project until you have seen it through, which can take years.
Astronomers typically are math and science whizzes,
skilled with computers. You will need to take high school
calculus or precalculus, physics, chemistry, and computer
science to prepare for college astronomy.
Reading, writing, and speaking skills also are important.
Astronomers give talks at professional meetings and write
papers for scientific journals. So, when choosing your courses,
do not neglect language, communication, and social studies.
Where Astronomers Are Found
Most astronomers teach at colleges and universities and also
do some research in a particular area of astronomy, such as
planetary science, solar astronomy, or the study of stars or
galaxies. Many who teach astronomy may work in the physics
department of their university. Often, those who teach
astronomy also teach physics.
About a third of professional astronomers have careers
in federal government or at government-supported national
observatories and laboratories. About 10 percent of astronomers
are employed in business or private industry like the
aerospace field.
What Astronomers Do
Observational astronomers design and carry out observing
programs with a telescope or spacecraft, but they do not spend
all their time looking through the eyepiece of a telescope. They
ASTRONOMY 73
.Careers in Astronomy


typically spend only 10 to 30 nights per year working at an
observatory or getting observations from spacecraft. And even
then, they are not looking up at the heavens. They are working
at computers, analyzing and interpreting the information
collected by the telescope and other instruments.
People interested in astronomy
also may find careers as science
librarians or teachers, science
writers, planetarium or science
museum directors, observing
technicians or assistants, telescope
operators, and optical engineers.
Related career opportunities might
be found in computing, image
processing, and instrument design
and building.
Professional astronomers such as theoretical astrophysicists may never
work directly with observing equipment. They often do their research using
supercomputers and complex computer models.
74 ASTRONOMY
Careers in Astronomy.


Space for Amateurs
Serious amateur observers make important contributions
to astronomy. Amateurs are the chief comet-finders. They
map storms on Mars and Jupiter, track the movements
of asteroids, and discover supernovas. Their thousands
of telescopes, computers, and electronic cameras far
outnumber the comparatively few large university and
government observatories. You might prefer to remain a
hobbyist, where you can do real science and you get to
decide how to spend your stargazing nights.





Astronomy Resources
Scouting Literature
Deck of Stars; Night Sky pocket guide;
Chemistry, Digital Technology, Geology,
Nuclear Science, Photography, Radio,
Space Exploration, and Weather merit
badge pamphlets
Books
Consolmagno, Guy, and Dan M. Davis.
Turn Left at Orion: Hundreds of
Night Sky Objects to See in a Home
Telescope—and How to Find Them.
Cambridge University Press, 2011.
Davis, Kenneth C. Don’t Know Much
About Space. HarperCollins, 2001.
———. Don’t Know Much About the
Solar System. HarperCollins, 2004.
Dickinson, Terence. The Backyard
Astronomer’s Guide, 3rd ed. Firefly
Books, 2008.
———. Hubble’s Universe: Greatest
Discoveries and Latest Images, 2nd
ed. Firefly Books, 2017.
———. NightWatch: A Practical Guide
to Viewing the Universe. Firefly
Books, 2006.
Hall, Allan. Getting Started: Long
Exposure Astrophotography.
CreateSpace Independent Publishing
Platform, 2013.
Harrington, Philip, and Edward
Pascuzzi. Astronomy for
All Ages, 2nd ed. Globe Pequot
Press, 2000.
Lambert, David. The Kingfisher Young
People’s Book of the Universe.
Kingfisher Books, 2001.
Lang, Kenneth R. The Life and Death
of Stars. Cambridge University
Press, 2013.
Legault, Thierry. Astrophotography.
Rocky Nook, 2014
Mellinger, Axel, and Ronald Stoyan.
The Cambridge Photographic Star
Atlas. Cambridge University
Press, 2011
Moché, Dinah L. Astronomy: A
Self-Teaching Guide, 8th ed.
Wiley, 2014.
Price, Fred W. The Planet Observer’s
Handbook, 2nd ed. Cambridge
University Press, 2000.
With your parent’s permission, visit
the Boy Scouts of America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org,
for a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.
ASTRONOMY 77
.Astronomy Resources


Schaaf, Fred. 40 Nights to Knowing the
Sky: A Night-by-Night Skywatching
Primer. Henry Holt and Co., 1998.
CDs, DVDs, and Videos
Amazing Universe III. Hopkins
Technology, 1995; CD-ROM.
High Resolution Astrophotography.
DamianPeach.com, 2015; DVD.
IMAX Cosmic Voyage. Warner Home
Video, 1996; DVD.
NOVA: Secrets of the Sun. PBS Home
Video, 2012; DVD and Blu-ray.
Wonders of the Solar System. BBC
Home Entertainment, 2010; DVD
and Blu-ray.
Magazines
Astronomy
21027 Crossroads Circle
P.O. Box 1612
Waukesha, WI 53187-1612
Toll-free telephone: 800-446-5489
www.astronomy.com
Sky & Telescope
P.O Box 420235
Palm Coast, FL 32142-0235
Toll-free telephone: 800-253-0245
www.skyandtelescope.com
Organizations and Websites
The Astronomical League
9201 Ward Parkway, Suite 100
Kansas City, MO 64114
Telephone: 816-333-7759
www.astroleague.org
International Dark-Sky Association
5049 E. Broadway Blvd., #105
Tucson, AZ 85711
Telephone: 520-293-3198
www.darksky.org
National Aeronautics and
Space Administration
300 E. Street SW, Suite 5R30
Washington, DC 20546
Telephone: 202-358-0001
www.nasa.gov
NASA Solar System Exploration:
Eclipses
solarsystem.nasa.gov/eclipses
NASA Solar System Exploration:
Planets
solarsystem.nasa.gov/planets
National Radio
Astronomy Observatory
520 Edgemont Road
Charlottesville, VA 22903
Telephone: 434-296-0211
public.nrao.edu
National Science Foundation
NOIRLab
(formerly the National Optical-IR
Astronomy Research Laboratory)
950 North Cherry Ave.
Tucson, AZ 85719
Telephone: 520-318-8000
NOIRLab.edu
The Planetary Society
60 S. Los Robles Ave.
Pasadena, CA 91101
Telephone: 626-793-5100
www.planetary.org
Sky Maps
www.skymaps.com
Space Telescope Science Institute
3700 San Martin Drive
Baltimore, MD 21218
Telephone: 410-338-4700
www.stsci.edu
spaceweather.com
www.spaceweather.com
78 ASTRONOMY
Astronomy Resources.


Acknowledgments
The Boy Scouts of America thanks
William Cress, Beaver Falls,
Pennsylvania, who is a longtime
Astronomy merit badge counselor and
an experienced amateur astronomer.
We appreciate immensely his knowledge,
advice, and support in helping to update
the Astronomy merit badge pamphlet.
He gathered an impressive group of fel-
low astronomers to assist in this effort,
and we thank them here, as well:
• Jane Konrad, Pittsburgh Regional
Center for Science Teachers and
the Pennsylvania NASA Educator
Resource Center
• Dan Malerbo, Buhl Digital Dome,
Carnegie Science Center, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania
• Tim Manka, retired science instruc-
tor, an Astronomy merit badge
counselor since 1966
• Jean Philpott, Buhl Digital Dome,
Carnegie Science Center, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania
• Pat Plunkett, Wheeling (West
Virginia) Jesuit University
• Tom Reiland, founder, Wagman
Observatory, western Pennsylvania
The Boy Scouts of America thanks
Dr. Edward Murphy, professor of
astronomy at the University of Virginia
in Charlottesville for reviewing the
Astronomy merit badge pamphlet and
providing updates since 2016.
We are grateful to Marcus Valdez,
Fanwood, New Jersey, who serves as
assistant Scoutmaster of Troop 33, and
to the Amateur Astronomers of William
Miller Sperry Observatory at Union
County College in Cranford, New Jersey,
for their assistance with photography.
The Boy Scouts of America is
grateful to Al Dorn and the Omaha
Astronomical Society for their expertise,
assistance, and guidance in updating
requirements for the Astronomy merit
badge and support in developing the
2004 edition. The Society’s website,
found at www.omahaastro.com,
provides a wealth of information for
the beginner amateur astronomer as
well as those who have developed a
more serious interest.
The Boy Scouts of America is
grateful to the men and women
serving on the National Merit Badge
Subcommittee for the improvements
made in updating this pamphlet.
ASTRONOMY 79
.Astronomy Resources


Photo and Illustration Credits
Scott Berger, courtesy—pages 25, 54,
68, and 70
Digital Vision™ Astronomy & Space
CD—page 51
Gemini Observatory/NOAO*/
AURA†/National Science
Foundation, courtesy—page 64
Goodshoot—page 5
NASA, courtesy—pages 27 (Mercury),
28 (Earth), 47, 59 (telescope), 74
(two people), and 76
NASA, ESA, and the Hubble Heritage
Team, courtesy—pages 29 (Saturn)
and 59 (plumes)
NASA, Jet Propulsion Laboratory,
courtesy—pages 27 (Venus),
30 (Neptune), and 36 (asteroid)
NASA, Marshall Space Flight Center,
courtesy—page 72
National Optical Astronomy
Observatory/Association of
Universities for Research in
Astronomy/National Science
Foundation, courtesy—
page 74 (woman)
National Radio Astronomy Observatory
(NRAO)/Associated Universities, Inc.
(AUI)/National Science Foundation
(NSF), courtesy—page 58
Orion Telescopes & Binoculars,
courtesy. Used by permission
—page 62
Jacqueline Orrell/SLAC National
Accelerator Laboratory/NSF/DOE/
Rubin Observatory/AURA—page 65
Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences,
courtesy—page 49 (sunspots)
SOHO Project, NASA Goddard Space
Flight Center, courtesy—
page 49 (solar flares)
Wikipedia.org/Dante Alighieri,
courtesy—page 37
All other photos are the property of
or are protected by the Boy Scouts
of America or are royalty-free stock
images.
Dan Bryant—page 6
John McDearmon—all illustrations on
pages 7, 12, 15, 17, 19, 21, 31–32,
34, 40–42, 44–45, 48, 50, and 55–57
Mary Oakes—pages 53 and 68
*National Optical Astronomy Observatory
†Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy
80 ASTRONOMY
Astronomy Resources.