CHEMISTRY

STEM-Based

BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES

CHEMISTRY

“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”

Chemistry
1. Do EACH of the following:
(a) Describe three examples of safety equipment used in a chemistry
laboratory and the reason each one is used.
(b) Describe what a safety data sheet (SDS) is and tell why it is used.
(c) Obtain an SDS for both a paint and an insecticide. Compare and discuss
the toxicity, disposal, and safe-handling sections for these two common household products.
(d) Discuss the safe storage of chemicals. How does the safe storage of chemicals apply to your home, your school, your community, and the environment?
2. Do EACH of the following:
(a) Predict what would happen if you placed an iron nail in a copper sulfate
solution. Then, put an iron nail in a copper sulfate solution. Describe your
observations and make a conclusion based on your observations. Compare
your prediction and original conclusion with what actually happened. Write
the formula for the reaction that you described.
(b) Demonstrate how you would separate sand (or gravel) from water.
Describe how you would separate table salt from water, oil from water, and
gasoline from motor oil. Name the practical processes that require these kinds
of separations and how the processes may differ.
(c) Describe the difference between a chemical reaction and a physical change.
3. Construct a Cartesian diver. Describe its function in terms of how gases in
general behave under different pressures and different temperatures. Describe
how the behavior of gases affects a backpacker at high altitudes and a scuba
diver underwater.
4. Do EACH of the following:
(a) Cut a round onion into small chunks. Separate the onion chunks into
three equal portions. Leave the first portion raw. Cook the second portion of
onion chunks until the pieces are translucent. Cook the third portion until the
onions are caramelized, or brown in color. Taste each type of onion. Describe
the taste of raw onion versus partially cooked onion versus caramelized onion.
Explain what happens to molecules in the onion during the cooking process.
(b) Describe the chemical similarities and differences between toothpaste and
an abrasive household cleanser. Explain how the end use or purpose of a
product affects its chemical formulation.
(c) In a clear container, mix a half-cup of water with a tablespoon of oil.
Explain why the oil and water do not mix. Find a substance that will help the
two combine, and add it to the mixture. Describe what happened, and explain
how that substance worked to combine the oil and water.

5. List the five classical divisions of chemistry. Briefly describe each one, and tell
how it applies to your everyday life.
6. Do EACH of the following:
(a) Name two government agencies that are responsible for tracking the use
of chemicals for commercial or industrial use. Pick one agency and briefly
describe its responsibilities.
(b) Define pollution. Explain the chemical impacts on the ozone layer and
global climate change.
(c) Using reasons from chemistry, describe the effect on the environment of
ONE of the following:
(1) The production of aluminum cans
(2) Burning fossil fuels
(3) Single-use items, such as water bottles, bags, straws, or paper
(d) Briefly describe the purpose of phosphates in fertilizer and in laundry
detergent. Explain how the use of phosphates in fertilizers affects the
environment. Explain why phosphates have been removed from
laundry detergents.
7. Do ONE of the following activities:
(a) Visit a laboratory and talk to a chemist. Ask what that chemist does and
what training and education are needed to work as a chemist.
(b) Using resources found at the library and in periodicals, books, and the
internet (with your parent’s permission), learn about two different kinds
of work done by chemists, chemical engineers, chemical technicians, or
industrial chemists. For each of the four positions, find out the education and
training requirements.
(c) Visit an industrial plant that makes chemical products or uses chemical
processes and describe the processes used. What, if any, by-products are
produced and how are they handled?
(d) Visit a county farm agency or similar governmental agency and learn
how chemistry is used to meet the needs of agriculture in your county.

Chemistry Resources.

Chemistry Resources
Scouting Literature
Astronomy, Cooking, Electricity,
Energy, Engineering, Environmental
Science, Fingerprinting, Fire Safety,
Forestry, Gardening, Geology, Inventing,
Medicine, Metalwork, Nuclear Science,
Oceanography, Painting, Plant Science,
Pottery, Public Health, Pulp and Paper,
Soil and Water Conservation, Space
Exploration, Textile, and Veterinary
Medicine merit badge pamphlets
Visit the Boy Scouts of America’s
official retail website at
http://www.scoutstuff.org for a
complete listing of all merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.

Books
Balbes, Lisa M. Nontraditional Careers
for Chemists: New Formulas in
Chemistry. Oxford University Press,
2006.
Bonnet, Bob. Science Fair Projects:
Chemistry. Sterling, 2001.
Brown, Cynthia Light. Amazing Kitchen
Chemistry Projects You Can Build
Yourself. Nomad Press, 2008.

94

CHEMISTRY

Churchill, E. Richard, et al. 365 Simple
Science Experiments With Everyday
Materials. Black Dog & Leventhal
Publishers, 2013.
———. 365 More Simple Science
Experiments With Everyday
Materials. Black Dog & Leventhal
Publishers, 2014.
Editors of TIME. Big Book of Science
Experiments: A Step-by-Step Guide.
Time for Kids, 2011.
Evernden, Margery. The Experimenters:
Twelve Great Chemists. Avisson
Press, 2001.
Franceschetti, Donald R., ed. Careers in
Chemistry. Salem Press, 2013.
Gardner, Robert. Science Projects About
Kitchen Chemistry. Enslow, 1999.
Kramer, Alan. How to Make a Chemical
Volcano and Other Mysterious
Experiments. Scholastic, 1991.
Newmark, Ann. Chemistry. Dorling
Kindersley, 2005.
Potter, Jean. Science in Seconds for
Kids: Over 100 Experiments You
Can Do in Ten Seconds or Less.
Wiley, 1995.

.Chemistry Resources

Snyder, Carl H. The Extraordinary
Chemistry of Ordinary Things.
Wiley, 1995.
VanCleave, Janice Pratt. Janice
VanCleave’s A+ Projects in
Chemistry. Wiley, 1993.
———. Janice VanCleave’s Chemistry
for Every Kid: 101 Easy Experiments
That Really Work. Wiley, 1989.
Wolke, Robert L. What Einstein
Didn’t Know: Scientific Answers to
Everyday Questions. Dell, 1999.
Woodburn, John H. Opportunities in
Chemistry Careers. VGM Career
Books, 2002.

Organizations and Websites
American Chemical Society
1155 16th St. NW
Washington, DC 20036
Toll-free telephone: 800-227-5558
Website: http://www.acs.org
Occupational Safety and
Health Administration
U.S. Department of Labor
200 Constitution Ave. NW
Washington, DC 20210
Website: http://www.osha.gov
The Science Page
Website: http://sciencepage.org
U.S. Department of Agriculture
1400 Independence Ave. SW
Washington, DC 20250
Website: http://www.usda.gov
U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency
Ariel Rios Building
1200 Pennsylvania Ave. NW
Washington, DC 20460

Telephone: 202-272-0167
Website: http://www.epa.gov
U.S. Food and Drug Administration
10903 New Hampshire Ave.
Silver Spring, MD 20993
Toll-free telephone: 888-463-6332
Website: http://www.fda.gov
WebElements™ Periodic table is
available at http://www. webelements.
com. A periodic table with models
can be found at http://www.pittsfordschools.org/webpages/jmellon/
general.cfm.

Acknowledgments
The Boy Scouts of America thanks
Scouter Gene Youngerman, Austin,
Tex., for his assistance with revising
the requirements and text for this new
edition of the Chemistry merit badge
pamphlet. Thanks also to reviewer
Pat Hallquist, Oshkosh, Wis. The BSA
is grateful to the following members
of Alpha Chi Sigma Fraternity, professionals in chemistry, for their contributions to the previous edition of the
Chemistry merit badge pamphlet and
for their continued interest in this
new edition: Albert C. Holler, Maurice
M. Bursey, Timothy Bushnell, James P.
Deavor, Jeffrey H. Glans, and Howard
L. McLean.
We appreciate the expertise of
Dr. Erwin Goldman, National Onion
Association, for technical assistance
with the onion experiment. Thanks
to the Sherwin-Williams Company,
Cleveland, Ohio, for use of the safety
data sheet on pages 23–24.

CHEMISTRY

95

