SMALL-BOAT
SAILING
STEM-Based


SMALL-BOAT
SAILING
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


35950
ISBN 978-0-8395-3356-6
©2025 Scouting America
2025 Printing
Note to the Counselor
Merit badge counselors are responsible for following the
requirements, procedures, and techniques presented in this
pamphlet and for ensuring that each Scout earning the merit
badge is able to demonstrate knowledge and skills at a level
consistent with the requirements. In addition, counselors must
ensure that all applicable Scouting America safety policies,
including Safe Swim Defense and Safety Afloat, are followed
during training, practice, and review.
Counselors for the Small-Boat Sailing merit badge must be
registered members of Scouting America, have current training
in Safe Swim Defense and Safety Afloat, and be approved by
the local council Advancement Committee. Councils with an
Aquatics Committee should utilize that committee to coordinate
with the Advancement Committee for approval of qualified
counselors.
All counselors should have formal training in the know-
ledge and skills indicated by the requirements, experience in
teaching such skills to youth, and experience in identifying
and managing risks associated with the activities involved.
For the Small-Boat Sailing merit badge, appropriate credentials
include instructor certification with a recognized sailing
agency or school, U.S. Sailing, or the American Sailing
Association for sailing with different hull types including
the rig being used for instruction. Counselors should also
be familiar with the requirements for the Small-Boat Sailing
merit badge and be able to perform the skills associated with
each requirement. The council Advancement Committee may
approve counselors with similar experience and training in
knowledge, skill, safety, and instruction.
FPO


SMALL-BOAT SAILING 3
Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Small-Boat-Sailing or check
Scoutbook for the latest requirements.


4 SMALL-BOAT SAILING


SMALL-BOAT SAILING 5
Contents
Sailing Safety and Preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Sailboat Basics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
Wind . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
Getting Underway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
Sailing Fundamentals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
Marlinespike Seamanship . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
Rules of the Road . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
Emergencies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74
Maintenance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
History of Sailing in America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89
Small-Boat Sailing Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93





SMALL-BOAT SAILING 7
.Sailing Safety and Preparation
The complete text
of Safety Afloat
can be found in
the Guide to Safe
Scouting, which
can be found at
scouting.org/
health-and-safety/
gss.
Sailing Safety
and Preparation
Sailing is an enjoyable pastime. The serenity of the water
can make you feel as though you have escaped from everyday
life. However, smooth sailing requires paying careful attention
to safety.
Scouting America Safety Afloat
When earning any of the aquatic merit badges, it is
important to follow safety rules and use self-discipline
and good judgment. Small-boat sailing will be among
the most memorable of your Scouting experiences if
you understand and follow the points of Safety Afloat.
These guidelines were developed to promote boating safety and
to set standards for safe unit activity afloat. They apply to all
sailing activities.
1. Qualified Supervision. All activity afloat must be supervised
by a mature and conscientious adult age 21 or older who under-
stands and knowingly accepts responsibility for the well-being
and safety of those in his or her care and who is trained in
and committed to compliance with the nine points of Scouting
America Safety Afloat. That supervisor must be skilled in the
safe operation of the craft for the specific activity, knowledge-
able in accident prevention, and prepared for emergency situa-
tions. If the adult with Safety Afloat training lacks the necessary
boat operating and safety skills, then he or she may serve as the
supervisor only if assisted by other adults, camp staff person-
nel, or professional tour guides who have the appropriate skills.
Additional leadership is provided in ratios of one trained adult,
staff member, or guide per 10 participants. For Cub Scouts, the
leadership ratio is one trained adult, staff member, or guide per
five participants. At least one leader must be trained in first aid


8 SMALL-BOAT SAILING
Sailing Safety and Preparation.
including CPR. Any swimming done in conjunction with the
activity afloat must be supervised in accordance with Scouting
America Safe Swim Defense standards. It is strongly recommend-
ed that all units have at least one adult or older youth member
currently trained in Scouting America Aquatics Supervision:
Paddle Craft Safety to assist in the planning and conduct of all
activities afloat.
2. Personal Health Review. A complete health history is
required of all participants as evidence of fitness for boating
activities. Forms for minors must be signed by a parent or
legal guardian. Participants should be asked to relate any
recent incidents of illness or injury just prior to the activity.
Supervision and protection should be adjusted to anticipate
any potential risks associated with individual health conditions.
For significant health conditions, the adult supervisor should
require an examination by a physician and consult with a
parent, guardian, or caregiver for appropriate precautions.
3. Swimming Ability. Operation of any boat on a float trip is
limited to youth and adults who have completed the Scouting
America swimmer classification test. Swimmers must complete
the following test, which must be administered annually.
Jump feetfirst into water over the head in depth. Level off and
swim 75 yards in a strong manner using one or more of the
following strokes: sidestroke, breaststroke, trudgen, or crawl;
then swim 25 yards using an easy, resting backstroke. The 100
yards must be completed in one swim without stops and must
include at least one sharp turn. After completing the swim, rest
by floating.
• For activity afloat, those not classified as a swimmer are lim-
ited to multiperson craft during outings or float trips on calm
water with little likelihood of capsizing or falling overboard.
They may operate a fixed-seat rowboat or pedal boat accom-
panied by a buddy who is a swimmer. They may paddle or
ride in a canoe or other paddle craft with an adult swimmer
skilled in that craft as a buddy. They may ride as part of a
group on a motorboat or sailboat operated by a skilled adult.
4. Life Jackets. Properly fitted U.S. Coast Guard–approved life
jackets must be worn by all persons engaged in boating activity
(rowing, canoeing, sailing, boardsailing, motorboating, waterski-
ing, rafting, tubing, and kayaking). Type III life jackets are recom-
mended for general recreational use.
Use sunscreen
with a sun
protection factor
(SPF) of at least
15. Sunglasses, a
wide-brimmed hat,
long-sleeved shirt,
and lip balm with
an SPF of at least
15 will give you
further protection
from the sun.


SMALL-BOAT SAILING 9
.Sailing Safety and Preparation
• For vessels over 20 feet in length, life jackets need not be
worn when participants are below deck or on deck when the
qualified supervisor aboard the vessel determines that it is
prudent to abide by less-restrictive state and federal regula-
tions concerning the use and storage of life jackets, for exam-
ple, when a cruising vessel with safety rails is at anchor.
All participants not classified as swimmers must wear a life
jacket when on deck underway.
• Life jackets need not be worn when an activity falls under
Safe Swim Defense guidelines—for example, when an
inflated raft is used in a pool or when snorkeling from an
anchored craft.
5. Buddy System. All participants in an activity afloat are paired
as buddies who are always aware of each other’s situation and
prepared to sound an alarm and lend assistance immediately
when needed. When several craft are used on a float trip, each
boat on the water should have a “buddy boat.” All buddy pairs
must be accounted for at regular intervals during the activity
and checked off the water by the qualified supervisor when the
activity is over. Buddies either ride in the same boat or stay
near each other when riding in single-person craft.
6. Skill Proficiency. Everyone in an activity afloat must have
sufficient knowledge and skill to participate safely. Passengers
should know how their movement affects boat stability and
have a basic understanding of self-rescue. Boat operators must
meet government requirements, be able to maintain control of
their craft, know how changes in the environment influence
that control, and undertake activities only that are within their
personal and group capabilities.
• Content of training exercises should be appropriate for the
age, size, and experience of the participants, and should cover
basic skills on calm water of limited extent before proceeding
to advanced skills involving current, waves, high winds, or
extended distance. At a minimum, instructors for canoes and
kayaks should be able to demonstrate the handling and rescue
skills required for Scouting America Aquatics Supervision:
Paddle Craft Safety. All instructors must have at least one
assistant who can recognize and respond appropriately if the
instructor’s safety is compromised.
• Anyone engaged in recreational boating using human-pow-
ered craft on flatwater ponds or controlled lake areas free
of conflicting activities should be instructed in basic safety


10 SMALL-BOAT SAILING
Sailing Safety and Preparation.
procedures prior to launch, and allowed to proceed after they
have demonstrated the ability to control the boat adequately
to return to shore at will.
• For recreational sailing, at least one person aboard should
be able to demonstrate basic sailing proficiency (tacking,
reaching, and running) sufficient to return the boat to the
launch point. Extended cruising on a large sailboat requires
either a professional captain or an adult with sufficient
experience to qualify as a bareboat skipper.
• Motorboats may be operated by youth, subject to state
requirements, only when accompanied in the boat by an
experienced leader or camp staff member who meets state
requirements for motorboat operation. Extended cruising on
a large power boat requires either a professional captain or
an adult with similar qualifications.
• Before a unit using human-powered craft controlled by youth
embarks on a float trip or excursion that covers an extended
distance or lasts longer than four hours, each participant
should either receive a minimum of three hours training and
supervised practice or demonstrate proficiency in maneuver-
ing the craft effectively over a 100-yard course and recovering
from a capsize.
• Self-guided unit trips on Class III whitewater may only be
done after all participants have received American Canoe
Association or equivalent training for the class of water and
type of craft involved. Unit trips on whitewater sections of
rivers rated Class IV are only allowed in rafts with a profes-
sionally trained guide in each raft. Trips above Class IV are
not allowed.
7. Planning. Proper planning is necessary to ensure a safe,
enjoyable exercise afloat. All plans should include a scheduled
itinerary, notification of appropriate parties, communication
arrangements, contingencies in case of bad weather or
equipment failure, and emergency response options.
• Preparation. Any boating activity requires access to the
proper equipment and transportation of gear and partici-
pants to the site. Determine what state and local regula-
tions are applicable. Get permission to use or cross private
property. Determine whether personal resources will be
used or whether outfitters will supply equipment, food, and
shuttle services. Lists of group and personal equipment


SMALL-BOAT SAILING 11
.Sailing Safety and Preparation
and supplies must be compiled and checked. Even short
trips require selecting a route, checking water levels, and
determining alternative pull-out locations. Changes in
water level, especially on moving water, may pose signifi-
cant, variable safety concerns. Obtain current charts and
information about the waterway and consult those who
have traveled the route recently.
• Float Plan. Complete the preparation by writing a detailed
itinerary, or float plan, noting put-in and pull-out locations
and waypoints, along with the approximate time the group
should arrive at each. Travel time should be estimated generously.
• Notification. File the float plan with parents and guardians,
the local council office if traveling on running water, and
local authorities if appropriate. Assign a member of the unit
committee to alert authorities if prearranged check-ins are
overdue. Make sure everyone is promptly notified when the
trip is concluded.
• Weather. Check the forecast just before setting out, and
keep an alert weather eye. Anticipate changes and bring
all craft ashore when rough weather threatens. Wait at least
30 minutes before resuming activities after the last incidence
of thunder or lightning.
• Contingencies. Planning must identify possible emergencies
and other circumstances that could force a change of
plans. Develop alternative plans for each situation. Identify
local emergency resources such as EMS systems, sheriff’s
departments, or ranger stations. Check your primary
communication system, and identify backups, such as the
nearest residence to a campsite. Cell phones and radios may
lose coverage, run out of power, or suffer water damage.
8. Equipment. All craft must be suitable for the activity, be
seaworthy, and float if capsized. All craft and equipment must
meet regulatory standards, be properly sized, and be in good
repair. Spares, repair materials, and emergency gear must be
carried as appropriate. Life jackets and paddles must be sized to
the participants. Properly designed and fitted helmets must be
worn when running rapids rated Class II and above. Emergency
equipment such as throw bags, signal devices, flashlights,
heat sources, first-aid kits, radios, and maps must be ready for
use. Spare equipment, repair materials, extra food and water,
and dry clothes should be appropriate for the activity. All
gear should be stowed to prevent loss and water damage. For


12 SMALL-BOAT SAILING
Sailing Safety and Preparation.
float trips with multiple craft, the number of craft should be
sufficient to carry the party if a boat is disabled, and critical
supplies should be divided among the craft.
9. Discipline. Rules are effective only when followed. All par-
ticipants should know, understand, and respect the rules and
procedures for safe boating activities provided by Safety Afloat
guidelines. Applicable rules should be discussed prior to the out-
ing and reviewed for all participants near the boarding area just
before the activity afloat begins. People are more likely to follow
directions when they know the reasons for rules and procedures.
Consistent, impartially applied rules supported by skill and good
judgment provide stepping-stones to a safe, enjoyable outing.
First Aid
When you are the skipper of a boat, you are responsible for the
safety of all those on board. If someone becomes ill or gets hurt
while on the water, getting medical help might take some time.
You have to be prepared to handle minor injuries and possible
medical emergencies until help is available.
Hypothermia is a condition in which the body loses heat
faster than it can create it, and the victim starts to feel cold.
There are a number of stages of hypothermia, beginning with
shivering and chattering teeth, then leading to finger and toe
numbness, mental confusion, loss of consciousness, and, in
extreme cases, death.
To treat hypothermia, move the victim to a warm, dry area.
If this is not possible, try to shield the victim from wind, rain,
and spray. Remove wet clothing. Wrap the person in layers of
dry clothing, blankets, or towels. If the victim is conscious,
offer warm liquids to drink, but only if the victim can
swallow comfortably.
To avoid hypothermia, participants need to stay dry and
well-insulated from cold and wind chill. Dressing properly for
the weather can prevent hypothermia.
When a person’s body cannot cool itself sufficiently on a
hot, sunny day, heat exhaustion could occur, causing the victim
to feel faint. Early symptoms of heat exhaustion include heavy
sweating, reddening of the skin, headache, fatigue, difficulty
concentrating, and possible loss of consciousness.
Heat exhaustion can lead to heatstroke, which is very
serious. Sweating, which is the body’s natural protection from


SMALL-BOAT SAILING 13
.Sailing Safety and Preparation
overheating, may stop entirely as the body dehydrates (dries
out) and begins to shut down. Loss of consciousness soon
follows. To treat heatstroke, sponge the person with cool water.
Get medical help immediately. If not treated promptly, the
victim could die.
To prevent heat emergencies, drink plenty of fluids, wear
a hat and sunglasses, and apply a sunscreen with an SPF of
15 or higher. Avoid unnecessary direct sun exposure, and limit
strenuous physical activity.
Motion sickness (called seasickness on boats) can happen
to anyone, although some people are more prone to it than
others. The rougher the sea conditions, the more likely it is
to occur. Motion sickness causes victims to feel sick to their
stomachs and can lead to vomiting. It helps if a seasick victim
remains in fresh air and stares at the horizon. The worst place
to be is down below in an enclosed cabin. Motion sickness
can make a person feel miserable, but it normally is not life-
threatening. Comfort the victim as much as possible until you
can get to shore or smoother waters. The nausea goes away
quickly after the motion stops.
Applying an ice pack to a contusion, or bruise, will reduce
pain and swelling. Cuts, scratches, abrasions, and puncture
wounds can all lead to infection if not cleaned and bandaged
properly with a sterile dressing. Minor wounds can be washed
carefully with soap and water and bandaged. Deeper cuts or
puncture wounds may need stitches, antibiotics, and a tetanus
shot to prevent infection. Return to shore at once and visit
a doctor.
If a wound bleeds, press a clean cloth or bandage to the
area until the bleeding stops. If the bleeding does not stop in
a few minutes, get medical attention.
Blisters can occur from continuous rubbing (such as from
a shoe or handling sheets or lines), burns, or allergic reactions
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) is the important first response in
the event of cardiac emergency, and such emergencies can occur as the
result of any strenuous activity. CPR is used in drowning accidents when
submersion has caused respiratory and cardiac arrest, and individuals
trained in CPR should be included in every aquatic outing. Complete
CPR should be attempted only by people qualified by practice under
supervision of a trained instructor. The Scouts BSA handbook and the
First Aid merit badge pamphlet explain CPR and when it should be used.
Frightened or
anxious victims
might breathe
too heavily or
too deeply, which
can result in
hyperventilation.
Calmly encourage
the person to
relax and
breathe slowly.


14 SMALL-BOAT SAILING
Sailing Safety and Preparation.
(such as from poison ivy). Avoid breaking a blister. Doing so
can lead to infection. Instead, cover and protect that area of the
skin from further damage. Most blisters will shrink and disap-
pear on their own. If you have any doubt, see a doctor.
Required Equipment
The U.S. Coast Guard requires that every vessel carry certain
safety equipment while underway. Some states also require that
boat operators take an approved boating safety course and carry
an operator’s certificate. Many states require small boats to be
registered and to display numbers on the hull. Other states exempt
small sailboats from registration if they do not have motors.
Life jackets are required in every state and on every vessel,
no matter how big or small. Every person on board is required
to have one. Roughly 90 percent of all boating fatalities result
from drowning. Most drowning victims were not wearing a life
jacket. Scouting America policy requires that everyone wear a
life jacket when on the open water in a small boat.
A life jacket is a wearable personal flotation device and is
available in a variety of sizes and designs. The law requires that
the life jacket must be the correct size for the person who wears
it. It must be in serviceable condition, and it must be approved by
the U.S. Coast Guard. The USCG also specifies that any sailboat
TYPE I (OFFSHORE LIFE JACKET) TYPE II (NEARSHORE
BUOYANT VEST)
TYPE III (FLOTATION AID)
You can tell if a life
jacket meets USCG
standards by looking
for a USCG approval
number on it.
Life jackets


SMALL-BOAT SAILING 15
.Sailing Safety and Preparation
16 feet or longer must carry a Type
IV throwable flotation device on
board, in addition to a life jacket for
each passenger. A throwable device,
such as a cushion or life ring,
provides immediate emergency
buoyancy to an overboard victim.
If you find yourself sailing
in low-visibility conditions,
such as fog, you will need a
horn. You are required to alert
other vessels of your presence
by sounding one long blast
and two short blasts. The law
requires that boats shorter than
26 feet sound the horn for
three to five seconds. The horn
should be loud enough to be heard at least one-half mile away.
Bigger boats need louder horns that can be heard at least one
mile away.
Sailing a small sailboat at night is not a good idea. However,
if you do find yourself out after dark, you must have a light.
A small sailboat without a motor must display a white light at
night in time to prevent a collision. A flashlight will do. Shining
it on your sail to reflect the light is a good way to get the atten-
tion of other vessels so they will not accidentally hit you. For
suggested additional equipment, see the preparation checklist in
the “Getting Underway” chapter.
All boaters have the responsibility to learn and follow
the rules of their state and of the U.S. Coast Guard.
Contact your police department’s marine division or
your state boating law administrator’s office for full
details on requirements in your area.
TYPE V
(SPECIAL-USE DEVICE)
TYPE IV (THROWABLE DEVICE)
Throwable
flotation
devices also
must be
USCG-
approved
and in good
condition.


16 SMALL-BOAT SAILING
Sailing Safety and Preparation.
Weather and Water Conditions
The speed of the wind determines how much power the sails
have to work with. Gentler winds, which sailors call light air,
make sailing slow, peaceful, and relaxing. Medium wind speeds
are often the most fun for sailors. Higher winds, or heavy air, can
be dangerous for unprepared or inexperienced sailors.
Wise sailors do not leave land without first checking the
weather forecast. Perhaps the most important item in the forecast
is the predicted wind speed. You cannot control the speed of the
wind, but you can be prepared for it.
If the wind is too strong for your skill level, it could be dan-
gerous. Strong wind and rough seas can swamp boats or cause
them to capsize, or overturn. Small boats are particularly vulner-
able. Always check the weather forecast before you go sailing. If
in doubt, do not go out.
When a thunderstorm passes over water, sailors call it a
squall. Severe squalls can bring heavy rain, lightning, hail, and
damaging winds. Wind gusts can reach hurricane velocity. A
squall is a serious threat to any small boat, especially a sailboat. If
you see dark clouds rising in the sky and hear thunder rumbling
in the distance, head to the safety of the harbor immediately.
If you cannot make it to safety before a squall strikes:
• Lower your sails so you do not capsize in a gust.
• Anchor to hold your position and to keep the bow aimed into
the wind.
• Stay low and in the center of the boat to maximize
its stability.
• Do not hold the mast or any standing rigging that might be
struck by lightning.
• Double-check your life jacket. Be sure it is fastened and
adjusted properly.
• Remain calm and ride it out. Squalls often blow over in a
few minutes.
• Stay with the boat if you capsize.
A plastic or other nonrusting whistle attached to your
life jacket (not around your neck) makes an excellent
emergency signaling device. Attach it with a stainless
steel cotter ring (split ring) or a plastic cable tie.
Remember this
sailor’s maxim:
When in doubt,
don’t go out.


SMALL-BOAT SAILING 17
.Sailing Safety and Preparation
Foul-weather warnings are indicated by colored flags or lights as
indicated. These warning signs might not be displayed in your
area, so check for local usage.
Small craft
WINDS UP TO
38 MPH
Gale
WINDS UP TO
54 MPH
Storm
WINDS UP TO
73 MPH
Hurricane
WINDS 74 MPH
AND UP
Daytime
signals
Nighttime
signals
Wind speed in marine weather forecasts is often given in knots—nautical
miles per hour. While a statute mile—5,280 feet—measures distance on
land, a nautical mile—6,076 feet or 1.15 statute miles—measures distance
at sea. The difference in length is the equivalent of more than two and a
half football fields. Because of this length difference, a nautical mile per
hour is 15 percent faster than a statute mile per hour.
Evaluating Wind Speeds
• Wind speeds of 5 to 15 miles per hour generally are safe and fun for
all qualified sailors.
• When wind speeds exceed 15 miles per hour (steady), it is time to be
very careful if you do not have much sailing experience. Wait for the
breeze to calm down.
• When wind speed is likely to reach 20 miles per hour, small-craft
advisories may be posted. The water can be quite choppy and
dangerous for smaller boats and beginner sailors.
• When wind speeds are above 25 miles per hour, all small sailboats
struggle for control, including those sailed by experts. The risk of
capsizing is high. It is best to stay on shore and wait for the wind
to decrease.


18 SMALL-BOAT SAILING
Sailing Safety and Preparation.
It’s in the Clouds
Weather systems primarily move from west to east. By keeping a close
eye on the western sky, you can often get an idea of what weather to
expect. Clouds indicate the atmosphere’s stability at different altitudes
and can warn of what weather is likely.
Cirrostratus—If these clouds thicken, there will be rain in six to 24 hours.
If they cover the whole sky, a warm front or storm is near.
Altostratus—When thickening, these clouds indicate a warm front
or storm.
Stratocumulus—When these clouds become dense, expect rain. If they
form after showers, weather will clear.
Cumulus—If these clouds mass to windward (the direction from which
the wind is blowing) they foretell a storm. If they grow larger on a
summer day, there will be a thunderstorm. In small, widely separated
patches, they mean fair weather.
A B
C D
A
B
C
D


SMALL-BOAT SAILING 19
.Sailing Safety and Preparation
Cirrus—Expect fair weather when
these clouds drift idly, stand still,
or dissolve as the sun climbs. If
they increase, rain or foul weather
is ahead.
Cirrocumulus—These clouds
indicate the approach of a weak
disturbance, or, if the clouds are
increasing in density, rain within
24 hours.
Altocumulus—In small, isolated
patches, or if decreasing, these
clouds mean fair weather. If they
are piled up into domes, beware
of thunderstorms.
Cumulonimbus—These are
thunderstorm clouds and generally
produce heavy showers of rain,
snow, or hail.
Stratus—These clouds indicate
light, steady rain.
Clouds may tell only what you
can expect in the immediate
future. Weather forecasts (from
TV, radio, the internet) will give
you a more extended prediction
of approaching weather. Before
leaving shore, always get an
up-to-the-minute forecast. Use
clouds for confirmation, and
carry a radio on board for regular
weather updates.
E
F
G
H
I
E
F
G
H
I


20 SMALL-BOAT SAILING
Sailing Safety and Preparation.
Power Line Safety When Sailing
In addition to being aware of water depths and conditions,
sailors must also be aware of overhead obstacles, especially
electrical power lines. Avoid sailing near electrical power lines,
and review charts before sailing on unfamiliar waterways.
Power lines that cross navigable waterways are marked on
charts with clearances listed as the height of power line at
Mean High Water (MHW). Heights and clearances are accurate
only in marked channels.
Know the height of the mast for the craft you are sailing
and also the heights of any power lines on the waterway you
are sailing. Only cross under power lines in marked channels,
for which you know there is ample clearance between the top
of your mast and the bottom of the power line. Don’t forget
to add the height of any mast-mounted equipment such as a
VHF antenna. Be prepared that the water level might rise from
tides, flooding or controlled damming, or that power lines may
sag from summer heat. Look out for downed or sagging power
lines following storms or high winds.
Preparing a Float Plan
Before going out on the water on any boat, leave a copy of your
float plan with a reliable friend or family member—someone
who will take action if you are overdue or if he or she suspects
trouble. A float plan contains the information searchers or
rescuers need to know in an emergency, such as departure and
estimated arrival times, planned route, anticipated stops along
the way, and the names and number of passengers.
For longer voyages, a
float plan should be in a
structured written form like
the one below. For brief day
sails close to shore, it can
be as simple as describing
your plans to your parent
or guardian. Written float
plans are always better,
however, because they
do not rely on
anyone’s memory.
Once you have
filed a float plan,
stick to it. If you
sail off in the
opposite direction
from where
your float plan
indicated and you
get into trouble,
searchers will
look for you in the
wrong location.
Sample Float Plan
Float plan of ___________________________________
Destination____________________________________
Date and time of departure ______________________
Date and time of return__________________________
Boat name and number ________________________
Description of boat _____________________________
Planned route, going and returning _____________
________________________________________________
Others who will go along _______________________
Equipment ____________________________________
Clothing _______________________________________
Weather _______________________________________
In emergency, contact _________________________
Look up and
carefully scan the
area for power
lines before
raising your
mast and check
again as you
bring the boat
out of the water.


SMALL-BOAT SAILING 21
.Sailing Safety and Preparation
What to Wear
If the weather is warm enough, shorts are
ideal clothing for sailing because they allow
you to easily bend at the knee. Being able
to move around freely is essential in small-
boat sailing.
If temperatures are cool, layering
is the key to keeping warm, dry, and
safe. You might start layering with a
T-shirt, followed by a sweatshirt or
a fleece vest, and then a sprayproof
windbreaker or hooded parka.
As the day warms up, you can
remove layers. Later, if the wind
picks up and it gets cooler, you
can add back as many layers as
you need for comfort.
Perhaps the most common
injuries on sailboats are foot injuries.
To avoid foot injuries, wear proper
shoes. Boat shoes should have nonskid
soles and should enclose and protect
the toes and heels. They should be
well-secured with
laces or straps—
sandals are not
appropriate
footwear on
sailboats.
Always keep your life jacket on the
outside of all clothing. Adjust the
straps to accommodate your added or
removed layers. A small duffel bag is
handy to stow and protect your spare
clothes and personal gear.
If you sail often
or for long
periods, a pair
of sailing gloves
will help protect
your hands.
For your safety
and comfort,
polarized
sunglasses
with UV protection
are recommended
under sunny
conditions. Secure
all eyeglasses
with a strap.


Sailboats may have one or more hulls. A single-hulled boat is called
a monohull, while boats with more than one hull are multihulls. The
most common small multihull is a catamaran. Catamarans have two
hulls and are known for their speed, but they are not as maneuverable
as monohulls.


SMALL-BOAT SAILING 23
.Sailboat Basics
Sailboat Basics
A sailboat transfers energy from
the wind through its sails to
propel the boat. Sailboats come
in many shapes and sizes, but
nearly every sailboat has five
essential parts: the hull, fins,
spars, rigging, and sails.
Hull
The hull is the central floating
body of the boat—the part you
sit in. All other parts are
attached to it.
A hull has a number of
parts, each with its own name.
The bow is the front of the hull. The stern is the back.
The cockpit is where you sit inside the hull. A deck
may partially cover the top of the hull to help keep
water out. The gunwale (pronounced gun’-nul) is
the outside edge of the deck, where it touches the
topsides. The topsides are the sides of the hull
that extend down to the chine, the edge where
the hull’s bottom and topsides join together.
The transom is the flat outside portion of
the stern.
Sailors use seafaring terms to describe
direction. For example, instead of using “right” and
“left” to distinguish the two sides of a hull, sailors use
the terms starboard and port. Looking forward, the right
side of a hull is the starboard side, and the left side is
the port side. The terms fore and aft refer to things that
are ahead (before) or behind (after).
MAINSAIL JIB
BOW
DECK
CENTERBOARD
TRUNK
TOPSIDES
TRANSOM
RUDDER
STERN
COCKPIT
GUNWALE
Typical sailboat
with a centerboard
ASTERN
AFT
AMIDSHIPS
CENTERLINE
PORT
STARBOARD
FORE
AHEAD
ABEAM ABEAM
CENTERBOARD


24 SMALL-BOAT SAILING
Sailboat Basics.
Fins
Similar to the fins on a fish, sailboats need fins to help guide the
boat through the water. Sailboat fins extend down into the water
from the hull to provide for steering and stability. A sailboat
needs two fins—a rudder and a central fin.
Rudder
The rudder is located at the stern, usually
mounted on the transom of a small sailboat.
It swings side to side, just like a door opening
and closing. When the rudder is turned, it
bends the flow of water moving past it and
causes the stern to swing to one side. The
bow rotates in the opposite direction.
Attached to the top of the rudder are a
tiller and tiller extension—the stick that the
helmsman uses to turn the rudder. Some
small sailboat rudders kick up to prevent
damage when the boat is beached or if it
runs aground (hits bottom) in shallow water.
Central Fin
Central fins have the same three functions
on any sailboat, regardless of its size. A
central fin prevents the hull from skidding
sideways, or side-slipping; it provides a pivot
point for turning; and it increases stability
so the boat is less tippy. The three types of
central fin—centerboard, daggerboard, and
keel—all do the same thing, but they can be
quite different in design.
A centerboard is a very common type of
central fin on small sailboats. It is retractable
and can be lowered into the water from
the hull after the boat is launched. The
centerboard resides inside the centerboard
trunk, a narrow watertight housing in the
center of the cockpit, when it is not in use.
Rudder
Centerboard


.Sailboat Basics
The centerboard is controlled by the centerboard pennant,
a line used to raise and lower it into the water. The centerboard
pivots fore and aft around a pivot pin located in the centerboard
trunk. Because the centerboard retracts by swinging aft into its
trunk, it protects itself from serious damage if the boat strays
into shallow water and runs aground.
A daggerboard differs from a centerboard mainly in the way
it retracts: A daggerboard plunges straight down when lowered
and raises straight up and lifts out, rather than swinging like
a centerboard.
Also, a daggerboard does not “live” inside the hull as a
centerboard does. It is entirely removed and may be stored
separately. A daggerboard slides up and down through a
daggerboard trunk, a watertight slot in the hull.
Since a daggerboard cannot kick up automatically like a
centerboard, it is important to raise it in time to avoid serious
damage from running aground when in shallow water or when
sailing to a beach.
TRANSOM
RUDDER
WATERLINE
CENTERBOARD
BOW
TILLER
STERN
TILLER EXTENSION
DAGGERBOARD
RETRACTS
SMALL-BOAT SAILING 25


26 SMALL-BOAT SAILING
Sailboat Basics.
A keel is rarely seen on small sailboats because of its size
and weight. A keel is not retractable; it is usually a fixed fin,
built permanently into the hull. Keels on larger sailboats have
ballast, or heavy weights, built into them to increase stability.
Without a ballasted keel, most large sailboats would capsize the
moment they were launched.
Spars
To support and spread its sails, sailboats use special poles called
spars. Masts are vertical spars that hold sails up. Booms are
horizontal spars that spread sails out.
In the early days of sailing, spars were made of wood.
Today, most spars are made of aluminum or a carbon-fiber
composite material. They are stronger, lighter, and easier to
maintain than wooden spars.
The boom is joined to the mast with a fitting called a gooseneck,
which allows the boom to swing side to side and up and down.
KEEL


SMALL-BOAT SAILING 27
.Sailboat Basics
Rigging
There are two types of rigging on a
sailboat. Standing rigging is made of
stainless-steel wires that support and
stabilize the mast. Running rigging
includes all the ropes that hoist,
shape, and trim (adjust) the sails.
Standing Rigging
The main responsibility of standing rigging is to hold up the
mast. It is not normally adjusted while a sailboat is underway,
so it gets its name from “standing” still. Running rigging is
routinely handled and adjusted while underway.
Standing rigging is made up of stays and shrouds, which
often are made of the same wire. Their only difference is
location. Stays extend fore and aft from the mast and are
anchored to the hull along the boat’s centerline. Shrouds
extend from the sides of the mast and are anchored to the
chain plates at the deck’s port and
starboard edges.
Stays provide fore and aft support
to the mast. A forestay is led to the bow
and prevents the mast from tipping over
backward. Each item of standing rigging
has a specific name, but anything that
attaches to the centerline is called a stay.
Shrouds keep the mast from falling
sideways. In a small sailboat, the shrouds
are anchored to the outer edges of the
deck slightly aft of the mast. This location
also keeps the mast from tipping forward.
Adjusting the tension of the standing
rigging, or tuning, usually is not done
while underway. If a piece of standing
rigging were accidentally released, the
mast could suddenly fall, causing injury
to the crew.
Some small sailboats, such as
Optimists, Sunfish, and Lasers, have
freestanding masts. The mast simply
drops into the mast step built into the
hull. The mast step provides enough sup-
port to keep the mast upright.
CENTERLINE
CHAIN PLATE
SHROUD
FORESTAY
MAST
Standing rigging
The freestanding mast of an Optimist
pram needs no standing rigging.
Standing rigging, side view


28 SMALL-BOAT SAILING
Sailboat Basics.
Running Rigging
Commonly made of low-stretch braided polyester, running
rigging controls a sailboat’s sails. Some sailors use different
colors of line to code different items of running rigging.
Typical running rigging includes:
• Halyards—hoist sails up the mast
• Sheets—trim sails in against the pressure of the wind
• Outhaul—stretches the mainsail out along the boom
• Cunningham—stretches the mainsail downward after hoisting
• Boom vang—prevents the boom from riding up
HALYARDSHALYARDS
OUTHAUL
BOOM VANGBOOM VANG
SHEETSHEET


SMALL-BOAT SAILING 29
.Sailboat Basics
Sails
Sails are the sailboat’s engine. They gather energy from
the wind and pass it along through the spars and standing
rigging to the hull. Most modern sails are triangular.
The corners of any triangular sail are called the
head (top), the tack (forward lower), and the clew
(aft lower). The sides of any triangular sail are
called the luff (leading edge), the leech (trailing
edge), and the foot (bottom). Battens are flexible
sticks that are inserted into pockets distributed
along the leech. They keep the leech from
curling and help to hold the sail’s shape.
HEAD
CLEW
FOOT
LEECH
LUFF
TACK
BATTENS


30 SMALL-BOAT SAILING
Sailboat Basics.
The number and arrangement of sails and masts a boat
carries is its rig. Many small sailboats have just one mast and
one sail, a cat rig. Some have two sails, a sloop rig.
In a sloop, the larger sail spread open by the mast and
boom is called the mainsail—sometimes simply called the
main—and the smaller sail, attached to the forestay forward
of the mast, is called the jib.
Cat rig
BATTEN
MAINSAIL
BOOM
OUTHAUL
BOOM VANG
MAIN
SHEET
MAST
CUNNINGHAM
Sloop rig
HALYARD
FORESTAY
BOOM VANG
SHROUD
JIB SHEET
OUTHAUL
MAIN SHEET
MAINSAIL
BATTEN
MAST


SMALL-BOAT SAILING 31
.Sailboat Basics
Designed for cruising longer distances, larger sailboats may have more
than one mast and several sails.
• A genoa jib may be larger than the mainsail.
• A gaff-rigged boat has a diagonal spar called a gaff.
• A ketch has a mizzen mast aft of the taller main mast, just ahead of the
rudder post.
• A yawl has a short mizzen mast aft of the rudder post.
• A schooner has one or two foremasts ahead of the main mast.
Gaff-rigSloop with
genoa jib
Yawl Ketch Schooner





SMALL-BOAT SAILING 33
.Wind
A flag on shore
shows “true”
(actual) wind,
whereas a flag
onboard shows
“apparent” wind.
You will trim the
sails based on the
apparent wind
direction, which is
a combination of
true wind and the
boat movement.
Wind
The two key things to know about wind are its direction and
speed. Wind direction determines where a sailboat may go and
how the crew trims the sails. Wind speed determines how much
power a sail has to use.
Direction
To sail well, you must be aware of the direction the wind
approaches the hull at all times. It is not always easy to do,
and wind occasionally may shift without much warning.
There are a number of ways to tell wind direction while
sailing or getting ready to sail. The best and most reliable wind
indicators are ripples, which form when the wind brushes the
surface of the water. Ripples march in parallel patterns, pushed
from behind by the slightest puff of wind. The direction from
which the ripples come is the direction of the wind. Ripples
react, turning direction almost instantly, to wind shifts. Observe
only the smallest ripples that ride on top of any bigger waves
or chop.
You also can observe the
fluttering of flags on your boat,
another boat, a flagpole, or even
the luffing (flapping) of a sail.
Some people attach telltales
such as ribbons or pieces of yarn
to their sailboat’s shrouds or
mount a masthead fly (a
small weather vane) on the
mast. Another simple but
effective direction indicator is
your own face—the wind is
coming from the cool side.
FLAG
SMOKE
RIPPLES
WIND
Wind direction
indicators


34 SMALL-BOAT SAILING
Wind.
Velocity
Wind speed may suddenly increase (gust) or decrease (lull).
As wind blows across the water, it leaves visible evidence of
its velocity in the surface color and texture. Darker patches
of ripples indicate stronger winds and gusts. Lighter colored
ripples and smoother water surface (flat spots) indicate lighter
winds. By carefully observing ripples approaching your boat,
you can “see” the wind coming and predict puffs and wind
shifts some distance away.
Stopping a Sailboat
A sailboat cannot make sudden stops. Stopping a sailboat is like
stopping a bicycle on level ground without using your brakes.
On a bicycle, first you would stop pedaling. Then you would
allow the bike to coast until it runs out of energy and slows to
a halt. Because it is not easy to tell exactly where the bicycle
will be when it finally stops, you have to plan ahead and leave
plenty of room.
Sailors use the directional terms windward to describe where the wind
is coming from and leeward (pronounced loo’-werd) to describe where
the wind is headed. The windward side of a boat means the side from
where the wind is coming.
The leeward side is the
downwind side, away from
the wind.
The words windward and
leeward mean the same as
“upwind” and “downwind.”
When sailors use the words
“up” and “down” to describe
a direction (like “head up”
or “head down”) they mean
upwind or downwind. So if
someone tells you to “head
up,” it means steer upwind
a bit. “Head down” means
steer downwind.
WIND
WINDWARD LEEWARD


SMALL-BOAT SAILING 35
.Wind
Stopping a sailboat takes planning, too.
It needs plenty of room to use up its energy
before it can stop. Sailboats gradually coast
to a stop after the power is released from
the sails and the hull has used up all of its
momentum (the energy that keeps a sail-
boat moving even after its sails are
no longer filled with wind).
To stop a sailboat, you must do
two things:
1. Turn the boat with the bow
headed into the wind.
2. Release all the sheets so that
the sails luff freely and shed
their wind power.
Mooring
To stop at a specific spot, such as a mooring buoy, a sailboat
must begin its approach from some distance downwind. Judging
exactly how much coasting distance the boat will need to end up
stopped right at the buoy, the skipper then turns upwind. With
its sheets released and the sails fully luffing, the boat begins
to coast, gradually using up its momentum and slowing as it
approaches the mooring buoy.
Estimating a sailboat’s
momentum can be troublesome.
It is easy to misjudge, and there is
a very narrow margin for error.
If the turn upwind is too close and
the boat does not have enough
coasting distance to use up its
momentum, the boat will not stop
when it arrives at the mooring
buoy. On the other hand, if the
turn upwind is too far away, the
boat will coast to a stop too soon.
Some boats can coast farther
than others. Wind speed, hull
weight, current, and sea
conditions are all factors that
affect a sailboat’s momentum.
Mooring a sailboat
The sails will not luff fully
unless the bow is turned
into the wind (or pretty
close to it).
WIND


36 SMALL-BOAT SAILING
Wind.
Your judgment about how far a sailboat will coast will improve
with practice. Rehearse stopping at a precise location by making
repeated practice stops at a mooring buoy. You will learn from
each attempt and gradually improve your stopping skills.
Getting Out of Irons
If a sailboat turns into the wind and stops too soon, it is in
irons. Having pointed into the wind and stalled, the sailboat
can no longer move ahead or be steered with the rudder. It is
as though it were a prisoner chained up in leg irons.
To get out of irons in a cat-rigged sailboat, first put the
boat in reverse for a few seconds. Push the tiller hard over in
the direction you want the hull to go after you are out of irons.
At the same time push and hold the boom out to the same
side, enough to get the wind to fill the sail and push the hull
backward. Hold it there until the boat backs up enough to turn
sideways to the wind, then center the tiller and trim in the
sail normally. As the boat gains forward speed, it will begin to
steer properly.
The only time a
sailboat can move
in reverse is when
it is in irons.
To get out of irons in a sloop-rigged boat,
hold the tiller in the center and back the jib
by grasping the clew and holding it well
out to one side of the boat. When the wind
fills the backed jib, it presses against it and
turns the bow away from the wind. Once
the bow turns enough, the boat is out of
irons and may resume sailing normally.
WIND


SMALL-BOAT SAILING 37
.Wind
Docking
Docking often can be easier than sailing to a mooring buoy,
because it may allow more room for error. Because a sailboat
pulls up and stops alongside a dock, it does not necessarily
need to stop at a specific spot. It may have the entire length
of the dock to use up its momentum and come to a stop.
When stopping at a dock, choose a side that is lined up
with the wind as much as possible. Begin your approach from
the downwind end. That way when you turn up alongside you
can meet the two essential rules of stopping: (1) Turn into the
wind (or pretty close), and (2) release all sheets so the sails
can fully luff. By coming up alongside the dock, you have the
option of safely circling around and approaching again with
less speed on a second try.
Beaching
Beaching can be tricky. As your boat approaches a beach and
the water gradually gets shallower, you must raise the fins to
prevent damage from their dragging against the bottom. But
because raising the fins affects your ability to steer the boat,
you must make your turn into the wind (to stop) just before
the water gets too shallow to keep your fins from hitting bottom.
Never sail into a
dock with your
bow pointed
squarely at it.
It would be like
driving a car with
no brakes into
a garage. If you
have too much
momentum and
are unable to
stop in time,
you will crash.
If your sails are
not fully luffing,
do not attempt
any approach
to a dock.
LEEWARD SIDE
WINDWARD SIDE
DOCK
APPROACH





SMALL-BOAT SAILING 39
.Getting Underway
Next time let’s put drain plugs on
the checklist.
Getting Underway
Going sailing requires a lot of preparation. You need to make
sure you have the right equipment before you get underway.
You also need to make sure you cast off safely, with all your
equipment in place.
Preparation Checklist
To make sure you do not forget something important, write
down everything you need to have on board and everything
you need to do before casting off. Keep this checklist in a safe
place where you can find it easily. You can use the same list
every time you go out. From time to time you may think of
some other things to add to your list.
A preparation checklist might include:
• Legally required paperwork (such as
a state-issued certificate of number or
an operator’s safety certificate)
• Life jackets—check their condition,
and put them on
• Bailing equipment (pump, bucket,
bailer scoop, sponge)
• Paddle or oar
• Drain plugs
• Whistle for emergency signaling
• Horn for fog and other signaling
• First-aid kit
• Rigging knife
• Tool kit
• Anchor and line


40 SMALL-BOAT SAILING
Getting Underway.
• Spare line/tow line
• Chart and compass
• Handheld two-way radio
(Do a radio check.)
• Flashlight (Check the batteries.)
• Food and beverages
• Foul-weather gear
• Fuel (if you have an
auxiliary engine)
• Float plan (File your float plan
with someone onshore.)
Boarding
Small sailboats are often quite tippy until their fins are lowered.
To avoid an embarrassing capsize before you even raise your
sails, follow the correct procedure for boarding a small boat.
Step 1—Pull the boat alongside the dock.
Step 2—Get a crewmate to hold the boat steady alongside the
dock while you board.
Step 3—Do not try to board over the bow. Instead, crouch
down at the edge of the dock as close to the middle of the hull
as possible. Hold onto the deck and shroud to steady yourself
as you step sideways (toes toward the bow) directly onto the
cockpit floor. Do not step on the deck or a seat. As you transfer
your weight from the dock into the boat, keep a three-point
stance so you do not lose your balance. Of your two hands
and two feet, three of the four should always be in contact
with the boat or the dock.


SMALL-BOAT SAILING 41
.Getting Underway
Step 4—Once completely
in the boat, sit or crouch
down immediately to lower
your center of gravity. Never
stand up.
Step 5—If the water is
deep enough, lower the
centerboard immediately
after boarding, before
loading any gear or
other passengers.
Step 6—Bring gear in from
the dock and stow it.
Step 7—Hold the boat
steady alongside the dock
while other passengers
board, also using the
three-point stance.
Rigging
Rigging is the process of
bending on (attaching) and
hoisting the sails. Every boat
is rigged a little differently,
so you will need some time
to become familiar with
the setup of each new boat
you sail.
You can bend on the
sails as soon as the fins are
lowered and all the gear is
stowed. Detachable rudders
are most easily installed
before the sails are raised
(especially if the boat is
moored). Slide the pintles
(metal rods secured to the
rudder) into the gudgeons
(rudder supports) to form
a hinge for the rudder to
rotate on.
Lowering the centerboard
Attaching the rudder


42 SMALL-BOAT SAILING
Getting Underway.
Attach the three corners of the sails in order by tack (1),
clew (2), and head (3). Depending on the design, the mainsail’s
luff bolt rope may need to be fed into the mast’s groove. Insert
and secure any battens (4).
Reave (thread) the sheets through their blocks or
fairleads and tie figure-eight knots in the ends (see
“Marlinespike Seamanship”).
Before hoisting sails, be sure the hull is pointed into the
wind. Do not try to raise sails with the wind approaching from
astern. The sails should luff freely as they are raised. The main
usually is raised first so it can help hold the boat into the wind
until the jib can be raised. Coil and secure the halyards, and you
are ready to go.
Rigging the sails
1
2
3
4


SMALL-BOAT SAILING 43
.Getting Underway
Shoving Off
When you are ready to shove off, or leave the dock, take
a good look around for any approaching vessels or nearby
obstructions. Be sure the coast is clear. Take the tiller and,
when it is safe to do so, have a crewmate or dockhand push
the bow gently away from the dock and wind.
WIND


44 SMALL-BOAT SAILING
Getting Underway.
Cockpit Seating
If you are the skipper, you should sit on the windward
side of the cockpit. Steer with your aft hand. Keep
your shoulders square to the boom and your head
facing forward. Sit far enough forward in the cockpit
that you do not crowd the tiller; it should be able to
swing freely from side to side at all times.
The crew should sit on whichever side of the
boat is required to keep the hull level. A little heel
(tilt) is perfectly normal, but as the wind increases
in strength, heel may become excessive. The crew
should be prepared at all times to move across the
cockpit and hike out (sit on the edge of the deck and
lean out to windward) with changes in wind velocity.


SMALL-BOAT SAILING 45
.Getting Underway
Steering
The steering mechanism of a boat is called the helm. In a
small sailboat, the helm includes the rudder and the tiller.
An odd thing about steering with a tiller is that you have
to push it one way in order to go the other way. It takes some
practice to break yourself of the instinct to aim the tiller where
you want the boat to go. A sailboat steers right or left when
the rudder is turned in that direction. The rudder moves in the
opposite direction of the tiller—and so does the boat.
To steer right,
move the tiller to
the left; to steer
left, move the
tiller to the right.
To turn to starboard, move the
tiller to port. To turn to port,
move the tiller to starboard.
Port turn
Starboard turn





SMALL-BOAT SAILING 47
.Sailing Fundamentals
Sailing Fundamentals
Points of Sail
The points of sail are names sailors use to describe the
direction the wind approaches the hull of a sailboat. There
are five points of sail: beating, close reach, beam reach, broad
reach, and running.
BEAM REACH
CLOSE REACH
BEATING
BROAD REACH
RUNNING
BEAM REACH
BEATINGBROAD REACH
LUFFING ARC
90º
60º
45º
WIND
135º
Points of sail
ACROSS THE WIND
DOWNWIND
UPWIND


48 SMALL-BOAT SAILING
Sailing Fundamentals.
It is impossible for any sailboat to sail directly into the
wind. Attempting to do so will cause a sailboat to stop and
go into irons. The closest most sailboats can point (the course
steered while beating) toward the wind is roughly 45 degrees
on either side. That creates the luffing arc, a wedge of about 90
degrees (a quarter of a circle) in which a sailboat cannot go.
A sailboat is running, or on a run, when it is headed
exactly where the wind is going. The wind pushes the boat
squarely from behind, favoring neither side. When running, a
sailboat goes fastest when the sails are spread all the way out
to the side of the boat, where they can capture the most wind.
It does not matter on which side the boom is carried, as long
as it is fully extended to present the maximum sail area to the
approaching wind.
The luffing arc is
sometimes called
the no-go zone. If
a sailboat enters
the luffing arc,
the boat will
slow down and
go into irons.
It is understandable
to think that running
might be the fastest
point of sail, since
the wind pushes the
boat from directly
behind, but actually
running is the
slowest. When a
sailboat is running,
the wind presses
against the sail and
then spills around
the edges, similar
to water flowing
around a rock in
a stream. The
wind becomes
turbulent, swirled and unsteady, a condition called
stalling. Stalling is not as powerful a force as lift,
which propels a sailboat on all other points of
sail. Lift occurs when the wind slides smoothly
along both sides of a sail from luff to leech. (See
“Sail Trim” later in this chapter.)


SMALL-BOAT SAILING 49
.Sailing Fundamentals
Reaching is cross-wind sailing, that
is, when the wind approaches the boat
from the side, rather than from ahead or
behind. There are three reaches: close
reach, beam reach, and broad reach.
The differences among them have to
do with whether the wind approaches
the hull squarely from one side or a
bit fore or aft.
A sailboat is on a beam reach only
when the wind comes squarely from one
side of the boat. A beam reach is the
fastest point of sail for most sailboats.
Sails are trimmed roughly halfway in for
a beam reach.
A sailboat is on a broad reach when
the wind comes roughly from the aft
corner (quarter) of the hull. When broad
reaching, the sails are trimmed more than halfway out.
A sailboat is beating when it is sailing on the edge of the
luffing arc, pointing as close to the wind as possible without
stalling and going into irons.
A sailboat is on a close reach when it is heading anywhere
between beating and beam reaching. It gets its name from
steering “closer” to the wind (more upwind) than a beam
reach. A sailboat on a close reach ordinarily should have its
sails trimmed roughly three-quarters of the way in.
Starboard Versus Port Tack
In addition to being on one point of sail or another, a sailboat
underway also is either on a port tack or starboard tack. A
sailboat is on the tack corresponding to the side opposite its
mainsail boom.
Sometimes the easiest way to tell which tack a sailboat is
on is to see which side is the windward side. If the wind comes
from the starboard (right) side of the boat, the starboard side
is the windward side. Thus, it is on starboard tack. If the wind
comes from the port (left) side of the boat, the port side is the
windward side, so it is on port tack.


50 SMALL-BOAT SAILING
Sailing Fundamentals.
When a sailboat is on a run, the wind comes from directly
astern, favoring neither side, but the boat is still on a tack.
You can tell which tack it is on, because it is the side opposite
the mainsail boom, just like all other points of sail. So, when
the boom is carried on the port side, the boat is on starboard
tack. When the boom is carried on the port side, it is on
starboard tack.
Sailors often use a form of shorthand when
communicating. For example, a skipper might say,
“After leaving the harbor, we will begin beating on
starboard tack.” The words “beating on starboard
tack” tell the crew which side will be the windward
side, which side the sails will be on, where they
should be positioned in the cockpit, which jib sheet
to trim, and roughly how much to trim it in.
The boat on the left is on starboard tack. The boat on the right is
on port tack.


SMALL-BOAT SAILING 51
.Sailing Fundamentals
Safety Position
A convenient way for a sailboat to stop temporarily
without going into irons is to use the safety position.
The safety position can be used for stopping to chat
with a passing boater, pausing to get your bearings,
waiting for a boat to catch up, or taking time out to
handle an emergency on board.
To go into the safety position, put your boat on
a close reach and release the sheets so the sails
luff fully. The boat will coast to a stop and
drift slowly.
You can get out of the safety position
and resume sailing simply by trimming
in your sails.
SAFETY
POSITION
TRIM IN TO GET
MOVING AGAIN.
WIND


52 SMALL-BOAT SAILING
Sailing Fundamentals.
Tacking and Jibing
There are only two ways a sailboat can switch from one tack
to the other. It may turn upwind and tack, or it may turn
downwind and jibe (sometimes spelled gybe).
Tacking and coming about mean the same thing. The two
terms are used equally, so do not be surprised to hear someone
switch back and forth between them. A sailboat tacks (comes
about) when it turns upwind and beyond until the sails fill on
the opposite side. Tacking usually requires a turn of at least
“READY
ABOUT!”
Make sure new
heading is safe.
WIND
LUFFING
ARC
TILLER
TOWARD
SAIL
“READY!”
Look around
to make
sure it is
safe to tack.


SMALL-BOAT SAILING 53
.Sailing Fundamentals
90 degrees (a quarter turn), because that most often is the span
of the luffing arc. Whenever a sailboat makes a turn completely
through the luffing arc, the wind fills the sails on the opposite
side. When that happens, the boat has changed tacks by
coming about.
Since tacking is perhaps the most common maneuver in
sailing, it is important to learn it well. On a sloop-rigged boat,
the duties usually are divided among the skipper and the crew.
Both skipper and crew have important duties to perform and
they should be coordinated.
The skipper’s duties include
• Giving the commands (“ready about” followed by
“hard alee”)
• Steering the boat through the turn
• Switching seats
When you are the skipper, you make the decisions about where
the boat goes, including when to tack. Because tacking requires
teamwork on a multihanded (having one or more crewmates)
sailboat, you must communicate your intentions, so everyone
can prepare and cooperate.
Just before coming about, alert the crew by announcing,
“Ready about.” The command should be loud enough for
everyone to hear. Pause a few seconds to let the crew prepare
and acknowledge hearing your command, usually by responding
“Ready.” Then say “Hard alee” as you push the tiller to the
leeward side. This tells the crew that you are in the act
of turning.
As skipper, it is important for you to face forward during a
tack and watch the horizon. Watching the horizon helps keep
you oriented, so you know how far to turn and when to stop. If
you glance away from the horizon, you may lose your bearings
and oversteer. Just as you complete the tack, pull the tiller back
to the centerline of the hull to resume a straight course.
During the tack, just before the sails begin to fill on the
other side, it is time to change seats. Move directly across the
cockpit to the other side of the boat. Since you will be facing
forward, you will need to pass the tiller from one hand to the
other behind your back. This behind-the-back tiller handoff
takes some practice, but it becomes second nature after a while.
The crew’s duties include releasing the active jib sheet,
switching seats, and trimming in the other jib sheet. The
primary responsibility of the crew in a sloop-rigged boat is to


54 SMALL-BOAT SAILING
Sailing Fundamentals.
tend the jib. During a tack, the jib sheet must be released on
one side and trimmed in on the other side of the boat. It is a
routine procedure, but timing is important.
The first step in tacking is to release the jib sheet. Be
careful not to release it too soon. The jib sheet should not be
released before the jib starts to luff on its own (as the boat
enters the luffing arc). Releasing the jib too early allows it to
luff and spill away needed power going into the turn. This
sudden loss of power can cause the boat to stall and go into
irons. Remember, it is not the skipper’s words “hard alee” that
trigger the action of the crew to release the jib. It is the actual
luffing of the jib as the boat enters the luffing arc. The crew
should watch the jib closely during a tack and release the jib
sheet only when the jib is fully luffing.
Once the jib is released, the crew should check to be sure
the sheet does not catch on the fairlead (sometimes called the
jib lead). The sheet must be free to allow the jib to carry over
to the other side of the boat. The inactive jib sheet should
dangle freely with no tension on it at all, so it does not affect
the curve in the sail even slightly.
The second step in tacking is to change seats, moving
across the cockpit to where the “new” jib sheet comes from the
fairlead. The timing of this move depends on the speed of the
turn. When the wind is gentle and the boat turns slowly, you
will have plenty of time to get to the new windward side before
the sails fill. When the wind is stronger, you will have to move
more quickly to match the speed of the turn.
The third step in tacking is to trim in the new active jib
sheet. Again, timing is important. Do not begin to sheet in the
jib until it luffs its way across to the new leeward side of the
boat. Sheeting in too soon could back the jib, stop the tack, and
put the boat in irons.


SMALL-BOAT SAILING 55
.Sailing Fundamentals
Jibing is another method of changing tacks. It is a
maneuver used mainly when headed toward a downwind
destination. It does not necessarily require a sharp turn (as in
coming about), however. A sailboat on a run can jibe without
changing course at all. A sailboat jibes when, with the wind at
its stern, the boom swings from one side
of the boat to the other and wind fills
the sail on the opposite side.
There are two types of jibes: flying
jibes and controlled jibes. A flying jibe
can be particularly dangerous in high
winds. A flying jibe (sometimes called
a slam jibe) occurs when either a
change of heading or a sudden wind
shift causes the wind to approach
the mainsail leech from the opposite
side and throw the boom across to
the other side of the boat. Because
of the risk to crew safety and the
potential damage to the boat from
the boom’s impact, flying jibes are
generally avoided except in racing.
Controlled jibes are safer.
They allow the skipper to
control the movement of the
boom and reduce the risk
of injury and damage. In a
controlled jibe, the skipper
trims in the mainsail just
before the jibe, restricting how
far it can swing. Then the
skipper pays out the mainsheet after
the jibe, controlling the rate
it moves to leeward.
Jibing Procedure
Because the boom can swing suddenly and forcefully over the cockpit
in a jibe, the maneuver can be dangerous. Unprepared crew members
can be injured or knocked overboard by the boom. It is important to
pay close attention to shifting winds (to avoid accidental jibes) and to
adhere strictly to correct jibing procedure.
“PREPARE
TO JIBE.”
“READY.”
“JIBING,” OR
“JIBE HO.”


56 SMALL-BOAT SAILING
Sailing Fundamentals.
As with tacking, both skipper and crew have specific
duties to perform during jibing. The skipper’s duties include
giving the commands, trimming the mainsail, steering the
boat, changing seats, and retrimming the mainsail. As skipper
you should alert the crew of an upcoming jibe by giving the
command, “Prepare to jibe.” Say it loudly enough for everyone
to hear. Be certain that everyone understands the importance of
keeping low until the boom has crossed overhead. Give the
second command, “jibe ho,” just before the boom actually
begins to swing.
In a controlled jibe there are some steps in between the
two commands. The mainsail must be sheeted in enough so
that the boom cannot swing too forcefully. Leave enough time
to trim prior to the actual jibe, perhaps five to 10 seconds.
Steer the boat through any turn you may need to make
to head for your next destination. As with tacking, you should
face forward, pass the tiller behind your back, and keep an eye
on the horizon to stay oriented. Be careful not to oversteer, that
is, turn beyond your intended heading. Say “Jibe ho” loudly,
just before the jibe and in plenty of time for everyone on board
to duck under the swinging boom. Change seats just as you
would if you were coming about. Be sure to be in your new
windward seat before the boom arrives on the new leeward side.
Reset the mainsail position for your new heading.


SMALL-BOAT SAILING 57
.Sailing Fundamentals
The crew’s duties in a jibe are very similar to those in
coming about. The crew tends the jib, but the timing of the
switch from one sheet to the other is a bit different. The
crew’s duties include releasing the active jib sheet, changing
seats, and trimming the new active jib sheet. When the crew
hears “Prepare to jibe,” they should acknowledge hearing the
command by responding “Ready.” It is not yet time to act; it is
simply time to become alert.
As a crew member, you release the active jib sheet,
removing it from its cleat and allowing it to go free. You release
the active jib sheet when the jibe is in progress—just as the
boom starts to swing across the boat—immediately after the
skipper calls out, “Jibe ho.”
Then you change seats, or move from one side of the boat
to the other. This should take no longer to do than the time
it takes for the boom to swing from one side to the other. In
breezy conditions it may be only a second or two.
Next, trim in the new active jib sheet. Do this immediately
after changing seats. Since the leeward jib sheet you must now
trim is on the side of the boat you just left, it helps to bring
the line with you as you cross the cockpit.
Never allow anyone to stand in the boat or to change
seats until all on board are alerted.


58 SMALL-BOAT SAILING
Sailing Fundamentals.
Sail Trim
The term sail trim refers to the amount a sail is pulled in
toward the centerline of the hull. Sails are trimmed by their
sheets, so sometimes sailors use the expressions “trimming in”
or “sheeting in” their sails. There are three fundamental rules
of sail trim.
1. When sailing downwind (running), sails should be all the
way out (square to the wind) to expose as much sail area to
the approaching wind as possible.
2. When sailing on a reach (close reach, beam reach, or broad
reach), the sails should be trimmed out as far as possible,
but only to the verge of a luff. That means that if you
sheet out the sail any more it will tremble slightly along
its leading edge.
3. When sailing upwind (beating), sails should be trimmed all
the way in.
The three rules of sail trim apply to all sailboats, and they apply
to mainsails and jibs alike. Upwind (beating) and downwind
(running) sail trim is easy, because you simply sheet the sail
all the way in or all the way out. Reaching sail trim, however,
requires some special attention.
The leading edge of any sail is called the luff, because it
is where luffing begins when a sail is sheeted out too far. For
instance, if you were to assume the safety position with the
sails all the way out and the hull on a close reach heading, the
sails would be luffing fully from luff to leech. As you start to
Sails are trimmed in when
turning upwind, and out
when turning downwind.
WIND


SMALL-BOAT SAILING 59
.Sailing Fundamentals
trim the sail in, it would fill first at its leech. Then, as
you trim the sail in further, more of the sail would fill,
with the remaining luff working its way out toward the
leading edge. The last hint of a luff, a slight back pressure
on the sail cloth at its leading edge, would eventually
disappear. At that point the sail is perfectly trimmed—
right at the verge of a luff.
It is important for the skipper to sail a straight
course so the sails can be trimmed properly. Every time
the boat changes its heading, it changes the angle
at which the wind approaches the sails so the sails
must be retrimmed. Any time the boat turns upwind,
the sails need to be trimmed in to keep them from
luffing. Any time the boat turns downwind, the
sails should be sheeted out.


60 SMALL-BOAT SAILING
Sailing Fundamentals.
Upwind Sailing
Because sailboats cannot sail directly into the wind, they must
take an indirect route to an upwind destination. They must
zigzag, alternately beating on port and starboard tack.
The closest most sailboats can head toward the wind is
about 45 degrees—one-eighth of a circle. Recall that when a
sailboat is sailing as close to the wind as possible, on the edge
of the luffing arc, it is beating.
DESTINATION
OVERSTANDING
TACK
TACK
TACK
TACK
WIND
WIND
WIND
WIND
WIND
WIND
LUFFING
ARC
LAYLINE
LAYLINE
Upwind sailing


SMALL-BOAT SAILING 61
.Sailing Fundamentals
A sailboat beats upwind until it reaches a layline to its
destination. When a sailboat reaches the layline (see diagram),
it can fetch its destination (sail directly to it without having to
tack again). There are two laylines for any upwind point, the
starboard and port tack approaches.
Upwind helmsmanship requires concentration. While
beating, you are sailing the invisible line on the edge of the
luffing arc, between luffing and not luffing. Although you
cannot actually see the line, you can tell where it is by testing
the edge. Steer gradually upwind to see the point where your
sail starts to luff. If your boat has a jib, watch the leading edge
very carefully. Whenever you trespass into the luffing arc, your
sails will warn you by luffing.
With practice and experience, you soon will develop
a feel for the best course to steer to get upwind the fastest.
Experienced helmsmen call this course “the groove.”
If you point too high, your boat will slow down.
If you bear off too much, your boat will gain
speed, but it will not make very good progress
upwind. Staying in the groove will get you
to an upwind destination the fastest.
WIND
Sailing in the groove





SMALL-BOAT SAILING 63
.Marlinespike Seamanship
A line that is
devoted to a
particular task
has a specific
name such as
halyard, sheet,
or anchor line.
Marlinespike
Seamanship
A marlinespike is a tool used by sailors for splicing line (rope)
or loosening difficult knots. The term marlinespike seamanship
refers to the uses of line on a boat.
About Line
All sailboats need line. Line is used to anchor or tie a boat to a
dock or mooring. Line is used to hoist, trim, and adjust sails.
Line is also used in emergencies to tow a disabled boat, to
make temporary repairs, or to lash down loose gear in a storm.
Modern line used on boats today is made of plastic, which
lasts longer and is stronger than the natural fibers (cotton, linen,
and hemp) used in the past.
Some types of line are better suited to particular tasks
than others. There are three major features to consider when
selecting line: material, construction, and tensile strength.
The two types of plastic line you are likely to use most are
nylon and polyester. Nylon is less expensive and a bit stronger
than polyester, but polyester is more stable. Each has its place
on a sailboat.
Nylon is best used for anchor, dock, and mooring lines.
Nylon is quite strong, and under heavy loads it can stretch up
to 10 percent. Its elasticity absorbs the constant tensioning and
Synthetic (plastic) line should be cut with a hot knife,
a tool designed to melt through the fibers rather than
cut them. At the same time it seals the ends so the
line does not fray.


64 SMALL-BOAT SAILING
Marlinespike Seamanship.
easing of a boat rocking, rising, and falling in choppy sea
conditions. Nylon’s natural elasticity helps to ease the strain
on deck hardware (cleats), and it improves the holding power
of anchors.
Polyester is popular for
all running rigging because of
its low stretch. When you hoist
or trim in a sail, you want it
to stay put, not stretch back
toward where it started.
There are two main
types of construction used
in line making: three-strand
twist (shown here at left) and
braided (shown here at right).
Three-strand twist allows for
more stretch, so it is mainly used to enhance nylon’s elasticity.
Braided construction minimizes stretch, so it is mainly used
with polyester to reduce elasticity.
A line’s tensile strength is based on the load it can take
without breaking. Tensile strength increases with thickness.
A slight increase in thickness provides a
large increase in tensile strength but also
an increase in cost. However, it is a good
safety practice to use line that has several
times the tensile strength you might ever
expect to need.
Clean line works better and lasts
longer. Sand and grit weaken line by
gradually grinding away the fibers. Dirt
and grit also transfer to turning blocks
and other fittings, preventing them from
working properly. Oils can make line
slippery and dangerous to handle.
Remove sand, dirt, mud, and oils by
regularly rinsing lines in fresh water
with detergent.
To keep lines untangled and out from
underfoot, coil them neatly. Hang longer
lengths of line such as halyards.


SMALL-BOAT SAILING 65
.Marlinespike Seamanship
Knots
There are dozens of knots you could learn, but you can handle
nearly any chore on a small sailboat with just a few: the cleat
hitch, bowline, square knot, clove hitch, figure-eight knot, and
two half hitches.
A cleat hitch is used to secure a line
to a cleat, which is used to fasten a line
under a load. Three types of cleats typically
are found on small sailboats: deck cleat
(sometimes called a horned cleat), jam
cleat, and cam cleat.
A deck cleat is usually bolted firmly to
a deck or dock to provide a place to secure
a mooring line. Most of the load from the
line is taken up and held by the full turn
around its base (1). The remainder is held
secure by a crisscrossing figure eight around
the two horns and over the top (2).
The cleat hitch is locked off by a final
half hitch (3). When done properly, a top
view of a cleat hitch should show two
parallel lines crossed over by one (4).
1
3
2
4


66 SMALL-BOAT SAILING
Marlinespike Seamanship.
A jam cleat is used for quick release under light loads,
such as with outhauls or cunninghams. A very heavy load
could cause too much strain for a quick release.
A cam cleat is designed for quick release, particularly with
sheets. The two cams are spring loaded to squeeze together.
The teeth grip the line and channel it into the narrow space
between the cams, where it becomes wedged securely. To release
a line in a cam cleat, you merely lift up.
The dependable bowline (pronounced
boe’-linn) makes a secure loop in a line. It
will not slip, and it easily unties after heavy
loading. It can be used for a variety of
purposes such as tying up to a post or rail,
bending on sheets and halyards, or securing
gear in rescues and emergencies.
The figure eight is a stopper knot and
gets its name from its resemblance to the
numeral 8. It is used commonly on sailboats
For help with remembering how to tie the bowline knot correctly,
memorize this saying: “The rabbit comes out of its hole, goes
around the tree, and then goes back into its hole.”


SMALL-BOAT SAILING 67
.Marlinespike Seamanship
to put a lump in the end of a piece of running rigging to stop
it from slipping through a fairlead or a turning block. It is
good practice while rigging to double-check that all lines of
the running rigging, particularly sheets, have their figure eights
well-secured before raising sails. For
security they should be tied two or three
inches from the end of the line.
The square knot is used to join two
lines of equal thickness together. To tie
a square knot correctly, put one line in
each hand and remember the expression,
“right over left, then left over right.”
Otherwise you might make a mistake and
tie a granny knot. Granny knots are much
harder to untie after they are pulled tight
under heavy loading.
The clove hitch is often used as a
quick and easy way to temporarily tie
up a dinghy to a post or rail. A clove
hitch can work its way loose over time.
Because a boat bobs up and down over
waves, a boat tied up with a clove hitch
should not be left unattended for long.
Two half hitches are used to secure
a line around a post or ring. They are
easy and quick to tie and are a good
alternative to the clove hitch.
Figure eight
The square knot is sometimes
called a reef knot.
Two half hitches Clove hitch


68 SMALL-BOAT SAILING
Marlinespike Seamanship.
Coiling and Heaving Line
Occasionally you may need to heave (toss) and pay out coiled
line to a dockhand, a tow boat, or an overboard victim. It is a
good idea to practice coiling and heaving line on shore.
Line should be coiled clockwise (with the lay of the line)
in loops of equal size. Proper coiling helps make sure that the
line will pay out smoothly without tangling and falling short
of the mark.
To heave a coiled line, split the coil in half. Hold half in
each hand. With the heaving arm straight down by your side,
swing it slowly forward and backward without bending your
elbow. The coil should remain in a straight line extension
of your arm. Swing the line backward then forward to gain
momentum, and release the coil when your hand is about
shoulder height. The goal is to have the line extend
fully in an arc and arrive untangled at its target.
Let the line pay out of your opposite hand.
The end of the line needs to be secured,
either to the boat, the dock, or with a
loose loop around your wrist.


SMALL-BOAT SAILING 69
.Marlinespike Seamanship
Faking Down Line
Faking is a form of coiling where the line is laid down on a
deck or cockpit and the coils are placed one on top of the
other in a figure-eight pattern. Faking
down a line, rather than simply
coiling it, is usually done when
a longer line needs to be paid
out quickly and without tangling,
such as when anchoring in
unusually deep water.
Faking down line was a matter of life and death
on whaling boats of the early 19th century. After
being harpooned, a whale would often dive. The line
attached to the harpoon would have to run out quickly
and reliably from the cockpit or the whale could pull
the boat under, drowning the whalers. Faking down
the harpoon lines was entrusted to only the most
reliable crew members.
Faking down
a rope


70 SMALL-BOAT SAILING
Rules of the Road.
Rules of the Road
The purpose of the rules of the road is to promote safety and
to prevent collisions. It is essential that all boaters learn and
follow these navigation rules.
Right-of-Way
The stand-on vessel, with the right-
of-way, is free to continue on its
course. A vessel without the right-
of-way, the give-way vessel, has the
responsibility to take action to avoid
any collision.
When two sailboats meet and
neither is using an engine, there are
three primary rules of the road:
• Opposite tacks. When two sail
boats on opposite tacks meet, the
one on starboard tack is the stand-
on vessel and has the right-of-way.
When two boats approach one another and
there is a risk of collision, the right-of-way
rules apply.
STAND-ON
VESSEL
GIVE-WAY
VESSEL
PORT TACK
WIND
STARBOARD TACK


SMALL-BOAT SAILING 71
.Rules of the Road
SLOWER OVERTAKEN
STAND-ON VESSEL
Windward boat
gives way to
leeward boat.
Windward boat
gives way to
leeward boat.
Leeward boat
has right-of-way over
the windward boat.
Leeward boat
has right-of-way over
the windward boat.
WIND
• Same tack. When two sailboats on the same tack meet, the
one on the leeward (downwind) side is the stand-on vessel
and has the right-of-way.
• Overtaking. When a faster-moving sailboat
overtakes another from behind, it is the
give-way vessel and must keep clear of
the boat it is overtaking.


72 SMALL-BOAT SAILING
Rules of the Road.
When you encounter other boats, it is important to know that
there are different right-of-way rules for motorboats, sailboats,
and muscle-powered craft (canoes, rowboats, kayaks, etc.). In
general, motorboats have to keep clear of sailboats—but not
always. In general, both sailboats and motorboats must keep
clear of muscle-powered craft—but not always.
Here are some exceptions.
• All boats must keep clear of disabled
vessels except to render assistance.
• All boats must yield to vessels restricted
in their ability to maneuver, such as
barges or commercial fishing boats
engaged in fishing.
• In narrow channels, smaller boats must
yield to ships and deep-draft vessels
that can operate only in the channel.
• Any vessel overtaking another must
keep clear of the overtaken vessel.
• A sailboat that is using an engine is
considered a powerboat and must
follow powerboat rules.
It is a good idea to boat defensively, that
is, simply avoid other boats even when
you have the right-of-way. Other boaters
may not understand the rules as well as
you. They may not be alert, or they may
not be very skilled at boat handling. You
can increase your personal safety simply
by staying well clear of other vessels.
There are a number of additional rules that apply only to sailboats that
are racing. The above rules are fundamental and apply to all sailboats,
whether or not they are racing. Even so, it is a common courtesy among
casual sailors to yield to a boat that is actively racing. If you accidentally
stray into a racecourse, try to not interfere with the wind of the boats
that are racing.


SMALL-BOAT SAILING 73
.Rules of the Road
Responsible Sailing
• Wear a life jacket
whenever you
are on the water.
Some states have
laws requiring that
children wear life
jackets when a boat
is underway. Check
your state’s laws.
• Check with your
state boating law
administrator’s
office for details
about mandatory
boater safety
education laws.
• Stay away from swimming areas. They usually are marked by
special buoys.
• Stay well clear of scuba-diving areas. They usually are marked by a
red flag with a white diagonal stripe extending from corner to corner.
• Be mindful of the wake (waves) created by your boat. You are
responsible for your wake damage to other people’s property.
• Stow your trash for disposal ashore. It is against federal law to throw
anything made of plastic overboard.
• Check local laws before flushing marine heads (toilets) overboard.
In many places it is illegal.
• Never tie up to a channel or regulatory marker. It is against the law.
• Always offer help to another boat in distress unless it puts you
in danger.
For further information about boating rules, check with local police, the
U.S. Coast Guard Auxiliary, or a local unit of the U.S. Power Squadron.
You may also view the U.S. Coast Guard’s navigation rules page on the
internet (with your parent or guardian’s permission). See the resources
section in the back of this pamphlet.


A life jacket can
save your life—
but only if
you wear it.
Emergencies
Being prepared to handle emergencies while sailing makes
activities on the open water safer and more fun for everyone.
Capsizing
A sailboat capsizes when it heels over so far that the top
of the mast touches the water. Capsizes can occur on small
boats when:
• The sails are trimmed in too far.
• The wind is too strong.
• The boat is carrying too much sail area.
• The crew members do not use their weight correctly to
balance the hull.
Capsizing in a small sailboat is not necessarily a crisis. Well-
trained sailors sometimes capsize for practice or just for fun
on a hot day. Rehearsing what to do in safe and controlled
conditions can pay off someday in a true capsize emergency.
Considerate and courteous sailing includes rendering
assistance promptly to those in trouble or distress
and in all respects being faithful to the customs and
traditions of the sea.
74 SMALL-BOAT SAILING
Emergencies.


SMALL-BOAT SAILING 75
.Emergencies
To avoid capsizing, sail with main sheet
uncleated and be ready to shift your weight.
MOVE WEIGHT OUT BY HIKING TO
COUNTERACT HEELING.
SHEET OUT JIB IF
NECESSARY.
SHEET OUT MAINSAIL,
WHICH REDUCES
HEELING BY SPILLING
POWER (WIND) FROM
THE SAIL.
WIND
The biggest danger in capsizing is the possibility of drowning, but that danger can
be greatly reduced if everyone on board routinely wears a properly sized and fitted
life jacket.


Emergencies.
Always stay with a capsized boat even if you do not
think you can right it. The hull, even if completely
turtled (upside down), provides flotation much like
a life raft. In addition, rescuers are more likely to
find you and the hull if you remain together. Do not
try to swim to shore. Distances on the water can be
much greater than they appear, and you might get
tired out or suffer hypothermia before you reach
shore. If the water is cold, climb atop the boat while
waiting for help.
76 SMALL-BOAT SAILING


SMALL-BOAT SAILING 77
.Emergencies
Capsize Recovery
When a boat capsizes, first count heads, that is, locate all crew-
mates and be sure everyone is present, uninjured, and wearing
a life jacket. When all hands are accounted for, then it is time
to right the boat. Remember: People first, boat second.
Follow these steps for capsize recovery.
Step 1—Count heads. Account for all crew members.
Make sure no one is trapped beneath the sail.
Step 2—Stay with the boat. Do not swim away.
Step 3—Release all sheets from their cleats.
Step 4—Turn (swim) the hull to point it into the wind.
Step 5—Swim to the centerboard/daggerboard.
Step 6—Pull down or stand on the tip to right the boat.
Step 7—Grab on to the hull before it drifts away.
Step 8—Climb on board.
6


78 SMALL-BOAT SAILING
Emergencies.
Before righting a capsized boat, release all sheets from
their cleats. The sails should be free to luff as soon as the boat
is righted so the boat does not capsize again or sail away from
you. For the same reason it is important to turn the boat to the
wind before righting it. It will help to keep the righted boat
stationary until you can get back on board.
When you are ready to
right the boat, pull down on
the centerboard/daggerboard
with all your weight. You will
get maximum leverage at the
very tip. As soon as the boat
is righted, immediately grab
onto it so it cannot drift off
without you.
Scoop Method Recovery
The scoop method is for boats
with two crew members. The
fundamental righting method
described earlier is used with
one difference: In the scoop
method, one crew member
pulls down on the centerboard
and rights the boat while the
crewmate is scooped up into the
cockpit nearly effortlessly. The
advantage of the scoop method
is that after the boat is righted,
only one crew member is left
outside of the boat. The scooped
crew member can then help the
partner aboard.


SMALL-BOAT SAILING 79
.Emergencies
Overboard Recovery
When a crew member goes over-
board, choose one of the recovery
methods below, based on the con-
dition of the victim and how able
he or she is to assist in the rescue.
If a crew member falls over-
board while sailing, it is critically
important for one person on board,
the designated spotter, to maintain
constant eye contact with the over-
board victim—or the victim’s last
observed position. That person can
point the way for the helmsman to
steer to pick up the overboard crew
member.
The approach to the victim
should be from downwind on a
close-reaching safety position. From
a safety position, you can maintain
slow speed for greater precision in
approaching the victim. Once you
have made contact, do not let go.
You might not get a second chance.
Depending on the amount of
freeboard (the height of the hull
above the water), a simple arm pull or an extended paddle
may be enough to retrieve a crew member. An alternative is
to pull a conscious crew member aboard by the life jacket. Be
sure the jacket is well-fastened first, so you do not pull it off by
accident. Reach in through the armholes and grab the shoulder
straps, pulling up and back onto the boat. Another method
is to tie a bowline in the end of a piece of line (a halyard or
sheet will do). Dangle it into the water for the victim to use as
a foothold. Be sure the inboard end is securely cleated.
It may be safer to bring an overboard victim in
over the stern, where the boat is more stable.
When bringing a victim onboard from the water, take
care to avoid capsizing the rescue boat. If the rescuers
all rush to one side to assist the overboard victim, the
sudden shift of weight might tip the boat over.


80 SMALL-BOAT SAILING
Emergencies.
Running Aground
If you sail into waters where your boat’s draft (depth below
the waterline) exceeds the depth of the water, you will run
aground. If you hit rocks, the boat could be damaged. If you hit
a soft bottom of mud or sand, you may need only to shove off,
refloat the boat, and be on your way again.
Although the water may be shallow, avoid stepping out of
the boat. Do so only as a last resort. If the boat suddenly gets
free and sails off, you will be stranded. Use an oar, paddle, or
boat hook to shove off. If leaving the boat becomes absolutely
necessary, hold onto it forward of the mast and be ready to
jump on quickly if the boat suddenly starts to go. Holding
the boat forward of the mast will allow you to keep the boat
pointed into the wind, with sails luffing, until you are ready to
get started again.
If you run aground, follow this procedure:
Step 1—Release all sheets so the sails fully luff.
Step 2—Turn the boat into the wind first, and then toward
deep water.
Step 3—Raise the rudder blade and centerboard/daggerboard
enough to free them.
Step 4—Push off, if necessary using an oar or pole.
Step 5—As you enter deeper water, lower your fins and
resume sailing.
Hitting an Electric Power Line
If your boat comes into contact with an overhead power line,
do NOT jump into the water. The electrical charge might pass
from the mast, through your boat, and electrify the surrounding
water. According to the U.S. Coast Guard, the safest action is
to stay in place in the boat, and do NOT touch anything that
is metal. Leave the boat only after it has moved away from the
power line.


SMALL-BOAT SAILING 81
.Emergencies
Towing
Side-by-Side Towing
In side-by-side towing, the towing vessel and the vessel to be
towed both deploy fenders to the side of the boats to be rafted
together. The towing vessel then slowly comes along the side
of the vessel to be towed. The towing vessel remains slightly
aft of the vessel being towed as this gives the towing vessel
better steering capability. The boats are attached to each other
with four lines: two breast lines at the bow and stern, and two
spring lines running from the bow cleats to the stern cleats of
both boats. The breast lines and spring lines should be tight so
that there is no movement between the vessels.
Example of side-by-side towing involving two boats of similar size
THEORY: Setting up the lines
Towing boat’s
rudder is aft of the
towed boat
The boat doing
the towing
Breast lines
Springs
The boat
being towed


Single-line Towing
For a single-line tow, avoid coming alongside the craft in need
of towing. Heave a towline to the craft and instruct the boat’s
captain to attach the towline to the bow cleat or bow eye. If
a bow eye is not installed, or if the craft is more than 20 feet
in length, it is best to use multiple lines attached to multiple
points on the craft. The towing craft should use a bridle
cleated off at the stern. The towline is attached to the bridle.
Use the bowline knot to create loops in the line to tie to other
lines. Use enough towline to separate the two crafts by eight to
10 boat-lengths. Stay in constant communication with the crew
on the towed craft. Lines that are cleated and under pressure
in a towing situation are difficult to quickly remove from a
cleat. Therefore, it is best to keep a knife readily available in
case of an emergency in which you need to quickly disconnect
the towed craft.
Emergencies.
82 SMALL-BOAT SAILING
Bridle rigged to
several strong
points around
boat
Long towline
to absorb
stitch loads
A bowline makes
a loop to slide on
the bridle
Bridle led
through bow
roller or fairleads


SMALL-BOAT SAILING 83
.Maintenance
Do your best to
keep the boat
clean at all times,
inside and out:
the bilges free of
water and dirt,
the waterline and
bottom free of
marine growth,
topsides free
of marks and
damage, and the
cockpit and decks
free of loose gear.
Maintenance
Keeping Shipshape
A shipshape boat has its hull and all its equipment clean, neat,
and ready for action. Keeping all gear prepared and ready helps
avoid problems. For example, if you need to anchor quickly in
an emergency but the anchor line is tangled, the boat could
drift into danger before you could untangle the line and set
the anchor.
Two old sayings in sailing apply to keeping shipshape: “A place
for everything and everything in its place.” “Leave it better than
you found it.”


84 SMALL-BOAT SAILING
Maintenance.
Do the following routinely after any sail:
Step 1—Rinse and wipe
the boat clean of any dirt,
debris, or footprints.
Step 2—Pump, bail,
drain, or sponge-dry
the hull.
Step 3—Secure all
running rigging by
pulling it taut and
cleating it.
Step 4—Neatly coil
longer lines such as
halyards, sheets, and
mooring lines so they
can run freely without
snags or kinks the next
time they are used.
Never leave line where
it can be stepped on.
Step 5—Stow or remove
loose gear from the boat.
Step 6—Dry out and
neatly roll, furl, or
flake sails.
Step 7—If the boat has
been in seawater, rinse
it well—particularly the
metal and moving parts.
Step 8—Secure the sail
and boat covers to keep
them in place during
harsh weather.
Step 9—For security and
to prevent chafe, properly
cleat all mooring or dock
lines, and use fenders
as needed.
1
3


SMALL-BOAT SAILING 85
.Maintenance
Preventing Corrosion
Sailboats have a variety of metal parts and fittings. For example,
standing rigging, chain plates, and tangs hold the mast up;
cleats, blocks, and fairleads help control the running rigging;
and deck cleats and chocks are used to tie the boat up at a
dock or mooring. We depend on metal parts to remain strong,
but nearly all metals naturally corrode over time, especially
when close to water and humidity.
When air and water are present, they can cause a type of
corrosion called oxidation, in which a chemical change takes
place on metal surfaces, often discoloring the metal. Rust is
a familiar form of oxidation that occurs on iron and steel and
turns the surface reddish brown. When copper oxidizes, it
turns green. When aluminum oxidizes, it turns white. If left
alone, oxidation will gradually cause metal to disintegrate.
Sailboat parts are usually made of metals that resist oxidation
such as stainless steel and special types of aluminum. If you need
to replace or add any metal parts to your boat, be sure to get
them from a store that sells marine-grade hardware—hardware
made especially for boats.
Electrolysis is a type of corrosion that occurs when two
different metals react with one another. When different metals
come into contact, particularly when moisture is present, one
of them will gradually disintegrate. Sometimes metal parts that
are simply near each other, not even touching, can react if they
are underwater. Electrolysis is a slow process that may lead to
gear failure weeks, months, or even years after it begins.
Oxidation-Fighting Tips
• Use only marine-grade hardware and fasteners on
your boat.
• Keep metal parts dry when not in use.
• Coat all moving parts (turning blocks, traveler,
gooseneck, etc.) with a light coat of spray lubricant
weekly or as needed.


86 SMALL-BOAT SAILING
Maintenance.
Fiberglass Care
Reinforced fiberglass is strong and durable. It will last for many
years with little or no maintenance. However, the polyester gel
coat that gives it its colorful, shiny finish needs some attention.
Over time the color of the gel coat may fade, and the
shine may turn dull. You can restore the color and shine with
a two-step process.
Step 1—Apply a marine fiberglass cleaner that contains
oxalic acid. The oxalic acid will restore color instantly without
scrubbing. Rinse and wipe the surface thoroughly with fresh
water until all traces of the cleaner are removed.
Step 2—Apply a marine polish. This will restore the shine and
improve the color. Be sure to rub it in well. The polish will help
protect the finish from future discoloration.


SMALL-BOAT SAILING 87
.Maintenance
Fouling
Marine growth, such as barnacles and slime, will grow on a
boat’s bottom within a few days if a boat is left in the water at
a dock or mooring and not hauled out. This growth, or fouling,
will significantly slow a boat because it causes drag. Fouling
gets worse the longer a boat remains in the water unprotected.
Boats left in the water at a mooring or marina slip need
to have their bottoms coated with antifouling paint, which
discourages marine growth. The paint needs to be reapplied
once or twice annually depending on the location and length
of the boating season. Antifouling paint is poisonous and
should never be applied to anything other than boat bottoms.
When you use it, be sure to follow the directions printed on
the label and observe all the precautions. Wear gloves while
applying it, and clean up carefully after using it.
Electrolysis-Fighting Tips
• Only use fasteners (screws, bolts, nuts, rivets, etc.)
that are made of the same metal as the fitting you
are installing. For example, if the fitting is stainless
steel, use only stainless steel fasteners with it.
• Never mix fasteners of two different metals. If a
bolt is brass, for example, use only a brass nut and
washer to go with it.
• When installing or replacing a stainless-steel fitting
on an aluminum spar, put a piece of tape between
the fitting and the spar to serve as a barrier from
direct surface-to-surface contact.
• Rinse off seawater thoroughly immediately after
returning from sailing. Salt speeds electrolysis.
• Do not leave any metal immersed in water
needlessly. Keep bilges pumped dry, outboard
engines tilted up, and metal equipment (anchors,
chain, boat hooks, etc.) out of standing water.
• Coat all moving parts with a light film of
spray lubricant.





SMALL-BOAT SAILING 89
.History of Sailing in America
History of Sailing
in America
Sailing has been a part of our history since the first European
explorers sailed to the Americas. Christopher Columbus sailed
across the Atlantic Ocean in 1492 and claimed the land he
found in the name of Spain. In the centuries that followed, the
navies of England, France, Spain, and other countries crossed
the ocean in square-rigged sailing ships to trade, plunder,
explore, and conquer.
For nearly 400 years, trade among the early colonizers and
their European suppliers and investors was entirely dependent
on sailing ships. The ships transported goods and people across
thousands of miles of ocean. Skilled sea captains were well-
paid and highly respected. Early colonizers also depended on
sailing ships to catch fish; hunt whales; and trade food, raw
materials, and manufactured goods along the coastal settlements.
The small villages of centuries ago eventually grew into today’s
thriving seaport cities.
The invention of the steam engine in the 19th century
nearly made sailing ships a thing of the past. Sailing ships
could not keep up with steamships with paddlewheels and the
propeller-driven ships with internal-combustion engines that
were later developed. For carrying cargo, motorized ships were
far faster and cheaper to operate than sailing ships. Today,
virtually all trading ships are powered by engines and propellers
rather than wind and sails. Sailing is now strictly for sport
and recreation.


90 SMALL-BOAT SAILING
History of Sailing in America.
Competitive Sailing
In the early days of sport sailing,
sailboat racing (originally known as
yachting) was only for the rich. Only
the wealthiest people could afford to
build large, fast sailboats and pay
a professional crew. In those days,
sailing skill did not necessarily win
regattas. The competitors with the
bigger, faster boats generally took
home the prizes.
The oldest ongoing sports
competition event in the world is the
America’s Cup sailing competition.
It began in 1852 as a challenge
between the Royal Yacht Squadron
in England and the New York
Yacht Club in the United States.
Today the competition continues,
but a number of other countries
also compete for the cup.
One-Design Classes
In the early 20th century, the first one-design sailboat, the Star,
was introduced. It revolutionized the sport. The 23-foot Star was
small by America’s Cup standards. Yet because each one was
built exactly alike, no one had an advantage over any other Star
sailor. Only a sailor’s skill made the difference between who
won and lost, not the size of the racer’s boat or bank account.
The Star was the first, but many more one-design classes
followed. Today there are hundreds of classes, big and small,
each built to exacting standards for fair racing among people
of ordinary means. No longer called yachting, sailboat racing,
particularly one-design racing, has become an affordable
pastime that evolved into an Olympic sport in the
mid-20th century.
Among many racing sailors,
the America’s Cup is still
considered the ultimate prize
in the world. It is named
after the vessel America,
which won the first race.


.History of Sailing in America
Waterfront Access
As small sailboats caught on, the sport got an additional boost
by the country’s new and growing network of high-speed
interstate highways. The highways gave many people quicker
and easier access to lakes, rivers, beaches, and marinas.
The need for sailing instruction grew almost instantly, and
community sailing programs started popping up all over.
US Sailing Association
The US Sailing Association, better known as
US SAILING, is the national governing body that
selects, trains, and helps finance the Olympic
campaigns of the country’s top sailing athletes. It also
governs sailboat racing rules and procedures and
develops training programs for instructors.
For recreational sailors, US SAILING offers a
national credential, Small Boat Sailor Certification,
with multiple levels of achievement. The starting point
is a small inexpensive booklet, the Small Boat Sailor
Certification Record Book, widely known as “The Little
Red Book.” It lists the skills required for certification
by US SAILING, skills that closely match the ones
described in this pamphlet.





SMALL-BOAT SAILING 93
.Small-Boat Sailing Resources
Scouting Literature
Deck of First Aid; Emergency First Aid
pocket guide; Be Prepared First Aid
Book; Fieldbook; Sea Scout Manual;
Canoeing, Kayaking, Motorboating,
Rowing, Scuba Diving, and Whitewater
merit badge pamphlets
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.
Books
Aarons, Richard N., ed. Small-Boat
Seamanship Manual. International
Marine/Ragged Mountain
Press, 2006.
Ashley, Clifford. Ashley Book of Knots.
Doubleday, 1944.
Bond, Bob. The Handbook of Sailing.
Knopf, 1992.
Fries, Derrick. Start Sailing Right! US
Sailing Association, 1997.
Isler, Peter, and J.J. Isler. Sailing
for Dummies, 2nd ed. Wiley
Publishing Inc., 2006.
Kantor, John. Basic Sailing.
Longshore Sailing School
(LongshoreSailingSchool.com),
2004.
Maloney, Elbert S. Chapman Piloting
and Seamanship, 68th ed. Hearst
Corporation, 2017.
Rousmaniere, John. Annapolis Book
of Seamanship, 4th ed. Simon &
Schuster, 2014.
Royce, Patrick. Royce’s Sailing
Illustrated. Royce Publications, 1997.
Sleight, Steve. The Complete Sailing
Guide, 4th ed. DK Publishing, 2017.
Smith, Hervey Garrett. The Marlinspike
Sailor, 2nd ed. Martino Fine
Books, 2012.
US Sailing Association. Small Boat
Sailor Certification Record Book
(“The Little Red Book”). US Sailing
Association, 2001.
Small-Boat Sailing Resources


94 SMALL-BOAT SAILING
Small-Boat Sailing Resources.
Magazines
Blue Water Sailing
747 Aquidneck Ave., Suite 201
Middletown, RI 02842
Toll-free telephone: 888-800-7245
bwsailing.com/bw
Sail
PO Box 37274
Boone, IA 50037-0274
Toll-free telephone: 800-745-7245
sailmagazine.com
Sailing
Toll-free telephone: 800-895-2596
sailingmagazine.net
Sailing World
55 Hammarlund Way
Middletown, RI 02842
Toll-free telephone: 866-436-2460
sailingworld.com
Organizations and Websites
American Sailing Association
5301 Beethoven St., Suite 265
Los Angeles, CA 90066
Telephone: 310-822-7171
asa.com
Online Small Boat Sailing Course
asa.com/online-sailing-course
U.S. Coast Guard: Boating
uscgboating.org
US SAILING Association
1 Roger Williams University Way
Bristol, RI 02809
Toll-free telephone: 800-877-2451
ussailing.org
Acknowledgments
Scouting America thanks the United
States Sailing Association, better
known as US SAILING, the national
governing body for the sport of sailing
in the United States, for its generous
permission to pattern our how-to
illustrations after those in its official
learn-to-sail guide, Start Sailing Right!
Thanks also to the following
US SAILING employees and volunteers.
• Janine Connelly, US SAILING
Training Director
• Pat Giella, US SAILING
Instructor Trainer and National
Faculty member
• Jo Mogle, US SAILING Training
Committee Vice Chair for Standards
and Credentials
• Richard Jepsen, US SAILING
Training Committee Chair and
CEO OCSC Sailing School
• Timmy Larr, US SAILING Training
Committee volunteer
Scouting America also appreciates
the assistance of Scouter David Bell,
Scouting America Health and Safety
Committee member.
Scouting America is grateful to
the men and women serving on the
National Merit Badge Subcommittee for
the improvements made in updating
this pamphlet.


SMALL-BOAT SAILING 95
.Small-Boat Sailing Resources
Photo and Illustration Credits
John Kantor, courtesy—page 95
Wikipedia.org, courtesy—pages 18
(cirrostratus, altostratus, and
stratocumulus clouds) and 19
(cirrus, cirrocumulus, altocumulus,
cumulonimbus, and stratus clouds)
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of
or are protected by Scouting America.
Dan Bryant—cover and page 14 (type
III life jacket)
W. Garth Dowling—page 32
Sam Kolich—cover (sailboat on right)
John McDearmon—all illustrations
Brian Payne—pages 14 (types I and II
life jackets) and 15 (flotation pad)
Randy Piland—cover (sailboat at left);
pages 6, 21, 88, and 91
Scouting America thanks John
Kantor, Longshore Sailing School
president and US SAILING
Instructor Trainer and national
faculty member, for his invaluable
help with writing this edition of
the Small-Boat Sailing merit badge
pamphlet. Scouting America greatly
appreciates his expertise and
involvement. Longshore Sailing School,
based in Westport, Connecticut, is
among the largest, oldest, and most
respected community sailing programs
in the United States. Many of the photos
in this pamphlet were taken there.


Find more merit
badge ideas in
Subscribe today at go.scoutlife.org/subscribe
Use promo code SLMBP15 to get a special
print + digital bundle offer.
Special Scout Rate!