EMERGENCY
PREPAREDNESS


EMERGENCY
PREPAREDNESS
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


35888
ISBN 978-0-8395-3368-9
©2022 Boy Scouts of America
2022› Printing
Note to the Counselor
The Boy Scouts of America believes that its youth members need
adult contacts to help them develop character, citizenship, and
fitness. As a merit badge counselor, you have subscribed to these
aims of Scouting.
The Guide to Safe Scouting, No. 34416, is updated every
year and is available from your local council Scout shop. It is also
accessible online at the official BSA website: www.scouting.org/
health-and-safety. As an Emergency Preparedness merit badge
counselor, this booklet may be particularly helpful to you.
Some BSA local councils have both risk management and
health and safety committees; or these committees may be com-
bined. In the BSA, risk management is an administrative function
(prevention, funding); health and safety is a program function
(assuring implementation of safe programs). These committees
may be helpful as you plan Scouting activities in your area.
The protection of our youth members is as vital as develop-
ment of their career and hobby interests, which is the merit badge
program’s basic function. Your active participation in and support
of this goal is appreciated.


EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS 3
Requirements
1. Earn the First Aid merit badge.
2. Do the following:
a. Discuss with your counselor the aspects of emergency
preparedness:
(1) Prevention
(2) Protection
(3) Mitigation
(4) Response
(5) Recovery
Include in your discussion the kinds of questions that are
important to ask yourself as you consider each of these.


4 EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
b. Using a chart, graph, spreadsheet, or another method
approved by your counselor, demonstrate your under-
standing of each aspect of emergency preparedness listed
in requirement 2a (prevention, protection, mitigation,
response, and recovery) for 10 emergency situations from
the list below. You must use the first five situations
listed below in boldface, plus any other five of your
choice. Discuss your findings with your counselor.
(1) Home kitchen fire
(2) Home basement/storage room/garage fire
(3) Explosion in the home
(4) Automobile crash
(5) Food-borne disease (food poisoning)
(6) Fire or explosion in a public place
(7) Vehicle stalled in the desert
(8) Vehicle trapped in a blizzard
(9) Earthquake or tsunami
(10) Mountain/backcountry accident
(11) Boating or water accident
(12) Gas leak in a home or a building
(13) Tornado or hurricane
(14) Major flooding or a flash flood
(15) Toxic chemical spills and releases
(16) Nuclear power plant emergency
(17) Avalanche (snowslide or rockslide)
(18) Violence in a public place


EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS 5
c. Meet with and teach your family how to get or build a
kit, make a plan, and be informed for the situations on
the chart you created for requirement 2b. Complete a
family plan. Then meet with your counselor and report
on your family meeting, discuss their responses, and
share your family plan.
3. Show how you could save a person from the following
dangerous situations without putting yourself in danger:
a. Touching a live household electric wire
b. A structure filled with carbon monoxide
c. Clothes on fire
d. Drowning, using nonswimming rescues (including
accidents on ice)
4. Show three ways of attracting and communicating with
rescue planes/aircraft.
5. With another person, show a good way to transport an
injured person out of a remote and/or rugged area, conserving
the energy of rescuers while ensuring the well-being and
protection of the injured person.


6 EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
6. Do the following:
a. Describe the National Incident Management System
(NIMS) and the Incident Command System (ICS).
b. Identify the local government or community agencies
that normally handle and prepare for emergency services
similar to those of the NIMS or ICS. Explain to your coun-
selor ONE of the following:
(1) How the NIMS/ICS can assist a Boy Scout troop
when responding in a disaster
(2) How a group of Scouts could volunteer to help in the
event of these types of emergencies
c. Find out who is your community’s emergency manage-
ment director and learn what this person does to
prevent, protect, mitigate, respond to, and recover from
emergency situations in your community. Discuss this
information with your counselor, utilizing the
information you learned from requirement 2b.
7. Do the following:
a. Take part in an emergency service project, either a real
one or a practice drill, with a Scouting unit or a commu-
nity agency.
b. Prepare a written plan for mobilizing your troop when
needed to do emergency service. If there is already a
plan, explain it. Tell your part in making it work.
8. Do the following:
a. Tell the things a group of Scouts should be prepared to
do, the training they need, and the safety precautions
they should take for the following emergency services.
(1) Crowd and traffic control
(2) Messenger service and communication
(3) Collection and distribution services
(4) Group feeding, shelter, and sanitation


EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS 7
b. Prepare a personal emergency service pack for a mobili-
zation call. Prepare a family emergency kit (suitcase or
waterproof box) for use by your family in case an
emergency evacuation is needed. Explain the needs
and uses of the contents.
9. Do ONE of the following:
a. Using a safety checklist approved by your counselor,
inspect your home for potential hazards. Explain the
hazards you find and how they can be corrected.
b. Review or develop a plan of escape for your family in
case of fire in your home.
c. Develop an accident prevention program for five family
activities outside the home (such as taking a picnic or
seeing a movie) that includes an analysis of possible
hazards, a proposed plan to correct those hazards,
and the reasons for the corrections you propose.


EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS 93
.Emergency Preparedness Resources
Scouting Literature
Boy Scout Journal; Backpacking,
Camping, Canoeing, Cooking, Cycling,
Electricity, Fire Safety, First Aid, Hiking,
Home Repairs, Lifesaving, Motorboating,
Nature, Orienteering, Pioneering,
Public Health, Radio, Rowing, Safety,
Search and Rescue, Signs, Signals,
and Codes, Small-Boat Sailing, Snow
Sports, Swimming, Traffic Safety,
Weather, and Wilderness Survival
merit badge pamphlets
Books
American Red Cross. American Red
Cross Water Safety Handbook, 3rd ed.
StayWell, 2009.
———. First Aid/CPR/AED for Schools
and the Community (participant’s
manual), 3rd ed. Staywell, 2006.
———. Responding to Emergencies
(participant’s manual), 4th ed.
Staywell, 2007.
Forgey, William W. Basic Essentials:
Wilderness First Aid, 3rd ed. Falcon
Guides, 2007.
Kelly, Kate. Living Safe in an Unsafe
World: The Complete Guide to Family
Preparedness. New American Library
Trade, 2000.
Meyer-Crissey, Pamela, and Brian L.
Crissey, Ph.D. Common Sense
in Uncommon Times, 2nd ed. Granite
Publishing, 2013.
U.S. Department of Transportation,
National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration. First There First Care:
Bystander Care for the Injured.
DOT HS 809 853, 2005.
Emergency Preparedness
Resources
With your parent’s permission, visit
the Boy Scouts of America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org,
for a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


94 EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
Emergency Preparedness Resources.
The following emergency
preparedness resources
from the American Red Cross
may be of particular interest
to Scouts, Scout leaders, and
merit badge counselors.
Masters of Disaster™
Educator’s Kit,
No. A1140EDU.
Masters of Disaster™
Family Kit,
No. A1140FAM.
Organizations and Websites
American Red Cross
Toll-free telephone: 800-733-2767
www.redcross.org
American Veterinary
Medical Association
www.avma.org
Citizen Corps/Community
Emergency Response Teams
www.ready.gov/community-emergency-
response-team
Environmental Protection Agency
Telephone: 202-272-0167
Toll-free telephone for literature
requests only: 800-490-9198
www.epa.gov
Federal Emergency
Management Agency
Telephone: 800-621-3362
Toll-free telephone for literature
requests only: 800-480-2520
www.fema.gov
National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration
Telephone: 202-482-6090
www.noaa.gov
Radio Amateur Civil
Emergency Service
www.usraces.org
Ready.gov
Telephone: 202-282-8000 or
202-447-3543 TTY
www.ready.gov
U.S. Department of
Homeland Security
Telephone: 202-282-8000
www.dhs.gov
U.S. Department of Transportation
NHTSA Office of Emergency
Medical Services
Telephone: 202-366-5440
www.transportation.gov
U.S. Geological Survey
Toll-free telephone: 888-275-8747
www.usgs.gov


EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS 95
.Emergency Preparedness Resources
Acknowledgments
The Boy Scouts of America gives
special thanks to members of the BSA
Health and Safety Committee, in
particular David Bell, Ph.D.; Rick Mason;
Arthur Mittelstaedt Jr., Ed.D.; and Sven
Rundman, for their assistance. We also
thank the following subject matter
experts from the Office of Health
Affairs, U.S. Department of Homeland
Security, for their contributions to this
pamphlet: Scouter Darrell Donahue,
Ph.D., American Association for the
Advancement of Science Fellow; Assistant
Secretary and Chief Medical Officer
Jeffrey Runge, M.D.; Donald Noah, DVM,
MPH, special advisor; and Tom McGinn,
DVM, chief veterinarian.
The Boy Scouts of America thanks
the following individuals for their
assistance with the 2012 revision of this
merit badge pamphlet: Ken Brinson,
Bob Cameron, Wayne Fortin, Laura
Itogawa, Ken Matsumoto, Pat Murphy,
Peggy Orr, Steve Scarano, and
Stephen Steinberger.
The Boy Scouts of America is
grateful to the men and women
serving on the National Merit Badge
Subcommittee for the improvements
made in updating this pamphlet.
The Boy Scouts of America is
grateful to the American Red Cross
for providing hands-on assistance
from beginning to end with the
2008 edition of the Emergency
Preparedness merit badge
pamphlet upon which this edition
is based. In particular, the BSA
would like to thank the following
individuals from the American
Red Cross National Headquarters,
Preparedness and Health and
Safety Services: John E. Hendrickson
(who is also a member of the BSA
Health and Safety Committee);
Jean Ertdmann; Victoria Melvin;
Laurie Willshire, MPH, BSN; and
Joscelyn Silsby, MPH, CHES.
Thanks also to Scott Meyer,
Disaster Services, Mass Care.