STEM-Based
ANIMATION


ANIMATION
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


35778
ISBN 978-0-8395-0061-0
©2025 Scouting America/Boy Scouts of America
2025 Printing
Note to the Counselor
Thank you for offering your talents as a merit badge counselor.
The entire merit badge program succeeds because of the
dedication and generosity of people like you.
This merit badge is intended to introduce Scouts to the art
of animation; how to create their own animations; the ways in
which animation is used and experienced not only in cartoons
and movies, but also in everyday life; and the fun and exciting
career opportunities in animation.
To that end, the requirements are designed to expose
Scouts to several types of animation but not to turn them
into professional animators. The requirements are written to
support all age levels and allow the counselor to guide Scouts
in having fun with this merit badge while working within their
age-appropriate abilities. Even a Scout with little or no artistic
drawing ability can fulfill the badge requirements. (For ideas, see
the examples in the Stop-Motion and Experimental Animation
sections of this pamphlet.)
In scope, the requirements are limited to animation and
do not include visual effects. It is also important to differentiate
between animation and video. For the purposes of this merit
badge, animation is bringing life to inanimate objects by taking
multiple still images and building them into a video. Video is
recording live action and breaking the recording down to single
frames—the opposite of animation. Simply taking a video of
something moving is not considered animation for this
merit badge.
FPO


ANIMATION 3
At the online resource for this badge (scoutlife.org/
Animation), the Scout will find extensive examples, video
tutorials, and animation tools, with most of the material
provided at a minimal cost or free. These resources are
presented with the young Scout in mind and serve as an
extension of this merit badge.
You and the Scouts you counsel are encouraged to take
advantage of the special features offered in this book. You can
also flip through the pages and see examples of animation
running along the margins, and the centerfold section includes
cutout pages with which to create an animation flip book. On
the reverse side of the centerfold, you will find another example
of 2-D animation.
In short, this book marks a new era in Scouting. Now, have
fun with it—and let’s get some Scouts excited about animation!
Thanks for
all you do!


4 ANIMATION
About the Patch
The design of the Animation patch includes several unique elements, the
significance of which can be understood and appreciated only by those
who are familiar with animation.
The black round object with horizontal bars is an
animator’s disk—a light table used to create hand-
drawn two-dimensional animations. Multiple
layers of transparent paper are laid on the disk
and held in place by pegs (indicated by the
white dots on the horizontal bars). The animator
flips through the layers to see several previous
frames of animation in order to judge where to
draw the most recent frame on the top page. This
layering explains why the ball has several light
shades of blue with one dark blue ball. The previous
frames of the ball motion are on lower layers, so they appear fainter.
Original patch artwork Final patch design


ANIMATION 5
This rotating animation disk sits on a light table. Note
the metal posts on the horizontal bars where the paper is
mounted. Such disks traditionally are used to create hand-
drawn animations.
The patch shows a ball animation, which typically
is among the first projects an animation student must
do in school. Note the squashing and stretching of the
ball as it moves. This shaping makes the animation look
more believable.
The balls are drawn in blue because animators often
use blue pencil for initial sketches, then trace over the
blue lines with dark pencil to create the “cleanup drawing.”
When photographed, the blue pencil does not show.
In this initial sketch of a bouncing ball, note how the
ball squashes and stretches. When the individual frames
are sequenced into a video, this technique makes the ball
movement look more realistic.


6 ANIMATION


ANIMATION 7
Flip through pages 3–43 of this pamphlet from front
to back and watch the simple 2-D animation of the
stick figure in the right-hand margin! Now turn the
pamphlet over and create your own stick figure flip-
book animation in the margins. You could draw hikers,
a motorboat, a rocket ship blasting off—anything you
want. (The animation you create can be used toward
fulfilling requirement 3.)


8 ANIMATION
Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Animation or check
Scoutbook for the latest requirements.


ANIMATION 9





ANIMATION 11
Contents
What Is Animation? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
History of Animation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
Principles of Animation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
Scene Planning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
2-D Animation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
3-D Animation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
Stop-Motion Animation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
Mixed Media and Experimental Animation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
Careers and Education . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
Glossary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92
Animation Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 94





.What is Animation?
ANIMATION 13
What Is Animation?
Animation is the technique of displaying a series of images in
rapid succession to create the illusion of movement. The images
can be hand-drawn artwork, computer-generated imagery, or
three-dimensional objects.
This pamphlet discusses principles and types of animation.
While there are 12 principles (listed on page 33), the number
of types is constantly changing as new animation technologies
develop. For the purpose of this pamphlet, types are
synonymous with styles, methods or techniques.
Types of animation include:
• Traditional or two-dimensional (2-D)
• Computer-generated or three-dimensional (3-D)
• Stop-motion
• Experimental or mixed media
You will learn about each of these types as you work on
the merit badge requirements. Other types of animation include
motion graphics, rotoscope, cut-out, live animated, pinscreen,
screencast, typography, mechanical, whiteboard, augmented
reality, retro, isometric, minimalist, 360, audio-animation and
autonomatronics, chuckimation, puppetry, zoetrope, sand,
paint-on-glass, drawn-on-film, erasure, hud, plexus, realistic
cartoon and Tim Burton’s style of animation.
Animators Are Keen Observers
What does it take to be an animator? A good animator is a
spectator of the world, noticing everything. Try carrying a
sketchbook with you wherever you go. Sketching is like taking
notes—it teaches you to be a better observer.
However, you do not have to be an expert artist. Drawing
well is something that can be learned. All you have to do is


14 ANIMATION
What is Animation?.
to keep practicing. Draw whatever is around you: dogs, cats,
plants, other Scouts, leaders, etc. Observe their body language
and try to capture it in a quick sketch. This will train your eye to
see the pose. Try to focus on capturing movement and emotion.
Watching animated films and live-action movies is another
great way to study. Today’s technology makes it easy to watch
these frame by frame. Try drawing from these to learn how the
Character animation tells a story and is a kind of acting. The
animator brings the character to life, giving the figure emotion
and depth.
A good animator studies the work of great animators.
Many “making of” and “how-to” guides are available via
books, DVDs, and the internet. Take advantage of these
resources to learn about making good animation. See
the Resources section of this pamphlet for suggestions.


ANIMATION 15
.What is Animation?
action is broken down in each frame. Try watching a movie
without sound and pay attention to only the action and acting.
A good animator is also a good actor. The characters you are
animating are putting on a performance.
You also must understand anatomy and body mechanics.
To animate something properly, the animator must understand
how that subject is built and how it moves. An object moves
In animation, a frame is an individual picture in a series
of images. A sequence of frames makes the animation.


16 ANIMATION
What is Animation?.
differently in water, for example, than it does on land. For the
best believability, objects must appear to abide by
real-world physics. However, these physical laws
may be broken for comedy, special effects, and
various other reasons.
Animation Is Everywhere
Animation is everywhere you look these
days. Cartoons, commercials, movies, and
video games are obvious examples, but
animation is also used in many other areas.
Animation may be used in factories to help operators visualize what
is happening and to keep factories running at peak performance.


ANIMATION 17
.What is Animation?
The military uses animation for simulations and training.
Factories use animation to monitor the status of operations, such
as how fast a tank is filling with fluid. Animation might be used
in a courtroom to clarify details of an accident or a crime scene.
NASA uses animation to track satellites, spacecraft launches,
and mission progress. Physicians use animations to help
visualize surgical procedures. Meteorologists use animations to
show what the weather is doing. Through animation you can
take virtual tours of buildings or even places you can’t normally
visit, like deep oceans or other planets.
Animation is used to teach human anatomy. It is also used in
hospitals for diagnostic procedures.
In fulfilling the requirements for the
Animation merit badge, you will not
only learn how animators work, you will also have
opportunities to create your own fun animations. You
will need only simple tools, most of which you probably
have or can easily get. Ask your counselor for help in
obtaining any special tools that you might not have
readily available, such as a camera, a camera tripod,
and video-editing software.





.History of Animation
ANIMATION 19
Magic lanterns were
used in the 1700s to
project hand-painted
images that, when
shown in sequence,
told a story.
History of Animation
The history of animation is as old as the history of storytelling.
The word animate means “alive.” When early humans first
painted animals and hunting scenes on cave walls, they lit fires
to show off their work. The dancing flames cast irregular light in
the caves, making the images of prehistoric animals appear to
be alive and moving.
Also, from the earliest times, children worldwide have used
a light source to project hand shadows onto a wall to create the
shapes of animals or faces. This kind of entertainment can be
enjoyed by a group of friends. The shared experience of creating
lifelike imitation is a key part of the attraction of animation.
The idea of projecting shadows led to the first magic
lantern shows, starting around the mid to late 1700s and lasting
until the introduction of cinema. A primitive projection device
like a wooden box with a candle inside was fitted with a lens.
Hand-painted images on glass plates were placed between the
light source and the lens, projecting the image onto a wall. The
subject matter on these glass plates was as varied as a person’s
interest or imagination.
Some of the first magic lanterns were
created as home entertainment for family
and friends. As the technology advanced
with better light sources, from candles to gas
lights and eventually to arc lamps running on
electricity, the brighter illumination made it
possible to perform magic lantern shows for
larger crowds in playhouses and theaters.


20 ANIMATION
History of Animation.
As the projectors became more powerful, several lenses
could be used to show more than one image at a time, allowing
for more intricate storytelling. Sometimes the images were
shown in succession like the pages of a storybook, but with
special effects added like shimmering water or elements of a
drawing that would move. The more complex projectors could
switch an image from one lens to another, creating a change in
a character’s facial expression or giving the illusion of morphing
(transforming) a person into a hideous creature before the
viewer’s eyes. This kind of technology lent itself well to stories
about monsters and mythology long before film was available.
The Persistence of Vision
By the 1830s, several inventions were making use of a trick of
the eye called “the persistence of vision.” Simply put, this
means your eye will hold an image in your mind and associate it
with another, similar image that changes slightly. Showing a
series of such images in quick succession gave rise to a new
form of entertainment—the phenakistoscope.
The phenakistoscope used the viewer’s persistence of vision to
create the illusion of movement.


ANIMATION 21
.History of Animation
The phenakistoscope was a disk-shaped device that had a
sequence of drawings around the outside of the circle. If you
spun the phenakistoscope like a wheel, and looked into a mirror
while holding the device and peering through the slits cut into
the disk, you would see each drawn image separated for a
fraction of time—long enough for your mind to see each image
and associate it with the next slightly different image, creating
the illusion of sequential movement.
The zoetrope employed a similar principle and became a
popular source of entertainment. Sequential drawings on strips
of paper could be placed around the inner wall of a spinning
drum. Slits along the upper rim of the wall allowed the viewer
to look at the drawings inside, which seemingly moved in
a continual motion. With the zoetrope sitting in the middle
of a table, the experience could be shared by a large group
looking in from all sides. This was an improvement over the
phenakistoscope, which could be experienced by only a single
viewer at a time.
The zoetrope also relied on persistence of vision. If you look at the
images through the slits while the drum is rotating, you see what
appears to be a galloping horse.


22 ANIMATION
History of Animation.
In 1877, the zoetrope was improved upon by replacing
the slits with mirrors positioned in the middle of the drum.
Called a praxinoscope, the device had many different designs,
but all used sets of mirrors rather than slits.
The praxinoscope improved upon the zoetrope by adding
mirrors. Now the viewer didn’t have to look through slits.


ANIMATION 23
.History of Animation
When the horse tripped wires, each of Muybridge’s 24 cameras
took a photo. Viewed in a zoopraxiscope (an instrument Muybridge
developed), these images showed an animated horse running.
Thomas Edison’s invention of a motion picture camera
led to the development of projectors that could bring
this entertainment into theaters and playhouses.
Around the year 1890, short film clips and movie reels
were shown in combination with live theatrical acts.
Eventually, moving film took over the theaters, and the
modern cinema was born.
Motion Pictures
In 1878, railway tycoon Leland Stanford wanted to have photos
taken of his prize racehorse, named “Occident,” at his Palo Alto
farm (later the site of Stanford University). He hoped to win a
bet over whether all four of his horse’s hooves ever left the
ground at the same time. The photographer, Eadweard
Muybridge, set up a row of 24 cameras hooked to trip wires in
front of a wall where the horse would run. As Occident trotted
past the cameras, the hooves tripped the wires, causing each
camera to take one exposure. When these images were
presented in succession through an early movie projector called
a zoopraxiscope, the concept of the motion picture was born.


24 ANIMATION
History of Animation.
The Enchanted Drawing by J. Stuart Blackton was the first film
made mostly with stop-action photography. Many consider
Blackton to be the “father of animation.”
Animated Films
Almost from the first, live-action films were combined with
cartoon animation. In 1900, J. Stuart Blackton made the first
film that included animated sequences, The Enchanted Drawing,
using stop-motion photography. Blackton filmed himself in front
of a large character face on a drawing board, with which he
appeared to interact. He achieved this illusion by stopping the
camera to make changes to his drawing, as if the character were
reacting to his actions. In 1906, Blackton made Humorous
Phases of Funny Faces, the first animated film consisting mostly
of drawings using stop-motion photography. Drawings were
made on a chalkboard and filmed sequentially, with the images
of a man and a woman appearing to react to one another.


ANIMATION 25
.History of Animation
Other early attempts at making short animated films
sometimes combined animated characters with live action.
Artist Winsor McCay was an American cartoonist known for his
comic strip Little Nemo in Slumberland, which he drew for 20
years starting in 1905. McCay made several short animation test
films of his Little Nemo characters, but he is best known for his
film Gertie the Dinosaur. In 1914, Gertie was the first key frame
animated film. Key frames are drawings that plan out where the
character is going to go and what the character is going to do.
In 1914, Gertie the Dinosaur by Winsor McCay was the first
animated film to use key frames.
Winsor McCay set a new standard of quality and
craftsmanship in animation.


26 ANIMATION
History of Animation.
King Kong helped to inspire a young filmmaker named
Ray Harryhausen, who became Willis O’Brien’s assistant.
Harryhausen (1920–2013) went on to produce a series
of monster films using stop-motion animation in color,
between 1958 with The 7th Voyage of Sinbad and 1981
with Clash of the Titans. Harryhausen’s films became
the inspiration for many filmmakers today who love to
work with special effects and creatures.
At this same time, Willis O’Brien was experimenting
with the process called stop-motion animation. Using realistic
puppets with a metal armature or poseable skeleton inside,
O’Brien was able to reproduce convincing motions of dinosaurs
and other creatures based on the paintings of artist Charles
Knight. O’Brien made the short films The Dinosaur and the
Missing Link (1915) and The Lost World (1925) before he made
his most important feature films, King Kong (1933) and Mighty
Joe Young (1949), which earned him an Academy Award® for
best visual effects. All of these were black-and-white films that
mixed stop-motion animation with live actors, making it look as
if they shared the screen with one another.
King Kong came out only a few years after the end of the
silent film era. When people saw it, they were amazed by what
they were seeing because the
animated creatures seemed
so lifelike.


ANIMATION 27
.History of Animation
For many years, it was common for a short animated
cartoon to be shown before the feature film. These are some of
the influential animators of the silent and early sound eras in
filmmaking and their cartoons:
• Otto Messmer’s “Felix the Cat,” first appearing in 1919, ranks
among the greatest cartoon characters of all time and is one
of the most recognized animated characters in film history.
• Max Fleischer’s “Koko the Clown,” also dating from 1919,
was created by tracing over live-action film footage in a
process called rotoscoping. Koko was forever escaping the ink
bottle from which he was drawn and getting into trouble in
the real world.
• Walt Disney’s first cartoons were the “Laugh-O-Grams”
created in the early 1920s in Kansas City. These featured
various characters including barnyard animals that were
animated in a style called “rubber hose.” The characters had
little definition in their arms and legs, and could bend and
stretch beyond what was possible in real life. This made for
funny-looking action that could only happen in the world
of cartoons.
This illustration shows a sketch of Max
Fleischer’s rotoscope for the patent he filed.


28 ANIMATION
History of Animation.
Disney Studios
Walt Disney’s first studio in Kansas City did not make money, so
he moved to Hollywood. There he created the “Alice Comedies,”
which featured a live-action girl in a cartoon world. One of
Disney’s last successful short-film series of the silent picture era
was Oswald the Lucky Rabbit.
Despite the success of Oswald,
Disney lost the rights to the
character. Vowing that he would
never again work for someone else,
Disney started his own studio
featuring a new character called
Mickey Mouse.
The first cartoon with sound
released to a large audience was
Steamboat Willie (1928), starring a
talking and even whistling Mickey
Mouse. Disney Studios also made
the first color animation with the
short film Flowers and Trees (1932).
Among Walt Disney’s other
major contributions to animation
was the full-length animated feature
film, of which Snow White and
the Seven Dwarfs was the first. (A
“feature film” is a movie that is
long enough to be thought of as
the main film of a program.) Made
in 1937, Snow White was a leap
forward in the craft of animation, applying real-world principles
of “squash and stretch” as well as action and reaction to what
seemed like living, breathing characters made of art. The film
won Disney a special Academy Award®. (Squash and stretch
as well as other techniques are covered in detail in the next
section, Principles of Animation.)
The success of Snow White allowed the Disney studio
to grow and to improve the art of storytelling as it continued
producing feature films. Other studios also began creating
animated features.
Walt Disney was the voice of the original
Mickey Mouse character.


ANIMATION 29
.History of Animation
Cartoons on Television
Television was the next big thing in animation. Several
Hollywood studios created animated “shorts” that ran between
seven and 10 minutes. These short films were viewed at the
beginning of feature films and came after the trailers (previews)
for upcoming films. TV was well-suited for airing these films.
Warner Brothers Studios had great success with such cartoon
characters as Bugs Bunny, Daffy Duck, Porky Pig, and the
Road Runner. These shorts were grouped together in a show
called Looney Tunes, typically seen on the Saturday morning
cartoon lineup.
All of the major television networks hired animation studios
to produce shows especially for children to watch on Saturday
mornings. Hanna-Barbera Productions created The Flintstones
and other cartoons aimed at children, including such series
as Yogi Bear, The Jetsons, The Huckleberry Hound Show, and
many more. United Artists also adapted some of the studio’s
animated cinema shorts to the TV screen and created The Pink
Panther Show.
Cartoons that were viewed weekly had to be created
quickly, and the need for speed forced a change in the style of
animation. In a technique called limited animation, one piece
of artwork represents the character’s body or head, and another
layer is placed on top with only the moving parts like the mouth
and eyes of the head or the arms and legs of the body. This
way, the artist saved time by not having to redraw the entire
character in every frame. The method saved the studio money,
but in some cases it made the animation look stiff.
Television also created new opportunities for animation
in advertising. Products could be marketed to the ready
audience of children who were
watching Saturday morning
cartoons. Ads for breakfast
cereals are one example of
how animation was used to
market products to children,
with animated cartoon
characters appearing on cereal
boxes on store shelves.


30 ANIMATION
History of Animation.
Computer-Generated Animation
Animation has enhanced live-action films both on television and
on movie screens. Star Wars (1977) used animation to intensify
the light sabers and for the stop-motion characters in the chess
scene aboard the Millennium Falcon spacecraft. Director George
Lucas created a special effects company called Industrial Light &
Magic (ILM) with the artists who made the original Star Wars
film. The ILM artists used various forms of animation in the
movie’s sequels. They were the first to use a computer-
generated image (CGI) or computer-generated (CG) animation
mixed with live action. The advances in animation technology
at ILM led to the CG characters in many other productions,
including the later Star Wars prequel films.
In 1985, the film Young Sherlock Holmes had the first
photorealistic (lifelike) CGI character, a “stained-glass knight.”
Other highly realistic animated characters followed, such as
the villain in the 1991 film Terminator 2: Judgment Day.
Another notable advance in computer-generated animation
was director Steven Spielberg’s use of CG dinosaurs in the hit
film Jurassic Park (1993).
Many animation artists who had worked in traditional
special effects learned to use computers to remain
relevant in this quickly changing industry.


ANIMATION 31
.History of Animation
Pixar Animation Studios was created in 1986 from a group
of artists working at Lucasfilm, the same group that created
Industrial Light & Magic. Pixar made movie history with Toy Story
(1995), the world’s first feature-length computer-animated film.
In 2001, New Zealand animator/filmmaker Peter Jackson
released the first in the Lord of the Rings trilogy of films. The
special effects company Weta Digital created the first successful
digital actor with the character Gollum (Smeagol), who was
created using motion capture. In motion capture, an actor’s
primary movements and facial expressions are recorded by
special cameras. This information is fed into a computer, which
applies the motion to a digital model of the character or creature
the actor is playing. Weta Digital also created software that
could generate large numbers of digital characters, all driven in
such a way that they responded to the other digital characters
around them, just as in a video game.
Video games also use computer-generated animation
and have advanced significantly from the pixelated
characters of the 1980s, like Pac-Man, to the almost
photorealistic games that are played today.
The entire history of animation—from the old-time magic
lantern shows to today’s computer-generated characters—is tied
together by the element of storytelling. The following sections
explain how the animation artist goes about creating the
characters that give life to the story.





.Principles of Animation
ANIMATION 33
Principles of Animation
The principles of animation are a set of 12 basic ideas applied to
animation to create appealing, believable results. They were
introduced by two of the original Disney animators, Ollie
Johnston and Frank Thomas, in their book, Disney Animation:
The Illusion of Life (1981). Since that time, the principles have
become standard in the animation industry.
The principles are:
1. Squash and Stretch
2. Anticipation
3. Staging
4. Straight Ahead Action and Pose to Pose
5. Follow Through and Overlapping Action
6. Slow In and Slow Out
7. Arcs
8. Secondary Action
9. Timing
10. Exaggeration
11. Solid Drawing
12. Appeal


34 ANIMATION
Principles of Animation.
Squash and Stretch
Squash and stretch allows the animator to give the subject
matter weight or flexibility. Squash and stretch is commonly
added to a bouncing ball to give the ball a sense of speed while
it’s in the air and a sense of impact when it hits the ground. The
animator can squash or stretch the object as much as desired, as
long as the object retains its volume. For example, if the ball
stretches vertically, it needs to squash in horizontally. An
example appears in the Animation merit badge patch, where
you can see the squash and stretch effect.
Shown is the same animation with and without squash and
stretch. Notice how stretching as the ball falls gives it a sense of
speed. In traditional animation, squash and stretch is frequently
used instead of motion blur for rapidly moving objects.
Anticipation
Anticipation allows the animator to prepare the audience for the
character’s next action. For instance, a person can’t just jump up
off the ground. First, they must squat down to build up their
energy, and then jump. A baseball pitcher can’t just throw a
ball; they must first wind back their arm to build up energy for
the throw. Try standing up from your chair without first leaning
forward to get your center of gravity over your feet. These kinds
of actions must be taken into account in animation.
Staging
Staging is the presentation of an idea so that it is clear to the
audience. The idea can be a broad action or something as
simple as a change of expression on a face. Throughout the
scene, one idea at a time should be introduced to the audience
so that they will not miss any information.


ANIMATION 35
.Principles of Animation
Straight Ahead Action and Pose to Pose
Straight-ahead action and pose to pose are the two main
methods for animating. Using straight-ahead action, the
animator draws or animates frame by frame, doing the drawings
in order: 1, 2, 3, 4, and so on. With pose-to-pose animation, in
contrast, the animator draws or poses the main (key) frames of
the animation before filling in the in-between frames. Using the
pose-to-pose method, the animator might do drawing 1, then
drawing 25, and then drawing 47, before going back to do the
drawings in between.
Most animators use the pose-to-pose method because
it offers benefits in timing and frame composition. The
main exception is stop-motion animation, in which the
animator has no choice but to use the straight-ahead
method because it would be extremely difficult to go
back and do in-between poses.
Follow Through and Overlapping Action
An object with momentum, such as a heavy ball on a chain,
can’t immediately stop after it has started moving. It must finish
its movement first. Also, things don’t stop all at the same time.
First one part comes to a halt, and then another. For example, if
you slide a gelatin sculpture across a table and suddenly stop it
sliding, it will continue to wiggle. Or imagine a character
running while wearing a long coat. When the character stops
running, the coat will continue to move forward and then back
again, slowly coming to a standstill well after the body stops
moving. The animator needs to show these kinds of follow-
through and overlapping motions.


36 ANIMATION
Principles of Animation.
Slow In and Slow Out
Slow in and slow out build on the principle that objects cannot
start moving and stop moving immediately. To seem natural,
they must build up momentum to start moving, and they must
slowly decrease in speed to stop moving. Because of this
principle, most animations have more frames at the beginning
and ending of each movement and fewer frames in between.
Arcs
Arcs apply to most natural, lifelike movements. All natural
movements tend to happen in arcs, or slightly circular motions.
For instance, if a character’s arm is swung, the hand will not go
straight from point A to point B. It will move in an arc because it
is attached to a pivot (the shoulder). If characters don’t move in
arcs, their movements will feel robotic and unnatural.
All natural movements tend
to happen in arcs, or slightly
circular motions.
The principle of “slow in and slow out” means
that most animations have more frames at the
beginning and end of each movement, with
fewer frames in between.


ANIMATION 37
.Principles of Animation
Secondary Action
Secondary action is an action that results directly from another
action, or is in addition to the main action of the scene.
Secondary actions are important in adding realistic complexity
to an animation. An example is a character that is clapping
while running—the running is the main action, while the
clapping is secondary.
Timing
Timing refers to the number of animation frames needed for a
given action. For example, knowing that it takes 24 frames to
make up one second of film, it could take all 24 frames to
animate a character jumping up and down once. Frames 1
through 11 could be the anticipation, frame 17 could be the
highest point in the jump, and frame 24 could be the landing
back on the ground. Using a stopwatch or studying video with a
frame counter is a good way to analyze the timing of an action.


38 ANIMATION
Principles of Animation.
Exaggeration
Exaggeration means to overemphasize a movement. This
technique was developed in the early days of film animation to
give more life to animated characters. In general, the less a
character has human proportions, the more exaggeration is put
into the animation. For example, if a realistically drawn
character is surprised, the character’s eyes widen and the mouth
opens. If the character is designed to be more cartoonish, the
animation could exaggerate the widening of the eyes, with the
head popping out and the jaw dropping to the floor.


ANIMATION 39
.Principles of Animation
Solid Drawing
Solid drawing is the idea that the subject matter is
actually a three-dimensional object and should be drawn with
weight and volume. Even two-dimensional drawings (without
depth) can appear to have three-dimensional form (with depth)
simply because of the way they are drawn and animated.
Character sheets—pages with the character drawn from several
different angles and poses—have traditionally been useful for
animating characters with 3-D form. Modern-day computer
animators, however, do not have to draw as much because the
models they animate are rendered in three-dimensional space.
“Solid drawing” is
the idea that the
subject matter is a
three-dimensional
object and is to be
drawn with weight
and volume.
Appeal
Appeal is all about making characters that are believable and
interesting. Appeal applies both to the way a character acts and
to the way the character is designed and drawn.





.Scene Planning
ANIMATION 41
Scene Planning
Be Prepared! The Scout motto is also the animation motto.
Before you start a journey, you have to know where to start
and where you are going. Animating a scene is quite time-
consuming, and you need to have a plan before you begin.
Professional animation can be very expensive. In a
professional animation studio, a movie or commercial is
meticulously planned out before the animation work begins.
The professional studio usually will storyboard each scene to
make sure the successive scenes work together as a whole to
communicate a vision. You can learn more about storyboarding
in the Moviemaking merit badge pamphlet.
For the Animation merit badge, you will focus on making
one scene and doing it to the best of your ability. Three
important things to do before starting to animate are to:
1. Think about your scene.
2. Create thumbnails.
3. Map out your animation.
Think About Your Scene
Don’t jump in headfirst and start animating. Take time to
think through your scene. Make sure the action is clear in
your mind before you start. If you are animating a character,
know what the character is trying to do. Understand the
character’s personality and how he or she would act in a
certain situation.
Whatever animation method you intend to use, create
some type of guide so that you will know how far to
move your character. For all of these examples, make
sure you know how long the scene will last.


42 ANIMATION
Scene Planning.
Create Thumbnails
Thumbnail is an old animation term for a small drawing not
much larger than a person’s thumb. Animators would create
these tiny drawings to help them visualize the key poses they
wanted in their animations. By drawing small, they could
quickly create thumbnails and not get caught up in too many
details. The important thing is to capture the main gesture that
illustrates a key story point.
A thumbnail sketch is a tiny drawing about the size of a person’s thumb.
Think about the timing of your scene. How long does
the action take? Will the scene have audio? These are
the kinds of questions you need to answer at this
stage of your planning. A stopwatch is a great tool to
help you estimate the time needed for the scene. A
film or video reference can be used to help guide your
drawings. To identify the key character poses you will
need, try shooting a reference with a video camera or
a smartphone. Play back the video with a program that
lets you step through the frames one at a time. If your
program has a frame counter, take note of the frame
number of each pose for timing purposes.


ANIMATION 43
.Scene Planning
This is an example of a layout drawing for an animation of
swinging a bat. The trees, grass, and bag represent the stage
or background for the animation and would later be turned into a
colored painting. The two character drawings represent the first
and last pose of the animation. This layout helps to guide the
animator in knowing where to animate on the page and how to
keep the proper perspective in the drawings.
Map Out Your Animation
Create a guide for your animation. In the animation industry,
this is known as a scene layout.
If you are creating a two-dimensional (2-D) animation,
simply use one sheet of paper and draw your first, middle,
and last pose on it. Think of the piece of paper as a television
monitor or a movie screen. Place your drawings on the paper
where you would expect your audience to see them once they
are on the screen. This piece of paper will serve as your guide
when you proceed to do your animation drawings.
If your project will be a stop-motion animation, then create
a way to measure the distance your animation will travel, and
map it out with some type of guide. You could use simple
markings on the ground where a character will place his or her
feet while walking.
The same process is used in three-dimensional (3-D)
animation. Using a character model, create the key poses that
will be needed to guide you as you animate in the computer.
Now, on to the fun part: animating!


44 ANIMATION
Scene Planning.
Make a Flip Book!
1. Carefully remove the center two sheets of paper from this
merit badge pamphlet (or download the PDF from
scoutlife.org/Animation).
2. Cut out all the images following the dotted lines. Stack the
images in numerical order, and line up the right edges.
3. Staple the images along the left edge to make a miniature book.
4. Flip through the pages to see the animated character in action!
Now turn the book over and create your own flip. Or use a few blank sheets
of paper and follow the same process. This is a great way to create your own
animation for requirement 3.
Why Are Some Images Missing?
When you see missing frame numbers, this alerts the person recording
the animation to repeat the previous image. This is called “shooting on
twos.” Animators do this to save time and money. Faster action, like when
this character is swinging the bat, calls for every frame to be drawn so the
fast motion can be captured. We call that “shooting on ones.”
You will notice that in some of the frames, the bat and the ball are stretched
out. This is a good example of the squash and stretch principle of animation.
See the finished animation on the companion website for the Animation
merit badge at scoutlife.org/Animation.


ANIMATION 45
1 3
5 7
9 11
13 15
17 19


This page intentionally left blank


ANIMATION 47
21 22
23 24
25 26
27 28
29 31


This page intentionally left blank


ANIMATION 49
33 35
37 39
41 43
45 47
49 51


This page intentionally left blank


ANIMATION 51
53 55
56 57
59 61
63 65
66 68


This page intentionally left blank


ANIMATION 53
.Scene Planning
This storyboard from a short film,
Baxter, by Ty Coyle shows how the
animated character moves through
the scene and how it interacts with
the environment.
This map shows character
movement through the scene
from the film Baxter.





.2-D Animation
ANIMATION 55
2-D Animation
Two-dimensional (2-D) animation—also called classical,
traditional, or hand-drawn animation—involves drawing every
character, prop, and effect by hand and photographing each in
the proper sequence on top of a background.
2-D animation typically starts with a blank sheet of paper.
However, computer software programs such as Adobe® Flash®
animation or Toon Boom®, which can achieve the look of 2-D
animation, are used by professional animators to produce TV
cartoon shows and by hobby artists to create content for online
video-sharing websites.
The 2-D Animation Process
Once a scene has been properly planned out, the traditional
2-D animator starts drawing on specially designed paper that has
registration holes like those punched in the paper for a three-ring
binder. In the United States, these holes are called ACME
registration, and they fit on a peg bar with distinctive pegs that
hold the paper in place while drawings are created in layers to
create the illusion of movement. These same peg bars are then
used when shooting or filming the animation one frame at a time.
This animator’s disk is mounted
on a light table so it’s easier to see
through the layers of pages. There
are special pegs for holding the
paper while the animator draws.
Registration holes hold the
paper in place while animators
create drawings in layers.


56 ANIMATION
2-D Animation.
Animating a Feature Film
On a large production, professional hand-drawn animation
passes through many hands before it is seen on the screen.
Working under the film’s director or directors are supervising
animators who control the quality of production and may be
assigned to one particular character. The supervisor establishes
the character’s look and movement and monitors the work of
the key animators who work on that particular character.
Key animators create key drawings that represent the
movement of a character within a scene. Each key
animator works with an assistant or cleanup artist.
The animators typically do rough drawings using
colored pencil—usually blue, because blue can be
taken out in the filming process. Graphite pencil
is used when the motion is put in final form.
The assistant then cleans up the drawing,
usually by creating a new drawing that traces
over the animator’s work. The assistant follows
timing keys, small charts typically found in
the margin of the page that show what the
animator would like to see in the various
drawings between the key poses.
As many as 300 artists might work on the production of
a classical animated feature film. When many artists are
drawing the same character, it is important that they all
draw the character consistently so that it will look the
same throughout the film. Model sheets are created as
examples of the way a character may look with various
expressions or body movements.


ANIMATION 57
.2-D Animation
Animators must be able to work out the timing and the
spacing of the action. Often they act out the motion on their
own, sometimes filming themselves as a reference and using a
stopwatch to figure out how long the action takes.
For a professional film project, traditional animation
produces a huge amount of artwork. In film, each individual
image moves at 24 frames a second. In video, the image moves
at 30 frames per second. For typical or slower animated motion,
a single drawing can be filmed on two frames, meaning that
it takes 12 drawings on film to create one second of movement.
Faster action requires a new drawing on each frame—meaning
that 24 drawings are required to create a single second
of movement.
A typical 90-minute animated feature film can easily
require more than 100,000 drawings.
Most of the artwork created in the classical animated
film industry is done by the in-betweener. This usually is an
entry position for a new artist who is interested in animation.
In-betweeners take the key drawings and create all the similar
drawings that appear between them. For one second of
animation, as few as four drawings might represent the work
of the animator. The assistant might do several breakdown
drawings to help an in-betweener understand the relationship
between key poses, but typically all the other drawings on
an animated production are created by the in-betweeners. It’s
no wonder that computers became such assets to the world
of animation.


58 ANIMATION
2-D Animation.
From “Ink and Paint” to Digital Painting
Before computers were employed in classical animation to paint
each frame, a process called “ink and paint” was required for
the final images to be filmed. Every hand-drawn picture needed
to be traced by an artist in ink on the front of a clear celluloid
sheet, and then painted on the back. (The term animation cel—
pronounced like “cell”—comes from celluloid.) Later, a process
was created so that the drawings could be printed onto the
celluloid with a special printer, then painted on the back. The
cels (celluloid sheets) had the same registration holes as the
animation paper and fit on the same peg bars.
Many different cels along with the background painting
were stacked atop one another on a special camera stand. One
picture was taken to make up one frame of film. Then those
cels were replaced with the next set of cels to be photographed
against the background. This process was repeated again and
again until the entire scene was filmed.
Today, a single artist using a computer and working
alone can produce the same quality of production as
The Flintstones cartoon show. Back in the 1960s when
The Flintstones television show was produced, it
required a whole team of artists.
A process developed in the early 1990s
allowed original animation drawings to
be scanned into digital images so that
areas could be filled in automatically
on a computer. This saved costs
by replacing the long process of
painting by hand.
This illustration shows how the
multiplane camera captures
multiple “levels” of an image.


ANIMATION 59
.2-D Animation
Animation Software
Computer software can now be used to create the hand-drawn
look of 2-D animation. The same steps are needed for planning
out the scene, but the software can now insert the in-between
drawings from just the key drawings or poses. Software can also
automatically color and composite (layer) the character over the
background as the frames are made. Specific motion like lip
sync, or the mouth shapes of a character’s dialogue, still requires
the artist’s attention, but computers have greatly reduced the
labor-intensive aspects of 2-D animation.
Simple Animation Tools
You can easily produce 2-D animation using simple tools such as
a sketchbook or a stack of sticky notes (like Post-it® notes). To
create a 2-D animation sequence and achieve the illusion of
motion, make one drawing after
another and flip the pages of
the notebook, or film a series of
sticky notes. Adding elements of
music and sound can create a
dynamic storytelling experience
for your viewing audience.
The computer has been one of the animator’s most
time-saving tools.





.3-D Animation
ANIMATION 61
3-D Animation
In 3-D animation, also known as computer
animation or computer-generated imagery
(CGI), the animator creates three-dimensional
characters in a three-dimensional environment.
Using special computer software, you create a
character that has width, depth, and a skeleton
that you can view from all angles and pose like
an action figure. That’s important: You don’t
redraw the character for each frame of the
animation; you pose the rigged 3-D model. You
then create a 3-D scene in which to place the
character. Because it is all computer-generated,
the scene or environment can be anything you
want—outer space, a city, a mountain range, an
ocean, etc. Given the scene and the character(s),
you are ready to start animating.
Animating in 3-D is similar to animating in stop motion
(see the next section of this pamphlet), but the computer
software helps a great deal. In stop motion, you must
painstakingly pose the character for every frame of the video.
Computers have changed the world of animation.
Starting with the first computer-animated feature film,
Pixar Animation Studios’ Toy Story (1995), CGI has
removed some of the past restrictions of traditional
2-D animation. In computer-generated animation, the
camera can move anywhere and in any way the director
likes. Without the use of computers, such camera
moves in 2-D or hand-drawn animation would require
animators to create a huge amount of artwork that
would cost more than a film could make in ticket sales.


62 ANIMATION
3-D Animation.
However, the software does not always know what you
intend the character to do. Much of the time, you must go
back and add in-betweens or tweak the animation to make the
motion appear more natural.
In 3-D animation, however, you pose the character only for
key frames, and the software fills in the in-between frames.
For example, if you need an arm to move from one position to
another, you place the arm in the first position and then the last
position, and the software can fill in the motion of the arm.
A character rig is the skeleton of the digital character.
It defines how the parts of the character can be moved.
Does an arm move like a board with hinges at the end,
for example, or does it move like a rubber band? The
answer depends on the effect the animator is trying
to produce.


ANIMATION 63
.3-D Animation
In this example of 3-D animation, the colored lines show all
the different things the animator has control over. This is called
the “rig.” The eye alone has almost two dozen controls, and the
animator must adjust every one of those for every frame of
the animation.


64 ANIMATION
3-D Animation.
When the individual frames are played back as a video in
real time, the series of poses that the animator has constructed
creates a fluid performance.
3-D animation is used not only in live-action movies,
animated movies, animated short films, and commercials, but
also for industrial, medical, military, and educational purposes,
and more.
Scenes are created first with a rough sketch, then a simplified
mock-up called an “animatic,” and then the final image.
The next time you watch an animated movie, watch the
credits at the end. You might be amazed by how many
artists are required to generate a full-length feature film.
The different disciplines include animators, modelers,
lighters, riggers, texture painters, effects artists, and
more. It is important to appreciate that the work isn’t all
done by just one person.


ANIMATION 65
.3-D Animation
3-D Animation Software
To create 3-D characters and scenes and do the animations,
3-D animators use software programs such as Autodesk®
Maya,® Autodesk® 3ds Max,® Houdini™ by SideFX Software,
MODO® by The Foundry, and Blender,® among others.
Blender® is an open-source computer application
that you can use to create professional-quality 3-D
animations. Some of the examples in this pamphlet
were created using Blender. The software is free for
personal and commercial use. To download it (with your
parent or guardian’s permission), go to blender.org. Do
an internet search (with permission) for Blender 3-D
animations and tutorials to learn everything you can do
with the software.
Posing “Bonnie,” a freely available character rig from
professional animator Josh Sobel, in Autodesk® Maya.®
(A character rig is the skeleton of the digital character.) This
view shows several of the software controls that are used
to manipulate the character.


66 ANIMATION
3-D Animation.
This looks like an underwater photograph, but it is actually a completely
computer-generated 3-D scene.
Everything in this scene was created on a computer. The black-and-white
theme gives this 3-D image a classic old look, though none of it is “real.”


ANIMATION 67
.3-D Animation
This image is from “Tears of Steel,” an open-source project from the
Blender Foundation. Combining a computer-generated 3-D environment
and live-action content is called compositing. Compositing can be done
in Blender™, the free, open-source 3-D software available at Blender.org.
This image is from “Big Buck Bunny,” an open-source project from the
Blender Foundation. You can tell exactly how each character feels simply
by looking at their expressions and body language. The image was
created using the Blender™ 3-D program.
Animators often use real-life videos as references when
posing their characters to pick up on nuances or subtle details
of movement.


68 ANIMATION
3-D Animation.
This image from “Sintel” (an open-source project from the Blender Foundation) displays
different shape keys, which are used to create different facial expressions on the main
character, Sintel.


ANIMATION 69
.3-D Animation
This screenshot shows Blender™ being used to animate a Cub Scout controlling a pinewood derby car race. The screen
looks complicated, but by following video tutorials online, you can quickly learn how to use computer-animation tools like
Blender. A Dope sheet, B Graph editor, C 3-D view with controls turned off, D 3-D view, E Outliner,
F Render settings, G Properties panel, H Timeline
A
B
C
D
G
H
E
F





.Stop-Motion Animation
ANIMATION 71
Stop-Motion Animation
Stop-motion animation is a technique that allows the animator
to make physical, real-world objects appear to move on their
own. This is achieved by taking a picture of the object, moving
the object slightly, taking another picture, and then repeating
this process until the animation is completed.
For stop-motion, the subject matter is almost unlimited. You
could use clay, an action figure, sticky notes, toy construction
bricks, or even yourself. The only requirement is that the subject
matter physically exists and can be moved.
LEGO® bricks are a fun way to create animations.


72 ANIMATION
Stop-Motion Animation.
Rather than using the key-frame animation methods that
were discussed in the 2-D and 3-D animation sections, the
animator works in a straight-ahead manner, starting at the
beginning of the animation and working through until done.
This is because it would be extremely difficult to take the key-
frame pictures and then return the object to its exact location
and pose for the in-between frames.
Clay animation, or claymation, is just one form of stop-motion
animation. Animators form the characters—and sometimes the
background—with clay, usually surrounding a wire armature for
more stability. Claymation is a painstaking process.
Stop-motion is not used as frequently as 3-D animation
or 2-D hand-drawn animation because it is not as
efficient or cost-effective. Stop-motion has been the
technique of choice, however, for feature animations
such as filmmaker Tim Burton’s production The
Nightmare Before Christmas (1993), Wallace and
Gromit: The Curse of the Were-Rabbit (2005), Fantastic
Mr. Fox (2009), Coraline (2009), and ParaNorman (2012).
Before computer graphic visual effects took the stage,
stop-motion was also used to bring to life everything
from creatures to robots in a variety of popular films
including King Kong (1933), Jason and the Argonauts
(1963), Star Wars (1977), Alien (1979), Clash of the Titans
(1981), and The Terminator (1984).


ANIMATION 73
.Stop-Motion Animation
Stop-motion characters use armatures—metal skeletons—
inside either a clay or a latex body. The sturdy metal skeleton
gives rigidity to the flexible latex or clay. It allows the animator
to easily pose characters while providing enough support so that
they don’t accidentally move on their own.
With 3-D printing technology, stop-motion techniques have
evolved tremendously. Instead of hand-crafting characters’ faces
for ParaNorman, Laika animation studio printed thousands
of different 3-D faces so that all the characters could display
every possible facial expression and mouth position. The stop-
motion artists then swapped out the faces between frames as the
characters’ emotions changed in each scene.
Stop-motion animation requires the animator to plan
ahead and have lots of patience.
A 3-D printer can “print” three-dimensional objects of almost any
shape by setting down layers of a plastic material.


74 ANIMATION
Stop-Motion Animation.
Try This!
A friend is a fun, easy subject to photograph for stop-
motion animation. Have your friend stand in one
location, take a picture, have him or her move a half
step forward, take another picture, and then repeat the
process. When you have edited the sequence of images
into a video, it will appear as though your friend is
sliding around on the ground.
Creating a Stop-Motion Animation
To create your own stop-motion animation, you don’t need
professional equipment, a custom character with a complete
armature, or a professionally constructed set. You just need
a subject to animate, a camera, a tripod, and basic video-editing
software. Simply mount your camera on the tripod and focus
it on your subject. Take a picture of your subject, and then
move the object slightly, take another picture, move it again,
and repeat.
Sticky notes were used to create this animation. Find out more
at scoutlife.org/Animation.


ANIMATION 75
.Stop-Motion Animation
You can make your subject do almost anything. Just move
it and photograph it one frame at a time—and make sure your
hand is out of the frame before you take each picture! After you
have finished, plug your camera into a computer and load your
sequence of images into any video-editing software.
A friend could be your stop-motion subject.


76 ANIMATION
Stop-Motion Animation.
Posing a character for a stop-motion animation


ANIMATION 77
.Stop-Motion Animation
Setting up a scene for a
stop-motion animation
Posing LEGO® characters
A free stop-motion app downloaded to a smartphone will give you an
instant stop-motion animation studio.





.Mixed Media and Experimental Animation
ANIMATION 79
Mixed Media and
Experimental Animation
Mixed media animation combines two or more different
mediums to give the viewer a new or different experience. A
medium can be just about anything that could be included in
the animation. For example, you could use live-action footage
(film or video) of someone walking through a parking lot, then
draw the person wearing a superhero outfit over the original
footage. The idea is to have different styles that contrast against
each other but complement the animation as a whole.
Mixed media is open to all forms of animation and
can bring stop-motion and 3-D together as one. The only
requirement is that you include more than one method in the
same animation. The art comes from knowing when and how to
mix two mediums for a unique effect that neither medium could
accomplish by itself.
Mixing also allows artists to emphasize the elements they
want viewers to focus on. An emphasis on color could be
achieved, for example, by mixing a black-and-white photo of a
city and a 2-D animation of a big monster walking though the
buildings in full vibrant color.
The most common mediums used in mixed media
animation fall into two categories: live action and hand-
drawn. Live action includes anything that could be taken
from the world around you, including photographs,
footage from a camera, or physical objects you can
pick up. Hand-drawn elements can be anything created
on a “canvas” of any type—whether that means static
(motionless) drawings or 2-D and 3-D animations.


80 ANIMATION
Mixed Media and Experimental Animation.
Many artists use mixed media animation to convey abstract
or symbolic ideas. Because different mediums may not share the
same level of detail, a highly detailed train (for example) might
travel across the screen against a background of mountains that
are indicated with only a few lines. Such a technique focuses
most of the viewers’ attention on the train because it is the most
important element in the scene.
Experimenting With Mixed Media Animation
To begin exploring this type of animation, all you need are two
or more different mediums and a way to record the animation in
progress. Having the different pieces interact can be as simple as
cutting a hand-drawn figure from a sheet of paper, then making
an animation of the figure walking though fallen leaves. The
leaves could symbolize that autumn has come, or many other
concepts depending on the artist who creates the animation.
Computer software may allow you to put several different
mediums in your animation, then mix and match as you see fit.
When mixing animation styles, you can be as abstract
as your imagination allows. Many experimental
animations do not have a story line—they consist only
of beautiful imagery.
You can make an animation using an old record player, some nuts
and bolts, and a strobe light. When set in motion with the strobe
light flashing at just the right rate, the wing nuts appear to move
all by themselves.


ANIMATION 81
.Mixed Media and Experimental Animation
The best way to learn is to watch a few videos of mixed
media animation, then start experimenting on your own. If
you are interested in trying something different and finding
your own unique style, this may become your favorite type of
animation. Don’t be afraid to try something that has never been
done before. After all, that is what viewers love to see.
Cut out a cardboard Scouting America logo and use it to
“paint” the logo with sand. Take a photo, move the sand, take
another photo, move the sand, etc. Assemble the images into
an animation and see what it looks like.





.Careers and Education
ANIMATION 83
Careers and Education
Animators are often actors, filmmakers, and storytellers all
rolled into one. They are artists propelled by kid-like curiosity
and seemingly possessed of magical abilities.
There are different types of animators:
• Character animators have an awareness of acting and study
the movements of people and animals.
• Visual effects animators are more concerned with the
movement of the environment, including fluids, particles,
solid objects, complex systems that move, and crowds.
These specialists are particularly aware of lighting, shadows,
and textures.
• Motion graphics designers are animators who deal with
moving typography (animated letters), design elements, and
the raw movements of things. They might focus on interactive
elements or artistic experimental animation like animations
projected onto whole buildings.
These three areas of animation can overlap. Imagine a
character animator, a visual effects animator, and a motion
graphics animator going to dinner together. What would each
person be likely to observe at the restaurant?


84 ANIMATION
Careers and Education.
Besides specializing in the three broad areas of
animation—character, effects, and movable graphics or design
elements—animators may have a wider set of skills, learning
many animation styles, mediums, and subjects.
This striking example of visual effects is not a photograph. It’s a
3-D computer-generated image—including the shadows and the
translucent curtains.
The character animator would notice the pace at which
everyone walked, sat down, and chewed; how a friend
with a toothache purses her lip; and how the server
holds a tray in his right hand while leaning to the left.
The visual effects animator would see the steam rising
from hot plates; the way the light refracts in water
glasses; how water condenses on a glass and drips onto
the table; and how lights and shadows in the room are
tinged with yellow and blue.
The motion graphics animator would notice the
typography on the menu; how the layout of the
restaurant’s logo might be improved; and whether the
online order app has a legible, interactive interface and
colors that work with different tablet devices.


ANIMATION 85
.Careers and Education
A knowledge of natural movement is needed for character animation.
Animators who study the latest developments in character, effects, and
design will always be prepared for new and exciting animation projects.


86 ANIMATION
Careers and Education.
The Outlook for Animation Careers
In every generation, children look for animated characters to
delight them, and the entertainment industry steadily meets that
desire. Also, kids aren’t the only fans: People who grew up with
interactive games often continue to play as adults, but by then
they want more sophisticated visuals.
The need for animated media is also ever increasing in
areas outside the entertainment industry, as proven by the
continued popularity of mobile devices, visually compelling
operating systems, and innovative software interfaces. People
using the technology want animated icons to click and animated
diagrams to show them how it all works.
Once you begin to look, you’ll see animation
everywhere in your daily life.
In this motion media example, a student is pitching an idea to a
sports network for the 2013 Super Bowl opening title sequence.


ANIMATION 87
.Careers and Education
Preparing for an Animation Career
Where do you begin? Start small. Learn to do a simple
animation as you earn this merit badge. Then keep going.
No magic pill, piece of software, or any one thing will make
you an animator. It takes constant observation of movement and
close study of how and why things move the way they do.
Then, just start drawing.
• Character animators are always creating little gesture studies
from life. They fill sketchbooks with stick figures that capture
the weight of someone leaning on an elbow or impatiently
waiting for a bus—quickly drawn with a few simple lines.
• Visual effects animators may study and sketch how light fills
a room, or use photography to capture the environments that
grab their curiosity.
• Motion graphics animators may analyze and remake the
shifting typography and images in the opening credits of
a movie; the opening sequences of a television show; or a
TV channel’s spinning, three-dimensional, station
identification logo.
A good animator soon realizes that moving the
character, the object, or the graphics isn’t the only
important thing. More significant is the how the image
moves, why it moves, and what story it is trying to tell.
Do audiences feel the way they should after watching it?
Gesture sketches
For more
about basic art
principles, see
the Art merit
badge pamphlet.


88 ANIMATION
Careers and Education.
Choosing an Art School
What should you look for in an art school that teaches
animation? First and foremost, look for a university that
teaches foundational drawing skills. You need to be an artist
for one drawing before you can be an artist for 24 frames in
a row. All artists need to understand the fundamentals of art,
such as form, color, balance, and proportion.
In addition to the fundamentals:
• Character animators should study figure drawing and
anatomy, and take acting and psychology classes.
• Visual effects animators need extra study of lighting,
perspective, and photography, and perhaps higher math for
those who want to go into technical direction of visual effects.
• Motion graphics animators need typography classes,
photography, and perhaps printmaking.
Look for an animation program that allows you to take
courses in multiple animation disciplines. Don’t take only
character-animation classes, for example, and neglect all
other types of animation. Choose programs that offer different
mediums (2-D, 3-D, stop-motion, mixed media).
Lastly, seek out a program that includes different styles of
animation. For example, a Disney character moves differently
from a character on the animated television shows Adventure
Time or Foster’s Home for Imaginary Friends. Experiencing or
even being around these different types of media, styles, and
disciplines will give you a broader artistic skill set. This wide
range of knowledge is helpful when it comes time to take
the first step into your career, and then the next. The market
changes, and knowing only one medium, one discipline, or one
style will open doors in only one type of market.
However, be sure to take enough classes to specialize in at
least one area. You will have time to specialize in other areas
as you move through your career. With a strong foundation of
knowledge, you will easily be able to move into new areas and
continue to grow as an artist and an animator.


ANIMATION 89
.Careers and Education
Matching Your Training to Your Interests
Your unique learning experience should match your passions
as an artist. Do you love space exploration? NASA employs
animators to visualize data, to preview how missions will look,
and to explain to the public what researchers have found. Are
you interested in augmented reality and video games? Join a
group project where a team of students are developing a game
that needs animation. Or, take a course in making an interactive
storytelling app.
Perhaps you will want to do your undergraduate studies in
visual effects animation and then complete a graduate program
in computer science to develop the next motion-capture method
for the next blockbuster movie. Or maybe you want to major
in character animation and minor in motion graphics so that
you will gain experience in both character and non-character
narrative animation. The combinations are nearly infinite when
you consider all the animated media being used in so many
specialized areas.
In an animation studio, many other people besides the
animators contribute to the process. Writers and story
artists help to construct the story. Background artists
create the backgrounds. Audio engineers put together
the audio tracks. Layout artists and scene planners help
to plan out the animation so that the animators will
know exactly what to do when they start their scenes.
The animation industry offers many different types of
jobs, and they all are rewarding.
Many schools are using animation to improve
the quality of education. Read more at
toonboom.com/education/k-12.
If a career in animation interests you, now is the time to
take the first step. After you have earned the Animation merit
badge, don’t stop. Keep animating and observing the world.
Include animation in your daily activities and your homework.
For a report in social studies class about supply and demand,
for example, you might create an animation that shows the
nationwide demand for strawberries. Be creative!


90 ANIMATION
Careers and Education.
SCAD: The Savannah College of Art and Design
Animation is an essential part of the film and entertainment industry, as
evidenced by the 2-D animation of programs on the Cartoon Network, the
3-D animation of Oscar-winning features like Disney’s Frozen (2013), and
the motion-capture animation of films like The Adventures of Tintin (2011).
The Animation building at the Savannah, Georgia, campus of the Savannah College
of Art and Design showcases student animations over the building’s front entrance.
SCAD also has locations in Atlanta, Georgia; Hong Kong; at Lacoste, France; and
online through eLearning.
Visiting a local art school
like the Savannah College
of Art and Design is a great
way to learn more about
a fun and exciting career
in animation.
Animation students at the Savannah College of Art and Design (SCAD)
learn to employ their craft in film, television, interactive media, and video
games. They explore new ways to create believable worlds and to tell tales
that reach across generations, cultures, and continents. SCAD has a diverse
student body representing more than 100 countries. Alumni are employed
throughout the animation industry, working for such companies as Disney,
DreamWorks, Pixar, Blue Sky, 20th Century Fox, Cartoon Network, and
Nickelodeon. Visit scad.edu for more information.


ANIMATION 91
.Careers and Education


Glossary.
92 ANIMATION
Glossary
animatic. A preliminary version or
simplified mock-up.
animation. A simulation of movement
created by displaying a series of
pictures, or frames, in rapid succession.
armature. A metal skeleton inside a
stop-motion puppet.
background. The part of the scene that
is farthest to the rear; the artwork upon
which the animation takes place.
breakdown. Intermediate drawing
between the key drawings.
cel, cell (celluloid). A transparent
sheet upon which traditional animation
was inked and painted before being
photographed. The picture’s outline
was drawn on the front of the animation
cel, then colored on the back.
CGI (computer-generated imagery).
Images created or manipulated with the
aid of a computer.
cleanup. Tracing a clean line over
a rough drawing to create a final
drawing that can be inked, painted,
and photographed.
compositing. Combining multiple
levels or layers of artwork into a
single image.
frame. A single photographic image in
an animated movie. One second of film
contains 24 frames.
in-betweens. The drawings that are
between the key poses. In-betweens
are drawn to create smooth transitions
between key poses.
key poses. The main drawings in
an animation sequence. Key poses
establish important positions in the
action, defining the starting and ending
points of motions.
lip-sync. The process of matching
a character’s mouth to the dialogue.
The mouth is adjusted frame by frame
to match the sound of the dialogue and
to create the illusion that the character
is speaking.
mesh. A 3-D outline of an object.
model sheet. A collection of drawings
that show animators how a character is
supposed to be drawn.


ANIMATION 93
.Glossary
motion capture. The process of
recording the movements of a live
actor and converting them into digital
data that can then drive a computer-
generated character. Also known as
performance capture.
overlay. A part of the scene environment,
such as a chair or a bush, placed in
front of the main animation.
pose to pose. The technique of first
doing the key drawings at significant
points in the action, and then doing the
in-between drawings.
rigging. Giving an underlying skeleton
to the computer model of an animated
character so that the character’s body
parts are attached to one another,
allowing the animator to manipulate
them. After the character model is
rigged, the model’s body parts will
move in correct relation to one another.
rotoscoping. Tracing over live-action
film movement, frame by frame, to
create an animated sequence.
scene planning. Working out how
the characters, backgrounds, and
effects will be combined and how the
animations will move.
slow in. The gradual acceleration of the
action in an animation.
slow out. The gradual deceleration of
the action in an animation.
storyboard. A visual plan of the scenes
in an animation, indicating what will
happen and when it will happen.
straight-ahead action. The technique
of drawing or animating an entire
sequence, in order, from the first
position to the last.
thumbnail. A small image used as a
reference or an indicator.
timeline. A horizontal representation of
a scene’s elements, timing, and
key poses.
timing. The speed of an action;
how slow or how fast an object or a
character moves.


Animation Resources.
94 ANIMATION
Animation
Resources
Scouting Literature
Art, Communication, Digital Technology,
Drafting, Graphic Arts, Model Design
and Building, Moviemaking,
Photography, Programming, Robotics,
and Theater merit badge pamphlets
Books
Bancroft, Tom. Animator: The Coolest
Jobs on the Planet. Raintree, 2014.
Bancroft, Tom. Creating Characters With
Personality: For Film, TV, Animation,
Video Games, and Graphic Novels.
Watson-Guptill, 2006.
Blair, Preston. Animation 1: Learn to
Animate Cartoons Step by Step.
Walter Foster Publishing, 2003.
Blair, Preston. Cartoon Animation.
Walter Foster Publishing, 1994.
Goldberg, Eric. Character Animation
Crash Course! Silman-James
Press, 2008.
Johnston, Ollie, and Frank Thomas. The
Illusion of Life: Disney Animation,
3rd edition. Disney Editions, 1995.
Stanchfield, Walt. Drawn to Life: 20
Golden Years of Disney Master Classes,
volumes 1 and 2. Focal Press, 2009.
Williams, Richard. The Animator’s
Survival Kit: A Manual of Methods,
Principles and Formulas for Classical,
Computer, Games, Stop Motion and
Internet Animators, 4th ed. Faber &
Faber, 2012.
Online Resources
Animation merit badge
scoutlife.org/Animation
Adobe Animate Software
adobe.com
Animaker
animaker.com
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


ANIMATION 95
.Animation Resources
Acknowledgments
Scouting America gratefully
acknowledges the work of the following
professionals in writing and illustrating
this Animation merit badge pamphlet
and developing the badge requirements:
Rick Folea—team lead; Eagle Scout;
coauthor, Robotics, Programming, and
Digital Technology merit badge
pamphlets; executive board member,
Northeast Georgia Council;
AutomationDirect.com
Rick Richards—2-D/3-D animator
whose screen credits include Shrek (2001
Academy Award® winner for Best
Animated Feature); the Jimmy Neutron
television series; and countless TV
commercials and video-game cinematics
Tina O’Hailey—dean, School of Digital
Media, Savannah College of Art and
Design; former artistic trainer,
DreamWorks, Walt Disney Feature
Animation, and Electronic Arts Inc.
Ty Coyle—animator, layout artist,
award-winning director/writer; graduate,
Savannah College of Art and Design;
creator of Baxter, the animated short
used throughout this book
Theory Animation—Theory Animation
is the world’s first online animation
studio. By producing apps, web shows,
and other tools, Theory’s goal is to make
the world laugh a little more.
Kyle Martin—visual effects artist,
AutomationDirect.com; graduate,
Savannah College of Art and Design
Chris Folea—Eagle Scout; visual
effects artist, AutomationDirect.com;
lighter/animator, Ray and Clovis
animated series; graduate, Savannah
College of Art and Design
Tony Stanley—Scout leader, Troop 826,
Kissimmee, Florida; art director, EA
Sports; former animator, Walt Disney
Feature Animation Florida
Special thanks to AutomationDirect.com, an industry leader in factory
automation, for supporting the development of this merit badge with team
members, materials, and services.


96 ANIMATION
Animation Resources.
Photo and Illustration Credits
Automationdirect.com/Chris Folea,
courtesy—cover (Cub Scout dribbling
and layup); pages 3–43 (bow and arrow
stick figure animation in right margin),
3, 34, 35, 36 (slow in and slow out;
character movement), 39 (solid
drawings), and 69
Automationdirect.com/Rick Folea,
courtesy—pages 4 (original patch
artwork), 16 (screenshot), 80, and 81
Automationdirect.com/Kyle Martin,
courtesy—cover (armature)
Tom Bancroft with Chuck Vollmer,
courtesy; used with permission—
page 12
©2008 Blender Foundation/
bigbuckbunny.org, courtesy—
page 67 (“Big Buck Bunny” scene)
©Blender Foundation/durian.blender.org,
courtesy—page 68
©Blender Foundation/mango.blender.org,
courtesy—page 67 (“Tears of
Steel” scene)
Ty Coyle—pages 14, 15 (both fox
animation), 40 (Baxter storyboard
animation), 53 (Baxter storyboard,
character movement), 60 (3-D
animation timeline), 62–63 (Baxter
evolution), 63 (Baxter rig), and
64 (Baxter animatic)
DAQRI, courtesy—page 17 (human heart)
Taylor Grant, courtesy—page 71
Kyle Martin, courtesy—page 21
Savannah College of Art and Design/
Tina O’Hailey, courtesy—pages 66
(underwater scene and still life), 74,
76, 77 (setting up stop-motion scene;
posing LEGO® characters), 84, 86, 90
(SCAD building)
Savannah College of Art and Design/Josh
Sobel, courtesy—page 65
Tony Stanley, courtesy—cover (pencil
sketch); pages 4 (bouncing ball),
5, 10 (sketch), 37 (alligator), 39 (dog
sketches), 42 (thumbnail sketches),
43, 45–51 (baseball sketches), 55
(animator’s disk and Scout using
disk), 85, and 87
Toon Boom Animation, courtesy—page 58
Wikipedia.org, courtesy—pages 20, 25, 27,
and 28
Wikpedia.org/©Blender Foundation,
courtesy—page 62 (character rig)
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of or are
protected by Scouting America.