METALWORK


METALWORK
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


35918
ISBN 978-0-8395-3312-2
©2024 Scouting America/Boy Scouts of America
2024 Printing
Note to the Counselor
The Metalwork merit badge offers Scouts a fun way to explore four
metalworking disciplines. The four options in this pamphlet were
selected because they can be offered at any Scout summer camp
that schedules five two-hour sessions for this merit badge.
There is no need to make all four metalworking options available
during a Scout’s summer camp experience. If finding a counselor for
each of the options proves to be too difficult, or if providing all of the
tools and materials is too costly, select one option and do it well.
The projects in this pamphlet are offered as guidelines only. If
you have favorite projects that can be readily completed by Scouts,
feel free to use them. You are encouraged to help enrich each
Scout’s experience by drawing upon your professional knowledge
and experience, but remember that a merit badge counselor may
neither add nor delete requirements, nor simplify or make
requirements more difficult than stated.
Scouts working on this merit badge require direct adult
supervision. A sheet metal burr can cause a cut, molten pewter
and orange-hot steel can cause severe burns, and the sulfuric acid
silversmiths use to pickle their silver can be dangerous to anyone
if used improperly. Work in groups no larger than two to three
Scouts per merit badge counselor.
Some of the tools described in this pamphlet are those collected
by professional metalworkers throughout their years of experience.
Many metalworking professionals continue to practice their trade
with a minimal use of power tools. To earn this merit badge, Scouts
need to learn to use only a few basic tools that they should be able
to borrow from a more experienced metalworker. If a Scout
develops greater interest in the craft and desires to further the
hobby outside the requirements of the Metalwork merit badge, the
Scout can begin to collect a personal set of tools.
FPO


Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Metalwork or check Scoutbook for the latest requirements.
METALWORK 3


4 METALWORK


METALWORK 5


6 METALWORK


METALWORK 7
Contents
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
The Basics of Metalworking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
The Sheet Metal Mechanic/Tinsmith . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
The Silversmith . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
The Founder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
The Blacksmith . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
Careers in Metalworking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
Glossary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89
Metalwork Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 94





METALWORK 9
.Introduction
Introduction
Mastering the metalworker’s craft cannot happen over-
night. Learning the skills and techniques of a metalworker
requires knowledge of the basics—and lots of practice.
You will begin your work on this merit badge by learning
about the properties of metal, how to use simple metalworking
tools, and the basic metalworking techniques. Then you will
practice using these tools and techniques before concentrating
on the more intricate skills of one of the four metalworking
options offered for the Metalwork merit badge:
• Sheet metal mechanic/tinsmith
• Silversmith
• Founder
• Blacksmith
Sheet metal mechanics, or tinsmiths, work by bending thin
sheets of metal then soldering the component parts together.
Silversmiths hammer and cut thin sheets of metal into grace-
fully shaped components and then solder the parts together.
Founders pour molten metal into molds to make a finished
piece. Blacksmiths use fire, water, and steel to hammer out
fanciful and useful objects. All four of these metalworking
techniques can create art objects of great beauty as well as
useful objects that meet a practical need. The choice is yours!


10 METALWORK
Introduction.
The History of Metal
Working metal is one of humankind’s oldest skills. When pre-
historic people discovered metal in its natural state and then
found that they could change its shape by hitting it with a
hammer, they became the world’s first metalsmiths.
The Copper Age
During the late Stone Age, between 7000 b.c. and 6000 b.c.,
scientists believe humans in Anatolia learned to create useful
items from native copper they had found. Native metals are
those that occur naturally in a nearly pure form. Copper is
a nonferrous metal—one that does not contain iron—that
occasionally can be found in a native state. Other nonferrous
metals that occur naturally are gold, silver, and tin.
About a thousand years later, scientists say, our ancestors
began to melt native metals. Placing the lumps of metal in a
crucible, a container that resists high heat, they would melt
the metal and then pour a stream of molten metal into crude
two-piece clay molds.
ORE-BEARING ROCKS
Trade values increased the demand for metal objects and forced
early metalworkers to look for additional sources of metal. They
found one solution in ore-bearing rocks.
It is unknown how our ancestors discovered that certain
rocks leave a small amount of metal behind when they are
melted in extremely hot fires. Today, this process—called
smelting—is a large part of the metal industry. Smelting iron
from ore probably began in China and India around 4000 b.c.
and then spread westward to the area around the Black Sea.
Yet another important discovery of this era was the creation
of alloys—metals mixed with other metals or substances to
change the properties of the
metal. Silversmiths began to
add a small amount of copper
to silver, and goldsmiths began
to add small amounts of silver
and copper to gold, which
reduced the ductility of these
two very soft metals, making
them less likely to deform—
and much more useful.
Anatolia is a region
in modern-day
Turkey.
Ore-laden rock
Native copper


METALWORK 11
.Introduction
The Bronze Age
The Bronze Age began in China around
3300 b.c., when smiths began creating
tools with a strong alloy made by adding
tin to copper. The result was bronze—a
metal with such reduced ductility that
it could be fashioned into tools strong
enough to cut blocks of limestone and
granite. By 2500 b.c., the technique had
spread throughout India and to the eastern
Mediterranean countries.
CASTING EMERGES
Throughout the early ages of metalworking, smiths could create
objects by heating metal and hammering it on an anvil. As
their knowledge of metal increased, they found that molten
metal could be cast into a hollow mold.
Initially, molds were made of clay. As metalworkers in
countries in eastern India, China, and along the Mediterranean
Sea developed their casting skills, better types of molds
emerged. Some types of molds, including hard-packed sand
molds and ceramic molds, are still being used.
The Iron Age
Soon after people discovered that they could smelt ores, the
production of iron began. Because iron ore is more abundant
than copper ore, iron can be produced in larger quantities
and at lower cost than copper. Smiths began to create iron
pieces such as cooking kettles, which quickly became popular
because of their availability and usefulness.
The Discovery of Steel
Metalworkers in India and Japan independently discovered
how to make steel in about a.d. 600. To create this strong alloy,
iron and carbonaceous material (charcoal, sawdust, or other
matter that contains the element carbon) were mixed in a
crucible and heated in a forced-draft furnace long enough for
the iron pieces to melt and absorb the carbon gas produced by
the carbonaceous matter. The result was a steel disk, called a
cake, which blacksmiths then forged into bars that could be
used as trade goods.
Because of its
low production
cost and high
demand, iron
became known
as the “demo-
cratic” metal.
Copper ingot, Bronze Age, Greece


Introduction.
Because steel is less ductile and malleable—capable of
being shaped with tools—than iron, a blacksmith has to work
harder to make something out of steel than out of iron. Objects
made of steel are much less likely to bend or deform than items
made of iron, and by controlling the amount of carbon intro-
duced during the production stage, steels of varying hardness
can be manufactured.
CARBON STEELS
Steel is iron that contains less than 2 percent carbon. Low-carbon
steel contains up to 0.25 percent carbon. Medium-carbon steel
contains between 0.25 and 0.55 percent carbon. High-carbon
steel contains more than 0.55 percent carbon, but today’s usual
upper limit is about 1.20 percent carbon. Carbon steels contain
iron as the only metal in their composition.
The steel that is most often used by today’s blacksmiths
and sheet metal mechanics contains between 0.08 to 0.23
percent carbon. Modern industry uses one of the medium-
carbon steels to make most hand tools. If an item must hold
a sharp edge for a long time, such as a pocketknife or an ax,
then one of the high-carbon steels is used.
ALLOY STEELS, STAINLESS STEELS, AND BEYOND
Until the invention of the steam engine, wrought iron and
carbon steel served quite well. As the use of steam-powered
machinery caught on with industry during the 19th century,
each new steam engine model produced greater power.
These increasingly more powerful engines placed more
demands upon their metal components, so the engineers
who designed steam engines began to demand stronger and
tougher new alloys, especially ferrous alloys. They turned to
metallurgists—scientists who study the properties of metals—
to help meet their demands.
The drawbacks to
making something
from high-carbon
steel are lost
flexibility and
the chance that
the item may
snap if twisted.


METALWORK 13
.Introduction
The metallurgists experimented by adding small amounts
of other metals to carbon steel, creating alloy steels that were
increasingly more ductile, stronger, harder, tougher, and more
resistant to wear and corrosion.
Rising demands by industrial steel consumers, such as the
producers of automobiles and manufacturing equipment, have
led to the development of many new varieties of steel.
Modern steel companies produce an average of 200 to 300 different steel grades to
meet the industry’s demands.





METALWORK 15
.The Basics of Metalworking
The Basics of
Metalworking
Metalworking requires the craftsman to pay close attention
to the work at hand and to adhere closely to special safety
requirements. Before diving into the techniques of metalwork-
ing, learn how to keep yourself and others safe while working
with metal.
Safety Rules
When working with metal, acid, and high temperatures, metal-
workers should be aware of possible hazards, and youths must
have adult supervision. Following the rules will keep metal-
working safe and enjoyable.
Sheet Metal Safety
Paying attention to what you are doing and wearing the proper
gear is critical in metalworking. When sheet metal is cut, a
small chip of metal can fly anywhere—possibly into your eye.
Sharp edges on metal can cause cuts. Hot metal can cause
painful burns. The rules listed below apply to all four
metalworking options.
1. Always work with direct
adult supervision.
2. Always wear safety goggles or
safety glasses, leather gloves,
and a shop apron.
3. Handle sheet metal with care.
It can cause serious cuts.
4. Treat every cut immediately, no matter
how minor, to help prevent infection.
Safety glasses


16 METALWORK
The Basics of Metalworking.
5. Remove all burrs from the sheet metal before
attempting further work on it.
6. Do not run your hands over the surface of
sheet metal that has just been cut or drilled.
The burrs can cut.
7. Use a brush—not your hands—to clean the
work area.
8. Place scrap pieces of sheet metal in a scrap
box right away.
9. Do not use tools that are not in top condition.
Avoid using hammers with loose handles or
chisels with worn or misshapen heads.
10. Use a broom and a dustpan to sweep the shop
floor. Do not leave slivers of metal on the
worktable or the shop floor.
Always wear the proper safety gear when working
with metal.


METALWORK 17
.The Basics of Metalworking
Safety With the Pickling Tank
If you select the silversmith option to complete your Metalwork
merit badge, you have additional safety rules to learn. Follow
these guidelines when using the pickling tank, an integral step
in the silversmithing process.
1. Always use the pickling tank with adult supervision.
2. Always wear eye protection, a shop apron, and rubber gloves
when working with the pickling tank and solution. Use
tongs to move items into and out of the pickling solution.
3. Use the pickling tank in a well-ventilated space, and do not
breathe fumes from the pickling solution.
4. Never pour water into the pickling tank solution; pour the
pickling solution into the water.
5. Keep small children and pets away from the pickling tank.
6. Always store the pickling tank with its lid tightly secured.
7. Plainly mark the contents of the pickling tank.


18 METALWORK
The Basics of Metalworking.
Safety With Molten Pewter
If you select the founder option to complete your Metalwork
merit badge, you will be working with molten pewter. You must
know a few more safety rules:
1. Always work with direct adult supervision.
2. Have a fire extinguisher handy when using the melting pot.
3. Place a sheet of metal under the melting pot and the mold-
pouring area to prevent accidental splatters from burning
your worktable.
4. Wear safety glasses, leather gloves, long pants, boots, and a
shop apron when pouring metal. Be sure to pull your pant
legs down over the top of your boots. Do not wear shorts,
sandals, or water shoes.
5. Do not set a pouring ladle down with its handle extending
past the edge of the workbench.
6. Do not put moist or wet metal in the melting pot. Bubbles
caused by escaping steam will cause the molten metal to
splash out of the crucible, possibly causing painful burns.
7. Do not eat while casting metal.
8. Always wash your hands after handling metal.
Safety With Hot Steel
If you choose the blacksmith option to complete your
Metalwork merit badge, you will be working with orange-
or yellow-hot steel. Here are some special rules that you
must follow:
1. Always work with direct adult supervision.
2. Have a fire extinguisher handy at all times.
3. Wear safety glasses, leather gloves, a shop apron, long
pants, and boots when working in a blacksmith shop.
Be sure to pull your pant legs down over the tops of your
boots. Do not wear shorts, sandals, or water shoes.
4. Allow hot metal to cool in an out-of-the-way place.
5. Use tongs to pick up a dropped object. Although it might
not glow, the metal might still be 1000 degrees.


METALWORK 19
.The Basics of Metalworking
Tools
❏ Sheet metal snips
❏ Patterns
❏ Machinist’s vise
❏ Center punch
❏ Flat-faced wooden mallet
❏ Pipe anvil
❏ Iron pipe of about 2-inch
outside diameter
❏ Hand seamer
❏ Hemmer
❏ Lineman’s, needle-nosed,
and locking-jaw pliers
❏ Wood blocks, in pairs
❏ Two C-clamps
❏ Flat file with handle
❏ 12-ounce ball peen hammer
❏ 1
⁄2-inch cold chisel
❏ Hacksaw and spare blades
❏ Pop rivet gun
❏ Rivet set
❏ Propane torch
❏ 125-watt or 150-watt electric
soldering iron
❏ Steel dividers
❏ Folding rule or measuring tape
❏ Carpenter’s square
(or equivalent)
❏ Metal straightedge
❏ Scriber
❏ Drill press
❏ Drill bits (sized to match
the pop rivets)
❏ Shop apron
❏ Leather gloves
❏ Safety glasses
Tools and Materials
The following tools and materials can be used to learn the techniques and
complete the projects described in this pamphlet. The basic techniques
are explained in this chapter, and step-by-step instructions for the
projects are given in later chapters.


20 METALWORK
Materials
❏ Lead-free solder
❏ Variety of family-size
metal food cans (avoid
institutional-size food cans;
they are too large to make the
projects in this pamphlet)
❏ Two or three
tenpenny nails
❏ Two or three
pop rivets
❏ Two 3-by-3-inch
pieces of 26- or
28-gauge copper
or brass (not steel
or aluminum)
❏ One 5-inch piece of 3
⁄8-inch
(round or square) medium-
carbon or high-carbon steel
(C1065, W1, or equivalent)
❏ Clothes hanger wire
❏ Five or six small blocks of
scrap 2-by-4-inch lumber of
different lengths
❏ One 6-inch flat steel scrap
❏ Soapstone pencil
Mark your tools with tape, paint, or permanent markers so that
you can identify them easily in the shop.


METALWORK 21
.The Basics of Metalworking
Springback
Cold metal does not always stay in
place after it is bent. To overcome the
springback effect, the metal often must
be bent past its yield point.
An experiment will demonstrate
springback. Place a thin piece of sheet
brass or sheet copper that has never
been worked between two pieces of
wood, leaving enough metal clear of
the top so you can press against it with
your hand. Clamp the wood and metal
tightly into a vise. Without using any
tools, do your best to put a 45-degree
bend in the unworked metal. Stop
when you have pushed the metal to
45 degrees. Do not overbend the metal.
When you let go, the angle of the metal
will adjust itself to something less than
45 degrees. That effect is springback.
Work Hardening
The process of hardening a metal by
hammering it is called work hardening.
All metals except mercury and lead
become harder as they are hammered.
As a metal is work-hardened, it becomes
more resistant to change its shape. The
metal must be softened—or annealed—
from time to time during the work hard-
ening process or it will rupture or crack.
Another experiment provides an
example of work hardening. Hit a small
piece of thin sheet brass or sheet cop-
per repeatedly with the domed end of
a ball peen hammer. Place your blows
closely together, covering the work
with small dents. This peening process causes the crystals that
form the metal to condense with each blow. The closer the
crystals are to each other, the stiffer the metal becomes.
To demonstrate springback, use your
hands to push the unworked metal into
a 45-degree angle.


22 METALWORK
The Basics of Metalworking.
Annealing
Metal is annealed by heating it to the temperature where it is
soft enough for the metalworker to continue to shape the piece.
How long a piece of metal is exposed to the critical temperature
depends on its thickness and shape.
Annealing Ferrous Metals
Most ferrous alloys must be cooled slowly after being elevated
to their critical temperature. When high-carbon steel is cooled
too quickly, it becomes brittle and tends to crack easily. This is
referred to as being glass hard.
High-carbon steel is annealed by being heated to a bright
cherry red heat (about 1350 degrees) and then being cooled
slowly in a metal box insulated with wood ashes or vermiculite
(clean cat litter). The piece must be cooled for at least eight
hours before it is worked again.
Measuring the Thickness of Metal
In the United States, the thickness of sheet metal and
wire is measured with a thickness gauge—one for
ferrous metal and another for nonferrous metal.
The system runs from 0—about the diameter of a
pencil—to 36—finer than a human hair. The numbers
run consecutively, although even-numbered gauges
are used most often. Twenty-gauge sheet steel is 0.035
inch thick, while 20-gauge nonferrous metal is 0.032
inch thick.
Most irons and
steels are ferrous.
Some nonferrous
metals are
aluminum, tin,
copper, brass,
silver, gold,
and platinum.


METALWORK 23
.The Basics of Metalworking
Annealing Nonferrous Metals
Nonferrous metals are annealed by bringing them to a cherry
red heat, allowing them to cool until the color disappears, and
then quenching them in water. For copper, brass, and silver,
cherry red heat ranges from 660 degrees to 1100 degrees,
depending on the alloy. Unlike ferrous metals, nonferrous
metals do not become brittle if cooled immediately
after reaching critical temperature. This permits a
metalworker to quickly continue working.
Riveting
A rivet is a mechanical fastener that is ham-
mered into place. Factory-made rivets are
available in a variety of sizes. Common
nails can be used as rivets if they are cut to
the correct length and the shank is peened
down. While the nail head is flat instead of
round like a rivet, it will hold adequately.


24 METALWORK
The Basics of Metalworking.
Soldering and Brazing
Soldering and brazing are methods of joining metals with
melting nonferrous metal filler without having to heat the
base metal to its melting point. The method used depends
on the metals involved in projects.
Before two metals can be joined by soldering or brazing:
1. The surfaces to be soldered or brazed must be clean.
2. An adequate source of heat must be available.
3. The correct solder or brazing alloy must be used.
4. The proper flux must be applied.
Solder
Solder is a metal filler that is melted to join two pieces of metal.
By definition, soldering occurs at temperatures less than an
arbitrary 800 degrees. Use lead-free solder when joining tin-
plated steel and thin sheet steel.
Silver Solder
Silver solders are brazing materials that melt at temperatures
higher than 800 degrees. When working with silver, always use
silver solder rather than regular solder. Silver solder can be
made to flow using a propane torch.
There are five categories of silver solder.
Type of Solder Flow Temperature
Extra-easy-flow silver 1200 degrees
Easy-flow silver 1300 degrees
Medium-flow silver 1360 degrees
Hard-flow silver 1460 degrees
IT silver (high-temperature solder) 1490 degrees
Use only lead-free solder. Although
lead-tin solder is still available, it
releases toxic fumes. Over time, inhaling
these fumes can cause brain damage.
Eating or drinking from utensils made of
lead-tin solder also can cause brain damage.


METALWORK 25
.The Basics of Metalworking
Having all five types of silver solder handy is smart when
assembling pieces of a complex project. The first solder joint
should use the highest-temperature silver solder available.
Subsequent joints should use the remaining solders in declining
temperature order as the subsequent components are attached.
This way the first joint will not come apart as the next joints
are soldered.
Flux
All metals oxidize when exposed to air,
especially humid air. The thin layer of
tarnish or rust that results must be removed
before solder will stick to a metal. A chemi-
cal mixture called flux is applied to the
joint to remove these oxides and prevent
further oxidizing while the metal is heated
to the soldering temperature. Flux also
lowers the surface tension of the molten
solder, making it flow more easily.
Cutting
Use handheld sheet metal shears to make
projects. These shears are manufactured
with right-cutting, left-cutting, and combina-
tion jaws. Hold the shear and look down the
blade to determine which kind of shear you
have. If the blade curves to the right, it is a
right-cutting shear. If the blade curves to the
left, it is a left-cutting shear. If the blade
does not curve at all, it is a combination
shear that can be used to make straight as
well as circular cuts. To cut a hole in sheet metal, first use
a hollow punch to make a small hole
inside the diameter of what will
become the large hole. Then insert the
tip of the snips into the punched hole.
Cut in a circular pattern until the lay-
out line is reached. Follow the layout
line to complete the cut.
When using an acid flux, wear gloves
and goggles, and work in an area
with good ventilation.
HOLE MADE WITH
HOLLOW PUNCH
PATH OF SHEARSSECTION TO BE
REMOVED


26 METALWORK
The Basics of Metalworking.
Edging
The small band of metal that runs around the top edge of a
modern metal can is a machine-made hem, or a safe edge.
Because a cut edge is too sharp to be left in a finished piece,
a careful sheet metal mechanic will put a hem in the edge
for safety.
Bending
A bar former is used to make bends in small sheet metal
sections, and a bending break is used to make bends in
large sheet metal sections. Both tools can be set up to make
90-degree and 45-degree angles as well as curved bends. If
there is no access to a bar former or a bending break, clamp
sheet metal between two wooden blocks or between two steel
bars and use a wooden mallet to make the bend. Or, if your
projects are small, use a hand seamer to make bends.
Seaming
Seaming is the process
of joining two pieces of
metal as if by sewing.
The flatlock seam is
most commonly used
when making an item
from sheet metal. When designing a piece, allow for extra metal
on the edges to make the seams.
Flatlock seam
Use a hand seamer to make bends. To bend a safe edge, place
3
⁄16 inch of metal in the seamer’s jaws.


METALWORK 27
.The Basics of Metalworking
Rolling
Rolling is a technique that allows the metalworker to create
rounded shapes easily. A slip-form roller can be used to shape
sheet metal into a cylinder. Using a
mallet, you can also gently hammer
the metal over the edges of an anvil
or over a piece of iron pipe.
A slip-form roller can be used to make
curved shapes such as cones and
cylinders. Notice in the diagram that the
edges of the seams have already been
bent and are facing opposite directions.
When using the horn of the anvil to
roll sheet metal, do not hit straight
down on the metal where it touches
the anvil. Position the blows to
avoid denting and crimping the
sheet metal.


28 METALWORK
The Basics of Metalworking.
Tempering
Unlike iron, steel can be hardened to the point that it becomes
brittle and fractures easily. To make it useful, its brittleness
must be relaxed enough to make the steel capable of holding
an edge without snapping when flexed. This relaxing technique
is called tempering.
Tempering is done in two steps. First, the steel is made
brittle by being heated to its critical temperature (between
1350 and 2400 degrees, depending on the alloy and the
carbon content) and then being cooled rapidly by plunging
into water.
The second step is the real tempering step. The brittleness
is relaxed by applying just the right amount of heat to achieve
the correct degree of hardness needed to make the tool
function properly. A temper color index will help determine
the degree of hardness desired.
The temper color index will help you see the subtle differences
between colors such as bronze and dark brown. Notice the bands
of color that have appeared in this area.
The colors on
the steel will be
matched with a
corresponding
temperature
during the
tempering step.


METALWORK 29
.The Basics of Metalworking
Temper Color Index Chart
Many different kinds of tools can be made from the same bar of metal.
The variable is the heat at which the metal is tempered. Each tool needs
a different final degree of hardness, and that is accomplished by heating
it to one of these temperatures, thus relaxing the brittleness just enough
to make the tool hard enough to do the job, but not so hard that it will
shatter when used.
Degrees
Temper Color Fahrenheit Tool Being Made
Greenish blue 630 Light springs
620
Light blue 610 Screwdrivers
600 Wood saws and punches
Dark blue 590 Springs
580 Picks
Blue 570 Light-work cold chisels
560 Knives
Dark purple 550 Steel cold chisels
Purple 540 Axes and center punches
Light purple 530 Hammers and sledges
Brown with purple spots 520 Surgical instruments
Dark brown 510 Twist drills
Bronze 500 Rock drills and hot chisels
Dark straw 490 Wood chisels
Golden straw 480 Drifts and leather dies
Straw 470 Penknives
Straw yellow 460 Thread-cutting tools
Yellow 450 Planer tools
Light yellow 440 Drills for stone
430 Paper cutters and lathe tools
Pale yellow 420 Razors
410 Burnishers
400 Scrapers


30 METALWORK
The Basics of Metalworking.
Making a Temper Color Index
Making a temper color index will help you decide when a metal
has reached the desired temperature.
Step 1—Saw a piece of flat steel about 5 to 6 inches long.
Step 2—Sand or file one side of the bar until it is bright
and shiny.
Step 3—Firmly clamp one end of the steel in a pair of
locking-jaw pliers, leaving 4 inches free.
Step 4—Have an adult light the propane torch.
Step 5—Place the steel over the flame, letting the light blue cone
of heat touch the steel about 2 inches from the tip of the pliers.
Step 6—Continue to hold the
steel over the flame in the same
place. Do not wave the steel bar
over the flame. Wait for the iri-
descent colors to appear.
Step 7—As the colors appear,
continue to heat that spot and
watch the colors move down the
bar. The first color that will
appear is a faint straw color. Soon
other colors will appear, such as
deeper shades of straw, bronze,
purple, royal blue, and sky blue.
Step 8—When the straw color reaches about
1
⁄16 inch from the far end of the steel, quickly
plunge the steel into a bucket of water to cool
it. This is called quenching. Practice good
technique by dunking the steel up and down
rather than stirring it.
Step 9—When air bubbles and steam stop
rising from the metal, wait about 30 seconds,
then remove the piece from the water, dry it
off, and rub a small amount of lubricating oil
on it to protect it from rust.


METALWORK 31
.The Basics of Metalworking
Making a Center Punch
Your first exercise in tempering will be
to make a center punch, which is a basic
metalworking tool used to put small dents in
metal. Unless your counselor suggests another type, use
a medium-carbon C1065 steel. The basic technique is the same,
regardless of which steel or quenching medium is chosen.
Step 1—Measure about 6 inches of C1065 bar steel (either
round or square), and mark it with a soapstone pencil.
Step 2—Position the cutting line near the edge of the vise.
Clamp the jaws tightly to prevent the metal bar from vibrating
as it is sawed.
Step 3—Using a hacksaw, cut the piece from the bar.
Step 4—Set the bar stock aside
and clamp the cut-off section in
the vise with one end extending
about 2 inches.
Step 5—Using a flat file, file a
short tapered point in one end
by bearing down on the forward
stroke to scrape the metal. Lift the
file away from the metal on the
backward stroke.
Do not scrub
the file back and
forth; this dulls
the teeth.
Center punch
5
3 4


32 METALWORK
The Basics of Metalworking.
Tempering the Center Punch
Now you are ready to temper the center punch. For safety,
be sure to work under direct adult supervision.
Step 1—Using tongs, hold the center punch under a large torch
flame or place it in a blacksmith’s fire. Bring the metal up to a
bright cherry red heat (about 1350 degrees).
Step 2—Using tongs, remove the center punch from the heat
and plunge it immediately into a nearby bucket of water. Do
not throw it into the water. Hold it with the tongs and dunk it
up and down in the water. Do not use a swirling motion. Doing
so will part the water and prevent it from completely reaching
all surfaces of the steel, causing uneven cooling and warping.
By moving the hot steel up and down in the water, the gas
jacket that forms around it as the water turns to steam is
broken up.
Step 3—Once the steel is cool, test it for hardness. Do not drop
it or tap on it with a hammer, or it will shatter. Run an old file
over the steel. (This test will dull a new file’s teeth.) The steel
will be so hard that it is unscratchable, or glass hard.
Step 4—Next, look at the temper color index chart and decide
which temper color to use. Cross-match the colors on the chart
with the color on the temper color index. You will look for that
color when you heat the center punch.
Step 5—Using sandpaper, rub the last 3 to 4 inches
of the center punch to a bright shine.
Step 6—Clamp the striking end of the
center punch in a pair of locking-jaw
pliers, leaving the pointed end free.
Step 7—Have an adult light a
propane torch and hold it or set
it in a secure cradle.


METALWORK 33
.The Basics of Metalworking
Step 8—Place the shaft of the center punch over the flame, let-
ting the light blue cone of heat touch the steel about 2 inches
from the tip of the pliers. Do not wave it over the flame.
Step 9—Wait for the iridescent colors to appear. The first color
that will appear is a faint straw color. As the colors move down
the bar, shades of straw, bronze, purple, royal blue, and sky
blue will appear.
Step 10—When the temper color that you have chosen is
about 1
⁄16 inch from the point of the center punch, quickly
plunge the center punch into a bucket of water. Remember
to dunk the center punch up and down to break up the
steam jacket.
Step 11—When the steel has cooled in the bucket of water for
a couple of minutes, remove it from the water, dry it off, and
then rub a small amount of lubricating oil on it to protect it
from rust.
If the steel is quenched at the wrong time, the entire
tempering process must be repeated. Being able
to judge the precise time to quench the steel
takes practice.





METALWORK 35
.The Sheet Metal Mechanic/Tinsmith
The Sheet Metal
Mechanic/Tinsmith
The difference between a sheet metal mechanic and a tinsmith
is the metal that they use. For the most part, all metalworkers
use the same techniques.
Today, people who work with sheet metal are called sheet
metal mechanics because they are trained to work with any
type of sheet metal. Working with thin sheets of stainless steel,
aluminum, mild steel, galvanized steel, copper, and brass, a
sheet metal mechanic can make a remarkable range of items.
Using many of the traditional tinsmith’s skills along with
more modern techniques such as spot welding, sheet metal
mechanics make a wide range of components used in things
like automobiles, aircraft, satellites, heating and air-conditioning
systems, building construction, and consumer products.
Because maintaining high rates of productivity is so important
to manufacturing, sheet metal mechanics use machine tools to
assist them when they roll, cut, and bend each item’s
basic components.
Not all sheet metal mechanics work in
manufacturing plants. Many work in local
shops that fabricate components for heating
and air-conditioning systems. Some make
custom-designed components for local
building construction firms.
Many of today’s tinsmiths are trying to preserve the craft.
Working with tools of ancient design, they use sheets of tin-
plated steel to fashion museum reproductions for collectors and
historic re-enactors. Sheets of pure tin were used to make
household objects until the 18th century, but today the sheets
are expensive and rare.


The Sheet Metal Mechanic/Tinsmith.
Basic Sheet Metalworking Tools
The tools needed by the sheet metal mechanic/tinsmith are not
much different from the basic metalworking tools you learned
about in the previous chapter. However, a few of these tools
have special duties in the sheet metal mechanic’s shop.
Anvils
Some of the most basic metalworking tools, anvils are the large
blocks of iron on which pieces of metal are shaped. There
are several types of anvils, and stake anvils are some of
the most common.
Stake anvils are designed to be moved easily.
They are usually mounted in a metal stake holder
that has been attached to a stump or a large block
of wood. A stake anvil does not need to be as heavy as a black-
smith’s anvil because sheet metal is bent rather than forged.
The tinner’s anvil has a flat surface with one curved edge.
It is used to make straight and curved bends in thin sheets of
tin-plated steel. It can be held in the square (hardie) hole of a
blacksmith’s anvil. The curved sides of the canister stake are
useful when turning up the flatlock seam that is used when
a capped bottom is attached to a canister or a drinking cup.
The widely flared horn of a funnel stake is used to roll tapered
cylinders such as a funnel.
The hatchet stake is used for making bends that go past
90 degrees. This is the stake used to put the bends in a
flatlock seam. A hatchet stake can be made from a piece
of 3
⁄4-inch-thick hardwood, such as maple or ash, that is cut
to a 45-degree edge on one side. It can be clamped in a vise
and used horizontally or it can be placed on its side on the
edge of a worktable with the long side down. Either way it is
held, the sheet metal is tapped back against the angled face to
form the flatlock seam.
Hammers
The face of a tinner’s hammer is used to set rivets. The tapered
end—the peen—is used to coax sheet metal around bits of stiff
wire when making a wire edge. The bordering hammer also
can be used in more advanced techniques to coax the sheet
metal around a wire when making a wired edge and to bend
the flatlock seam around the bottom of a canister when making
a capped bottom.
Stake anvil
Tinner’s
hammer


METALWORK 37
Hand Shears
Simple hand shears will work for all of
the projects described in this pamphlet.
Professional sheet metal mechanics and
tinsmiths often use large, foot-operated
shears or power-operated shears to cut
their pieces from large sheets, but using
hand shears is best for learning basic
metalworking techniques. Only adults
should use these power tools.
Make sure to keep hand shears sharp
and well-maintained. Never try to cut thick
sheets of metal with hand shears—this will
dull the cutting edges and can cause the pivot
bolt in the jaw to break. When you are done
using the shears, wipe them with a clean cloth to
remove the hand oils that cause rust. Be sure to place a light
coat of oil on the shears and then wrap them in an oil-soaked
cloth to prevent them from rusting. This is a good practice with
all steel tools.
Preserving Your Work
Most finished metal pieces will need to be treated against rust
and other forms of oxidation, which will ruin the piece over
time. Objects made from zinc-plated (galvanized) metal need
no further treatment to prevent rust because the zinc coating
is the preservative. Aluminum does oxidize, turning white and
chalky. Zinc chromate primer must be applied before painting
aluminum or the paint will flake off.
Those who prefer a shiny metal surface must apply a
degreaser to the metal and then apply a good quality clear-coat
sealer. Clear polymer-based varnishes are often used. Tin-plated
steel need not be painted because the tin coating acts as the
preservative. Because the tin coating is so thin, it must be
washed and dried after handling to remove natural salts and
acids left by human hands.
Hand shears
Copper, brass,
and bronze also
oxidize, turning
green. Some
people like this
green effect
and encourage
the oxidation
process by
applying salt
water to
the piece.


38 METALWORK
The Sheet Metal Mechanic/Tinsmith.
Sheet Metal Projects
The sheet metal projects described in this pamphlet create
simple objects that can be useful in camp. If you have an idea
for a project that is not described here, you may design your
own. Be sure your design uses some of the basic metalworking
techniques described earlier.
Regardless of whether you have decided to make practical
objects or art objects, be sure to show your design sketches to
your counselor and to obtain your counselor’s permission
before you begin working on your projects.
Making a 16-Ounce Metal Cup
BODY
BASE
RADIUS
Metal cup patterns
HANDLE


.The Sheet Metal Mechanic/Tinsmith
Basic Tools Needed
❏ Bick iron stake
❏ Hatchet stake (can also be
made of hardwood with one
edge cut to a 45-degree bevel)
❏ Funnel or canister stake (optional)
❏ Stake holder
❏ Short length of 3-inch-diameter
iron pipe
❏ Mallets
❏ Sturdy machinist’s vise
❏ Sheet metal shears
❏ 1-inch hole punch
❏ Stump (for mounting the
stake holder)
❏ 125-watt or 150-watt
soldering iron
❏ C-clamps
❏ 2-by-4-inch wood pieces
in various lengths
❏ Center punch
❏ Steel ruler
❏ Hemmer
❏ Hand seamer
❏ Scriber
❏ Steel dividers
❏ Try square
❏ Needle-nose, lineman’s,
and locking-grip pliers
❏ Various patterns
❏ Flux brushes
❏ Shop apron
❏ Leather gloves
❏ Safety glasses
Materials
❏ 26-gauge or 28-gauge
sheet metal
❏ Lead-free solder
❏ Soldering flux
❏ Wire coat hanger
❏ Finishing nail (to prick pierced
patterns in sheet metal)
❏ 1
⁄4-inch copper tubing
❏ Three 4-by-6-inch pieces of window
glass (1
⁄4 inch thick) per lantern


The Sheet Metal Mechanic/Tinsmith.
Step 1—Using the drawings as an example, sketch patterns on
stiff paper for each of the three cup pieces: the body, the han-
dle, and the base. When you have your sketches how you
want them, cut out the shapes. These are your template pieces.
Step 2—Arrange the template pieces on the sheet metal
and use a sharp nail or metal scriber to trace the outlines
onto the tinplate.
Step 3—Using sheet metal shears,
follow the scribed lines to cut
out the three pieces. Use con-
struction scissors to snip the
1
⁄16-inch nicks in the pieces
to be used as the cup’s body
and handle.
3
2
40 METALWORK


METALWORK 41
.The Sheet Metal Mechanic/Tinsmith
Step 4—Once the pieces are created, you can start putting
together the body of the cup. Start by creating a safe edge along
the top of the cup by bending over about 1
⁄4 inch of the tin.
Step 5—Bend the flatlock seam edges on both ends of the
body, but don’t attach the seam yet.
Step 6—Roll the cup body into a cylinder, then attach the
flatlock seams.
4 5
6a
6b


42 METALWORK
The Sheet Metal Mechanic/Tinsmith.
Step 7—Solder the flatlock seam, then solder the bottom piece
to the body.
Step 8—Now you are ready to create the handle. Begin by
folding safe edges along both sides just as you did the lip of the
cup in Step 4, then roll the handle piece into a curve. Lastly,
bend over about 1
⁄4 inch of each end to make “ears” to attach
the handle to the body.
Step 9—Finish the cup by
soldering the handle to the body.
Step 10—Fill the cup with water
to check for leaks.
7
8 9


METALWORK 43
.The Sheet Metal Mechanic/Tinsmith
Making a Lantern
1⁄4" 2 1⁄4" 4 1⁄2" 4 1⁄2" 4 1⁄2" 2 1⁄4" 1⁄4"
7 3⁄4"
1⁄2" CUT
OUT
3 1⁄2" x 5"
CUT
OUT
3 1⁄2" x 5"
CUT
OUT
3 1⁄2" x 5"
1 1⁄2"
18 1⁄2"
1"
1"
6" 8"
2"
2 1⁄2"1⁄4"
1 1⁄4"
2 1⁄4"
3 1⁄2"
5"
1"
GLASS SIZE
1
⁄8" x 4" x 6"
(3 REQUIRED)
Lantern pattern
BODY
4 1⁄2"
6 1⁄2"
1"
HOLES
4 1⁄2"
6 1⁄2"
1 1⁄2"
HOLE
BASE LID
CANDLEHOLDER
HANDLE
HEATSHIELD


44 METALWORK
The Sheet Metal Mechanic/Tinsmith.
Step 1—Arrange the patterns on a piece of sheet metal and
scribe the outlines onto the sheet metal with a sharp nail or a
metal scriber. Cut out each component using sheet metal shears
and file all edges smooth.
Step 2—Punch a large hole in the center of the parts marked
“cut out” in the pattern diagram; these parts will become the
windows. Stick the tip of the snips into the hole and carefully
cut a curved line until you reach one of the scribed lines that
outline the shape of the window. Now you can cut straight
along the scribed line.
Step 3—Fold the lantern body’s 1
⁄4-inch bends first,
making sure to fold them in opposite directions.
Next make the four body folds.
Step 4—Fold a hem on the candleholder and
flatten it slightly with a mallet. Roll the candleholder
into a cylinder around a 3
⁄4-inch dowel. Don’t try to
close the gap in the cylinder—it comes in handy when
removing melted candle stubs. You can use the blade of
a screwdriver to pry out the melted wax.
Step 5—Create the bottom piece by punching two
large air holes in the base as shown and then folding
down all four sides. Don’t worry about leaving a small
gap between each fold because this piece fits inside the
body of the lantern. Solder the candleholder in place.
3
4
5


METALWORK 45
.The Sheet Metal Mechanic/Tinsmith
Step 6—Fold both 1
⁄4-inch hems on the heat shield
component. Fold the tabs as shown. Roll the heat
shield into a flat-topped arc.
Step 7—Create the top piece by punching a large air
hole in the center of the piece. Punch two small holes
in an opposite pair of tabs for the wire handle. Fold
down the sides—don’t worry about leaving a small
gap because this piece fits over the lantern body.
Solder the heat shield into place.
Step 8—Set the body of the lantern over the bottom
piece and solder the bottom in place.
Step 9—Make the glass holders by cutting pieces of
1
⁄4-inch copper tubing to fit inside the lantern. Cut two
lengths of tubing for each corner. Use florist’s wire to
wire them together in pairs, then solder them together.
Remove the wires.
Step 10—Use a wire coat hanger to make the handle.
Cut off the hook and straighten the length of wire, then
bend it into the shape of a handle.
Step 11—Set the top on the body (it fits on the outside).
Poke the scriber through the holes in the top and mark
the corresponding spot on the body.
Step 12—Remove the top piece and use a nail to punch
holes where you just marked.
Step 13—Have an adult cut three 4-by-6-inch pieces of
1
⁄4-inch window glass. Put them in the lantern body and
hold them in place using the copper glass holders.
Step 14—Place a candle in the lantern and attach the top
using the wire handle.
To replace the candle, unhook the wire handle and
remove the top piece.
6
7
9
13





METALWORK 47
.The Silversmith
The Silversmith
Silversmiths do much more than
hammer silver into beautiful shapes.
They are artists who design one-of-a-
kind pieces that start as a sheet of
silver, often incorporating elegant hand
engraving and beautiful patterns. They
are also highly skilled in a number of
metalworking techniques.
Well-trained silversmiths know how
to function as sheet metal mechanics.
They cut, bend, edge, roll, file, saw, rivet,
solder, and braze, using sheets of silver, copper, nickel silver,
and pewter. Silversmiths are pattern makers and founders. They
carve their own intricate patterns, create the molds, melt the sil-
ver, and then pour it into the molds. Silversmiths know the
craft of the blacksmith. They know how to forge and temper
high-carbon steel to make their own engraving tools, chasing
tools, hammers, and stake anvils.
Silversmiths are practical metallurgists who understand the properties of
the metals they use. They know when to anneal a work-hardened piece
and how to use work hardening to their advantage.


48 METALWORK
The Silversmith.
Basic Silversmithing Tools
Silversmiths use many of the same tools as other craftsmen,
but because the objects silversmiths create are smaller, their
tools are scaled accordingly.
Hammers
The hammers used by silversmiths have specific shapes that
have been refined over thousands of years to perform specific
purposes. Each hammer’s face has a slightly different curve.
Raising hammers and forming hammers are used for mak-
ing curved shapes. A planishing hammer is used to remove dents
made by other hammers during the raising and forming stages.
Forging hammers are used to fashion an object
from thick material. Because forks, spoons, and
ladles, for example, are often made from heavy-
gauge metal, forging them requires a much heavier
hammer. Forging hammers usually weigh 18 to
24 ounces.
Hammers and stakes have smooth, highly polished sur-
faces. Great care must be taken not to mar the surfaces
of these tools because any defect will transfer to the sil-
ver as you hammer it.
Rub the tools on a piece of cloth to burnish them
before use. After using these tools, wipe the steel sur-
faces with a clean, lubricated cloth. Wrap the head of
the hammer in an oil-soaked cloth for storage. These
steps are especially important to help prevent rust and
for long-term storage.
Planishing hammer
Raising hammer
Planishing is the
process of
smoothing the fin-
ished piece, so
hammers used in
this process must
be fairly special-
ized to do the job.
Some planishing
hammers have
both a round face
and a square face.
The square face is
helpful for work-
ing with the cor-
ners of rectangu-
lar pieces. One of
the final steps in
silversmithing,
planishing work-
hardens the metal
while giving its
surface a much
more uniform
appearance.


METALWORK 49
.The Silversmith
Mallets
Like the other metalworkers, silversmiths use mallets to bend
sheet silver. Made of rawhide, hardwood, plastic, or nylon,
these soft-faced mallets are less likely to mar the surface of the
metal than a metal hammer. Some silversmiths glue
leather to the faces of their wooden raising mallets to
cushion blows even more. Mallets are used to
true up, or straighten, pieces that have
become warped or bent during sinking
or raising steps.
Stakes and Anvils
Silversmiths use some of the same stakes and anvils as sheet
metal mechanics and tinsmiths, such as the bottom stake
and the ball stake. Some stakes silversmiths use look the
same as other craftsmen’s tools but are much smaller in
scale. In other cases, some of the silversmith’s stake anvils
are uniquely different.
The raising stake is an example of a stake that is uniquely
the silversmith’s. Used with a raising hammer (a hammer with
a head that has a similar curve to the desired curve), the rais-
ing stake is used to curve flat sheets of metal. Water pitchers,
bowls, and flower vases, for example, start off as flat disks of
silver, and the raising stake or hammer lifts—or raises—the
metal to form the shape.
A silversmith’s anvil is kept highly polished and unmarred.
To keep an anvil “perfect,” take care to avoid striking it with a
hammer when working a bend or curve in a project.
Flat-faced
wooden mallet
Jeweler’s anvil


50 METALWORK
The Silversmith.
Sawing Equipment
Silversmiths consider both saw blades and files to be sawing
equipment. One of the most basic skills of a silversmith or jew-
eler, sawing is used to cut openings in decorative shapes along
the edges of objects. The equipment needed for sawing is
minimal: a saw frame, a saw blade, a bench pin to hold
the metal still during sawing, and a C-clamp to hold
the bench pin to the workbench.
While saws are used for cutting larger pieces,
small files are used to refine the shape of silver-
smiths’ designs. Small, straight files called needle
files are commonly used, and curved files called
riffler files come in handy for specialty pieces.
Be sure to purchase the proper saw blades for the
project. Saw blades can be inexpensive, but cheap,
flimsy blades are no bargain. At the least, buy blades
of good enough quality to avoid frustration. Match the
thickness of the blade to the thickness of the piece
being cut. Make sure that at least three teeth touch the
metal at all times.
Bench pin


METALWORK 51
.The Silversmith
Pickling Solution
Silversmiths use an acid bath called pickling solution to remove
residue left after soldering and oxidation caused by heating
during the annealing process. A solution of 10 percent sulfuric
acid and 90 percent water is often used. Commercial pickling
products are available in a granular form to be mixed with
water as needed.
Never use a steel item to reach into the pickling solution. If you do, every-
thing in the solution will become copper-plated. This is because the pick-
ling solution removes some of the copper found in sterling silver. Once
the steel item is removed, the solution will be fine again, but the plated
objects must be polished heavily to remove the copper layer.
To remove items from the solution, always use sticks or tongs made
of wood or copper. Rinse the pickled object in fresh water and dry it com-
pletely. Also, never leave soldered work in the solution for more than a
couple of hours—it will weaken solder joints.


52 METALWORK
The Silversmith.
Basic Silversmithing Skills
While they know the basic techniques of
metalworking, silversmiths must know
some techniques that are specialized for the
types of materials and tools they use.
Laying Out Lines
One old saying, “Measure twice, cut once,” is
good advice when it comes to laying out lines. When using
dividers, loosen the setscrew and place the tips against a steel
rule. Holding one tip firmly at the zero point, spread the dividers
until the second tip has reached the desired measurement. Lock
the setscrew in place to hold the legs securely and use the tips to
mark off the line.
Use a square to establish a
90-degree corner, checking
from both sides to be certain
the angle is correct. To lay out a strip with parallel
sides, drag one leg of a divider
along a prepared edge. Scrub
the metal with a scrub sponge in
a circular motion so the scratch
line shows clearly.


METALWORK 53
.The Silversmith
Sawing
While sawing might seem to be a fairly basic and easy skill to
master, care must be taken when it is used as a metalworking
technique. The jeweler’s saw is a common sawing tool used by
silversmiths, and it must be handled with care to prevent injury
and ensure proper use.
To use the jeweler’s saw:
Step 1—Make sure the blade is firmly
attached to the saw frame, with the teeth
pointing toward the handle.
Step 2—Hold the saw so the blade is perpen-
dicular to the work. Reach under the bench pin to
do this properly. Take care not to jab at the metal.
Step 3—When preparing to saw, relax your grip.
Let the saw blade do the work.
Step 4—Use long, relaxed strokes to saw. Periodically touch
a piece of beeswax or candle wax to the blade as a lubricant.
Step 5—Turn the work while sawing. Be careful not to turn
the saw.
Jeweler’s saw


54 METALWORK
The Silversmith.
Sinking
To a silversmith, sinking means hammering a depression into a
piece of flat metal. This technique, which stretches the metal, is
used to make bowls, plates, and serving trays. Most objects that
use the sinking technique consist of three parts:
• The rim—the flat part used to pick up the object
• The bouge—the curved sides of the depression
• The platewell—the horizontal bottom of the piece into which
the bouge transitions
Sinking very shallow forms can be accomplished by using
a sandbag and a hammer, but it takes considerable time to
achieve the desired depth. Because the sand shifts under each
blow, the metal does not move a great deal.
Using a sinking block yields faster results. Hammering the
metal over a depression carved into a block of hardwood such
as beech or maple allows for greater stretching with each blow,
with the sides of the wooden block supporting the metal as it is
stretched to the desired depth and shape.
However, the final form should not conform to the depres-
sion. That is, don’t hammer the metal until it is driven to the
bottom of the depression (called “bottoming out”)—this ruins
both the surface of the sinking block and the work. Bottoming
out puts dents in both items because the metal can no longer
yield in two directions as it could when it was sus-
pended over the curved depression. When the
hammer squeezes the metal between itself
and the block, the metal will push out
to the side around the hammer-
head, forming a dent.
Sinking block


METALWORK 55
.The Silversmith
One way to create a sinking block is to cut a hole in a thick piece of hard-
board or plywood (1). Drive roofing nails along the edges and attach the
metal to the board by holding the work in place with the nail heads (2).
Using a silversmith’s hammer with a head that has a radius that matches
the desired curve of the bouge, tap the metal along the inside perimeter
of the hole, driving the material into the gap between the surface of the
workbench and the top of the board (3). Work the metal until it almost
touches the bottom surface—remember that you are stretching the metal
when you are using the sinking technique.
1 2
3
The bowl of the tray or plate cannot be
created with only one sinking step. Trying
to do so will stretch the metal so much
that it will tear, so several sinkings will be
necessary. Be sure to anneal the object
between each sinking and remove the
nails after the first sinking.


56 METALWORK
The Silversmith.
Soldering
Soldering is a basic skill used often
by silversmiths. As with most skills,
practice at soldering will help you achieve better results.
SWEAT SOLDERING
At times you may wish to apply a special piece to the surface
of another. Perhaps you have fashioned a small fleur-de-lis that
you would like to attach to a flat disk that will become the
front of a neckerchief slide. To attach that fleur-de-lis without
obvious signs of soldering, use the sweat soldering technique.
Step 1—Turn the fleur-de-lis on its back and melt on a couple
of small pieces of silver solder. Do not let them flow away;
just heat them until they have attached themselves—they
should still be small blobs of silver solder at this point.
Set the piece aside.
Step 2—Place a small amount of flux on the disk where you
want to attach the fleur-de-lis.
Step 3—Carefully position the back of the fleur-de-lis onto
the flat disk. Play the torch flame over the fleur-de-lis until the
silver solder flows. Be careful not to let the silver solder flow
out from under the fleur-de-lis. The attachment should look as
if you carved it in place.
Preserving Your Work
Silver, copper, and brass must be
polished regularly to prevent
oxidation from dulling and pit-
ting the finish. Apply a liberal
amount of a good-grade polish
to a lint-free cotton cloth, and
take your time as you polish.
Working on small sections and
using a circular motion, rub the
pumice into the metal until it
is polished to a high luster.


METALWORK 57
.The Silversmith
Silversmithing Projects
Listed below are the basic tools and materials needed to make
the projects shown in this pamphlet. You don’t have to buy
specialty tools from catalogs; many of these tools can be made
from things found in scrap yards.
Basic Tools Needed
❏ Raising hammer
❏ Planishing hammer
❏ 16-ounce forging hammer
❏ Flat-faced wooden mallet
❏ Peen-ended wooden mallet
❏ Raising stake
❏ Bottom stake (optional)
❏ Ball stake
❏ Stake holder (optional)
❏ Stump (used to mount
the stake holder)
❏ Flat files
❏ Riffler files
❏ Jeweler’s saw
❏ Jeweler’s saw blades
❏ Bench pin
❏ Sturdy wooden bench
❏ Sheet metal snips
❏ Try square
❏ Metal straightedge
❏ Ruler
❏ Scriber
❏ Steel dividers
❏ Center punch
❏ Silver solder (at least
three types, of different
melting temperatures)
❏ Flux (borax paste)
❏ Brazing station (several hearth
bricks or pea gravel in a heavy
pan; avoid using aquarium
gravel coated with epoxy)
❏ Pin-flame propane torch
❏ Sinking block (your choice of
hole diameter)
❏ One-gallon or larger pickling
tank with close-fitting lid


The Silversmith.
Forging a Spoon
The spoon project is hammered cold using a piece of 18- or
20-gauge sheet copper. As you forge the bowl of the spoon,
you may find that you need to soften the metal. Remember that
nonferrous metals are annealed by heating them to a red heat
and then quenching them in water. To meet the requirement for
a soldered joint, you may wish to fashion a small fleur-de-lis
and apply it to the handle of the spoon by using the sweat sol-
dering technique.
Step 1—Use a marking pen to draw the pattern onto the metal.
Be sure to mark out the dotted line—this gives you sufficient
material to make a fairly deep bowl.
Step 2—Using a jeweler’s saw and a bench pin, saw out the
basic shape of the spoon.
Materials
❏ 10 percent sulfuric acid solution
❏ Sheet copper of varying gauges
❏ 3
⁄8-inch hardboard
❏ Cotton shop cloth
❏ Crocus cloth
❏ Machine oil
❏ Wooden tongs
❏ Jeweler’s pumice of various grits
❏ Cotton cloth
❏ Silver polish (or type of polish appropriate to the
metal being used)
Copper has the
same properties
as silver and is
less expensive.
58 METALWORK


METALWORK 59
.The Silversmith
Step 3—Using a forging hammer to
thin the metal in the bowl of the
spoon, strike a series of blows
beginning in the center of the bowl
and working out to the edge.
Step 4—Using a bouge and a
curve-faced hammer, sink the
spoon’s bowl. Place the bowl of the
spoon over the cavity and stretch the
bowl using a silversmith’s hammer
that has a radius that corresponds to
the radius of the bouge. Remember
to stop hammering before the metal touches the bottom of the
bouge to help prevent denting the bouge. If the edge of the
bowl warps, place it upside down on the anvil and tap it back
into line with a wooden mallet. Anneal after each sinking.
Step 5—Once the bowl has been drawn out to the proper
width and thickness, forge the spoon handle. Working along
the spine of the handle, strike from the center outward. Flare
the end of the handle and keep it narrow near the bowl. Use a
kitchen spoon as a guide. Anneal as often as necessary.
Step 6—File the edges of the spoon smooth. Be careful not to
scrub the file back and forth. Push the file away from you to
remove metal, and lift it up on the return stroke. This keeps the
file’s teeth sharper longer.
Step 7—Soak the finished spoon in the pickle bath for about
20 minutes to remove oxides and fire scale. Use wooden tongs
to retrieve it from the pickling tank to avoid accidentally stain-
ing the piece. Flush the piece with plenty of water to neutralize
the remaining acid, then dry it with a clean cloth.
Step 8—Polish your work. Remove the swirls and manufactur-
ing marks by rubbing the piece with pumice. Start with a coarse
grit and gradually move to finer and finer grits as the desired
degree of shine appears.





METALWORK 61
.The Founder
The Founder
A person who pours molten metal into
molds is called a founder. Ancient
humans began melting metal and
pouring it into molds almost as soon
as they discovered how to hammer it
into shape.
Numerous industrial companies
cast metal, and most city telephone
books will contain a listing for at least
one foundry. Not all foundries are huge
factories employing scores of people.
Some smaller foundries specialize in
producing hard-to-cast shapes using
hard-to-cast metals and cater to artists
whose sculptures will become patterns
for limited-edition castings. In some
cases, the artists operate their own
foundries and make their own castings.
Increasingly, hobbyists are casting
metal on a small scale in their garages
and workshops.
Basic Tools and Skills
Founders use skills and techniques that are different from other
metal workers. Their craft includes making and working with
molds to create pieces from molten metal. While some founders
use premade molds to cast the metal shapes, many founders
are involved in every step of the creation process, including
carving or sculpting their own patterns to shape the molds.
Keep in mind that working with molten metal is
dangerous. Always have adult supervision when working
with any of these techniques.


The Founder.
Making a Pattern
The pattern must be created before the mold can be made.
The first step is to draw a full-size sketch of the object.
This two-dimensional drawing will have to translate into a
three-dimensional object, so limit the depth of the object to
about 1
⁄2 inch.
Sketch the pattern with the finished piece in mind. Pieces
designed with projecting elements such as extended arms or
legs modeled in running poses cannot be cast in one piece
because the arm or leg will stick in the mold and prevent the
piece from being released. Keep the design simple and within
your capabilities to create a model.
The next step in pattern making is to sculpt the model
using sulfur-free polymer clay. Use a variety of tools to
creatively carve the details of the piece. Follow the clay
manufacturer’s instructions to bake the model until it is hard.
Making a Mold
When the pattern is complete, it can be used to make a mold,
which will hold the molten metal until it is hard. Mold makers
can choose from at least four different types of molds for
casting metal:
• Lost-wax mold, in which the wax pattern is eventually
burned out of the mold, forming a highly detailed cavity
• Rammed-sand mold, which is made by compressing a box
of fine-grained sand around a pattern
• Metal molds, which became
popular during the industrial
revolution and are the most
expensive type of mold
Designs with slightly beveled sides (called “draft”)
rather than perfectly straight sides are more easily
removed from the mold. Only three or four degrees of
draft are necessary, so you can still give the illusion of
perfectly straight sides. Avoid undercuts (sometimes
called “ledges”) that will jam in the mold, making it
impossible to remove the finished piece.
If you wish to
whittle your
pattern rather
than sculpt it,
use a softer
hardwood such
as basswood
or tupelo, or
use reusable
sculptor’s wax.


METALWORK 63
.The Founder
• Rubber molds, which are
durable and reusable molds
most often made from room-
temperature vulcanizing (RTV)
silicone rubber
No matter which mold-making
method is chosen, remember to include vents and a
sprue—the opening in the mold through which the molten
metal will be poured.
Casting Molten Metal
In metal casting, the metal is heated to its melting point and
poured into a clean mold. Using an electric melting pot with a
thermostat and a bottom-pour spout will help control the tem-
perature of the metal and help prevent impurities from entering
the mold when the molten metal is poured.
Mold lubricants, such as finely powdered graphite, help
the molten metal flow into the mold and prevent the metal
from sticking to the mold when it is being removed. The lubri-
cant should be smeared into a fine coating that thoroughly cov-
ers the piece like grease. Use a stiff-bristled brush to work the
lubricant into the crevices of the mold.
A metal mold should be preheated by making two trial
runs before the final cast is poured. This is another secret to
making high-quality castings. The castings made with the
trial runs will be flawed, but mistakes can be melted down
for another try. Save these pieces for later, because adding
them to the pot will add wait time while the metal completely
melts again.
For your health and safety, use
lead-free pewter. Lead ingots leave
lead particles on the skin and can
get into your food and your body.
Molten lead produces dangerous
fumes. Lead poisoning causes brain
damage. Using lead-free pewter will
prevent all these problems.
The process
of applying
lubricants to a
mold is called
blackening,
because early
silversmiths
would hold
their molds over
a candle flame,
letting the soot
coat the mold.


64 METALWORK
The Founder.
The piece should be allowed to cool completely before
disassembling the mold and removing the piece from it.
Any scars in the metal left as evidence of gates, vents, and
parting line flash can be filed and polished until they are no
longer detectable.
Preserving Your Work
Pewter does not need to be covered with
a finish to preserve it from oxidation.
However, some people
like to paint their cast
metal figures. If you do
so, paint the piece with
a metal primer before
applying color. White
primer works best
because white makes a
better color base for the
finished colors. If you
can’t find white primer,
use gray metal primer,
but cover the figure
with a thin base coat
of white paint before
applying the colors.
Always place the mold as close to the melting pot as
possible. Some melting pots allow the mold to be filled
directly from the bottom of the pot to prevent the
dross—impurities that float to the surface of molten
metal—from being poured. If a transfer ladle is used to
fill the mold, the dross must be skimmed off before the
mold is filled. Once the transfer ladle is full of molten
metal, move quickly to minimize heat loss. Pour the
molten metal at a rapid and steady rate.
Always apply
thin coats of
paint so that you
do not obscure
the figure’s details
and so that the
paint does not sag
and drool.


METALWORK 65
.The Founder
Casting Projects
Use the following checklist to gather the tools and materials
necessary to complete the founder option requirements for this
merit badge.
Basic Tools Needed
For creating the RTV silicone mold:
❏ Four spring clamps
❏ Two disposable paint brushes
(one for applying the RTV
silicone and one for applying
the graphite to the mold)
❏ Disposable rubber gloves
For creating the pattern:
❏ Sculpting tools
❏ Hobby knife
❏ Toaster oven
For casting the molten metal:
❏ Electric melting pot
with thermostat
❏ Pyrometer
❏ Heavy aluminum baking tray
for use as a pouring station
❏ At least one premade metal
or silicone rubber mold
❏ Scout-made silicone
rubber mold
❏ Riffler, needle, or jeweler’s files
❏ Standard screwdriver
❏ Spring clamps
❏ Hobby knife
❏ Shop apron
❏ Insulated leather gloves
❏ Safety glasses


66 METALWORK
The Founder.
Preparations
❏ Collect all materials before
starting.
❏ Choose a well-ventilated spot.
❏ Determine where to place the
sprue and vents on the pattern.
❏ Make the sprue and vents
from wax, wood, or sulfur-free
clay before mixing the RTV
silicone rubber.
❏ Make locator pins before mixing
the RTV silicone rubber.
❏ Measure the pattern against the
stock of box-making panels and
select those large enough for
the necessary clearance.
Materials
For creating the pattern and mold:
❏ 12 panels of thin plywood or
hardboard cut into 4-by-6-inch
rectangles
❏ Two 4-by-6 pieces of fiberboard
❏ Four small wooden pegs, each
about an inch long
❏ One pound of sulfur-free
polymer modeling clay
❏ Plastic wrap or aluminum foil
❏ Approximately 16 ounces of
two-part RTV silicone rubber for
one figure that is 2 1
⁄2 inches tall
by 1 inch wide by 1
⁄2 inch deep
❏ Four disposable mixing cups.
Two of the cups must be large
enough to hold the contents of
each rubber pour.
❏ Two disposable mixing sticks
❏ Approximately 1 ounce of mold
release cream (petroleum jelly
is effective)
For casting the molten metal:
❏ A Scout-made pattern
❏ An instructor-provided mold
❏ Fine graphite powder
❏ Lead-free pewter (approxi-
mately 2 ounces per each
54-millimeter figure)
❏ Tempered hardboard, 1
⁄4 inch
thick, cut in pairs to the size of
each rubber mold
❏ Soap and water to clean
graphite from hands
❏ Paper towels


METALWORK 67
.The Founder
Making a Silicone Rubber Mold
Step 1—Study the pattern and decide where the parting line
should be and where to place the sprue and vents. When
deciding where to place the sprue, choose a location such as
the bottom of the piece where no one will see where the sprue
is attached. In this example, the sprue will be attached to the
bottom of the truck-shaped pattern. Use some of the polymer
clay to make a cone-shaped sprue and one or more vents.
Step 2—Make a molding flask out of pieces of plywood or
hardboard. Use some of the sulfur-free clay to hold the pieces
together. Make sure there is a minimum clearance of 1
⁄2 inch
all around the model. If the pattern will be embedded in a
layer of clay, estimate how thick the clay will be. Holding the
pattern in the box to simulate for the clay layer, check for
at least 1
⁄2-inch clearance from the top of the embedded
pattern to the top of the box.
The dotted lines drawn on the pattern above indicate where the
parting line will be.
As the box is built, place the pattern in it and check it for fit.


68 METALWORK
The Founder.
Step 3—If the flask is made of loose panels, make sure that
there is a good seal with the polymer clay to prevent the RTV
silicone rubber from leaking. Wrap a rubber band around the
panels to hold them together.
Step 4—Spread a layer of polymer clay in the bottom of the
flask. Make it deep enough to prevent any part of the pattern
from touching the bottom of the box as it is pushed into the
clay down to the parting line in step 6.
Step 5—Wrap the portion of the pattern that is to be embedded
in clay with aluminum foil or plastic wrap. This will prevent it
from picking up any clay residue that will obscure the details
when making the second half of the two-piece mold.
Step 6—Embed the wrapped half of the pattern up to the
established parting line. Make sure that no part of the pattern
touches the bottom board.
Step 7—Insert the two alignment pegs into the clay. Putting
the pegs in opposite corners (about 3
⁄4 inch from the corner)
will locate the two halves correctly. Attach the pouring gate
and vents to the model.
Step 8—Using disposable mixing sticks, prepare the RTV
silicone rubber according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
Be sure to wear rubber gloves when working with the liquid
silicone rubber mixture.
Step 9—Brush a thin layer of mixed RTV silicone rubber over
the pattern. This will discourage the formation of air bubbles in
the small crevices.


METALWORK 69
.The Founder
Step 10—Holding the container as close as possible to the
flask, slowly pour the mixture over the pattern, allowing it to
fill all the crevices and to level off. Continue pouring until the
top of the RTV silicone rubber is a minimum of 1
⁄2 inch above
the highest point of the model. Lift an edge of the tile about a
half inch and let it fall quickly, lightly rapping the piece on the
table a few times to drive the bubbles to the surface.
Step 11—Place the top board on the flask.
Step 12—Cure. Allow the chemical reaction to progress
by letting the piece rest until the RTV silicone rubber has
hardened to its maximum amount. This will take eight
hours at room temperature.
Step 13—Invert the flask and disassemble it. Remove the clay,
the foil or plastic wrap, and the alignment pegs.
Step 14—Reassemble the flask and attach the pouring sprue
and vents. Use clay to hold the flask together.
Step 15—Apply mold release cream to all of the exposed
areas of the cured silicone rubber. The silicone rubber only
sticks to itself.
Step 16—Repeat steps 8 through 12 to create the second half
of the mold.
Step 17—Disassemble the box and separate both parts of the
mold from the original. Remove the pattern.
Step 18—Check the sprue and the vents to make sure they are
not constricted. If they are, use a hobby knife to cut the RTV
silicone rubber. The molten metal will be poured into the
mold cavity through the sprue, and the air will escape through
the vents.
Step 19—Reunite the two halves of the mold, making sure that
the silicone alignment pins drop into the holes. Place a piece of
thin plywood or a tempered hardboard panel on the front and
back of the mold to reinforce the rubber. Use two spring clamps
and press two panels together opposite the sprue. This will help
prevent the molten metal from leaking out.


70 METALWORK
The Founder.
Using a Silicone Rubber Mold
Step 1—Use graphite powder to lubricate the rubber mold.
This will help prevent the cast metal from sticking to the rubber
and will help the molten metal to flow freely through the
smaller parts of the mold. With an applicator brush, dust a
small amount of finely powdered graphite over the mold and
then smear the graphite into a greasy coating with your finger-
tips. Clap the molds together to remove any excess powder.
Step 2—Position the tempered hardboard mold supports on the
outside of each mold half. The mold should be clamped in at
least two positions with spring clamps for best results.
Step 3—Heat the lead-free pewter to between 550 and 650 degrees.
Use the coolest temperature that you can to obtain good quality
castings. Experiment with the melting pot’s heat settings to
discover where the coolest temperature is.
Step 4—Pour the metal quickly into the mold, filling it to the
top. If the mold fills too slowly, widen the throat of the sprue a
little bit. A slow-filling mold will let the metal solidify prema-
turely, preventing the figure’s extremities such as hands and
hand-held objects from filling with metal. Use a sharp hobby
knife, a small file, or a rotary burr to remove a small amount of
the rubber from both halves of the mold.
Tips for Casting Lead-Free Pewter
Lead-free pewter is composed of 91 percent tin. The remaining percentage
is made up of copper, antimony, and bismuth. Metals with a high tin con-
tent have excellent flow characteristics and work well with highly detailed
figures. Pure tin is the best material for pouring figures, and figures made
from pure tin can easily bend without breaking. Following these tips will
yield the best results.
• Tin fumes are toxic, so be sure to do your melting and pouring in a
well-ventilated area, and keep your head away from the melting pot.
• Heat the metal to between 550 and 650 degrees. Use a thermometer
to obtain the correct temperature. Use the lowest temperature you
can that produces good castings.
• Wait at least 15 minutes after the metal has melted before pouring
the mold.
Use a
thermometer to
discover the
best temperature
for use with
your particular
molds, and write
that temperature
on the mold
with a permanent
marker for
future reference.


METALWORK 71
.The Founder
Step 5—Using gloved hands, squeeze the sides of the mold
together after pouring. Tap the mold gently on the work surface
at the same time to help improve the detail and reduce the
flashing (the small amount of metal that leaks around the
parting line) around the figure. Always wear insulated leather
gloves when pouring and holding the mold. Allow the mold
to set for at least one minute before opening it. When the figure
is being released from the mold, the mold can be bent slightly,
if necessary.
Using Multipart Molds
Complex figures must be cast in a slightly different way. For
example, you might have created a figure of a man holding a
flag in front of his body with his right hand. This figure cannot
be cast as it was sculpted because the out-thrust arms cannot
be released from the mold without destroying the mold. To
avoid this, the right arm is carefully sawn off the sculpture and
cast as a separate piece. Here is how.
Step 1—Center the figure’s body in the mold, with the right arm
placed nearby and off to one side and a connector called a “gate”
dug between the two pieces. This permits the molten metal to
flow from the body, along the gate, and into the component.
Step 2—Since you know that the figure’s arm must be assem-
bled onto the body, put a dab of clay on the inside of the arm at
the shoulder joint and fashion it into a small pin. Place a small
depression, the size of the pin, in the figure where the arm will
attach. Once the mold is cast, file the arm into its finished shape
and attach it to the torso using two-part epoxy glue.
The flagpole is cast as a separate item and attached to the
figure later. Use paper to make the flag, and paint it using
acrylic or enamel hobby paint.
Properly handled, the rubber molds will give you long
and continuous use. Allow rubber molds to cool after
each use. Because rubber is not as good a conductor of
heat as is metal, the rubber molds retain the heat of the
hot metal longer than a metal mold. Continuous rapid
pouring can overheat and burn a rubber mold.





METALWORK 73
.The Blacksmith
The Blacksmith
When the Worshipful Company of Blacksmiths, a craft guild,
was formed in London during the 12th century, its motto was
“By hammer and hand, all arts do stand.” This was not an idle
boast. Before the availability of less-expensive machine-made
products drove them out of business during the industrial revo-
lution, blacksmiths were truly important craftsmen because
they made the iron and steel tools that were used by other
craftsmen. They also made all the iron hardware and kitchen
equipment that was used by people from all walks of life.
Today there is a tremendous interest in preserving this
craft. In addition to the smiths who are working to rediscover
the techniques of the old masters, today’s blacksmiths are also
artists, making all sorts of imaginative things from hot steel.
Because of the high temperatures generated by the
forge, Scouts who select this option must work under
direct adult supervision.
Some blacksmiths in large cities concentrated upon
making artistic items for use by architects and
builders, specializing in making ornamental ironwork
such as fences, gates, railings, balconies, and
elegant sign frames.


74 METALWORK
The Blacksmith.
Basic Blacksmithing Tools
The blacksmith’s tools have remained unchanged for thousands
of years, and the blacksmith still uses the most basic
elements—fire, water, and iron—to fashion both practical
objects and objects of art.
Although an anvil is a sturdy
chunk of metal, it is not a tool that can
be abused with arbitrary or purposeless
hammer blows. Doing so will leave pits
and marks on the working surfaces that
will show up on worked objects. Never
strike the anvil directly with a hammer.
Always have a piece of metal between
the hammer and the anvil to avoid
making dents and dings.
The anvil’s step is used for cutting
metal, so it most likely will have dings
and chisel marks. The face is where
most of the work is done, so it must
be kept free of any marks and imperfec-
tions. The heel has a square hole called
the hardie hole and a round hole called
the pritchel hole.
A hardie is a chisel-shaped tool with a square shank that
sits in the hardie hole and is used with a hammer to cut iron
and steel. A pritchel is a round punch; therefore, the pritchel
hole is used to punch holes in hot iron and steel. The horn of
the anvil is used to create scrolls and bend curves in bar stock.
The leg vise is used to bend and twist hot iron and steel.
The long leg sits in a cup attached to the shop floor. This
gives the leg vise extra power to resist hard blows
when a person is bending large pieces of
metal with a sledgehammer.
Hardie
STEP FACE
Anvil
HORN
PRITCHEL
HOLE
HARDIE
HOLE


METALWORK 75
.The Blacksmith
The modern blacksmith’s forge
has an electric bellows attached to
the firepot by a short length of sheet
steel pipe. By burning soft coal with
a steady stream of air from the
bellows, the forge fire can reach 3000
degrees. When forging, keep the steel
between 1400 degrees and 1800
degrees. Low-carbon steel burns at
about 2200 degrees. Because the
forge fire generates such high
temperatures, always be alert to
avoid burning the steel.
The cross peen hammer is the blacksmith’s heavy forging
hammer. Large ball peen hammers are also used to forge out
items on the anvil.
If work is not planned properly and stock is cut too short
to be hand-held while forging, tongs will be necessary. The
tongs used most often have flat jaws to hold flat or square
stock or curved jaws to hold round stock. Some tongs have
a square groove to make it possible to grasp small-diameter
square or round bars. Blacksmiths often make their
own tongs to hold objects with unusual
shapes such as ax heads.
Forge
Tongs
Cross peen
hammer


76 METALWORK
The Blacksmith.
Basic Blacksmithing Skills
Naturally, there are some fundamental techniques that must
be learned before making anything at the anvil. Because there
is not room in this pamphlet for a complete treatment of the
subject, only the most basic information and techniques are
presented here.
Forging a Taper
To forge a taper, hammer the end of a
hot bar into a tapered point like that of
a center punch. To avoid having to use
tongs, cut a length of bar long enough
to permit holding the cool end in your
gloved hand when forging. To make the
taper, tilt the hammerhead and hit the
hot bar with angled blows.
Hit the hot end once and then
rotate the bar 90 degrees and hit it
again. Repeat this process of hitting
and rotating the bar back and forth,
forcing the hot steel into a taper.
This action is called tumbling.
Think, “hit, rotate 90 degrees, hit,
rotate 90 degrees,” and so on until
the taper is completed.
Using the Horn of the Anvil
Position the hot steel on the horn so
that the hot portion juts outward past
the horn. Strike the hot section a soft
blow, forcing it to bend over the curve
of the horn. To keep from flattening
the metal, hit it at an angle, and avoid
hitting it straight down on the horn.
Always hit the metal beyond where
it touches the horn.
Hot steel can be bent over the horn
of an anvil.
Think, “hit, rotate 90 degrees, hit,
rotate 90 degrees,” and so on until the
taper is completed.


METALWORK 77
.The Blacksmith
Using the Edge of the Anvil
Use the edge of the anvil to make
L-shaped bends in objects. Heat the
spot to be bent to an orange heat.
Position the hot spot on the outside
edge of the anvil, letting the cooler tip
project over the anvil. Tap the end of
the bar straight on with a hammer,
forcing the hot spot to bend over the
edge. To square up the bend, tap the
bend at the front of the anvil, where
you can be sure to get a 90-degree
bend. Be careful not to strike the
bend at the corner of the anvil or
you will squash the material there,
weakening the piece.
Twisting Steel
Twisting is used to put a decorative
element in square and flat stock.
Heat a bar to an even orange color
where the twist should appear.
Clamp one end of the hot steel bar
in the vise, grab the other end near
the hot section with tongs or a bar
twister, and rotate the bar 360 degrees.
An even heat means an even spiral.
Preserving Your Work
Paraffin wax makes a fine preservative.
Be sure that you are wearing gloves
because the metal will still be quite
warm. Rub a candle stub over your
work while it is still warm, letting the
liquid wax flow into all the crevices.
Be careful not to overheat your work
because the wax will evaporate
or burn off, which is ineffective.
Just before the wax hardens, rub off
the excess wax with a shop rag.
Bending steel over the edge of the
anvil creates L-shaped bends.


78 METALWORK
The Blacksmith.
Materials
❏ 1
⁄4-inch by 1
⁄2-inch flat, mild steel (C1020, A36, or equivalent)
❏ 1
⁄4-inch diameter mild steel (C1020, A36, or equivalent)
❏ 1
⁄4-inch or 3
⁄8-inch square mild steel (C1020, A36, or equivalent)
❏ 3
⁄8-inch round or square medium-carbon steel (C1065, W1,
or equivalent)
❏ 1
⁄4-inch square, or 1
⁄4-inch by 1
⁄2-inch flat, medium carbon steel
❏ Tenpenny or larger nails
❏ Candle stubs
❏ Cooking oil
Basic Tools Needed
❏ 125-pound anvil (minimum)
❏ Stumps (one for the anvil; one
much taller one for the vise)
❏ Two turnbuckles for securing
anvil to stump
❏ Two 12-inch lengths of
welded-link chain to pass
over the anvil’s feet and
connect to the turnbuckles
❏ Two eye screws to secure the
turnbuckles to the stump
❏ Leg vise or large machinist’s vise
❏ Firepot
❏ Metal forge top with legs
❏ Mechanical bellows
❏ Bellows pipe
❏ Measuring tape or folding rule
❏ Soapstone pencils
(for marking steel)
❏ 24-ounce cross peen hammer
❏ 12-ounce ball peen hammer
❏ Hot hardie
❏ Cold hardie
❏ Flat-jawed tongs
❏ 1
⁄4-inch and 3
⁄8-inch bolt tongs
❏ Pea-sized soft coal,
approximately 50 pounds
per eight-hour day
❏ C-clamp or locking-grip pliers
❏ Center punch
❏ Drill press
❏ Drill, sized to
match the
diameter of the nails used
as rivets
❏ Shop apron
❏ Leather gloves
❏ Safety glasses


METALWORK 79
Blacksmithing Projects
The following projects are practical objects that a Scout can
use while camping. Because the creation of art is personal
to each artist, no art objects are illustrated. If you
prefer to be artistic rather than practical, use your
imagination and remember to apply the basic
metalworking techniques.
Forging a Dutch Oven Lid Lifter
Step 1—Sketch the Dutch oven lid lifter to use
as a pattern. The length of the lifter from the
hook all the way around the handle should be
about 16 inches.
Step 2—Using a hacksaw, cut a 16-inch length
from a piece of 1
⁄4-inch square mild steel.
Step 3—Place the metal in the forge, and bring the
end of the shaft to an orange heat.
Step 4—Using tongs, remove the piece from the fire and forge
a taper in the end of the shaft (A). Flatten the taper (B).
4a 4b


80 METALWORK
The Blacksmith.
Step 5—Carefully reheat the flared taper and bend it about
30 degrees by tapping it over the edge of the anvil (A).
Bend the tip back (B).
Step 6—Reheat the hook end, then create the J-hook by
bending it over the anvil horn. Bring the hook to the face of the
anvil to “true it up,” or straighten the bar, leave the J slightly
open to make grabbing the oven handle easier. Plunge the piece
in water to cool it.
Step 7—Place the handle
end of the bar in the
forge, and heat the center
of the bar to an orange
heat. Using tongs, transfer
the piece from the fire to
the workbench and clamp
it in the vise. Place a 90-
degree bend in the center.
6 7
5a 5b


METALWORK 81
Step 8—Grasp the piece with tongs and reheat it. Without
touching the hot metal, forge a T-handle in one end by bending
the bar over the horn of the anvil. Make sure the handle is big
enough for all of your fingers to fit comfortably inside without
touching or grazing the hot Dutch oven.
Step 9—Reheat the shaft and apply a decorative twist, then
true up the shaft again, if needed.
Step 10—Wearing gloves to protect
your hands from the still-warm
metal, rub a candle stub over the
finished piece to preserve your work.
Just before the wax cools, remove the
excess with a rag.
8
9a 9b
.The Blacksmith


82 METALWORK
The Blacksmith.
Forging a Dutch Oven Trivet
Step 1—Cut three 7-inch
pieces of 1
⁄2-inch by
1
⁄4-inch mild steel.
Step 2—Heat the tip
of one piece to an orange heat and clamp the bottom
half inch in the vise. Bend the tip over the edge of the
vise in a 90-degree angle. Cool the piece.
Step 3—Reheat the piece, then hook the bends under the vise
jaw and bend them upward like an elephant with a raised trunk
to form the foot of the trivet.
Step 4—Repeat steps 2 and 3 with the other two pieces.
Be careful to make all three pieces the same shape and size
so the legs of the finish piece will nest correctly. Allow the
pieces air-cool for at least an hour. (Cooling in water will
make the metal too hard to drill.)
Step 5—Stack the pieces and clamp them firmly together.
Use the center punch to place a mark in the center of the bar,
about a half inch from the unbent ends. Use vise grips to hold
the punch steady, then make a dimple in the top piece by
giving the punch a solid blow with a mallet.
5 6
Step 6—Lubricate the dimple with a drop of oil and, using the
mark as a guide to keep the drill bit from wandering, drill a
hole through the first piece. To ensure that the holes in all three
pieces will line up, stack the second piece under the first and
use a nail to make a tiny mark to guide drilling the second
piece. Stack those two pieces on the third piece and mark it.
Then drill a hole in piece three. This method ensures that all
three holes line up and that the legs will nest correctly.


METALWORK 83
.The Blacksmith
Step 7—Stack the three pieces and
slide a nail through the hole. Use a file
or another nail to mark the shaft about
3
⁄16 inch above the top of the hole.
Step 8—Clamp the shank of the nail
in a vise and use a hacksaw to cut it at
the mark.
Step 9—Take the trivet pieces to
the anvil and slide the nail into place.
Using the peen end of a ball peen
hammer, strike in a circle around the
protruding shaft of the nail, creating
a mushroom shape. This is called
“upsetting” the metal because the
metal is thickened and shortened on
the end. Gradually increase the size
of the mushroom until the rivet has
thickened enough to keep the legs
firmly attached without any wobbling.
Step 10—Heat the trivet a little in the
forge, and then lubricate the trivet with
wax to prevent it from rusting.
Don’t overdo it here—you don’t want to thicken the rivet’s shank so much
that the legs are locked in place, making it impossible to pivot the legs
around the rivet. You want the legs free to rotate so that the three legs of
the trivet can be nested together and stored inside a Dutch oven.
Spread the trivet’s legs to use the lid of the Dutch oven as a frying pan.
Fold the legs and place the trivet in the Dutch oven for storage.
7
9





METALWORK 85
.Careers in Metalworking
Careers in
Metalworking
Master metalworkers have their choice of many interesting
hands-on careers, including gunsmiths, welders, founders, and
sheet metal mechanics. Other metalworking careers, while not
as hands-on, require a background and extensive knowledge in
metalworking, including structural engineers and architects.
Basic Skills of a Metalworker
While the four metalworking disciplines described in this
pamphlet—tinsmith, silversmith, founder, and blacksmith—
are quite diverse, the basic skills a worker in each specialty
needs are the same.
Metalworkers should be strong in basic
math skills, including geometry, and they
should have good verbal and written
communication skills. The hands-on
nature of the work requires good
hand-eye coordination, attention
to detail, and an interest in
precision. A metalworker needs
sharp logic skills in order to
break down a complex task
into a logical sequence of
steps. Creativity and a good eye
for balance, conceptualization,
composition, and other qualities
of an artist are positives for
metalworkers, too.


86 METALWORK
Careers in Metalworking.
Education and Career Paths
Many metalworkers need a high school education, followed by
vocational school or an apprenticeship, to become professional
hands-on metalworkers. Some may choose to work for a ship-
yard, an automobile-parts manufacturing plant, or an aircraft
manufacturing plant. Others may decide to work for large
machine shops that specialize in rebuilding engines or manu-
facturing specialty parts for other companies. Still others may
decide to become sheet metal workers, who manufacture
heating and air conditioning items used in the construction
of private homes, manufacturing plants, and office buildings.
Some professionals with interests in metalworking earn
college degrees in mechanical, structural, or metallurgical
engineering. They will tackle such projects as designing bridges
or creating specialty metals in a steel mill or an aluminum-
producing facility. An engineer who is familiar with the
properties of metals might find a good career in the
automobile, shipbuilding, aircraft, petroleum, defense,
or parts-manufacturing industry.


METALWORK 87
.Careers in Metalworking
Any metalworker can start their own business after
learning the trade as an apprentice. Successful metalworking
entrepreneurs are those who learn to balance their creative
side with their practical business side. Some of these successful
entrepreneurs make and sell architectural hardware to
construction companies, or create fanciful and imaginative
sculptures and décor for banks, law offices, and other
professional buildings.
Many professional associations, such as the Artist
Blacksmith’s Association of North America and the Society
of American Silversmiths, can give you advice on pursuing a
metalworking career. If you are considering
such fields as sheet metal mechanic,
machinist, or welder, visit a local
metalwork shop or workers’
union and ask about appren-
ticeships or on-the-job train-
ing opportunities.
High school
courses that
will help prepare
a future metal-
worker include
art, math, and
science. Perhaps
the most basic
knowledge
a metalworker
can acquire is
an understanding
of the strengths,
limitations, and
metallurgical
properties of
typical metals
used in the craft.





METALWORK 89
.Glossary
Glossary
alloy. A substance having metallic properties and being
composed of two or more chemical elements of which at least
one is an elemental metal.
annealing. A treatment consisting of heating to and holding
at a suitable temperature followed by cooling at a suitable rate,
used primarily to soften metals but also to simultaneously
produce desired changes in other properties.
anvil. A heavy iron block with a steel face upon which metal is
shaped with a hammer.
bench pin. A rectangular wooden board clamped to a work-
bench used by jewelers to control a piece when using a
jeweler’s saw or needle file.
blackening. The act of applying carbon such as candle soot to
a metal mold or applying graphite dust to a rubber mold. The
carbon acts as a releasing agent, making it easier to extract the
cooled casting from the smaller recesses of the mold.
bouge. The curved portion of a plate or a tray from the edge of
the rim to the bottom of the plate or tray.
brazing. Joining metals by flowing a thin layer (capillary thick-
ness) of nonferrous filler metal into the space between them.
Bonding results from the contact produced by the dissolution of
a small amount of base metal in the molten filler metal without
fusion of the base metal. Sometimes the filler metal is put in
place as a thin solid sheet or as a clad layer, and the composite
is heated, as in furnace brazing. The term brazing is used
where the temperature exceeds some arbitrary value, such as
800 degrees; the term soldering is used when the temperature
is lower than the arbitrary value.
casting. (1) An object at or near finished shape obtained by
solidification of a substance in a mold. (2) Pouring molten
metal into a mold to produce an object of a desired shape.


90 METALWORK
Glossary.
corrosion. The deterioration of a metal by a chemical or an
electrochemical reaction to oxygen present in its environment.
cross peen hammer. A hammer where the peen (the end
that comes to a blunt taper) runs from left to right with refer-
ence to the face. Also called a blacksmith’s hammer or an
engineer’s hammer.
crucible. A vessel made of a material such as
porcelain that can withstand high temperatures
without cracking, used for melting a substance
that requires a high degree of heat.
crystal. A solid composed of atoms, ions, or
molecules arranged in a pattern that is repetitive
and three-dimensional.
cure. To allow the hardening process to run
its course by letting the piece rest for a period
of time.
dross. The impurities that form on the surface of
molten metal.
ductility. The ability of a metal to deform plastically without
fracturing, being measured by elongation or reduction of area
in a tensile test or by other means.
ferrous. Of, relating to, or containing iron.
flux. A substance used to clean away impurities caused by
oxidation during soldering or brazing. Solder will only adhere
to the metal where flux has been applied.
forced-draft fire. A fire where air is deliberately introduced
through some mechanical means (such as a bellows) to signifi-
cantly increase the rate of combustion.
forge. A furnace where bars of metal are heated prior to being
hammered on an anvil. The shop that houses this furnace is
also called a forge.
foundry. A furnace where metals are heated to the liquid state
prior to being poured into a mold (casting). The shop that
houses this furnace is also called a foundry.
hardie. A blacksmith’s chisel-like tool that fits in an anvil’s
square hole (the hardie hole) and used to part bars of metal. To
part a bar of metal with a hardie, a smith lays the metal over the
hardie’s chisel-shaped end and strikes the metal with a hammer.
Crucible


METALWORK 91
.Glossary
hardness. Resistance of metal to plastic deformation,
usually by indentation. However, the term may also
refer to stiffness or temper, or to resistance to
scratching, abrasion, or cutting.
hem. To fold a small portion (between 3
⁄16 inch and
3
⁄8 inch) of the edge of a piece of sheet metal back
upon itself. Hemming acts to both stiffen the sheet
metal and to create a safe edge, preventing cuts.
malleability. The characteristic of metals that permits
plastic deformation in compression without rupture.
mallet. A hammer with a barrel-shaped head
made of wood.
melting point. The temperature at which a solid begins
the transformation into a liquid.
melting pot. A sturdy vessel (usually metal) used
to melt metal.
metal. An opaque lustrous elemental chemical
substance that is a good conductor of heat and
electricity and, when polished, a good reflector of light.
Most elemental metals are malleable and ductile, and
generally heavier than the other elemental substances.
metallurgy. The science and technology of metals.
Process metallurgy is concerned with the extraction of metals
from their ores and with the refining of metals. Physical
metallurgy deals with the physical and mechanical
properties of metals as affected by composition,
mechanical working, and heat treatment.
mold. A cavity in which a substance is
shaped. It is used in the casting of
molten metal.
native metal. A metal that occurs naturally
in a nearly pure form. Gold nuggets are an
example of a native metal.
nonferrous. Of, or relating to, metals other
than iron.
ore. A natural mineral that may be mined and
treated for the extraction of any of its compo-
nents, metallic or otherwise.
Melting pot
Mold
Hem


92 METALWORK
Glossary.
oxidation. A thin layer of rust or corrosion that forms on the
surface of unprotected metal because of the metal’s interaction
with oxygen in the atmosphere.
parting line. The horizontal line formed where the two halves
of a two-piece mold meet. A parting line is often placed at an
object’s halfway point when viewing the object from the side.
pattern. (1) A three-dimensional model used for making the
cavity in a mold into which molten metal is to be poured to
form a casting. (2) A piece of stiff paper or light-gauge sheet
metal that has been cut to conform to the outlines of a compo-
nent part of a sheet metal project. The craftsperson then traces
the paper or metal pattern’s outline onto the sheet metal from
which the component part is to be constructed.
pickling solution. Any of various baths used to clean metal.
One of the pickles used by silversmiths is a 10 percent sulfuric
acid, 90 percent water solution. A pickling solution is most
often used to remove the metal oxide that has formed on the
surface of silver. Pickling solutions also will remove the flux
used to solder seams.
planishing. The process of hammering or refining a metal surface.
platewell. The flat bottom of a tray or plate into which the
bouge runs.
quench. To cool (as in heated metal) by immersion (as in oil
or water).
raising. The process of creating a hollow form from a flat sheet
of metal by forming it over a cast-iron stake.
rivet. A mechanical fastener that is hammered in place.
rolling. The technique of creating rounded shapes, performed
either using an anvil or a slip-form roller.


METALWORK 93
.Glossary
seaming. Connecting two pieces of sheet metal without
welding. Seams are soldered or brazed to ensure that the
joint remains together.
sinking. The process of creating a concave shape from a flat
piece of metal by hammering the metal over the top of a
shaped form (sinking block).
smelting. A metalworker’s term for exposing ore-bearing rocks
to high temperature to separate the metal from the rock.
soldering. Similar to brazing, but the filler metal has a melting
temperature range below an arbitrary 800 degrees. Soft solders
(low melting point) are usually lead-tin alloys, although pure-
tin solders are available and are recommended.
sprue. The hole through which metal is poured into the mold
during the casting process.
stake anvil. A polished cast-iron or steel tool placed in a vise
and used during the forming and planishing of metal.
steel. Commercial iron that contains carbon in any amount up
to about 1.7 percent as an essential alloying constituent, is
malleable under suitable conditions, and is distinguished
from cast iron by its malleability and lower carbon content.
tempering. The process of relaxing the brittleness of a water-
or oil-hardened steel by reheating it at a lower temperature.
tumbling. The process of alternately rolling and hammering
the end of a bar of hot metal to forge a taper.
twisting. The process of making a decorative spiral in square,
hexagonal, or octagonal metal.
vents. Small tunnels placed in molds to conduct air
out of a mold during the casting process. Unless vented,
trapped air has nowhere to go and its presence will
prevent the molten metal from flowing into portions
of the mold.
work hardening. The process of hardening a metal by
hammering it.
yield point. The point at which a crystal
under pressure has been transformed to
such a state that, when the transforming
pressure is released, the crystal cannot
return to its original condition.


94 METALWORK
Metalwork Resources.
Metalwork Resources
The resources listed below represent
only a fraction of those available to the
hobby metalworker. Check the local
library and bookstores for additional
titles, and don’t be afraid to purchase
out-of-print titles or titles with older
copyright dates—the majority of
metalworking techniques are timeless.
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.
Books
Metalworking
McCreight, Tim. Complete Metalsmith:
Student Edition. Brynmorgen
Press, 2005.
Repp, Victor E. Metalwork: Technology and
Practice, 9th ed. McGraw-Hill, 1993.
Walker, John R., and Kenneth W. Stier.
Modern Metalworking, 10th ed.
Goodheart-Willcox, 2017.
Metal Can Craft
Hansson, Bobby. The Fine Art of
the Tin Can: Techniques &
Inspirations, revised ed. Lark
Books, 2005.
Maguire, Mary. Tin Crafts: Over
20 Inspirational Projects for the
Home. Lorenz Books, 1999.
Tinsmithing/Tinware
DeVoe, Shirley Spaulding. The Art of
the Tinsmith: English and American.
Schiffer Publishing Ltd., 1997.
Handberg, Ejner. Shop Drawings
of Shaker Iron and Tinware.
Berkshire House Publishing, 1993.
Vosburgh, H.K. The Tinsmith’s Helper
and Pattern Book. Reprint. Forgotten
Books, 2017.
Silversmithing
Finegold, Rupert, and William Seitz.
Silversmithing. F + W Media, 1997.
McCreight, Tim. Jewelry: Fundamentals
of Metalsmithing. Hand Books
Press, 1997.
——. The Metalsmith’s Book of
Boxes and Lockets. Hand
Books Press, 1999.
Silvera, Joe. Soldering Made Simple:
Easy Techniques for the Kitchen-
Table Jeweler. Kalmbach
Books, 2010.


METALWORK 95
.Metalwork Resources
Metal Casting
Ammen, C.W. The Complete Book of
Sand Casting. Tab Books, 1979.
McCreight, Tim. Practical Casting: A
Studio Reference, 2nd ed.
Brynmorgan Press, 1994.
Blacksmithing
Andrews, Jack. The New Edge of the
Anvil. Skipjack Press, 1994.
Bealer, Alex W. The Art of
Blacksmithing, revised ed. Castle
Books, 2009.
Blandford, Percy. Practical
Blacksmithing and Metalworking,
2nd ed. Tab Books, 1988.
Sims, Lorelei. The Backyard Blacksmith.
Crestline Books, 2009.
Weygers, Alexander G. The Complete
Modern Blacksmith. Ten Speed
Press, 1997.
Organizations and Websites
Artist-Blacksmith’s Association
of North America
abana.org
Metal Museum
www.metalmuseum.org
National Institute for
Metalworking Skills
www.nims-skills.org
Society of American Silversmiths
www.silversmithing.com
Materials and Supplies
Centaur Forge
Telephone: 262-763-9175
www.centaurforge.com
The Dunken Company
Toll-free telephone: 800-544-6653
www.dunken.com
Rio Grande
Toll-free telephone: 800-545-6566
www.riogrande.com
Shor International Corporation
Toll-free telephone: 800-295-6320
www.shorinternational.com
Stebgo Metals
Toll-free telephone: 800-289-0138
www.stebgo.com
Widget Supply
Telephone: 541-926-1003
www.widgetsupply.com


96 METALWORK
Metalwork Resources.
Acknowledgments
This edition of the Metalwork merit
badge pamphlet was written by Eagle
Scout Andrew G. Hagemann, Newport
News, Virginia. Scouting America is
grateful to Mr. Hagemann for volun-
teering his time and expertise to this
project. He also opened his amazing
workshop for a photo shoot.
The author wishes to thank
Christian Hagemann, Fremont,
Nebraska, for his kind help with the
tinsmith chapter and for providing the
pattern for the drinking cup. Chris has
fond memories of his Scouting experi-
ences as a youth. He is now a master
gunsmith and self-taught tinsmith.
Thanks to the following contributors
for sharing their resources and expertise:
• Jack Andrews
• The Castings Company
• Doug Learn and the Artist-Blacksmith’s
Association of North America
• Stewart Marshall, Queen’s Scout
• Timothy McCreight
• Dezso and Desmond Rubesch
A special thanks to Kenneth
Hampton, Eagle Scout 1952, for his
invaluable assistance with the how-to
drawings used in the pamphlet.
Thank you for the continued assis-
tance from Joe Walden, experienced
blacksmith hobbyist, and Brian
Schmidt, Metallurgy Engineer, of Deere
& Company, for their continued service
in ensuring this merit badge pamphlet
is current and relevant.
Scouting America also gratefully
acknowledges the assistance of the
Colonial Virginia Council, Newport
News, Virginia.
Scouting America is grateful to the
men and women serving on the
National Merit Badge Subcommittee for
the improvements made in updating this
pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration Credits
Andrew G. Hagemann, courtesy—
cover (anvil); pages 10 (copper)
and 49 (anvil)
Wikipedia.org, courtesy—page 11
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of or
are protected by Scouting America.
John McDearmon—all patterns and
illustrations on pages 25–27, 38,
42–45, 52, 55, 58–59, 67–68, 74,
and 80–81
Brian Payne—pages 56 (silversmith)
and 87 (showing samples)