SNOW
SPORTS


SNOW SPORTS
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


35951
ISBN 978-0-8395-3365-8
©2024 Boy Scouts of America
2024 Printing
Note to the Counselor
Like many other outdoor activities, the snow sports discussed in this
pamphlet have risks. These risks can be minimized by following the
complete guidelines under Winter Activities in the BSA’s Guide to Safe
Scouting, particularly those that pertain to winter-sports safety.
The abridged rules below highlight the guidelines that will help
you ensure the well-being of those Scouts under your supervision.
• Use only designated areas where obstacles have been identified and
marked, cleared away, shielded, or buffered in some way.
• At all times when Scouts are in the field, maintain direct supervision
by two or more mature and conscientious adults (at least one of whom
must be age 21 or older) who understand and knowingly accept
responsibility for the well-being and safety of the youth in their care.
They should be experienced and qualified in the particular skills and
equipment involved in the activity and committed to compliance with
BSA Winter Sports Safety as defined in the Guide to Safe Scouting.
The appropriate number of supervisors will increase depending on the
number of participants, the type of activity, and environmental conditions.
• Explain the potential hazards of snow sports before engaging in the
activity. Make sure Scouts understand and respect the rules of safety
and etiquette for snow sports, especially the rules of the local ski
patrol. Place emphasis on preventing accidents through adherence
to safety measures and proper technique.
• Be sure Scouts wear appropriate clothing and protective equipment,
including gloves, helmets, and goggles when appropriate. The use of
a helmet is required for snowboarding and downhill skiing.
• Comply with BSA medical requirements as outlined in the Annual
Health and Medical Record. Each participant—youth and adult—
must have a current physical examination performed by a licensed
health-care practitioner who has knowledge of the sport and its
particular physical demands.
• Make sure all specialized equipment such as snowboards, skis, snow-
shoes, and helmets fit and function properly.
FPO


SNOW SPORTS 3
Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Snow-Sports or check Scoutbook for the latest requirements.


4 SNOW SPORTS


SNOW SPORTS 5


6 SNOW SPORTS


SNOW SPORTS 7
Contents
The History of Snow Sports . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Responsibility and Safety in Snow Sports . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
Getting Ready to Go . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
Downhill Skiing. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
Cross-Country Skiing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
Snowboarding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
Snowshoeing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
Snow Sports Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93





Scandinavian
settlers who came
to North America
late in the 19th
century brought
skiing with them
and taught others
how to enjoy it.
SNOW SPORTS 9
.The History of Snow Sports
The History
of Snow Sports
For centuries, people in northern countries faced the problem
of getting about in deep snow. Humans needed some means
of staying on top of the snow and taking advantage of its slip-
pery qualities, rather than floundering along with maximum
exertion and minimum progress. The invention of the ski and
snowshoe filled a great need.
Modern skis and ski styles began developing in northern
Europe during the 1800s when Sondre Norheim of Norway
developed the telemark style of turning with skis that used a
free-heel binding system such as that used in modern cross-
country skis. The Alpine, or downhill, skiing style was devel-
oped in the 1880s, using a toe-and-heel binding piece similar
to what is used in downhill skiing today. These 19th-century
skis were long and cambered, or curved, to support the weight
of a skier on any but the softest snow. They also were slippery
enough that a skier could glide down mountainsides and along
flat places.
Snowshoes have been around for more than 4,000 years.
Humans back then discovered how they could travel more effi-
ciently over snowy areas using footwear that covered a large
surface. Modern-day snowshoes have come a long way since
the primitive ones made of wood and leather.
Sherman Poppen, a skier from Michigan, invented the
Snurfer in the 1960s as a toy for his daughter. This cross between
a plywood sled and skateboard deck evolved into the modern-
day snowboard in the 1980s.
Skiing, snowshoeing, and snowboarding remain among
the fastest and most thrilling ways to travel on foot in snow
country. These sports also provide the physical benefits of fresh
air, rhythmic action, and strenuous exercise. Best of all, snow
sports allow anyone to stay active outdoors during winter.


10 SNOW SPORTS
Responsibility and
Safety in Snow Sports
Snow sports hold a special magic. The beauty of the winter land-
scape dramatically enhances the challenge, fun, and excitement of
outdoor activity. But many of the same features that make winter
adventures appealing pose special risks. Whenever you are out
enjoying the snow, always show courtesy to others and exercise
caution and common sense to help reduce the risk of accidents
and injuries. Observe the Your Responsibility Code and share with
others the responsibility for a great skiing or riding experience.
Your Responsibility Code
1. Always stay in control and be able to stop or avoid other people
or objects.
2. Remember that people ahead of you (or below you) have the right
of way. It is your responsibility to avoid them.
3. Do not stop in any place where you obstruct a trail or are not visible
from above.
4. Whenever starting downhill or merging into a trail, look uphill and
yield to others.
5. Use safety devices to help prevent runaway equipment.
6. Observe all posted signs and warnings. Keep off closed trails and out
of closed areas.
7. Know how to load, ride, and unload safely prior to using any lift.
This code is officially endorsed by the National Ski Areas Association,
National Ski Patrol, Professional Ski Instructors of America, and the
American Association of Snowboard Instructors. This is an abridged
version of the code.
Responsibility and Safety in Snow Sports.


SNOW SPORTS 11
Wilderness Use Policy
In addition to showing respect for your fellow skiers, snowshoers,
and riders, it is your responsibility to show respect for the out-
door environment. When engaging in snow sports, all privately
or publicly owned backcountry and designated areas are to be
considered “wilderness.” Leave No Trace principles must be
followed to avoid damaging the environment and to protect it
for future generations.
Leave No Trace Principles
The Boy Scouts of America emphasizes these practices for all troops
planning to use the wilderness.
1. Plan Ahead and Prepare. Proper planning helps keep you safe and
helps you avoid unexpected situations. Minimize your impact by find-
ing out in advance about an area’s regulations such as limitations on
group size.
2. Travel and Camp on Durable Surfaces. Use only designated ski trails
and campsites to help protect fragile vegetation and communities
of organisms.
3. Dispose of Waste Properly (Pack It In, Pack It Out). This simple yet
effective saying motivates backcountry visitors to take their trash
home with them.
4. Leave What You Find. Allow others a sense of discovery, and preserve
the past. Leave rocks, animals, archaeological artifacts, and other
objects as you find them.
5. Minimize Campfire Impacts. Use a camp stove instead of building
a campfire. The naturalness of many areas has been degraded by
overuse of fires.
6. Respect Wildlife. Quick movements and loud noises are stressful to
animals. Observe wildlife from afar, store food securely, and keep gar-
bage and food scraps away from animals. Help keep wildlife wild.
7. Be Considerate of Other Visitors. Help other visitors enjoy their
wilderness experience by traveling and camping in small groups,
keeping the noise down, selecting campsites away from other
groups, and respecting their privacy.
.Responsibility and Safety in Snow Sports


12 SNOW SPORTS
Responsibility and Safety in Snow Sports.
Safety
Snow sports present special safety challenges. Essential ingredi-
ents for fun include skill training and an awareness of the
hazards unique to the activity you are participating in.
Avalanche Dangers
Avalanches are a serious concern for skiers, snowshoers, or riders
whose outings take them into snowy, mountainous regions. An
avalanche occurs when snow breaks loose on a slope or when a
cornice of snow collapses and tumbles down. Often the sliding
snow carries debris such as rocks and tree branches with it.
Your greatest protection against avalanches is knowing
where, how, and when they are likely to occur and then plan-
ning routes that avoid these danger spots. Indicators of danger
include the following.
• Steep terrain. Avalanches usually happen on slopes of 40 to
60 degrees.
• Accumulations of new snow. Avalanches generally occur
during or after a heavy winter storm. The danger of an
avalanche remains high until the new snow settles,
consolidates, and becomes stable.
• Variations in the quality of snow layers, especially if one or
more layers are airy, granular, or in slabs. A weak layer of
snowpack can allow layers above to break loose and slide.
• Sounds that suggest cracking or settling of the snowpack.
If, despite your preparations and judgment, you see an
avalanche roaring toward you and you cannot get out of its path,
jettison your pack and your skis, snowboard or snowshoes.
When the snow hits, move your arms and legs in a swimming
motion to keep yourself upright, and try to keep your head
above the surface. As the avalanches settles, push away any
accumulation of snow from your face to form an air pocket that
will allow you to breathe.
Those who plan to
travel where
avalanches can
occur would be
smart to take an
avalanche course
through the
American Institute
for Avalanche
Research and
Education.
While it’s always best to avoid avalanche country, an avalanche rescue kit—
beacon, probe, and shovel—can be lifesaving if you carry one and know
how to use it. Battery-powered avalanche beacons worn by each group
member emit a radio signal that can be picked up by the beacons of others.
Before departure, make sure all beacons are in good working order. This
means they must have good battery power.


SNOW SPORTS 13
.Responsibility and Safety in Snow Sports
Should others in your party be caught in an avalanche, keep
your eye on them as long as you can, and note the exact place
you saw them last. Hopefully, they will be wearing avalanche
beacons—battery-powered lights that emit a radio signal that
can be picked up by the beacons of other group members—that
will help you find them quickly. If not, listen for their voices and
use your ski poles (grip side down) or a ski to probe the snow.
Search quickly. Your chances of saving a person decrease
rapidly as the snow settles. When you find victims, use a sturdy
short-handled shovel to free them and then provide first aid for
shock, hypothermia, and any injuries. (See the First Aid section
in this chapter for a discussion of first-aid techniques.)
Smart Style
Because snowboard riding in terrain parks has become
so popular, the National Ski Areas Association (NSAA),
Burton Snowboards, and OVO Helmets have teamed
up to educate snowboard riders and freestyle skiers
on safety and park
etiquette. The Smart
Style Terrain Park Safety
Initiative focuses on
three easy-to-under-
stand concepts.
• Look before you leap.
• Easy style it.
• Respect gets respect.
Look before you leap means that you should know
the park very well before you ride the features. You
should always perform an inspection run through the
park or pipe to check for any irregularities and changes
that may have happened since you rode it last. You
need to know that the landing zone is clear before you
hit any feature. You should use a spotter on any feature
where you cannot see the landing. The spotter will use
signals to indicate whether it is safe for you to proceed.
Never stop in the
NO Zone of any
feature that is the
potential landing
and run-out of
that feature.
In springtime,
wet avalanches
can occur even
in consolidated
snow packs.
Avoid skiing
late in the day
when warmer
temperatures
increase the
chance of a
wet avalanche.


14 SNOW SPORTS
Responsibility and Safety in Snow Sports.
Easy style it means you should start with small features
and work your way up slowly to bigger features. Warm
up slowly, especially when the snow is hard, to allow
your muscles to become warm. Monitor your energy
levels as you ride, and know when to quit. That way,
you will avoid overdoing it and risking injury.
Respect gets respect is a motto you should apply to all
stages of your park experience—from the lift line to the
features. There are rules and procedures in the park,
and it is important to understand how to follow them.
When you are ready to use any feature, get in line and
call out your drop by yelling “Dropping!” This lets
everyone know that you are next to go over that feature
or enter the pipe, and it will eliminate any confusion.
Once the first rider has ridden away from the feature,
the next person can call out “Got next!” and drop in.
Don’t be
embarrassed
to be clear and
loud when calling
out your drop.
Doing so helps
keep you and
other riders safe.
To signal that the feature is clear,
a spotter will circle his or her
arms overhead.
To signal that a feature should not
be used, a spotter will cross his or
her arms overhead.


SNOW SPORTS 15
.Responsibility and Safety in Snow Sports
Accidents and Emergencies
Despite taking the necessary precautions, accidents do
sometimes happen. If you are on the scene at an accident,
you should know how to proceed to get help for victims as
efficiently and safely as possible.
First, see if the person is injured. If the person appears
to be hurt, cross a pair of skis at least 20 feet uphill or place
your snowboard, bindings down, above the person to create a
marker. Never remove the injured person’s equipment, because
this could cause further injury.
Next, alert someone responsible, such as a ski-area
employee, and advise that person of the accident. You may
need to ask a passing skier or snowboarder to call the ski patrol
or other authority. Be sure the person you send for help can
identify the location of the accident. If you do not know the
name of the trail or location, look for a landmark of some sort.
If possible, tell the messenger what the probable injuries are
so that he or she can report the information to the ski patrol.
Keep the injured person warm, comfortable, and calm.
Watch for signs of shock. It may help to strike up a conversa-
tion and reassure the person that help is on the way. Stay with
the injured person until help arrives; the ski patrol or other
authorized persons may have questions only you can answer.
Warning other people on the hill or trail about an injured rider
also helps signal the ski patrol.


16 SNOW SPORTS
Responsibility and Safety in Snow Sports.
Shock
When a person is injured or under great stress, the circulatory system
may fail to provide enough blood to all parts of the body. This condition,
called shock, may accompany any serious injury occurring in snow sports.
It can be fatal. Symptoms include pale, moist, clammy, or cool skin; weak
and rapid pulse; weakness; shivering; thirst; nausea; and shallow, rapid
breathing. Because of the risks and uncertainties that may accompany a
snow-sports injury, every injured person should be treated for shock.
1. Summon medical help.
2. Keep the victim lying down with the feet slightly elevated.
3. Prevent loss of body heat by wrapping the victim in blankets or
warm clothing.
4. Keep the airway open, and perform rescue breathing if needed. If the
victim is conscious, give water.
See the First Aid merit badge pamphlet for details on how to perform
rescue breathing.
Make it a practice while skiing or riding to keep an eye out for trail markers and
telephones. Then you’ll be able to reach help more quickly in an emergency.


SNOW SPORTS 17
.Responsibility and Safety in Snow Sports
Reporting an Accident
Be aware of the ski area’s procedure for reporting accidents.
Make it a habit to check with the local ski patrol for instruc-
tions on accident reporting before you head out.
At Alpine ski resorts, one common method of reporting
accidents is to send someone from your group to the bottom of
the nearest lift and inform a lift operator. Remember to include
important details: the exact location of the accident, the type of
injuries, the number of people hurt, and their conditions.
First Aid
Snow sports, like other activities, have their own set of precau-
tions and unique risks. The conditions described here represent
those for which any safety-conscious person should be prepared.
You should perform first aid only if help from the ski patrol or
trained medical personnel is unavailable.
Hypothermia
Hypothermia occurs when the body is
losing more heat than it can generate.
It can strike at any time when a person
is not dressed warmly enough. Wind,
rain, hunger, dehydration, and exhaus-
tion increase the risk.
Staying found while you are in
the outdoors helps keep you
and your companions safe.
Especially if you plan to go in
the backcountry, be sure you
have a map and compass and
know how to use them. For
more information, see the
Scouts BSA Handbook for Boys
or the Scouts BSA Handbook
for Girls, and the Fieldbook.


Responsibility and Safety in Snow Sports.
The following symptoms are typical of hypothermia.
• Coldness and numbness
• Fatigue, confusion, and irritability; poor judgment
• Stumbling and/or falling
• Sleepiness; loss of consciousness
To treat a hypothermia victim:
• Get the victim to a shelter and into dry clothes.
• Warm the person by zipping him or her into a sleeping bag.
• If the victim is conscious, give high-energy foods and
warm liquids.
• Place water bottles filled with warm fluid in the victim’s
armpit and groin areas.
• In cases of advanced hypothermia, help the victim breathe
warm, moist air.
If no warm shelter or other heat source can be found, the
victim should be pressed closely to one or more people so heat
can be transferred through direct skin contact. Be ready to pro-
vide additional first aid, and seek medical care for the victim.
The best thing to do is to prevent this potentially deadly
condition. Eat well before you go out, and dress and equip
yourself for the worst weather. If the weather begins to deterio-
rate, cut your outing short and head back. Do not try to brave
out a storm. Use your head, and you and your companions will
have a safe and more enjoyable tour.
Overheating and Dehydration
Overheating occurs when the body cannot keep itself
cool enough. Although it is more common in warm
environments, overheating in cold weather can
occur when a person is doing strenuous physi-
cal activity and is wearing layers of warm
clothing. If a person feels dizzy, faint,
nauseated, or weak; develops a head-
ache or muscle cramps; or looks pale
and is sweating heavily, the person is
suffering from heat exhaustion.
To treat heat exhaustion, have
the person lie down. Loosen and
remove some clothing so the person
Remember to
take frequent
breaks, and drink
plenty of water
to help prevent
dehydration.
Drinking plenty of water
while on the slopes will
help ensure that you stay
hydrated.


SNOW SPORTS 19
.Responsibility and Safety in Snow Sports
begins to cool down, but be careful not to cool too quickly and
risk chilling. Have the victim sip water. Recovery should be
rapid. If the condition worsens, get medical help.
Heatstroke is the life-threatening stage of heat exhaustion
in which dehydration (body-water loss) has caused body tem-
perature to rise to a dangerous level. A person suffering from
heatstroke stops sweating, has an extremely rapid pulse, and
may be disoriented or unconscious. Relieve the victim immedi-
ately by immersing the body in cool water or applying cold
packs. When the victim is able to drink, give plenty of water.
Treat for shock and seek emergency medical help.
Sunburn
Although sunburn is more commonly associated with summer-
time activity, the risk of severe sunburn is very real on a sunny
winter day. Cool air may keep you from feeling the sun’s heat,
but do not ignore your own health and safety. Cover up and
apply sunscreen to any exposed areas. Remember that reflected
sunlight or glare from the snow or ice can be worse than direct
exposure. Shield your face and give special attention to protect-
ing your eyes with appropriate goggles or sunglasses that offer
protection from ultraviolet radiation.
Concussion
A concussion is a brain injury, caused by a blow to the head or
by a sudden change in motion of the head, in which the brain
bounces rapidly back and forth inside the skull. A person does
not need to be knocked out to have a concussion. Some signs
are disorientation, slurred speech, nausea, sensitivity to light or
noise, and sleepiness. Someone with a suspected concussion
should be assessed promptly by a medical professional.
Contusion
Contusion is the medical term for bruises—black-and-blue
marks that appear, usually caused by a blow from a blunt object.
Discoloration is caused by blood leaking into damaged skin tis-
sue. Most bruises are not serious and are easy to recognize and
treat. Help reduce discoloration, pain, and swelling by covering
the site of a new bruise with a cold compress for 30 minutes.
Bruises that include possible bone injury or any contu-
sions on the head or abdomen coupled with sharp or
persistent pain should be seen by a medical professional.


20 SNOW SPORTS
RICE
For sprains and strains remember RICE:
R = Rest
I = Ice
C = Compression
E = Elevation
Sprains and Strains
Sprains are relatively common snow-sports injuries. Sprains are
caused by twisting, wrenching, or lifting movements that tear
or stretch tissues surrounding a joint. Such an injury causes
sudden pain and swelling at the joint. There may be some dis-
coloration, and the joint will likely be tender to the touch and
very painful when moved. Elevate the injured joint, and apply
cold compresses for no more than 20 minutes at a time. The
term strain usually refers to a less severe joint or muscle injury
where tissues are not torn but may have been overextended or
overstressed. Treat strains the same as a sprain.
Fractures
More serious than sprains or strains are fractures, or broken
bones—injuries all too frequently associated with snow sports.
There are two kinds: closed (simple) and open (compound).
In closed fractures, the broken bone does not tear or puncture
the skin. In open fractures, the bone tears through the skin at
the break. Signs of a fracture
may include tenderness to the
touch, swelling and discolor-
ation, unusual or abnormal
position or movement, a
grating sound or feeling, or
a sharp snapping sound or
feeling at the time of injury.
Responsibility and Safety in Snow Sports.
Closed (simple) fracture
Open (compound) fracture


SNOW SPORTS 21
.Responsibility and Safety in Snow Sports
To treat a fracture, keep the victim still and quiet and
treat for shock. Do not move the injured area. Protect the
spinal column by supporting the victim’s head and neck
in the position found. For open fractures, use direct pres-
sure to control bleeding. In all cases, get medical help to
the victim. If the victim must be moved, splint the frac-
ture prior to transport. See the First Aid merit badge pam-
phlet for a discussion of improvised splinting procedures.
Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation, or CPR, is the
important first response in the event of a cardiac
emergency. Such emergencies are relatively
common in strenuous winter activities. For every
outing, there should be persons trained in CPR.
The Scouts BSA handbooks and the First Aid merit
badge pamphlet explain emergency skills such as
CPR and rescue breathing and explain when they
should be used.
CPR is required only when someone has no
pulse, indicating that the heart has stopped beat-
ing. CPR should not be performed on someone
who has a pulse but is simply unconscious. In this
case, rescue breathing, not CPR, is the correct
procedure to follow.
Prevention goes hand in hand with mitigation, which
means “to lessen in force or intensity” and “to make
less severe.” By taking precautions to manage risk and
the possibility of injury, you can be prepared to antici-
pate, help prevent, mitigate, and respond to just about
any incident that might happen while participating in
snow sports.
SCOUTS BSAH A N D B O O K F O R B O Y S
SCOUTS BSAH A N D B O O K F O R G I R L SFIRST AID


Getting Ready to Go.
Getting Ready to Go
Your experience in the snow will be less enjoyable if you head
out on an outing without proper clothing or if your level of
fitness is not up to the cardiovascular demands of your sport.
In addition, you need to familiarize yourself with the use of
ski-area equipment and accepted etiquette.
Wearing proper clothing for winter conditions
will enhance your enjoyment of your sport.
Snowboarding gloves and mittens often have a rein-
forced palm to stand up to the wear caused by balanc-
ing on the snow. Some also have built-in wrist guards.


SNOW SPORTS 23
.Getting Ready to Go
Dressing for Success and Safety
Dress in layers when you go out skiing, snowshoeing, or riding.
Your first layer should consist of a polypropylene shirt or top and
pants or long thermal underwear made of a fiber such as polyes-
ter that will wick moisture away from your body. For the second
layer, wear a lightweight wool sweater or fleece pullover and
pants. Your top layer should consist of water-resistant pants and
a jacket to protect you from snow, sleet, or rain and to block
the wind.
To keep snow out of your pants, wear a longer jacket that
comes down over your waist. Overall-style pants are another
option for keeping snow out from around the waist. Choose
gloves or mittens made of waterproof but breathable fabrics.
Thermal socks will help keep your feet toasty.
Headgear
Alpine skiers and snowboarders must wear a helmet to protect
the head. It will also provide warmth. Nordic skiers and snow-
shoers should wear a hat for warmth and carry a fleece neck
gaiter or face mask to protect the face when it is really cold.
Eye Protection
Snowboarders and Alpine skiers should wear goggles to protect
the eyes from the wind and from harmful solar radiation, and to
keep ice pellets or snow from irritating the eyes. When choosing
eyewear, select goggles that allow an appropriate range of
peripheral vision. Look for wide-angle frames or sport shields.
For Nordic skiers and snowshoers, sunglasses or double-lens
goggles are a good choice because they do not fog up easily.
Cotton clothing
and blue jeans are
not recommended
because they
will not keep you
warm when they
get wet.
Use sunblock
and lip balm to
prevent sunburn
and chapping.
Wearing a snow sports helmet not only provides
protection but also warmth. Your helmet should
be snug but not tight. If you can move the helmet
back and forth while wearing it, then it’s too loose
and needs to be resized using the adjustable
straps and sizing pads. Follow the manufacturer’s
instructions for fitting a helmet, or get help from a
ski or snowboard instructor. Specialty shops also
may be a good resource. Remember, if you have
a serious fall while skiing or snowboarding, the
helmet you are wearing should be replaced.


24 SNOW SPORTS
Getting Ready to Go.
Getting Fit
To enjoy snow sports, you must be in good physical condition.
You need strength, endurance, and flexibility—strength for the
muscular power needed; endurance for the stamina to enjoy a
full day of skiing, snowshoeing, or riding; and flexibility for a
complete range of movement and to prevent injury.
Warming Up
A good warm-up can mean the difference between a great expe-
rience on the snow and a trip to the emergency room with a torn
muscle or something more serious. Be sure to take the time to
prepare your body for the sport.
Start your warm-up with some activity to get your muscles
ready, such as jogging briefly. Then perform these stretches,
holding each one a minimum of 30 seconds up to two minutes.
Activities such as
running, soccer,
biking, and hiking
are great ways to
build strength and
endurance and
to keep in shape
year-round.
Quadriceps (“quad”) stretch. Stand next
to a wall in case you need support. Pull one
foot up behind yourself until you can feel
tightness in the quad muscle. Repeat with
the other leg.
Lower back stretch. Sitting on the ground,
cross one leg over the other knee and place
that foot flat on the ground. Rotate the
torso toward the bent leg. Repeat with
the other leg.
Calf stretch. Use a wall or something solid to
lean into, one leg forward and one leg back.
Keep the back leg straight and push into
the wall until you can feel the calf stretch.
Repeat, reversing the front and back legs.
Hamstring stretch. While standing, bend
from the waist with your legs straight. Stretch
your hands toward the ground until you feel
the back of your legs stretching. Work toward
placing your palms flat on the ground.


SNOW SPORTS 25
.Getting Ready to Go
Lifts
Alpine snow sport enthusiasts need to learn to use ski lifts to
get to the top of a hill. Ski lifts include surface lifts such as rope
and handle tows, T-bars, and platter lifts. Surface lifts are used
on short, gentle slopes that beginners use when they are learn-
ing basic skills. Chairlifts and enclosed gondolas, or trams, are
common at snow resorts. When you use surface lifts and aerial
chairlifts you may keep your skis on or your front foot attached
to your snowboard. When riding in an enclosed gondola, how-
ever, you will need to remove your skis or snowboard.
Rope and Handle Tows
To use a rope tow, reach out in front of you to grab the rope or
handle. If you are a snowboarder and your back is facing the
rope tow, reach over the tip of your board to grab the rope. If
you are using a handle tow, you might want to grab the cable
between the handles to start so that you do not get pulled off
your feet initially. Let the rope or cable run through your hands
briefly and then grasp it more tightly. Once you start moving,
grip the rope firmly so it does not slide through your hands.
At the top, be prepared to move away from the tow to clear
the unloading area.
T-Bar Lifts
A T-bar lift is a rotating lift that is designed to handle two people.
To grab the bar, flex your knees slightly but do not try to sit down
or lean back. Stay erect. When you reach the top, the second
person off should gently release the T-bar. Quickly move away
from the unloading area.
Rope tow
If you are on
a snowboard,
place your rear
foot on your
board between
the bindings.


26 SNOW SPORTS
Getting Ready to Go.
Platter Lifts
Platter lifts (also called Poma lifts) are similar to T-bar lifts, but
they have a disk that can be grabbed with the hands or placed
between the legs. When you use your hands, you get more con-
trol and shock absorption—a real advantage if you are a begin-
ning skier. To grab the platter with your hands, bend your elbows
fully and lean back a little so that you can absorb the shock
when the cable finishes running out and starts to pull you up
the hill. If your arms get tired, try sticking the platter under
your armpit. When you reach the top, release the platter gently
and quickly move away from the unloading area.
Chairlifts
To take a chairlift, read and listen to instructions, move to the
marked loading line, and watch for the chair to come up behind
you. Hold ski poles in your inside hand and look over your
outside shoulder. Once in the chair, distribute your weight
evenly and lower the safety bar. Do not bounce or swing the
chair. To exit, move to the edge of the chair and get your
weight forward on the chair. Lift the bar, position your weight
over both feet, and stand up.
If you are on a snowboard, immediately put your free foot
on the stomp pad between the bindings. Do not let your rear
foot drag in the snow. Once off the lift, both skiers and snow-
boarders should focus on balancing and getting to the bottom
of the ramp under control. Then, move away from the unload-
ing traffic as quickly as possible.
Riding a chairlift


SNOW SPORTS 27
.Getting Ready to Go
No two slopes or
trails are exactly
the same, even
though they might
have the same
difficulty rating.
Ask an area
ski patroller if
you have any
questions about
which trail is
right for you.
Remember that
areas or slopes
marked “closed”
are marked that
way for a reason.
Never ski or ride
in these areas.
Trail Marking
Another thing snow sport enthusiasts need to become familiar
with is the international trail-marking system. This system has
been designed to help users identify the trails best suited to their
level of ability as well as hazards within a ski area. The signs are
there for everyone’s safety and should always be followed.
Each ski area determines whether a trail is a green circle
(beginner), blue square (intermediate), black diamond (advanced),
or double black diamond (very advanced) slope. Nordic and
snowshoe trails often use this system as well. Terrain parks use
an “orange pill” to identify terrain features. There may or may
not be ratings to indicate difficulty.
International trail markings indicate ski-trail difficulty.
BEGINNER (GREEN CIRCLE) INTERMEDIATE (BLUE SQUARE)
ADVANCED (BLACK DIAMOND)
VERY ADVANCED
(DOUBLE BLACK DIAMOND)
TERRAIN PARK
(ORANGE PILL) TRAIL CLOSED CAUTION


Getting Ready to Go.
Sticking to trails that are appropriate for your
level of skill will help keep the slopes safe and
enjoyable for all users.
Skiing, Snowshoeing, and Riding Etiquette
Skiing, snowshoeing, and snowboarding are popular sports, so
recreation areas and trails can become crowded, especially after
a fresh snowfall. To ensure that everyone out on the slopes and
trails has an enjoyable and safe experience, it is important to
follow certain rules.
1. Stay on designated trails. Trails are laid out for the safety
and convenience of all users. Leaving the trail might cause
you to encounter unknown hazards and become lost. If you
are a Nordic skier or snowshoer and the trail is one-way, be
sure to travel in the proper direction. If a trail has two sets of
tracks, use the set of tracks on the right side.
2. Take care when passing. If you are attempting to pass a
slower downhill skier or snowboarder, it is your responsibility
to see that you do not collide with the person. Snowboarders
or skiers who are below you always have the right-of-way.
Snowshoers should also yield the right-of-way to skiers,
because they can more easily step aside than a skier. Yield
when passing, and when on narrow trails, call out “left” or
“right” to indicate on which side you will pass. If you are
cross-country skiing or snowshoeing, pass slower skiers and
snowshoers on the flat. Call “track!” before you pass so they
can yield by stepping to the right out of the track.
3. Never obstruct other skiers, snowshoers, or riders. Do
not stop in the middle of the trail or run. If you need to rest
or regroup, make sure you are out of way of others. Do
not descend a hill until others are out of your path.
Cross-country
skiers work hard
to establish tracks
that other cross-
country skiers can
use. As a courtesy,
snowshoers
should avoid
those established
tracks, walking
alongside them to
make their own
trail instead.


SNOW SPORTS 29
.Getting Ready to Go
Snow Conditions
Snow conditions vary from outing to outing. They may
even change during an outing, for example, if the tem-
perature rises and the snow starts to melt. Because the
condition of the snow can affect your ability to maintain
control, it pays to become familiar with various snow
conditions and understand how your equipment is likely
to respond. Snow conditions you might encounter
include the following:
Powder is soft, freshly fallen snow.
Crust is powder that has an icy, crustlike surface.
Crust often forms when the sun melts the top layer
of snow and then the temperature drops, refreezing
the melted layer.
Slush is snow that has started to melt and has a high
water content.
Ice is snow that has melted and refrozen a number of
times and has become compacted, hard, and slippery.
To accommodate different types of snow, you can
make adjustments to the way you ski, snowshoe, or
ride. For example, when skiing or riding powder, be
sure to keep your weight evenly balanced to keep from
sinking. Snowshoers will want to use the kick-step in
powder. You may find that crust and slush make turns
more difficult to execute and control. Ice is the most
difficult type of snow to contend with because of its
excessive slipperiness. Your instructor can give you
specific tips for coping with various snow conditions.
4. Check in and out at ski centers. Ski area personnel often
spend time searching for skiers, snowshoers, or boarders
who failed to sign out upon returning.
5. Use caution in crowded areas. Slow down and be prepared
to stop when you enter a heavily populated area.


30 SNOW SPORTS
Getting Ready to Go.
Finding Your Way With a Map and Compass
Always carry a topographic map of the area and a compass, and know
how to use them. Topographic maps use contour lines to represent the
three-dimensional shape of the terrain. A compass is a navigational tool
that consists of a magnetized needle balanced inside a circular, rotating
housing mounted atop a baseplate. The plate is etched with a direction-of-
travel arrow. The floor of the compass housing is engraved with an orient-
ing arrow and, parallel with it, several north-south orienting lines.
A topographic map and compass used together serve as a much
more powerful aid than either a map or compass used alone. Suppose
you want to reach a lake by the most direct route. Place the long edge
of your compass baseplate on a real or imaginary line connecting the
map points representing your present location and that of the lake. Turn
the compass housing until the orienting lines in the compass housing
parallel any true-north lines on the map.
Hold the compass at waist level with the direction-of-travel arrow on
the baseplate pointing away from you. Without changing the compass
setting, turn your body until the compass needle aligns itself with the
orienting arrow (for declination-adjusted compasses) or the red tip of the
needle points to the declination dot (for declination-marked compasses).
When that happens, the direction-of-travel arrow will be aimed at the lake.
This is known as taking a bearing for the route to your destination.
Next, look up along the direction of travel. If you can see the lake,
you need make no further use of the compass. If the lake is out of sight,
though, locate an intermediate landmark toward
which the direction-of-travel arrow is pointing—a
tree, boulder, or other feature—and walk toward
it. Take another bearing, identify the next land-
mark in line with the direction-of-travel arrow, and
go to it. Continue until you reach your destination.
For further details on map and compass use,
including how to adjust a compass for declination,
see the Scouts BSA handbooks and the Fieldbook.


SNOW SPORTS 31
.Getting Ready to Go
Touring and Backcountry Considerations
Touring and backcountry travel require advance planning. Some
basic tips are covered here. You will find more information in
the Scouts BSA handbooks and the Fieldbook. Carry a flashlight
or headlamp and an emergency blanket—in case you are not
able to get back before nightfall. Other items your group should
take include a multitool or Swiss army knife, waterproof
matches, some kind of tinder for fires, a first-aid kit, and, if
skiing, extra waxes, a ski scraper, and a cork. If you are taking
a longer trip, take an emergency repair kit.
For a one-day trip, plan to make three food stops: at
midmorning, noon, and midafternoon. High-energy foods such
as sandwiches, chocolate, and oranges are excellent choices.
Energy bars or granola bars are great in-between-meal snacks.
Bring plenty of fluids, both sports drinks and water.
Your group should leave a trail plan with some responsible
person. Give that person the names and addresses of all skiers,
where you are going, and when you expect to be back.
Keep spare
mittens, gloves,
and socks in
your pack.
A GPS device, radio, and a mobile phone can be very
helpful if you get lost. Remember, however, that mobile
phones do not always work in remote wilderness
locations. Always carry a map and compass as well.





SNOW SPORTS 33
Downhill Skiing
Most successful downhill skiers start with lessons from a
certified ski teacher. Every ski resort offers lessons, and most
of the instructors at these resorts are members of the Professional
Ski Instructors of America (PSIA), a national organization for
ski teachers.
A skier is never too good for ski lessons. Serious skiers
who have mastered the basics continue to practice to improve
skills such as balance, edging, pressure control, and turning.
The more you know about skiing, the more you will be
challenged to improve.
Major Ski Organizations
in the United States
The Professional Ski Instructors of America is a national
organization for ski instructors. Its American Teaching
System has been developed to promote safety, fun,
and learning. Another important ski organization is U.S.
Ski & Snowboard, the national governing body for
Olympic skiing and snowboarding. U.S. Ski &
Snowboard provides a pathway for aspiring young
athletes to develop their skills through competitions
and programs that provide them with opportunities
to achieve athletic success. The National Ski Patrol is a
voluntary organization that promotes safety in snow
sports and trains and certifies volunteer ski patrollers.
.Downhill Skiing
Helmets Rule!
Scouts participat-
ing in downhill
skiing activities
are required to
wear a helmet
for protection.


34 SNOW SPORTS
Downhill Skiing.
Alpine Skiing Equipment
Before you hit the slopes, you will need to become familiar
with Alpine ski equipment. Manufacturers offer a wide range of
equipment to meet the needs of skiers ranging from beginners
to Olympic athletes. You can rent equipment by the day or
week, lease it for an entire season, buy used equipment at a
local shop or ski swap, or buy new equipment.
Skis
Most skis are made with either a wood or foam center, or core.
Metal and fiberglass are layered or wrapped around the core. The
tops of skis are usually sealed with plastic or fiberglass.
The bottom, or base, of a ski is made of a special plastic that must
be frequently waxed to help the skis glide smoothly. The metal
edges must be kept sharp to help the ski grip on hard snow.
Alpine skis come in many shapes and are made from
a variety of materials. The different shapes and materials
used affect the way a ski turns. The shape of a ski is
referred to as the sidecut. Since the 1990s, manufacturers
have been making skis that are wider at the tip (front end)
and tail (back end) than in the waist (middle), giving
them an hourglass shape. The shape determines the arc,
or radius, of the turn the ski will make as it is tipped on
edge and pressed into the snow during a turn. Skis with a
deep sidecut (a pronounced hourglass shape) allow for
sharper turns.
Different types of skis are available for different
purposes. Sport or recreational models are generally
softer flexing and have a moderate sidecut. They are a
good choice for beginners, because they allow skiers
to maintain control and turn easily at slower speeds.
Performance or advanced skis may vary in stiffness
and sidecut, depending on the type of skiing that an
advanced skier prefers. For example, racing skis have
a deep sidecut for tight slalom turns.
Types of Alpine Skis
There are five basic types of Alpine skis.
Sport models are generally soft-flexing and have a
moderate side cut. They are designed to make turning easier at
slower speeds for beginner and intermediate skiers.
Carving skis generally have a narrow waist and a wide tip
and tail, which helps bend the ski into a tight arc as it is tipped.
TOP
TIP
SHOVEL
WIDTH EDGE
WAIST WIDTH
OVERALL LENGTH
SIDECUT RADIUS
TAIL
BASE
Alpine skis


SNOW SPORTS 35
.Downhill Skiing
All-mountain skis come in a variety of flexes and side cuts.
They range from very wide skis with little side cut and a soft flex
that are designed to float in the powder, to very straight, narrow
skis with little side cut that are designed to ski in the bumps.
Racing skis are designed for high speeds and hard snow.
They generally have a stiff flex that can make turning more
difficult, but that makes the ski more stable at higher speeds.
Racing skis are specialized for turning around gates, and the
side cut determines how wide a turn the skis can make.
Twin-tip skis are turned up at the tip and the tail and are
designed for performing on jumps, rails, and half-pipes. They
can be skied all over the mountain, but their design makes
many conditions outside the terrain park more challenging.
Boots
Most boots for downhill skiing consist of a plastic outer shell
for support and an inner shell of material designed to mold
to the foot for comfort and control. Boots come in a variety
of widths, and they have buckles on the outer shell that allow
a skier to adjust the amount of tension. Find a pair of boots
that fits tightly enough to prevent any heel lift or sideways
movement of your foot but not so tightly that it cuts off
your circulation.
For most people, a properly fitted ski boot will be at least
a full size smaller than their shoe size. Boots need to fit snugly,
because any sliding of the foot inside the boot will reduce your
ability to control your skis and may cause blisters as well.
Do not try to
make a boot fit
by wearing more
than one pair
of socks.
DIN Standards
The amount of force required to release a ski boot from a ski binding (See
bindings section on page 36) is called the DIN setting and should be
adjusted by a certified binding technician when you rent or buy a pair of
Alpine skis. To make the correct adjustment, the technician takes into con-
sideration your height, weight, and ability, and the length of your boot. DIN
is an abbreviation for Deutsche Industrie Normen, an organization that
sets internationally recognized industrial and other standards. In Alpine
skiing, adherence to DIN standards has greatly reduced the chances of skis
accidentally releasing from bindings and has been an important step in
increasing skier safety.


36 SNOW SPORTS
Downhill Skiing.
Carrying Skis
The safest, easiest way to carry skis is to fasten them
together. Carrying skis together also causes less wear
and tear on them—nicked or dented edges have a
negative effect on performance.
Bindings
Ski bindings attach your boots to your skis. They also play a
key safety role because they release your boots from your skis
when you fall, which greatly decreases the chance of injury.
All bindings are designed to make the skier as safe as possible
when skiing. All skiers should understand how their equipment
operates; however, bindings should be adjusted only by a
certified binding technician.
Poles
Ski poles are hollow shafts made of either alumi-
num or graphite with rubber or plastic hand grips
at the top. Baskets, flat disks located just above
the end tips of the ski pole, prevent the pole from
penetrating too deeply into the snow. Ski poles
assist you in keeping your balance as you ski.
You also use them to help you get up after a fall.
The most important aspect of the pole is the
length. To check for proper length, stand erect
and jab a pole into the snow next to you. If you
are inside, tip the pole upside-down and grab
the pole underneath the basket. If the pole is the
right length, your forearm should be parallel to
the ground.
Ski poles
SHAFT BASKET TIP
HAND GRIP


SNOW SPORTS 37
.Downhill Skiing
Most binding systems have some method of keeping the
bottom of the skis—the running surface—together for carrying.
When you are outside, you can carry the skis over one shoul-
der, with the poles in the opposite hand for balance. Another
method is to place your poles over the other shoulder and
under the skis for support. Do not carry your skis this way
when you are indoors, because it can be dangerous when you
turn. For long-distance carrying, put the pole straps over the
skis on each end and slip the baskets under the opposite strap.
This makes the poles a sort of handle for the skis.
Alpine Skiing Skills
If you have never skied before, getting started might be a little
intimidating. Don’t worry. Your nervousness will soon be
replaced by excitement.
All skiers, especially beginners, will fall periodically. When you do, try to
fall to one side of your skis. Position yourself perpendicular to the fall line,
so you will not slide down the slope. Move your hips over your feet and
use your poles to push yourself up from the snow.
1 2
3 4


38 SNOW SPORTS
Downhill Skiing.
Most teaching progressions include flatland movements,
straight runs, gliding wedges, wedge turns, christies, wedge-
christies, skidded parallel turns, and carved parallel turns. A
PSIA instructor’s teaching progression will be determined by
the instructor’s ski school and will vary depending on each
student’s needs.
Flatland Movements
The first step in learning to ski is getting used to walking
and moving with your skis on, which is sometimes more chal-
lenging than it looks. To practice balancing on skis, an instructor
may have you hop in place, rock back and forth, and step from
foot to foot. Pushing yourself around the beginning area will help
you become comfortable on skis. The instructor might take you
on a tour on skis or have you walk in figure eights on skis. All of
these exercises are designed to help you work on your balance
and get you used to some of the movements you need to learn to
become a good skier.
If you try to walk straight up
even a small grade, your skis prob-
ably will slide backward. One way
to move up or down a slope is to
imagine the line a ball would take
if it rolled down the hill. This line
is called the fall line. Turn side-
ways and put your skis exactly
across this line. You will find that
digging in the uphill edge of your
ski into the snow lets you take
small steps up and down the hill.
This is called sidestepping.
CLIMBING
Your first real challenge might not be skiing downhill, but
climbing uphill.
Sidestepping is one way to move up and down a hill. Turn
your skis sideways across the fall line, then take small steps,
digging the uphill edges of your skis into the snow.
Another climbing technique, the herringbone, is more diffi-
cult than sidestepping, but it can be faster and less tiring. Face
directly uphill toward the fall line, and point the tips of both skis
outward while keeping the tails together. With the inside edges
of both skis digging into the snow, you can duck-walk up the hill.


SNOW SPORTS 39
.Downhill Skiing
Skiing Downhill
For your first straight downhill run on skis, you should be on
a slope that is very gradual, with either a long flat slope or a
slight uphill slope at the end. This slope will enable you to
coast to a gradual stop.
For a straight run, it is best to stand in a balanced, athletic
stance—feet apart, legs slightly flexed, head up, and hands placed
comfortably where you can see them in front of you. Get set,
take a breath, and slide!
Your instructor probably will spend some time at this point
getting you used to sliding downhill. You should try a variety of
straight runs to challenge your balance. These include straight
runs while stepping foot to foot, hopping, rocking back and
forth—and even skiing on one foot. In a little while these
actions will feel very natural.
Wedges
Once you are comfortable in a straight run, you are ready to
learn to change direction. This will really challenge your balance,
and depending on the terrain at the area you are skiing, your
instructor may introduce something called a wedge.
In the wedge position, you move the skis into a narrow
V shape with the tips close together and the tails slightly apart.
This stance gives you a wider base of support for balance and
can assist you in turning your feet where you want to go.
Practice this stance on flat terrain while you are standing still.
You can practice brushing your skis into a wedge, and hop-
ping them into a wedge. Next, try brushing into a wedge while
you are gliding from a straight run. As you brush into the wedge,
notice that the bigger you make the wedge, the slower you go.
This is one way to control your speed, but as you develop your
turning skills, you will see that the shape of your turn is the
best way to control speed, and if your wedge gets too big, it
makes turning more difficult.
WEDGE TURNS
Once you can control your speed and stop on your own, your
instructor will show you how to change direction from a gliding
wedge. Think of your first turns as long, gradual changes in
direction, like doing a straight run with a little bend in it.
The easiest way
to think of the
fall line is to
imagine the line
a ball would
take if it rolled
down the hill.


40 SNOW SPORTS
Downhill Skiing.
Start the turn by simply looking in
the direction you want to go. If you
want to go to the right, look to the
right and gradually take some of your
weight off of your right foot. As your
balance shifts to your left foot, you can
gradually point both feet to the right.
Once you can make a controlled
turn to both the left and the right, try
increasing your speed and linking turns
together using a very small wedge.
The first linked turns you try won’t
be long and gradual like single turns;
instead, you will make a slight direc-
tion change and immediately begin
looking toward the turn in the other
direction, shifting balance and turning
your feet just like you did before. As
you become comfortable controlling
your turns, you can use a smaller
wedge, allowing the shape of your turn to control your speed.
WEDGE CHRISTY TURNS
The next turn to master is the wedge christy, also called a basic
christy. This is a turn that begins like a wedge turn, but finishes
with the skis matching, or becoming parallel. Wedge christies
almost come naturally, because as you shift your balance to the
outside ski and guide both feet in the direction of the turn, the
inside ski becomes so light that it simply matches the direction
of the outside ski.
TRAVERSE AND SIDESLIP
Traversing and sideslipping are two important skills for getting
around the mountain. A traverse is simply a straight run across
the hill. Traversing can be difficult because, unlike the wedge
in which you balance on the inside of both feet, in a traverse,
you balance on the inside of the downhill ski and the outside
of the uphill ski. A sideslip is similar to the traverse, except
that instead of sliding across the hill, you face across the hill
but slip sideways down the hill.
Wedge position
Every christy
turn is a blend of
wedge turning,
sideslipping, and
traversing.


SNOW SPORTS 41
.Downhill Skiing
ADVANCED TURNS
Soon you will be ready for a skidded parallel turn, an easy
transition from the wedge christy. You will learn how to use
your ski poles and how to flex and extend your legs through-
out your turns.
As you leave the beginning area behind and find yourself
skiing intermediate runs, you will realize that becoming a better
skier is fun. If you stick with it and practice, you will go on to
carved turns. It takes time before a skier can carve most turns.
You, your friends, and your instructor can explore more of the
mountain while you hone your skills.
You also can work on moguls. These are bumps in the
snow caused by skiers turning in one spot. Control in the
moguls—absorbing the bump with your legs and keeping
your skis on the snow—takes practice.
LONG, MEDIUM, AND SHORT TURNS
The first turns you learned to make probably were in the medium
size range, with a turn radius of about 10 meters. Medium turns
are useful for most types of skiing and work well to control
speed on most beginner and intermediate slopes.
Longer turns are for speed. If you are comfortable on a slope,
open up the turn shape to increase your speed. Short turns are
the most difficult because all the elements of medium and long
turns must be done quickly. Learning the timing of short turns
takes practice, but it is necessary to ski steep terrain and bumps.
HOCKEY STOPS
Once you have learned the short turn, try the hockey stop, or
emergency stop. You have probably seen ice skaters quickly
pivot their skates sideways, spraying ice and coming to an
immediate stop. To do this on skis, simply do a very short,
quick turn. Start a hockey stop by traversing across a hill,
gradually pointing downhill until you begin to gain speed.
Then quickly point both feet uphill and tip your feet, knees,
and legs into the hill to set the edges.
Your instructor might have suggestions to make turns
easier, such as turning over the top of small rolls in the
terrain or increasing your speed a bit to make the skis
glide easier.





SNOW SPORTS 43
Cross-country skiing is one of the most aerobically
demanding sports you can participate in. It requires
using both arms and legs to move along the trail. It is a
demanding but exhilarating full-body workout.
Cross-country skiing can be done on a variety of
terrain. XC skiers may choose to ski on groomed and
tracked trails at ski resorts, in parks or fields without
trails, or in the challenging backcountry. Skiing without
groomed trails is called ski touring and requires more
skill than skiing on groomed trails at a resort. In the
backcountry, skiers often have to break trail, and the
terrain is usually more challenging and hilly. Advanced
backcountry skiers may use special backcountry or
telemark ski equipment to ski more challenging terrain
without trails.
Ski mountaineering is the most demanding type of
skiing. Ski mountaineers climb and ski in mountainous
areas and need to be skilled mountaineers as well as
experienced skiers. Ski mountaineering can be
hazardous because of the rugged terrain and the
possibility of avalanches.
Cross-Country Skiing
Cross-country (XC), also called Nordic skiing, is a versatile and
rewarding snow sport that can be enjoyed by novices and
experts skiers alike. It offers opportunities to ski flat, groomed
trails or to ski without trails in backcountry hills. Cross-country
skiing is divided into three major styles:
• Classic, or diagonal-stride, skiing
• Skating, or freestyle skiing
• Telemark, or downhill Nordic, skiing
.Cross-Country Skiing


44 SNOW SPORTS
Cross-Country Skiing.
Nordic Equipment
Each Nordic skiing style uses its own specialized equipment,
but what all the styles have in common is that skiers use free-
heel bindings and at least somewhat flexible boots.
Classic Cross-Country Equipment
Traditional diagonal-stride skiing on groomed trails, in which
the skis remain parallel to each other, is called classic skiing to
distinguish it from skate skiing, a style that employs a
technique similar to ice skating. (See the discussion of skating
later in this chapter.) Classic gear is lightweight, easy to use,
and suited to skiers of almost any ability.
CLASSIC SKIS
Classic skis are narrow, usually less than 50 millimeters wide,
and usually taller than the skier. Modern ski length is based on
width of ski, weight of skier, and type of skiing. Touring and
backcountry skis are sturdier, wider, shorter and may have
metal edges. Waxless patterns on the base allow the ski to slide
forward or climb moderate hills without slipping backward.
Some classic skis have high-performance, waxable bases.
Classic and Skating Skis
Nordic skis come in two basic categories: skating and classic. Neither type
has metal edges and both types are very thin and light. Skate skis have a
lower profile tip than classic skis and are typically 15 to 20 centimeters
shorter than classic skis.
Classic skis Skating skis


SNOW SPORTS 45
CLASSIC BOOTS AND BINDINGS
Classic boots usually are lightweight,
flexible, and comfortable. Classic bindings
are as narrow as, or narrower than, the
width of the ski so that the edge of the
binding will not catch on the side of
the groomed ski track. Most classic boots
use system bindings of the NNN or
Salomon type, which have replaced the
traditional three-pin binding.
CLASSIC POLES
Classic poles often are made of lightweight fiberglass or
aluminum. The pole baskets are behind the tip so that
they do not catch in the snow. The poles should reach
to the top of a skier’s armpit.
Skating Cross-Country Equipment
Similar to classic cross-country gear, skating equipment is
lightweight but has been redesigned for the special needs of
skating, a style of skiing that is faster and demands more
energy than classic Nordic skiing.
Keeping Your Gear in
Good Repair
If something goes wrong with your skis miles from civilization, you could
be in for a long, wearisome trudge home. Avoid this situation by carrying
an emergency repair kit containing a pair of pliers, a small roll of duct tape,
a screwdriver that will fit the screws on your bindings, cord or wire, and
any other repair items your instructor might suggest.
Taking good care of your skis while you are out on the trails and when
you store them can also decrease the chances that they will need repairs.
While skiing, pay attention to the surfaces over which you ski. Beware of
rocks and sticks poking through the snow; they can gouge the bases of
your skis and cause them to become sluggish. Avoid ditches, drops, and
other depressions that could excessively bend your skis. When you get
home, let your gear dry at room temperature. Recondition ski boots as
you would any outdoor footwear.
.Cross-Country Skiing
Classic ski boots, which attach
to the binding only at the toe.


46 SNOW SPORTS
Cross-Country Skiing.
SKATING SKIS
Skating skis look like classic skis but with a lower profile
tip and are usually 10 to 20 centimeters shorter and flexed
for greater gliding speed. They always have a smooth,
waxable base.
SKATING BOOTS AND BINDINGS
Skating boots are lightweight and comfortable.
The main features of the skating boots are a
high plastic cuff, which adds support and sta-
bility to the boot, and a stiff sole for greater
push-off. Skating bindings are almost identical
to classic bindings, but they sometimes have
a slightly stiffer flex.
SKATING POLES
Skating poles look like classic poles, only longer. Skating poles
should reach to just above the skier’s upper lip.
Telemark Equipment
Telemark skiing is an advanced form of downhill cross-
country skiing and makes use of a number of Alpine skiing
techniques. In many ways, telemark equipment resembles
Alpine equipment.
Unlike Alpine ski poles that are the same for both hands, skating
poles are designed for the right and left hand.
Skating boots are designed for speed.


SNOW SPORTS 47
.Cross-Country Skiing
TELEMARK SKIS
Telemark skis have a shape similar to Alpine skis. But because
XC skis have a free-heel binding system, the skier cannot
generate as much forward pressure as an Alpine skier, so
telemark skis typically have a softer, more even flex. Telemark
skis are shorter than classic cross-country skis. They may be
waxable or waxless.
TELEMARK BOOTS AND BINDINGS
Traditional telemark boots have
soles much like hiking or
climbing boots but have squared
toes and three small holes to
fit in the standard three-pin
binding. Modern telemark boots
look very much like Alpine
boots with a full plastic shell
and three or four buckles.
Modern telemark bindings have
a cable and heel piece that
greatly improves performance.
Although the telemark bindings
do not hold the heel down as
an Alpine binding does, they are
lifted off the ski like an XC binding, which helps reduce the
possibility that the binding will come in contact with the packed
snow surface and hinder performance.
TELEMARK POLES
Telemark poles are very similar to Alpine poles. Many telemark
skiers use poles that can adjust in height and can be converted
into avalanche probe poles.
Let’s Go Skinning
For added traction, cross-country and telemark skiers
faced with a challenging climb can attach climbing skins
to their skis. These narrow, lightweight strips of mohair
or nylon provide maximum traction on kicks and give
the skier a bit of forward glide. They can easily be
removed, rolled up, and tucked away before a descent.
The cable and heel piece of the telemark bindings
help improve the skier’s performance.


48 SNOW SPORTS
Cross-Country Skiing.
Waxless and Waxable Cross-Country Skis
Cross-country skis come in waxless and waxable versions. Skiers choose
waxless or waxable versions depending on their skill, experience, and
personal preference. The base of a waxless ski has a molded texture on
the middle third of it that resembles overlapping fish scales, diamonds,
or some other pattern. The pattern provides traction on the snow during
the kick or push-off but lifts slightly during the glide to allow the skier to
move smoothly forward. Waxless skis are suitable for variable tempera-
tures and snow conditions and are an excellent choice for beginners or
anyone who does not want to deal with waxes.
Some skiers find waxless skis to be noisy on downhill runs and a
bit slow, so they choose waxable skis. The base of a waxable ski has no
molded pattern. Instead a skier applies a thin layer of special wax to the
middle third of the base. As the skier’s weight presses the ski down,
microscopic crystals of snow dig into the wax and hold the ski steady.
As the skier’s weight shifts to the other ski, the waxed portion of the base
rises a little above the snow, allowing the front and back of the ski to glide.
Waxable skis can be swifter and quieter than waxless models, but
using wax effectively takes experience and practice. Different snow condi-
tions require different waxes for maximum efficiency, and you will need
to know the approximate temperature of the snow in order to choose the
right wax. Waxes can be rubbed directly onto the base and then smoothed
with a block of cork.


SNOW SPORTS 49
.Cross-Country Skiing
Nordic Skiing Skills
Every move in Nordic skiing starts with
the basic stance. Your weight is centered
over your entire foot. Your ankles and
knees are bent slightly, shoulders
rounded, arms relaxed, and head up.
Skiing in Flat Areas
DIAGONAL STRIDE
The diagonal stride is the classic cross-
country movement. Arm and leg move-
ments complement each other. As one
leg moves forward, the opposite arm
moves forward, much like walking
or running. To ski efficiently, move
forward with each stride so that you
are gliding on one foot and kicking or
pushing off on the other foot. Use your
poles for added power. Good skiing is
relaxed and rhythmic. Use the diagonal
stride for slower speeds on flat trails
and slight uphill slopes.
DOUBLE-POLING
Double-poling is a good change of pace
from diagonal striding. It often is used
on a slightly downhill slope or on fast
tracks. Most of the double-poling power
is supplied by your stomach muscles,
rather than the arms, so be sure to lean
forward on the poles and bend at the
waist—as if you were doing a stomach
crunch—when double-poling. The kick
is timed when both arms are going
forward so that you are balanced and
gliding on one foot.
Diagonal stride
Double-poling


50 SNOW SPORTS
Cross-Country Skiing.
Ski Skating
Ski skating is an advanced technique in which the skier
employs a skating motion that results in greater forward
momentum. There are a number of different ways to
skate. The different skate styles are like gears on a
bicycle. Some gears are best at slow speeds or up hills.
Others are better suited to higher speeds. The differ-
ence is subtle and depends mainly on the timing of
the poling and skate push-off. The different “gears”
can take years to master.
The most basic method is
called V1 skating. The V1 is used
on flat to slightly uphill terrain (first
gear). Skiers move from ski to ski in
a skating motion. Notice the asym-
metric placement of the hands at
the top of the forward swing in the
V1. Here the skier steps forward
with the pole plant. The pole push-
off is only on one side of the skate.
It is good form to transition smoothly
between right- and left-sided
V1 skates.
The V2 skate is better suited to
flats and slight downhill sections at
higher speeds (second gear). Here
the skier steps forward from the
pole/skate push-off. Poling occurs
with each skate push-off in the V2.
The V2 alternate has the same tim-
ing as the V2, but poling is on one
side only (third gear). To make skat-
ing easier, focus on simply moving
from one ski to the other. Try to avoid
pushing off too hard. If your body is
up and forward over a gliding ski,
you will go fast with little effort.
V1 skating
V2 skating


SNOW SPORTS 51
.Cross-Country Skiing
Going Uphill and Downhill
TRAVERSE
A traverse is skiing uphill or downhill at an angle to the slope.
For an uphill traverse, ski with an uphill diagonal stride across
the slope. This creates a Z pattern in the snow. As the slope
increases, you will have to edge the skis into the snow more to
prevent sliding and to decrease the angle up the hill.
SIDESTEPPING
The sidestep can be used to climb or
descend most hills. It’s a slow way to
climb, but it is easy to learn. Sidestepping
is like going upstairs sideways, keeping
your skis parallel and perpendicular to the
fall line (the path a ball would take if
rolling down the hill). Use your poles for
stability.
HERRINGBONE
The herringbone is another way to climb
hills if they are not too steep. It will take
much practice. Work on it until you can
move uphill without putting the tail (end)
of one ski across the other as you climb.
Use your poles behind the skis to keep
from slipping downhill.
Traversing Sidestepping
Herringbone


52 SNOW SPORTS
Cross-Country Skiing.
The arms and legs move opposite of each other as they do
in the diagonal stride. However, the skis are angled out to form
a V shape. There is very little glide, and in general, the steeper
the hill, the wider the V.
STRAIGHT DOWNHILL RUNNING
To ski straight downhill, first clear the ski bottoms of snow by
shuffling. Stand with your knees slightly bent and your skis
parallel. Either step forward or push off with your poles to
start, then lift the poles and hold them to the side. Keep your
weight slightly forward and use the knees and ankles as shock
absorbers for bumps. Keeping one foot slightly ahead of the
other is a good way to increase your stability.
Straight downhill running


SNOW SPORTS 53
.Cross-Country Skiing
Controlling Your Speed and Stopping
POLE DRAG
Dragging the poles helps control speed on steep hills or on fast
snow and ice. For dragging to the side, take your hands out of
the pole straps. Hold the poles together and put downward
pressure on the shafts and pull up on the handgrips. The bas-
kets dragging in the snow will slow you.
SNOWPLOW
The snowplow is a way to control speed and to stop on flatter
slopes. Put your skis in the shape of a wedge (like a V) with
the tips close together and the tails apart. Remember the basic
stance—pressure over the whole foot, ankles and knees bent,
shoulders rounded, arms relaxed, and head up.
To slow or stop yourself with a wedge, focus on using
your ankles and feet, rolling the foot onto the big toe (rather
than using your knees) to control the amount of edging you
want. As the hill gets steeper, use a wider wedge by steering
the tails farther apart while keeping the tips close together.
Pole dragging Snowplow


54 SNOW SPORTS
Cross-Country Skiing.
Turns
SNOWPLOW TURN
Influence the direction and speed of your descents with snow-
plow turns. Position the skis in the shape of a V—the snow-
plow—and lean on the skis’ inside edges. More pressure on the
right ski will cause you to turn left; pressure on left will take
you to the right.
STEP TURN
The step turn is an easy way to turn while moving. Try it first
on flat ground or on a gentle slope. Go slowly at first. Simply
lift the tip of the ski on the side you are turning and point it in
the new direction. Then set your weight on that ski and step
the other one up to it.
Step turn


SNOW SPORTS 55
.Cross-Country Skiing
KICK TURN
The kick turn is used to change direction while standing still.
Lift one ski above the snow, raise its tip, and carefully rotate
your leg until you can put the tip down beside the tail of your
other ski. Shift your weight off that ski, then lift it and twist
around to place it in the normal position alongside the first ski.
TELEMARK TURN
Because Nordic bindings do not hold the
heel down, a telemark stance is used for
better fore and aft stability when skiing
downhill. The position is much like a
lunge on skis. Stand with the feet hip
width apart and one foot about a boot’s
length behind the other, keeping the hips
centered between them. This is a lot like
standing on bicycle pedals. The heel is up
on the rear foot and down on the front
foot. The torso is upright with rounded
shoulders and both hands in front for
better balance.
To turn, steer both legs and skis
simultaneously in the direction you want
to go. Lead with the ski opposite, or out-
side, the direction of the turn. Once the
turn is completed, scissor your feet to
change leads and rhythmically steer into
the next turn.
Kick turn
Telemark turn





SNOW SPORTS 57
.Snowboarding
Snowboarding
Many snowboarders have backgrounds in sports such as skate-
boarding, skiing, surfing, and wakeboarding (a relatively new
board sport that combines skills used in waterskiing, snow-
boarding, and surfing). Some skills acquired in those sports
can be helpful when learning how to snowboard.
Snowboarding Equipment
To begin snowboarding, you will need boots, bindings, a
helmet, a snowboard, and a leash to prevent the hazard of
a runaway board. You can rent equipment by the day or week,
lease it for an entire season, buy used equipment at a local
shop or snowboard swap, or buy new equipment.
Buying used equipment
that is more than a couple of
years old may not be a good
idea, since snowboarding
technology changes rapidly.
However, because rental fees
can quickly add up, you may
want to buy your own gear
if you plan to snowboard at
least 15 days a year. If possi-
ble, first rent the equipment
you want to buy to find out if
it suits your needs.
A first-time snowboarder should take lessons from
a certified instructor.
A certified snow-
board instructor or
knowledgeable
salesperson
should be able to
help you find
equipment that is
right for you.


58 SNOW SPORTS
Snowboarding.
Snowboards
A snowboard has the following parts:
• Nose (or tip)—the front part of the snowboard. It is
rounded and upturned to push snow under the
board and reduce friction.
• Tail—the rear part of the snowboard.
• Waist—the middle section of the board. Its width
should be equal to the length of your foot.
• Toeside edge—the edge of the snowboard on
the same side as your toes. It is used for making
toeside (frontside) turns and traversing.
• Heelside edge—the edge of the board on the
same side as your heels. It is used for making heel-
side (backside) turns and for traversing.
• Bindings—the fasteners that hold your boots
to the board.
• Leash—a strap around the leg or attached to the
boot to prevent a runaway board.
• Stomp pad—a pad that provides friction for your
back foot when you are riding with the back foot loose.
Major U.S. Snowboarding Organizations
The American Association of Snowboard Instructors is an organization of ski
and snowboard instructors whose purpose is to educate and certify instructors.
The United States of America Snowboard and Freeski Association, founded in
1988, is a not-for-profit corporation that supports the responsible growth and
development of amateur snowboarding through competition, while maintain-
ing the fun and unique character of the sport. The USASA conducts hundreds
of events nationwide through more than two dozen regional programs.
U.S. Ski & Snowboard is the national governing body for Olympic skiing
and snowboarding. Its mission is to field and maintain a winning team of
world-class ski and snowboard athletes. The association provides a pathway
for aspiring young athletes to develop their skills through competitions and
programs that provide them with opportunities to achieve athletic success.
Parts of a snowboard
NOSE (OR TIP)
HEELSIDE
EDGE BINDINGS
LEASH
WAIST
TAIL
TOESIDE
EDGE
STOMP
PAD
Using a leash makes sense for snowboarding at a resort area. However,
it is not recommended in the backcountry, where there is avalanche danger
and where you will need to be able to quickly release your snowboard.


SNOW SPORTS 59
.Snowboarding
Choosing Your Board
The following information will help you determine which board
is appropriate for your skill level and the style of riding you
plan to do.
The most important factor in selecting a board is your
weight. Boards are rated for weight ranges, and you should
fit within the range of the board you choose. Boards generally
should be at least chin height and no wider than the length
of your foot where the bindings attach. The toe and heel of
your boot should be flush with or slightly overhanging the
edges of your snowboard to give you the most leverage and
to allow for easy turning.
When selecting a board for width, make sure that your
toes and heels come to the edge of the board. If a board is
too wide for your foot, it will be challenging to edge or turn.
Too much overhang of toes or heels can
also negatively affect riding, so
make sure you get a board that
is the right width.
Freestyle board
Freeride board
Freecarving/Alpine board
Whether you rent or buy new
or used equipment, it is essential
that all equipment fit and
function properly.
Snowboard
lengths are
measured in
centimeters. The
length of your
board will depend
on your height,
weight, riding
style, and ability.


60 SNOW SPORTS
Snowboarding.
Types of Snowboards
• Twin boards have twin tips—the nose and tail are an identical, blunt
shape suitable for riding forward or backward, jumping, and doing
complicated spins and tricks. These are popular for riding terrain parks
and pipes as well as for mountain freestyle-type riding.
• Directional boards have a directional shape with a stiffer tail and a longer
tip for better flotation in chopped-up snow. The most common type of
board, directional boards can be ridden both forward and fakie (switch)
but are designed to turn differently ridden forward than they do fakie.
• Specialty boards are intended for very specific purposes such as park
riding, pipe riding, rails, powder riding, and backcountry travel. They
are not a good choice for a beginner.
• Freecarving/Alpine boards are stiff and narrow, used by racers or by riders
who want to go really fast and lay down inch-deep tracks on hardpack or
groomed snow. Alpine boards are not recommended for beginners.
Boots
Snowboarding boots come in three types: soft, step-in,
and hard.
Soft boots are by far the most popular of the three
and offer the most flexibility in the type of riding you
can do. They are comfortable, compatible with the most
common bindings, and allow flexibility for freestyle
maneuvers. In general, soft boots have two parts. An
inner bladder keeps your feet warm and dry and puts
some padding between your feet and the bindings. The
outer boot has deeply treaded soles that seat firmly in
the base of highback bindings and a supportive,
flexible upper that allows plenty of ankle movement.
Step-in boots must be used with the corresponding
step-in binding. A step-in boot has an interface on its sole
that connects with the bindings. Therefore, there is no
need for straps on the bindings. Some riders prefer the
freedom of being able to step into their binding instead
of to attach straps.
Step-in
snowboard boot
Soft
snowboard boot


SNOW SPORTS 61
.Snowboarding
Whatever type of boots you choose, they should fit snugly around the heels
and ankles to help prevent blisters. For a proper fit, make sure your boots
hug the forefoot and that they fit your foot snugly from end to end. Avoid
tying your boots so tightly that your feet go numb. This could cause your
toes to freeze.
Hard boots (also called Alpine boots) have sturdy
plastic shells, stiffer uppers than most soft boots, and
stiffer soles to ensure that they will hold firmly to plate
bindings without bending and popping free. Hard boots
are generally used for racing or freecarving. Soft or step-in
boots are probably the best choice for beginners.
Bindings
Bindings fasten your boots to your snowboard and are designed
not to release when you fall. Three major types of bindings are
strap, step-in, and plate bindings. Make sure your bindings are
compatible with your board and boots and with the style of
riding you plan to do.
Strap bindings. Strap bindings clamp soft boots to the board
with two straps and are by far the most popular bindings. The
boots fit in a contoured baseplate and are held there by the
straps, which buckle tightly with ratchets. A vertical plastic
plate called a highback rises behind the ankles and lower
calves. Taller, stiffer, and more cup-shaped highbacks give
riders greater leverage on the board and can improve heelside
edge control.
Step-in bindings. Step-in bindings eliminate the need for
straps on the binding. There is an interface with the binding
that connects with the boot to lock the boot onto the board.
Step-in bindings may or may not have a highback. There are
many different types of interfaces available, so make sure that
your boots and bindings are compatible.
Plate bindings. Plate bindings lock hard boots securely to the
board. They consist of a sturdy base plate and a heel or toe
lever. When a boot is put into the binding, bails reach up and
grab the boot’s heel and toe protrusions. Flipping the heel or
toe lever upward locks the bails in place.
Step-in bindings
Strap bindings


62 SNOW SPORTS
Snowboarding.
Maintaining Your Bindings
For safe and enjoyable riding, keep your bindings in good repair.
• Check bindings carefully for any damage before riding. Look for cracks
in plastic, torn or broken straps, and missing pieces. If you find any
problems, have the bindings repaired.
• Make sure all screws are tight, including those that hold straps as well
as those in the baseplate that hold the bindings to the board.
• Ensure that the ratchets on strap bindings function smoothly and
properly. Check that the mechanism on step-in bindings moves freely.
• Keep your bindings clean. Remove dirt, debris, or salt (from roads) to
keep all the parts of the bindings working well.
Tuning Your Snowboard
Waxing is the easiest and most common way to tune a snowboard. Because
wax makes it easier for snowboards to glide over snow, a waxed board will
slide faster and turn more easily. Waxing also protects the snowboard’s base
from the effects of moisture, snow contaminants, and dirt.
Only wax specially made for waxing skis or snowboards should be used
on your board. Use the correct wax for the temperature on the day you will
be riding. Any snowboard shop should be able to supply the type of wax
you need. If you are waxing well in advance of an outing, you should
choose a good all-temperature wax.
If needed, clean the base of the board with a biodegrad-
able wax remover (available at snowboard shops). Unless
you have been riding in dirty snow and the base of your
board is covered in dirty residue, you can probably skip
this step. Gather the materials to wax the board: wax,
an iron (wax irons are best because of temperature
control, but any iron will work), a plastic scraper, and
a waxing cork or nylon scrub pad. (Never use steel-
wool pads when waxing a snowboard!)


SNOW SPORTS 63
.Snowboarding
Step 2—Hold a bar of wax
against the base of the
waxing iron and let the
wax drip onto the base of
the board. Run a bead of
wax back and forth along
the base of the board
without letting the iron
touch the base.
Step 3—After dripping
wax over the length of the
base, smooth it out with
the iron, spreading a thin
layer of wax evenly over
the entire base. Be careful
not to let the iron stall, or
you could ruin the base.
Step 1—Clean the
base of the board.
Step 4—While the wax is
cooling, sharpen your plastic
scraper with a 12-inch mill
file: (1) Lay the file flat on a
table. (2) Drag the thin edge
of the scraper over the file.
(3) Keeping the scraper at
90 degrees to the file, file
until the scraper’s edge is
smooth and sharp.
Step 5—After waiting
five minutes for the wax
to cool, scrape off
excess wax by pushing
or pulling the scraper
from tip to tail.
Step 6—Texture the wax
with a nylon scrub pad,
running the pad from tip
to tail. Never run the pad
from edge to edge.


64 SNOW SPORTS
Snowboarding.
Leashes
One hazard of snowboarding is a runaway snowboard—a snow-
board that gets separated from its rider. A runaway snowboard
can be a dangerous “torpedo,” especially if there’s no time to
warn those below. A leash, a short cord that straps the front boot
or leg to the front binding, helps prevent runaway snowboards.
Although some resorts do not require leashes, it is highly recom-
mended that you always use a leash.
Carrying a snowboard under
one arm
Carrying a board by resting it against the
small of the back
A board not in use should be positioned with the binding against
the snow surface as shown, to keep it from sliding away or
taking off by itself.


SNOW SPORTS 65
.Snowboarding
Carrying a Snowboard
There are many good ways to carry a board. You can carry it
under one arm with the bindings facing your body on either
side of your hip, or rest it against the small of your back with
the bindings facing either in or out. You can hold it there with
both arms draped over the base, gripping the edge of the board.
This is comfortable for many people while hiking, but be aware
of the tip and tail sticking out to either side so as not to bump
into people.
Preventing Snowboarding Injuries
Most snowboard injuries are caused by either twisting or impact.
Many injuries involve the wrist, arms, or upper body. If you
are about to crash, bend your knees and try to get low. This
way, you will not have far to fall. Never put your hands out
when falling; it risks injury to hands, wrists, elbows, and
shoulders. If you fall forward, take the impact on your
knees. Your knees are less vulnerable bent than when
they are straight. If you fall backward, just sit down and
take the impact on your rear. Stiff, supportive snow-
boarding boots help reduce the chance of injury, as
do wrist guards and a helmet.
A snowboard set in goofy stance
A snowboard set in
regular stance


66 SNOW SPORTS
Snowboarding.
Snowboarding Skills
You are likely to fall often as you are learning to snowboard.
Don’t get discouraged. Once you have mastered the basic skills,
you will improve quickly. With a few days of practice, you can
be riding the whole mountain.
Stance and Angle
It doesn’t matter which way you ride—choose the way you feel
most comfortable. Riding with the right foot forward is known as
“goofy”; riding with the left foot forward is known as “regular.”
To begin, you need to decide which foot will be your lead foot.
You may already know which it is if you skateboard, wakeboard,
or surf. If not, imagine sliding across a slippery floor or across
some ice. You will naturally feel more comfortable with one foot
or the other in front.
Adjusting Your
Board
Once you get accustomed to the
way the board moves and your
personal style of riding it, you can
adjust the bindings to allow your stance to be the most natural and comfort-
able for you. Your stance should always be centered and aligned with the
width of the board, and about an inch wider than the width of your shoulders.
You can change the position and angles of snowboard bindings by
simply unscrewing, adjusting, and then retightening them. Many rental
board setups have an easy clip system that allows you to adjust the bindings
with the push of a button.
FRONT ANGLE REAR ANGLE
NOSE TAIL
Bindings have
degree markings
on the baseplate
or disks.
Strapping boots into highback
bindings while standing
Strapping boots into highback
bindings while seated


SNOW SPORTS 67
.Snowboarding
You can place bindings on a board in countless ways,
which gives you an amazing amount of freedom. Binding place-
ment affects the way a board performs, so it is a good idea to
start with a stance suggested by your instructor and then adjust
as you become more proficient. When placing your binding on
the board, angle your front binding forward about 12 degrees in
relation to the center of the board. Angle your back binding
rearward approximately 6 degrees.
Strapping In
To strap in, sit on a flat area in the snow, away from the flow of
traffic. If required, attach a leash to your front leg or front foot.
For highback bindings, step into the front binding and fasten the
ankle and toe straps across the top of your foot. Tighten the straps
firmly, but do not fasten them so tightly that you interfere with
your circulation. (If you’re using step-in bindings, you won’t have
straps to fasten.)
Plate bindings have either a toe or a heel lever. If they have
a toe lever, insert the heel of your front foot under the front
binding’s heel bail and step down with your toe while flipping
the toe lever to the locked position. If your bindings have a heel
lever, step in toe first and lock your heel down last.
Skating
Locking down plate bindings


68 SNOW SPORTS
Snowboarding.
Skating and Sidestepping
Do not fasten your back foot. You can “skate” around the
snow, propelled by your back foot, until you are comfortable.
Place most of your weight over your front foot and push with
your back foot. Once you push off with your free foot and your
board starts to slide, you can put your back foot between the
bindings and/or on the stomp pad and briefly glide with both
feet on the board.
To travel up short hills, you may also sidestep. First, turn
your board across the fall line, facing up the hill. Next, step up
the hill with your free foot and then step the board forward,
being sure to use the toeside edge to grip the snow. Small steps
usually work best. Continue this one-two method of stepping
until you reach the top.
Once you know how to skate, find a flat area and stand
on the board with your free (rear) foot between your bindings
(close to the rear binding). With your knees bent, your weight
evenly balanced on both feet, and your shoulders facing toward
your toes, flex and extend your legs to get comfortable in this
position. This is called your neutral stance. To test the limits of
your balance, rock onto your toeside edge and then your heel-
side edge. You can catch yourself with your rear foot if you start
to fall. Once you are comfortable with this stance, you are
ready to try gliding down a small hill.
Sidestepping Neutral stance


SNOW SPORTS 69
.Snowboarding
Riding Your First Hill
Find a short hill with a flat spot at the bottom. Skate or sidestep
to the top of the hill, turn your board to point down the hill and
place your rear foot back between the bindings next to the rear
binding. While in neutral stance, allow the board to travel straight
down the hill. Practice keeping your weight balanced on both
feet and your shoulders facing your toes (your body should not
twist but should remain in alignment). Try this until you feel
comfortable riding the board down the hill with your foot out.
Once you are comfortable going straight, you can try a slight
turn, still with your rear foot unattached.
As you start down the practice hill, try flexing
your knees and ankles to let some of your weight
go onto your toes. As your weight shifts onto
your toes, the board will begin to turn toward
your toes. Maintain this position until the board
turns and comes to a stop.
1
2
3


70 SNOW SPORTS
Snowboarding.
Standing
Once you are comfortable riding with the rear foot out, you can
get some practice on the beginner hill. Sit down out of the way
of traffic and strap in your rear foot so that both feet are in your
bindings. You can stand up from either a kneeling or a sitting
position. Place your board across the fall line. If you do not have
your board across the fall line as you stand up, your board will
start to move down the hill before you are ready.
If you are sitting down and facing downhill, you can stand
up on your heelside edge. Start by pulling your feet up close to
your body and dig the heelside edge into the snow. When you
are ready to stand, push up with both hands until you are bal-
anced in a squatting position. Some people find it easier to
reach forward and grasp the toe edge as they push off the
snow. Watch other people getting up to give you an idea of
how to do it. Once you are in a squatting position, you can
go ahead and stand all the way up.
If you are kneeling, face uphill with the board behind you
(make sure the board is across the fall line). Pull your heels up
under your rear, and dig your toeside edge into the snow. At
the same time, work your hands toward the outside of your
knees. Before you stand up, look uphill and check for oncom-
ing traffic. When the way is clear, push up with your arms
until you are in a squatting position on the board, and then
straighten your legs.
Standing from seated position
1 2


SNOW SPORTS 71
.Snowboarding
Sideslipping
Once standing, you will find it difficult to balance while stand-
ing still—this is normal. To keep from falling, you need to side-
slip. This maneuver lets you slip sideways down the slope, either
toeside or heelside.
Practice sideslipping on your heelside edge first because
it is easier to see what you are doing and the highback binding
supports the leg somewhat. Stand up, staying equally balanced
on both heels. You can either gently pull your toes toward you
or push them away from you to adjust the heelside edge as
needed. Keep a relaxed, upright stance, and balance your weight
evenly on your heels. Look where you are going—not down
at your feet.
If you are having trouble standing up on a gentle slope,
move to a slightly steeper hill. It is actually easier to dig your
heelside edge into steeper grades than on the flats. When you
are ready, gradually drop your toes slightly and start sideslip-
ping. Be sure to make smooth, subtle movements, because it
is easy to lose your balance. To go faster, allow your toes to
drop a little more. To slow down or stop, lift up on your toes.
Be smooth, stay comfortably flexed, stand on both feet evenly,
and resist the urge to dig in your heels too hard, or you will
stop and lose your balance.
Standing from a kneeling position
1 2
Sideslipping
improves your
balance and
reinforces your
edge control.


72 SNOW SPORTS
Snowboarding.
Sideslipping is a little like riding a bike. If you go too slow
or stop, balance is difficult. You need to keep moving to main-
tain balance. When you feel comfortable sideslipping on your
heelside edge, switch to your toeside edge. Repeat the steps out-
lined previously, adjusting for your toeside edge. If you start to
slip too much, lift your heels more to dig the uphill edge into
the snow. Let your knees and ankles do the edging as opposed
to just leaning uphill.
When on toeside, it is very important to watch where you
are going. Your board will naturally tend to go where you look,
so be careful. If you look at a tree, you will go toward—or run
into—the tree. Instead, look at where you want to go, not where
you do not want to go. Look across or up the hill instead of look-
ing down the slope, which will take your board straight downhill.
Heelside sideslip
Toeside sideslip
When sideslipping,
use your hands
and arms for
balance by
holding them
uphill in front
of you.


SNOW SPORTS 73
.Snowboarding
Traversing
When you have mastered the sideslip—both toeside and heel-
side—you are ready to traverse. This maneuver allows you to
go across a hill. Traversing reinforces your edging skills, helps
you gain more speed, and improves your ability to stop.
To traverse, stand with your weight balanced evenly on
both feet, bend your knees slightly, and align your torso with
your lower body (your shoulders should be facing your feet).
On the heelside, push on the front-foot toes while sideslipping.
This will cause the tip of the board to drop slightly downhill,
and the board will traverse. On the toeside, push the front-foot
heels while sideslipping, and the tip will drop slightly downhill
and the board will traverse. The longer you hold this position,
with one foot pushing down more than the other, the longer
you will traverse.
Traversing can be done by crossing a hill on either the toeside or heelside edge.
Traversing can
be done in either
direction—tip
first (forward) or
tail first (fakie
or switch).


74 SNOW SPORTS
Snowboarding.
Stopping
To stop, turn the board perpendicular to the direction you are
going. Tilt the board hard on the uphill edge, and balance over
both feet. When you become more comfortable as your skills
improve, you will learn to stop faster. The important thing to
remember is that all your movements should be smooth—if you
do anything too abruptly, you are likely to lose your balance.
Learning to Turn
Practicing a maneuver known as the garland teaches the skills
necessary for turning. Think of the garland as a half-turn. This
maneuver is usually learned in only one direction—with the
tip leading (forward).
Practice first with the heelside garland. While traversing on
your heelside edge, push down on the toes of your front foot.
This will force the tip of the board down the hill, toward the
fall line. To stop the garland, roll back onto both heels, and lift
the toes. To do a toeside garland, start in a toeside traverse, look
down the hill over your front shoulder and push slightly on the
heel of your front foot. The tip of the board will start to point
downhill. To finish this garland, lift both heels and look back
up the slope.
The more you practice garlands, the more comfortable you
will be pointing your board completely downhill and then com-
ing back across the hill. Once you have mastered garlands, you
are ready to learn some turns.
Stopping


SNOW SPORTS 75
.Snowboarding
Turning
There are numerous types of turns in snowboard-
ing, but most can be categorized two ways:
skidded or carved.
Skidded turns. Skidded turns are the turns you
will make most in snowboarding. They allow you
to control your speed on different types of terrain
and make turns of different sizes.
Step 1—Start a skidded turn by standing on the
center of your board. Maintain an upright stance.
From a heelside position, push down on the front-
foot toes to make the board go into the fall line.
Step 2—Once the board is in the fall line
(pointed straight down the hill), continue to
push on the front-foot toes and start pushing
on the back-foot toes to bring the board around
to the toeside edge. From a toeside position,
look down the fall line toward the tip, and
push down on the front-foot heel.
Step 3—When the board is in the fall line, con-
tinue pushing on the front-foot heel and add the
back-foot heel. This will bring the board around
onto the heelside edge.
This is the simplest skidded turn. You should
practice this technique until it becomes easy to go
from a heel turn to a toe turn and back. Once you
are linking turns, you can adjust the size and shape
with how much you twist the board (that is, how
much you push down your toes or heels).
This technique will work on many types of
terrain and can be used with different snow condi-
tions. Practice executing skidded turns in various
locations, moving toward more challenging terrain.
Remember to always use your feet to make the
turns and keep the body and arms quiet and
smooth. If you find yourself using your arms or
your body to make the turns, go back to easier
terrain and review your technique.


76 SNOW SPORTS
Snowboarding.
Carved turns. Carved turns are a specific type of turn—one in
which the tip and tail of the board follow the same track in the
snow. Carved turns are smooth arcs that depend on the shape
of your board, snow conditions, speed, and other factors. You
must be riding faster to perform this maneuver, and balance
is crucial.
Start by placing your weight equally between both feet and
tip toward the toe edge or heel edge while in a traverse. Once
you can achieve the balance, as your board tips over on its
edge, it will turn all by itself. Try this on both edges while in a
traverse until you are comfortable balancing on the edge. Once
you master this, try a carved J-turn. Start with your board
pointed down the fall line and tip the board over onto an edge
and balance. Allow the board to make the turn back across the
hill to a stop. To check if you executed the turn correctly, look
at your track. If you see a very thin line in the snow, you did it!
After practicing the carved J-turn on both edges, you can
try a full turn. Start by going across the hill fast. You will need
the speed to help you balance. Begin the turn normally (like a
skidded turn), but as soon as you start turning, try to lean into
the turn and tip the board on edge. You should be able to get
the same feeling you had in the skidded turn. Once you get the
board on edge it should turn itself back across the hill.
Carved turn


SNOW SPORTS 77
.Snowboarding
Keep practicing and before too long you will go from one
carved turn to another, leaving thin lines in the snow. Once
mastered, it’s a very useful maneuver to use all over the hill,
especially in the pipe and park.
Riding Fakie (or Switch)
Riding fakie, or switch, just means riding along tailfirst. Many of
the spins executed during snowboarding will leave you riding
fakie. The same techniques used to ride forward are used to ride
fakie, so it is a good idea to first review traversing, garlands, and
turning. Then, try traversing fakie on a gentle slope. Next, try a
fakie garland, focusing on using the proper technique. Once
these feel comfortable, try some fakie turns, again focusing
on using correct technique.
Tricks
When you are comfortable with
the basic snowboarding skills,
there are several types of tricks
you can try, including ollies,
grabs, and jumps.
OLLIES
An ollie is a basic but impor-
tant way of getting airborne.
If you are a skateboarder, you
are probably already familiar with
ollies. To ollie, start cruising along in a straight
line on a gentle slope. Before you ollie, compress
into a slight crouch. Jump up, bringing your front foot up
first and driving it forward through the air. Lifting your front
foot first loads up energy in the tail and provides some spring
for your jump. Level out the board in the air by bringing both
knees to your chest. Finish your ollie by landing with both feet
on the ground at the same time.


78 SNOW SPORTS
Snowboarding.
GRABS
To do a grab, first get airborne. While in the air, flex your knees
and ankles to pull your board up toward you. This will increase
the amount of air you have and will make it easier to grab the
board. Once you pull your board up to you, reach down and
grab your board between your feet or by the tip or tail.
If it is difficult to grab the board, start by just touching the
board or even your toes as you go off a jump. Remember to
focus on the landing as well as the grab. Once you can reach
down and touch your toes or board, you will get some solid
grabs that will lead to the ability to tweak or poke the grabs. To
tweak, you push or pull the board in some direction with the
grab hand. To poke, you extend one or both legs while grabbing.
Grab
Never grab in
the “no-grab
zones.” You can
grab anywhere
between the feet,
just outside the
feet, or at the tip
and tail.


SNOW SPORTS 79
.Snowboarding
JUMPS
Doing a 180 involves jumping in one direction but landing in
the opposite direction. You may ride from forward to fakie or
from fakie to forward. As you approach the jump, prepare for a
half-turn spin. During the jump, either spin frontside (with your
chest facing the direction of travel) or backside (with your back
facing the direction of travel).
You can practice the movement of the turn with your board
on the snow. As you ride across the hill, go over a small bump.
As you ride across the bump, execute the spin, remembering to
ride away with the other foot leading (forward to fakie or fakie to
forward). It is easier to start with frontside spins, because you
can focus your eyes on where you are throughout the maneuver.
The 180 maneuver
1 2
3 4


80 SNOW SPORTS
Snowboarding.
Features
Terrain parks contain many different features, including tabletop
jumps, hip jumps, boxes, rails, and half-pipes, that can be fun
and exciting to sample. It is very important that you familiarize
yourself with the different features and how to maneuver on
them safely before you try out a new trail. One way to do this
is to observe other riders hitting the feature and to note how
they do it. Noticing where riders start, how fast they go, and
where they land will help you hit the features safely.
Many resorts have a special
trail symbol to mark freestyle
terrain—the orange pill.
Rails
Boxes


SNOW SPORTS 81
.Snowboarding
Half-pipe
Signs often mark controlled entry gates to terrain parks.
Tabletop jump





SNOW SPORTS 83
.Snowshoeing
Snowshoeing
Throughout history, snowshoeing has been an
important means of transportation. Today, this fun
and invigorating activity is popular with winter
recreationists, too. Snowshoeing is easy to learn, is
inexpensive, and provides a great workout and
satisfying way to explore nature during the colder
months. This age-old sport appeals to a broad
population because it offers low-impact exercise
that improves cardiovascular fitness and is
appropriate for all ages and abilities.
Parts of a Snowshoe
Snowshoes allow you to float across snow-covered terrain with
ease. They keep you from sinking waist-deep into new snow by
evenly distributing your weight over a large surface area.
Snowshoes allow you to hike, climb, or run across snow-packed
trails or deep drifts of freshly fallen powder without struggling.
Frames and Decking
Until the 1950s, snowshoe frames were commonly
made of wood, while the decking, or surface area,
was formed from rawhide woven into a tight
netlike pattern. Today’s snowshoes are
smaller, more responsive, and
longer-
lasting. Modern
snowshoe frames are
made from durable,
lightweight
aluminum or composite metals. Solid sheets of
tough synthetic materials form decks that provide
optimal flotation despite a smaller surface area.
Snowshoeing is
good for your
health! It burns
up to 600 calories
per hour—
even more on
challenging
terrain.
Parts of a snowshoe
FRAME
DECKING
CRAMPONSBINDINGS
Vintage snowshoes


84 SNOW SPORTS
Snowshoeing.
Crampons
In addition to flotation, snowshoes provide traction on snow and
ice. Short metal teeth called crampons clutch slippery surfaces to
aid in travel uphill and over hard, frozen snow. Some snowshoes
have only toe crampons under the ball of the foot, while versions
made for more aggressive outdoor pursuits also have heel cram-
pons for handling steep, mountainous terrain. Some styles also
have side rails, or cleats running the entire length of the frame on
both sides, to assist in climbing and descending steep slopes.
Bindings
Bindings secure snowshoes to boots and keep a traveler’s feet
aligned for efficient walking. They range in complexity from a
few simple straps that go over the foot and around the heel
to styles that mimic snowboard bindings by combining
plastic bands with ratcheting devices. Bindings are
critical to ensuring comfort and making the snowshoe
perform well in a variety of conditions.
Bindings can attach to decking in two ways: fixed or
rotating. Fixed bindings limit the foot’s rotation, forcing the
tail, or back, of the snowshoe up with each step. These bindings
maintain a natural and comfortable stride, but they also kick up
snow with each step. Floating, or rotating, bindings pivot a
good deal where they attach to the deck. They shed snow with
each step, helping to reduce fatigue and making it easier to travel
and steer through dense, deep snow. Rotating bindings are also
better suited for climbing because the front of the snowshoe
moves out of the way on uphill grades, allowing the crampons to
engage more strongly. The fact that the bindings pivot, however,
makes backing up or clearing obstacles a bit more difficult.
Types of Snowshoes
A snowshoe’s size, shape, and features vary based on how
they will be used and the type of terrain they will cover.
For instance, a more oval shape allows for increased flota-
tion, while a more tapered end adds agility and speed.
Some styles include additional features, heel lifts, and side rails.
Running/fitness snowshoes are lightweight and durable. They
have minimal traction, a tapered tail, and a sleek design that pro-
vides greater maneuverability for running and racing. The reduced
surface area doesn’t allow these snowshoes to float on deep snow,
so this style is best for sticking to trails and packed snow.
Fitness snowshoes
Snowshoes with
rotating binding


SNOW SPORTS 85
.Snowshoeing
Recreational snowshoes are perfect for beginners and others
who want to explore gentle terrain. Meant for short, rolling hikes
with minimal elevation change, they usually have a rounded
tail, simple bindings, and little traction.
Hiking snowshoes are more advanced, durable, and
able to handle moderate to advanced terrain and deep
powder with little effort. They often have beefier bind-
ings, more aggressive traction systems, and a streamlined
design that makes them suited for longer explorations on rolling
and steeper terrain.
Backcountry/mountain snowshoes are for adventurers who
plan on breaking trail or backpacking over rugged terrain. They
have the strongest bindings and the largest surface area for
maximum flotation, even when carrying heavy loads or traveling
through new, deep snow. Mountain snowshoes usually have
extra aggressive crampons and side rails for added grip on steep
climbs and descents. Many styles also have heel lifts or climbing
bars that support the foot and reduce fatigue on long climbs.
Choosing a Snowshoe
When choosing a snowshoe, it’s important to pick a model that
is comfortable, fits your budget, and best suits your needs. Here
are a few factors to consider.
What will you use your snowshoes for? Figure
out if you’ll primarily be backpacking, hiking, or
climbing on steep terrain or running or walking on
packed trails. This will help you determine which
style and features are needed. For instance, if you’ll
be sticking to packed trails, a recreational snow-
shoe will meet your needs, whereas if you’ll be
backpacking or mountaineering, you’ll want a
larger, more durable shoe with aggressive crampons
and a heel lift.
What snow conditions will you most often
encounter? Consider a larger oval or rounded
shoe with floating binding if you will spend most
of your time in deep and dry powder. For heavy or
packed snow, a smaller shoe with tapered, sleek
design will work well.
Hiking snowshoes
In general, the
more you weigh
and the drier the
snow you will
be traveling,
the larger the
snowshoe deck
should be.


86 SNOW SPORTS
Snowshoeing.
What type of bindings will work best for you? Pick a
binding that is suited for the shoes you plan to use and the
conditions you will encounter. Most bindings are built to handle
a variety of footwear from boots to running shoes, but make
sure the binding fits the shoes you will be using and holds
them snugly in place without rubbing or constricting your
movement. Consider also whether you will be able to operate
the binding while wearing gloves or mittens.
Will you be carrying heavy loads? Your body and pack
weight is important to consider when choosing the right size
snowshoe to keep you afloat. When shopping for snowshoes,
look for the recommended load weight.
Caring for Snowshoes
Quality snowshoes can sustain years of use if they are
well cared for. Here are some pointers to help keep snowshoes
performing well.
• Inspect snowshoes after each adventure. Check wooden
frames for splinters or gashes. In modern styles, keep an eye
out for rips in the decking. Examine bindings, laces, and
ratchets, and replace them when they appear worn. Check all
metal and plastic for cracks, and examine nuts and bolts to
make sure they remain tight.
• After each use, rinse snowshoes to remove dirt, salt, and
minerals. Use a clean cloth to remove any remaining debris,
and dry the shoes completely before storing.
• At the end of winter, soak snowshoes in a bath of lukewarm
water to remove embedded dirt, salt, oil, and minerals. Dry
thoroughly and store in a cool, dry, well-ventilated place
away from direct sunlight so they’ll be
ready to go when the snow flies again.
In the mountains, stones, boulders,
branches, and other debris can cause tears
in the decking, damage to the frame, and
wear on the crampons. Avoid walking on
dry ground, hard surfaces, or rocky ridges
while wearing snowshoes. Instead, for
safety and comfort, take the time to switch
out snowshoes for hiking boots.


SNOW SPORTS 87
.Snowshoeing
Keeping Your Snowshoes in Good Condition
If something goes wrong with your snowshoes miles from civilization, you
could be in for a long, wearisome trudge home. Avoid this situation by
carrying an emergency repair kit containing a pair of pliers, a small roll of
duct tape, a screwdriver, cord or picture wire, and any other repair items
your instructor might suggest.
Snowshoeing Skills
Learning to snowshoe is fairly simple: Firmly plant the leading
foot, place your weight on it, pause for a moment, and then
step forward with your other foot. At this point, the only real
skill you need to focus on is perfecting a wider than normal
stance so you can avoid stepping on the frames. As you gain
experience, you will develop more advanced skills so you can
venture onto more varied terrain.
Using Poles
Using poles can help distribute the work throughout your body, providing
an upper-body workout and conserving energy in your legs. Using poles
also improves balance, provides additional stability, and takes some strain
off joints, especially the knees and back. Poles are also a huge help with
getting up after a fall in deep snow.
When choosing poles, look for
adjustable poles that can change to
handle the terrain. For instance,
make them shorter for added power
and ease while ascending and longer
to help reach in front of your body
when descending. Be sure to choose
poles with straps. Putting your hand
up through the straps from below
allows you to rest on the straps and
ensures that you won’t lose the
poles even if you drop them while
on a steep slope.


88 SNOW SPORTS
Snowshoeing.
Climbing Uphill
When ascending, place your foot firmly into the snow
to engage the toe crampons under the ball of your foot.
This will provide the added traction needed to tackle a
steep slope. If the snow is crusty or packed, you will
need to rely largely on the claws of your crampons to
dig in. If you are traveling over new and/or powdery
snow, you might need to actually kick a step (called a
kick step) into the hillside with each movement for-
ward. This will drive your cleats into the freshly fallen
or soft snow.
Certain conditions might call for the herringbone
step, or “duck walk,” where you point your toes out
and lean forward, keeping your heels in and your
poles in front of you to ease your progress uphill. For
long ascents, flip up the heel lift (if you have one) to
reduce fatigue and strain on your legs.
Traversing a Slope
If you encounter extremely steep terrain or snow conditions
that make climbing a slope impossible, you will want to tra-
verse the slope. Traversing, also known as side-hilling, mini-
mizes muscle strain and ultimately saves time and energy. It is
a critical skill to have when exploring more challenging terrain.
To begin, kick your snowshoe into the hillside and stomp
down, trying to keep your snowshoes horizontal to the slope as
you do this. Dig the uphill edge of each snowshoe into the hill-
side to create a shelf. Move along slowly, being sure to always
weight the uphill snowshoe and
remaining mindful of maintain-
ing your balance. Use poles for
added support. Try to keep gain-
ing elevation by creating switch-
backs, or a series of turns by
which you traverse the steep sec-
tions. To change direction, get
solid footing and then pivot on
the downhill foot. Take turns
leading, and do your best to fol-
low the steps of the person in
front of you.
Traversing on
challenging
terrain is best
done by those
wearing snow-
shoes with more
aggressive
traction systems
and/or side rails.
Kick step


SNOW SPORTS 89
.Snowshoeing
Traveling Downhill
On the way down, stay relaxed, and let gravity work
for you. Plant your heel and follow with your toe
(the “plunge step”). Keep your weight slightly back,
keep knees bent, and maintain a smooth rhythm.
If your snowshoes have heel crampons, lean back
farther to engage them. If you have only toe crampons,
keep your weight more forward to engage the spikes.
Keep poles out in front to help add balance and
control on descents.
Breaking Trail
If you venture out after a snowstorm or frequent
areas that are rarely used in winter, you’ll likely find
yourself breaking trail. Breaking trail can be tough in
new, deep powder or in wet, heavy snow. Appropriate
equipment for venturing off the trail includes larger
snowshoes designed to help you sink less and stay
somewhat afloat. Step efficiently, utilize poles, and
keep a slow and steady pace so you don’t overheat.
Take frequent breaks and alternate taking the
lead with your hiking partners to spread out the
effort and prevent exhaustion.
Choosing a Trail
Snowshoeing can be done almost anywhere that is covered
in snow. Many people enjoy snowshoeing at ski resorts and
Nordic ski areas, which offer varied terrain, marked trails, and
groomed routes. On Nordic trails, practice proper trail etiquette
by yielding the right-of-way to skiers. If you want to stay close
to home or just practice some skills, golf courses, parks, city
or county open spaces, and local sledding hills make great
spots for short jaunts.
Before hitting the trail at a ski resort, check to make
sure snowshoers are allowed and if there are any
restrictions. Some resorts limit snowshoers traveling
uphill to certain areas or times in order to avoid
conflicts with downhill ski traffic.
Traveling downhill


90 SNOW SPORTS
Snowshoeing.


SNOW SPORTS 91
.Snowshoeing
Traveling in the Backcountry
For a different perspective, explore your favorite summer hiking
trails, state parks, or national parks on snowshoes. Venturing into
these areas can be peaceful and challenging, but it requires
advanced skills and knowledge so that everyone returns safely
and without incident. Here are a few of the specialized skills
needed for backcountry winter travel.
• Each team member must be physically fit for the demands
of backcountry travel; breaking trail and climbing steep
slopes can be exhausting.
• All members of the group should be efficient and skilled
navigators. Before you embark, chart a course using map,
compass, and terrain association. Do not rely solely on GPS
devices because they can be inaccurate or fail.
• Know how to assess avalanche danger. Each member of your
party should have a beacon, probe, and shovel and know
how to use them in an emergency.
Watch the weather, carry survival gear, travel with a partner,
and make wise decisions—even if it means not reaching your
goal. Better to turn around early and get everyone home safe
than find yourself in a survival situation.





SNOW SPORTS 93
.Snow Sports Resources
Snow Sports Resources
Scouting Literature
BSA Deck of First Aid cards; Basic
Illustrated Wilderness First Aid;
Emergency First Aid pocket guide; Be
Prepared First Aid Book; and Emergency
Preparedness, First Aid, Orienteering,
Personal Fitness, Search and Rescue, Signs,
Signals, and Codes, and Wilderness
Survival merit badge pamphlets
Books
Downhill Skiing
Bartelski, Konrad, and Robin Neillands.
Learn Downhill Skiing in a Weekend.
Knopf, 1992.
Fellows, Chris. Total Skiing. Human
Kinetics, 2010.
LeMaster, Ron. The Essential Guide to
Skiing: 201 Things Every Skier Must
Know. Peak Sports Press, 2004.
———. Ultimate Skiing. Human
Kinetics, 2010.
White, Chalky. Chalky White’s The 7
Secrets of Skiing, 2nd ed. Bernard
“Chalky” White, 2011.
Cross-Country Skiing
Hindman, Steve. Cross-Country Skiing:
Building Skills for Fun and Fitness.
Mountaineers Books, 2005.
McGee, J. Scott. Basic Illustrated Cross-
Country Skiing. Falcon Guides, 2012.
O’Bannon, Allen, and Mike Clelland.
Allen & Mike’s Really Cool Telemark
Tips: 123 Amazing Tips to Improve
Your Tele-Skiing, 2nd ed. Falcon
Guides, 2008.
Older, Jules. Cross-Country Skiing for
Everyone. Stackpole Books, 1998.
Petersen, Paul, and Rick Lovett.
The Essential Cross-Country Skier.
Ragged Mountain Press, 1999.
Volken, Martin, Scott Schell, and
Margaret Wheeler. Backcountry
Skiing: Skills for Ski Touring and Ski
Mountaineering. Mountaineers
Books, 2007.
With your parent’s permission, visit
the Boy Scouts of America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org,
for a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


94 SNOW SPORTS
Snow Sports Resources.
Snowboarding
Bennett, Jeff, Scott Downey, and Charles
Arnell. The Complete Snowboarder,
2nd ed. Ragged Mountain Press, 2000.
Howe, Susanna. (Sick): A Cultural
History of Snowboarding. St. Martin’s
Press, 1998.
Jensen, Julie. Beginning Snowboarding.
Lerner, 1996.
Kleh, Cindy. Snowboarding Skills: The
Back-to-Basics Essentials for All
Levels. Firefly Books, 2002.
McNab, Neil. Go Snowboard: Read It,
Watch It, Do It. DK Adult, 2006.
Reichenfeld, Rob, and Anna Bruechert.
Snowboarding. Human Kinetics,
1995.
Rottman, Alexander, and Nici Pederzolli.
Freestyle Snowboarding: Tricks, Skills
and Techniques. Firefly Books, 2010.
Ryan, Kevin. The Illustrated Guide to
Snowboarding. Masters Press, 1998.
Smith, Jim. The Art of Snowboarding:
Kickers, Carving, Half-Pipe, and
More. Ragged Mountain Press, 2007.
Snyder, Rocky. Fit to Ski and
Snowboard: The Skier’s and
Boarder’s Guide to Strength and
Conditioning. Ragged Mountain
Press, 2006.
Teter, Hannah, and Tawnya Schultz.
Mastering Snowboarding. Human
Kinetics, 2012.
Weiss, Christof. Snowboarding Know-
How. Sterling, 1993.
Snowshoeing
Bair, Diane, and Pamela Wright.
Snowshoe Routes: New England.
Mountaineers Books, 2006.
Burakian, Eli. Basic Illustrated
Snowshoeing. Falcon Guides, 2012.
Ingersoll, Bill. Snowshoe Routes:
Adirondacks & Catskills.
Mountaineers Books, 2006.
Olmsted, Larry. A Trailside Guide:
Snowshoeing. W.W. Norton
and Co., 1998.
Prater, Gene. Snowshoeing: From Novice
to Master. 5th ed. Mountaineers
Books, 2002.
Recor, Mary Lou, and Chris Hanna, eds.
Snowshoeing in Vermont: A Guide to
the Best Winter Hikes, 2nd ed. Green
Mountain Club Inc., 2010.
Savignano, Phil. Basic Essentials
Snowshoeing. Falcon, 2000.
Walter, Claire. The Snowshoe Experience:
Gear Up & Discover the Wonders of
Winter on Snowshoes. Storey
Publishing, 2004.
———. Snowshoeing Colorado, 3rd ed.
Fulcrum Publishing, 2004.
Organizations and Websites
American Association of
Snowboard Instructors
133 S. Van Gordon St., Suite 200
Lakewood, CO 80228
Telephone: 303-987-9390
www.thesnowpros.org
American Institute for Avalanche
Research and Education
avtraining.org


SNOW SPORTS 95
.Snow Sports Resources
Cross Country Ski Areas Association
Telephone: 802-236-3021
www.xcski.org
National Ski Patrol
133 S. Van Gordon St., Suite 100
Lakewood, CO 80228
Telephone: 303-988-1111
www.nsp.org
Professional Ski Instructors
of America
133 S. Van Gordon St., Suite 200
Lakewood, CO 80228
Telephone: 303-987-9390
www.thesnowpros.org
United States of America Snowboard
and Freeski Association
P.O. Box 15500
South Lake Tahoe, CA 96151
Toll-free telephone: 800-404-9213
www.usasa.org
United States
Snowshoe Association
678 County Route 25
Corinth, NY 12822
Telephone: 518-654-7648
ussnowshoe.com
U.S. Ski & Snowboard
1 Victory Lane
Box 100
Park City, UT 84060
Telephone: 435-649-9090
usskiandsnowboard.org
Acknowledgments
The Boy Scouts of America is grateful to
the following individuals and organiza-
tions for their assistance in updating this
merit badge pamphlet.
• Bruce Gafner, ADK Winter
Mountaineering Instructor, Winter
Leadership Awardee, Rome NY
• Lane Clegg, head coach, Snowbird
Snowboard Team, Snowbird, Utah
• Mark Dorsey, marketing director,
Professional Ski Instructors of America
• Tom Kelly, vice president of
public relations, U.S. Ski & Snowboard
• Jimmy Ludlow, ski instructor, Alf
Engen Ski School, Alta, Utah
• Chris McCabe Sr., ski patroller, Mount
Peter Ski Patrol, Warwick, New York
• Mike Norton, Snoqualmie
Pass, Washington
• Don Portman, Winthrop, Washington
• Rob Sogard, adult program manager,
Snowbird Ski and Summer Resort,
and Alpine team coach, Professional
Ski Instructors of America
• National Ski Areas Association
• SnowSports Industries America
• Burton Snowboards
• OVO Helmets
We gratefully acknowledge
Snowbird (Utah) Ski and Summer
Resort for hosting a photo shoot.
The Boy Scouts of America is
grateful to the men and women serving
on the National Merit Badge
Subcommittee for the improvements
made in updating this pamphlet.


96 SNOW SPORTS
Snow Sports Resources.
Photo and Illustration Credits
MBBirdy via Getty Images—page 56
MSR/Mountain Safety Research,
courtesy—page 83
National Ski Areas Association,
courtesy—page 13
All other photos and illustrations
not mentioned above are the property
of or are protected by the Boy Scouts
of America.
Trevor Clark—page 32
Daniel Giles—page 82
John McDearmon—all illustrations on
pages 20, 27, 34, 58, and 66
Brian Payne—cover (snowboard boot,
snowboard); pages 8, 24, 31, 51, 53,
54, 55, 59, 60–61, 64, 65, and 87
Jesse Scofield—page 17
Scott Stenjem—page 47
W. Garth Dowling—pages 90, 92
Subscribe today at go.scoutlife.org/subscribe
Use promo code SLMBP15 to get a special
print + digital bundle offer priced just for Scouts!