GR APHIC
ARTS


GR APHIC ARTS
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Graphic-Arts or check Scoutbook
for the latest requirements.
35906
ISBN 978-0-8395-3374-0
©2024 Scouting America/Boy Scouts of America
2024 Printing


GRAPHIC ARTS 3





GRAPHIC ARTS 5
Contents
Graphic Communications Today. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
The Evolution of the Graphic Arts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
The Major Printing Processes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
Preparing to Print . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
Making the Layout . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
Postpress Operations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
Careers in the Graphic Arts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81
Graphic Arts Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92


6 GRAPHIC ARTS
This pamphlet will give you an introduction to the graphic arts. You will
be involved in your own hands-on creation of a printed piece, from start
to finish. Your merit badge counselor will help you get started and will
answer any questions you have that are not covered in this pamphlet.
Your counselor may also be able to help you locate the materials and
equipment you need.


GRAPHIC ARTS 7
.Graphic Communications Today
Graphic
Communications
Today
The field of graphic arts includes many kinds of work in the
printing and publishing industries. Graphic arts professionals
are involved in the creation of all kinds of printed communica-
tion, from business cards to books to billboards. The scope of
printing communications is huge.
What many people think of as printing—putting ink on a
sheet of paper—has undergone so many dramatic changes that
even its name has changed. The term used most often today
is graphic communications. This includes all of the processes,
materials, related fields, and people necessary to reproduce
words, ideas, pictures, and symbols into a printed form so
that others may see and react to them.
Greeting cards, bumper stickers, menus, cereal boxes, street
signs, candy wrappers—the list is endless. Just about anything
you can think of calls for some type of graphic arts treatment.
For example, the production of a colorful, eye-catching poster
could start with a graphic designer who works with a client’s
idea and message. The designer plans the way the poster will
look and selects the typefaces, colors, paper, and printing process.
Artists could work on the project, too, by creating illustrations or
photographs. Skilled technicians prepare the piece for printing,
operate printing equipment, carefully watch the results, and make
adjustments to get the best quality in every poster.
Graphic arts professionals produce all sorts of printed
materials that communicate in their own ways. You will
discover how graphic arts affects us all, whether or not we
realize it.
The word
graphic comes
from the Greek
word graphein,
which means
“to write.”
Anything that is
presented as
written words
or pictures
is graphic.


Petroglyphs in a canyon in Tamgaly, Kazakhstan


GRAPHIC ARTS 9
.The Evolution of the Graphic Arts
The Evolution of the
Graphic Arts
The story of graphic communications begins with the rock paint-
ings people used long ago as a simple means of communication.
Over time, people developed standardized writing systems to
communicate. The invention of movable type with a printing
press in the 1400s was a major turning point in the history of
graphic arts, as it made mass production of printed materials
possible for the first time. The advent of computers in the late
20th century marked another watershed in the history of graphic
communications, enabling printers to use digital processes to set
pages of text and graphics with less effort and greater speed.
From Pictures to Writing Systems
No one knows exactly how long ago
humans started to create pictures for others
to see and understand, but paintings on
rocks and cave walls have been found
on every continent except Antarctica.
Scientists may have discovered the world’s
oldest known cave paintings in the Fumane
Cave in northern Italy. Although analysis
is ongoing, these paintings are believed to
be between 32,000 and 36,500 years old.
Some archaeologists believe cave paintings
found near Avignon, France, to be more
than 30,000 years old.
Thousands of years ago, several
civilizations developed picture writing
systems. A simple drawing, called a
pictograph, stood for an object, a person,
or an action. A combination of pictographs
told a story or recorded information.
Pictographs, or rock paintings, from
the Bronze Age


10 GRAPHIC ARTS
The Evolution of the Graphic Arts.
In Sumer (an area in present-day Iraq), writers used a
writing tool made of bone, wood, or reed to mark on a soft
clay tablet, which later dried and made a permanent record.
A simple drawing of the head of an ox and three dots recorded
three oxen. Pictographs evolved into symbols that stood for
words in a writing system called cuneiform (kyoo-NEE-ih-form)
writing. People who spoke different languages adapted this
system for their writing.
The ancient Egyptians used a picture-writing system called
hieroglyphics. Each hieroglyph was a symbol that represented
an object or idea.
Several thousand years ago, the Chinese created a writing
system with thousands of characters representing objects, ideas,
and sounds. They have kept this system, modernizing the
characters and adding new ones over hundreds of years.
Cuneiform tablet Egyptian hieroglyphs


GRAPHIC ARTS 11
.The Evolution of the Graphic Arts
Next Step: The Alphabets
In an alphabet, a letter stands for a sound. Different
cultures formed alphabets based on cuneiform script and
Egyptian hieroglyphics.
The Phoenicians (fuh-NEE-shuns), who lived along the
coast of what is now Lebanon and Syria, were sailors and traders
who explored the Mediterranean Sea. Their alphabet, believed to
be developed about 1200 b.c., traveled with them and spread to
Spain and Greece.
Historians believe the Greeks formed their alphabet around
800 b.c., adapting signs from the Phoenician alphabet and
assigning vowel sounds to some of the Phoenician characters.
They also added new letters.
Next, the Romans based their alphabet on the Greek alpha-
bet. They changed the design of some letters and added a few
new ones. The Roman alphabet is the one we use for English
and western European languages.
Printing Begins
Before the invention of printing methods, documents and books
were produced by hand. Each copy was handwritten by a writer
known as a scribe. It was a slow process, so books were not
widely available and were very expensive. There had to be a
faster way.
The Chinese invented a way of printing in about a.d. 500,
by carving a wooden block with a whole page of text. The char-
acters were carved in relief, that is, the carver cut out the area
around each character, leaving the character raised up from the
background. (If you have ever used a rubber stamp, the letters
or pictures on the stamp are in relief.) The characters were also
carved in reverse. When the printer inked the block and placed
a sheet of paper on it, the result was a page that read correctly.
The Chinese used woodblocks to print books in the form
of scrolls.
The word
alphabet comes
from the first
two letters of the
Greek writing
system, alpha
and beta.
GREEKPHOENICIAN ROMAN
Some scholars
consider the
Korean alphabet
to be the most
logical writing
system in the
world because
the shape of each
consonant mimics
the shape of a
speaker’s mouth
when pronouncing
the letter.


12 GRAPHIC ARTS
The Evolution of the Graphic Arts.
A Chinese printer, Pi Sheng, made the first movable type
between a.d. 1041 and 1049, with each character in relief on a
separate piece of baked clay. Printers formed a page by arrang-
ing the type in rows in an iron frame. They inked the type,
placed the paper on it, and hand-rubbed the paper to produce
the printed page. After printing, the movable type could be
used again, but the printing process still was very slow.
Movable type was not a lasting success. Woodblock printing
again became the most widely used method in Asia, and knowl-
edge of movable type did not reach Europe until the 1400s.
Europe: From Manuscript Books to Printing
In European history, the period from a.d. 476 to 1453 is
known as the Middle Ages. This period began with the fall
of the Roman Empire. It was a time of many wars, invasions,
and instability.
Books were scarce. Those that did
exist were sometimes lettered on scrolls.
Later books were made with pages sewn
together between covers. Scribes and art-
ists worked months, even years, copying
by hand Bibles, prayer books, history
books, or books about medicine or
herbs. These books were called
illuminated manuscripts, because
they were illustrated with colorful
pictures, borders, and other decora-
tions called illuminations.
Only the wealthiest people
could afford books. As times
changed, the common people
wanted more knowledge. By the
1400s, they wanted to learn to
read, and they needed books.
A Buddhist
prayer printed
on a scroll in
a.d. 868 is thought
to be the oldest
complete book
in existence.
Many early books were decorated with
colorful artwork called illuminations.


GRAPHIC ARTS 13
.The Evolution of the Graphic Arts
Gutenberg’s Contribution
Johann Gutenberg (1397–1468) of Germany was a goldsmith
who is credited with the inventions that introduced modern
printing to Europe: cast-metal movable type, the printing press,
and ink. Gutenberg made movable type by making a bar of hard
steel, called a punch, and carving a letter in relief on the end of
it. The letter read backwards. He stamped the punch into a block
of soft copper, leaving a letter-shaped depression. This was the
matrix (the mold) for the letter. He fitted pieces of wood together
to make a small mold with the matrix for the letter in the
bottom. Then he poured in a mixture of molten metals. When
the metal hardened, he took the wooden mold apart.
The result was a slender block of metal with the letter in
relief on the tip, reading backwards. Gutenberg could cast
hundreds of each letter of the alphabet with this method. His
wooden mold was adjustable for the narrowest and widest letters.
His letters were in the blackletter style (sometimes called text)
that scribes used to hand-letter books. He even produced slight
variations of each letter, so the text would look handwritten.
As time went on, printers designed type that was easier
to read. Today there is a wide choice of typefaces, or type of
a particular design, for all purposes. You will read about type
choices in the “Preparing to Print” chapter.
Gutenberg turned a wooden wine press (used for
crushing grapes) into a printing press. The
printers inked the type, placed a sheet of
paper on it, and pulled a handle that
operated the press and put pressure on the
paper. They removed the paper and inked
again. Though printing was still a hand
operation, Gutenberg made it much faster to
print many copies of a book. This type of
press was used for the next 350 years.


14 GRAPHIC ARTS
The Evolution of the Graphic Arts.
Gutenberg’s crowning achievement was the Gutenberg
Bible, published around 1455. Gutenberg and his employees
used six presses to print 200 copies. Gutenberg’s methods
spread to printers in German towns and then to Italy, France,
Holland, England, and Spain. Books, so long out of reach for
most people, were now available.
Gutenberg’s invention coincided with the end of the
Middle Ages and the beginning of the Renaissance, a period in
history when a revival of art, literature, and learning occurred
throughout Europe. Gutenberg had opened the way for knowl-
edge and communication. When he died, an inscription at his
burial place called him “the inventor of the art of printing and
deserver of the highest honors of every nation and tongue.”
Early Printing in the Americas
The Spanish, who brought the first printing press to the
New World, printed the first book in the Americas in 1539
in Mexico City.
In the British American colonies, the first press from
England was set up in 1638 at Harvard College in Cambridge,
Massachusetts. In 1649, master printer Samuel Green took over
the press at Harvard College. In 1663, he produced the first
Bible printed in the colonies. The Bible was also the first book
printed in an American Indian language. It was a translation
of the Bible in the language of the Algonquin tribe.
The earliest
known page of
a book printed by
Gutenberg is from
a Latin textbook
published in 1448.
A page from the Gutenberg Bible


GRAPHIC ARTS 15
.The Evolution of the Graphic Arts
More presses were set up. Printers were often the writers,
editors, and publishers of newspapers. Newspapers and the
people who printed them were important in the colonies’ surge
toward independence. For example, John Peter Zenger, printer
and editor of the New-York Weekly Journal, was arrested in
1734 for publishing articles that criticized the colonial governor.
He was imprisoned for nine months before his trial. The jury
decided that although Zenger had broken the law, he had
printed the truth, so he was set free. This freed newspapers
to voice the colonists’ views about England’s rule during the
next 40 years. When the colonies gained independence from
England, the Founding Fathers guaranteed freedom of the
press in the U.S. Constitution.
Major changes occurred in printing with the invention
of the steam-powered press in 1811, which made printing four
times faster. Later, the rotary press quadrupled printing speed
by using rollers to feed paper across a printing cylinder.
Typesetting sped up when American inventor Ottmar
Mergenthaler introduced the Linotype machine in 1886. When
the operator pressed keys, the machine lined up brass molds for
letters and filled them with molten lead, casting complete lines
of type. After printing, the lead was melted down and reused.
As time went on, new printing processes and faster presses
powered by electricity answered the need for greater mass
communication. Phototypesetting in the 1950s, computer
typesetting in the 1960s, desktop publishing in the 1980s, and
direct-to-plate technology today have brought immense change.
Benjamin Franklin (1706–1790), one of the
most important Americans of all time, was
apprenticed as a printer. In 1726, he bought
his own print shop and wrote, printed, and
sold thousands of copies of his Poor Richard’s
Almanack. Franklin published a newspaper,
the Pennsylvania Gazette, and many books.
After retiring from printing, he became a
statesman and diplomat.


CAMP
COOKERY
FOR SMALL GROUPS
x RECIPES FOR GROUPS OF EIGHT x
™


GRAPHIC ARTS 17
.The Major Printing Processes
The Major Printing
Processes
There are five major printing processes in the graphic arts
industry today: relief printing, lithography, screen printing,
gravure (or rotogravure), and electronic/digital printing.
Relief Printing
Relief printing uses a raised surface to press ink onto paper. The
most common forms of relief printing are letterpress
and flexography.
Letterpress Printing
Letterpress is one of the oldest printing methods, with its origins
in the movable type invented in China in the 11th century and
in Germany in the 15th century. The significance of Johann
Gutenberg’s invention was that his movable metal type was
reusable. Individual letters could be set by hand for a printing
job, printed, and then taken apart and used in another project.
Printers used handset type until the late 1800s.
Letterpress printing was the dominant process for 500 years,
but new technologies in the last 50 years have offered better and
more efficient ways to do printing. Letterpress today has taken on
a more modern look. Although it is not as widely used as the
other major printing processes, it is still an important method
within the printing industry. In some cases, hard plastic plates are
used in place of the metal type of the past for printing packaging
such as specialty labels and beverage cans.
Many individual private-press printers continue to use the
traditional letterpress methods with equipment that is 100 years
old or older. They print stationery, business cards, books,
greeting cards, wedding invitations, and fliers, and incorporate
special effects such as embossing, foil stamping, and die-
cutting. These effects are discussed in the “Postpress
Operations” chapter.
RELIEF
GRAVURE
SCREEN PRINTING
LITHOGRAPHY


18 GRAPHIC ARTS
The Major Printing Processes.
The Type Case. The case that held the individual letters of
Gutenberg’s type changed little during its first 400 years. But, in
1859, Tom Rooker of the New York Tribune newspaper received
a patent for arranging a type case according to how frequently
particular characters were used. This case is most likely the one
we refer to today as the California job case.
The Press. As with the type case, the printing press changed
very little during its first 400 years. Printers used converted
wine presses made mostly of wood. In England during the
early 1800s, Lord Stanhope produced the first press completely
constructed of iron. It could print a full-sized sheet.
The press that is still used today to print handset type is
called a platen press. It works on a simple principle: A flat type
surface and a sheet of paper are alternately pressed together to
make an impression and moved apart to allow the type to be
inked and a fresh sheet of paper to be substituted.
In letterpress
printing, a raised
metal (or hard
plastic) surface
contains the
image to be printed.
This surface is
coated with ink
and then pressed
against a piece of
paper, transferring
the ink to the paper.
The printing done by letterpress was once called
typography, from the Greek word typos, meaning
“impression” or “cast.” Typography now refers to the
style and appearance of printed matter. A typographer
is a person who is skilled in the design, choice, and
arrangement of type.
ffi
j
?
!
z
x
q
b c d i s f g ff 9
fi 0
A B C D E
l m n h o y p w ^,
EN QUADS
EM QUADS
H I K L M
v u t a r . -
P
X Y Z J U
Q R S T
N
&
V
O
ffl
W2 EM
AND
3 EM
QUADS
; :
3 EM
SPACES
e
fl ’
4 EM
5 EM
k 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 $ Æ¢ Œ
F
æ
G
œ
California job case


GRAPHIC ARTS 19
.The Major Printing Processes
PRINTING AND SAFETY
You must be careful when setting type. Check to see that the
“nicks” on the individual letters are always facing up in your
composing stick, a small adjustable tray you hold in your left
hand and into which you place individual letters as you take
them from the job case to form words and sentences. Choose a
type font that is easy to read. Make a proof and proofread your
copy before printing your final sheets. Clean and replace each
piece of type in its proper compartment within the job case.
Caution: Be sure you feel comfortable with
the instructions you receive about the way the
platen press operates. You must operate this
piece of equipment only under direct adult
supervision and with total concentration
because it can severely damage your hand
if not operated correctly.
Some schools and smaller print shops still use a hand-operated
platen press like the one shown here.
If you decide to use the letterpress printing process to
complete your merit badge requirements, you will find
that learning how to handset type will be a valuable
and enjoyable experience. You also will know how
printers worked hundreds of years ago.


20 GRAPHIC ARTS
The Major Printing Processes.
Flexography
First introduced in the early 20th century, flexography is one
of the newer relief printing processes. It uses a flexible rubber
or photopolymer plate with a raised image area to press ink
onto a substrate (print-receiving surface). Depending on the
printing project, the substrate might be paper or plastic. Using
rubber stamps is a simplified flexographic printing process.
Today, modern flexography is always done on a rotary
press, with the “flexo” printing plate on a cylinder. Printing
by the flexographic process is ideal for the packaging industry
because of the simplicity of operation and the ability to print on
a wide variety of surfaces. Candy wrappers, labels, milk cartons,
and gift wrap are examples of items printed with flexography.
The process consists of three major units: infeed, printing,
and delivery units. Most flexography is done on roll-fed materials
such as film, foil, and laminates used in the food industry. The
inks used in flexography are much thinner than those used in
most other processes, and require a much simpler inking system.
Today, flexographic plates are made using computer-generated
images and a light-sensitive photopolymer resin. Layouts for
flexography are converted into a high-contrast negative film.
Ultraviolet light passes through the negative image and alters the
resin’s molecular structure to create the flexographic plate. There
are now plates made directly from the computer called computer
to plate, or CTP.
The difference
between
traditional
letterpress and
flexography is
that the raised
surface for
flexography is
made of plastic
or rubber instead
of metal.
DOCTOR BLADE
ANILOX ROLL (CARRIES
THE INK FROM THE FOUN-
TAIN ROLL TO THE PRINT-
ING PLATE)
FOUNTAIN ROLL
PLATE CYLINDER
PLATE
PRINT
IMPRESSION
CYLINDER
SUBSTRATE
Flexographic press


GRAPHIC ARTS 21
.The Major Printing Processes
Offset Lithography
Lithography is based on the principle that oil and water do not
mix. The image area of a surface is chemically treated to attract
oil (or grease or ink) and repel water. The nonimage part of the
surface attracts water but repels oil. A wet roller runs over the
printing surface, depositing water in the nonimage area and
leaving the image area dry.
A second roller with an oil-based ink is also rolled over
the surface. The ink from this second roller is attracted to the
dry image area and repelled by the wet nonimage area. The
substrate is then pressed against the printing surface, and the
ink is transferred from the image area to the substrate.
The most common kind of lithographic printing today
is offset lithography, sometimes referred to simply as offset.
In offset lithography, the inked image is transferred (or “offset”)
to a rubber surface called a blanket. The blanket is then pressed
against the paper, transferring the inked image from the blanket
to the paper. Products printed by offset lithography include many
items on paper, paperboard, and other substrates, such as metal
and plastic. Letterhead, business cards, books, magazines,
brochures, calendars, posters, and even cans and credit cards
are just a few examples. Offset lithography has advanced to
become the most widely used printing process today.
Lithography
means “stone
writing” because
originally the
printing surface
was a piece of
limestone that had
been ground flat.
Lithography was
used by many
great artists in
the 19th century.
Today, only artists
use stones; today’s
lithographic
printing plates are
made from sheets
of aluminum.
The lithographic process was developed by the German
printer Alois Senefelder about 1798. Senefelder was
looking for an inexpensive way to print plays and
musical scores. Limestone was available from quarries
near his home. He wrote in reverse on a flat block of
stone with a piece of greasy chalk and then applied water
to the entire stone. The water coated only the areas not
touched by the chalk. Oil-based ink was repelled by the
wet areas and attracted to the greasy image. When he
placed paper in contact with the stone, the inked image
transferred to the paper. Senefelder also developed a
printing press to handle the heavy stone.


22 GRAPHIC ARTS
The Major Printing Processes.
Using Offset Lithography
If you choose to complete requirement 4 using offset lithography,
you will need access to a shop that will allow you to do all the
necessary steps that lead to making a plate for the press. How
you make the plate will depend on what equipment is available.
Review the platemaking options below and, with help from
your merit badge counselor, choose the option that matches
the equipment available to you. Then go on to read the details
for your choice.
Here is the traditional method.
Step 1—Make a traditional pasteup or output a digital version
to a laser printer.
Step 2—Make a high-contrast negative using a process camera.
Step 3—Strip a flat. (See the section on stripping that follows.)
Step 4—Expose and process the offset plate.
Use this method if you have a digital layout and an imagesetter.
Step 1—Output your layout to film.
Step 2—Strip a flat.
Step 3—Expose and process the plate.
If you have a digital layout and a platesetter, output your file
directly to the plate material and process it.
In offset printing,
the ink adheres
only to the image
area—if the ink
and moisture
are in the right
balance. The
moisture roller
and the ink
rollers must
operate with the
correct pressure
on the plate, and
the amount of
water and ink
that is fed must
be regulated.
WATER INK
BLANKET
CYLINDER
PLATE
CYLINDER
PAPER
IMPRESSION
CYLINDER
Diagram of a three-
cylinder offset press.
As the cylinders turn,
water wets the non-
image areas on the plate
cylinder, and ink adheres
to the image areas. The
blanket cylinder picks
up the ink from the
plate cylinder. As the
paper passes between
the offset cylinder and
the smooth impression
cylinder, the paper picks
up the image from the
offset cylinder.


GRAPHIC ARTS 23
.The Major Printing Processes
Stripping a Flat
Stripping is the process of attaching the negative (or negatives)
to a masking sheet so everything is in the correct position for
making the plate. The result of the stripping operation is called
a flat. Stripping is done on a light table, which has a light source
under a frosted white acrylic or glass surface.
The masking sheet can be vinyl or paper, but it must be
translucent to regular light, meaning it will transmit light but not
give a clear view through it. The masking sheet must block
ultraviolet light and typically is a special yellow or orange paper
called goldenrod.
The procedures to make a flat vary, but they generally are
as follows:
Step 1—Square the masking sheet on the glass and draw
guidelines—if guidelines are not preprinted on the masking
sheet. These guidelines serve to locate where the image can
print for making the plate and for the press.
Step 2—Mark the gripper bite allowance on the edge of the
paper that is going into the press first.
Tape the negative to the goldenrod paper. Turn the flat over and cut out the
image area.
Grippers are mechanical “fingers” on the press that take hold of the
paper and guide it through the press. The gripper bite allowance, which
must be in a nonprinting area, is the space needed on the lead edge of
the paper so the grippers have room to grab the sheet.
3 4


24 GRAPHIC ARTS
The Major Printing Processes.
Step 3—Position the negative, squaring it
to the guidelines. Tape the negative to the
masking sheet, with the film base toward
the sheet.
Step 4—Turn the flat over. Carefully cut
windows in the goldenrod so light can pass
through the image areas of the negative,
only where you need to show the image.
Do not cut the negative.
Step 5—Use a small paintbrush and opaque
to cover pinholes (tiny transparent areas that
light can get through, usually caused by
dust particles) or scratches. Opaque is a red,
thin, smooth liquid that keeps light from
coming through the negative. Allow
it to dry before handling the flat.
Platemaking
Different kinds of plates are available, depending on the length
of the press run (the number of copies you will print) and other
considerations, so follow instructions for the plate you are
using. All plate surfaces are light-sensitive and should be used
under subdued or yellow light. Handle the plate on the edges to
prevent fingerprints, and be careful not to scratch or bend it.
Get proper instructions on the exposure system to be used,
including safety precautions. This is the general procedure.
Step 1—Place the plate on the base of the vacuum frame, with
the light-sensitive surface up. Place the flat on top of the plate,
with the text “right reading” (so you can read it) and the
edges squared.
Step 2—Close the frame and use the vacuum system to bring
the plate and flat tightly together. Check to see that the flat
covers the plate and is square to it.
Step 3—Expose for the required time. As a safety precaution,
never look directly at the light source.
Step 4—Develop or process the plate according to the manu-
facturer’s instructions. The image should be solid and even in
color. Preserve the plate by spreading gum arabic on it. This
gum protects the plate from corrosion during the time between
when the plate is made and when it is used on the press.
Cover any nonimage marks with opaque.
5
You may need
to use gloves
to protect your
hands from stains.


GRAPHIC ARTS 25
.The Major Printing Processes
Develop the plate.Expose the plate to light.
Insert the plate into the vacuum frame. Place the flat on top of the plate in the
vacuum frame.
1 2
3 4


26 GRAPHIC ARTS
The Major Printing Processes.
Presswork
Presswork is a major and complicated step. Make sure you
understand the operation of the press and safety precautions
before starting. Follow instructions closely.
Presswork preparation may vary but will include the
following steps.
Step 1—Lubricate the press, following specifications.
Step 2—Load paper in the paper feed tray or table.
Step 3—Set the paper feed and paper delivery systems. (The
delivery system stacks the sheets after they are printed.)
Step 4—Fill and set the ink fountain for a smooth and even flow.
Step 5—Prepare the dampening or fountain solution and place the
storage bottle on the press. Predampen the rollers and set the speed.
Step 6—If necessary, punch gripper holes in the plate. Then
mount the plate and dampen it, following instructions.
Step 7—Follow these operational steps.
1. Turn on the press.
2. Apply moisture to the plate.
3. Apply ink. Adjust the flow of moistening solution and ink.
4. Set the paper feed. Turn on the paper feed. Complete
the run.
Mount the plate on
the press.
6


GRAPHIC ARTS 27
.The Major Printing Processes
Adjust the flow of dampening or fountain
solution and ink.
Set the paper feed.
Operate the offset press. Complete the press run.
7-3 7-4


28 GRAPHIC ARTS
The Major Printing Processes.
On certain presses, some of these steps may be combined with
a single-lever operation. To stop, reverse the steps.
When your printing job is complete, clean the press and
put everything in order, with cleaning rags in a safety can.
Preserve the plate with gum arabic.
Check the first copies for correct margins, even ink
coverage, and squareness. Make adjustments and
print the required number of good-quality copies.
Offset presses like these are used in many schools and small print shops.


GRAPHIC ARTS 29
.The Major Printing Processes
Screen Printing
Screen printing, which uses a stencil and a fine screen mesh,
is one of the most versatile printing methods because it can be
used to print on almost any substrate. Printers often use screen
printing to print on items such as T-shirts, computer circuit
boards, and other surfaces that cannot be run through typical
printing presses.
The mesh screen, usually made of polyester fabric, is
stretched over a wooden or metal frame. The frame is placed
on top of the substrate being printed, and ink is placed in the
frame, on top of the screen mesh. Then a wide flexible blade
called a squeegee is dragged across the screen, pressing ink
through the openings in the mesh wherever the stencil has
openings in it. When the ink goes through the stencil, it
leaves the stencil’s image on the substrate.
A Short History of Stencil Printing
Stencil printing is an ancient art. In one early form,
people pierced patterns in leaves and painted
through the openings to make a design. The Chinese
and Egyptians cut stencils to print designs on fabric
and walls.
The Japanese became highly skilled in stencil
printing, using special waterproof paper so that
dyes would not soak through. To support delicate
pieces of the stencil, they glued a fine network of
human hairs across the openings.
Eventually, stencil craft spread through western
Europe and was used commercially in England and
France to decorate furniture and wallpaper. By the
1870s, the French and Germans were experimenting with the idea of
using a stencil with a screen of woven silk fabric. In 1907, Samuel Simon
of Manchester, England, patented the method. He stretched the fabric in
the frame, attached a stencil to the screen, printed through the silk and
stencil, and then removed the stencil.
The silk-screen process developed into a commercial printing process
in the United States during World War I. It was used to decorate flags,
pennants, and banners. In 1929, a new stencil material, a knife-cut film
tissue, was introduced. This gave smoother edges to stencils.


30 GRAPHIC ARTS
The Major Printing Processes.
Screen printing works well on a
variety of substrates.
Today’s Technology
New Fabrics. Silk was the primary screen fabric for many
years, but it has been almost completely replaced in commercial
printing by polyester and stainless-steel mesh. These materials
provide greater strength, more uniform thread diameter, and a
variety of mesh types. They are also easier to reuse, so they are
more economical.
New Stencil Materials. The stencil material has also improved.
Direct and indirect photographic stencil materials enable the screen
printer to reproduce designs of greater detail and intricacy. For
direct stencils, the stencil material is attached to the screen before
the image is exposed onto the stencil. For indirect stencils, the
image is exposed or cut into the stencil material before the stencil
material is attached to the fabric. There are now computer-to-plate
(CTP) methods for making screen-printing stencils.
New Presses. Electronic circuit boards provide a great
example of how much detail can be reproduced with screen
printing. The board starts out with a uniform coating of
electrical conducting material. The pattern of the circuitry
is then screen printed with an ink called acid-resist. The
board is then dipped in acid, which eats away the
conducting coating wherever it is not covered with the
screen-printed acid-resist. When the resist is removed,
the conducting circuit pattern is left on the board. Then
the electronic components are applied. Screen printing
also is used to print watch faces, automotive gauges,
industrial instrument panels, T-shirts, and other
clothing. Automated presses have sped up the screen
printing process. Large, multicolor screen-printing
presses enable printers to produce colorful
billboard advertisements.


GRAPHIC ARTS 31
.The Major Printing Processes
Inks and Versatility. Screen printing is used wherever a thick,
brilliant film of ink is required. Outdoor signs, bumper stickers,
and decals rely on screen printing for their rich color and dura-
bility. The versatility of today’s screen printing owes a great
deal to the variety of inks that can be printed through a screen.
Printing Surfaces. Screen printers can print successfully on
paper, metal, wood, many kinds of plastics, glass, ceramics,
cloth, and card stock—almost any material. The process makes
printing possible on substrates of different shapes and sizes.
Screen printing is the primary method used to print on oddly
shaped bottles, jars, and other product containers.
Screen-printed textiles are a major business, and custom-
printed T-shirts are a popular form of advertising, promotion,
and sales. Today’s T-shirt screen printer can print almost any
kind of design, ranging from simple single-color logos and
symbols to elaborate designs using a rainbow of colors and
a variety of ink types.
The Process
The Design. The printing process begins with a design.
You will adapt your design to work with the type of stencil,
ink, and substrate you plan to use.
Screen printing works best when your design is made up of
large or moderately sized detail, and the ink is applied in a
thick, uniform film. Designs with many fine lines, small detail,
and a lot of type are not recommended for screen printing.
Check with your
counselor ahead
of time to find
out what kinds
of materials and
equipment will
be available for
you to use.
Plan a simple, single-color design to print on a poster, card, or
perhaps a T-shirt. (But keep in mind the quantity requirement 4
asks you to print.)


32 GRAPHIC ARTS
The Major Printing Processes.
The Stencil. Photographic stencils are the most commonly
used stencils today. They require a positive image original,
which will be placed in direct contact with a light-sensitized
stencil material and then exposed. The positive image original
can be produced using a graphic arts process camera or a high-
quality photocopy machine that can copy onto translucent
vellum or clear transparency film.
The Ink. A water-based air-drying ink is the easiest to use.
Your counselor can help you select the right type of ink for
the material you will be printing on.
Many hobby and craft stores sell screen printing kits for items
such as cards, posters, and T-shirts. Ask your counselor whether
a kit is available and suitable for your project.


GRAPHIC ARTS 33
.The Major Printing Processes
Preparing the Stencil and Screen
The most common type of screen-
printing stencil used today is the direct
emulsion stencil.
Step 1—The usual method to make a direct
emulsion stencil is to apply a uniform film
of diazo compound (a light-sensitive
emulsion) using a special scoop-coater
or a stiff-bladed squeegee. Follow the
manufacturer’s instructions for preparing
and coating your screen.
Step 2—Allow the emulsion to dry on the
screen in the dark. Once dried, it will be
sensitive to light. The bottom of the sensi-
tized screen is placed in contact with the
film positive image of your design. This
may be done in a special vacuum exposure
frame. You also may use a simpler method.
Place a flat piece of sponge foam inside the
screen frame and position the screen bot-
tom-side up. Place the positive on the
screen’s stencil and a large sheet of glass
on top. The foam inside the screen frame
holds the screen in contact with the positive
and the glass.
Step 3—Expose the screen’s stencil to a
light source that has a lot of ultraviolet
light. Consult the manufacturer’s
recommendations about exposure times.
Remember, high-intensity ultraviolet light
can damage your eyes if you look directly
at it, so find out whether precautions are
necessary for the equipment you use.
Newer equipment has safety features. You
also may use natural sunlight to expose
your screen.
1
2a
2b
3


34 GRAPHIC ARTS
The Major Printing Processes.
Step 4—Wash out the image area. With most direct emulsions,
you can easily wash out the design with warm water. When all
image areas are free of unwanted stencil material, blot the
screen dry with paper towels.
Step 5—Use gummed kraft paper packing tape to seal the
inside of the frame. Cut four pieces of tape—two pieces the
length of the top and bottom and two for the sides. Fold them,
glue side out, and adhere them to both the frame and the
mesh. This prevents ink from seeping between the mesh and
the frame.
Step 6—Turn the frame over and seal all the open areas
between the frame and the stencil. Use a special screen
blockout fluid or masking tape to cover these open areas.
Step 7—Check your screen carefully by holding it up to the
light and looking through it. Make sure all unwanted pinholes
and defects are covered up.
4
5
6
7


GRAPHIC ARTS 35
.The Major Printing Processes
PREPARING TO SCREEN PRINT
To set up your printing work area, do
the following.
Step 1—Choose an area that is free of clutter
and provides enough room for you to work
without crowding. Lay down some news-
papers to keep the work table clean, and get
your tools and equipment together. You will
need the following materials: a screen frame
and printing board, an ink spatula, a squee-
gee, and a substrate.
Step 2—Prepare an area to place your
printed pieces for drying. If you are working
in a print shop or classroom, you may find
special drying racks. You also can string a
clothesline and use clothespins to hold your
prints while they dry.
The Hand-Cut Stencil
If you are planning to make a hand-cut stencil, it is a good idea to use a
water-adhering stencil film when you are starting out. It is easier and safer
to use than the lacquer stencil film.
Keep your design as simple as possible. Use bold, simple shapes and
simple block letters. Avoid fine lines and fancy script letters that are difficult
to cut out. To make the simplest hand-cut stencil, cut a design in kraft paper
or butcher paper. Ask your counselor about the steps in this process.
Place the stencil over the substrate and lower the screen. After you
make the first pass with the ink, the stencil should stick to the bottom of
the screen when it is raised. This type of stencil may not last as long as a
stencil cut from film.
You may want to paint a design directly on the screen. Brush on the
design with a water-soluble solution and mask it with a non-water-soluble
solution. Then wash the design out, leaving the openings in the stencil for
printing. Seal the edges and pinholes as described above. If you use this
method, ask your counselor about appropriate solutions for painting the
design and masking.
1


36 GRAPHIC ARTS
The Major Printing Processes.
Step 3—Prepare to print. Attach the screen to the printing
board. (The printing board will be under the screen when you
print.) Locate the position of the image on the printing board.
Use strips of card stock and adhesive tape to locate at least
three register stops for aligning the image in the correct position
on the substrate. Registering means having the printed image in
the same place on each piece.
If you are printing on T-shirts, spray tacky adhesive on
the printing board to hold the shirt in place. For printing with
multiple colors, adhesive also helps register each color in the
proper place in the design.
PRINTING
Here are the steps for printing.
Step 1—Stir the ink thoroughly. Use the ink spatula to put a
sufficient amount of ink at the top of the screen frame, not on
the open parts of your stencil. Spread it to the width of your
design so that when you make your first print, all areas will
be covered.
Step 2—Use both hands to hold the squeegee. Hold the squeegee
almost upright, at an angle of about 60 degrees, at the top of
the screen frame. Applying even pressure, pull the squeegee
toward you slowly and evenly to force the ink through the
screen and onto your substrate.
A printing board
is a piece of wood
about 3 inches
wider all around
than your screen.
Attach it with
hinges to one end
of your frame.
For a smoother
printing surface,
tape poster board
or untextured
mat board over
the wood.
3a 3b


GRAPHIC ARTS 37
.The Major Printing Processes
Step 3—After completing the print stroke,
lift the screen frame off the surface and
return the squeegee to the top of the
frame, using a flood stroke to spread a
thin film of ink and prevent the screen
from drying out and blocking fresh ink.
(Some screens have a leg to hold the
frame up between prints, or you can
prop it with a small block of wood.)
Step 4—Carefully remove your printed
piece and put it in the drying area.
Step 5—Repeat the process until you have
printed the required number of pieces.
43
21
Some screen inks and solvents can be hazardous if used
incorrectly. Check with your counselor for instruction
about proper handling and ventilation requirements.
Also ask whether you should wear protective gloves for
clean up and about the proper disposal methods for any
hazardous waste products.


38 GRAPHIC ARTS
The Major Printing Processes.
CLEANING UP
Use the correct type of solvent for the ink you are using. Water-
based and acrylic inks are recommended because they wash up
with water. Oil-based flat colors and plastisol textile inks must
be cleaned up with mineral spirits or paint thinner.
Use absorbent cloth rags or special paper towels to clean
all equipment. Your counselor will guide you in specific cleanup
procedures and the proper disposal of any solvents and solvent-
soaked rags or cloths.
After cleaning the ink from the screen, remove the paper
tape and blockout fluid with warm water. Remove the stencil,
following the manufacturer’s instructions. You can remove some
stencils with ordinary warm water, but others require special
chemicals and/or high-pressure water washout.
Gravure Printing
Gravure printing (also called rotogravure) is considered the
finest method of reproducing pictures. However, the high cost of
making the printing plates usually limits its use to long press
runs. High-quality magazines, Sunday newspaper magazine
sections and color advertising fliers, large mail-order catalogs,
postage stamps, currency, and expensive books usually are
printed using gravure. Other products well-suited to gravure
printing include wall and floor coverings, plastic laminates
used for cabinets and countertops, and patterned vinyl surface
coverings used in the furniture and automotive industries. Many
packaging materials also are printed by gravure.
Gravure printing uses a recessed (sunken) surface shaped
like the image to be printed. The image to be printed is carried
in tiny cells (or wells) that are chemically etched or engraved
below the surface of the image carrier. The entire surface of the
image carrier is flooded with a thin, liquid ink. Then the surface
of the image carrier is wiped clean by a flexible steel doctor
blade, leaving ink in only the tiny cells. The ink is transferred to
the surface to be printed when that surface is tightly pressed
against the image carrier.
In gravure, as in other processes, the layout is either photo-
graphed or electronically captured as a computer file. Several
different methods are used to transfer the image to the printing
image carrier, or cylinder. Modern gravure technology uses
mechanical or laser engraving techniques to etch the cylinder
to make the recessed cells.
For easy cleanup
and disposal, use
water-based and
acrylic inks.


GRAPHIC ARTS 39
.The Major Printing Processes
There are some variations among image carriers for the
gravure process. The image carrier may be an etched, copper-
coated steel cylinder, or a wraparound plate, or sometimes even
a flat plate like those used in manual printing processes.
Gravure presses are single-color or multicolor. Unlike other
printing processes, all portions of the gravure image, both line
and continuous tone, must be converted into tiny dots. Ask
your counselor to show you some samples of gravure printing
or ask to visit a gravure printing shop to see the actual printing
process in operation.
Gravure printing press
Diagram of a
gravure press
IMPRESSION
CYLINDER
INK IN
THE CELLS
DOCTOR
BLADE
INK BATH
PAPER
PLATE
CYLINDER
Etched gravure
cylinder


40 GRAPHIC ARTS
The Major Printing Processes.
Electronic/Digital Printing
The newest process, digital printing, primarily uses electronic
methods to place the image directly onto the substrate.
Computers process digital information that is input from
scanners or digital cameras, photo compact discs (CDs),
the internet, and a wide variety of other image-gathering and
image-storage devices. All this digital image information can
be manipulated in the computer in ways that have never been
available before.
Digital cameras and computer systems have helped make
complex photographic operations quick and easy.


GRAPHIC ARTS 41
.The Major Printing Processes
Electrostatic printing, or xerography, uses reflected light
from an image on an original to apply electrical charges to the
substrate being printed. Toner, a powdered ink, has an opposite
electrical charge. The charged area of the substrate attracts the
toner. Then the substrate passes through a fuser that melts the
toner in place on the substrate. Laser printing works much like
the electrostatic process, but it does not use reflected light.
Instead, a laser receives instructions from a computer and
places the charge on the substrate. The toner-covered substrate
passes through a fuser to finish the process.
Ink-jet printing uses a series of microscopic sprayer nozzles
that squirt droplets or bubbles of ink onto the paper. A computer
“instructs” the nozzles to spray only where the image is to
appear. Ink-jet printers may be as small as a desktop computer
printer or a digital photo printer. They can also be more than
15 feet wide and capable of producing billboards.
Digital presses are high-speed, high-quality versions of
ink-jet and laser printers.
Digital duplicators are highly automated machines designed
to print on paper. The image to be printed is sent from a
computer to the duplicator, which makes a high-quality stencil.
The stencil is wrapped around a fine wire mesh cylinder. Ink is
then forced from the inside of the cylinder, through the open areas
of the stencil, and onto the paper. The basic idea of using a stencil
and a mesh is like screen printing.


42 GRAPHIC ARTS
The Major Printing Processes.
Output Devices
Output devices attached to these computers can produce
anything from a single black-and-white copy to large quantities
of full-color copies. Choosing the best output device depends
primarily on three factors: the quantity of copies needed,
the quality desired, and the amount and variety of color to
be printed.
• Single copies and small quantities printed with one or
more colors are generally made on desktop laser printers
and ink-jet printers.
• Medium quantities can be printed one color at a time on
digital duplicators.
• Large quantities can be printed quickly on toner-based
digital presses and high-speed laser printers.
• Larger quantities of single-color work are usually printed
using other processes, such as offset lithography.
Color printing in most processes is complicated and expensive.
The more expensive the setup, the more pieces you have to run
to make the job cost-effective. If you choose an expensive
method for a small printing job, the cost per printed piece may
be too great.
However, because of changes
in technology, printers constantly
reevaluate their choices of output
devices. On one hand, developments
in digital presses and high-speed laser
printers allow these machines to
print more quickly and handle
larger quantities. On the
other hand, the cost
of offset printing is
decreasing because
of digital platemaking.
Now printing large
quantities is not required
to reduce the cost of
each printed piece.


GRAPHIC ARTS 43
.The Major Printing Processes
Resolution
When preparing your layout on the computer, you
must consider the resolution of your output device.
The resolution is a measure of the clarity and detail
the output device can show, which affects the quality
of the image in the layout. The unit of measurement for
resolution is pixels per inch (ppi). A pixel is the smallest
mark, or picture element, the output device is capable
of creating. The higher the ppi number, the better the
resolution and the better the output will look.
Pixels are grouped together to make line art and text.
Laser printers produce traditional halftones by convert-
ing groups of pixels into large or small regularly spaced
dots, arranged in a grid. Ink-jet printers produce
stochastic halftones by converting groups of pixels
into same-size dots, arranged in a random way to
imitate a continuous-tone image.
Traditional halftone Stochastic halftone


44 GRAPHIC ARTS
The Major Printing Processes.
Graphic designers today produce layouts in electronic form.
A resident font
in an output
device, such as
a laser printer,
is a font that is
included in the
software that is
a permanent
part of the
output device.
Layouts
In electronic/digital printing, you create your layout in digital
form using desktop-publishing software. The result is a layout
of the design in electronic form. Specifics for preparing the
layout will vary with the software used, but here are a few
general guidelines.
• If you use a scanner to input line art, the resolution of the
scan does not need to be any greater than the resolution of
the output device.
• Any vector versions of the fonts you use in your design
should be available in your output device as resident fonts, or
the fonts should be in your computer system so they can be
downloaded to the output device.
• For scanning continuous-tone images, the rule of thumb is
that the resolution of the scan should be twice as much as
the desired line ruling (lines per inch) in the halftone you
will print.


GRAPHIC ARTS 45
.The Major Printing Processes
Printing
When the layout in electronic form is finished, you send it to the
output device for printing. This is called downloading the layout.
Depending on what equipment is available and suitable for your
project, you might be downloading your layout to a high-speed
laser printer, a digital press, or a digital duplicator.
When you download your layout to a digital duplicator,
a master is made and a sample, or test print, is printed. If the
sample is acceptable, you select
the quantity on the duplicator’s
control panel, and then the
duplicator prints the correct
number. In some systems, you
choose the quantity when the
file is downloaded.
Always be sure the file being sent in the download has no errors.
Otherwise, you will waste paper by printing incorrect sheets.
High-tech copiers can accept
electronic files for output.
Modern laser printers are capable of creating
highly detailed images at fast speeds.





GRAPHIC ARTS 47
.Preparing to Print
Preparing to Print
Every printing job requires planning. First, the printer has to
understand what type of job it is and what the finished piece is
expected to be. Then the printer decides which printing process
is best for the job. At that point, each step can be planned to
prepare the job for printing.
Some printing processes are better suited than others in
terms of speed and/or quality for a particular project. With so
many new technologies and options available to printers today,
planning is very important. At the start of your printing project,
you will decide which process to use so you can make the
correct preparations.
The beginning of a printing job can be broken into two
parts: the design and the layout. The design portion deals with
deciding how you will communicate your message and what
that message will look like. For example, if you want to
promote an event, you need to decide whether it would be
better to design a flier, a brochure, a poster, or a T-shirt for
printing. You will also decide what kind of design elements you
want to use. Design elements are the words and pictures of
your design. Printers usually refer to the words as text and the
pictures as graphics.
When you are ready to do the layout portion, you assemble
all the elements of your design to make a master, a completed
version that will be the basis of what you will be printing.
The printing process you plan to use and the
equipment you have available will determine the
way you assemble your layout.


48 GRAPHIC ARTS
Preparing to Print.
The Design Process
Step 1—The Thumbnail
When you are developing a design, think of a lot of different
ways to do it. Sometimes your first idea will be a good one.
Sometimes a better idea will come along later.
Your first step is to make thumbnail sketches. Your thumb-
nail sketch will be a simple pencil drawing of your design idea,
usually smaller than the size you plan for the printed piece. It
mainly shows proportion and the shape of the piece, with the
design elements drawn as basic geometric shapes (lines, circles,
rectangles, etc.). You can make small thumbnails rather quickly,
moving the design elements around.
You should make more than one thumbnail sketch. It is
a good way to think and change your mind, moving from one
design to the next and inventing different ideas. One idea will
lead to another. You will have several ideas to choose from,
and this will help you create the best possible design.
The term thumbnail comes from the tradition of early letterpress
printers who used their thumbnails to mark a soft clay or wax
tablet with their preliminary design plans.


.Preparing to Print
Step 2—The Rough
The next step is to choose your favorite
thumbnail and expand on that design. This
expansion of the thumbnail is called a rough.
A rough is drawn the actual size of the
planned piece, and it shows the design ele-
ments in greater detail than the thumbnail did.
The rough will serve as a guide to describe the
specifics of the design to others who may be
assisting in the production of the job.
• Draw the larger words, as best as you can
draw them, in the style and size they will
be in the printed piece.
• Show long paragraphs as a series of
straight lines.
• Pictures in the design should depict
minimum details. For example, you can
draw people as stick figures and objects
in the picture as basic geometric shapes.
Write notes off to the side of the rough to indicate the sizes and
styles of the type and the picture’s format and source. Write
these notes in a color different from the color you used for
design elements. This will make it easier to tell the difference
between the design elements and the notes that describe them.
(You may omit these
notes if you plan to
make a comprehen-
sive. See step 3.)


50 GRAPHIC ARTS
Preparing to Print.
Step 3—The Comprehensive
Sometimes there is a third step, called a comprehensive, or
comp. A comp is a very detailed, hand-drawn representation of
the way the final piece will look. A comp usually is made to
show a customer or client. Some customers may not be able to
interpret a rough, but a comprehensive will show them what
the design idea will look like when it is printed. Add notes
regarding type and pictures.
The comprehensive looks
pretty close to what the
finished product will be.
A computer is
sometimes used
to make a comp
instead, but the
thumbnails and
roughs may be
hand drawn.


GRAPHIC ARTS 51
.Preparing to Print
Text and Graphics
The design you create may contain both text and
graphics. Your choice of text and graphics and the
way you arrange them are important considerations.
For example, choosing an easy-to-read typeface will
help get your message across. On the other hand,
including too many images in your design may detract
from your overall message. Different text styles and
graphics can even communicate moods or emotions
that go beyond what the text says or what the
graphics show.
Type Classifications
Text can be organized into five different type
classifications: roman, sans serif, text, script,
and novelty.
Roman type has both heavy and light letter
strokes ending with serifs. Serifs are fine lines that
are drawn at the end of a main letter stroke. They
help a reader group together the individual letters
in a word, making it easier for a reader to see the
whole word and to follow a line of text across the
page. Roman text is typically the easiest to read
and is often used for body copy.
Sans serif type does not have serifs. The charac-
ters often are described as being plain or block letters.
This type is also easy to read and is often used for
headlines and for type set smaller than 10 points.
Script type is designed to look like cursive
handwriting. It often looks as though the letters
in each word are connected.
Novelty type does not fit neatly into any of the
above descriptions. It may have some characteristics
of other classifications or no resemblance to them.
Novelty type is unique and is sometimes called
decorative type.
Calligraphy is the art of producing artistic and elegant handwriting or lettering.
Blackletter type (sometimes called “text” or Old English) looks like the
calligraphy style of writing used in the illuminated manuscripts of the
Middle Ages.


52 GRAPHIC ARTS
Preparing to Print.
Within each type classification, there are different versions
called type families. For example, the type family called Palatino
is in the roman type classification. The Palatino family includes
different family “members,” or type styles, such as Palatino
condensed, Palatino expanded, Palatino bold, Palatino italic,
and other styles.
Traditionally, in letterpress printing, the term font was a
style of type from a particular family at a specific size, and each
font was usually stored in its own storage box called a job case.
Today, with type being stored digitally on computers, a font
generally refers to a particular type family (such as Palatino)
of a certain style (such as italic), with all sizes available within
the digital information that describes the font to the computer.
The size of type is measured in units called points. A point
is 1⁄72 of an inch. A typical point size for text in a book is
10 points. This type you are now reading is 10 points. Another
unit of measurement in printing is the pica (pronounced
PIE-ka). A pica is equal to 1⁄6 of an inch. That means there are
12 points to a pica and 6 picas in an inch. Picas are usually
used to measure the size of a column of type or occasionally
the size of a layout.
Sometimes, especially when printing jobs contain a lot
of text (such as books, magazines, or newspapers), a person
called a typesetter sets the type and outputs it (prints it out or
provides it via computer).
ASCENDERX-HEIGHT
POINT
MEASUREMENT
CAP-HEIGHT
DESCENDER
BASELINE
SERIF
Parts of type
Generally, it is not recommended to set type in all capital letters. To
ensure readability, do not set script or blackletter type in all caps.


GRAPHIC ARTS 53
.Preparing to Print
The term galley
comes from the
name for the
tray that held
the first draft
of handset type
in letterpress
printing.
This first output is sometimes called a galley proof. A proof-
reader reads the proof and looks for errors, marking any mistakes
with proofreader’s marks. The typesetter then makes the correc-
tions. When the job moves on to the next step in the production
process, it should be free of typesetting errors.
Different point sizes
Type family
Helvetica Neue Light
Helvetica Neue Medium
Helvetica Neue Bold
Helvetica Neue Heavy
Helvetica Neue Light Italic
Helvetica Neue Medium Italic
Helvetica Neue Bold Italic
Helvetica Neue Heavy Italic
Helvetica Neue Light Condensed
Helvetica Neue Medium Condensed
Helvetica Neue Bold Condensed
Helvetica Neue Heavy Condensed
Helvetica Neue Light Condensed Italic
Helvetica Neue Medium Condensed Italic
Helvetica Neue Bold Condensed Italic
Helvetica Neue Heavy Condensed Italic
This is 6-point Helvetica type.
This is 10-point Helvetica type.
This is 12-point Helvetica type.
This is 18-point Helvetica type.
This is 36-point
Helvetica type.


54 GRAPHIC ARTS
Preparing to Print.
Proofreader’s marks
APOSTROPHE
ASTERISK
CAPITALIZE
CARET; INSERT
CLOSE UP
COLON
COMMA
DELETE
EM DASH
EN DASH
EXCLAMATION POINT
FIX BROKEN TYPE
HYPHEN
LOWERCASE; SMALL LETTERS
NEW PARAGRAPH
PARENTHESIS
PERIOD
QUESTION MARK
QUOTATION MARKS
SEMICOLON
SPACE
SPELL OUT
STET; LET IT STAND
TRANSPOSE
TURN A REVERSED LETTER
WRONG FONT


GRAPHIC ARTS 55
.Preparing to Print
Examples of proofreader’s marks


56 GRAPHIC ARTS
Preparing to Print.
The initial proof is shown in figure A. The corrected, final proof—
ready for pasteup—is shown in figure C. Note how the
corrections marked in the marked-up proof in figure B affect
figure C. Then compare figures A and C.
THE SCOUT OATH
On my honor I will do my best
to do my Duty to God and myycountry
and to obey the Scout Law;
to help other people at all times
to keep myself physically strong,
mentally awake, and morally straight.
A
THE SCOUT OATH
On my honor I will do my best
to do my Duty to God and myycountry
and to obey the Scout Law;
to help other people at all times
to keep myself physically strong,
mentally awake, and morally straight.
B
THE SCOUT OATH
On my honor I will do my best
To do my duty to God and my country
and to obey the Scout Law;
To help other people at all times;
To keep myself physically strong,
mentally awake, and morally straight.
C


GRAPHIC ARTS 57
.Preparing to Print
Graphics
The word graphics means the artwork used in printing. There are
two categories of graphics: continuous-tone images and line art.
Line art is made up of lines, solid areas, and sometimes small
dots. Although it does not have real shades of gray as continuous-
tone images do, shades of gray can be imitated with fine lines called
cross-hatching or small irregularly spaced dots called stippling.
A continuous-tone image contains shades of tone or color like
a smudge of charcoal or a rainbow. Examples of continuous-tone
images are photographs from a camera, pencil drawings that
contain various shades of gray, watercolor or oil paintings, or any
image that has ranges of color and/or tone that are not represented
by dots or lines.
Continuous-tone images cannot be reproduced exactly
using traditional printing processes, although some of the newer
electronic/digital processes can make very close imitations. The
process used to print this book cannot make a close imitation of
continuous-tone images, so an example cannot be included.
Continuous-tone images must be converted to halftones to be
reproduced by printing processes.
Halftones are actually a special category of line art, and are
used to print images that look like continuous-tone images. A
halftone is a series of regularly spaced dots of different sizes. The
dots create an optical illusion that tricks the eye into thinking it sees
a continuous-tone image. The number of halftone dots per inch
(sometimes called lines per inch) usually ranges from 85 to 200.
Most of the halftones in this book are 200 dots per inch, or DPI.
DOT SHADING CROSS-HATCH SHADING
These examples show the different types of shading in line art.
SOLID SHADING


58 GRAPHIC ARTS
Preparing to Print.
The halftone dots are so small, the human eye cannot see the
individual dots unless they are magnified, but the eye does see an
overall effect that imitates continuous tones. The arrangement of
the halftone dots creates this effect. The halftone dots in the part
of an image that is supposed to look dark are big and fill most of
the halftone dot area. The halftone dots in the part of an image
that is supposed to look light are small and fill very little of the
halftone dot area.
Generally, halftones are made from a continuous-tone
image, such as a traditional photograph. In the past, the
continuous-tone image was photographed through a special
screen that created a halftone version of the original. Today it is
more common to take a continuous-tone image and scan it into
a computer or to take a picture with a digital camera. The
computer software then converts the digital file into a pattern of
small halftone dots that make up an image.
The line art and halftones you see in printed pieces may
have started out as photographs, pen-and-ink drawings,
paintings, or other traditional artwork. Today, some of these
printed graphic images may have been created on a computer.
All artwork—traditional art or computer art—needs to be
converted into a format that allows it to be printed. In the past,
these conversions involved some kind of photographic process,
but computer systems are now the primary way of making these
conversions. Computers can convert either traditional or
computer artwork into digital information that is stored in the
computer’s memory and can be used to prepare the artwork for
printing. The digital information is categorized as being either a
bitmapped image or a vector image.
This halftone shows an already-printed photo made up of dots
of different sizes; the enlarged portion shows the dot structure.


GRAPHIC ARTS 59
.Preparing to Print
A bitmapped or raster image is stored in the computer’s
memory using bits. A bit is the smallest piece of information
a computer can remember. It has a value of either 0 or 1. A
bitmapped graphic is represented in the computer’s memory as
a series of 0s and 1s that identify whether or not there is an
image on that part of the graphic (see diagram). It is usually
best not to enlarge a bitmapped image; doing so will make it
look jagged.
A vector image (sometimes called an object-oriented image)
is stored in the computer’s memory as a set of mathematical
drawing instructions the computer sends to the output device,
such as a printer or digital duplicator. The output device follows
the computer’s instructions to draw the best representation of
the graphic that the output device is capable of doing.
Vector image and file. Computer instructions for the output
device to draw the image.
Bitmapped image and file.
Note how the arrangement of
the 0s and 1s in the computer
file create the image.
Vector images will
still look sharp
and smooth
when enlarged.


60 GRAPHIC ARTS
Preparing to Print.
Design Concepts
When you are designing your printed piece, it is important to
choose the right text and graphics for your message. It is also
important to arrange those choices in an appealing and efficient
way that communicates your message effectively.
Different typefaces exist for a reason. Each type classification
is generally suited for a particular purpose. For example:
• Roman type is usually used for books, newspapers, magazines,
or any printing where there is a lot of continuous reading.
• Sans serif type is typically found in headlines, titles, and
other display situations. This type is well-suited for use at
very small sizes or for printing where you want to look at
words letter by letter, as in a dictionary or a phone book.
• Blackletter type has an “official” look and is often used for
religious documents or other important documents, such as
diplomas, certificates, and legal papers.
• Script type usually projects a sense of elegance and formality.
It is commonly used for wedding invitations or where the
appearance of ceremony or a carefully crafted human touch
is desired.
• Novelty type may be designed to look powerful, silly,
exciting, special, frantic, zany, or nearly any mood you
want. Novelty type should be used sparingly.


GRAPHIC ARTS 61
.Preparing to Print


62 GRAPHIC ARTS
Preparing to Print.
You can communicate your message through your choice
of type style, too. For example, italic type adds emphasis, and
bold type draws the reader’s attention.
Keep different type characteristics in mind and choose type
to enrich the message in your design. However, be careful not
to use too many typefaces in one design. Excessive typeface
use, which is easy and tempting when setting type on a
computer, can turn your design into something that ends up
looking busy and disorderly, like a ransom note pieced together
from words out of a magazine. In addition, avoid setting
sections of text in all capital letters—and never use “all caps”
with script or blackletter typefaces.
Your choice of graphics will be greatly affected by the
layout techniques and printing processes available to you. If the
graphic you want to use is the key to your design, that graphic
may determine the printing process you have to use. Or
sometimes the processes or equipment available to you will
determine the graphics you can use.
You may be able to create your own artwork, or you may
have artwork sources available to you. It is important that you
never use images or graphics from a source that is legally
copyrighted. Before you finish your design, ask your merit
badge counselor about possible artwork choices so you can
come up with a workable and effective solution for your
graphics.
The last step in finalizing your design is determining
balance—how to arrange the text and graphics for maximum
effect. Typically, design elements can be arranged either formally
or informally. Formal balance is a design arrangement where
the elements are placed about a center line and create a
symmetric appearance. With informal balance, the design
elements are arranged in a visually appealing way and are
placed to draw attention to a particular design element or to
invite the eye to flow along the page. The ultimate goal is to
arrange the elements of your design in a way that
communicates the message easily and effectively.


GRAPHIC ARTS 63
.Preparing to Print
Formal balance
Informal balance


64 GRAPHIC ARTS
Preparing to Print.
What Is Intellectual Property?
Anyone who has an interest in graphic arts and related fields should be
well-informed about intellectual property—property that originates from
the work of an individual’s mind or intellect. Early copyright law protect-
ed the economic interests of book publishers rather than the intellectual
rights of authors. Modern copyright law also protects the labor of elabo-
rating an idea. It does not, however, protect the idea itself. The concept
of what is called discovery also plays a role in intellectual property
rights. For example, a patent is awarded to one who can demonstrate
that he or she has invented something not previously known.
Intellectual property can be
owned, bought, and sold. Some
examples of intellectual property
include the following:
• Patents protect what makes things
work, like a chemical formula or
what makes a wheel turn.
• Trademarks are signs, such as
words and logos, that distinguish
goods and services.
• Product designs protect the appearance of a product, such as the
shape of an airplane or the design of a fashion item.
• Copyright is an automatic right that applies when the work is fixed,
that is, written or recorded in some way.
Countries have laws to help protect intellectual property for two
main reasons. One is to give creators legal rights to their creations and
to interpret the rights of the public to access those creations. The sec-
ond is to promote—as a deliberate act of government policy—creativity
and the dissemination and application of its results, and to encourage
fair trade, which would contribute to economic and social development.
Intellectual property rights concerns many people worldwide. This is
why the United Nations operates two sectors that help monitor intellec-
tual property rights. One is the World Trade Organization, a global inter-
national organization that deals with the rules of trade between nations.
The WTO helps “producers of goods and services, exporters, and
importers conduct their business.”


GRAPHIC ARTS 65
.Preparing to Print
Another is the World Intellectual Property Organization, which
describes itself as “dedicated to the use of intellectual property (patents,
copyright, trademarks, designs, etc.) as a means of stimulating innova-
tion and creativity.” The WIPO promotes “innovation and creativity for
the economic, social, and cultural development of all countries, through
a balanced and effective international intellectual property system.”
This system guides the development of laws that govern intellectual
property rights and the infrastructure necessary to apply and reinforce
those laws.
You might wonder how this all applies to you. The Scout Oath and
Scout Law relate directly to observing intellectual property law. Young
people frequently have an opportunity to copy or share content such
as music, videos, photographs, movies, games, and other media with
others, without permission from the owner. They may ask a friend to
make a copy for them to avoid having to pay for a copy themselves.
Scouts who knowingly make copies without permission are violat-
ing the Scout Oath’s pledge to be morally straight and the point of the
Scout Law calling on Scouts to be trustworthy. As a user of music,
games, and other content, it’s important to educate yourself about intel-
lectual property and to understand how unauthorized and illegal content
sharing harms others. After all, you may someday be a creator.





GRAPHIC ARTS 67
.Making the Layout
Making the Layout
There are two ways to make a layout—the final version of
the design you prepare for the printing process. One is to use
a traditional method called a pasteup. The other is to lay out
your design on a computer, using desktop-publishing software.
Except for handset letterpress printing, every printing process
discussed in this book starts with a layout made by one of these
two methods. Your choice of a layout method depends on the
equipment you have to work with and the printing process you
plan to use.
Discuss your production plan with your merit badge coun-
selor to make sure your plan will get your design to the press.
Once you have made the layout, you will be ready to move on
to the next step in the printing process you have chosen.
Making a Traditional Pasteup
The modern method of layout production is to use
desktop-publishing software on a computer to create the
final version of the design you prepare for the printing
process. Except for handset letterpress printing, every
printing process discussed in this book starts with a layout
made by this method.


68 GRAPHIC ARTS
Making the Layout.
Traditional Film Photographs
If you shoot photographs using film, you must have
your film developed. When you do so, you get back
both negatives and positives. In a negative, light
areas are dark, and dark areas are light. When a
negative is printed, you get a positive, which looks
like the view you saw with your eyes when you took
the picture.


GRAPHIC ARTS 69
.Making the Layout
Digital Photographs
Today, most people use a digital
camera for ease. Most smartphones
even have high-quality digital cameras.
Digital cameras, whether a separate
device or part of a phone, have a light-
sensitive sensor, which automatically
adjusts the film speed as pictures are
taken. Digital cameras do not use film.
Instead, they store images on a
memory card or built-in memory. You
can review pictures as you take them,
make digital adjustments (exposure,
light level, color, red-eye, balance, etc.)
to individual images, and delete the
ones you don’t want to keep. Digital
photography can be more cost effective
as well, since there is never a need to
buy or develop film, or to pay for prints of images that you don’t want.
For more information about digital cameras, see the Photography merit
badge pamphlet.
Making Layouts Using
Desktop-Publishing Software
Most layouts today are done on computer systems by using
software applications to make text documents and graphics
documents. It also is possible to take text and graphics made
from different applications and put them together in another
application to make a layout document. When layout artists
use software applications to create documents, they save
those documents in the computer memory as files.
Here are some of the tools you can use when using a computer
to make a layout.
• Use word-processing software to set type for text.
• Create bitmapped or vector graphics with painting, drawing,
or illustration software.
• Use computer clip art.


70 GRAPHIC ARTS
Making the Layout.
• Scan (electronically photograph) your own
graphic creations, using a scanner connected
to a computer. Do not scan copyrighted
material for your project.
• Download (transfer) both text and
graphics from the internet. (Make sure
you have your parent or guardian’s
permission before downloading
anything from the web.)
• Take photos with a digital
still camera, if available,
and download the photos
to the computer.
• After you have created your text and graphics, use a page
assembly software application to make a digital layout.
Procedures vary with different computers, software, and
scanners, so you will need special instruction to assemble
your layout on the computer. Check the manuals for the soft-
ware application you use or ask your counselor for assistance.


GRAPHIC ARTS 71
.Making the Layout
Once you have completed the file of your layout, it is time to
get the digital pasteup out of the computer—to output a copy
of it. The output device you choose will depend on what is
available and what printing process you plan to use for your
job. Output devices include the following:
• The computer’s printer, which prints a black image on
white paper. You can use the black-and-white image like
a traditional pasteup to make a high-contrast negative.
• An imagesetter, which makes a high-contrast piece of film
as a process camera does.
• A platesetter (digital platemaker), which makes a printing
plate that can be put on the press.
In addition, some computers are connected directly to digital
duplicators, electronic presses, high-speed laser printers, or
other production output devices that can print large amounts
of paper quickly. Read more about this in the chapter about the
major printing processes, under “Electronic/Digital Printing.”
Digital platemaker


CAMP
COOKERY
FOR SMALL GROUPS
x RECIPES FOR GROUPS OF EIGHT x
™


GRAPHIC ARTS 73
.Postpress Operations
Postpress Operations
Bindery and finishing describes everything that takes place after
the printed sheet leaves the press. (Some of these operations may
also be done before printing.) These operations include binding
(in a variety of methods), cutting or trimming, folding, collating
(gathering), drilling or punching, stitching or stapling, padding,
die-cutting, embossing, foil stamping, and perforating.
Small printing establishments complete these tasks on
small, fairly simple pieces of equipment. Large printing
establishments use larger and more sophisticated equipment
for binding and finishing. Some of the equipment may be
connected directly to the printing presses.
Steps in handbinding a book
STEP 1—ASSEMBLING
PRINTED SHEETS FOR
THE BOOK
STEP 2—FOLDING
THE SHEETS INTO
SIGNATURES
STEP 4—SEWING
THE SIGNATURES
TOGETHER
STEP 5—TIPPING
ON (GLUING) THE
ENDSHEETS
STEP 3—COLLATING
(GATHERING) THE
SIGNATURES IN THE
CORRECT ORDER
STEP 8—PREPARING THE COVER
STEPS 6
AND 7—ROUNDING
AND BACKING THE SPINE
OF THE SEWN BOOK
STEP 9—
CASING-IN THE
BOOK WITH THE COVER
STEP 10—
THE FINISHED
BOUND BOOK WITH
THE DECORATED COVER
After bindery
and finishing, the
distribution of the
printed product
to the users is
the final step in
the production
process.


74 GRAPHIC ARTS
Postpress Operations.
Key Bindery Operations
Bindery operations include case binding, perfect binding, and
saddle stitching. Case binding is used for hardcover books such
as textbooks and library books. Case binding can be done in
several hand operations with simple equipment, but usually it
is a mass-production operation of several steps with machines
doing the work. The operations include folding multiple-page
printed sheets into sections called signatures. These signatures
have to be in multiples of four pages. The signatures are collated
(gathered) in the proper order and sewn together. Endsheets,
headbands, and a cover finish the book.
Perfect binding is used for paperback books and some mag-
azines. Perfect binding also requires folding printed sheets into
signatures and gathering them in order. The signatures
are then clamped together and the folds ground to make a flat
edge. The spine edge is glued (similar to padding—see the
Endsheets, or endpapers, are made of a stronger
paper stock than the book pages and are placed at
the beginning and end of the book. One leaf of the
endsheets is pasted to the inside of the front or back
cover. Headbands are narrow strips of cloth that are
glued or sewn to the book at the top and bottom ends
of the spine to provide a decorative edge.
The cover also
goes through
several operations
in its preparation.
Your counselor
can help you
understand all
these operations.
Perfect binding


GRAPHIC ARTS 75
.Postpress Operations
explanation later in this chapter). A harder paper cover is
wrapped around the glued pages, covering the front, spine,
and back. Perfect-bound books are less costly than case-bound
books, but they will not withstand bending or other hard use.
Saddle stitching, or stapling through the fold of a multiple-
page publication, is another method of binding smaller pamphlets
or booklets. Saddle stitching is used for smaller publications.
Merit badge pamphlets are saddle stitched.
Other methods of binding generally are for single-sheet
printed material, where each page is printed on a separate
sheet. These binding methods are spiral, plastic comb, flat-
stitching, and stapling.
Spiral and plastic comb binding require the pages to be
punched with holes before the wire or plastic binding is applied.
Stitching, a one-step operation using a thin wire called spool
wire, is the oldest of the methods and the most economical.
Stapling uses preformed staples. Books that have been stitched
or stapled look the same.
Saddle stitching
STAPLING FLAT-STITCHING PLASTIC COMB SPIRAL BINDING


76 GRAPHIC ARTS
Postpress Operations.
Making a Signature
If your printing project involves multiple-page composi-
tion, you should learn how to fold a sheet into a book-
let format or signature. The most common project is
simply folding
an 81
⁄2-by-
11-inch sheet
in half, making
four 51
⁄2-by-81
⁄2-
inch pages—a
typical four-
page program
with one fold.
If you are producing more pages, fold another
sheet to make four pages. Put the two signatures
together for an eight-page booklet or program. Number
the pages consecutively—now you have what printers
call a dummy. It shows which pages will have a
common fold when printed as two pages at a time.
Make signatures for the dummy, for as many pages
as you want.
Printing projects with different formats have more
complicated folds. Two parallel folds (as if folding a
letter) produce
the dummy for
a six-page bro-
chure. (Each
folded section,
front and back,
is considered
one page.)
For a greeting card or announcement dummy, fold a
sheet in half, turn it 90 degrees and then fold in half
again. When you number the pages and unfold the
sheet, you can see where the design for each page
goes in the layout for the whole sheet.


GRAPHIC ARTS 77
.Postpress Operations
Other Bindery Operations
Collating means gathering the various printed sheets together
in the correct order. In large operations, high-speed collating
machines gather the pages in the proper sequence. In small
operations, workers place stacks of each printed piece in order
on a table that rotates, or they walk around a table assembling
the pages in order.
Padding is the process for finishing notepads,
memo pads, and forms that a customer wants in
pad format. It starts with measured stacks of identi-
cally printed pages, divided into sections by card-
board sheets. The stack is put under pressure, and a
padding compound is applied to coat one side of
the stack. Usually two or three coats are applied,
with drying time in between. After the final coat is
dry, the stack is cut into individual pads.
Both drilling and punching create holes in the
printed piece. Notebook paper and printed materi-
als that will be put in ring binders are examples. A
drill with a hollow center can go through several
hundred sheets at a time, whereas a punch is
good for only one to 10 sheets at a time.
Padding
Machine drilling


78 GRAPHIC ARTS
Postpress Operations.
Die-cutting, embossing, and foil stamping are three finishing
operations especially designed for extra effects.
Die-cutting is a process in which a sharp-edged cutting tool
(cutting die) cuts a design out of the printed material or cuts
the whole printed piece into a shape. The cutting die is made
especially for a particular design. If the cut is made within the
printed area, each piece is cut separately. But if the shaping is
done on the edges of the sheet (to make a memo pad shaped
like a fish, for example), a die that can cut through several
hundred sheets at a time is used.
Embossing is a process that uses an uninked die to raise in
relief a design already printed on the paper surface.
Foil stamping is a special process that uses metallic foil
instead of ink to create a metallic finish on a printed product,
such as gold lettering on the cover of a leather-bound book.
Foil stampingEmbossing
Die-cutting


GRAPHIC ARTS 79
.Postpress Operations
Folding is the process
of bending and creasing
paper into the format for a
particular printed item. A
single sheet of paper can be
machine folded if it is
folded in straight folds and
right-angle folds. Greeting
cards, maps, and letters
folded to fit envelopes are
examples of printed prod-
ucts requiring specific folding operations.
Paper cutting is a major operation
that occurs before or after printing. Large
sheets are cut to specific formats. The cutter
can go through several hundred sheets
accurately with one pass of the knife.
Most large paper cutters today are
computer controlled for accurate cuts.
The operator has only to position the
paper stack for the right cut. All multiple-
page books and pamphlets have to be
trimmed on three sides so the edges will
be smooth. In large printing operations,
trimming is part of the overall binding
process, either as an in-line operation
(performed on the press) or on a special trim-
mer. For small jobs, this operation could be done
on a regular paper cutter.
Perforating is punching a line of tiny holes in
the paper so it can be torn apart easily. Examples
are coupons and ticket stubs. Scoring is creasing
heavy papers so they will bend cleanly, without
cracking or creasing the paper.
All finishing and binding operations can
be done as small operations, with each step
handled on a special piece of equipment.
However, most printing processes today
are highly automated, with several
operations combined.
Trimming
Perforating
Scoring
Folding





GRAPHIC ARTS 81
.Careers in the Graphic Arts
Careers in the
Graphic Arts
Maybe you are an innovative artist. Or maybe you are a
computer wizard. You might be great with machinery. Or you
like the idea of running a business that turns out beautifully
printed books or magazines. Maybe you have the kind of
scientific mind that can answer the challenges of printing on
new types of surfaces. Or you might like to be one of the few
artisans carrying on the art of binding books by hand.
The graphic arts industry has many different career areas,
each needing people with special aptitudes and talents. Most
careers require specialized training, education beyond high
school, or an apprenticeship program.
Some of the major parts of the printing industry involve
publishing and printing newspapers, magazines, and books.
Other large segments of the business include commercial
printing, package printing, and business forms printing.
The industry has seen tremendous changes because of
developments in computer technology, and more changes are
ahead. If you are thinking about a graphic arts career, be sure
to seek advice from people who currently work in the business.
They can tell you about the latest technology and the newest
opportunities in the field.
When you work on your printing project for the Graphic
Arts merit badge, you may do everything for the job,
developing the idea and continuing through the entire
printing process. But in the printing industry, it is
common for a person to specialize in one area.


82 GRAPHIC ARTS
Careers in the Graphic Arts.
Requirement 7 asks you to tell how to prepare for three
career opportunities in the graphic arts. Ask your merit badge
counselor or a high school guidance counselor about educa-
tional preparation. Contact local schools and colleges to learn
about their graphic arts programs. Also, you can check the
library for books on careers. Some books are listed in the
resources section at the end of this pamphlet.
If you decide on a career in graphic arts, talk to your
school guidance counselor about the courses you should take
in high school. Science and computer courses may help you
prepare, and you may be able to take graphic arts courses at
your high school or a local vocational/technical school. Check
the entrance requirements for the program you are considering
entering after high school.
Many scholarships are available for students interested
in a graphic arts career. Nearly all of the scholarships are for
students going on to post-secondary education. For scholarship
information, see the references at the end of this booklet, ask
your guidance counselor, or ask the staff in the graphic arts pro-
gram at the college or technical school that interests you.
Some post-secondary programs teach technology, some
prepare students for management positions, and others train
students for teaching the graphic arts.
Here are a few brief profiles of the many career
opportunities in the graphic arts.


GRAPHIC ARTS 83
.Careers in the Graphic Arts
Opportunities in Graphic Arts
Communications
If you are interested in: Consider these graphic arts occupations:
Accounting Accountant, comptroller, cost clerk
Art Art director, commercial artist, graphic designer,
illustrator, layout artist
Chemistry and physics Platemaker; research and development for ink,
paper, chemicals
Computers Computer graphics artist, computer photo
editor, graphic designer, hardware or software
designer for the graphic arts, prepress
specialist, imaging specialist, website designer
or developer
Electronics Camera operator, scanner operator,
press operator
Engineering Electronic engineer, industrial or mechanical
engineer, time study technician
Language Proofreader, copy editor, editor, typesetter, writer
Mathematics Printing estimator
Mechanics Bindery technician, press operator
Personnel Employment manager, human
resources director
Photography Commercial photographer, photo offset
camera operator
Precision work Lithographic platemaker, lithographic stripper,
pasteup artist, production manager
Safety Safety manager
Sales Printing sales representative
Teaching Graphic arts instructor, high school or
college level


84 GRAPHIC ARTS
Careers in the Graphic Arts.
The Management Area
A college degree in business and a thorough knowledge of
printing practices and equipment is an excellent background for
some of the management positions in a printing plant.
Plant Manager. To be a plant manager, you need to be skilled
at working with people. A plant manager coordinates printing
activities by directing supervisors in all departments. Plants
often hire people with engineering degrees for this position.
Printing Sales Representative. A printing sales representa-
tive contacts potential customers and sells them the company’s
printing services. A successful printing sales representative
knows the plant’s capabilities and advises customers about
printing decisions. The sales manager trains and supervises
the sales representatives.
Printing Estimator. A printing estimator looks at specifications
for a printing job, decides on a production plan for it, and
estimates the cost for the potential customer. A good way to
prepare for a career as a printing estimator is to get experience
working in various departments in the company, so you learn
what different types of printing jobs require.


GRAPHIC ARTS 85
.Careers in the Graphic Arts
Customer Service Representative. If you work as a customer
service representative, you will track a customer’s printing job
through all the plant’s departments and serve as a contact
between the company and the customer.
Printing specifications, or specs, are the physical descriptions that define
how a job will look (such as the number of pages, the size of the piece,
and the type of paper it will be printed on) and the processes necessary
to create the finished piece (such as the type of printing process and
the bindery operations needed).


86 GRAPHIC ARTS
Careers in the Graphic Arts.
The Art Area
Commercial art is a broad category that includes many kinds
of artists who work on graphic communications materials.
Commercial artists may work for a printing company, another
type of business, an advertising agency, or a graphic
design studio. Or they may freelance. A freelancer works
independently, accepting assignments from various businesses,
agencies, and other sources.
To prepare for a career in commercial art, look for programs
at colleges, universities, and art institutes that focus on
commercial art, graphic design, advertising art, and website
design and development. Courses are likely to include art,
design principles, and computer-assisted design (CAD).


GRAPHIC ARTS 87
.Careers in the Graphic Arts
Graphic Designer. A graphic designer develops the concept
and plans the appearance of materials such as ads, brochures,
annual reports, packaging, labels, signs, company logos,
magazines, websites, and interactive media. Designers know
how to create good designs and typography, and how to make
creative and effective use of different kinds of art media. The
graphic designer creates the comprehensive that is used as a
production guide.
Layout Artist. A layout artist uses the
graphic designer’s comp to prepare the
layout. In smaller companies, one person
might be both the graphic designer and
the layout artist.
Production Artist. A production artist
has a strong technical knowledge that is
used to inspect or “preflight” a layout.
The production artist makes sure that the
layout does not have any technical
problems that would keep the layout
from being able to go through the
production workflow.
Illustrator. An illustrator produces the
finished illustrations for books, ads,
greeting cards, or other print materials.
Some illustrators specialize in one area,
such as children’s book illustration. Book
illustrators often have a fine arts degree
in drawing or painting. Some artists have
skills in all these areas, making them
valuable employees in smaller advertising
agencies and printing companies.


88 GRAPHIC ARTS
Careers in the Graphic Arts.
The Prepress Area
Some high schools offer courses in printing, but most prepress
occupations require extensive training after high school. Look
for colleges, universities, and vocational/technical schools with
programs that may be called graphic arts, graphic communica-
tions, or printing.
To train for some positions, high school graduates 18
or older can apply for apprenticeships. Apprentices learn by
working in a printing plant and, in some cases, by completing
a correspondence course.
Although the printing industry is still growing, changing
technology and automation have slowed the growth in the
number of prepress and bindery career opportunities, but
there is a new and growing need for press operators in all
printing processes.


GRAPHIC ARTS 89
.Careers in the Graphic Arts
The following occupations are just a few of many
prepress opportunities:
Prepress Workflow Coordinator. A prepress workflow coordi-
nator handles the digital files of a printed job from the time
they are received from the customer to the time the plates are
made for the job.
Platemaking Specialist. A platemaking specialist makes
printing plates or stencils from digital files or films.
Digital Imaging Specialist. A digital imaging specialist creates
and adjusts digital photos and pictures on a computer and then
combines photos and images with type into a final digital layout.
The Pressroom Area
High school courses in chemistry, physics, computer science,
and graphic communications will help prepare for the next level
of education.
Press operator apprenticeships, where they are available,
last two to five years, depending on the type of press involved.
People applying for positions as press assistants need at least a
high school diploma. In a small print shop with simple equip-
ment, on-the-job training may be possible. There are many
pressroom opportunities, depending on the different types of
printing being done.


90 GRAPHIC ARTS
Careers in the Graphic Arts.
Printing Press Operator. A printing press
operator prepares, maintains, and operates
printing presses. The operator also installs
printing plates on presses, loads paper,
adjusts ink flow, and checks print quality.
With a computer-controlled press, the opera-
tor monitors the printing process and makes
adjustments at a control panel.
Press Assistant. A press assistant works
with the press operator. An assistant may be
required to start with small duplicator
machines and work up to the large multi-
color presses.
The Bindery Area
Most bindery workers are trained on the job. Bindery positions
require good mechanical skills, electronic systems experience,
good coordination, and the ability to work quickly. Most finish-
ing and bindery positions are entry level, unless the employee is
a specialized setup person for the machines. In smaller graphic
arts shops, many people start in the binding and finishing area
and progress to printing, if these functions are all contained in
one plant.


GRAPHIC ARTS 91
.Careers in the Graphic Arts
Bindery Supervisor. A bindery
supervisor coordinates operations
in the bindery, schedules jobs, and
supervises and trains workers.
Bindery Worker. A bindery
worker may prepare and tend
one or more automated machines
that do cutting, scoring, folding,
stitching, taping, and gluing.
In large binderies, the work is
done on an assembly line, with
workers performing one or two
types of tasks.
Perfect-Binder Setter. A perfect-binder setter sets up and
controls a binding machine that gathers magazine or book
signatures, glues them, and adds the cover to magazines or
paperback books.
Handbound Bookbinder. A bookbinder handbinds books—
usually working on special editions and custom binding—and
repairs old and rare books. Bookbinders learn by training with
the relatively few experts in the field.
Distribution Specialist. A distribution specialist coordinates
the mailing and shipping of printed products and uses comput-
ers to organize mailings and to control addressing and mailing
equipment. Working as a distribution specialist is an important
position because it carries the responsibility of making sure
magazines, catalogs, billing statements, and direct mailings
get to customers correctly and on time.
Use a reference in this booklet to identify three
career opportunities of interest. Describe these
options to your counselor, and then pick the one that
sounds the most interesting to you. Discuss your
choice with your counselor. You may use notes or
computer printouts to help you with this discussion.


92 GRAPHIC ARTS
Graphic Arts Resources.
Graphic Arts Resources
Scouting Literature
American Business, Art,
Communication, Digital Technology,
Journalism, and Photography
merit badge pamphlets
Books
Adam, Robert, and Carol Robertson.
Screenprinting: The Complete
Water-Based System. Thames
and Hudson, 2004.
Adams, J. Michael, and Penny
Ann Dolin. Printing Technology.
Thomson Delmar Learning, 2001.
Adams, Sean; Noreen Morioka; and
Terry Lee Stone. Color Design
Workbook: A Real World Guide to
Using Color in Graphic Design.
Rockport Publishers, 2008.
Airey, David. Logo Design Love:
A Guide to Creating Iconic Brand
Identities, 2nd ed. Peachpit
Press, 2014.
Blake, Kathy. Handmade Books: A Step-
by-Step Guide to Crafting Your Own
Books. Little, Brown, & Co., 1997.
Bringhurst, Robert. The Elements of
Typographic Style, 4th ed. Hartley
and Marks Publishers, 2013.
Brookfield, Karen. Eyewitness: Book.
Dorling Kindersley Publishing, 2000.
Cullen, Kristin. Layout Workbook:
A Real-World Guide to Building
Pages in Graphic Design. Rockport
Publishers, 2007.
Fleishman, Michael. Starting Your
Career as a Freelance Illustrator or
Graphic Designer. Watson-Guptill
Publications, 2001.
Friedl, Friedrich. Typography: An
Encyclopedic Survey of Type Design
and Techniques Throughout History.
Black Dog & Levanthal, 1998.
Gatter, Mark. Getting It Right in Print:
Digital Prepress for Graphic Designers.
Harry N. Abrams, 2005.
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


GRAPHIC ARTS 93
.Graphic Arts Resources
Goldfarb, Roz. Careers by Design:
A Business Guide for Graphic
Designers. Allworth Press, 2002.
Gomez-Palacio, Bryony, and Armin Vit.
Graphic Design, Referenced: A Visual
Guide to the Language, Applications,
and History of Graphic Design.
Rockport Publishers, 2011.
Gordon, Barbara. Opportunities in
Commercial Art and Graphic
Design Careers. McGraw-Hill, 2003.
Graham, Lisa. Basics of Design: Layout
and Typography for Beginners, 2nd ed.
Delmar Cengage Learning, 2005.
Graphic Artists Guild. Graphic Artists
Guild Handbook of Pricing and
Ethical Guidelines, 15th ed. Graphic
Artists Guild, 2018.
Griffiths, Antony. Prints and
Printmaking: an Introduction to
the History and Techniques.
University of California Press, 1996.
Lupton, Ellen. Graphic Design: The
New Basics, 2nd edition. Princeton
Architectural Press, 2015.
———. Thinking With Type: A Critical
Guide for Designers, Writers, Editors,
& Students, 2nd rev. and expanded ed.
Princeton Architectural Press, 2010.
Olmert, Michael. The Smithsonian Book
of Books. Smithsonian Books, 2003.
Prust, Z.A. Graphic Communications:
The Printed Image. Goodheart-
Wilcox Co., 2009.
Romano, Frank, ed. Pocket Pal:
The Handy Book of Graphic Arts
Production, 20th ed. Graphic Arts
Technical Foundation, 2007.
Sherwin, David. Creative Workshop:
80 Challenges to Sharpen Your
Design Skills. HOW Books, 2010.
Sidles, Constance. Graphic Designer’s
Digital Printing and Prepress
Handbook. Rockport Publishers, 2001.
White, Alexander. The Elements of
Graphic Design: Space, Unity, Page
Architecture and Type, 2nd ed.
Allworth Press, 2011.
Williams, Robin. The Non-Designer’s
Design Book, 4th ed. Peachpit
Press, 2014.
———. The Non-Designer’s Type Book.
Peachpit Press, 2005.
Wilson, Daniel G. Lithography Primer,
3rd ed. GATFPress, 2005.
Organizations and Websites
Print and Graphics
Scholarship Foundation
pgsf.org
This online resource provides information
about applying for college scholarships to
study graphic communications.
Vocational Information Center:
Graphic Arts and Printing
Career Guide
khake.com/page27.html
This site provides a comprehensive
listing of links to descriptions of
hundreds of career opportunities in
the fields of graphic arts and printing.


94 GRAPHIC ARTS
Graphic Arts Resources.
Acknowledgments
Scouting America thanks the following
members of the International Graphic
Arts Education Association who
contributed their time and expertise to
update this new edition of the Graphic
Arts merit badge pamphlet: A. Thomas
Loch, John Craft, Dave Dailey, Dave
Hayes, Ken Kulakowsky, James Nelson,
Michael Stinnett, Ken Stoffregen, James
Tenorio, and Mike Williams.
Scouting America gratefully
acknowledges the following additional
IGAEA individuals who contributed to
previous editions of the Graphic Arts merit
badge pamphlet, upon which this new
edition is based: Chuck Brown, Michael
Cermak, Kevin Chederquist, Linda Laney,
Warren Mack, Glen Moerdyk, Edward
Prahl, Robert Rateno, Thomas Vogt,
Gary Walton, Mark Watanabe,
and John Wilson.
Scouting America is grateful to
the men and women serving on the
National Merit Badge Subcommittee
for the improvements made in updating
this pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration Credits
Collection of the Hebraic Section,
Library of Congress, Washington, D.C.,
courtesy—page 10 (cuneiform tablet)
Hemera Technologies—page 16
Wikipedia.org—pages 12, 14, and 29
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of or
are protected by Scouting America.
John McDearmon—all illustrations on
pages 17–18, 20, 22, and 40
Randy Piland—page 69 (memory cards)
Michael Roytek—pages 49 and 65


GRAPHIC ARTS 95
.Notes


Get ahead in Scouting with Scout Life magazine. It’s loaded with the
latest news on merit badges and other advancement tools. Plus, it’s got
outdoor adventure, games and comics, leadership tips, life skills, stories
about other Scouts and more. It’s just what you need to succeed.
Subscribe today at go.scoutlife.org/subscribe
Use promo code SLMBP15 to get a special
print + digital bundle offer priced just for Scouts.