GR APHIC
ARTS

BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES

GR APHIC ARTS

“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”

Requirements
1. Review with your counselor the processes for producing
printed communications: offset lithography, screen printing,
electronic/digital, relief, and gravure. Collect samples of
three products, each one produced using a different printing
process, or draw diagrams to help with your description.
2. Explain the differences between continuous tone, line,
and halftone artwork. Describe how digital images can be
created and/or stored in a computer.
3. Design a printed piece (flier, T-shirt, program, form, etc.)
and produce it. Explain your decisions for the typeface or
typefaces you use and the way you arrange the elements in
your design. Explain which printing process is best suited
for printing your design. If desktop publishing is available,
identify what hardware and software would be appropriate
for outputting your design.
4. Produce the design you created for requirement 3 using one
of the following printing processes:
a. Offset lithography. Make a layout, and produce a plate
using a process approved by your counselor. Run the
plate and print at least 50 copies.
b. Screen printing. Make a hand-cut or photographic
stencil and attach it to a screen that you have prepared.
Mask the screen and print at least 20 copies.

35906
ISBN 978-0-8395-3374-0
©2013 Boy Scouts of America
2017 Printing

c. Electronic/digital printing. Create a layout in electronic
form, download it to the press or printer, and run 50 copies.
If no electronic interface to the press or printer is available,
you may print and scan a paper copy of the layout.
d. Relief printing. Prepare a layout or set the necessary
type. Make a plate or lock up the form. Use this to print
50 copies.
5. Review the following postpress operations with
your counselor:
a. Discuss the finishing operations of padding, drilling,
cutting, and trimming.
b. Collect, describe, or identify examples of the following
types of binding: perfect, spiral, plastic comb, saddlestitched, and case.
6. Do ONE of the following, then describe the highlights of
your visit:
a. Visit a newspaper printing plant. Follow a story from
the editor to the press.
b. Visit a retail, commercial, or in-plant printing facility.
Follow a project from beginning to end.
c. Visit a school’s graphic arts program. Find out what
courses are available and what the prerequisites are.
d. Visit three websites (with your parent’s permission) that
belong to graphic arts professional organizations and/or
printing-related companies (suppliers, manufacturers,
printers). With permission from your parent or counselor,
print out or download product or service information
from two of the sites.
7. Find out about three career opportunities in graphic
arts. Pick one and find out the education, training, and
experience required for this profession. Discuss this with
your counselor, and explain why this profession might
interest you.

GRAPHIC ARTS    3

Graphic Arts Resources.

Graphic Arts Resources
Scouting Literature
American Business, Art,
Communication, Digital Technology,
Journalism, and Photography
merit badge pamphlets
Visit the Boy Scouts of America’s
official retail website (with
your parent’s permission) at
http://www.scoutstuff.org for
a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other
helpful Scouting materials
and supplies.

Books
Adam, Robert, and Carol Robertson.
Screenprinting: The Complete
Water-Based System. Thames
and Hudson, 2004.
Adams, J. Michael, and Penny
Ann Dolin. Printing Technology.
Thomson Delmar Learning, 2001.
AdamsMorioka and Terry Lee Stone.
Color Design Workbook: A Real
World Guide to Using Color in
Graphic Design. Rockport
Publishers, 2008.

94    GRAPHIC ARTS

Airey, David. Logo Design Love:
A Guide to Creating Iconic Brand
Identities, 2nd ed. Peachpit
Press, 2014.
Blake, Kathy. Handmade Books: A Stepby-Step Guide to Crafting Your Own
Books. Little, Brown, & Co., 1997.
Bringhurst, Robert. The Elements of
Typographic Style, 4th ed. Hartley
and Marks Publishers, 2013.
Brookfield, Karen. Eyewitness: Book.
Dorling Kindersley Publishing, 2000.
Cullen, Kristin. Layout Workbook:
A Real-World Guide to Building
Pages in Graphic Design. Rockport
Publishers, 2007.
Fleishman, Michael. Starting Your
Career as a Freelance Illustrator or
Graphic Designer. Watson-Guptill
Publications, 2001.
Friedl, Friedrich. Typography: An
Encyclopedic Survey of Type Design
and Techniques Throughout History.
Black Dog & Levanthal, 1998.
Gatter, Mark. Getting It Right in Print:
Digital Prepress for Graphic Designers.
Harry N. Abrams, 2005.

.Graphic Arts Resources

Goldfarb, Roz. Careers by Design:
A Business Guide for Graphic
Designers. Allworth Press, 2002.

Sherwin, David. Creative Workshop:
80 Challenges to Sharpen Your
Design Skills. HOW Books, 2010.

Gomez-Palacio, Bryony, and Armin Vit.
Graphic Design, Referenced: A Visual
Guide to the Language, Applications,
and History of Graphic Design.
Rockport Publishers, 2011.

Sidles, Constance. Graphic Designer’s
Digital Printing and Prepress
Handbook. Rockport Publishers, 2001.

Gordon, Barbara. Opportunities in
Commercial Art and Graphic
Design Careers. McGraw-Hill, 2003.
Graham, Lisa. Basics of Design: Layout
and Typography for Beginners, 2nd ed.
Delmar Cengage Learning, 2005.
Graphic Artists Guild. Graphic Artists
Guild Handbook of Pricing and
Ethical Guidelines, 14th ed. Graphic
Artists Guild, 2013.
Griffiths, Antony. Prints and
Printmaking: an Introduction to
the History and Techniques.
University of California Press, 1996.
Lupton, Ellen. Graphic Design: The
New Basics. Princeton Architectural
Press, 2008.
———. Thinking With Type: A Critical
Guide for Designers, Writers, Editors,
& Students, 2nd rev. and expanded ed.
Princeton Architectural Press, 2010.
Olmert, Michael. The Smithsonian Book
of Books. Smithsonian Books, 2003.
Prust, Z.A. Graphic Communications:
The Printed Image. GoodheartWilcox Co., 2009.

White, Alexander. The Elements of
Graphic Design: Space, Unity, Page
Architecture and Type, 2nd ed.
Allworth Press, 2011.
Williams, Robin. The Non-Designer’s
Design Book, 4th ed. Peachpit
Press, 2014.
———. The Non-Designer’s Type Book.
Peachpit Press, 2005.
Wilson, Daniel G. Lithography Primer,
3rd ed. GATFPress, 2005.

Organizations and Websites
Graphic Comm Central
Website:
http://www.graphiccommcentral.org
This portal site for graphic communications education and training includes
links to lessons and activities as well
as career resources and virtual tours
of printing plants.
Print and Graphics
Scholarship Foundation
Website:
http://www.printing.org/page/3273
This online resource provides information
about applying for college scholarships to
study graphic communications.

Romano, Frank, ed. Pocket Pal:
The Handy Book of Graphic Arts
Production, 20th ed. Graphic Arts
Technical Foundation, 2007.

GRAPHIC ARTS    95

