AMERICAN
LABOR


AMERICAN LABOR
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/American-Labor or
check Scoutbook for the latest requirements.
35853
ISBN 978-0-8395-3326-9
©2024 Scouting America/Boy Scouts of America
2024 Printing FPO


AMERICAN LABOR 3


4 AMERICAN LABOR


AMERICAN LABOR 5
Contents
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Us and Them: The Struggles Between
Labor and Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
The American Labor Force Today. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
Conflicting Views in the Workplace . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
Labor-Management Relations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
Career Opportunities in Labor Relations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
Labor-Related Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62





AMERICAN LABOR 7
.Introduction
Introduction
The Declaration of Independence inspired many workers to
demand their rights as people “created equal” to business own-
ers. Just as the Colonists had united to name their grievances
(complaints about wrongs suffered) against the British king,
George III, and declare themselves independent of his control,
American workers in specific trades came together to demand a
redress (the setting right of unjust situations) of their grievances
about low wages, long hours, and poor working conditions.
In time, these workers—particularly the “organized” labor
force—demanded a voice in the workplace and equity, or a
fair distribution of the benefits of economic prosperity. What
they discovered is that democracy and capitalism, although
they reinforce each other at many levels, often are at odds. The
concept of equal rights clashes with individual rights. The entre-
preneur, a person who starts a business and assumes the risks,
wants to make a profit for his or her efforts. In fact, that person
wants to make more profits than competitors.
What is “equal” about that? Should the people who work
for the entrepreneur share the profits? These issues are at the
core of the American labor movement.
You might be surprised to learn that the Boston
Massacre in 1770 began as a labor dispute
between an off-duty British soldier seeking a
job to supplement his wage and a Colonial rope
maker who resented having to compete with the
soldier for scarce employment opportunities.
Yet this event ignited a long fuse leading
to the American Revolution, indepen-
dence, and individual rights.





AMERICAN LABOR 9
.Us and Them: The Struggles Between Labor and Management
Us and Them: The
Struggles Between Labor
and Management
The economic development of the United States occurred in
three stages. It began with settlers staking claims to land, then
trying to raise crops and livestock to sustain their families.
People worked to produce what they needed and could con-
sume. In time, as trade developed, planters exported crops and
artisans made items to sell.
The increased demand for products created an increased
demand for labor—as well as an increased demand for higher
profits. The invention of labor-saving machines, periods of
prosperity and economic depressions, waves of immigration,
and worker discontent led to critical changes in society. The
majority of American workers were no longer independent and
self-sufficient. Instead they had become employees, dependent
on others for employment.
The pressure for ever-higher profits in a competitive
economy resulted in management strategies to increase
productivity by lowering wages and raising workday hours.
Company owners spent money for machines instead of
improvements to working conditions. Workers united to
protest and protect their interests, including their health and
safety. The labor movement began because of frustration with
management and continues in the 21st century, as workers
strive to maintain the gains they have made and work for
resolutions to new conflicts.
Factory workers
often included
children, who
worked long
hours under
unsafe working
conditions and
were paid very
little—sometimes
nothing—for
their work.


10 AMERICAN LABOR
Us and Them: The Struggles Between Labor and Management.
Eli Whitney’s
cotton gin
Agricultural Revolution and Slave Labor
When the founding fathers wrote the U.S. Constitution in 1787,
they avoided addressing the issue of slavery in the
document. The plantation system produced important cash
crops for export, but it depended on the labor of enslaved
African Americans.
In 1793, Eli Whitney invented the cotton gin, which
removed cottonseeds quickly and cheaply. Now cotton could
be grown profitably anywhere in the South, which encouraged
planters to acquire more land by moving westward.
Through the 1850s, slaves produced most of the raw cotton
for textile mills in Great Britain and in the northeastern part of
the United States. Whether or not people supported the idea of
slavery, they knew that slave labor was profitable.


AMERICAN LABOR 11
.Us and Them: The Struggles Between Labor and Management
Industrial Revolution and Free Labor
Industrial growth took off in the first half of the 19th cen-
tury because the opportunities for trade expanded and new
machines increased productivity. Canal systems and railroads
allowed freight to move around the country more easily and
cheaply. The invention of the steam printing press led to the
widespread circulation of many different newspapers; the
telegraph sent information instantly over long distances. The
transportation and information networks knitted regional and
national markets together.
Rural families started producing surplus crops and other
goods for the market. They became less isolated and more
aware of employment opportunities for their children. Young
men often went west to buy and work their own land. Young
women moved to towns and cities to work in the new textile
mills and factories.
The rise of commercial agriculture and industries drastically
changed the labor force. For centuries, most workers learned
a craft by beginning as an apprentice to a master craftsperson,
who owned a business. After years of training, the apprentice
became a journey worker, or skilled craftsperson. After more
years of working for the master (and saving money), the
journey worker started a new business as a master. The
relationships were unequal, but the understanding that
everyone had to spend time in training and the promise
of becoming a master made the system work.
Iron worker creating steel, circa 1919


12 AMERICAN LABOR
Us and Them: The Struggles Between Labor and Management.
The factory system soon undermined the master/journey
worker/apprentice arrangement. The availability of
inexpensive and high-quality products shifted the demand to
mass-produced items. Master craftspeople had to compete with
mills and factories. Many furniture makers, shoemakers,
hatters, and tailors hired more apprentices, changed work
methods, and increased production. Those who could not
compete lost their businesses and served as journey workers
for other masters or took jobs in factories.
Employers determined that they could break down expensive
skilled work into simple tasks that could be done for a lower
cost in a centralized workshop under supervision. This division
of labor into small, specialized operations allowed employers
in the late 18th and early 19th centuries to replace skilled
journey workers with semiskilled workers, some of whom
were children.
Factory workers put in 12 hours
a day, six days a week. Conditions
in the factory and boarding houses
where they lived seemed tolerable
until the arrival of several million
European immigrants during the
mid- to late 1800s. These newcomers
joined the ranks of the semiskilled
employees, increasing the competi-
tion for a limited number of factory
jobs and driving wages down. More
factories opened, so company owners
competed with each other while try-
ing to protect profits.
By increasing production and
lowering the piece rate, the employers
effectively froze the workers’ wages
and increased their own profits.
The workload of the average worker
more than doubled, but only the
owner benefited.
The hostility toward immigrants
grew in different areas of the country
during in the mid-1800s. A famine
in China and the discovery of gold
The dangerous working conditions factory
workers endured for many years eventually
led to laws and labor unions that helped
protect workers.


AMERICAN LABOR 13
.Us and Them: The Struggles Between Labor and Management
in California brought many Chinese people to the West Coast.
By 1860, more than 35,000 Chinese immigrants worked in
California mining camps. In 1848, the U.S. victory over Mexico
in the U.S.-Mexican War resulted in the acquisition of land
from Texas to California. Nearly 80,000 people, mostly of
Spanish-Indian descent, would provide the low-paying labor
to make agriculture, mining, and ranching profitable in that
region. Native-born Americans resented having to compete for
work with the people of Spanish-Indian descent. They also
feared that the abolition of slavery would flood the labor force
with freed slaves, threatening more jobs and driving wages
even lower.
Native-born
workers resented
their employers’
actions as well
as the immigrants
who were willing
to work for less
money and often
took their jobs.
Employers cut costs by using several tactics.
1. Speed-up—Workers had to increase the rate at
which the machines operated.
2. Stretch-out—Workers had to increase the number
of machines they tended.
3. Piece-rate reduction—The employer lowered the
price paid per piece produced.
Thousands of Chinese immigrants helped build the transcontinental railroad during
the 1860s.


14 AMERICAN LABOR
Us and Them: The Struggles Between Labor and Management.
“To be free, the
workers must
have choice. To
have choice, they
must retain in
their own hands
the right to deter-
mine under what
conditions they
will work.”
— Samuel Gompers
Birth of the Labor Movement
The labor movement began in the 18th century with local crafts
organizations known as benevolent societies. These groups
provided financial assistance to workers or their families in
case of debt, illness, or death. Later, journey workers in specific
crafts united on a temporary basis to protest wage reductions
and long workdays.
Eventually, different unions tried to win recognition from
management to be the sole bargaining agent for all workers in
a particular bargaining unit, or group. Some unions demanded
closed shops where only union members were hired. Employers
tried to avoid dealing with unions by hiring nonunion workers
and appealing to the courts to declare unions illegal. Courts
prosecuted the unions as “criminal conspiracies in restraint
of trade.” Later, the courts decided that unions were legal but
challenged the methods unions used to make gains, such as
strikes and boycotts.
A new social class emerged as more and more workers
became wage earners. Unions organized for the economic
benefit of the members and got involved in independent
political activity. In the 1820s, political labor parties such as
the Workingmen’s Party brought attention to the social and
economic problems of workers. Their efforts led to legislation
that prohibited imprisonment for debt and established a
10-hour workday for women and children. They also laid
agency shop. A workplace where nonunion employ-
ees of the bargaining unit (group covered by collec-
tive bargaining) must pay the union a sum equal to
union dues as a condition of continuing employment.
closed shop. A workplace where only union members
could be hired. Workers had to join the union before
being employed. This practice was outlawed with the
Labor-Management Relations Act of 1947.
open shop. A place of employment where workers
are not required to join the union.
union shop. A workplace where every member of the
bargaining unit must become a member after a speci-
fied amount of time.


AMERICAN LABOR 15
.Us and Them: The Struggles Between Labor and Management
the groundwork for the establishment of the free public
school system.
In the mid-1800s, more women entered the workforce, pri-
marily in the growing textile industry. Most worked in mills in
company towns, where the companies owned the mills as well
as worker housing and had virtually total control over the lives
of the workers, including children. In 1864, Kate Mullany, a
young Irish immigrant, organized 400 women in Troy, New York,
into the nation’s first bona fide all-female union, the Troy Collar
Laundry Union. She led them on a successful strike leading to
improved wages and working conditions. The union lasted sev-
eral years and became part of the broader labor movement sup-
porting—and being supported by—traditional male unions such
as the Iron Molders in Troy. Mullany went on to serve as the first
woman to serve as an officer of a national union in 1869.
Workers tried to organize local unions of different crafts
into citywide groups called city central groups, or trades unions.
In the second half of the 19th century, they concentrated on
forming national unions of workers in the same crafts. Two
important federations of national unions—with different agen-
das—developed after the Civil War.
The Noble and Holy Knights of Labor, organized in 1869 as
a secret society of tailors, went public in 1879. Led by Terence
V. Powderly, the inclusive union accepted workers of all skill
levels and trades (except lawyers, politicians, and liquor deal-
ers). The union encouraged men and women of all races and
national origins to become members. Powderly’s broad social
vision, which focused on reforms and political issues, alienated
many members who wanted the leader to concentrate on eco-
nomic concerns.
In 1886, skilled workers in craft unions organized the
American Federation of Labor. Samuel Gompers, the leader
of this loose confederation of autonomous (self-ruling) unions,
ran the AFL as a business union, focusing on bread-and-butter
issues such as securing better wages and working conditions
and mandating the eight-hour workday.
Key leaders in the
labor movement
are mentioned in
bold print in
this pamphlet.
To learn more
about any one of
them, read one of
the biographies
listed in the
resources section.
“An injury to one is an injury to all.”
—the slogan for the Knights of Labor


16 AMERICAN LABOR
Us and Them: The Struggles Between Labor and Management.
While workers organized large national labor organizations,
industrialists merged with competitors to create huge, powerful
companies. Big business fought union efforts to have any influence
in the workplace. Management used the courts, private armies,
and federal troops to put down labor activity. Employers con-
tracted with prisons to hire convicts as strikebreakers. Additionally,
employers hired new immigrants, African Americans, and Latinos
to break strikes, often causing racial unrest. Trade unionism grew
in fits and starts in response to the success or failure of strikes,
boom-and-bust business cycles, and union militancy.
The Labor Movement in the 20th Century
Labor leaders promoted the ideas of union solidarity (a spirit
of unity based on common interests) and democracy in the
workplace. However, deep-rooted prejudice and fear often
exerted a stronger influence on union members than idealism.
High unemployment and competition for jobs during economic
depressions contributed to the following problems:
• Discrimination against foreign-born workers, minorities,
and women
• Splits between skilled and unskilled workers
• Power struggles between supporters of business unionism
and radical labor activists such as members of the Socialist
Party and the Communist Party
Labor Day
For more than 100 years, the first Monday in September has been
designated Labor Day, a holiday that recognizes the contributions of
workers to the economic strength and social well-being of the United
States. The first Labor Day celebration was held on September 5,
1882, in New York City and was organized by the Central Labor Union.
Highlights of the celebration included a parade attended by about 10,000
workers, picnics, concerts, and speeches.
As the labor movement gained ground, Labor Day celebrations
grew in popularity. In 1894, Congress passed a bill that made Labor Day
a national holiday. Early Labor Day celebrations followed the model of
the first Labor Day and usually featured parades, family entertainment,
and speeches. Today, many people take the victories of the labor move-
ment for granted, but government offices, banks, and many private busi-
nesses still close in recognition of the holiday, giving workers a chance
to enjoy a day off from their labors.
Union members
call people who
cross picket lines
and work during a
strike “scabs.”


AMERICAN LABOR 17
.Us and Them: The Struggles Between Labor and Management
The disunity within the rank and file weakened the unions
and allowed racketeers to infiltrate and corrupt some labor
organizations. Employers publicized charges of union corrup-
tion to turn public opinion against labor’s organizing efforts.
As a result of worker unrest, new unions formed. In 1900,
the International Ladies’ Garment Workers’ Union (ILGWU)
formed in response to the horrible conditions in sweatshops—
workplaces where employees labored for long hours and low
wages in unsanitary and dangerous conditions. A strike in 1909
by 20,000 (mostly women) members resulted in a compromise
with manufacturers that provided for preferential hiring of
union members and prohibited employers from contracting
with outside workers to do homework—sewing tasks per-
formed at home at the worker’s expense.
In 1911, the Triangle Shirtwaist Company fire in New York City’s garment district killed
146 women workers. The women were unable to escape because the factory doors
were locked. In the aftermath of the fire, labor unions and other social and political
groups rallied to protest the conditions that had led to the tragedy.


18 AMERICAN LABOR
Us and Them: The Struggles Between Labor and Management.
In 1905, socialists and other workers formed a radical
labor organization, the Industrial Workers of the World. The
goal of the IWW was to create One Big Union—a single union
for all workers—and overthrow the industrialists. The IWW,
led by William D. “Big Bill” Haywood, used controversial tac-
tics, but it was one of the few unions to champion the rights
of immigrant workers in the West. The IWW opposed U.S.
participation in World War I for ethical and political reasons
and encouraged strikes to disrupt the war effort. As a result,
Haywood was convicted of treasonous crimes. After a brief
stint in prison, he fled the United States to lend his support to
the socialist revolution in Russia.
Communism advocates the collective ownership and distribution of
goods and does not recognize the concept of private property. In 1848,
Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels defined the concepts of this theory in
The Communist Manifesto. Marx believed that throughout history
social classes have struggled for control of labor and production. He
thought that business owners oppressed the workers and predicted
that the laborers would revolt and overthrow the capitalists.
In 1925, A. Philip Randolph, a labor leader
and civil rights activist, organized African
American railroad employees (excluded
from most railroad unions) into the
Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters.
He crusaded for higher wages and the
improvement of working conditions for
all workers.
Educator and advocate of democracy,
freedom, and civil rights, Albert Shanker
served as president of the American
Federation of Teachers for 23 years, until
his death in 1997. During his tenure at
the AFT, Shanker succeeded in raising
national academic standards and
improving classroom teaching.


AMERICAN LABOR 19
.Us and Them: The Struggles Between Labor and Management
The AFL’s failure to organize the semiskilled and unskilled
workers in the mass production industries provoked John
L. Lewis, president of the United Mine Workers of America,
and seven other AFL union leaders in 1935 to organize the
Committee for Industrial Organization. The AFL expelled the
CIO unions, which then formed a permanent independent
federation renamed the Congress of Industrial Organizations.
The CIO showed more militancy against employers, including
the rarely used tactic of a sit-down strike, thus winning union
recognition in unorganized industries and the right to engage
in collective bargaining.
Union membership declined sharply during the 1920s
and into the early 1930s, much of it due to extreme antiunion
action by employers, restrictive court rulings, and business-
oriented legislation of the era. Workers became desperate for
change in the early 1930s and began organizing and hold-
ing wildcat strikes, often causing disruption in production.
In an attempt to revitalize the economy and bring peace to
the workforce, President Franklin Delano Roosevelt offered
the American people a New Deal and pushed through social-
reform programs and pro-labor legislation to help the working
class. Congress passed the National Labor Relations Act, giving
private sector workers the right to organize and bargain col-
lectively. The law states, “It is declared to be the policy of the
United States … by encouraging the practice and procedure of
collective bargaining and by protecting the exercise by workers
of full freedom of association, self-organization, and designa-
tion of representatives of their own choosing, for the purpose
of negotiating the terms and conditions of their employment or
other mutual aid or protection.” Reforms included unemploy-
ment insurance and Social Security, which required workers
and employers to pay a tax to the federal government in order
to provide a pension to retired employees. Because of these
and later reforms, the labor movement has often been referred
to as “The People’s Lobby.”
Thanks to favorable labor laws and successful organizing
drives, union membership rapidly increased. Roosevelt recog-
nized labor’s growing influence and appointed many labor rep-
resentatives to federal agencies. In return, the unions pledged
not to strike while the country was at war. Most unions hon-
ored the pledge and enjoyed a high rate of employment.
When the war ended in 1945, unions went on strike. They
brought out all the grievances they had shelved during the war


20 AMERICAN LABOR
Us and Them: The Struggles Between Labor and Management.
Rosie the Riveter
During World War II, the female labor force grew by more than 5 million
workers as women stepped into jobs vacated by the men who had gone
to fight. The women joined unions, proved they could build planes and
automobiles as well as men, and demanded equal pay for equal work.


AMERICAN LABOR 21
.Us and Them: The Struggles Between Labor and Management
and demanded their share of the country’s economic prosperity.
Labor scored many successes, which caused concern in business
and government that the unions were becoming too powerful.
New legislation, such as the Labor-Management Relations Act,
reversed many of labor’s gains from Roosevelt’s New Deal.
The American Federation of Labor, led by George Meany,
and the Congress of Industrial Organizations, led by Walter
Reuther, recognized that support for labor was changing.
The two rival organizations decided to merge to protect union
strength. In 1955, George Meany became the first president of
the AFL-CIO.
The new organization set about ousting racketeers from
the unions. A few unions were expelled because of corruption.
The negative publicity fueled an effort to keep unions out of
business and gave additional support to state right-to-work
laws, which prohibit closed shops.
Despite public opinion and new labor laws, unions negotiated
much higher wages for their members than those of nonunion
workers as well as a variety of employer-paid fringe benefits.
The economy prospered. Unions, business, and the govern-
ment developed a social compact—an unspoken agreement to
work with each other as long as everyone was making money.
The economy sputtered during the 1970s, and millions
of workers lost high-paying industrial jobs. The least-skilled
and least-educated workers were the first to go. Many of these
people found work in low-paying service jobs. Membership in
those unions that represented the big manufacturers decreased
but increased in unions representing service industries and
government workers. The Industrial Revolution had ended.
On April 4, 1968, Martin Luther King Jr. was assassi-
nated in Memphis, Tennessee, where he had come to
support a sanitation workers’ strike.
Racketeering is
making money
through illegal
activities, such as
extorting money
for providing
“protection.”


22 AMERICAN LABOR
Us and Them: The Struggles Between Labor and Management.
The civil rights movement in the 1960s raised the issue of discrimina-
tion and challenged the unions’ predominantly white male leadership.
In 1963, A. Philip Randolph (the labor activist who had organized the
Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters) led the March on Washington
for Jobs and Freedom, where he and 250,000 people heard Dr. Martin
Luther King Jr. give his “I Have a Dream” speech.
The Social Compact
Post–World War II to 1960s
The federal government developed a
foreign policy that benefited U.S.
business interests. In turn, companies
tolerated government “meddling”—the
result of increased regulating powers.
Unions accepted the pro-
business foreign policy
and the right of private
companies to own the
economy. Labor experi-
enced high employment
rates and received wages
and fringe benefits that
raised living standards.
Big corporations
dominated the
economy and
union member-
ship swelled.
The groups
could neither
defeat nor
embrace the
other, so they
held an unde-
clared truce.
BUSINESS GOVERNMENT
LABOR


AMERICAN LABOR 23
.Us and Them: The Struggles Between Labor and Management
Labor Rights as Human Rights
The rights of workers are also found in international documents
such as the Universal Declaration of Human Rights that was
proclaimed by the United Nations General Assembly in 1948
and states “Everyone has the right to form and to join trade
unions for the protection of [their] interests.”
A number of other international documents, such as
the U.N.’s International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights and International Covenant on Economic, Social, and
Political Rights, and, most specifically, the International Labor
Organization’s Conventions Nos. 87 (Freedom of Association
and Protection of the Right to Organize) and 98 (Right to
Organize and Collective Bargaining), articulate labor rights as
basic human rights.
The American labor movement has long been a champion
of promoting democracy and opposing dictatorships. Its fight
against the efforts of communists to take control of unions in
Europe following World War II helped the Marshall Plan suc-
ceed and democracy flourish in war-torn countries. It also
fought authoritarian dictators whose goal was to eliminate
unions as an independent voice of workers in many nations.
Information Revolution and Global Labor
During the 1980s and 1990s, the semiconductor and microchip
changed everything. With personal computers, global com-
munications satellites, and the internet, people could instantly
transfer information, ideas, and money around the world. Many
jobs became available for people who understood information
technology. Top executives and highly skilled IT workers made
a lot of money. However, many industrial jobs for skilled and
educated people were lost. These workers were forced to
compete with the unskilled for low-paying service jobs.
Manufacturing companies restructured, laying off employ-
ees who had earned enough to support a family on one salary.
Middle management and lower-level workers who had little
hope of getting their jobs back scrambled for work as millions of
women entered the labor force to help maintain family incomes.


24 AMERICAN LABOR
Us and Them: The Struggles Between Labor and Management.
Globalization
For more than 200 years, the United States participated in an
international economy. Trade took place between nations,
and governments set the rules. Commerce in the 21st century
involves a global economy. Corporations, investment bankers,
and traders treat the world as one big market. Global business
is changing so rapidly that democratic governments are losing
their ability to protect national interests and their labor force.
Multinational corporations (companies that operate in dif-
ferent countries) use technology to create comparative advan-
tage, the economic principle that each nation should produce
what it makes best and most cheaply and then trade those
goods with another nation for what that nation makes best
and most cheaply. Multinational corporations set up factories
in several countries to make parts or components wherever the
costs are lowest, union control is weakest, labor laws are most
relaxed, and tax rates are most advantageous. Using computers
and communications satellites, the companies send manufactur-
ing specifications to plants around the world. Then they ship
the parts to another country for assembly.
“Made in America” doesn’t mean what it once did. An American car has parts made all
over the world; many Japanese cars are assembled in the United States. Much of world
trade today is not between countries, but between different parts of global companies.
Where the Jobs Are . . . And Were*
2018 2008
Walmart 2,200,000 Walmart 2,100,000
Amazon 647,500 U.S. Postal Service 663,238
U.S. Postal Service 497,157 United Parcel Service 426,000
Kroger 453,000 McDonald’s 400,000
Yum! Brands 450,000 International Business 398,455
Machines (IBM)
*This table compares total employment at some of the largest U.S. employers based on data from
Fortune magazine and the United States Postal Service.


AMERICAN LABOR 25
.Us and Them: The Struggles Between Labor and Management
Outsourcing is the practice of subcontracting jobs to outside workers,
especially to foreign or nonunion companies and individuals. This prac-
tice often cuts costs because the company does not pay benefits to the
outside workers. Outsourcing has produced a new group of temporary
and part-time employees, including freelancers, contract laborers, and
consultants, who work without benefits on a by-project basis.
The Social Compact . . . Unlinked
21st Century
GLOBAL
MARKET
MULTINATIONAL
COMPANIES
U.S.
GOVERNMENT
U.S. LABOR &
OUTSOURCE
SATELLITES


26 AMERICAN LABOR
Us and Them: The Struggles Between Labor and Management.
Corporations are sending manufacturing jobs and
service jobs offshore. Jobs in data entry, customer service,
claims processing, telemarketing, software engineering, and
business analysis are some examples of the positions that
have moved overseas.
Computerized trading and instant access to current infor-
mation about foreign currencies allow a global financial mar-
ket to operate day and night around the world. Traders invest
not only in money, but also in companies worldwide. They
want a maximum return on their investments, so they look for
businesses that use best practices, that is, the most economi-
cal, efficient, and profitable way to do or produce something.
Companies that keep costs down and productivity up generate
the biggest profits and get the traders’ money. Corporations
seeking investment capital have to make hard decisions about
restructuring the company, cutting wages and benefits, laying
off employees, and outsourcing or eliminating positions.
Lynn Stout, the late Distinguished Professor of Corporate
and Business Law at Cornell Law School, in The Shareholder
Value Myth wrote, “Fifty years ago, if you had asked the direc-
tors or CEO of a large public company what the company’s pur-
pose was, you might have been told the corporation had many
purposes: to provide equity investors with solid returns, but
also to build great products, to provide decent livelihoods for
employees, and to contribute to the community and nation. The
concept was to focus on long-term performance, not maximiz-
ing short-term profits.”
Stout noted that various employer groups united around
a new corporate philosophy that was quickly embraced. The
doctrine is that the sole corporate mission is to reverse the “vir-
tuous circle” and “stakeholder capitalism” philosophy—the one
that helped create broad prosperity and a growing middle class
following World War II. Milton Friedman, in his 1962 book
Capitalism and Freedom, rejected as “subversive” the notion
that corporations have social responsibilities. “Few trends could
so thoroughly undermine the very foundations of our free soci-
ety as the acceptance by corporate officials of a social responsi-
bility other than to make as much money for their stockholders
as possible.” Gone was the idea that the destinies of labor and
management should be linked and they should share roughly
equally in economic and productivity gains.”


.Us and Them: The Struggles Between Labor and Management
Guest Workers and Visas
Before guest worker visas are issued, employers interested in
hiring guest workers must prove that a labor shortage exists;
that foreign-born workers would not be taking jobs from
Americans; and that the guest workers would be paid pre-
vailing rates (average wages paid for a specific job in a geo-
graphical area or industry). Critics of the visa program claim
that the labor shortage does not exist, that guest workers
are paid less than the prevailing rate (which drives American
wages lower), and that temporary jobs become permanent
once the guest worker gets a green card, an identity card stat-
ing that the foreign worker has permanent resident status in
the United States.


28 AMERICAN LABOR
Us and Them: The Struggles Between Labor and Management.
Now Showing:
Organized Labor in the United States
Clashes between workers and employers—often brutal—have been
depicted in movies and in television documentaries. Many films are
accounts of violent strikes, racketeering within unions, robber barons
and corporate greed, plant closings, mysterious deaths of labor leaders
and whistle-blowers, and union activity in textile mills, coal mines, and
other industries. Whether fictionalized or not, these stories often reflect
working-class history: the immigrant experience in the United States,
extended periods of unemployment, low wages and long hours, civil
rights and labor struggles, class-gender-race wars, and radical politics.
Generally, workers are portrayed as the good guys and management
as the bad guys. That sets up dramatic plots—the powerless against the
powerful, the little guy versus the big guy—but when viewing such a film,
consider the issues from all sides. Were the issues presented fairly, or has
an obvious pro-labor or antilabor perspective been portrayed?
The American labor force feels threatened. Many workers
believe they have lost jobs to guest workers, nonimmigrants
admitted into the United States on special visas to work for
specific employers for a limited period of time. Guest work-
ers are particularly prevalent in the high-tech and agricultural
industries. American workers also feel that they have lost jobs
to workers in Third World countries (less economically devel-
oped nations in Africa, Asia, and Latin America) who will work
for a much lower wage. Some Americans believe it is difficult
to compete without giving back gains the labor movement has
made. What frustrates many American workers is that some
workers in the Third World (including children and convicts)
labor long hours in terrible conditions for low wages—the same
conditions that unions fought to change.


AMERICAN LABOR 29
.Us and Them: The Struggles Between Labor and Management
Famous Strikes
1877: The Baltimore & Ohio Railroad slashed wages and touched off
a railroad strike that spread coast to coast. This uprising was the first
industrywide strike and the first time a U.S. president called in federal
troops to protect the interests of big business. Workers in other indus-
tries staged sympathy strikes in support of the railroad workers. By the
time the strike was put down, 100 people were dead. The railroad strike
polarized the social classes and forced Americans to side either with
labor or with management. The strike also led to a new unity among
workers and a revitalization of the labor movement.
1894: The American Railway Union
called a strike against the Pullman
Palace Car Company because
George Pullman, owner of the rail-
road passenger car company, kept
raising rents in his company town
while reducing wages. (A company
town is a community whose econ-
omy is dominated by one employer.
The company owned all the land,
buildings, houses, and stores.)
Pullman closed his plants, so the
union authorized a boycott. No ARU
member would work on any train
that included Pullman cars. The rail-
road companies refused to detach
the cars, so the boycott became a
general strike, which resulted in the
shutting down of 11 railroad lines.
For the first time, a federal court
issued an injunction, or order to
stop, on the basis that the strike “damaged interstate commerce and
was a criminal conspiracy to obstruct postal service.” President Grover
Cleveland sent federal troops to enforce the court order. Eugene V. Debs,
the leader of the ARU, ignored the injunction and was jailed for six
months. The use of the injunction became management’s major weapon
against labor for the next 40 years.
George Pullman


30 AMERICAN LABOR
Us and Them: The Struggles Between Labor and Management.
1902: Anthracite coal miners who were members of the United Mine
Workers called a strike against coal companies that lasted more than
five months. President Theodore Roosevelt ordered arbitration, which
ended in a compromise that increased wages. This was the first time a
U.S. president intervened as a neutral third party to end a strike.
1936: The United Rubber Workers called a strike against the Goodyear
Tire and Rubber Company in Akron, Ohio, after the company
announced layoffs. This strike was important for several reasons:
• It was the first major labor conflict to use the sit-down strike as
a tactic.
• It was the first strike by a union belonging to the newly formed
Committee for Industrial Organization.
• It combined efforts by rank-and-file activists with support from
Akron’s central labor council and CIO headquarters.
1936–37: United Automobile Workers of America staged sit-down
strikes against General Motors and then Chrysler. The strikes ended
months later after the auto companies recognized the UAW as the sole
bargaining agent for all employees.
1945–46: A wave of militant and successful strikes in as many as
44 states by the United Automobile Workers; United Electrical, Radio,
and Machine Workers; and the United Steelworkers Union showed that
American labor wanted its share of postwar prosperity. The UAW strike
against General Motors was the first, largest, and longest postwar
strike. For the first time, a union demanded that the company increase
wages without passing on the cost to consumers. General Motors
increased the autoworkers’ wages but refused to negotiate on the
prices of products. Two years later, the UAW did get the first cost-of-
living escalator clause, which guaranteed that some pay increases
would keep pace with rises in consumer prices.
1965: To help striking Filipino grape workers, Cesar Chavez—leader
of the National Farm Workers Association (later to become the United
Farm Workers)—called for a national grape boycott. The grassroots
organizing effort led to a union contract with the growers that gave
workers increased pay, employer-funded health care, housing,
job-training programs, and union hiring halls. It also established a
ban on the use of toxic pesticides such as DDT.


AMERICAN LABOR 31
.Us and Them: The Struggles Between Labor and Management
1960s–70s: Although strikes by public-sector employees were generally
outlawed, many occurred as teachers, hospital and sanitation workers,
and firefighters went on strike to win union recognition and collective-
bargaining rights. In 1970, New York postal workers started what
became the first national walkout (strike) by federal employees. Their
wildcat strike for higher pay spread to other cities, despite federal
injunctions. President Richard Nixon called in the National Guard to
move the mail. The strike ended when the government agreed to nego-
tiate substantial pay increases for the postal workers.
1981: The Professional Air Traffic Controllers Organization had com-
plained for years that air traffic controllers suffered from stress because
of a lack of staff and equipment to keep up with increased flight traffic.
When they illegally went out on strike, President Ronald Reagan imme-
diately warned the controllers to return to work or lose their jobs. When
strikers did not return, he dismissed them. Within a month, replacement
controllers were able to restore 75 percent of air service. Reagan’s
response signaled a new antilabor position.
1997: The International Brotherhood of Teamsters struck United Parcel
Service to protest the company’s strategy to subcontract work to non-
union and part-time employees. A 15-day strike ended with a victory
for the Teamsters when a federally mediated agreement forced UPS
to create 10,000 new full-time jobs.
More than 180,000 Teamsters went on strike in 1997 to win concessions from UPS.





AMERICAN LABOR 33
.The American Labor Force Today
The American Labor
Force Today
The American civilian labor force includes employed and
unemployed people over 16 years old, except those in prisons,
mental-health institutions, and nursing homes and people serv-
ing on active duty in the military. Blue-collar workers generally
perform manual or physical work in construction, manufactur-
ing, transportation, agricultural, and service industries. White-
collar employees usually work
in offices and schools and are
not required to do heavy physi-
cal labor. Their occupations
range from professional, techni-
cal, and managerial to clerical
and sales positions.
Certain crafts such as
electrical work and tool and die
making demand a high level
of skill and years of experi-
ence. Many professional and
technical occupations require
advanced levels of education.
Other positions require little or
no skill and just days or weeks
of training.
Many welders attend a vocational
school or community college to
learn their trade and then receive
further on-the-job training.


34 AMERICAN LABOR
The American Labor Force Today.
The labor force serves two distinct parts of the nation’s
economy: the private sector and the public sector. The private
sector refers to the aspects of the economy that are under the
control of individuals and privately owned businesses. The pub-
lic sector is under the control of the federal, state, or
local governments.
Another way to analyze the workforce is in terms of
unorganized versus organized labor. In unorganized labor
situations, the individual employee addresses problems
one-on-one with his or her supervisor and the managerial chain
of command. In organized labor, a recognized group of work-
ers deals with management as a collective body with one voice.
Organized workers believe that all employees would benefit
from belonging to a labor group. In fact, one of the main goals
of unions is to organize the unorganized.
Labor Unions
A labor union is an association of workers in a specific craft
or industry, with the main purpose of representing those
workers in negotiations (collective bargaining) about wages,
hours, and working conditions with the employer. Unions
take different forms.
• Craft unions are horizontal. Members are skilled workers
who perform one trade only, such as bricklayers, plumbers,
screen actors, or airline pilots.
• Industrial unions are vertical. Members are skilled and
unskilled workers in all trades within a single industry,
such as the automobile, textile, or rubber industry.
• Public sector unions are workers employed by local,
state, and federal governments. Federal unions, such as
the American Federation of Government Employees, are
Craft unions provide training to their members based
on the model of medieval craft guilds. A trainee
begins as an apprentice, learning a trade at a union-
sponsored school and acting as an assistant on the
job. After successfully completing a training period
of four or more years, the apprentice becomes a fully
qualified skilled worker, or journey worker.


AMERICAN LABOR 35
.The American Labor Force Today
governed by federal law while local and state unions are
governed by state laws.
Independent unions are craft or industrial unions that are not
affiliated with the AFL-CIO, such as those that represent Major
League Baseball players and certain groups of teachers.
Company unions were unions formed at a single company. These
unions were not affiliated with any other union and were usually
controlled or dominated by the employer. Because company unions
were considered to be employers’ attempts to interfere with workers’
rights to organize themselves, the National Labor Relations Act of
1935 declared them illegal.
More than half of the airline
pilots in the United States
are union members.


36 AMERICAN LABOR
The American Labor Force Today.
AMERICAN FEDERATION OF LABOR—CONGRESS OF INDUSTRIAL ORGANIZATIONS
(AFL-CIO)
SERVICE EMPLOYEES INTERNATIONAL UNION
(SEIU)
SEIU NURSE ALLIANCE
(Includes all local unions in all states)
INDIVIDUAL STATE COUNCIL
NORTHERN REGION
EASTERN REGION
SOUTHERN REGION
WESTERN REGION
SEIU LOCAL UNIONS
(Includes local unions from each SEIU Services Division.
Includes all chapters of each local union)
HOSPITAL EMPLOYEES
NURSES
HOME CARE EMPLOYEES
NURSING HOME EMPLOYEES
INDUSTRIAL AND ALLIED SERVICES
STATE AND LOCAL SERVICES
BUILDING SERVICES
HEALTH CARE SERVICES
STATE COUNCILS
(50 State Councils + Puerto Rico)
Organizational Structure of a Union


AMERICAN LABOR 37
.The American Labor Force Today
Unionization
If employees in a company decide they want union representa-
tion, they sign a petition, which is then sent to the National
Labor Relations Board in Washington, D.C. If the Board certi-
fies that there is enough interest (usually 30% of the work-
force) to form a union, it authorizes a secret ballot election to
take place in the workplace after a 60-day waiting period.
Many workers think the waiting period is unfair because
it gives employers a chance to engage in antiunion activities
that undercut the organizing efforts and elections. Today labor
unions are promoting legislation that would require the NLRB
to certify the formation of a union (without a waiting period
and election) when a majority of employees have signed
authorization cards or petitions to form a union.
Union Membership
As the nature of the U.S. economy has changed, union mem-
bership has changed, too. More people belonged to unions (as
a percentage of the labor force) when industry powered the
economy. In the past 50 years, however, union membership
has dropped steadily as the economy has shifted from manu-
facturing to service industries. Many older members of tradi-
tional unions such as the United Automobile Workers and
United Mine Workers of America have retired or lost their
jobs to downsizing—laying off workers and reducing the
workforce to cut costs.
The local union represents all union members in a specific workplace
or all members of a craft union in a particular geographical area. It is
the basic block in a union’s structure. Unions may be local, national,
or international organizations.


38 AMERICAN LABOR
The American Labor Force Today.
The following are some of the reasons union membership has increased or
decreased at various times in history:
• Economic cycles of prosperity or depression
• High employment or unemployment rates
• Government intervention such as injunctions
• National immigration trends and policies
• Pro-labor or antilabor legislation
• Employers’ hostility toward unions
• Strike victories or failures
• Cases of corruption and racketeering
• Successful outcomes in collective-bargaining sessions
• Public perception that unions are special-interest groups
• Loss of jobs in heavily unionized industries due to automation and complex
foreign trade issues
In the 21st century, unions are trying to find ways to adapt to changes in the economy,
political environment, workforce, and labor-management relationship and to revitalize
the labor movement.
In 2017, only 6.5 percent of private-sector employees belonged to a union
compared with 36.1 percent of public-sector workers. The groups with
the highest unionization rates are workers in education, training, library,
and protective services including police officers, firefighters, and security
guards. Four in 10 workers in each of these groups belong to a union.


AMERICAN LABOR 39
.The American Labor Force Today
2014
2000
1990
1980
1970
1960
1950
1940
1930
1920
1910
1900
1890
1880
1870
1860
1850
1840
1830
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40
Union Density


40 AMERICAN LABOR
The American Labor Force Today.
Union Goals and Achievements
Historically, members of the organized labor movement have
tried to secure four basic rights.
• To earn “a living wage”
• To work in safe and decent conditions
• To join an organization of their own choosing
• To bargain collectively
After 200 years of battling, bargaining, and striking, unions have
achieved their principal goals and more. In 1913, the establish-
ment of the Department of Labor as a cabinet-level department
gave the workforce a voice in the government. Union activity
led to legislation that set a national minimum wage, a 40-hour
workweek, and annual cost-of-living increases and required
safety devices and regulations in the workplace. Aggressive col-
lective bargaining resulted in medical insurance plans, pensions,
and extra pay for training, vacations, and overtime.
The unions’ successes may also contribute to their prob-
lems. Many companies have tried to avoid paying the union
workers’ high wages and expensive benefits by using nonunion
employees or offshore workers. In some cases, these practices
have resulted in the reduction or elimination of jobs.
Central Labor Councils
A central labor council is a city or county federation of local
unions that are affiliated with various national or international
unions. For example, local unions of sheet metal workers, elec-
tricians, plumbers and pipe fitters, operating engineers, commu-
nications workers, and office and professional employees may
all belong to a central labor council. The AFL-CIO has chartered
almost 600 central labor councils nationwide.
The principal mission of the central labor council is to
mobilize local organizing efforts and political action and to show
solidarity for the bargaining demands of specific unions. In addi-
tion, the central labor council also coordinates community efforts
with local unions to provide training, information, and referral
services for workers dealing with financial and personal crises.
You can find out
about central
labor councils
and unions in
your area by
looking up “Labor
Organizations” in
your phone book
or online.


AMERICAN LABOR 41
.The American Labor Force Today
Employee Organizations
The National Labor Relations Board defines a labor organization
as “any organization in which employees participate and which
exists for the purpose of dealing with employers concerning
grievances, labor disputes, wages, rates of pay, hours of employ-
ment, or conditions of work.” Labor unions existed before the
NLRB was established, so those earlier unions helped shape the
definition of a labor organization.
In recent decades, many companies have established
employee-participation committees. Sometimes these groups
are called by other names such as quality circles and employee-
involvement teams. These committees meet regularly with
management to discuss employee complaints, productivity,
company policies, and other workplace issues. Supporters of
these groups suggest that the two-way communication boosts
employee morale and encourages the cooperative resolution of
workplace problems.
Unions do not favor employee-participation committees
because they reduce the need for labor organization. Several
unions have challenged these groups by filing unfair labor
practice charges with the NLRB, claiming that the employee-
participation committees are actually illegal company unions.
In certain cases where the NLRB believed that employees were
dealing with employers about wages, grievances, and work con-
ditions, the Board ruled that the employee-participation com-
mittees were illegal. In other cases, the Board decided that the
employee groups were communicating about issues and ruled
that they were legal.
Unions already in place probably will continue to challenge
the legality of these groups. However, some labor leaders think
unions should look at employee participation committees as
opportunities to organize from within the company.
Independent Contractors
There has been a growing movement to classify employees as
independent contractors. A business may pay an independent
contractor and an employee for the same or similar work, but
there are important legal differences between the two. For the
employee, the company withholds income tax, Social Security,
and Medicare from wages paid. For the independent contractor,
the company does not withhold taxes. Employment and labor
laws also do not apply to independent contractor. They do not
have the right to organize or bargain collectively.





AMERICAN LABOR 43
.Conflicting Views in the Workplace
Conflicting Views in
the Workplace
Post–World War II prosperity launched the middle class.
Millions of Americans earned higher-than-ever wages, received
employee benefit packages that included health insurance
and pension plans, and bought their first houses and filled
them with new appliances and new furniture. All that shop-
ping boosted the economy. Workers trusted their employers
and their government. People who had survived the Great
Depression and a world war promised to work at their jobs
for the next 40 years in exchange for security . . . and a
gold watch.
The next generation—the Baby Boomers, born in the years
following World War II—expected to have a higher standard
of living than their parents. But the economy has since slowed
down, companies have laid off employees or cut their benefits,
and workers have realized that their retirement is at risk. The
children of the Baby Boomers do not have the same optimism
about employment opportunities as their parents and grand-
parents did. For the first time in the history of the American
labor movement, young workers do not assume they will have
a higher standard of living than their parents.
Every group that has a stake in the economy has different
responsibilities and expectations. Often they conflict. When
each group understands what others want, it is easier to make
and appreciate difficult decisions.
What Workers Want
Most workers, whether or not they belong to a union, share
the same concerns and expect the same rights. Employees
want a voice in the workplace. Many—even nonunion—wish
to speak with a collective voice about broad issues such as job
security, wages, hours, fringe benefits, workplace conditions


44 AMERICAN LABOR
Conflicting Views in the Workplace.
“Machines don’t
take sick days or
go on strike.”
—comment from
management in
response to the
complaint that
automation and
technologies
displace workers
and safety, and a system for resolving problems. When issues
relate to personal concerns such as performance appraisals
and salaries, training, sexual harassment, discrimination, and
unfair treatment, many prefer to speak as individuals.
Employees expect a fair hearing. They want management
to listen to the workers with an open mind and to consider
that their claims are valid. They also want straight talk. If the
company is for sale, employees expect management to share
information about terms and conditions so the workers can
make appropriate plans about their own employment. If the
company plans to outsource jobs, employees want to know if
the employer plans to transfer or lay them off. Workers want
assurances that they will not be displaced by machinery and
technology or replaced by guest workers.
Workers try to strike a balance between keeping their jobs
and protecting fringe benefits. These benefits may include
• Seniority (priority status based on length of time the
employee has worked for the company)
• Unemployment and disability insurance
• Health care
• Child care and elder care
• Profit sharing and employee stock-option plans
• Continuing education
• Retirement plans (pensions, 401(k)s)
• Workers’ compensation (accidental injury, death, or
dismemberment insurance)
American workers want democracy in the workplace. However,
today’s corporate executives may earn many times more than
the workers in the same company. Top management often
receives bonuses even as workers are laid off. Companies
announce record profits after cutting jobs or negotiating
employee wage reductions. What workers really want is mutual
trust and respect, job security, and a fair share of the profits.
Employee Representatives
When Samuel Gompers, president of the American Federation
of Labor, was asked what the labor movement wanted, he
said, “More.” Representatives for employees—union leaders
and negotiators, employee associations, labor lobbyists—have


AMERICAN LABOR 45
.Conflicting Views in the Workplace
always tried to get more for the workers. “More” ranges from
tangible benefits such as wage increases, paid vacations, and
matching contributions in retirement funds to intangible gov-
ernment protections in the form of pro-labor legislation, trade
restraints, and welfare programs such as Social Security.
Sometimes, however, the representatives have to bargain
for less. When a company threatens bankruptcy, workers often
have to give back benefits or accept a cut in pay in order to
keep their jobs.
What Owners and Management Want
In small companies, the owner is management. In large
corporations, the owner is usually a group of investors who
have created a legal and financial partnership, joint venture,
or syndicate. (For more information, see the American Business
merit badge pamphlet.) Owners of large companies hire busi-
ness managers to help them generate a profit.
Unless the top manager or executive is the owner, then
everyone in management is a worker with a boss. Management
often consists of several levels of administrators.
• Top management includes the chief executive officer and
chief financial officer. They determine the goals, objectives,
and policies for the company and report directly to
the owner.
• Upper management includes top executives who head
corporate divisions.
• Middle management executives head departments.
• Lower management directly supervises workers.
Managers at each level have a responsibility to generate profits.
Their own job security depends on it. So almost every decision
a manager makes—allocating resources, investing in expen-
sive technology, reducing company contributions to employee
retirement plans—involves the bottom line.
With owners demanding higher profits and employees and
labor unions insisting on wage increases and better benefits,
management has to make difficult choices. What managers
want is the right to manage. Because they have to balance so
many special interests with critical financial implications, man-
agement expects to have the final authority in the workplace.


46 AMERICAN LABOR
Conflicting Views in the Workplace.
Owners
The foremost concern of a company owner (an individual or
a group of investors) is to make a profit. How that is accom-
plished—by gaining a competitive advantage, increasing mar-
ket share, catering to the customer, improving productivity, or
boosting employee morale—is management’s concern.
Investment groups own other businesses, too. They make
decisions about whether to continue to invest in the com-
panies based on the profitability of those businesses. Just as
management may shut down a division in a company to cut
costs and improve profitability, the owner may sell an unprof-
itable company to protect overall profits.
Shareholders
Financial institutions, investment groups, and individuals often
buy shares of stock in a company. Each share represents a piece
of the company, a percentage of ownership. Some companies offer
an employee stock-option plan that
allows employees to acquire shares
of company stock and receive stock
distributions at retirement.
Shareholders want a return
on their investment in the
company. Most look for a short-
term profit, which pressures
company management to take
short-term action at the expense
of long-term goals. Since employee
shareholders receive stock
distributions at retirement, they
are interested in the long-term
return on investment.
What Others Want
What happens inside a com-
pany affects different groups outside the company. Decisions
to outsource, raise or lower wages, relocate, or sponsor local
community programs influence perceptions and support for
the company.


AMERICAN LABOR 47
.Conflicting Views in the Workplace
Customers
Customers want to buy quality products and services at the
best price. Since customers play a critical role in the success of
a business, a company must figure out how to meet consumer
needs and still make a profit.
Community
If unemployment is high in a community, citizens want a com-
pany to hire local workers. In addition, a community wants
a business to fill a niche—to offer a product or service not
offered by others—or to offer a better product at a better price
than competitors. The community also wants a company to
be a good corporate citizen, for example, by sponsoring the
arts (such as theater and music groups) or supporting
community programs.
Public Officials
The mayor and other public officials want to convince compa-
nies that the community is a great place to locate a business
because the city benefits from additional tax revenues. If a
company is successful, hires local workers, and has a good
reputation for the way it handles labor-management relations,
then officials can use it as an example to lure other businesses
to the community. However, if the company generates negative
publicity (from lawsuits, strikes, environmental violations, or
workplace injuries), then public officials perceive the company
as a problem for the community.
As you can see, these groups have different goals, yet they
are linked together. Each time a company addresses an issue
in one group, it upsets the balance with other groups. People
spend a lot of time at work defending their point of view and
insisting on getting what they want. While they are arguing,
picketing, or negotiating, they are not making a product, not
serving customers or citizens, and not making a profit. When
different groups realize that what they have in common
(the success of the company) is most important, then they
must compromise in areas that are driven by self-interest
and make an agreement that best serves everyone.





AMERICAN LABOR 49
.Labor-Management Relations
Labor-Management
Relations
Suppose that you and two friends started a lawn-care business.
Your parent has loaned you all the equipment. All you have to
do is maintain it, fuel it, and return it at the end of the summer.
You and your friends have agreed to split the profits after paying
expenses, and everyone has a plan to spend his or her share. But
today one of your friends broke the edger. Now what?
Did you notice how fast a simple plan becomes compli-
cated? Situations like that happen every day in businesses.
Conflicts of interest, if not negotiated, can easily escalate to
anger. No wonder workplace relationships get strained.
Laws and Practices That Govern
Labor-Management Relations
Labor and management always have had a polarized relation-
ship. The individual employee, working at the whim and mercy
of the boss, often feared management. When workers orga-
nized, they quickly realized they had some control over their
wages and working conditions.
In time, unions took a more aggressive stance with man-
agement. Soon, both sides developed an adversarial relation-
ship based on positions, power, and threats. They defined the
outcome of collective bargaining as a win for one party, a loss
for the other.
Nonunion employees borrowed some of the unions’
negotiating techniques but toned them down into a cooperative-
bargaining style based on mutual interests. Negotiations—
involving individuals or employee groups and management—
call for compromises on both sides and a win-win result.


50 AMERICAN LABOR
Labor-Management Relations.
The political environment influences labor-management
disputes. The president (with the consent of the Senate)
appoints members to the National Labor Relations Board,
which decides cases involving unfair labor practices by employ-
ers or unions. The appointees generally reflect the pro-labor or
antilabor views of the incumbent (current) government officials.
Collective Bargaining
The negotiation process known as collective bargaining occurs
between union and company representatives to discuss wages,
hours, working conditions, fringe benefits, and union security.
The goal of collective bargaining is to make a contract—a
collective-bargaining agreement. The contract must meet union
needs (and those of nonunion employees covered in the
bargaining unit) and employer needs. It also must include
specific grievance procedures to resolve labor disputes.
Unfair Labor Practices
The National Labor Relations Act and the Taft-Hartley Act define and
prohibit unfair labor practices as practices of discrimination, coercion,
and intimidation by management or unions. Employers may not
• Set up company unions.
• Use coercive tactics to discourage union organization.
• Refuse to bargain collectively with unions representing a
company’s employees.
Unions may not
• Force workers to join organizations not of their own choosing.
• Coerce an employee in the selection of a bargaining representative.
• Refuse to bargain in good faith with management.
Dispute Resolution Continuum
Cooperative Adversarial Model of
Bargaining Style Collective Bargaining
Conciliation Mediation Negotiation Binding Arbitration
Mutual Interests Rights Power
Win-Win Win-Lose
Dispute Resolution Continuum


AMERICAN LABOR 51
.Labor-Management Relations
When a contract is about to expire, the union and the
company must announce a notice of intent to enter into a
collective-bargaining agreement. If the two sides reach an
impasse, or fail to agree, then they may call in a neutral third
party to mediate a settlement. If the old contract expires before
a new one is negotiated and signed, the union may call a strike
or the company may call a lockout to pressure the other side to
accept terms.
Union Grievance Procedure
Management acts.
The employee thinks management has violated
the union contract.
The employee discusses the grievance
with the shop steward.
The employee and shop steward discuss the grievance
with the employee’s supervisor.
Has the grievance been resolved? Yes.
No.
The grievance is presented to top management.
Has the grievance been resolved? Yes.
No.
The grievance goes to arbitration,
where the decision will be final.


52 AMERICAN LABOR
Labor-Management Relations.
The law forbids
certain public-
sector employees
from going on
strike. Some
groups use
sick-outs as a
form of protest.
Firefighters get
the “red rash,”
police catch
“blue flu,” and
teachers suffer
from “chalk-
dust fever.”
Collective bargaining loses its teeth when strikes are
prohibited. In those situations, employees use other tactics
such as slowdowns—deliberate reductions in productivity—
and mass absenteeism to pressure employers to meet
their demands.
A strike—the complete cessation of work by employ-
ees—is a work stoppage. A lockout, in which an
employer closes the company and prevents employ-
ees from working, is management’s version of a
strike. Since locked-out workers became eligible for
unemployment compensation, the tactic has become
less effective than in the past.
Strikes of All Stripes
general strike. A widespread strike of all workers in a
geographic area, causing economic paralysis. If suc-
cessful, the general strike results in a major change
in power relations between labor and management.
jurisdictional strike. A work stoppage that results
from a dispute between rival unions about which
one has the right to represent particular employees.
It occurs when rival unions call workers off their jobs
to show their strength and support.
organizational strike. An action called to force the
employer to recognize the employees’ union as their
collective-bargaining agent.
sit-down strike. The refusal of striking workers to
leave their place of employment in order to prevent
other workers from replacing them.
sympathy strike. A walkout by employees—who have
no direct grievance against management—in support
of workers from another union.
wildcat strike. A work stoppage that occurs when
workers leave their jobs (often spontaneously) with-
out the authorization of their union leaders.


AMERICAN LABOR 53
.Labor-Management Relations
Mediation and arbitration of grievances offer cost-effective
alternatives to expensive litigation via judicial courts. Both
approaches involve using impartial third parties who are com-
mitted to confidentiality. Mediation is an informal, voluntary
negotiation process for resolving disputes. The mediator helps
the parties communicate, understand the issues, and reach an
agreement but has no decision-making authority. If the parties
cannot agree, the dispute goes to arbitration, a formal process
in which facts and issues are presented to a neutral arbitrator
who makes a legally binding decision.
Often, when labor and management have difficulty
negotiating an agreement, a mediator will give an opinion
about what the final decision might be if the dispute goes to
arbitration. That prediction creates an incentive for the parties
to reach a settlement before an arbitrator rules against one or
the other.
Work stoppages have been less frequent in the past
several decades owing to pro-management arbitration
decisions, employers’ right to hire replacement strikers,
and laws forbidding certain public employees to strike.


54 AMERICAN LABOR
Labor-Management Relations.
Work Stoppages Involving 1,000 or More Workers, 1947–2012
Number of Work Stoppages
Year
1947 1952 1957 1962 1967 1972 1977 1982 1987 1992 1997 2002 2007 2012
500
450
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0


AMERICAN LABOR 55
.Labor-Management Relations
Personnel Policies and Procedures
Many nonunion businesses have informal open-door policies
to address labor complaints. Workers are encouraged to discuss
their concerns with management without fear of any retaliatory
actions. Formal internal grievance procedures establish specific
steps an employee must take to challenge certain aspects
of employment.
Nonunion employees also use mediation and arbitration,
as well as peer review, which utilizes a panel of the employee’s
peers to evaluate the dispute and render a decision (which may
or may not be binding).
Labor Laws
The rights and responsibilities for labor and management are
determined by union contracts and labor legislation.
Hard Hats and Thinking Caps—Two Sides of
a Labor Issue
You know by now that the goals of labor and the goals of
management often conflict. On any day you can spot newspa-
per headlines announcing a problem between a union and an
employer, a new outsourcing deal, a complaint about the lack
of cultural diversity in top management, a discrimination law-
suit, a plant closing, or a threat to slash wages or reduce health
insurance benefits. When you start work on requirement 7,
pick a current labor issue of widespread interest and then try to
understand what caused the problem and what its effect is on
labor and on management.
As you prepare to argue the issue (in person or on paper)
from different points of view, imagine yourself as the mediator
in the labor-management issue you chose. Do not assume one
side or the other is right. Be objective and impartial so you can
see the facts beneath the issues. Remember: Management’s goal
is to make a profit. Labor’s goal is to make a living wage. Your
goal is to defend each party’s position within the limits of rights
and responsibilities.
Where Now?
Three centuries. Three economic revolutions. It is not business
as usual, and it certainly is not labor as usual. The workforce


56 AMERICAN LABOR
Labor-Management Relations.
is aging, yet living longer than earlier generations. Baby
Boomers are either not willing to retire in their 60s or not
financially prepared to retire. Older workers are holding on to
positions that younger workers expected to fill.
Globalization has changed the way Americans conduct
business and the way people work. Outsourcing has moved
both blue-collar and white-collar jobs out of the United States.
Opportunities in fields such as computer science are no longer
plentiful, although experts predict that there will be plenty of
face-to-face positions that cannot be moved overseas. Millions
of positions for unskilled and semiskilled workers in food ser-
vice and retail sales occupations will be available, yet many
unemployed skilled workers will compete for those low-paying
jobs. The American labor movement faces a lot of knotty prob-
lems and challenges, but it is not at the end of its rope.
Labor Laws
Anti-Trust Act of 1914 (Clayton Act). This pro-labor law states that union
activities are not illegal and limits the courts’ jurisdiction to issue injunc-
tions against labor organizations.
Railway Labor Act of 1926. This pro-labor act protects the collective-
bargaining rights of interstate railway employees (amended in 1934
to include airlines). This law established the National Railroad Adjustment
Board to arbitrate grievances that arise from labor-
management contracts.
Davis-Bacon Act of 1931. A pro-labor law that requires contractors on
federal government construction projects to pay the prevailing rates and
fringe benefits.
Norris-LaGuardia Act of 1932. This pro-labor act outlawed the yellow-dog
contract—a statement workers sometimes were forced to sign in which
they promised that they would not join a union. In addition, this law lim-
its the power of federal courts to issue injunctions against union activity
in labor disputes.
National Labor Relations Act of 1935 (Wagner Act). A pro-labor law that
applies to all companies and employees in activities affecting interstate
commerce except for agricultural laborers, government employees, and
people covered by the Railway Labor Act. It established
a National Labor Relations Board to safeguard workers’ rights to orga-
nize unions and bargain collectively through representatives of their
own choosing.


AMERICAN LABOR 57
.Labor-Management Relations
Anti-Strikebreaker Act of 1936 (Byrnes Act). This pro-labor law, which was
amended in 1938, prohibits employers from transporting people across
state lines to break strikes or threaten organizing or bargaining efforts.
Walsh-Healy Public Contracts Act of 1936. A pro-labor act that estab-
lished basic labor standards for work performed on U.S. government
contracts, including minimum wages, overtime compensation, prohibi-
tions against hiring convicts and children under 18, and requirements
related to health and safety.
Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (Wages and Hours Act). This pro-labor
law, amended in 1949, 1955, 1961, 1963, 1966, and 1996, established
minimum hourly wages and overtime payments for all workers in
covered businesses involving interstate commerce. This law requires
that men and women performing equal work be paid equal wages and
regulates the employment of children under age 18.
Labor-Management Relations Act of 1947 (Taft-Hartley Act). An antilabor
law that allows states to enact right-to-work laws. It prohibits closed
shops and restricts the activities and power of labor unions.
Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act of 1959 (Landrum-
Griffin Act). This law, prompted by investigations into racketeering
charges and intended to protect union members from corrupt leaders,
includes regulations for union election procedures and government
supervision of unions’ financial affairs.
Civil Rights Act of 1964. This law prohibits unions, employers, and
employment agencies from discriminating against workers or clients
based on race, color, sex, religion, or national origin. This law estab-
lished the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission to handle
complaints about violations of this act. Its provisions were extended
to public-sector employers in 1972.
Occupational Safety Health Act of 1970. This pro-labor law authorizes the
secretary of labor to establish and enforce health and safety
standards in workplaces.
State labor laws. Unlike many other countries, when the United States
enacted the National Labor Relations Act, the U.S. did not include public
employees within the same or similar framework for collective bargain-
ing. Not until the late 1950s and 1960s did state and local governments
grapple with a labor law to govern their rapidly growing public-sector
labor forces. No state or local government chose to transplant the pri-
vate-sector model of collective bargaining; instead, they adopted some
parts of it, chose to create no bargaining framework at all, or prohibited
collective bargaining.


58 AMERICAN LABOR
Career Opportunities
in Labor Relations
The field of labor relations includes all the interactions between
a company’s management and organized labor or nonunion
employees. Careers range from recruiters to employee benefits
specialists to administrative law judges.
Many unions today are hiring staff employees in a number
of positions, such as IT technicians, researchers, economists,
teachers and educators, field organizers, legislative aides,
clerical workers, and other areas. Young people who feel a
commitment to serving working people are particularly
welcomed by labor organizations.
There are also opportunities to work in nonprofit organi-
zations, such as those that serve low-income families and
have social justice aims. The experience gained in these
organizations is particularly worthwhile because young
workers are often immediately put into positions that require
resourcefulness, imagination, and leadership.
Human Resources
This area concerns all aspects involving the employees of a
company, including hiring, paying, training, and discharging
personnel as well as helping to develop policies.
A human resources generalist handles the full range of
responsibilities relating to personnel. In a large corporation, a
director of human resources develops and coordinates person-
nel policies and procedures and oversees the following depart-
ments, which are headed by experienced managers:
Career Opportunities In Labor Relations.


AMERICAN LABOR 59
Employment. An employment and placement manager
handles the hiring and separation (leaving the company) of
employees and supervises the people in the following positions.
• A recruiter often travels to find and interview promising job
candidates. The recruiter must understand the company and
its policies, as well as employment laws, in order to discuss
wages, working conditions, and opportunities.
• An equal employment opportunity officer, representative, or
affirmative action coordinator works in a large corporation,
handles discrimination grievances, and makes sure that
company practices are not in violation of the law.
Compensation. A compensation manager sets up and main-
tains the company’s pay system and compares the pay rates
to other companies to ensure that the pay scale complies with
legal regulations. The manager makes compensation decisions
based on information from people in the following positions:
• A job analysis specialist collects and studies information
about job duties to classify positions and develop
job descriptions.
• An occupational analyst studies the effects of industry
and occupational trends on worker relationships and
often acts as a technical link between the company and
other organizations.
Benefits. An employee benefits manager handles the company’s
benefits program, which includes insurance (health, disability,
life, accidental death and dismemberment) and pension plans
(savings, profit sharing, stock ownership). A benefits manager
(and benefits specialist) must know the current laws and regula-
tions that affect employee benefits. An employee assistance plan
manager, or employee welfare manager, is responsible for pro-
grams that help employees balance their work and personal lives
such as those relating to child care, elder care, transportation
and carpooling, physical fitness, and counseling.
Training and Development. A training and development
manager is responsible for programs to develop employees’
skills, improve productivity and quality of work, and boost
morale. A training specialist plans and directs activities that
include on-the-job training for new employees, new skills
training in response to technological changes, and executive
development programs.
Career Opportunities in Labor Relations


60 AMERICAN LABOR
Career Opportunities In Labor Relations
Industrial Relations
A director of industrial relations makes labor policy and col-
laborates with the director of human resources and other man-
agers about personnel policies that affect unionized employees.
The director negotiates collective-bargaining agreements and
coordinates grievance procedures. A labor-relations manager
is responsible for implementing industrial labor-relations pro-
grams, overseeing the preparation of information for negotiat-
ing collective-bargaining agreements, and administering union
contracts. The position requires extensive knowledge about
labor law and collective-bargaining trends.
Dispute Resolution
This negotiation process for settling disputes is an alterna-
tive to litigation. Resolutions at this level save much time and
money, so third-party individuals should be knowledgeable
and experienced in the areas of labor law and industrial relations.
• A conciliator assumes the responsibility for keeping disput-
ing parties in negotiations until they reach a voluntary
settlement. As a third party, the conciliator tries to establish
communication between disputants and build the trust nec-
essary for a cooperative solution.
• A mediator is an impartial third party who is appointed to
help resolve a labor-management dispute. The mediator
advises, but has no decision-making authority. An arbitrator
is an impartial individual who conducts a formal hearing
about a labor-management dispute and renders a decision
that may or may not be binding on both sides.
• An administrative law judge decides cases that cannot be
resolved through mediation or arbitration or are so complex
and critical that they go directly to court.
Unions
Unions offer a variety of job opportunities. They include
both elected and staff positions. Staff roles include executive
director and other management positions, legal, organizing
and collective bargaining, researchers, labor education,
communications, technology, public relations, political and
legislative, printing, accounting, human resources, clerical,
conference and travel coordinator, librarian, and others.


AMERICAN LABOR 61
Career Opportunities In Labor Relations
Qualifications, Education, and Training
Entry-level careers in human resources and industrial labor
relations generally require a college education with majors in
human resources, personnel administration, or industrial and
labor relations. A combination of interdisciplinary courses in
the social sciences, business, and behavioral sciences plus
courses in computers and information systems provide a strong
base of knowledge. Candidates with experience from intern-
ships or work-study programs have an edge over applicants
with no work experience.
For certain specialties such as employment benefits, indus-
trial relations, and dispute resolution, a background in law
is necessary. Many labor-relations positions require graduate
study. Management positions demand advanced degrees in
human resources, labor relations, or business administration.
Human resources workers and labor-relations specialists
need good people skills to interact effectively with a culturally
diverse workforce. Like dispute-resolution specialists, they
should demonstrate the qualities of fair-mindedness, discretion,
and compassion as well as the abilities to analyze problems,
interpret statistics, function under pressure, and manage
conflicting points of view.
A federal administrative law judge must have experience
as a lawyer and pass a competitive examination administered
by the U.S. Office of Personnel Management. The judge is
appointed (for life) to the bench by one of several federal
agencies and then receives judicial training from an organiza-
tion such as the American Bar Association.
Many conciliators, mediators, and arbitrators have law
degrees with a specialization in conflict management. Those
affiliated with mediation organizations must complete a train-
ing course and an apprenticeship and agree to uphold certain
ethical standards.
If you are interested in pursuing one of these careers,
consider a summer internship in a personnel or human
resources department. You will get on-the-job training in
basic administrative duties and gain an appreciation for the
field of labor relations.


62 AMERICAN LABOR
Labor-Related Resources.
Scouting Literature
American Business, Citizenship in
the Nation, Citizenship in the World,
Communication, Entrepreneurship,
Law, Public Speaking, and
Salesmanship merit badge pamphlets
Books
Bartoletti, Susan Campbell. Kids on
Strike! HMH Books for Young
Readers, 2003.
Dubofsky, Melvyn, and Joseph A.
McMartin. Labor in America:
A History, 9th ed. Wiley-
Blackwell, 2017.
Freedman, Russell. Kids at Work:
Lewis Hine and the Crusade
Against Child Labor. HMH Books
for Young Readers, 1998.
Le Blanc, Paul. A Short History of the
U.S. Working Class: From Colonial
Times to the Twenty-First Century,
2nd ed. Haymarket Books, 2017.
Lichtenstein, Nelson. State of the
Union: A Century of American
Labor. Princeton University
Press, 2013.
Murray, R. Emmett. Lexicon of
Labor: More Than 500 Key
Terms, Biographical Sketches,
and Historical Insights Concerning
Labor in America. The New
Press, 2010.
Olson, James. S. Encyclopedia of the
Industrial Revolution in America.
Greenwood, 2001.
Stein, R. Conrad. The Pullman
Strike and the Labor Movement
in American History. Enslow
Publishers, 2001.
U.S. Department of Labor. Occupational
Outlook Handbook (current year).
Bernan Press, 2019.
Woodburn, Judith. A Multicultural
Portrait of Labor in America.
Benchmark Books, 1994.
Zaniello, Tom. Working Stiffs, Union
Maids, Reds, and Riffraff: An
Expanded Guide to Films About
Labor. ILR Press, 2003.
Labor-Related Resources
With your parent’s permission,
visit Scouting America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org,
for a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


AMERICAN LABOR 63
.Labor-Related Resources
Biographies About American
Labor Leaders
Collins, David R. Farmworker’s
Friend: The Story of Cesar Chavez.
Carolrhoda Books, 1996.
Josephson, Judith Pinkerton. Mother
Jones: Fierce Fighter for Workers’
Rights. Lerner Publications, 1996.
Lichtenstein, Nathan. Walter Reuther:
The Most Dangerous Man in Detroit.
University of Illinois Press, 1997.
Reef, Catherine. A. Philip Randolph:
Union Leader and Civil Rights
Crusader. Enslow Publishers, 2001.
Streissguth, Thomas. Legendary Labor
Leaders. Oliver Press Inc., 1998.
Organizations and Websites
American Arbitration Association
120 Broadway, Floor 21
New York, NY 10271
Telephone: 212-716-5800
www.adr.org
American Federation of Labor and
Congress of Industrial Organizations
815 16th St. NW
Washington, DC 20006
Telephone: 202-637-5000
aflcio.org
American Labor Studies Center
8201 Admirals Walk Drive
Cohoes, NY 12047
Telephone: 518-331-4474
www.labor-studies.org
Illinois Labor History Society
430 S. Michigan Ave, Room WB 1806
Chicago, IL 60605
Telephone: 312-341-2247
www.illinoislaborhistory.org
The Labor and Working-Class
History Association (LAWCHA)
226 Carr Building (East Campus)
Box 90719
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708-0719
Email: lawcha.office@gmail.com
www.lawcha.org
Labor Heritage Foundation
815 16th St. NW
Washington, DC 20006
Telephone: 202-639-6204
www.laborheritage.org
Labor History Links
www.laborhistorylinks.org
LaborStart
www.labourstart.org/usa
National Labor Relations Board
1015 Half St. SE
Washington, D.C. 20570-0001
Toll-free telephone: 844-762-6572
www.nlrb.gov
New York Labor History Association
Robert F. Wagner Labor Archives
70 Washington Square South, 2nd Floor
New York, NY 10012
www.newyorklaborhistory.org
Occupational Safety and
Health Administration
200 Constitution Ave. NW
Room N3626
Washington, DC 20210
Toll-free telephone: 800-321-6742
www.osha.gov
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics
Postal Square Building
2 Massachusetts Ave. NE
Washington, DC 20212-0001
Telephone: 202-691-5200
www.bls.gov


64 AMERICAN LABOR
Labor-Related Resources.
U.S. Department of Labor
200 Constitution Ave. NW
Washington, DC 20210
Toll-free telephone: 866-487-2365
www.dol.gov
Wisconsin Labor History Society
6333 W. Bluemound Road
Milwaukee WI 53213
Telephone: 414-771-0700
www.wisconsinlaborhistory.org
Acknowledgments
We are appreciative of the support from the
following individuals on this update of the
American Labor merit badge pamphlet:
• Kenneth A. Germanson,
president emeritus, Wisconsin
Labor History Society
• Paul Cole, executive director, American
Labor Studies Center
• David Newby, retired president,
Wisconsin AFL-CIO
• Evelyn Hershey, education director,
American Labor Museum
For their past support, Scouting
America thanks Dr. George Green, profes-
sor of history at the University of Texas
at Arlington, for his guidance about
the significant events in the history of
the American labor movement, and the
Tarrant County Central Labor Council for
its openness and support.
Scouting America is grateful to the men
and women serving on the National Merit
Badge Subcommittee for the improve-
ments made in updating this pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration Credits
Ford Motor Company, courtesy—
page 46
International Brotherhood of Teamsters
archives, courtesy—page 31
Kheel Center for Labor-Management
Documentation and Archives,
courtesy—page 17
Library of Congress Prints and
Photographs Division, courtesy—
pages 8, 18 (A. Philip Randolph),
and 29
National Archives and Records
Administration, courtesy—
pages 10 and 13
National Photo Company Collection,
Library of Congress, courtesy—
page 11
TechDirections Books/Media,
www.techdirections.com, courtesy—
page 12
Walter P. Reuther Library, Wayne
State University, courtesy—
page 18 (Albert Shanker)
Watermind, courtesy—cover (Rosie the
Riveter poster) and page 20
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property
of or are protected by Scouting America.
Dan Bryant—page 35 (teacher)
John McDearmon—page 7
Mike Pearce—page 35 (pilot)