ENTREPRENEURSHIP
“Company’s saying or motto”C
L
Company logo
Your name
Company’s name
Company’s address
Company’s phone/fax/e-mail
Brief comment on your product
or service


ENTREPRENEURSHIP
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
This pamphlet is based on a pamphlet
created by the Center for Entrepreneurial
Leadership Inc. at the Ewing Marion
Kauffman Foundation and is distributed
with the permission of the center.
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Entrepreneurship or check
Scoutbook for the latest requirements.
35891
ISBN 978-0-8395-5008-2
©2025 Scouting America/Boy Scouts of America
2025
FPO





4 ENTREPRENEURSHIP


ENTREPRENEURSHIP 5
Contents
Be Your Own Boss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
What Do Entrepreneurs Do? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Entrepreneurial Opportunities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
Generating and Evaluating Ideas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
Getting Down to Business: The Plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
Business Basics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
Moving Ahead to Start Your Business . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
Shifting Into High Gear . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
The Big Picture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91
Entrepreneurship Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92





ENTREPRENEURSHIP 7
.Be Your Own Boss
Be Your Own Boss
If you have dreamed of going into business for yourself, you
are not alone. Surveys show that more than half of American
teenagers and college students are interested in starting their
own businesses. Many new ventures are launched every day.
Starting a business is hard work. It also can be great fun.
People launch businesses for many reasons: to work at something
they love, to have the freedom to chart their own course, to be
self-sufficient, and to have a chance for financial independence.
Making money, however, should never be a person’s only
reason for starting a business. People who go into business to
“get rich quick” are seldom as successful as those who pursue
their dreams with passion, commitment, and the necessary skills.
Build a business on something you love—an idea, a tal-
ent, an interest that captures your imagination and fires your
enthusiasm—and you may feel you are not working at all.
While you may actually work harder than you have ever
worked at anything, you will be having too much fun to
notice. Successful entrepreneurs do what they do because they
love it. They are following a dream and having an adventure.
An entrepreneur is many things. Most are adventurous,
self-reliant, and energetic, and they have other qualities you
will learn about as you work on the Entrepreneurship merit
badge. The common definition of an entrepreneur is
“someone who operates a business.” Thinking of an
entrepreneur as a problem solver, however, may
help you better understand what makes an
entrepreneur tick.


8 ENTREPRENEURSHIP
Be Your Own Boss.
Entrepreneurs are always looking for problems they can solve,
gaps they can fill, or unmet needs they can answer with the
right product or service. To sell their products or services,
entrepreneurs often start businesses.
As you earn this merit badge, you will look at what
entrepreneurs do, their characteristics and skills, and how they
bring new ideas, products, and services to people and society.
You will learn about identifying opportunities, creating and
evaluating business ideas, and exploring the feasibility (how
doable it is) of an idea as you develop a basic business plan.
You will also have the chance to fit everything together as you
consider running your own business venture.
With a little imagination and the
skills you learn as you earn the
Entrepreneurship merit badge,
you could start your own business,
like the makers of the Willis Water
Bomb, above.


ENTREPRENEURSHIP 9
.Be Your Own Boss
Many Scouts who start a business
to earn the Entrepreneurship merit
badge will probably operate that
business for only one to three
months. Some of the areas covered
in this pamphlet—especially the
financial areas—may seem compli-
cated when you first read about them.
However, you will find that these are really not difficult
to handle (and, in fact, can be fun) when starting up
and running a small business for a short time.
As you work to complete the requirements for this
merit badge, you will have done much of the hard work
necessary to start a business. As you take each step,
you may learn the joys of being your own boss and
earning money by pursuing an interest or a passion.
Working toward this merit badge might just help you
create your own path to small-business success—and
change your future!


Entrepreneurs can make a profitable business from just about any hobby. Timothy
Johnson of Littleton, Colorado, owns Busy Bee Enterprises, which sells products
made from honey. He continues to operate that business today.


ENTREPRENEURSHIP 11
.What Do Entrepreneurs Do?
What Do
Entrepreneurs Do?
To understand what an entrepreneur is and does, start with the
word “problem.” Most people face problems every day.
Problems frustrate, confuse, and annoy most people, unless
those people happen to be entrepreneurs.
Every Problem Is an Opportunity
Entrepreneurs see problems as opportunities. When
they come up against problems, they start looking
for solutions. Entrepreneurs are problem solvers.
Think of some things people might want that are
not readily available, such as:
• A toothbrush that brushes both sides of your teeth
at the same time
• An umbrella that does not bend or break in a
strong wind
• A way to eat chocolate on a hot day without it
melting and making a mess
Because people’s wants and needs are endless and
always changing, resourceful entrepreneurs will
always seek ways to meet those wants and needs.
Entrepreneurs recognize opportunities and take action.
They get excited by the challenge of finding solutions
to problems.


12 ENTREPRENEURSHIP
What Do Entrepreneurs Do?.
The Entrepreneur’s NEWS—
Read All About It
The NEWS motivates entrepreneurs—the N stands for needs.
Events—the E—motivate entrepreneurs, too. Entrepreneurs
sometimes find opportunities when special events happen. If
aliens were to land on Earth, you can be sure some enterprising
entrepreneurs would see opportunities to create business ven-
tures. Just think of the possibilities, from TV appearances and
parades to creating and marketing space-alien action figures.
The W stands for wants. Entrepreneurs are also motivated by
the element of surprise—the S. Entrepreneurs love to surprise
people with new ideas.
The Business of Doing Good
Many successful entrepreneurs are motivated by doing something they
enjoy. Socially responsible entrepreneurs take that enjoyment one step
further by making money while also feeling good about benefiting society.
Succeeding as a social entrepreneur can depend on three factors:
• Linking the business and the issue it addresses. As an example,
one company donates a pair of shoes to someone in need for each
pair sold.
• Recognizing that a socially responsible business may not provide a
quick return on investment. Because the emphasis of this kind of
business is not just on making money, turning a profit may take longer.
• Believing in your goals will encourage others—employees, investors—
to help you achieve them.
Many companies today place great value on social responsibility. One
company, started in 1982 by a famous actor, has donated more than
$370 million to charity. Another company, which produces sportswear
and sports gear, is committed to environmentally responsible
manufacturing processes and has given more than $55 million to
environmental organizations.
As you explore ideas for your own business, consider whether social
responsibility is a natural fit. When you discover what you love to do, you
may be able to link your business to a cause you feel passionate about
and do well while doing good.


ENTREPRENEURSHIP 13
.What Do Entrepreneurs Do?
What Is the Marketplace?
The marketplace is the entire “arena” of places where people
can buy all sorts of goods and services. Identify a group of
people who would want to buy a particular product or service,
and you have identified a potential market. Whenever there is
a potential market, there is an opportunity to start a business.
Products are something physical that you can touch.
Products may go by other names such as “goods,” “merchandise,”
or “items.” Some examples of products include cars, electronics,
clothes, food, jewelry, and trading cards.
A service is useful work that does not produce a tangible
(touchable) product. A haircut is an example of a service. Yes,
you can touch hair, but you are paying for the service of having
your hair cut. Other examples of services include babysitting,
tutoring, lawn mowing, dog walking, web design, and pool
cleaning.


14 ENTREPRENEURSHIP
What Do Entrepreneurs Do?.
Failure—It’s Part of the Game
Failure is a fact of the entrepreneurial life. Some of the most
famously successful entrepreneurs have had equally famous
failures. The Edsel of the Ford Motor Company was a legendary
flop. In the mid-80s, Coca-Cola introduced a beverage called
“new Coke” to replace the original soft drink formula. New
Coke was a disaster, and Coca-Cola eventually reintroduced the
original soft drink as “Coca-Cola Classic.” Don’t let the possibility
of failure stop you from pursuing your entrepreneurial dream.
Entrepreneurs learn from their failures and use what they
learn to excel at their next ventures.
Edsel


ENTREPRENEURSHIP 15
.What Do Entrepreneurs Do?
Identity five
people you think
are entrepreneurs.
Why do you
think they are
entrepreneurs?
How do they
affect the lives of
other people?
What would not
exist if it were not
for their efforts?
The Power of Entrepreneurial Thinking
When entrepreneurs turn their ideas into businesses, they help
the national economy grow. Through entrepreneurship, many
Scouts may be able to improve the quality of their own lives as
well as the quality of other people’s lives. The United States has
a history of encouraging individuals to realize their dreams
through entrepreneurship.
Entrepreneurial talents also can be useful in many areas
besides starting new business ventures. For example, some
entrepreneurial thinkers start community programs, revitalize
neighborhoods, or advise government agencies on how to solve
specific problems. Entrepreneurs contribute to nearly every
aspect of society.


16 ENTREPRENEURSHIP
What Do Entrepreneurs Do?.
Activity: What Is an Entrepreneur?
It is not easy to state exactly what an entrepreneur is,
but give it a try. Entrepreneurs are creative and try to
solve problems, so use this activity as an opportunity
to be entrepreneurial; create a definition that works
for you. Write your response.
A major motivator for successful entrepreneurs is the
great feeling that comes from doing something they
enjoy. Think about your own hobbies, favorite activities,
and skills or talents. Perhaps you know more than the
average person about some subject of interest. Your
best business opportunities will come from the things
you love to do and that interest you. Consider your own
wants and needs, not just those of the marketplace.


ENTREPRENEURSHIP 17
.What Do Entrepreneurs Do?
Famous Names
Some of this country’s best-known business operators are entrepreneurs.
Some started small businesses to produce a product or service, and
their businesses then grew into major corporations. Here is a handful
of well-known ones.
Entrepreneur Entrepreneurial Venture
Jeff Bezos Amazon
Tory Burch Tory Burch LLC
Debra Fields Mrs. Fields Inc.
Henry Ford Ford Motor Company
Berry Gordy Motown Record Corporation
Angie Hicks Angie’s List
Arianna Huffington Thrive Global
David Karp Tumblr
Yang Lan Sun Media Group
Tim Leatherman Leatherman multi-tool
J. Willard Marriott Marriott Corporation
Kiran Mazumdar-Shaw Biocon
Elon Musk Tesla Inc. and SpaceX
Pierre Omidyar eBay
Larry Page and Sergey Brin Google
Cher Wang HTC Corporation
Oprah Winfrey Harpo Productions
Mark Zuckerberg Facebook


18 ENTREPRENEURSHIP
What Do Entrepreneurs Do?.
Entrepreneurs: Their Roles
and Contributions
When entrepreneurs begin a new venture, they risk losing their
own money or money from investors. They risk losing the time
and effort they have invested. They risk a loss of pride if their
idea does not work. They risk losing their livelihood—their
means of supporting themselves. If they have employees, their
employees’ jobs also are at risk.
It may seem that entrepreneurs are risk takers who enjoy dan-
ger. In fact, most entrepreneurs are risk managers, not risk seekers.
A wise entrepreneur does not take foolish or reckless risks. Rather,
entrepreneurs carefully consider potential risks, then weigh them
against potential benefits and determine if a risk is worth taking.
Entrepreneurs who decide to pursue a venture enjoy the
challenge of seeing if they can make it succeed. They thrive on
challenge. The willingness to make decisions and take actions
that involve risk is a key factor that distinguishes entrepreneurs
from nonentrepreneurs.
If you are
willing to take
well-considered
risks to achieve
a personal goal
in starting a
business, you
may be a risk
manager. Think
about what might
lead you to accept
such risks.


ENTREPRENEURSHIP 19
.What Do Entrepreneurs Do?
Crazy—or Visionary?
Entrepreneurs sometimes pursue ideas that others think are
crazy. Some entrepreneurs may try business ideas so strange,
they cannot succeed. However, they may become highly suc-
cessful by pursuing unusual opportunities that others have dis-
missed, overlooked, or found too challenging. If and when
these entrepreneurs succeed, the same people who predicted
failure will view them as visionaries—pioneers who had great
insight about the future.
Job Generators
People also respect entrepreneurs because they create opportu-
nities for others. Entrepreneurs typically gather teams of people
who help make their visions reality. In doing so, a successful
entrepreneur serves as an important “growth engine” for our
economy. Many operate small businesses, employing one to 20
people. Some have grown into huge corporations employing
thousands of workers. Thus, entrepreneurs are responsible for
creating large numbers of jobs as well as providing goods and
services that people want.
Entrepreneurs deserve the respect they get. They see
opportunities rather than problems. They seek solutions. They
accept risks, investing their time, talent, energy, and money to
produce goods and services that improve people’s lives. In the
process, they create opportunities for others. For all of these rea-
sons, entrepreneurs are important contributors to society.


20 ENTREPRENEURSHIP
What Do Entrepreneurs Do?.
Entrepreneurs: Key Characteristics
and Skills
While entrepreneurs have in common certain characteristics
and skills, great individuality exists among them. In sports,
some athletes do well because they love their sport, have
developed their skills, and are trained. Others show natural
talent and require less training.
In much the same way, some entrepreneurs get formal
training. Others have a natural flair for entrepreneurship. Still
others succeed despite taking highly unusual approaches.
People respect entrepreneurs for accepting risks and
producing goods and services others want and will buy.
They respect entrepreneurs for always thinking about
how things could be instead of being satisfied with the
way things are.


ENTREPRENEURSHIP 21
.What Do Entrepreneurs Do?
The Successful Entrepreneur
Here are several important personal characteristics and attitudes
many effective entrepreneurs seem to share.
Do What You Love. The successful entrepreneur has passion.
People who feel committed to and care deeply about what they
do stand the best chance of being successful at it. The heart and
mind must be allies. Entrepreneurs typically care more about
what they do than how much money they might make. The
amount they earn is often secondary to achieving their goals.
Believe in Yourself. Another key quality of the successful entre-
preneur is self-confidence. Do you have confidence in your
ability to succeed? Every entrepreneur faces problems, and you
must believe you can overcome them.
Look to the Future. Entrepreneurs create a vision of their
future, and then they work to achieve it. To accomplish their
goals and make their vision a reality, successful entrepreneurs
must have drive and a willingness to work hard. They must
have persistence and the ability to complete tasks. They must
keep trying.
Additionally, entrepreneurs are opportunity-focused and
forward-looking. They are able to set both short- and long-
term goals. These are some of the qualities that help entrepre-
neurs see problems as opportunities.
Accept the Challenges. Entrepreneurs have a high tolerance
for risk. Their self-confidence helps them accept the challenges
of the path they take.
If you feel you lack self-confidence, you might not fully
appreciate your past accomplishments. Think about all
the things you have done—took part in music, art, or
sports; advanced in rank and earned merit badges in
Scouting; and held positions of responsibility in your
troop or at school. Have you held a part-time job?
Do you regularly help out at home? You will find
you have every right to be self-confident. Successful
entrepreneurs believe they are capable of success
and that they are worthy of success.


22 ENTREPRENEURSHIP
What Do Entrepreneurs Do?.
Entrepreneurs tend to thrive on competition. While they
may actively compete with others, they are more likely to com-
pete against themselves. They are constantly trying to improve
their own performance.
Be Innovative. Although they might not realize it, most
entrepreneurs are creative. They find innovative ways to
solve problems. They always look for new and better ways
to do things—ways that have not occurred to others.
Keep Learning. Entrepreneurs are willing to learn. They might
already know a great deal, yet they recognize that no one
knows everything and they can learn valuable information from
others. Entrepreneurs who are open to listening and learning
will enhance their ability to achieve success.
Believe in your ability to be creative. Experts say the
biggest block to creativity is thinking that you are
not creative.


ENTREPRENEURSHIP 23
.What Do Entrepreneurs Do?
Is Entrepreneurship for Everybody?
Not everyone has the qualities to be an entrepreneur,
or even wants to be an entrepreneur. Even a person
who has the necessary qualities is not automatically
made happy by being an entrepreneur. Some people
who have entrepreneurial characteristics are often
happier working for someone else.
If you have some of the characteristics discussed
here but you do not feel drawn to becoming an
entrepreneur, you can find ways to further your goals
or your chosen career by putting your entrepreneurial
characteristics to work for you. It may surprise you
how much recognition you will get for the good work
you do.


24 ENTREPRENEURSHIP
What Do Entrepreneurs Do?.
Activity: Are You a
Potential Entrepreneur?
Part 1: Entrepreneurial Characteristics—Personal
Review and Assessment
On a scale of 1 to 10, rate yourself on the following
characteristics, with a “1” meaning “strongly disagree”
and a “10” meaning “strongly agree.” Record your
score on a separate sheet of paper.
I am a person who
1. Is passionate, with strong feelings about things
personally important to me
2. Is self-confident
3. Has high self-esteem
4. Is capable of accomplishing whatever I set out
to do
5. Is self-reliant
6. Is opportunity-oriented
7. Is forward-thinking
8. Has vision and goals
9. Has drive and ambition
10. Is willing to work hard
11. Is willing to take a risk
12. Is competitive, especially against myself
13. Is creative
14. Is willing to learn
Total your score. If you score more than 100, you are a
good candidate for entrepreneurship. Then again: If you
score less than 100, you may also be a good candidate
for entrepreneurship. Remember, there is no set formula
for who can or cannot be a successful entrepreneur.
The purpose of this activity is to help you explore your
interest in and abilities for entrepreneurship.


ENTREPRENEURSHIP 25
.What Do Entrepreneurs Do?


26 ENTREPRENEURSHIP
What Do Entrepreneurs Do?.
Everything Has an “Opportunity Cost”
Like most successful people, entrepreneurs carefully consider
their opportunity cost. For example, when they commit time
and money to a venture, they cannot commit that same time
and money to another opportunity. They must determine where
it is wisest to invest their time and money.
Opportunity cost is an important consideration for just
about anyone. For example, while you have been reading this,
you could have been hanging out with friends, fixing a snack,
playing sports, or getting ready for a camping trip. By choosing
to read this pamphlet, you decided this was the best use of
your time. The next best thing you could have done with your
time (that is, your next best alternative, which you gave up) is
your opportunity cost of reading this pamphlet and thinking
about your entrepreneurial potential.
Few entrepreneurs possess every skill needed to ensure
business success. They often look to experts for help in
areas such as strategic planning, accounting, contracts,
legal issues, and specialized marketing.


ENTREPRENEURSHIP 27
.What Do Entrepreneurs Do?
Some Entrepreneurial Skills for Success
Having the right attitude and characteristics can carry you only
so far. You also need the skills that will help you succeed.
However, unlike personal characteristics and attitude—which
often can be hard or impossible to change—skills can be
acquired if entrepreneurs are willing to learn them. Also,
entrepreneurs can hire people who have the needed skills.
Either way, the following skills are important if the
entrepreneur’s business is going to succeed.
Ability to Plan. Planning is a key skill. Entrepreneurs must be
able to develop plans to meet goals in various areas including
finance, marketing, production, sales, and personnel (hiring and
keeping productive and satisfied employees).
Communication Skills. Entrepreneurs should be able to
explain, discuss, sell, and market their product or service. You
must be able to work effectively with others. Entrepreneurs
need to be able to express themselves clearly, both verbally
and in writing. They also should have strong reading
comprehension skills to understand contracts and other forms
of written business communication.


28 ENTREPRENEURSHIP
What Do Entrepreneurs Do?.
Marketing Skills. The success of a business depends very
much on whether the business reaches the market (its potential
customers), interests the market, and convinces customers to
buy. Many entrepreneurs who failed started with an innovative
product or service that, with proper marketing, could have been
highly successful.
Interpersonal Skills. Entrepreneurs constantly interact with
people, including customers and clients, employees, financial
lenders, investors, lawyers, and accountants, to name a few.
The entrepreneur’s ability to form and keep positive relationships
is crucial to the success of the entrepreneur's business venture.
Good marketing skills—including hands-on demonstrations of a
product—are critical for success.


ENTREPRENEURSHIP 29
.What Do Entrepreneurs Do?
Basic Management Skills. Many entrepreneurs manage every
part of their business. But even when entrepreneurs hire man-
agers to attend to daily details, they must understand if their
business has the right resources and if those resources are being
used effectively. They must ensure that all the positions in their
company are held by effective people.
Personal Effectiveness. To handle the pressures of their
busy lifestyles, entrepreneurs must be able to manage time
well and to take care of personal business efficiently. Because
first impressions are so important, entrepreneurs must also pay
attention to such things as personal grooming, telephone skills,
and being on time.
Think of the difference in the impression made by someone who answers the
phone with “Yeah?” versus someone who says, “Acme Company, this is Alex.
How may I help you?”
Resources are the different elements that must be com-
bined to produce a business product or offer a service.
Resources may include money; equipment, supplies,
and ingredients; personnel (workers, managers); work
space; support services; transportation; and technology,
knowledge, and information.


30 ENTREPRENEURSHIP
What Do Entrepreneurs Do?.
Think about the skills necessary to be a successful
entrepreneur. What are your strong areas? In what
areas would you most likely need help from other
experts? Entrepreneurs must be able to realistically
evaluate their own skills, and to know when to draw
on the skills of others.
Team-Building Skills. Because entrepreneurs usually assemble
a team of skilled people who help them achieve business
success, they must be able to effectively develop and manage
the team.
Leadership Skills. A key leadership skill for all entrepreneurs
is the ability to develop a vision for the company and inspire
the company associates to pursue that vision as a team. The
expression “People would rather be led than managed” applies
especially well to an entrepreneurial venture.


ENTREPRENEURSHIP 31
.What Do Entrepreneurs Do?
Activity: Are You a
Potential Entrepreneur?
Part 2: Entrepreneurial Skills—Personal Review
and Assessment
On a scale of 1 to 10, rate your skill in each area, with a
“1” meaning the least amount of skill and a “10” mean-
ing highly skilled. Record your score on a separate
sheet of paper.
1. Ability to plan effectively
2. Spoken communication skills
3. Written communication skills
4. Reading skills
5. Marketing ability
6. Interpersonal skills
7. Basic management ability
8. Personal effectiveness
9. Team-building skills
10. Leadership ability
A score of 70 or higher means you might already have
many of the key skills you need to be a successful
entrepreneur. If you gave yourself a score of 6 or
below on any of these items, you might want to work
to improve that skill. If you are determined, you can
improve any skill you believe you will need to become
a successful entrepreneur.





ENTREPRENEURSHIP 33
.Entrepreneurial Opportunities
Entrepreneurial
Opportunities
Finding just the right opportunity takes time and research.
Identifying Entrepreneurial Opportunities
Now that you understand the qualities and skills successful
entrepreneurs must have, consider entrepreneurial
possibilities that might be right for you.
Find the Right Starting Place. Sometimes a great idea
for a business will pop into an entrepreneur’s head
and the entrepreneur will run with it. Entrepreneurs
want ideas to carry forward their hopes, dreams, and
aspirations. However, rather than simply trying to come up
with a good idea, an entrepreneur might want to focus on an
opportunity. Opportunities are all around, so don’t wait for
someone else to do something about them.
Cast a Wide Net. Not all opportunities are worth pursuing.
Before you decide that a particular opportunity is right for
you, compile a list of possible opportunities. Think of every
problem, need, want, event, and new possibility that you
can. Do not worry at this point about whether something
seems too hard, too easy, too large, or too small.
Activity: Hunting for Opportunities
Identify at least five opportunities—problems, needs, wants, events, sur-
prises, or “gaps.” Briefly describe each one with a note about where you
found each opportunity. Rate the potential for each opportunity by giving
it a score of 1 to 10, with 10 for the strongest potential. Identify your three
highest-rated opportunities—the three you believe are the best for you.
Think carefully about the reasons you use to rank one above another.


34 ENTREPRENEURSHIP
Entrepreneurial Opportunities.
Let your creativity and energy flow freely, and you may be
surprised by how many opportunities you find. Do not evaluate
them yet. Just find them. To help you spot opportunities, com-
plete the following statements:
I wish there was a . . .
I’ve always been bothered by . . .
This would be much better if . . .
This would be more fun if . . .
This would not hurt so much if . . .
This would not be so hard if . . .
What this place needs is . . .
Think of other statements or questions that can help you find
opportunities. Talk to people about their needs and wants. Find
out what they need help with, what they are too busy to do,
what they don’t like to do, or what they need more—or less—of.
Look for opportunities everywhere—at the mall, in your
neighborhood, at home, on the internet, at school, on TV, or in
magazines and newspapers. Look for the gaps—the unmet
needs, the persistent problems, and the desirable things that
do not yet exist.


ENTREPRENEURSHIP 35
.Entrepreneurial Opportunities
Evaluating Entrepreneurial Opportunities
Finding an opportunity does
not mean you should auto-
matically pursue it. Evaluate it
to determine whether it is the
right opportunity for you.
• Do you have a strong desire
to pursue this opportunity?
Does it grab you?
• Do you have the ability to
pursue it?
• Is there a large enough
market for this opportunity?
• Can you pursue it without
traveling too far?
• Will it be an ongoing
opportunity, or is it
short-term?
• How much are the start-up
costs, and how much risk
is involved?
You evaluate opportunities to judge how good they are and to
compare them so you can decide which opportunities are best
for you. Here are some things to think about as you evaluate
the opportunities you have identified.
Have the Interest. Are you enthusiastic about the opportunity?
Entrepreneurs must have a strong interest in the business area
they choose. If you are not interested in what you are doing, you
may be limiting how well you can or how long you want to do it.
Get the Knowledge. Do you know enough about it to pursue
this opportunity? Occasionally, entrepreneurs successfully
develop an opportunity they know nothing about. However, the
more they know, the greater their chance of success. So, learn
all you can about your opportunity.


36 ENTREPRENEURSHIP
Entrepreneurial Opportunities.
Question Yourself. Still other questions to ask yourself include:
1. Do I have a good chance of developing a potentially
successful business idea (either a product or a service)
for this opportunity?
2. Would enough people actually be willing to purchase a
product or a service to satisfy the problem, event, surprise,
or unmet need that I see as an opportunity?
3. What risk do I run that other entrepreneurs will also see the
opportunity and will become my competitors?
4. How strong are the existing competitors (if any) who are
already trying to meet the problem, event, surprise, or
unmet need?
5. Can I effectively market a product or service for
this opportunity?
6. How expensive will it be to pursue this opportunity? What
are my chances of making enough sales to cover costs, and
of the business succeeding?
7. If I start a business around this opportunity, what are the
chances that there will be a market for my product for a
long time? Or am I addressing a temporary problem, event,
surprise, or need?
8. Do I have enough information to decide whether this is an
opportunity worth pursuing? How accurate is my information?
Activity: Rethinking Your Choices
Now, using the ways of evaluating opportunities that have been discussed,
decide again what you think are the three best opportunities from your
list. On a sheet of paper, make two columns. Title one column Previous
Top Three Opportunities and title the other column Current Top Three
Opportunities. In the first column, list the top three opportunities you
chose at the end of the last section. In the second column, list the three
you selected in this section.
Compare the two lists. If the top three opportunities you selected in
this section are different from the top three you chose previously, what
made you change your mind?


ENTREPRENEURSHIP 37
.Entrepreneurial Opportunities
INTERVIEW AN ENTREPRENEUR
By now you have realized that entrepreneurs are all around you
in your community. Find one who is willing to be interviewed.
Typically, entrepreneurs are generous about sharing what they
know with interested young people. By finding out how the entre-
preneur selected an opportunity, identified the best idea to meet
the opportunity, and made the idea into a business, you will
develop insights into how to choose your own best opportunity.
The following are some sample questions you may want
to ask the entrepreneur you interview. You may also ask the
entrepreneur general questions about anything covered so far.
Developing some of your own questions would be the
entrepreneurial thing to do.


38 ENTREPRENEURSHIP
Entrepreneurial Opportunities.
1. When did you start thinking
about becoming an entrepre-
neur, and why did you want
to be an entrepreneur?
2. What factors or who influenced
you to want to become
an entrepreneur?
3. What are the most important
entrepreneurial characteristics
and skills you think you
possess?
4. What were your biggest
obstacles in becoming
an entrepreneur?
5. What problem, event, surprise,
or unmet need did you identify
as an opportunity?
6. What made you believe it was
a good opportunity, and what
business idea (product or ser-
vice) did you come up with to
address this opportunity?
7. How did you come up with
your idea and know it was a
good idea?
8. How did you identify and
research your target market
and your competition?
9. What problems did you have
getting started, and how did
you overcome them?
10. What kinds of expenses did you
have when you started your busi-
ness? What, if any, problems did
you have raising enough capital
(money) for your business?
11. Where did you get the money
to start your business?
12. What surprises did you encoun-
ter in starting your business?
13. How did you find the
best people to be part of
your business team?
14. What ideas and approaches
did you use to market your
product or service? What
approaches worked best
and why?
15. Did you try any marketing
approaches that did not work
well? Why did they not work?
16. How well has your business
performed in the past, and
how well is it doing now?
17. Why do you think enough
people will want to buy your
product or service?
18. What advice would you offer
to a young, potential entrepre-
neur like me?
19. What is your opinion of the
three entrepreneurial opportuni-
ties I have identified, and which
opportunity do you think is the
best and why?
20. What advice can you offer
me if I decide to pursue
this opportunity?
Sample Questions for the Entrepreneur You Interview


ENTREPRENEURSHIP 39
.Entrepreneurial Opportunities
Activity: The Interview
Using the suggested questions as a guide, develop
your own questionnaire on a separate sheet of paper.
Have at least 12 questions to ask a local entrepreneur.
Be sure to include questions that will help you evaluate
your three best opportunities. You may use any of the
sample questions you think will be helpful. You may
also create your own
questions. When you
have finished inter-
viewing your selected
entrepreneur, write a
short report (or report
in person to your
counselor) on what
you learned about the
entrepreneur and
about your three
best opportunities.





ENTREPRENEURSHIP 41
.Generating and Evaluating Ideas
Generating and
Evaluating Ideas
The best opportunity in the world will pass you by if you can’t
come up with a realistic idea for a product or service to take
advantage of the opportunity. Your challenge now is to hatch
specific and marketable product ideas to meet the opportuni-
ties you have selected.
Opportunities and Ideas Go Together
Assume for the moment that your grandparents, who live
nearby, love to garden and have many flowers, shrubs, fruits,
and vegetables in their yard. They tell you they would like to
take a long summer vacation—three weeks or more. However,
they are not comfortable asking their neighbors to water and
weed for them, nor do they want to lose all the hard work they
have put into their yard. You are glad to care for their shrubs
and plants. You also realize that other people in their neighbor-
hood and nearby have the same problem and do not have
anyone to help them.
Voilà! You see a problem—an opportunity.
You can probably come up with a business
idea that will turn this problem into a prof-
itable entrepreneurial venture.
Always think carefully about any
opportunity you are considering and what is
really needed to satisfy it. People sometimes
generate ideas that miss important parts of
the opportunities they have identified.


42 ENTREPRENEURSHIP
Generating and Evaluating Ideas.
For example, if you decide to specialize in the plant-water-
ing business but do not include weeding as part of your service,
your business idea will not solve your grandparents’ problem or
the potentially similar problems of other people nearby. Your
business idea would probably not be able to take good advan-
tage of the opportunity you identified because it missed an
important part of the opportunity—the need for weeding.
Generating Ideas: How to Turn On the Tap
Here are some suggestions that may spark your creativity in
developing good business ideas.
1. Seek out creative people and ask them about your business
ideas. Their different points of view may help you explore
new possibilities.
2. Try to view your opportunity in out-of-the-ordinary ways.
Good business ideas often come from finding new solutions
to old problems.


ENTREPRENEURSHIP 43
.Generating and Evaluating Ideas
3. Spend time daydreaming. Letting your mind wander can
produce interesting results. Research has shown that people
are more creative when they are having fun. An afternoon of
recreational sports or a trip down a waterslide might free
your creative side.
4. Link one opportunity to others. If you are going to take care
of gardens, what other services might you offer homeowners
who will be away? Picking up the newspaper and mail,
caring for pets, watering and/or mowing the lawn, watering
indoor plants, and checking house security daily are other
services for which homeowners might be willing to pay.
Try this creative-thinking exercise: Consider two seem-
ingly unrelated things (a military tank and a swimming
pool, for example), and think of a way they could be
brought together and linked.


44 ENTREPRENEURSHIP
Generating and Evaluating Ideas.
Opportunities for
Teen Entrepreneurs
Here are a few examples of businesses that have been
started and operated successfully by young entrepre-
neurs. As you can see, the possibilities are many. This
list may help you find the right business idea.
Advertising flier
delivery service
Auto detailing
Bike repair
Boat and RV cleaning
Desktop publishing
Errand-running service
Foreign-language trans-
lation or tutoring
Handcrafts (artworks,
fishing lures, greeting
cards, jewelry,
metalwork, pottery,
sculptures, shell
crafts, T-shirts, wood
carvings, etc.)
House-sitting
Lawn and plant care/
gardening
Online marketing
Pet care/pet grooming/
pet-sitting/dog
walking/aquarium
cleaning/cage and
stall cleaning
Photography
Pool cleaning
Snow removal
Sports coaching
Tutoring
Web design
Window cleaning


ENTREPRENEURSHIP 45
.Generating and Evaluating Ideas
Go to the Source
Now that you have some techniques for generating ideas, select
the three best potential business ideas (goods or services) for
your three best opportunities. Then evaluate your potential
ideas. Find the best “partnership” you can between opportunity
and business idea. A key step is finding your target markets—
that is, the potential customers who are most likely to buy or
use the products or services that come from your ideas.
Questions to ask yourself:
1. Has this idea been tried before? If not, why not? If this idea
has been tried, was it successful? Can I improve upon it?
2. Will my idea let me compete successfully? Why would
people buy my product instead of my competitor’s product?
3. What information helped me come up with this idea?
How confident am I of the accuracy and reliability of
that information?
4. Do I have a good chance of finding enough money to start
a business based on this idea?
5. Do I have enough personal time to create and run a business
based on this idea? If not, can I find enough help?
The starter list of questions will help you evaluate your
different ideas for products and services. Some are
questions to ask yourself; others are questions you may
want to ask potential customers (or other entrepreneurs).
You will think of many more questions to help you
pinpoint your best idea.
Activity: Customer Interview
and Business Idea Evaluation
Interview potential customers about your three
best ideas. Report what you learn. Based on all of
your information so far, identify the best idea you
have found.


46 ENTREPRENEURSHIP
Generating and Evaluating Ideas.
Questions to ask potential customers or
other entrepreneurs:
1. Do you like my business idea? Why or why not? (If you
have a prototype, show it to your potential customer or to
the entrepreneur.)
2. Would you be willing to buy my business product? Why or
why not?
3. At what price would you be willing to buy one unit of my
business product?
4. How many units would you be willing to buy at alternative
(different) prices? (List the possible prices you might charge,
from high to low.)
A unit is one item
for sale, such as
a T-shirt or a
wood carving, or
in the case of a
service business
that charges by
the hour, one hour
of the service
provided. You will
learn more about
units and how to
set a price per
unit later in this
pamphlet.


ENTREPRENEURSHIP 47
.Generating and Evaluating Ideas
5. Do you think my business product is better than that of my
competitors? Why or why not?
6. Do you think this product (or service) will be too expensive
to produce (or provide)? Do you think I will be able to
make enough sales of this product to keep a business
running successfully?
7. What could I do to improve my business product
that would encourage you to buy more or pay a
higher price for the same product or service?
8. Do you think the market for my business
product will last long enough for it to
be worth my starting a business?





ENTREPRENEURSHIP 49
.Getting Down to Business: The Plan
Getting Down to
Business: The Plan
Having an idea for a business and starting a business are two
different things. Once you have what you believe is a good
idea, the next step is to explore its feasibility as an actual
business venture—not only to convince yourself that your idea
will work, but also to convince others. If you will need money
from other people to start your business, they will want to see
evidence that the business has a good likelihood of succeeding.
In most cases, they will want to see a business plan.
The Business Plan
A business plan organizes your business idea on paper. It helps
other people and you understand the resources and steps
needed to create your business, and its chances for success
once it is started. A business plan is useful because it will:
• Be helpful in securing funding
from most financial sources,
including family and friends
• Help you think through all of the
various aspects of the business
and develop confidence that
your idea is a good one
• Serve as a guide once the
business is up and operating


50 ENTREPRENEURSHIP
Getting Down to Business: The Plan.
Developing a business plan should be fun and enjoyable.
It is, after all, the plan for how you will accomplish something
you think is important and beneficial to others as well as to
yourself. Developing a plan usually takes a great deal of research,
thinking, and writing. You probably will end up talking with
many people and going to many places, such as libraries,
government sources, and professional associations.


ENTREPRENEURSHIP 51
.Getting Down to Business: The Plan
The following boxes on pages 52 and 53 outline some key
points to cover in your basic business plan. If you work your
way through this outline as a general guide, you will find out
most of what you need to know to determine whether your
idea is likely to become a successful business.
Use this outline if you find it helpful, but do not think that
you must follow it. Change it. Improve on it. Make your plan
work for your business idea.
There is no magic formula for a business plan. Businesses
are very different from one another, as are entrepreneurs.
As a result, plans will vary.


52 ENTREPRENEURSHIP
Getting Down to Business: The Plan.
Business Plan
Section 1: Describe the Business
• What is the name of your business?
• What are your business goals?
• What product or service do you
plan to sell?
• Where will the business be located?
What are its hours of operation?
(Give the company address
and phone, fax, website, and
email address, as applicable.)
Section 2: Describe the Personnel
• What skills and experiences
will help make your business
idea work?
• What skills and experiences do
you bring to the business?
• In what areas will you need help?
• Who will help you? (Describe
positions for the different tasks
that will need to be done to run
the business, and describe the
experiences and skills required
of the people who will fill those
positions. If you already have
people in mind, name them.)
Section 3: Describe the Market and
Your Competition
• Who are your main customers
(your target market)?
• Why do customers need your
product? (Name the chief benefits
of the product or service your
company will produce.)
• How will you set a price for
your product?
• Who are your competitors?
• What are your company’s com-
petitive advantages? (How does
your product or service differ
from that of your competitors?
How is it better or unique?)
• What sales tools will you use?
(How will you convince customers
to buy your product or service?)
• What are your sales goals?
Section 4: Describe Your Finances
• What items do you need to start
your business?
• How much will each item cost?
• Where do you plan to get
the money to cover your
start-up costs?
• What is your estimated income
(revenue) for four or six weeks?
• What are your estimated
expenses (cash paid out) for
those same weeks?
• How will you keep records of
income, expenses, and profits?
Section 5: Provide Supporting
Information
• Customer surveys
• Market research
• Promotional tools—sample adver-
tising fliers, business cards, etc.


ENTREPRENEURSHIP 53
.Getting Down to Business: The Plan
Marketing for Success
Once your business plan is complete, design a marketing plan that informs
potential customers about your product or service. Get started by defining
the following.
1. My target market is ____________________________________________________ .
Consider the type of people who will be your customers, including their
needs and ways you can help fill those needs.
2. My primary sales message is __________________________________________ .
Simply state the main reason a customer would want your product or ser-
vice. This message may incorporate your advantages over any competitors.
3. My secondary sales message is ________________________________________ .
This statement conveys an additional benefit. Keep your primary and sec-
ondary sales messages brief and to the point.
4. My best sales tools and promotions will be _____________________________ .
Consider fliers, brochures, posters, websites, advertising, publicity, and one-
on-one sales calls for disseminating your sales message. Promotions might
include coupons, special events, free samples, and more.
5. Social media I can use include __________________________________________ .
Think about ways to put social media tools (with your parent or guardian's
permission) such as Facebook, Twitter, or Instagram to work to promote your
business. For example, if you have a landscape company, you might post on
Facebook before-and-after photos of lawns you service. Or you might share
positive customer comments about your product or service on Twitter.
Keep these recommendations in mind:
• If you use photos of customers or their property in your social media
marketing, make sure to first obtain their permission in writing.
• Limit your social media marketing to a few outlets so you will have time to
adequately manage the ones you do use.
• Use social media to build your sales. For example, you might want to
reward a customer “like” on Facebook with a free added-value item with
their next purchase. Or you could begin a “yard of the month” contest
among your lawn care clients: Offer a free week of service for the yard that
receives the most votes on Twitter, and a free estimate for each potential
customer who votes.
• Tailor your medium to your audience. For example, women are more
active than men are on Pinterest, and many businesspeople are adept at
utilizing LinkedIn.


54 ENTREPRENEURSHIP
Getting Down to Business: The Plan.
Be Prepared!
The Scout motto, Be Prepared, applies particularly well to the
entrepreneur. Even if you discover later that you must change
direction, you will adjust more effectively to the change if you
have a plan that is guiding you. Having a plan will give you a
greater sense of control and direction over your future and the
future of your business.
Many business plans are short and have fewer than 25
pages, although the length will vary with the type of business.
You might decide to start with a very simple business idea with
a plan only five to 10 pages long. That is fine.
Love It? You Might Have to Leave It
Be prepared to be completely honest with yourself. Perhaps you
have come up with a great idea. Maybe you love the prospect
of running the business you are trying to create. However, if
your research and plan indicate that the business will not work,
you must recognize the need to change course.


ENTREPRENEURSHIP 55
.Getting Down to Business: The Plan
If your review of the plan leads you to believe your idea
will work, test it with people whom you respect or who have
experience in similar business areas. Their views will be
particularly valuable if you will be seeking resources from
others to help start and initially operate your business.
These friendly reviewers can give you an idea of how
others will likely react to your plan. Ask them to be brutally
honest, not just polite. Tell them that if they foresee a problem,
you want to know about it, without sugarcoating, so you can
address it.
Changing course does not necessarily mean abandon-
ing your idea. It might mean only that you must modify
the idea or approach it differently. However, if your
research shows that your idea simply will not work,
do not proceed with “launch.” Many entrepreneurs fail
because they refuse to accept that an interesting idea
might not work as a profitable business.
Make sure your
business plan
contains all of
the information
needed to
convince you that
the business will
succeed, and to
convince others
of the same.





ENTREPRENEURSHIP 57
.Business Basics
Business Basics
Now consider a few more basics of business and entrepreneur-
ship as you establish your business plan.
Setting Goals: Be SMART!
Having goals is important for you personally, and important for
a business. There is an old saying: “If you don’t know where
you are going, you are sure to get there.” In other words, you
might end up nowhere if you do not decide where you want
to go and focus on trying to reach that specific goal.
In setting goals, consider the following things:
Specific. Be as specific as you can. If you plan to take a trip,
for example, and someone asks you “Where to?” and you reply,
“Out West,” you have named a general goal but not a specific
destination. “Out West” could mean Seattle, Los Angeles, the
Grand Canyon, or many other places. Your experience at one
place would be quite different from your experience at another.
The same is true of a business. If you have only a general
goal, you could end up at any one of several different “places”
or business situations. It is hard to make decisions about how
to reach your goal when you don’t have a clear goal.
Entrepreneurs often must make quick decisions, in the
middle of confusion, and based on vague or even con-
tradictory information. Understanding your goals clearly
and precisely can help guide your actions and decisions.


58 ENTREPRENEURSHIP
Business Basics.
Measurable. As much as you can, make your goals something
you can measure. That will help you know how far along you
are and when you have achieved your goals.
On a trip, it helps you to know, for example, that your
destination is 1,400 miles away and there are certain cities and
landmarks through which you should expect to pass in a partic-
ular order. Similarly, for your business goals, it helps to know
how far you have to go, what to look for on your way there,
and how to tell when you have arrived.
Attainable. A goal can be challenging, but you
should be able to envision how you can reach it.
To be attainable, a goal should fit your personal-
ity, your values, your priorities, and your dreams
and aspirations. Understand what can be
achieved in the business you plan to start and
run. If the steps to reaching that goal fit with
the expectations you set for yourself, then your
goal is attainable.
You do not have
to attach numbers
to all of your
goals. If one of
your goals is to
have fun, that
would be hard to
measure. If one
of your goals is
to enjoy working
with the people
on your team
and helping them
feel a sense of
accomplishment,
that also would be
hard to measure.


ENTREPRENEURSHIP 59
.Business Basics
Relevant. All your goals need to relate to achieving your vision
of starting and running your own business, no matter how large
or small they are. If the goal is not connected to reaching the
vision, it probably isn’t necessary.
Timely. Set goals for various “time horizons”—short-term,
medium-term, and long-term. Make them interesting enough
to motivate and inspire you, and space them so you can feel
ongoing satisfaction as you achieve them. Set realistic timelines
for your goals. These do not have to be precise, but you should
identify what goals you hope to achieve in (for example) three
weeks, six weeks, six months, one year, or five years from
when you start. Timelines will help you chart your course,
check your progress, and make decisions.
As you can see, the letters SMART make a handy way to
remember the main points just discussed.
Aim for goals that have reasonable targets—not too
easy, not too hard, but difficult enough to motivate you,
inspire you, and provide a real sense of satisfaction
once you have achieved them.


60 ENTREPRENEURSHIP
Business Basics.
To Market, to Market
When you discover an idea for a product or service, based on an
opportunity you have identified, you must consider the nature of
the market to which your business will be targeted. In some
cases, an entrepreneur might try to develop a new market for a
brand-new product or service. In many cases, existing markets
have opportunities for entrepreneurs because there is not
enough of a particular product or service available, or customers
want an improved, less expensive, or more convenient or
accessible version of an existing product or service.
Consider the car market. Why do so few
entrepreneurs enter the car market
today? In the early 1980s, a carmaker
named John DeLorean tried to produce
a new line of cars. If you saw the movie
Back to the Future, maybe you noticed that
a souped-up DeLorean car was
used as a special-effects
automobile for “time
travel.” Despite that
moment of fame in the
movies, the DeLorean
was not successful in
the automobile market.
Entering the car mar-
ket today is extremely expensive.
It requires a massive amount of financial investment in many
areas including design, production facilities, and major advertis-
ing and promotion campaigns. A brand-new car manufacturer
would also face stiff competition and have a big challenge
convincing customers to purchase its product—as
DeLorean discovered.
Because business markets vary so much, a key challenge
for new entrepreneurs is to choose the best market to
enter, and to avoid markets with too many obstacles.
The DeLorean


ENTREPRENEURSHIP 61
.Business Basics
This example shows that some markets are hard to enter
because of the high start-up costs required. It also illustrates
how difficult it is to compete with the strength of existing
producers. Markets may be difficult to enter because they are
already crowded with strong sellers.
On the other hand, markets can be too small for entrepre-
neurs to enter successfully. For example, an entrepreneur might
try to start a computer-cleaning service in a small town, only to
discover that there are not enough people with computers, or
who want their computers cleaned, to support the business.
The level and quality of competition, and start-up costs
are just some of the ways in which markets can vary. Therefore,
as you consider your business idea, scrutinize the nature of the
market your business will enter. Some markets may be more
suited to you than others or may offer a better chance of success
than others. Try to identify a target market in which you believe
you will have your best competitive opportunity for generating
sales, based on your knowledge, observations, experiences, and
market research.


62 ENTREPRENEURSHIP
Business Basics.
Fun With Financials
Financial considerations are essential to a business. It takes
money to start a business, and every business will face
different kinds of costs. For starters, the business will always
need enough cash available to pay its bills and meet its other
financial obligations. Eventually, a company will earn profits (or
so its owners hope).
You, the entrepreneur—as well as your partners, lenders,
and investors—will want to have financial information about
your company that will help you understand the costs of starting
the business and its prospects for earning profits. The following
describes some basic financial information that a new business
typically provides in its business plan and (where appropriate)
continues to track as the company moves into operation.


ENTREPRENEURSHIP 63
.Business Basics
Start-Up Costs
To figure your start-up costs, you total the amount of money
you will need to get your business up and running. These costs
are for only the initial start-up period of your business. Costs
might include starting expenses for items such as rent for office
or shop space, telephone, equipment, advertising and market-
ing, supplies and labor for the first units you will produce,
and insurance.
As an entrepreneur, you estimate your start-up costs to
help determine whether it makes financial sense to start your
business. Your estimate will also help you predict how much
money, if any, you will need from others to start the business.
Costs of Getting Started
Copy the chart on the next page. Change it as required to
include the items you will need for your business’s first two
weeks. Indicate how you will get each item—by purchasing,
renting, borrowing, bartering, or through a donation. (Bartering
is trading—you trade a product or service in exchange for a
product or service you need. A donation is a gift—somebody
gives you the needed item.) For those items that cost money,
write in an estimated amount of cash.
Many entrepreneurs try to keep start-up costs as low
as they can. This practice is sometimes referred to as
“bootstrapping” a business. (Launching a full-fledged
business with tiny start-up costs can be like pulling on
heavy boots using small loops, or “bootstraps”—hence
the idea of bootstrapping a business.)


64 ENTREPRENEURSHIP
Business Basics.
Item Cost Purchase Rent Borrow Barter Donation
Telephone
Transportation:
Bike
Bus fare
Car (gas, oil, etc.)
Equipment
Bookkeeping
supplies
Advertising/
marketing
Bank account
(cost of service fees)
Product cost;
materials
Labor
Attorney/legal fees
Filing costs (for
registering company)
Consumable supplies
(used while
providing service)
Other:
©1996 Marilyn Kourilsky. Adapted from M. Kourilsky, Mini-Society: Entrepreneurship—Debriefing Teachable
Moments (Center for Entrepreneurial Leadership, 1996). Used by permission of Marilyn Kourilsky.
Figure the total cash you will need for the first two weeks of your business
by adding the costs of all items you have listed to purchase or rent.
Total cash needed for start-up: $ ____________


ENTREPRENEURSHIP 65
.Business Basics
Source Amount
Personal savings $ _________
Borrow from family $ _________
Borrow from friends $ _________
Borrow from bank $ _________
Partner’s savings (if applicable) $ _________
Earnings from first two weeks of business $ _________
Earnings from other/temporary job $ _________
Sale of personal belongings $ _________
Other (what or who?): $ _________
Other (what or who?): $ _________
Other (what or who?): $ _________
Your list tells you that, in addition to the items you will
get by borrowing, by bartering, or through donations,
you will need $ _____________ IN CASH to start your
business and operate it for at least two weeks. Indicate
the sources you will rely on to get the cash.


66 ENTREPRENEURSHIP
Business Basics.
Try to include in
your business
plan a basic cash
flow forecast for
your company
covering at least
the first four to
six weeks of
operation. For any
cash shortages
your forecast may
predict, state your
plans for covering
the shortages.
Cash Flow Forecast
Even a potentially successful business can meet major difficul-
ties or fail if it runs out of money to pay its bills and salaries
on time. A good cash flow forecast helps avoid this common
but serious business problem. A cash flow forecast estimates
the cash that will be coming into the company and the cash
that will be flowing out during a given time period. It is called
a forecast because it makes predictions about the cash flow for
a business.
One of the main purposes of a cash flow forecast is to
predict whether the cash coming into the business over a given
time will be enough to provide the cash the company must
pay out during the same time. A cash flow forecast might show
that sales will bring in a lot of cash in December, but during
September and October the company can expect cash shortages.
Knowing this, the entrepreneur can prepare for the predicted
cash problems.
For example, the entrepreneur might arrange for temporary
financing (a loan for a short time) to help the business through
the shortages. The company could then pay off the short-term
loan with the strong cash flow expected in December.


ENTREPRENEURSHIP 67
.Business Basics
Larger entrepreneurial ventures usually need month-by-
month cash flow forecasts that cover at least the first year of
operation. Week-by-week cash flow forecasts can be more
practical for smaller ventures. Use a chart like the one below
to chart yours.
©1996 Marilyn Kourilsky. Taken from M. Kourilsky, Mini-Society: Entrepreneurship—Debriefing Teachable
Moments (Center for Entrepreneurial Leadership, 1996). Used by permission of Marilyn Kourilsky.
Week 1 2 3 4
1. Beginning cash balance
Cash Receipts
2. Cash sales receipts
3. Invoice payments
4. Other cash receipts
5. Total Receipts
Cash Disbursements
6. Inventory/office supplies
7. Employee payroll
8. Rent, utilities, and telephone
9. Advertising/promotion
10. Consultants/promotional fees
11. Other cash disbursements
12. Total Disbursements
13. Total Cash Flow
14. Ending Cash Balance


68 ENTREPRENEURSHIP
Business Basics.
Revenue and Expenses
As an entrepreneur, you will like the word revenue. Business
people use that word to refer to the money that comes into
their company. Revenue (or sales revenue) is the total dollar
amount a company receives from the sales of its goods or
services over a particular time period, such as a week, month,
or year.
After start-up, a typical business must face two main catego-
ries of ongoing expenses: product costs and operating expenses.
Product costs, or “cost of goods sold,” usually refer to the
cost of the actual materials and labor used to produce the
goods that are sold to customers. Product costs vary directly
with the quantity of the goods that are produced. For example,
if you were producing stackable wooden storage cubes, the
amount of money you would have to spend on the wood, fas-
teners, paint, and labor to make the cubes would be your prod-
uct costs. Your total product costs for a particular period—say,
one month—would vary depending on whether you produced
12 cubes or 200 cubes that month.
In casual
conversation, you
may hear people
refer to operating
expenses as
“overhead.”


ENTREPRENEURSHIP 69
.Business Basics
The additional costs that are required to cover the basic
operation of the rest of the business are called operating expenses.
Salaries, advertising, rent, utilities, and office supplies are
typical operating expense categories.
Operating expenses are fixed—they do not vary directly
with the quantity of the goods produced. For example, if you
rented a small shop in which to make stackable wooden
storage cubes, you would pay the same amount for rent every
month whether you produced 12 cubes or 200 cubes in any
particular month.
For a small service business that does not produce a
physical item, it is common to ignore the idea of product costs
and include all business expenses in the category of operating
expenses. For simplicity, you may want to take the same
approach if you start a service business.
Profit and Loss
If, over a period of time such as a year, the total revenue a
business earns exceeds the total expenses (product costs plus
operating expenses) the business pays out, the difference
(revenue minus expenses) is called profit. Profit is the net
income (before taxes) earned after covering all expenses.
Profits can be reinvested
in the business to help it
grow, distributed to the
people who share own-
ership (you and your
investors), directed
toward a predetermined
philanthropic cause, or
divided among these
options, according to
your business plan.


70 ENTREPRENEURSHIP
Business Basics.
If the total expenses the business pays out exceeds the rev-
enue earned, then the difference (expenses minus revenue) is
called a loss. To stay in business, the business would have to
have enough money available to cover the loss.
In your business plan, you will want to forecast the poten-
tial profit or loss you expect for the company over the start-up
period of operation. It is common for a business to show a loss
during its early stages as the company establishes itself in the
marketplace and begins to attract customers. Over time, how-
ever, the entrepreneur, and any lenders or investors, will want
to see that the company is on the road to earning satisfactory
profits in the future.
Pricing Your Product
You will have to decide on a price for the product or service
you are going to sell. You can take several approaches to pricing.
The following example shows one method you can use to
establish a possible price after you have researched market
demand, the prices competitors are charging, costs of materials
and labor, operating expenses, forecasted sales, and
desired profits.
Ray, a young entrepreneur, plans to sell T-shirts. Ray has
calculated that his product costs (materials and labor) will be
$10 per T-shirt (that is, per unit of production). Ray has also
estimated that the total operating expenses for his business will
be $50 a week (covering rent, utilities, telephone, advertising,
loan payments, and license fees).


ENTREPRENEURSHIP 71
.Business Basics
Suppose Ray’s market research has led him to believe he
can sell eight T-shirts in a week. To calculate his total product
costs for one week, he multiplies the number of units (T-shirts)
per week by the unit product cost: 8 x $10 = $80.
Next, he must set a target for the profit he wants the busi-
ness to earn over the same period (one week). Assume that
Ray decides he would like to earn a profit of $30 per week for
the business to be worth the investment of resources he will
be making.
Finally, Ray adds up the product costs, operating expenses,
and profit forecasted for the week to calculate the total sales
revenue needed to cover these three items. He then divides by
the number of units he expects to sell to get the price per unit.
It is not unusual for an entrepreneur to increase price
hoping to increase profits. In fact, total profits may
decrease depending on how much less customers will
buy at the higher price.


72 ENTREPRENEURSHIP
Business Basics.
In this example, Ray’s business sales over the course of
a week must generate $80 to cover the product costs, $50 to
cover the operating expenses, and $30 to cover the profit Ray
would like to earn. That adds up to $160 of sales revenue that
he needs to generate in one week. Dividing the weekly sales
revenue needed ($160) by the number of units he believes he
can sell in a week (8), Ray calculates $20 as the possible price
for each T-shirt.
$160 (Total sales revenue) ÷ 8 (Units sold)
= $20 (Price per unit)
Following these steps is one way to establish a price you
might charge for your product or service. There are many
other possible approaches to pricing. Some can be as simple
as doubling your product’s cost of materials or cost of materials
and labor or by checking out your competitors’ prices and
charging a little less.


ENTREPRENEURSHIP 73
.Business Basics
You can see that there is a close relationship between price,
costs and expenses, and the amount of profit. The entrepreneur
must consider if the profit desired is realistic, based on the
prices that can be charged, the business costs and expenses,
and the sales that potentially can be made at those prices.
In general, no matter how they first establish a price, most
entrepreneurs find they must adjust their initial pricing several
times as they try to take into account the tug-of-war between
such factors as the low prices competitors charge, the profit
entrepreneurs want to make, and the quantities people are will-
ing to buy at various prices. Keep in mind that as you test the
potential results of different prices, you are seeking a price that
will allow you to earn the most profit, based on the actual sales
you can make in your market at that price and on the differ-
ence between revenue and total expenses at that price.


74 ENTREPRENEURSHIP
Business Basics.
Pricing a Service
If you have a service rather than a product, the cost of your
service often is expressed as an hourly rate—the amount of
money you charge for one hour of your service. You can use a
similar approach to set an initial price—or hourly rate—for your
service. Add up your operating expenses and desired profit to
find the total revenue needed from your service business during
a period (such as one week). Then divide by the number of
hours of service you believe you will provide to customers dur-
ing that same week. The result of that calculation is a possible
hourly rate you can charge for your service.
As you test the potential results of different hourly rates, your financial goal is the
same as that of an entrepreneur selling a product. You are looking for that price
(hourly rate) that will let your business earn the most profit.


ENTREPRENEURSHIP 75
.Business Basics
Again, plan to adjust your initial hourly rate several times
as you take into account the same issues as for product pric-
ing—the tug-of-war between the low hourly rates competitors
charge, the profit you wish to make, and the number of hours
of service that people are willing to buy at various hourly rates.
Debt and Equity
Entrepreneurs often need financial help when they start up a
company. If you expect your start-up costs to be more than you
can finance personally, then you will have to get money from
others to launch your new business. If you borrow the money
for the business, that is referred to as debt financing.
The most typical debt financing for small businesses does
not give the lender any ownership in the company, and the
return to the lender is not based on the company’s profits. The
return to the lender is based on the interest rate that was estab-
lished for the loan and the period of time over which the loan
will be repaid.
Debt is money that
must be repaid to
its lender. The
borrower also
must make regular
payments to the
lender called
interest—the
price paid for
using someone
else’s money.


76 ENTREPRENEURSHIP
Business Basics.
A lender’s interest in the health of the business is usually
focused on the business’s ability to pay the interest it owes to the
lender on time, and to pay off the full amount of the loan when
it is due. With debt financing, the entrepreneur is responsible for
paying back the debt and interest even if there is no profit.
On the other hand, if an entrepreneur raises money from
investors or partners in return for a share in the ownership
(and therefore the profits or losses) of the company, that is
referred to as equity financing. Those with equity in a company
are part owners. The returns (earnings) to equity holders will
be based on the success and the profits of the company. For
this reason, equity holders will often take an active interest in
all aspects of the company, its operation, and its future.
For example, if a relative invests money in your business as
an equity holder, that family member will share in the ownership
and business profits. If the same family member loans you
money for your business, then you will owe that family member
the amount of the loan as a debt and will have to pay interest.
Sources of Money
Common sources of money include personal
savings, family members, friends, a bank,
partners, early forecasted earnings of the
company (if the company is set to start making
profits right away), a home equity loan, venture
capitalists, and “angels.”
A venture capitalist or a venture capital
company can be a source of money for entre-
preneurial ventures that are riskier than banks
prefer. Banks generally avoid lending money to
higher-risk ventures. Venture capitalists, how-
ever, if shown a good business plan for a good
idea, may be willing to invest as equity part-
ners. They may be willing to assume the higher
risk if they have enough confidence that a new
business will generate large returns in the
future for its equity holders. However, venture
capitalists fund only a tiny percentage of all
new ventures.


ENTREPRENEURSHIP 77
.Business Basics
An angel is typically a wealthy individual who—in selected
cases—is willing to invest personal money in interesting, higher-
risk business ventures with prospects of high returns in the
future. In some cases, angels may be willing to provide funds
simply to support promising new entrepreneurs, particularly
if the angels themselves earned their wealth as entrepreneurs.
That does not mean they are willing to make a bad investment
just to be helpful. However, they might be willing to take a
chance on a venture with higher-than-normal risk in the hope
of helping a new entrepreneur—with a good idea and a good
plan—to succeed.
One of the decisions you will make
as an entrepreneur is whether you
would rather share your ownership
and profits (equity financing) or pay
interest on a loan and eventually
repay it (debt financing).





ENTREPRENEURSHIP 79
.Moving Ahead to Start Your Business
Moving Ahead to Start
Your Business
You have created and reviewed your business plan. What are the
results? Do you have a plan that you, and others, think will lead
to a successful business? If so, congratulations and well done.
On the other hand, if your hard work has led you to con-
clude that your idea probably would not result in a successful
business, congratulations also. It often takes just as much
research, knowledge, and judgment for an entrepreneur to
decide that a business idea will not work as it does to show
that an idea will work. It is also more difficult to accept the
results when your conclusion is, “This just is not going to fly.”
During this first planning effort, you may have identified
other possible opportunities. Explore their feasibility.
As you assess your business idea, be absolutely
honest. Have you answered all of the key questions
and gathered all of the important information you will
need? Is that information telling you that you have a
good idea that looks as if it will work? Or, is it telling
you that your idea may not result in a successful
business venture?
Your business plan should convince people that
your idea will work or has a good chance of working.
However, the first person that plan should convince
is you.
If you have decided that your idea won’t work,
carefully review both the idea and the business plan.
See if there are changes you could make that might
lead to an idea that would work.


80 ENTREPRENEURSHIP
Moving Ahead to Start Your Business.
Making It Happen—What’s Next?
Let us assume you have determined your business idea is feasible
and your business plan is complete. Several preliminary steps
may be useful as you begin the start-up process.
Posters. Developing a poster to promote your business will
encourage you to create the main message you want to commu-
nicate to the market about your product or service. It can lead
you to design a logo or a particular “look” or image for your
company. Once complete, a poster announces to the
market the product or service you are providing.
Fliers. Fliers are printed papers that are used for mass advertis-
ing. This inexpensive sales tool communicates that you are in
business and what you are offering for sale. In a flier, you can
tell people about your product or service, its features and bene-
fits, why they should be interested in buying it, the price, and
any special offers you are making. Also include information
about where and how people can get your product or service.
Think about the major points you want to make. Give
most of the space in the flier to the most important point. Keep
fliers short and make them immediately interesting. Most people
will give a flier one to two seconds, at most, to catch their
attention before throwing it away.
Marketing is very
important. Make
sure you have a
clear message you
can deliver to the
market to inform
people about
your business.


ENTREPRENEURSHIP 81
.Moving Ahead to Start Your Business
Through social media, users share information, ideas,
personal messages, and other content via electronic
communication. Several types of online communities
could be a good fit for your business.
Social networks allow you to connect with other
people of similar interests and backgrounds. Each user
creates a profile and interacts with other users, both
individually and as group members. Two examples are
Facebook and LinkedIn.
Bookmarking sites allow users to save, organize,
manage, and share links to various websites and
resources.
Social news sites let people post various news
items or links to outside articles, and then users vote
on favorite items. Voter favorites are featured more
prominently. Examples include Digg and Reddit.
Media sharing lets users upload and share pictures
and videos. Some sites feature profiles and comments.
YouTube, Instagram, and Flickr are popular ones.
Microblogging services are short updates
disseminated to subscribers. The most popular
example is Twitter.
Blog comments and forums give members a place
on the web to hold conversations by posting messages
concerning just about any topic of interest. Tumblr
is one popular blog site.
For more about writing and designing posters,
fliers, and websites, see the Graphic Arts merit
badge pamphlet.


82 ENTREPRENEURSHIP
Moving Ahead to Start Your Business.
Business Cards. Designing and producing a business card is
usually a high priority for any budding entrepreneur. A business
card is a highly versatile communication tool.
As an entrepreneur, you may view people you meet as
potential buyers of your product or service, potential suppliers,
professional consultants, or even potential partners and investors.
Some may know other people who might be interested in your
business. Leaving a business card with these people will enable
them to contact you in the future or have others contact you.
The information normally found on a well-designed
business card should include the name and address of your
company, your contact information, company logo, and a brief
line about your product or service.
Weigh the benefits of packing as much information as pos-
sible on a card against the risk of the card appearing cluttered
and unprofessional. Try to find a good balance between the
card’s information and its overall visual appeal.
Specialty shops offer many different services to help you
create a card and then produce it in large numbers at a reason-
able cost. You can also use a computer, printer, and business-
card sheets from an office supply store to design and print your
own cards.
Discuss with your
counselor which
of the preliminary
steps described—
poster, flier,
other sales tool,
business card, or
prototype—would
be most helpful
for your business
idea. You might
decide to do
them all.


ENTREPRENEURSHIP 83
.Moving Ahead to Start Your Business
Prototypes. If you plan to produce a product rather than offer
a service, an important early step is to create a prototype—a
fully working model as a sample of the product you hope to
eventually sell to customers. Building a prototype
• Is an excellent way to work out
the “kinks”—the unexpected
problems you are sure to face as
you try to create a new product
• Will help you accurately estimate
the cost of materials and labor to
produce the product
• Gives you a tangible model to
show potential customers and
possible investors
• Will help prove that the concept you
generated and researched for your
business plan can, in fact, be physically produced—and that
there really is an actual product that can work as described
in the plan
Hand out your
business card
freely to all
people who might
be interested in
your business’s
goods or services
or who might
want a business
relationship with
your company.
“Company’s saying or motto”CL
Company logo
Your name
Company’s name
Company’s address
Company’s phone/fax/email
Brief comment on your
product or service
Other Sales Tools
Write a newspaper or radio advertisement for your
business. The longer the ad, the more expensive, so
limit a newspaper ad to 50 words or fewer and a radio
advertisement to under 10 seconds. Do your ads get
attention? Will they make a potential customer want to
buy the product? Did the ads give all the important
information? Price? Phone number?
Design a website for your business. Emphasize
your main sales message and describe your product or
service, its features and benefits, how it meets
customers’ needs, the price, any special offers
available, and ordering information.
A creative card can suggest a creative
company. However, keep the card’s
message simple, clear, and easy to read.





ENTREPRENEURSHIP 85
.Shifting Into High Gear
Shifting Into High Gear
With your best opportunity and idea identified, and your
business plan and selected preliminary steps completed, your
business start-up process can shift into high gear. You can move
ahead with the many activities needed to begin your entrepre-
neurial venture. Some of the necessary activities include:
• Obtaining the money you need to cover start-up costs
• Preparing your service location or the location where you
will produce your goods
• Acquiring a business license, name registration, or other
necessary documents (See “Legal Matters,” below.)
• Opening a company bank account
• Establishing the system you will use to keep records
• Putting together the best team of associates to help you
(if your business will need the services of others)
• Identifying suppliers of materials and obtaining
necessary resources
• Beginning production, if applicable
• Marketing, marketing, marketing
Legal Matters
A business may need a special license or permit to operate
legally. A permit might be required before you put up a sign to
advertise your business. An entrepreneur may need to register
a business name or a trademark, copyright, or patent. Taxes—
sales taxes, payroll taxes, and income taxes—are other common
concerns of small businesses and entrepreneurs.


86 ENTREPRENEURSHIP
Shifting Into High Gear.
Talk with your counselor, parent or guardian, partners,
investors, or other knowledgeable people about the legal
requirements you may have to cover as an entrepreneur. Every
state has its own rules and regulations. City and county govern-
ments also have regulations on permits you may need. Space is
too limited in this pamphlet to cover them all—you will have to
do your own research.
Also think about the legal structure of your business.
Many entrepreneurs operate as sole proprietors. A sole propri-
etorship is owned by one person. It is the most popular busi-
ness structure because it is easy to create and operate. Setting
it up requires no legal documents or legal fees. You can operate
under your own name or a business name—a “DBA,” or “doing
business as” company. You report any business income or loss
on your personal income tax return.
A sole proprietor, however, is personally responsible for all
the work, debts, and risk. If you are sued, you could lose not
only your business assets but also your personal belongings
and money.
Another starting
point for
information on
licenses and
permits is the U.S.
Small Business
Administration.
See the resources
section for more
information.
A good place to start research on business permits is your city hall.


ENTREPRENEURSHIP 87
.Shifting Into High Gear
A partnership—another common legal structure among
entrepreneurs—has the same sorts of risks. Each partner is
personally responsible for the business’s debts and liabilities.
If the business is sued, the partners stand to lose their personal
possessions and money as well as the assets of the business.
Requirement 5(a)(4) asks you to identify and describe the
potential liability risks of your product or service. If you run a
bike-repair business, for example, and a customer is hurt on a
bike you just overhauled, you might be held liable for the per-
son’s medical expenses. If you are a pet-sitter and a valuable
show or breeding animal gets sick or dies under your care, the
owner might sue you for the value of the injured animal.
Liability, licenses, permits, business registration, taxes, and
all such matters can be complicated and even scary for the new
entrepreneur. You will need professional advice. Maybe you can
barter (trade) products or services with an attorney to help you
work through these issues. Perhaps an attorney will donate his
or her services to help your start-up venture. Law students at a
nearby university might be able to help.
Liability refers to
obligations or
responsibilities
under the law.
Does your product or service pose any potential liability risks? If so, you may need to
purchase liability insurance to protect yourself and your business if you are sued.


88 ENTREPRENEURSHIP
Shifting Into High Gear.
Be creative in seeking the legal advice you need. An entre-
preneur’s creativity is always getting a workout, in everything
from product development to financing and marketing. Getting
affordable legal advice and assistance is no exception.
Business Ethics
Suppose you have a computer-service business and a customer
wants you to install a pirated copy of a popular software pro-
gram. If you make an illegal copy as the customer asks, you
will be stealing from the owner of the copyright on that soft-
ware. What will you do?
The best form of
advertising is
positive word-of-
mouth from a job
well done.
This information on legal matters is provided to help
you fulfill the requirements for the Entrepreneurship
merit badge. It is not and should not be considered
professional legal advice. For all legal questions related
to launching and running your business, you should
seek the advice of a qualified professional.


.Shifting Into High Gear
Suppose you and a partner agree to rent a space where you
can set up and sell your wood carvings. The rent comes due.
You pay your half, but your partner doesn’t have the money for
their share of the rent. Is that your problem? What is your obli-
gation to the person who is renting you the space?
Suppose a customer says, “If you can make delivery of a
dozen widgets by Wednesday, you’ve got a deal.” You know
you can’t build and deliver a dozen widgets before Thursday
at the earliest. To make the sale, do you promise what you
can’t deliver?
Questions of ethics arise in every business. To save money
or to gain a competitive edge, entrepreneurs may be tempted to
cut corners, bend the rules, or lower their standards. But cheat,
lie, or betray a trust even once, and the damage to your reputa-
tion can be permanent. Customers and other business owners
will shy away from doing business with someone who engages
in unethical practices.
What are your ethical responsibilities in your business?
Discuss with your counselor any ethical questions you have
faced or think you may face in your venture. How do your
moral principles or values affect your business decisions? Can
you state, in two or three sentences, a personal code of ethics
for yourself and your business? Or explain the values you fol-
low when interacting with people in a business setting?
Is Your Dream Coming True?
Show everyone, including yourself, that you can make your
business dream a reality. Once your business is underway,
write a report on its status. Include interesting evidence of
the steps you went through to plan and start the business.
Also report on the performance of your business, including
sales revenue, expenses, and profit or loss.
Share your experiences and your results with
your counselor and others. Let your per-
sonal and business networks—friends,
family, investors, professionals, and
other entrepreneurs—know how you
are doing, and ask for their feedback
and advice. Work to make your business
succeed and to achieve the goals you
have set for it and for yourself.
Bending the rules
is bad business.





ENTREPRENEURSHIP 91
.The Big Picture
The Big Picture
The work of an entrepreneur can be fulfilling and rewarding.
Earning the Entrepreneurship merit badge will help you know
whether being an entrepreneur is a career option that interests you.
Even if you do not plan to start your own business, you are
now better able to decide which entrepreneurial skills and charac-
teristics might help you along the path you do choose. You are also
in a better position to change your mind later in life about becom-
ing an entrepreneur, if you should choose to do so.
Look again at the section of this pamphlet on the roles and
contributions of entrepreneurs in our society. Keep in mind all
that is possible for those who are willing to identify opportuni-
ties, take the initiative (even when they cannot be sure of the
results), and do their best to bring their ideas to reality.
Happy hunting—for opportunities!
Entrepreneurial Eagle Scout
Ewing Marion Kauffman was a highly successful entrepreneur and an
Eagle Scout. He founded Marion Laboratories, a pharmaceutical and
health-care company that was valued at more than $6 billion when it
merged with Merrell Dow in 1989 to become the Marion Merrell
Dow Corporation.
“Mr. K,” as Mr. Kauffman was affectionately known, also endowed
a $1 billion foundation—the Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation—
dedicated to a vision of self-sufficient people living in healthy communi-
ties. He believed that three key characteristics were vital to the ultimate
success of the entrepreneur: sharing the rewards of entrepreneurship with
those who produce, treating others as you would like to be treated, and
giving back to your community.
May the future bring you the kind of entrepreneurial experiences and
successes “Mr. K” had in mind. May you enjoy all of the great feelings
that can come from setting goals, accomplishing tasks, achieving success,
and bringing benefits to yourself and others.


92 ENTREPRENEURSHIP
Entrepreneurship Resources.
Entrepreneurship Resources
Scouting Literature
American Business, Communication,
Graphic Arts, Inventing, Personal
Management, Public Speaking, and
Salesmanship merit badge pamphlets, and
any pamphlets related to your business
venture, such as Dog Care and Pets for a
pet-sitting service; Gardening, Insect Study,
Plant Science, and Soil and Water
Conservation for a lawn-and-garden busi-
ness; etc. For a complete list, see the
“Merit Badge Library” list on the inside of
the back cover of this and other merit
badge pamphlets.
Books
Bochner, Arthur, Rose Bochner, and
Adriane Berg. The New Totally
Awesome Business Book for Kids.
William Morrow Paperbacks, 2007.
Bernstein, Daryl, and Rob Husberg.
Better Than a Lemonade Stand!
Aladdin/Beyond Words, 2012.
Beroff, Art, and Terry Adams.
How to Be a Teenage Millionaire.
McGraw-Hill, 2000.
Cathers, Ben. Conversations With Teen
Entrepreneurs: Success Secrets of the
Younger Generation. iUniverse, 2003.
Collins, Robyn, and Kimberly Burleson
Spinks. Prepare to Be a Teen
Millionaire. HCI, 2008.
Hansen, Mark Victor. The Richest Kids
in America: How They Earn It, How
They Spend It, How You Can Too.
Hansen House Publishing, 2009.
Harper, Stephen C. The McGraw-Hill
Guide to Starting Your Own
Business: A Step-by-Step Blueprint
for the First-Time Entrepreneur.
McGraw-Hill, 2003.
Linecker, Adelia Cellini. What Color Is
Your Piggy Bank? Entrepreneurial
Ideas for Self-Starting Kids. Lobster
Press, 2004.
Mariotti, Steve. The Young Entrepreneur’s
Guide to Starting and Running a
Business. Three Rivers Press, 2000.
O’Neill, Jason. Bitten by the Business
Bug: Common Sense Tips for
Business and Life From a Teen
Entrepreneur. CreateSpace
Independent Publishing
Platform 2010.
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


ENTREPRENEURSHIP 93
.Entrepreneurship Resources
Schiffman, Stephan. Young
Entrepreneur’s Guide to Business
Terms. Scholastic, 2003.
Scofield, Rupert. The Social
Entrepreneur’s Handbook: How to
Start, Build, and Run a Business
That Improves the World. McGraw
Hill, 2011.
Topp, Carol. Starting a Micro Business.
Ambassador Publishing, 2010.
Toren, Adam and Matthew.
Kidpreneurs: Young Entrepreneurs
With Big Ideas! Business Plus Media
Group LLC, 2009.
Organizations and Websites
BizWorld
311 California St., Suite 750
San Francisco, CA 94104
Toll-free telephone: 888-424-9543
bizworld.org
DECA
1908 Association Drive
Reston, VA 20191
Telephone: 703-860-5000
deca.org
Entrepreneurs’ Organization
500 Montgomery St., Suite 700
Alexandria, VA 22314-1437
Telephone: 703-519-6700
eonetwork.org
Resources for Entrepreneurs
Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation
4801 Rockhill Road
Kansas City, MO 64110
Telephone: 816-932-1000
entrepreneurship.org
Future Business Leaders of
America—Phi Beta Lambda
1912 Association Drive
Reston, VA 20191-1591
Toll-free telephone: 800-325-2946
fbla-pbl.org
Junior Achievement
One Education Way
Colorado Springs, CO 80906
Telephone: 719-540-8000
ja.org
SCORE Association
409 3rd St., SW, Suite 100A
Washington, DC 20024
Toll-free telephone: 800-634-0245
score.org
TeenStartUps.com
Entrepreneur Media Inc.
2445 McCabe Way, Suite 400
Irvine, CA 92614
Telephone: 949-261-2325
entrepreneur.com/tsu
U.S. Small Business Administration
409 Third St., SW
Washington, DC 20416
Toll-free telephone: 800-827-5722
sba.gov
YoungBiz
40 Wall St.
The Trump Building, 28th floor
New York, NY 10005
Toll-free telephone: 800-878-4982
youngbiz.com
Youth Venture
1700 North Moore St., Suite 2000
Arlington, VA 22209
Telephone: 703-527-8300
youthventure.org


94 ENTREPRENEURSHIP
Entrepreneurship Resources.
Acknowledgments
For reviewing and suggesting
updates to this edition of the pam-
phlet, Scouting America thanks David
Ehrlich. Ehrlich is the Director of
Education for the NTEA–The
Association for the Work Truck
Industry in Farmington Hills, Michigan.
In addition, he is a group leader on
Scouting America’s National Merit
Badge Subcommittee.
Photo and Illustration Credits
Library of Congress Prints and
Photographs Division; Carol M.
Highsmith, photographer—page 14
Wikipedia.org/Matthew Morven,
courtesy—page 60
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of
or are protected by Scouting America.
Dan Bryant—page 34 (shoppers)
Darrell Byers—page 13 (children)
Daniel Giles—pages 22 and 43
Brian Payne—pages 9, 10 (beekeeper),
50 (both), 54–56, 58 (youth with
dog), 70, 74 (youth with computer),
78 (youth with dog), and 87
Randy Piland—pages 13 (youth with
wheelbarrow), 30, 35, 37, and 40
Tara Tamer—page 61


Notes


Subscribe today at go.scoutlife.org/subscribe
Use promo code SLMBP15 to get a special
print + digital bundle offer priced just for Scouts!
Get ideas
for your next
merit badge
adventure in
every issue
of Scout Life
magazine.