OCEANOGR APHY
STEM-Based


OCEANOGR APHY
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


35924
ISBN 978-0-8395-3306-1
©2012 Boy Scouts of America
2015 Printing
Requirements
1. Name four branches of oceanography. Describe at least
five reasons why it is important for people to learn about
the oceans.
2. Define salinity, temperature, and density, and describe
how these important properties of seawater are measured
by the physical oceanographer. Discuss the circulation
and currents of the ocean. Describe the effects of the
oceans on weather and climate.
3. Describe the characteristics of ocean waves. Point out the
differences among the storm surge, tsunami, tidal wave,
and tidal bore. Explain the difference between sea, swell,
and surf. Explain how breakers are formed.
4. Draw a cross-section of underwater topography. Show what
is meant by:
a. Continental shelf
b. Continental slope
c. Abyssal plain
Name and put on your drawing the following: seamount,
guyot, rift valley, canyon, trench, and oceanic ridge.
Compare the depths in the oceans with the heights of
mountains on land.
5. List the main salts, gases, and nutrients in seawater.
Describe some important properties of water. Tell how
the animals and plants of the ocean affect the chemical
composition of seawater. Explain how differences in
evaporation and precipitation affect the salt content of
the oceans.


OCEANOGRAPHY 3
6. Describe some of the biologically important properties
of seawater. Define benthos, nekton, and plankton.
Name some of the plants and animals that make up
each of these groups. Describe the place and importance
of phytoplankton in the oceanic food chain.
7. Do ONE of the following:
a. Make a plankton net. Tow the net by a dock, wade with
it, hold it in a current, or tow it from a rowboat.* Do
this for about 20 minutes. Save the sample. Examine it
under a microscope or high-power glass. Identify the
three most common types of plankton in the sample.
b. Make a series of models (clay or plaster and wood)
of a volcanic island. Show the growth of an atoll from
a fringing reef through a barrier reef. Describe the
Darwinian theory of coral reef formation.
c. Measure the water temperature at the surface, midwater,
and bottom of a body of water four times daily for five
consecutive days.* You may measure depth with a rock
tied to a line. Make a Secchi disk to measure turbidity
(how much suspended sedimentation is in the water).
Measure the air temperature. Note the cloud cover and
roughness of the water. Show your findings (air and
water temperature, turbidity) on a graph. Tell how the
water temperature changes with air temperature.
d. Make a model showing the inshore sediment movement
by littoral currents, tidal movement, and wave action.
Include such formations as high and low waterlines,
low-tide terrace, berm, and coastal cliffs. Show how
offshore bars are built up and torn down.
e. Make a wave generator. Show reflection and refraction
of waves. Show how groins, jetties, and breakwaters
affect these patterns.
f. Track and monitor satellite images available on
the Internet for a specific location for three weeks.
Describe what you have learned to your counselor.
*May be done in lakes or streams.


4 OCEANOGRAPHY
8. Do ONE of the following:
a. Write a 500-word report on a book about oceanography
approved by your counselor.
b. Visit one of the following:
(1) Oceanographic research ship
(2) Oceanographic institute, marine laboratory,
or marine aquarium
Write a 500-word report about your visit.
c. Explain to your troop in a five-minute prepared speech
“Why Oceanography Is Important” or describe “Career
Opportunities in Oceanography.” (Before making your
speech, show your speech outline to your counselor
for approval.)
9. Describe four methods that marine scientists use to
investigate the ocean, underlying geology, and organisms
living in the water.


78 OCEANOGRAPHY
Oceanography Resources.
Scouting Resources
Bird Study, Energy, Environmental
Science, Fish and Wildlife Management,
Fishing, Fly-Fishing, Geology, Mammal
Study, Nature, Plant Science, Reptile
and Amphibian Study, Soil and Water
Conservation, Sustainability, and
Weather merit badge pamphlets
Books
Ballard, Robert D. Exploring the Titanic.
Econo-Clad Books, 1990.
Broad, William J. The Universe Below:
Discovering the Secrets of the Deep
Sea. Simon and Schuster, 1997.
Carson, Rachel L. The Sea Around Us.
Oxford University Press, 1991.
Carson, Rachel L., and Sue Hubbell.
The Edge of the Sea. Houghton
Mifflin, 1998.
Center for Marine Conservation Staff.
The Ocean Book: Aquarium and
Seaside Activities and Ideas for All
Ages. John Wiley & Sons Inc., 1989.
Coulombe, Deborah. The Seaside
Naturalist: A Guide to Study at the
Seashore. Simon and Schuster, 1992.
Denny, Mark. How the Ocean Works:
An Introduction to Oceanography.
Princeton University Press, 2008.
Earle, Sylvia, and Linda K. Glover.
Ocean: An Illustrated Atlas. National
Geographic, 2008.
Earle, Sylvia A., and Wolcott Henry.
Wild Ocean: America’s Parks
Under the Sea. National Geographic
Society, 1999.
Ellis, Richard. Encyclopedia of the Sea.
Alfred A. Knopf, 2000.
Foreman, W. History of American Deep
Submersible Operations.
Best Publishing Co., 1999.
Miller, James W., and Ian G. Koblick.
Living and Working in the Sea.
Best Publishing Co., 1995.
Strang, Craig, Catharine Halversen, and
Kimi Hosoume. On Sandy Shores.
GEMS: Great Explorations in Math
and Science, 1996.
Oceanography Resources
Visit the Boy Scouts of America’s
official retail website at
http://www.scoutstuff.org for a
complete listing of all merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


OCEANOGRAPHY 79
.Oceanography Resources
Organizations and Websites
American Meteorological Society
Telephone: 617-227-2425
Website: http://www.ametsoc.org
Careers in Oceanography, Ocean
Engineering, and Marine Biology
Website: http://www.marinecareers.net
The Discovery Channel Blue Planet
Website: http://dsc.discovery.com
/convergence/blueplanet/blueplanet.html
The JASON Project
Telephone: 703-726-4232
Website: http://www.jason.org
National Climatic Data Center
Telephone: 828-271-4800
Website: http://lwf.ncdc.noaa.gov/oa
/ncdc.html
National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration
Telephone: 202-482-6090
Website: http://www.noaa.gov
The Ocean Alliance
Toll-free telephone: 800-969-4253
Website: http://www.oceanalliance.org
The Savage Seas, Public
Broadcasting Service
Website: http://www.pbs.org/wnet
/savageseas
Scripps Institute of Oceanography
Telephone: 858-534-3624
Website: https://scripps.ucsd.edu
PBS Secrets of the Ocean Realm
Website: http://www.pbs.org/oceanrealm
Acknowledgments
The Boy Scouts of America thanks
Thomas Potts, associate director at the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration’s Undersea Research
Center, University of North Carolina
Wilmington for his extensive assistance
with this revision of the Oceanography
merit badge pamphlet. The BSA is
also grateful to Eagle Scout Lawrence
Cahoon, professor, Department
of Biology and Marine Biology at
the University of North Carolina
Wilmington, for his assistance.
The Boy Scouts of America is
grateful to the men and women serving
on the Merit Badge Maintenance Task
Force for the improvements made in
updating this pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration Credits
Jupiterimages.com—cover (diver, fish);
pages 4, 5, 9, 16, 19, 24, 32–35 (all),
37 (top), 38 (top), 40 (top), 41
(bottom), 42, 45, 48 (top), 52
(bottom), 59, 61–62 (all), 74–80 (all)
Life on the Edge 2004 Expedition:
NOAA Office of Exploration,
courtesy—page 59
NOAA, courtesy—pages 57 (bottom)
and 58
OAR/National Undersea Research
Program (photo by C. Van Dover),
College of William & Mary, courtesy
—page 53
OAR/National Undersea Research
Program; Farleigh Dickinson
University, courtesy—page 55