ROBOTICS
STEM-Based


ROBOTICS
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


ROBOTICS 5
Requirements
1. Safety. Do each of the following:
a. Explain to your counselor the most likely
hazards you may encounter while working
with robots and what you should do to
anticipate, mitigate and prevent, and
respond to these hazards. Describe
the appropriate safety gear and
clothing that should be used when
working with robotics.
b. Discuss first aid and prevention
for the types of injuries that could
occur while participating in robotics
activities and competitions,
including cuts, eye injuries,
and burns (chemical or heat).
2. Robotics industry. Discuss the following with
your counselor:
a. The kinds of things robots can do and how
robots are best used today.
b. The similarities and differences between remote-control
vehicles, telerobots, and autonomous robots.
c. Three different methods robots can use to move
themselves other than wheels or tracks. Describe
when it would be appropriate to use each method.
3. General knowledge. Discuss with your counselor three of
the five major fields of robotics (human-robot interface,
mobility, manipulation, programming, sensors) and their
importance to robotics development. Discuss either the
three fields as they relate to a single robot system OR talk
about each field in general. Find pictures or at least one
video to aid your discussion.


6 ROBOTICS
4. Design, build, program, test. Do each of the following:
a. With your counselor’s approval, choose a task for the
robot or robotic subsystem that you plan to build.
Include sensor feedback and programming in the
task. Document this information in your robot
engineering notebook.
b. Design your robot. The robot design should use sensors
and programming and have at least 2 degrees of freedom.
Document the design in your robot engineering notebook
using drawings and a written description.
c. Build a robot or robotic subsystem of your original design
to accomplish the task you chose for requirement 4a.
d. Discuss with your counselor the programming options
available for your robot. Then do either option 1 OR
option 2.
(1) Option 1. Program your robot to perform the task
you chose for your robot in 4a. Include a sample
of your program’s source code in your robot
engineering notebook.
(2) Option 2. Prepare a flowchart of the desired steps
to program your robot for accomplishing the task
in 4a. Include procedures that show activities
based on sensor inputs. Place this in your robot
engineering notebook.


ROBOTICS 7
e. Test your robot and record the results in your robot
engineering notebook. Include suggestions on how
you could improve your robot, as well as pictures
or sketches of your finished robot.
5. Demonstrate. Do the following:
a. Demonstrate for your counselor the robot you built in
requirement 4.
b. Share your robot engineering notebook with your
counselor. Talk about how well your robot accomplished
the task, the improvements you would make in
your next design, and what you learned about the
design process.
6. Competitions. Do ONE of the following.
a. Attend a robotics competition and report to your
counselor what you saw and learned about the
competition and how teams are organized
and managed.
b. Learn about three youth robotics competitions. Tell your
counselor about these, including the type of competition,
time commitment, age of the participants, and how many
teams are involved.
7. Careers. Name three career opportunities in robotics. Pick
one and find out the education, training, and experience
required for this profession. Discuss this with your counselor,
and explain why this profession might interest you.


ROBOTICS 85
.Robotics Resources
Robotics Resources
Scouting Literature
Composite Materials, Digital Technology,
Electricity, Electronics, Engineering,
First Aid, Game Design, Home Repairs,
Inventing, Metalwork, Model Design and
Building, Programming, Safety, Space
Exploration, Textile, Welding, and
Woodwork merit badge pamphlets
Books
Clark, Dennis, and Michael Owings.
Building Robot Drive Trains.
McGraw-Hill, 2002.
Cook, David. Robot Building for
Beginners, 2nd ed. Apress, 2010.
Domaine, Helena. Robotics. Lerner, 2005.
Gibilisco, Stan. Concise Encyclopedia of
Robotics. TAB Books, 2002.
Henderson, Harry. Modern Robotics:
Building Versatile Machines. Chelsea
House, 2006.
Mataric, Maja J. The Robotics Primer.
MIT Press, 2007.
McComb, Gordon. Constructing Robot
Bases. McGraw-Hill, 2003.
———. Robot Builder’s Bonanza, 4th ed.
McGraw-Hill, 2011.
Payment, Simone. Robotics Careers:
Preparing for the Future. Rosen, 2011.
Petruzzellis, Thomas. Electronics Sensors
for the Evil Genius. McGraw-Hill, 2006.
Predko, Myke. 123 Robotics Experiments
for the Evil Genius. McGraw-Hill, 2004.
Randolph, Ryan P. Robotics.
Rosen, 2009.
Valk, Laurens. The LEGO® Mindstorms®
NXT 2.0 Discovery Book: A Beginner’s
Guide to Building and Programming
Robots. No Starch Press, 2010.
Williams, Karl. Build Your Own
Humanoid Robots. McGraw-Hill, 2004.
The Boy Scouts of America’s Supply
Group has kits available that fit
requirements for the Robotics merit
badge. Go to www.scoutstuff.org
for more information.
DVDs
NOVA: The Great Robot Race. PBS, 2006.
Robotics. History Channel, 2001.
Online Resources
“How to Build a Robot.” Razor Robotics,
www.razorrobotics.com/
building-robots
Visit the Boy Scouts of
America’s official retail website
(with your parent’s permission) at
www.scoutstuff.org for a com-
plete listing of all merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


86 ROBOTICS
Robotics Resources.
“How to Make a Robot.” GoRobotics.net,
www.gorobotics.net/articles/how-to-
make-a-robot-lesson-1
“Robotics Tutorials.” ElectronicsTeacher.
com, www.electronicsteacher.com/
robotics/robotics-tutorial/
plain-robotics
Also see the websites and sources
described under “Robotics
Competitions” (See “Resources for
Kits and Competitions”).
The next time you are online or
at the bookstore, check out maga-
zines like Robot, Servo, Nuts and
Volts, and Popular Science. These
publications are great resources
for robotics-related information.
Organizations
American Society of
Mechanical Engineers
3 Park Ave.
New York, NY 10016-5990
Toll-free telephone: 800-843-2763
Website: www.asme.org
AUVSI Foundation
Robotic Competitions
Association for Unmanned Vehicle
Systems International
Website: www.auvsi.org
AUVSI Foundation website:
www.auvsifoundation.org
Carnegie Mellon Robotics Academy
Computer Science Social Network
Website: www.education.rec.ri.cmu.edu
Institute of Electrical and
Electronics Engineers
2001 L Street, NW, Suite 700
Washington, DC 20036-4910
Phone: 202-785-0017
Website: www.ieee.org
National Robotics Week
Website: www.nationalroboticsweek.org
RoboGames
Website: www.robogames.net
Robotics Education and
Competition Foundation
Website: www.roboticseducation.org
Technology Student Association
1914 Association Drive
Reston, VA 20191-1540
Toll-free telephone: 888-860-9010
Website: www.tsaweb.org
Robotics Merit Badge:
Get Interactive
Get ready to unlock the BSA’s first
interactive merit badge resource
center! Enhance your merit badge
learning experience by tapping
into a mind-blowing explosion
of videos, games, activities,
photos, the latest resources, and
much more. Visit www.boyslife.
org/robotics.
Acknowledgments
The Boy Scouts of America greatly
appreciates members of the Robotics
merit badge advisory group for their
assistance with developing the merit
badge and pamphlet. A number of
them are active volunteers in the
Scouting program and are robotics com-
petition mentors and experts. Their
input, expertise, time, and other
resources have been invaluable.