HEALTH CARE
PROFESSIONS
rinting
STEM-Based


HEALTH CARE
PROFESSIONS
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


FPO
Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Health-Care-Professions or check
Scoutbook for the latest requirements.
35975
ISBN 978-0-8395-0153-4
©2022 Boy Scouts of America
2022 Printing


HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONS 3


4 HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONS


HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONS 5


6 HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONS
Introduction
There are dozens of careers in the domain of health care! Often, when one
thinks about a career in health care, the first thing that comes to mind is
being a doctor or nurse. However, there are many other careers to consider.
The opportunities for satisfying work in health care are endless! Jobs in
the professional careers you will learn about while working on this merit
badge are available in local communities across the nation, in the military
services, public health agencies, and the private sector. Current government
estimates show that demand for all health care professionals will create one
of the fastest growing segments of the work force in the future. Today nearly
all of these professions are facing shortages due to the aging population
in the United States. Incomes in each of these professions are good, and
scholarships for the training/education required to enter into many of these
professions are available to students.
Most of these professionals that you will learn about while working on
this merit badge have a number of things in common:
• Each has specific educational requirements. Some will require
technical-school certification or Associate of Arts degree, while
others may require a bachelor’s or doctorate degree.
• People interested in health careers may major in a variety of areas,
though it is most common that they major in one of the sciences
• Most have specific licensing or certification requirements
• Each has specific standards of practice that guide performance
• Most will be bound by laws covering their profession in the state
where they work
• Most require continuing education every year to maintain practice
credentials
• There are a variety of settings where they can work. For example,
hospitals, out-patient clinics, schools, homes, rehabilitation or
nursing home settings are just a few of the possibilities
• Most provide education of the patient to help them in their recovery
from illness or injury and in prevention of health problems
• Each profession needs teachers for the next generation
So, if this sounds both exciting and challenging, then let’s get started
learning about the varied world of Health care Professions.
Information provided in this pamphlet was current as of January 2020. Information was obtained
from professional societies and schools that support/prepare each of the professionals discussed.
Some material was included in the 2017 and 2019 Medicine merit badge pamphlets.


HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONS 7
Contents
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
The Physician’s Oath . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
The History of Health Care . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Patient Relationships, Confidentiality, and HIPAA . . . . . . . . . 11
Physicians and Physician Assistants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
Nursing Professionals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
Allied Health Professionals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
Notes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66


8 HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONS
Physician’s Oath(As adopted by the World Medical Association — 2017)
AS A MEMBER OF THE MEDICAL PROFESSION:
I SOLEMNLY PLEDGE
to dedicate my life to the service of humanity;
THE HEALTH AND WELL-BEING OF MY PATIENT
will be my first consideration;
I WILL RESPECT
the autonomy and dignity of my patient;
I WILL MAINTAIN
the utmost respect for human life;
I WILL NOT PERMIT
considerations of age, disease or disability, creed, ethnic origin, gender, nationality,
political affiliation, race, sexual orientation, social standing, or any other factor
to intervene between my duty and my patient;
I WILL RESPECT
the secrets that are confided in me, even after the patient has died;
I WILL PRACTISE
my profession with conscience and dignity and in accordance
with good medical practice;
I WILL FOSTER
the honour and noble traditions of the medical profession;
I WILL GIVE
to my teachers, colleagues, and students the respect and gratitude
that is their due;
I WILL SHARE
my medical knowledge for the benefit of the patient and the advancement of health care;
I WILL ATTEND TO
my own health, well-being, and abilities in order to provide care of the highest standard;
I WILL NOT USE
my medical knowledge to violate human rights and civil liberties, even under threat;
I MAKE THESE PROMISES
solemnly, freely, and upon my honour


HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONS 9
.THE HISTORY OF HEALTH CARE
The History
of Health Care
Health care has a rich history that spans centuries. Since
the first use of plants and other items as simple medicines
and healing ointments, many people have contributed to
the advancement of the healing arts. Methods to improve
techniques and make use of new technologies are developed
nearly every day as researchers strive to find additional ways
to combat disease and promote health. Remedies to treat
illness have gone from simple plant-based remedies (and
many medications are still derived from plants!) to medicines
that can be delivered to a very specific part of the body using
nanobot technology!
One constant through the ages is the dedication of
health care providers to live and practice their “craft” in an
ethical and honorable manner. Similar to the Scout Oath
and Law for Scouts BSA members, the earliest physicians
promised to provide medical
care and personally live by an
oath to their profession. The
original physician’s oath
was the Hippocratic Oath
written in 5th Century BC.
Today, physicians continue
to affirm that they will
provide ethical care to all
persons based on the best
knowledge possible. Many
medical schools now use the
Physician’s Oath, approved
by the World Medical
Association in 2017.


10 HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONS


HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONS 11
.Patient Relationships, Confidentiality and HIPAA
Patient Relationships,
Confidentiality,
and HIPAA
The relationship between the patient and the health care
professional is critically important. Patients may share
information that is very personal. Communication between the
professional and the patient is a key element in discovering
what the health
problem or
diagnosis could
be. If the patient
does not trust the
professional to
keep information
confidential,
the patient
might not share
information that
could be critical
to establishing
a diagnosis. The
patient may be
especially reluctant
to admit to drug
or alcohol abuse,
or to provide
specifics about their sexual activity. With some exceptions, the
expectation is that discussions between a patient and a health
care professional are privileged — which means it is protected
from disclosure to third parties, including law enforcement.
However, health insurance companies usually require the
patient to share their health information with the company in


12 HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONS
.Patient Relationships, Confidentiality and HIPAA.
order to determine what, if any, of the expenses will be paid for
by the insurance company.
So, the confidentiality of information that is shared
between the patient and the professional is very important.
The law passed in 1996 that dictates what can and cannot be
shared is called HIPAA which stands for the Health Insurance
Portability and Accountability Act. It is a very complicated
law, and health professionals, hospitals and health care offices
have to comply with this or lose their ability to receive federal
funds. Part of the law includes the importance of confidentiality
of health records as well as the security of those records.
It defines what information can be shared without the
patient’s permission, as well as that which can be shared with
the patient’s permission. These laws address confidentiality.
Confidentiality refers to personal information shared with a
physician, therapist, or other individual that generally cannot be
divulged to third parties without the permission of the patient.
The patient determines who else can receive information — for
people 18 years and older, only the patient has access to their
information, unless the patient gives permission for specific
individuals to also have access to that information.


HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONS 13
..Patient Relationships, Confidentiality and HIPAA
Health professionals can share information about the
patient with other health professionals who are or will be
directly involved in the patient’s care. For example, the
nurse in a pediatrician’s office can speak to the nurse in
the optometrist’s office about a child who is coming for a
consultation without the family’s permission. However, the
nurse cannot share information with other professionals in the
pediatrician’s office who are not involved in caring for that
child.


14 HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONS


..Physicians and Physician Assistants
PHYSICIANS
and PHYSICIAN
ASSISTANTS
Many different professionals play a part in the delivery of health
care in the United States. Doctors and nurses are just the most
visible; other professionals who provide services supporting
the various aspects of diagnosis and treatment, as well as those
who may be consulted outside the scope of a physician’s care,
also play very important roles in seeing that patients receive
assistance with the various health problems they might have.
Each of these professionals serves a specific
function, and what he or she is permitted to do
within that field is defined by laws established
by state governments, frequently through
the granting of licenses. As these laws vary
somewhat around the country, information
on licensing for each profession cannot
be included here. Such information can
usually be obtained from your state’s
professional licensing board or the
equivalent.
Physician (Allopathic)
MD
Role: This professional is trained in the
practice of medicine and surgery at a medical
school granting a Doctor of Medicine (MD) degree.
Their area of specialty will determine the type
of patients they will treat. They are trained to assess the
patient and diagnose and treat both acute and chronic health


16 HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONS
Physicians and Physician Assistants.
conditions. They might order tests to help in the diagnosis of
the person’s complaint.
Education: Completion of an undergraduate college
degree followed by four years of medical school education
leading to a Doctor of Medicine degree. Some universities offer
highly competitive, accelerated premedical medical degree
programs in which students can complete the requirements for
both an undergraduate and a medical degree in six or seven
years.
Physician (Osteopathic) DO
Role: This professional is trained in the practice of
medicine and surgery from a school granting a Doctor of
Osteopathy (DO) degree. Osteopaths use a system of diagnosis
and treatment that emphasizes the role of the musculoskeletal
system in the healthy functioning of the body. Their training
is nearly identical to that of allopathic physicians, with
additional focus on the relationship between parts of the body
and manipulative therapy, a hands-on approach to alleviating
symptoms, reducing pain, and preventing health problems.


HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONS 17
..Physicians and Physician Assistants
Education: Completion of an undergraduate college
degree followed by four years of medical school education
leading to a Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine degree. DOs, like
MDs, continue their training with Residency and Fellowships in
any of the specialty areas listed below.
Both allopathic (MD) and osteopathic (DO) physicians
diagnose and treat illnesses and injuries and advise patients
on preventive measures to help them lead a safe, healthy life.
To arrive at a diagnosis and decide on a treatment, physicians
Interested in a Career in Medicine?
Ask questions. Pursuing a health-professional career is rewarding, but it
also takes a lot of hard work and dedication. Talk to your own health care
provider and other health care professionals about the kind of work they
do, what their schooling and training was like, what they like best about
the career, and what some of the challenges they face are. Their answers
can help you determine if a health-professional career is right for you and
can help you choose the specific profession that interests you most.
Study hard. Try your best to do well in school, no
matter the class. Science and math classes
are important if you hope to pursue a
health-professional career, but so are
other types of classes, such as English.
Some classes teach valuable skills,
such as good communication,
and some classes help you
become well rounded. It is
also a good idea to choose
advanced level classes in
school if they are available.
Get involved. Through extracurricu-
lar activities, hobbies, and volunteer-
ing, you can demonstrate your curiosity,
dedication, and uniqueness. Team sports and group
activities give you experience working with others, and they may also offer
leadership opportunities. Volunteering at a health-related event or facility
in your community is a good idea. This kind of public service offers you
an opportunity to learn more about health care and shows your interest in
helping others through that field.


18 HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONS
Physicians and Physician Assistants.
usually take a patient’s medical history, perform a physical
examination of the patient, and may order laboratory or
diagnostic tests. Their training incorporates evidence-based
care, in which physicians consider the findings of biomedical
research and their own clinical knowledge as well as their
patients’ preferences to develop a plan of care.
Physicians might work in hospitals, outpatient clinics, or in
a setting where they visit people in their homes or offices. They
might volunteer at Scout camps such as Philmont Scout Ranch
and local council camps. They might volunteer to provide
care to people who struggle to afford care, or they might visit
countries outside the United States to provide very specialized
care that isn’t available in those countries.
They might volunteer in disasters or war
zones with organizations like Doctors
Without Borders.
Physicians work with any number of
different professionals as they develop a
diagnosis and treatment plan. The team
approach to patient care, particularly
for the patient with a complex medical
problem usually results in better outcomes
for the patient. For example, the team
might include a physician, nurse, physical
and occupational therapist for a person
who has had a stroke.
Physicians as well as other health
professionals usually choose a specific area of care in which to
practice — both MDs and DOs can choose from among any of
the following specialties:
Primary Care
• Internal medicine
• Family medicine
• Obstetrics/gynecology
• Pediatrics
• Psychiatry
• Surgery


HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONS 19
..Physicians and Physician Assistants
Specialization
With increasing knowledge about health, disease, illness, and
treatments, it has become impossible for one person to know
everything they need to know to treat the many different
conditions that people have. Thus, we have specialization —
doctors and other health care professionals (such as Nurses
and Physician Assistants) specialize in many, many different
areas. However, there continues to be a need for primary care
physicians (pediatricians, internists, family medicine physicians,
nurse practitioners and physician assistants) who can provide
care to the vast majority of people in both rural and urban
settings. Specialists may be more available in developed
countries and urban areas, which can present obstacles to
getting timely care from a specialist when needed in rural areas
and developing countries.
Here are examples of the different kinds of specialists
available.
Subspecialty Care
• Allergy/immunology (immune system disorders)
• Anesthesiology
• Cardiology (heart and blood vessels)
• Colorectal surgery (surgery of the colon and rectum)
• Critical Care Medicine (or Intensive Care Medicine)
• Dermatology (care of skin/hair)
After physicians
have completed
their formal
training, they are
expected to stay
up-to-date in their
field. All states
require allopathic
physicians and
osteopathic
physicians to
earn continuing
medical education
credits to maintain
their license to
practice medicine.


Physicians and Physician Assistants.
• Emergency medicine
• Endocrinology (diseases involving hormones, such as
diabetes, thyroid disorders)
• Gastroenterology (disorders of esophagus, stomach,
intestines)
• Geriatric medicine (care of the elderly)
• Hematology/oncology (blood disorders, such as sickle cell
disease, leukemia, anemia)
• Hospitalist (care of people in the hospital)
• Infectious disease
• Nephrology (kidneys)
• Neurosurgery (brain and spine surgery)
• Neurology (disorders of brain and nervous system, such as
epilepsy, Parkinson’s, Alzheimer’s)
• Nuclear medicine (evaluates the body using radioactive
substances to view soft tissues)
• Oncology (cancer of solid tissues)
• Ophthalmology (Eyes)
• Orthopedic surgery
• Otolaryngology (ear, nose and throat/
head and neck surgery)
• Pathology (study of tissue to identify
causes of illness or death)
• Physical medicine and rehabilitation
• Plastic, reconstructive, and
maxillofacial (face/jaw) surgery
• Preventive medicine
• Pulmonology (lung diseases)
• Radiology — images using many
different techniques
• Rheumatology (joint diseases such as
arthritis)
• Thoracic/cardiothoracic surgery
(surgery of heart, chest, lungs)
• Urology (surgery of bladder, ureters,
prostate)
• Vascular surgery


HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONS 21
.Physicians and Physician Assistants
Education
Both allopathic (MD) and osteopathic (DO) physicians complete
graduate school training. Each will require training (residency)
after graduation to prepare them to practice in a particular
specialty. Applicants to medical school take an entrance
examination, the Medical College Admission
Test (MCAT), in addition to submitting
their undergraduate records, along with a
personal statement and recommendations.
The MCAT tests one’s ability to
solve problems, based on content
from biology, chemistry, physics,
biochemistry, psychology and
sociology. Medical school for both
allopathic and osteopathic medicine
is very similar.
During the first two years
of medical school, students
primarily study the basic biomedical
sciences. This includes anatomy
(gross and microscopic), embryology,
biochemistry, physiology, genetics,
pathology, pharmacology, microbiology
and immunology, and biostatistics. These
might be taught individually or on a coordinated
basis (by organ; for example, information about each of
the above subjects regarding the heart is presented at one time).
In years three and four, the focus is on clinical training in
hospital and outpatient settings. Most schools introduce clinical
experiences beginning in the first year of study so that the
basic science material is more relevant. The clinical experiences
include exposure to certain “core” specialties, which are
believed necessary to provide a foundation upon which to
build, regardless of which specialty is eventually chosen.
Core clinical areas include internal medicine and/or
family medicine, obstetrics and gynecology, pediatrics,
psychiatry, and surgery. The fourth year is usually composed
of a series of elective courses or rotations, allowing the soon-to-
be-graduated student to explore specialties he or she might be
interested in entering. As this final year progresses, more and
more clinical responsibility is placed on the student to prepare
for the postgraduate training that will follow.


22 HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONS
Physicians and Physician Assistants.
Choosing a Specialty and the “Match”
During medical school, students choose elective rotations
in the specialty they are interested in at institutions offering
graduate medical education in that particular specialty.
After deciding on a specialty, a medical student submits
applications to training programs for that specialty — much
in the way one applies to college and medical school. After
applications have been submitted and applicants have been
interviewed, students and institutions submit their ranked lists
to a computer matching system. The Match is the National
Resident Matching Program, a computerized service that pairs
students with postgraduate (residency) training programs. After
some calculations, a list of matched candidates and programs
is released. On “Match Day” medical students find out which
training program they have “matched” with.
Residency and Fellowship
After medical school, residency or graduate medical education
begins. This period is called “residency” because long ago,
physicians lived at the hospital facility where they were training
and were actually “resident” there. For a few specialties, such
as dermatology, radiology, ophthalmology, and neurology,
a one-year internship providing broad, general overview of
practice is required. Postgraduate training requires several years
of study in the field chosen by the new physician, depending
on the requirements of each discipline.


HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONS 23
.Physicians and Physician Assistants
Careers in the Military
Health care professionals in the military work for the United States through
the Department of Defense and the Department of Health and Human
Services. They serve in times of war and peace, wherever they are needed
in the U.S. and abroad.
Military physicians, nurses,
and other health care
professionals care for active
members of the military
and their in-garrison (at
a permanent base) and
in-field medical units, and
to retirees in veteran’s
hospitals. Sometimes,
military health care
personnel are deployed to
provide humanitarian aid
around the world.
This work requires not
only traditional health care
professionals education,
but also preparation in
areas that are particularly
important to military
service, including combat-
casualty care, field training,
and aspects of preventive
health. Their efforts help
keep troops in good
condition. Those interested
in a military career can find
detailed information on at
these websites:
www.usuhs.mil/vpe/USUFactSheet.pdf
www.armymedicine.army.mil/about/introduction.html
www.navy.com/healthcareopportunties/
www.airforce.com/careers/specialty-careers/healthcare/overview
www.militaryspot.com/marines/marine-corps-healthcare-careers


24 HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONS
Physicians and Physician Assistants.
Chiropractor (DC)
Role: Chiropractors focus on the diagnosis and treatment
of neuromuscular disorders, with an emphasis on treatment
through manual adjustment and/or manipulation of the neck
and spine. A specialist in this area practices a theory of healing
based on the belief that disease results from a lack of normal
nerve function. In some states they may be allowed to perform
physical examinations and do some minor surgery.
Education: Completion of at least two years of college
education followed by four
years of training from a
school granting a Doctor of
Chiropractic Medicine degree.
Practice Environment:
Most often DCs work in a
private practice environment.
Optometrist (OD)
Role: These specialists are trained to examine, diagnose,
and manage diseases and disorders related to the eye and
vision. They prescribe glasses, contact lenses, and other vision
aids, as well as vision therapy and in some states may prescribe


HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONS 25
.Physicians and Physician Assistants
medicines for the treatment of eye diseases like infections or
glaucoma. Optometrists also are trained to identify when it
might be necessary to refer a patient to an Ophthalmologist
(physician specializing in eyes) for medical or surgical
treatment. In some states they are permitted to monitor selected
patients for chronic conditions.
Education: Completion of an undergraduate college
degree followed by four years of education leading to a Doctor
of Optometry degree.
Practice Environment: Private or group practice, often
partners with ophthalmologists.
Podiatrist (DPM)
Role: A podiatrist, also
known as a podiatric physician and
surgeon, is a specialist who deals
with the examination, diagnosis,
treatment, and prevention of
diseases and malfunctions of the
foot, ankle, and related structures
of the leg. The DPM treats,
through medical or surgical
means, different types of foot,
ankle, and lower-leg problems,
including gait disturbances in children
and adults; ankle injuries and fractures among
athletes and others; bunions and hammertoes; and foot ulcers,
abnormal toenails, and skin, soft tissue, and bone abnormalities
in people who have diabetes, circulatory disorders, or other
conditions associated with risk of amputation.
Education: Completion of an undergraduate college
degree; four years of education in a college of podiatric
medicine leading to a Doctor of Podiatric Medicine degree;
and a mandatory three-year, hospital-based residency program.
Following residency, additional optional training may include
completion of a fellowship or other postgraduate training.
Practice Environment: Private or group single specialty,
multispecialty, or orthopedic practice; hospitals and academic
health centers; military and veteran health centers.


26 HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONS
Physicians and Physician Assistants.
Physician Assistants (PA)
Roles: PAs are health care providers who are licensed
to diagnose and treat illness and disease and to prescribe
medication for patients. They work in physician offices,
hospitals and clinics in collaboration with a licensed physician.
PAs work in primary care, sub-specialty care, and surgical
care. The roles of PAs and Advanced Practice Registered
Nurses (APRNs) are very similar (see the APRN section on
page 30), although their educational pathway is different.
In most states, the PA must have a formal working
arrangement with a physician in order to practice.
Education: PAs complete a master’s
degree that includes coursework similar
to that in medical school and clinical
rotations in a variety of areas including
family medicine, internal medicine,
surgery, pediatrics, psychiatry and more.
Undergraduate education in a variety of
science/health disciplines will prepare the
student for the graduate program. Some PA
programs will require the applicant to have
had some experience in a health care setting.
Certification and licensure are required.
Practice settings: Hospital, outpatient
clinics, community health clinics, private practices,
and prisons. Many work in the operating room
assisting in surgical procedures and then follow the patient
during their recovery. PAs may choose to practice in a specific
specialty area (see the list on pages 19-20).


HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONS 27
.Physicians and Physician Assistants
Tools of the Trade
Special tools frequently are needed to examine some parts of the body
that could otherwise not easily be studied, and to obtain certain useful
responses or measurements.
Ophthalmoscope. Used to examine the inside of the eye.
Special mirrors and lenses allow light to enter the
eye through the small pupil and be reflected back
to the eye of the observer, so that the retina can be
seen. This allows inspection of the arteries, veins, and the
optic nerve head of the eye.
Otoscope. Used to examine the ear. It includes a
magnifying lens, a light, and a speculum (a funnel-shaped
tip that is inserted into the ear canal). The instrument
allows easy inspection of the outer ear canal and the
eardrum, as well as some structures or the presence
of fluid behind the semitransparent drum.
Reflex hammer. Used to apply a “pulse” of force
(short quick blow) to a stretched tendon (e.g., in the
knee). This stimulates the central nervous system and
frequently causes a response (e.g., the knee jerk). It is
used to examine the nervous system, as abnormal
reflexes may indicate disease.
Sphygmomanometer. An instrument for measuring blood
pressure. It consists of a cuff with an inflatable
bladder, a rubber bulb for inflating the blad-
der, and a gauge for indicating the pressure.
Repeated measurements allow monitoring
of changes that might require beginning
or modifying therapy.
Stethoscope. An instrument used to concen-
trate and amplify sounds from various parts
of the body so that they can more easily
heard by the listener. It is most frequently
used to listen to the heart, lungs, and
abdomen. Abnormal sounds can be clues
to various problems.


28 HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONS


HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONS 29
.Nursing Professionals
NURSING
PROFESSIONALS
Registered Nurses (RN)
RNs comprise the largest group of health care professionals in
the United States. More than half of all employed registered
nurses work in hospitals, but they are increasingly working in
other settings, especially in ambulatory care settings (such as
physicians’ private practices) and public health or community
health settings (such as health departments).
Roles: These health care professionals are trained to
care for the sick and to promote health. Their focus is on
the patient’s response to a medical condition, not merely the
condition itself; they often act as patient advocates. They take
patients’ medical histories, discuss their health issues, and
check their vital signs. They may perform diagnostic tests;
organize and implement care plans; give patients information
about medical conditions, medical treatments and home
care, and preventive health measures; and treat patients by
administering medications or assisting with other therapies.
They may also offer emotional support and comfort. Registered
nurses may specialize in a particular field and may choose
to obtain additional training to become an advanced practice
registered nurse.
Educational requirements: Two to four years of
training leading to a diploma in nursing, an associate degree in
nursing, or a Bachelor of Science degree in nursing.
The education of registered nurses has changed
considerably in the past 25 years. Previously, the majority
of registered nurses obtained their initial education through
diploma programs, only 10 of which exist today. If you are
interested in becoming a nurse, the preferred route is via a
A nurse may
decide to work in
a particular setting.
For example,
some nurses
choose to work in
a specific part of
a hospital, such
as the emergency
department or an
intensive-care
unit, and some
nurses offer
medical care in
patients’ homes
through home
health care
services.


Nursing Professionals.
bachelor’s degree in nursing. The majority of nurses obtain
education through associate degree or baccalaureate degree
programs. Registered nurses also have the opportunity to
pursue advanced nursing programs. Associate degree programs
take two to three years to complete and are usually offered at
a community college or junior college. Associate degree and
bachelor’s degree programs include classroom instruction and
clinical training, but their curriculums differ. Associate degree
programs include courses in nursing theory and the liberal arts,
and they tend to emphasize training for technical proficiency.
Baccalaureate degree programs usually take four years to
complete and are offered at a college or university. During
the first two years of the program, students receive classroom
instruction emphasizing basic biomedical sciences such as
biology, anatomy, physiology, as well as nutrition, human
development, and psychology. Students also take courses in the
liberal arts. Clinical training generally occurs in the
second half of the program. During these last two
years, students continue to receive classroom as
well as clinical instruction regarding nursing
care of the person with medical, surgical,
or childbearing concerns as well as care of
women, infants and children. Nurses must
pass a national examination to be registered,
be licensed in their state, and in most states
participate in continuing education activities to
maintain their license.
Advanced Practice
Registered Nurses (APRN)
Registered nurses become APRNs
by completing a Master’s (MN)
or Doctorate in Nursing Practice
(DNP). Education includes
advanced pathophysiology,
advanced health assessment,
pharmacology and prescribing,
and clinical experiences doing
physical assessment, and clinical
preceptorships in the specialty
of interest such as pediatrics or


HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONS 31
.Nursing Professionals
gerontology. The coursework is tailored to the specific type
of advanced practice the student wants to complete — Nurse
Practitioner, Certified Nurse Midwife, Clinical Nurse Specialist
or Certified Registered Nurse Anesthetist. They practice in all
kinds of medical specialties and settings both independently
and interdependently under the supervision of physicians
depending on state law. Certification is required in most states,
and licensure is required in all states.
These are the four categories of Advanced Practice
Registered Nurses:
Nurse Practitioner (NP)
This APRN provides either primary or subspecialty care
to a panel of patients. The NP can assess and manage
acute and chronic medical conditions, order and interpret
diagnostic tests, and prescribe medications. Many provide
preventive health care. They may practice independently
of physicians in most states. Some studies report that the
Primary Care Nurse Practitioner can do 80% or more of
those things that a physician might do, including performing
physical examinations, minor procedures, and prescribing


32 HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONS
Nursing Professionals.
medication for their patients. Usually, the NP will choose a
specific population to work with for example, the Pediatric
Nurse Practitioner works with children from infancy through
adolescence; the Geriatric NP works with older adults; a
Psychiatric/Mental Health NP works with those having
behavioral or emotional health problems; a Women’s Health
NP may care for women of all ages related to reproductive
health. If an APRN wants to deliver babies, they would pursue
education as a Certified Nurse Midwife (CNM).
Clinical Nurse Specialist (CNS)
This APRN lends clinical expertise caring for a very specific
patient population focusing on a particular specialty (such as
oncology or psychiatry). In addition to obtaining a graduate
degree, they must be certified in their area of expertise —
such as oncology, psychiatry, or pain management. Obtaining
specialty certification demonstrates an advanced level of
knowledge as well as advanced clinical skills in a niche area of
nursing. They do not work independently, but with a team of
professionals. They are experts in educating other professionals
and patients with complex health problems. One might be
CNS certified in pain management — who consults with the
health care team on best strategies to help a patient’s particular
type of pain and who might work with a health care system
on approaches to assessment of every patient’s pain. The CNS
certified in Endocrinology might work with patients who have
diabetes on a plan of care that will prevent complications. In
some states, but not all, they may also prescribe medication.
Men in Nursing Careers
Historically nursing careers have been primarily filled by
women but now more men are joining this profession.
Currently, about 10% of all nurses are men, up from 3%
in 1984. Men practice in every nurse specialty alongside
of their female counterparts from pediatrics to obstetrics
to geriatrics to sexual assault examiners.
https://nurse.org/articles/Male-Nurses-And-The-
Profession/


HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONS 33
.Nursing Professionals
Certified Nurse-Midwife (CNM)
This APRN, who may be a man or a woman, assists women
in pregnancy and childbirth. He or she provides care and
education to women throughout pregnancy, supervises labor
and delivery, and cares for both the mother and the baby
during the period immediately following childbirth. The
majority of nurse-midwives practice in hospitals or birthing
centers, usually with physician backup in case of complications
or emergencies requiring advanced obstetric care or caesarian
delivery.
Certified Registered Nurse Anesthetist (CRNA).
This APRN cares for patients who require anesthesia for
a procedure or delivery of a baby. The CRNA assesses the
anesthesia needs of a patient, administers anesthetics, and
monitors the patient’s recovery from anesthesia. They usually
work in a hospital or surgical center.
The Need for Nurses
There is a shortage of nurses in the United States. The problem is
serious, as the proportion of nurses available to care for patients affects
the time a nurse can spend with each patient and the quality of care the
nurse can provide. The Bureau of Labor Statistics predicts employment
to increase by 12 % between 2018 and 2028, faster than any other
occupation. As a result of the shortage, employers may offer lucrative
salaries, sign-on bonuses, scheduling flexibility, and opportunities for
advancement and further education. In addition, some state laws and the
federal Nurse Reinvestment Act of 2002 are in place to help employers
attract and retain nurses. For example, some states laws prohibit
mandatory overtime, and some set minimum patient-to-nurse ratios to
help keep nurses from being over-worked. The Nurse Reinvestment Act
provides for financial aid for nursing education and offers special loan
repayment options for nursing students who commit to teach nursing.
https://www.bls.gov/ooh/healthcare/registered-nurses.htm


Nursing Professionals.
Nursing Specialties
Nurses often specialize in specific aspects of care, similar to
those specialties that Physicians and Physician Assistants may
choose. Nurses may specialize in care of patients with a specific
medical condition, or in care of a specific patient population
(children, women, elderly). Nurses work in a variety of settings
within the hospital or outpatient settings.
Work settings for nursing professionals:
Within the hospital:
• Emergency department
• Specialized intensive-care units (cardiac, surgical,
neurosurgical, medical)
• Recovery room (patients recovering from anesthesia)
• General medical or surgical areas — where patients are
stable and recovering, or learning how to manage an acute
or chronic issue before being dismissed from the hospital
• Radiology department — preparing and monitoring
patients during specialized procedures
• Mother/Infant care — assisting women in labor and
delivery of their infants — caring and monitoring mother
and baby after birth


HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONS 35
.Nursing Professionals
In the community:
• Medical offices — providing assessment of patients,
assisting with procedures, coordinating care of patients
with complex health care needs, educating patients
• Home health — visiting patients in their home setting,
providing care and education; supervising home-health
care assistants, providing hospice care (comfort care for
end-of life)
• Public health clinics — providing care to those coming
for a wide variety of services offered in public health
clinics e.g. vaccinations, pregnancy care, care for sexually
transmitted illness and more
• School nurse — providing care to children in the school
setting — monitoring vision, hearing, vaccinations,
providing first aide, administering medication for chronic
conditions such as asthma, or diabetes, teaching students
about healthy lifestyle practices
• Prison nurse — providing assessment, first aid, monitoring
of inmates, assisting with management of acute and
chronic health conditions of inmates


36 HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONS
Nursing Professionals.
In the community:
• Legal consultant — working with attorneys on medical
malpractice cases
• Occupational health — working on-site at a business or
industry/factory
• Informatics — working with computers, electronic health
records and other computer-based aspects of health care
• Teacher — in schools of nursing
• Researcher in a variety of settings to learn more about best
practices in care of patients or conditions
• International health / mission work
Licensed Practical Nurses (LPN) and
Licensed Vocational Nurses (LVN)
LPNs and LVNs represent the other classification of nurses
Roles: Activities might include providing
basic bedside care of the patient,
taking vital signs, wound care, and
administering some medications.
LPNs are under supervision of
RNs or Physicians. Many will
continue their education to
become Registered Nurses.
Educational
requirements: To enter an
LPN program, you need a
high school diploma or GED.
LPN programs usually include
one year of coursework,
providing classroom and clinical
education. One must pass a
national LPN exam and be licensed
in your state. These programs are
found at hospitals, vocational technical
schools, and community colleges.
Practice settings: In contrast to RNs, the majority of
licensed practical/vocational nurses work outside the hospital
in nursing care homes, ambulatory care settings, or through
in-home health care services.


HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONS 37
.Nursing Professionals


38 HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONS
Nursing Professionals.
A Sample “Simple” Patient
These pages contain a sample health visit and medical record for a
patient who appears to have a relatively simple problem—likely the
“common cold.” It is presented to give you a feeling for how a team of
health care professionals might provide care and record the information
obtained during a visit. Obviously, a complicated problem might warrant
more elaborate description, extensive examination, and sophisticated
testing, but the key is to understand how the history, physical exam, and
evidence-based recommendations fit together, providing the family with a
diagnosis and the best approach to treatment is the desired outcome.
The medical assistant leads the teenaged boy and his mom to an
exam room. The medical assistant takes his vital signs and asks him to
take off his shirt and put on an examination gown. She reports to the
provider that the child has had a stuffy nose and fever for two days. The
child and his mom are interviewed by a physician, physician assistant, or
a pediatric nurse practitioner.
History of Present Illness (what has happened so far): The patient
is a 13-year-old boy with a three-day history of nasal congestion, a non-
productive cough (no mucus comes up with the coughing), and fever for
two days. His mother has been giving him over-the counter cough syrup
and decongestant that haven’t helped much. His fever at home was 100ºF.
Acetaminophen (Tylenol) has helped him feel better. Several classmates
have been ill with similar symptoms. The patient did get his influenza
vaccine, and his other vaccinations are up to date.
Past Medical, Family, and Social History: No relevant findings
Medications: Pseudoephedrine, a decongestant, cough syrup, and
acetaminophen for fever
Allergies: Allergic to penicillin (reaction: hives)
Physical examination: Temperature 99.8ºF; pulse 85, respirations 16,
blood pressure 110/65
HEENT (head, ears, eyes, nose, throat):
Ears — tympanic membranes are retracted
Nose — mucosa pink, moist, clear drainage noted
Throat — minimal erythema (redness)
Neck — no palpable lymph nodes
Heart — no murmurs


HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONS 39
.Nursing Professionals
Lungs: Normal breath sounds, no wheezing, no rales (sounds of moisture
in the lung tissue), no evidence of pneumonia
Abdomen: Soft, non-tender
Skin: No rashes
Tests: None are indicated, though the mother wondered about a chest
X-ray. The provider explained that the child’s breath sounds and breathing
effort were normal, so there was no indication of pneumonia or other
lung problem. The provider explained that mucus produced with a cold
drains from the nose down the throat and is an irritant, causing cough.
Diagnosis: Upper respiratory infection (common cold)
Treatment: Provide comfort care, encourage fluids, rest, acetaminophen
every 4-6 hours as needed for fever; and honey or honey-based remedies
for cough. Antibiotics will NOT help the common cold get better
Follow-up: Parents are instructed to call the office if fever persists
beyond the third day, cough becomes worse rather than better, breathing
becomes fast or labored. The nurse gives them a handout about care of
the common cold.
You are probably beginning to see that the job of a
physician is sort of like the job of a detective. Every
cough, sneeze, ache, pain, bump, swelling, redness,
or other abnormality that a patient has, as well as
how long each symptom has been present or how
long it took to develop, is a “clue” in the “mystery”
of diagnosing the patient’s illness. It is therefore
important not to miss anything.


40 HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONS


.Allied Health Professionals
ALLIED HEALTH
PROFESSIONALS
Allied Health Professionals are non-nurse, non-physician health
care professionals.
There are dozens of professionals in these roles — some
of which are listed below. However, there are many, many
more allied health professions. If you’re curious, and with your
parent’s or guardian’s permission, do an Internet search for
“Allied Health Professions”.
Psychologist (PhD of PsyD)
Roles: These professionals specialize in the diagnosis
and treatment of behavioral disorders and mental and
emotional illness. Psychologists may focus on a variety of
areas including: developmental, clinical, health, industrial,
sports, and forensic psychology, in addition to specializing in
the design, implementation and evaluation of research. Some
of the more common disorders that might be treated by a
licensed clinical psychologist include learning
disabilities, substance abuse, depression,
anxiety, and eating disorders. A research
psychologist might work with a team of
scientists on a wide variety of research.
An example is a psychologist who studies
how people learn most efficiently, or one
who helps a research team design a project
to interview people about what kind
of candidate they would
prefer in a presidential
election. In most states,
psychologists do not
prescribe medication,


42 HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONS
.Allied Health Professionals.
but would refer to a psychiatrist or primary care health provider
if medication were deemed necessary.
Education: Education takes about 7 years or more,
depending on whether or not one does a fellowship (extra
training in a specialty area). First, there are four years of
undergraduate study, typically in related fields — psychology,
sociology, anthropology or pre-med — as these majors include
many of the pre-requisites for graduate school. The next step is
completing the PhD or PsyD in graduate school, which is very
competitive. Courses include human growth and development,
cultural bases of behavior, therapeutic communication, courses
on different types of therapy and research design and statistics.
After completing graduate school, the psychologist who wants
to be a therapist will have one to two years of supervised
practice prior to taking a licensing examination that enables the
clinical psychologist to be a therapist.
Practice settings: Hospitals; schools, working with
students; nursing homes; rehabilitation centers; addiction
centers; prisons; private practice; sports teams; businesses;
police departments or FBI as a forensic psychologist; and in
research centers.
Emergency Medical Technician
(EMT)/Paramedic
EMTs and Paramedics work in Emergency Services.
Roles: They are trained to perform immediate lifesaving
measures for treating or stabilizing sick or injured people on the
scene — such as in person’s home, or at the site of an accident.
They learn how to safely transport the sick/injured person to
a higher level of care, such as an emergency room or hospital.
Their level of training determines what specific measures they
are allowed to perform. EMTs and Paramedics may also be
cross-trained as firefighters, park rangers, police officers and
search and rescue professionals.
Education: There are three levels of EMT — education
builds on each level. All require high school graduation /
GED as a pre-requisite. Coursework includes assessment of
the patient’s condition, how to respond to cardiac and injury
emergencies, and those trained at the highest levels learn
how to administer medications, intravenous fluids, and use
specialized equipment to support the patient’s breathing.
Training also includes emergency management and rescue


HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONS 43
techniques. Each level of training
advances what the EMT is allowed
to do for the patient. At each level,
licensing examination is required, and
continuing education is required to
maintain licensure.
• EMT-Basic — must complete
a certificate programs typically
offered at junior colleges or
private providers. Be sure
the program you enroll in is
accredited.
• EMT-Intermediate — additional
training that teaches advanced
techniques such as administering
medications and intravenous
fluids, under a physician’s orders.
• EMT-Paramedic — associate or
bachelor’s degree is required for
the most advanced medical first
responders. One learns techniques
to control bleeding, how to use
more advanced equipment to help
the patient’s breathing, and how
to administer intravenous fluids
and medications.
Practice settings: Emergency
Services Departments; Fire
Departments; Air ambulance transport
services; Emergency Rooms as techs
Medical Assistant
Roles: The Medical Assistants
support nurses and physicians in
direct care of patients as well as with administrative tasks. They
are trained to take vital signs (pulse, respiratory rate, blood
pressure and oxygen saturation) and measurements of the
patient (height and weight). In addition, they will learn how to
manage medical records, patient scheduling, insurance claims
and other administrative tasks. For many Medical Assistants,
this is a starting point to other careers in health care — nursing,
medicine, laboratory techs and others.
Emergency medical technicians learn to
respond to hazardous material situations.
Medical assistants perform a variety of
duties throughout a medical practice.
.Allied Health Professionals


44 HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONS
.Allied Health Professionals.
Education: High school diploma/GED and a certificate
program, often offered at vocational-technical high schools,
junior colleges or independent vocational-technical training
centers. Coursework might include: accounting; anatomy;
clinical and diagnostic procedures; ethics; first aid; insurance
processing; laboratory techniques; medical administration;
medical law; medical terminology; patient relations;
pharmaceutical principles; physiology; and record keeping.
Practice settings: Outpatient clinics, doctors’ offices,
nursing homes, rehabilitation centers, home health


HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONS 45
..Allied Health Professionals
Health care Research —
Discovery and Advancement
Health care professionals, and scientists in related fields (like
microbiology and immunology) also influence the health care through
research. Many advancements in health care have resulted from this type
of research. Some research focuses on learning more about an illness
or medical condition in order to develop ways to prevent, detect, and
treat it. Other research tests treatments, including new drugs, surgical
procedures, and other therapies. Research projects oftentimes will
require many of the various health care professionals identified in this
merit badge pamphlet working together as a team.
Research can take many different forms. For example, researchers
may work in scientific laboratories, analyzing blood or tissue samples.
They may test new drugs and treatments on animals before testing
them in people. Researchers may review information (data) gathered
from patients’ records. They may even use computer programs to model
how a disease develops in the body. In clinical trials, volunteer patients,
known as “subjects”, help researchers test a particular drug or device.
Research must be conducted with special care to protect subjects’
health, safety, and privacy. Regulations set forth by the Federal Drug
Administration for drug trials, regulations of the Office for Human
Research Protection (OHRP), as well as guidelines described by the
National Institutes of Health for research involving human subjects
describe ethical conduct of research. The Health Insurance Portability
and Accountability Act of 1996 protects the privacy of patients’
medical records. Medical research involving human subjects paid for
with any federal government funds or monitored by the Federal Drug
Administration requires approval by an institutional review board.
The person who is going to participate in a research study must give
informed consent prior to beginning their participation. If one wants
to publish research in a medical journal, it is best practice to have the
project approved by a review board.
Results from research studies are shared with others so that they
can learn from and build upon each other’s work. Professional societies,
academic centers, and other organizations publish journals that report
research. They also host conferences and seminars where researchers
can present their work and answer questions about it. Unfortunately,
not all research is high quality. So, health care professionals and
policymakers must view each study with a critical eye. Some medical
journals help filter out lower-quality research by requiring all submitted
research to be peer-reviewed—in other words, others in the same field
read and comment on each research paper. Only research papers that
reach a certain standard of quality are considered for publication as
articles. Even so, each published article must be read carefully before it
can be permitted to influence practice.


46 HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONS
.Allied Health Professionals.
Certified Nursing Assistant (CNA)
Roles: The CNA helps patients with bathing, eating,
and dressing. The CNA might check the patient’s vital signs.
Although the job is similar to that of a MA, the CNA would not
have administrative type of responsibilities, rather only direct
patient care responsibilities. They are under the supervision of
nurses
Education: GED or high school diploma is required.
Completion of a CNA training course provides the information
needed to pass a certification exam. The course will include
how to help the patient with basic activities of daily living and
patient confidentiality. These programs are short — often 6-12
weeks, typically offered at a community junior college or a
medical facility. For many, being a CNA is a first step to other
health care careers.
Practice settings: Nursing home, rehabilitation centers,
hospitals, home health agencies
Occupational Therapist (OT)
Roles: OTs help people of all ages function in their home,
school, or work settings. They care for people who experience
limitations in their abilities to care for themselves or engage
in meaningful life/work activities. They assess the patient’s
home/school/work environment and develop plans to assist
the patient function within those settings. This could include
exercises, adaptive equipment, or adapting the environment.
Common occupational therapy interventions include making
splints to support hand function after injury or illness; working
with speech pathologist to help people who have trouble
with eating, providing special equipment to help people dress
themselves or do other activities of daily living.
Education: Entry-level practice requires a master’s
degree. Courses may include: functional anatomy, neurobiology,
kinesiology (science of movement), therapeutic communication
skills, and fieldwork — where the student works full time in
a particular area of clinical interest. OTs are licensed in the
state where they practice. They also take national certification
examination.


HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONS 47
..Allied Health Professionals
Types of Occupational Therapist Practices:
• Hospital or outpatient care — helping people develop/
recover activities of daily living such as bathing, dressing,
toileting, eating, writing
• Home health — working with infants/toddlers with
disabilities; working with adults recovering from illness/
injury
• Schools — work with children who have physical
disabilities to optimize their ability to participate in school
activities — e.g. help with writing, fine motor activities
Physical Therapist (DPT)
Roles: Physical Therapists are specialists in movement.
They care for people from newborns to the elderly who have
conditions that limit their mobility and may interfere with their
ability to do activities necessary for taking care of themselves or
participating in physical activities that they enjoy. This might be
helping an athlete recover from a knee or ankle injury, a person
recovering from orthopedic surgery, or someone re-learning


48 HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONS
.Allied Health Professionals.
how to use their bodies after a stroke or other brain injury. The
PT assesses the patient’s movement, noting any difficulties with
pain or limitation. Then a treatment plan is developed with the
goal of restoring optimal musculoskeletal function. Treatment
might include exercise, massage or manipulation of muscles
and joints, ultrasound or other techniques. State licensure is
required for Physical Therapists.
Education: There are two routes to becoming a DPT —
the most common is completing bachelor’s degree, and then
completing a three-year Doctor of Physical Therapy program.
Alternatively, there are programs which allow combining
undergraduate and doctoral education in a 3+3 program. After
receiving the DPT, and licensure, a person may continue their
education with a clinical residency or fellowship program in
a specialized area of practice. Specialty certification is also an
option, but not a requirement to practice in a specialty area —
such as pediatrics or sports medicine.
Types of Physical Therapy practice:
• Hospital based — prevent musculoskeletal complications
of illness/ or prolonged bed rest; develop and manage a


HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONS 49
..Allied Health Professionals
plan for acute recovery from illness, stroke, brain, spine, or
musculoskeletal injury
• Home health — visit patients at home to develop and
monitor a plan to promote strength and recovery, and a plan
for injury prevention
• Rehabilitation center or nursing home — develop and
implement plans of care for rehabilitation from illness/injury
• Sports injury care — prevention and rehabilitation of sports
related injuries
Orthotists and Prosthetists
Role: These professionals design, fabricate, and
fit supports or prosthetic body parts to the patient.
The orthotist primarily designs things such as
splints or braces that can be removed, while
the prosthetist designs, fabricates and fits
prosthetic limbs — legs, arms and hands.
Education: Master’s degree in
orthotics/prosthetics is required. Coursework
might include: anatomy and physiology,
neuroscience and neuroanatomy, prosthetics
and orthotics materials, prosthetic
management of upper and lower limbs,
gait pathokinesiology, histology and
research. A one-year residency after
graduation is required, and certification
is required. Some states require licensure.
Practice settings: Hospitals,
rehabilitation clinics or hospitals, private
practice


50 HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONS
.Allied Health Professionals.
Medical Appliance Technician
Roles: These technicians make appliances such as artificial
limbs or braces.
Education: There is no specific college program for this
specialty; rather training is on the job. They most likely would
work under the supervision of an orthotist or prosthetist who
would design the artificial limb, brace or removable splint.
Practice Settings: Hospitals, rehabilitation clinics or
hospitals
Radiologic Technologist and Technician
Role: A Radiologic Technologist is certified and registered
to perform diagnostic imaging examinations. These professionals
perform imaging of patients using a variety of techniques.
They may also provide radiation therapy treatments. They
can specialize in a specific imaging technique such as bone
densitometry, cardiovascular-interventional radiography,
computed tomography, mammography, magnetic resonance
imaging, nuclear medicine, quality management, sonography or
general radiography. Radiologic Technologists work directly with
physicians who are radiologists.
Education: Courses include anatomy, radiologic
techniques, patient positioning, equipment protocols, radiation
physics and radiation safety as well as basic patient care.
Radiologic Technologists require four-year bachelor’s degrees
and Technicians require a two-year associate degree. To practice,
one must pass a national certification examination. To remain
certified, one must earn continuing education credits every year.
Practice settings: Hospitals, clinics and rarely, private
practice offices that have radiology equipment.
Sonographer
Role: Sonographers use specialized equipment using high-
frequency sound waves to generate images of a person’s internal
organs, tissues and blood. A transducer, or probe, is moved over
the area of the body to be studied to obtain the sound wave
images. Sonographers might specialize in obstetrics/gynecology
— taking images of the developing fetus; cardiology — imaging
the heart; and other specialty areas. The sonographer will be
responsible for explaining the procedure to the patient.


HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONS 51
..Allied Health Professionals
Education: There are a number of
routes to becoming eligible for certification as
a sonographer: Technical/certificate programs
are available for students who already have
experience in some area of health care and are interested in
transitioning roles. The preferred route for long-term career
development is via an associate degree program or a bachelor’s
degree program, that include opportunities for training in a
specialty area such as cardiac, breast, obstetric, abdominal and
others. Coursework focuses on anatomy/physiology; sound
wave physics, and clinical opportunities to perform sonogram
examinations of patients. Certification by one of three national
certifying organizations will be helpful. The requirements of
each certifying body are slightly different, but all require an
associate or bachelor’s degree education.
Practice Settings: Sonographers primarily work in
a hospital or outpatient setting. They report directly to the
physician who orders and interprets the results of the imaging
study.
Sonographers create pictures of
babies in mothers’ wombs


52 HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONS
.Allied Health Professionals.
Pharmacist (PharmD)
Role: Responsibilities of the pharmacist include a range
of care for patients. They dispense medications and may assist
in monitoring patient health and progress in order to maximize
their response to the medication. They educate patients on
the use of prescriptions and over-the-counter medications, and
advise physicians, nurses, and other health professionals on
drug prescribing decisions. Pharmacists also provide expertise
about the composition of drugs, including their chemical,
biological, and physical properties and their manufacture and
use. They ensure drug purity and strength and make sure that
drugs do not interact in a harmful way.
Education: Two to four years of pre-pharmacy
undergraduate study plus a three- to four-year graduate
program in Pharmacy. Licensure is required to practice.


HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONS 53
..Allied Health Professionals
Pharmacy Technician
Role: The Pharmacy technician assists and is supervised
by a licensed pharmacist. They may dispense prescription
medication to customers or health professionals. They receive
written prescriptions and confirm their accuracy, and can
measure and package medications, and label prescriptions that
are reviewed by the pharmacist. They may provide a variety of
administrative services within a pharmacy as directed by the
pharmacist.
Education: High school graduation/GED is required
for entrance into a pharmacy technician training program.
These are usually year-long programs — either at an
independent vocational-technical school, or at a junior college.
Coursework might include: mathematical calculations used in
the pharmaceutical industry, recording keeping, medication
dispensing, and health care laws, policies, and regulations
regarding medication. Certification is recommended.
Practice setting Pharmacists and Pharmacy Technicians
• Hospital — participate in decisions on prescriptions for
the hospitalized patient, with particular attention to drug-
drug interaction. Dispense medication and educate patients
regarding their medications
• Retail pharmacy — dispense medication, monitor drug-drug
interaction, educate patient regarding their medication. May
be responsible for administering selected vaccinations such as
influenza (flu) vaccine or pneumonia vaccine.
• Research pharmacist — participate in drug development and
testing, working for pharmaceutical company or a research
center


54 HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONS
.Allied Health Professionals.
Dietician (RD)
Roles: A dietician is an expert in food and in the role of
food to promote health and manage chronic disease. A RD can
assess, diagnose and treat nutritional problems. The RD may
choose to get additional training/certification in specialty areas
such as pediatrics, diabetes care, or kidney disease care.
Education: A bachelor’s degree with courses that include:
food and nutrition science, food service systems management,
sociology, biochemistry, physiology, microbiology and
chemistry. The RD candidate completes supervised practical
courses of instruction in a variety of settings such as: hospital,
school, or food-service business. They must pass a national
registry exam and maintain the registration through continuing
education.
Practice settings:
• Health care facility (hospital, nursing home) — develop
meal plans for patients based on their disease state;
supervise food service system for patients or employees;
patient education regarding special dietary restrictions/
requirements
• School — establish menus for students from preschool to
college aged that meet nutritional requirements for children;
education of children regarding healthy nutrition; supervise
school food kitchens to assure food safety guidelines are
followed
• Public health agency — work with policy makers to
develop, implement and manage programs focusing on
health of the public such as Meals on Wheels, Women,
Infant, and Children Nutrition programs (WIC) and
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program
• Private practice — work with individuals on healthy
nutrition plans for weight loss/gain or for chronic disease
management
• Food industry — research and development of food
products


HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONS 55
..Allied Health Professionals
Medical Laboratory Scientist (MLS)
(formerly known as Medical Technologist, Medical
laboratory scientist or Clinical Laboratory Scientist)
Roles: Medical laboratory Scientists perform testing on
blood and tissue samples to assist in diagnosing disease. They
may specialize in doing very specific type of testing such as
testing for blood diseases or preparing slides of human tissue
for review by a Pathologist (physician who studies human tissue
to diagnose disease). They will communicate results with the
health care team responsible for the patient’s care. The MLS will
train other laboratory technicians. Those with advanced degrees
may become laboratory administrators.
Education: A bachelor’s degree is required. There are
specific MLS four-year college programs, which are the gold
standard for entering this field. Courses would include biology,
chemistry anatomy math and then more complex laboratory
courses. Some college programs offer what is called a 2+2
program — two years of basic science and two years learning
about complex laboratory training with clinical rotations.
Alternatively, one could get a degree in biology or other life
science and get a graduate degree in MLS.
While laboratory
tests are a critical
part of the modern
evaluation of a
patient, they
cannot be relied
upon in isolation.
Knowing how
to order the
appropriate tests,
and to interpret
the results of
these tests, is
an important part
of the science
and “art” of
medical practice.


56 HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONS
.Allied Health Professionals.
Medical Technician
Roles: This is person serves in an entry-level position and
might perform tasks in the laboratory under the supervision of
the Medical Laboratory Scientist.
They might prepare the patient for procedures, do routine
laboratory tests, enter data and prepare equipment. Vocational
training or an associate degree is required. If you’re not sure
you want to be an MLS — this is one way to explore the career
without getting the four-year degree.
Practice settings for MLS and Technicians:
laboratories in a variety of settings such as hospital,
Community health center, Research laboratory, Pharmaceutical
companies, Blood donation center
Histotechnologist
(Histologist)
Roles: The
histotechnologist prepares
tissue obtained during
a biopsy or autopsy for
microscopic examination.
This preparation might
involve special stains
or techniques that must
be very precise. The
histotechnologist will learn
to identify normal versus
abnormal findings on the
slides that they look at. A
pathologist, a physician who
specializes in establishing
diagnoses based on what
is seen on these slides,
works closely with the
histotechnologist
Education: Bachelor’s
degree with coursework that
will likely include: medical
terminology, biology,
chemistry, immunology,
anatomy and physiology. You will learn how to prepare


HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONS 57
..Allied Health Professionals
specimens for microscopy. Certification is highly recommended
and required by most employers.
Practice settings: most often, clinical laboratories in
hospitals or private labs
Cytopathologist
Roles: Cytopathologists study cells under the microscope
— some consider them to be cell detectives. They are trained to
identify normal versus abnormal cells that might indicate pre-
cancer, cancer or infection. They interpret Pap smears — the
test of tissues used to screen for cervical cancer in women.
Education: Bachelor’s degree, or a post-bachelor’s degree
certificate program. Coursework might include math, statistics,
chemistry, and biological sciences, including molecular biology.
Students usually enter the cytopathology program for their
junior and senior years of college. Certification is required.
Practice settings: laboratories in hospitals or private
medical laboratories are the most common settings
Phlebotomist
Role: A phlebotomist is the person who collects blood
samples to be used for testing from people. They will explain
to the person what is being done, they will be very careful
about identifying the person, and putting the correct persons
identifying information on the tube the blood was collected
in. They will practice universal precautions to prevent blood
exposure to themselves or others to avoid the risk of diseases
passed through blood, like hepatitis or HIV.
Education: Training programs are usually a semester
to one year in length. Coursework may include: anatomy and
physiology, blood and cell composition, and blood sampling
procedures. There will be hands on training to learn and
practice the different methods of obtaining blood, including
how to use fingerstick/heelstick methods for people from whom
it is hard to get blood through a vein. Certification is optional,
but highly recommended. Extra training and certification allow
the phlebotomist to work in a blood donation center.
Practice settings: Hospitals, doctor’s offices, community
health centers, outpatient laboratories, blood donation centers.


.Allied Health Professionals.
Audiologist (AudD)
Roles: An audiologist evaluates hearing, processing
disorders (difficulty with decoding things that one hears),
tinnitus (ringing in the ears) and balance disorders. They
work with people of all ages to help prevent disorders and
develop treatment plan to maximize people’s abilities
to hear, process and maintain balance. They use
a variety of technologies to help people with
hearing difficulties such as hearing aids or
cochlear implants. They supervise hearing
screening of newborns.
Education: To become an
audiologist requires a doctoral degree
in audiology. One can begin
these programs after getting a
bachelor’s degree in any field
of interest. Some programs
will allow students to
specialize in a specific area
of audiology practice such
as working with children
or with older adults.
Coursework will include
anatomy and physiology,
the science of amplification,
information about the
acoustics of speech and music
among others. There will be
clinical, hands-on experience.
Most states require audiologists
to be licensed. Certification
(Clinical Competence in
Audiology — CC-A) is
optional but may enhance
one’s ability to find a job.
Practice settings:
Office practices, Ear/
Nose/Throat practices,
Hospitals, Schools, working
with musicians to prevent
hearing loss


HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONS 59
..Allied Health Professionals
Speech and Language Pathologist (SLP)
Roles: Prevent, assess and treat difficulties with speech,
language, communication and swallowing in people of all ages.
One might work with people recovering from strokes, who
have to re-learn speaking, children with autism, children with
difficulty pronouncing certain sounds or with developmental
delays in their speech and language skills and with people who
have difficulty with swallowing safely. SLPs may work with
premature or ill newborns to assess feeding and help them
learn to breastfeed or bottle-feed effectively.
Education: First, one completes a bachelor’s degree in
Communication Science, and then a master’s degree in Speech-
Language Pathology and then a fellowship. One must pass a
national examination in order to be licensed. Certification is
optional, but it enhances one’s professional opportunities.
Practice settings:
• Health care facilities — hospitals, rehabilitation centers,
nursing homes
• Schools — helping children with communication or feeding
challenges
• Private practice — working with people of all ages to
facilitate their communication skills


60 HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONS
..Allied Health Professionals.
Respiratory Therapist (RT)
Roles: A RT assists in
diagnosing lung and breathing
disorders. They interview the
patient, do a chest physical exam,
and always consult with the
patient’s health care provider
to decide on a treatment plan.
They analyze breathing, tissue
and blood to determine what
kind of therapy might be
best. They perform tests
that evaluate a person’s
breathing capacity. They also
administer medications that
are given with an inhaler
or aerosol. They manage
ventilators and artificial
airway devices for people
who cannot breathe on
their own. They educate people about
their chronic lung conditions such as asthma or
cystic fibrosis. They respond to a “code blue” (situation that
occurs when the patient has stopped breathing, or their heart
has stopped) to help the medical team manage a breathing
emergency.
Education: An associate degree may get you started in this
profession, but the preferred and most common pathway is a
four-year bachelor’s degree program is preferred. Courses will
include anatomy and pathophysiology, clinical respiratory care,
procedures, pharmacology, mechanical ventilation, and advanced
respiratory theory. There will be a clinical component to give you
practical experience. All states also require either an entry-level
Certified Respiratory Therapist—CRT credential or advanced-
level Registered Respiratory Therapist—RRT credential through
the National Board for Respiratory Care (NBRC) to qualify for
licensure. Licensure is required in most states.
Practice settings: Hospitals are the most common sites
— in intensive/critical care areas as well as in other areas,
helping to manage the breathing needs / oxygen therapy and
other treatments. Sleep clinic and skilled nursing facility or
rehabilitation center


..Allied Health Professionals
Medical Records Specialist
Role: The medical records specialist is responsible for
organizing either paper or electronic patient records. This job
requires attention to detail in order to appropriately do what is
called “coding.” Coding is assigning a number to the diagnosis
or procedures that were done to the patient, based on the
information in the health provider’s notes on the patient’s record.
These codes then will dictate how much the service provided
cost, and what will be billed to the insurance company or to
the patient. They will consult with the health care provider to
make sure that information in the chart is accurate, and that the
assigned code actually reflects what was done. They must follow
the HIPAA rules (see pages 11-13, which discuss confidentiality)
to ensure confidentiality of the records. If the patient request
records to be sent to another health care provider, a medical
records specialist will oversee that transfer.
Education: High school graduation/GED is needed
for entry level into this field. However, most employers will
be looking for a person with medical records technician
certification. An associate or bachelor’s degree education in
medical coding or health information technology is beneficial to
career advancement. Coursework might include coding systems,
health care reimbursement, anatomy, physiology, medical
terminology and data systems.
Practice settings: hospitals and physician’s office,
community health clinics.


62 HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONS
.Allied Health Professionals.
“Pacemaker” for the Brain
Cardiac pacemakers work to keep the heart beating at a steady, regular
rhythm. This same technology called deep brain stimulation (DBS) has
recently helped neurologists to develop a technique that helps reduce
the frequency of seizures for people who have epilepsy that is not well
controlled with medication. The first to use chronic deep brain stimulation
as a therapy in motor disorders was Natalia Petrovna Bekthereva,
neuroscientist at the Institute of Experimental Medicine and the Academy
of Medical Sciences in Leningrad, in 1963. The first clinical trials of DBS
done to see if it really helps people with epilepsy were completed in 2010.
Research continues to be
done to make sure the
technique really works and
is safe.
Epilepsy is a chronic
condition seen in about
48 people out of 100,000.
The person with epilepsy
experiences unprovoked,
recurrent seizures. A
seizure is a sudden rush
of electrical activity in the
brain. Epilepsy cannot
be cured and is treated
with a number of different
medications. For some people, medications do not stop the occurrence of
seizures, and in some cases, deep brain stimulation may be the solution.
A thin metal electrode is surgically implanted in the brain and
connected to a device—much like a pacemaker—inserted under the skin.
The device delivers an electrical charge to a very specific target in the
brain when it senses the beginning of seizure activity Research studies
show that the delivery of electrical stimulation to certain brain targets can
sometimes stop this electrical hyperactivity, and stop the seizure.
Source: The Cutting Edge: Research in Deep Brain Stimulation for Epilepsy
http://www.epilepsy.com/article/2014/3/cutting-edge-research-deep-brain-stimulation-epilepsy


HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONS 63
..Allied Health Professionals
Biomedical Engineer (BME)
Role: Biomedical engineers are engineers with special
interest/expertise in technology related to health care. They
apply engineering principles and design concepts to medicine
and biology for healthcare purposes. They work to invent new
machines/technologies to help with diagnosis and treatment of
a variety of conditions. There are a number of specialty fields to
think about. One is that of neural engineering — this explores
how the body’s nerves can interact with devices. Another is
tissue engineering — figuring out how to make body parts from
cells grown outside of the body. The lower limb prosthesis
called “blade runners” was developed by biomedical engineers
to enable amputees to continue running, and running very fast!
Education: Entry-level positions require a bachelor’s
degree in biomedical engineering. Coursework focuses on both
engineering principles and material and biological sciences.
Graduate degrees are available for those wanting to pursue a
specialty are of biomedical engineering.
Practice settings: hospital, medical equipment
companies, rehabilitation centers


64 HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONS
Resources.
Resources
Scouting Literature
Animal Science, Dentistry, First Aid,
Personal Fitness, Public Health, Veterinary
Medicine, and Wilderness Survival merit
badge pamphlets
Websites
American Association of Men in Nursing
www.aamn.org
American Association of Pharmacy
Technicians
www.pharmacytechnician.com
American Association of Physician
Assistants
www.aapa.org
American Association of Women in
Medicine
www.amwa-doc.org
American Dietetic Association
www.eatright.org
American Medical Association
www.ama-assn.org
American Nurses’ Association
www.nursingworld.org
American Physical Therapy Association
www.apta.org/PTCareers/RoleofaPT
American Podiatric Medical Association
www.apma.org
American Psychology Association
www.apa.org/index
American Society of Radiologic
Technologists
www.asrt.org/main/careers/careers-in-
radiologic-technology
American Speech-Language-Hearing
Association
www.asha.org
Bureau of Labor Statistics (information
about jobs, job forecasts and more)
www.bls.gov/ooh/healthcare/home.htm
American Society of Cytopathology
cytopathology.org/page/careercytotechnology
ExploreHealthCareers.org
explorehealthcareers.org
Hearing and Speech Careers
hearingandspeechcareers.org
MedAssistantedu.org
www.medassistantedu.org
National Association of Emergency
Medical Technicians
www.naemt.org
Johnson & Johnson Nursing
nursing.jnj.com
Pharmacists Advancing Health Care
www.ashp.org/Pharmacy-Technician/
About-Pharmacy-Technicians/Pharmacy-
Technician-Career-Overview
Top Medical Career
topmedicalcareers.net
National Phlebotomy Association
www.nationalphlebotomy.org
Ultrasound Technician and Sonographer
www.ultrasoundschoolsinfo.com/
ultrasound-technician
With your parent’s permission, visit
the Boy Scouts of America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org, for
a complete listing of all merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful Scouting
materials and supplies.


HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONS 65
.Resources
HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONS 65
Acknowledgments
The Boy Scouts of America thank the
following individuals for their contributions
to this merit badge pamphlet:
Team Leader and Author: Sallie-Page
Goertz, MN, APRN, IBCLC; Pediatric
Nurse Practitioner; Associate Clinical
Professor of Pediatrics (Volunteer); The
University of Kansas Health System
Consultants: Jim Kovarik, PA-C;
Physician Assistant, Department of
Urology, The University of Kansas
Health System; Martha Barnard, PhD,
Chief, Pediatric Behavioral Psychology,
Department of Pediatrics, University of
Kansas School of Medicine; Kenneth K.
Goertz, MD; Pediatric Cardiologist,
Department of Pediatrics; University of
Kansas School of Medicine; Katie
Cannon Koch, BS, RDCS (PE);
Pediatric Cardiac Sonographer;
Technical Director, Pediatric
Echocardiography; The University of
Kansas Health System, Pediatrics; Nate
W. Lay, BS, NREMTP; Chief of
Support, Infirmary at Philmont Scout
Ranch; Cimarron, New Mexico
Photo Credits
All photos from Shutterstock.com except:
Michael Roytek/BSA, page 7
Wikipedia.org/FEMA/Win Henderson,
courtesy—page 43 (emergency workers)
BSA Archives, page 65, 68
Volunteering at a local hospital or nursing home can be rewarding
for you—and those you help.


66 HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONS
Notes.


HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONS 67
.Notes


68 HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONS
.