SEARCH AND RESCUE
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


34016
ISBN 978-0-8395-0014-8
©2023 Boy Scouts of America
2023 Printing FPO
Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Search-And-Rescue or
check Scoutbook for the latest requirements.


SEARCH AND RESCUE 3


4 SEARCH AND RESCUE


SEARCH AND RESCUE 5
Contents
What Is Search and Rescue? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
The World of SAR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
Incident Action Plan and Mission Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
Special SAR Environments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
Be Prepared…Safety First . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
Interviewing and Investigation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
Orientation and Navigation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
Search Tactics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
Specialized SAR Teams . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
Technical Rescues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
Careers in Search and Rescue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89
Search and Rescue Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93





SEARCH AND RESCUE 7
.What Is Search and Rescue?
What Is Search
and Rescue?
Imagine the concern a parent or loved one has when a teenager
is overdue from a hike in the wilderness, a small child is missing
from a crowded playground, a rock climber becomes stranded
on a precarious ledge, or an elderly person wanders away from a
caregiver. These occurrences happen several hundred times each
year and often may require the services of trained search and
rescue (SAR) managers and teams.
While many people are able to self-evacuate from remote
areas thanks to advances in technology such as cell phones,
GPS (Global Positioning System) receivers, and personal locator
devices, people still get injured and lost.
Be aware that earning the Search and Rescue merit
badge will not qualify you as a trained searcher. You
should never attempt a search or rescue on your own.
If you find yourself confronted with a missing person
situation, remain calm and immediately report the
situation to a Scout leader, parent, or responsible adult.
If these people are not immediately available, promptly
call 911 and report the missing person emergency to
the authorities.


8 SEARCH AND RESCUE
What Is Search and Rescue?.
A search and rescue mission is much like solving a classic
mystery. Once a person (called the subject) is reported missing,
law enforcement officials activate search teams. The following
procedure then takes place:
1. An incident commander is appointed to run the search
and rescue operation using what is called the Incident
Command System (ICS).
2. An Incident Action Plan (IAP) is developed to guide the
searchers as they look for the subject.
3. The incident commander and his or her staff decide which
kind of teams to deploy. These could be ground, horse, dog,
ATV, snowmobile, mountain bike, or even aircraft teams.
4. Teams are deployed to search for the subject using a variety
of search and rescue skills.
5. If all goes well, the subject is located and returned to safety.
As you read this pamphlet and work on this merit badge, you will
learn and practice many skills that may someday help save a life!


SEARCH AND RESCUE 9
.What Is Search and Rescue?
What Is a Search?
What Is a Rescue?
A search is an emergency situation requiring
a team of trained searchers to locate a
missing person. The search may be brief
and simple, such as finding that a missing
child is sleeping in the parents’ car, or it
may involve hundreds of searchers and days
of coordinated, well-managed activity.
A rescue is an emergency situation
where a person’s location is known—
perhaps having just been found by
searchers—and he or she must be removed
from danger and returned to safety. This
may involve simply walking the person
along a trail or it may require technical
rescue skills and medical care.
The term search and rescue (SAR) is
used because rescues are often required
after the person is found. Frequently
the same people are trained to do both
functions—search for the subject and then
treat and remove the subject.


10 SEARCH AND RESCUE
What Is Search and Rescue?.
Who Does Search and Rescue?
When a friend, fellow Scout, child, family member, or community
member is missing, we expect that there will be well-trained,
caring people who will search for, possibly rescue, and bring that
person to safety.
Members of search and rescue teams are nearly all volunteers,
although some may be Forest Service, Coast Guard, or fire and
rescue workers, or members of other agencies. Staff members at
Scouting high-adventure bases, including Philmont Scout Ranch,
are also trained in SAR.
There are a number of organizations that play a major role
in search and rescue efforts in the United States and some foreign
countries. The Air Force Rescue Coordination Center serves as the
single agency responsible for coordinating land-based federal SAR
activities in the 48 contiguous states. It also provides assistance in
Mexico and Canada.
Search and rescue is one of the United States Coast Guard’s
oldest missions. Coast Guard SAR response involves multimission
stations, cutters, aircraft, and boats linked by communications
networks. The Coast Guard is the maritime SAR coordinator
and is recognized worldwide as a leader in the field of search
and rescue.
The U.S. Forest Service, national and state parks, Homeland
Security and its Bureau of Customs and Border Protection,
State Department, Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA), National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), Federal
Communications Commission (FCC), Civil Air Patrol (CAP),
and many other agencies are involved in search and rescue.
There is even a national SAR plan available online. Check the
resources section for links to agency websites.


SEARCH AND RESCUE 11
.What Is Search and Rescue?
Trained search and
rescue officials
have skills and
training that help
them determine the
best strategy for
finding lost people.
The National Association for Search and Rescue
(NASAR) is a nonprofit organization that promotes
development and improved coordination among all
SAR resources. NASAR offers training and certification
functions to help teams worldwide be better prepared
to do SAR.
How to Contact a SAR Team
A computer search or a phone call to your local police,
sheriff, or state police office will help you determine the
best SAR team to interview.
The governors of each state decide which state or local
agency has responsibility for search and rescue activities within
their borders. The Mountain Rescue Association (MRA), National
Ski Patrol, dive teams, cave rescue groups, and four-wheel drive
clubs all stand ready to assist with SAR as well.
Here are a few sample questions:
• Who is in charge of the SAR team mission?
• How long does it take to train a search dog?
• What is the best kind of dog for SAR?
• What kind of technology is involved in SAR?
• How old do you have to be to be on a team?
• How often does the team go on a SAR mission?





SEARCH AND RESCUE 13
.The World of SAR
The World of SAR
Search and rescue, much like Scouting, has its own unique
language. In order to understand search and rescue, it is
necessary to know some of the most common terminology
and how SAR operations are structured.
Incident Command System
The Incident Command System (ICS) is a systematic approach
to the management of emergency incidents. Used by fire
departments, emergency medical services, law enforcement
agencies, and search and rescue teams to manage all types of
emergencies, this system is flexible and scalable to all types and
sizes of incidents and events. ICS is the most effective, efficient,
and economical system to manage search and rescue incidents.
History
Wildland firefighters first used
the ICS in the 1970s for the
management of large wildland
fires. In the 1980s, the National
Fire Protection Association began
requiring that the ICS be used
to manage all large fire and
emergency medical incidents.
In 2003, Homeland Security
Presidential Directive 5 (HSPD-5)
mandated that all federal agencies
use ICS to manage all incidents.


14 SEARCH AND RESCUE
The World of SAR.
Key Concepts
The Incident Command System uses five key concepts.
Unity of Command. Unity of command refers to the concept
that each person or resource responding to a scene reports to
only one supervisor. This eliminates the potential for individuals
to receive conflicting orders from multiple supervisors. Unity of
command increases accountability, prevents resources from
working without the knowledge of command, improves the flow
of information, and enhances operational safety. This concept is
fundamental to the ICS chain of command structure.
Common Terminology. In the past, individual agencies or teams
developed their own terminology. This often led to confusion
when groups worked together, as some words or codes had
different meanings for each group. The ICS requires that all
agencies responding to an incident use common terminology
and clear language during radio communications. This means,
for example, responding “Affirmative” rather than “10-4” to
indicate understanding. ICS has an associated glossary of terms
to bring consistency to position titles, resource descriptions,
and organizational structure.
FEMA offers a series of courses for those involved
in emergency planning and response activities.
Introduction to the Incident Command System, or ICS
100, is a foundational course that provides instruction
on the history, organizational structure, and principles
of ICS. This course serves as the basis for more
advanced courses in emergency management.


SEARCH AND RESCUE 15
.The World of SAR
Management by Objective. Incidents are managed by setting
and working toward specific objectives. Objectives should be
as specific as possible, ranked by priority, attainable, and if
possible, given a working time frame. Objectives are accom-
plished by first outlining strategies (general plans of action),
then determining appropriate tactics (how the strategy will be
executed) for the chosen strategy.
Flexible and Modular Organization. ICS is organized so that
it can grow or shrink as the incident dictates. Command is
established from the top down, with the most important
positions, such as incident commander, established first. Only
those positions that are required need to be filled. Most incidents
will require that only a few positions be filled. However, as the
incident grows and more resources are required, more positions
may need to be added.
Span of Control. The concept of manageable span of control
limits the number of resources and responsibilities that are
managed by a single supervisor. The ICS requires that any single
person’s span of control should be from three to seven individuals,
with an optimal number of five but no more than seven. If more
than seven resources are being managed by an individual, the
command structure needs to be expanded by adding new
command positions.
Good management in search and rescue requires
capable people knowing what to do at all levels, each
with a clear picture of the incident command structure.
This is why everyone involved in a search and rescue
operation must have basic knowledge of the Incident
Command System. Everyone must know his or
her position within the overall structure and must
understand the terms and functional titles used. After
all, what good does it do to call a person an incident
commander if no one really knows what that means?


16 SEARCH AND RESCUE
The World of SAR.
Incident Command Positions
The ICS is organized by levels, with the supervisor of each level
holding a specific title.
Incident Commander. The incident commander (IC) provides
overall leadership for the incident response and delegates
authority to others in his or her command. The incident
commander performs all command responsibilities until he or
she assigns people to those positions, establishes the incident
objectives, and directs the development of the Incident Action
Plan (IAP), a set of documents that call for details about the
search and rescue. The incident commander typically has
training and certification, as well as experience in multiple
positions within the ICS.
There are three types of incident command.
• Single incident command—This is the most common type
of incident command. A single individual is designated as
the incident commander and has the sole responsibility for
the incident.
• Unified command—A unified command is often used
for larger incidents when multiple agencies are involved.
A unified command usually has one representative from
each agency involved; these representatives act together as
a single entity for the command.
• Area command—During multiple-incident situations, such
as a large wildland fire or natural disaster, an area command
may be established. The area commanders provide for incident
command at separate locations. In this case, they typically
manage resources and do not establish objectives or develop
IAPs (Incident Action Plans).
Only in very large
and complex
incidents would all
the ICS positions
be staffed. As the
incident scales
down, the ICS
positions will be
eliminated
until there is
only an incident
commander.
A briefing is a meeting in which information is provided
on what to do (the task at hand) or what to expect ahead
of time. A briefing can include all known information
about the subject of a search. A debriefing is a meeting
in which the search team is questioned about its
success or problems or difficulties encountered
during the search.


SEARCH AND RESCUE 17
.The World of SAR
COMMAND STAFF
An Incident Command System enables integrated communication
and planning by establishing a manageable span of control.
An ICS divides an emergency response into five manageable
functions essential for emergency response operations: Command,
Operations, Planning, Logistics, and Finance and Administration.
This chart shows a typical ICS structure.
The command staff consists of the safety officer, public
information officer, and liaison officer. These officers report
directly to the incident commander and may have assistants in
major incidents.
Safety officer—The safety officer monitors the safety of all
responders and bystanders and gives safety messages at planning
meetings and briefings.
Public information officer—The public information officer
(PIO) provides information to the public including media and
government officials.
Liaison officer—A liaison serves as the primary contact for
supporting agencies involved in the incident.
Incident Command System structure
Source: training.fema.gov/emiweb/is/icsresource/assets/reviewmaterials.pdf
OPERATIONS PLANNING LOGISTICS FINANCE AND ADMINISTRATION
COMMAND STAFF
INCIDENT COMMANDER
SAFETY INFORMATION
LIAISON


18 SEARCH AND RESCUE
The World of SAR.
GENERAL STAFF
The general staff is made up of the operations, planning, logistics,
and finance/administration section chiefs.
Operations section chief—The operations section chief is
tasked with determining tactics and supervising resources to
meet the incident objectives.
Planning section chief—The planning section chief is
responsible for collecting, evaluating, and disseminating
incident information; developing and documenting the IAP
(Incident Action Plan); and leading the planning meeting.
Logistics section chief—The logistics section chief provides
facilities, services, and material support for the incident.
Finance/Administration section chief—The finance/
administration section chief is tasked with all administrative
and financial considerations surrounding an incident. This is
the least used section.
The planning
meeting’s main
purpose is to
develop the
Incident Action
Plan for the
next operational
period. Most
planning meetings
last less than
30 minutes.


SEARCH AND RESCUE 19
.The World of SAR
Place Last Seen/Last Known Point
(PLS/LKP)
While these terms are similar, they have slightly different meanings.
The PLS is where someone who can positively identify the subject
actually saw the subject. The LKP could be the same as the PLS, but it may
also be where the subject was known to have been but not necessarily
seen. The suspect’s abandoned vehicle, a log book at a trailhead, a photo
taken at an ATM machine or by a security camera, or some other form of
positive physical evidence can help establish the LKP.





SEARCH AND RESCUE 21
.Incident Action Plan and Mission Objectives
Incident Action Plan and
Mission Objectives
Now that you understand that the Incident Command System is
used in both small and large emergencies, it is necessary to know
why careful planning is done at the very beginning of the mission.
Even as the (IAP) Incident Action Plan is being developed,
it is vital to confirm the confinement or search area and deploy
some quick responses, such as a hasty team.
Search and Rescue Objectives
Search and rescue incidents are usually managed using the
Incident Command System. This system uses a technique called
“management by objectives,” which involves determining your
next action by developing objectives that must be obtainable,
measurable, and flexible. An example objective might be “search
for the missing subject from trailhead to top of ridge.” Would
this objective be obtainable, measurable, and flexible?
Notice that no search resources were part of the objective,
as you might use more than one search resource to complete
this objective, i.e., a ground team and a helicopter. The kinds of
resources used are very rarely identified as part of an objective.
A hasty team is the first team deployed during a search.
Its job is to look quickly and accurately for clues that
may lead team members to the subject. This quick
search is called a hasty search.


22 SEARCH AND RESCUE
Incident Action Plan and Mission Objectives.
A good way to look at an objective is to ask “what do you
want done?” Strategies answer the question “how do you want it
done?” Task assignments answer “who do you want to do it?”
Search resources are used to meet the objectives. There
may be many objectives during a search or rescue incident.
However, even in major disasters there are usually fewer than
10 objectives at any particular time.
Objectives are developed for a specific time period, called
the operational period. Most operational periods are 12 hours
long, though they can be any length that the incident commander
orders. For instance, in the above scenario one objective could be
“check all campgrounds within three miles of the hunting camp
every three hours until subject is located or search incident is
suspended.” This objective covers multiple time periods and
would be an incident-long objective.
The Incident Action Plan
Now that you know what the objectives and operational time
periods are, you can add other tasks and information needed to
manage the next operational period. This plan is referred to as
the Incident Action Plan (IAP).
Incident Action Plan
The IAP consists of eight forms (available at
training.fema.gov/icsresource/icsforms.aspx):
• Incident Objectives (ICS 202) [[12A]]
• Organization Assignment List (ICS 203) [[12B]]
• Assignment List (ICS 204) [[12C]]
• Incident Radio Communications Plan (ICS 205) [[12D]]
• Communications List (ICS 205A) [[12E]]
• Medical Plan (ICS 206) [[12F]]
• Incident Organization Chart (ICS 207) [[12G]]
• Safety Message/Plan (ICS 208) [[12H]


SEARCH AND RESCUE 23
.Incident Action Plan and Mission Objectives
IINNCCIIDDEENNTT OOBBJJEECCTTIIVVEESS ((IICCSS 220022))
1. Incident Name: 2. Operational Period: Date From: Date To:
Time From: Time To:
3. Objective(s):
4. Operational Period Command Emphasis:
General Situational Awareness
5. Site Safety Plan Required? Yes  No 
Approved Site Safety Plan(s) Located at:
6. Incident Action Plan (the items checked below are included in this Incident Action Plan):
 ICS 202  ICS 206 Other Attachments:
 ICS 203  ICS 207 
 ICS 204  ICS 208 
 ICS 205  Map/Chart 
 ICS 205A  Weather Forecast/Tides/Currents 
7. Prepared by: Name: Position/Title: Signature:
8. Approved by Incident Commander: Name: Signature:
ICS 202 IAP Page _____ Date/Time:
OORRGGAANNIIZZAATTIIOONN AASSSSIIGGNNMMEENNTT LLIISSTT ((IICCSS 220033))
1. Incident Name: 2. Operational Period: Date From: Date To:
Time From: Time To:
3. Incident Commander(s) and Command Staff: 7. Operations Section:
IC/UCs Chief
Deputy
Deputy Staging Area
Safety Officer Branch
Public Info. Officer Branch Director
Liaison Officer Deputy
4. Agency/Organization Representatives: Division/Group
Agency/Organization Name Division/Group
Division/Group
Division/Group
Division/Group
Branch
Branch Director
Deputy
5. Planning Section: Division/Group
Chief Division/Group
Deputy Division/Group
Resources Unit Division/Group
Situation Unit Division/Group
Documentation Unit Branch
Demobilization Unit Branch Director
Technical Specialists Deputy
Division/Group
Division/Group
Division/Group
6. Logistics Section: Division/Group
Chief Division/Group
Deputy Air Operations Branch
Support Branch Air Ops Branch Dir.
Director
Supply Unit
Facilities Unit 8. Finance/Administration Section:
Ground Support Unit Chief
Service Branch Deputy
Director Time Unit
Communications Unit Procurement Unit
Medical Unit Comp/Claims Unit
Food Unit Cost Unit
9. Prepared by: Name: Position/Title: Signature:
ICS 203 IAP Page _____ Date/Time:
AASSSSIIGGNNMMEENNTT LLIISSTT ((IICCSS 220044))
1. Incident Name: 2. Operational Period:
Date From: Date To:
Time From: Time To:
4. Operations Personnel: Name Contact Number(s)
Operations Section Chief:
Branch Director:
Division/Group Supervisor:
3.
Branch: 1
Division: 1
Group: 1
Staging Area: 1
5. Resources Assigned:
Resource Identifier Leader
# of
Persons
Contact (e.g., phone, pager, radio
frequency, etc.)
Reporting Location,
Special Equipment and
Supplies, Remarks, Notes,
Information
6. Work Assignments:
7. Special Instructions:
8. Communications (radio and/or phone contact numbers needed for this assignment):
Name/Function Primary Contact: indicate cell, pager, or radio (frequency/system/channel)
/
/
/
/
9. Prepared by: Name: Position/Title: Signature:
ICS 204 IAP Page _____ Date/Time:
IINNCCIIDDEENNTT RRAADDIIOO CCOOMMMMUUNNIICCAATTIIOONNSS PPLLAANN ((IICCSS 220055))
1. Incident Name: 2. Date/Time Prepared:
Date:
Time:
3. Operational Period:
Date From: Date To:
Time From: Time To:
4. Basic Radio Channel Use:
Zone
Grp.
Ch
# Function
Channel
Name/Trunked Radio
System Talkgroup Assignment
RX Freq
N or W
RX
Tone/NAC
TX Freq
N or W
TX
Tone/NAC
Mode
(A, D, or M)
Remarks
5. Special Instructions:
6. Prepared by (Communications Unit Leader): Name: Signature:
ICS 205 IAP Page _____ Date/Time:


24 SEARCH AND RESCUE
Incident Action Plan and Mission Objectives.
COMMUNICATIONS LIST (ICS 205A)
1. Incident Name: 2. Operational Period: Date From: Date To:
Time From: Time To:
3. Basic Local Communications Information:
Incident Assigned Position Name (Alphabetized)
Method(s) of Contact
(phone, pager, cell, etc.)
4. Prepared by: Name: Position/Title: Signature:
ICS 205A IAP Page _____ Date/Time:
MMEEDDIICCAALL PPLLAANN ((IICCSS 220066))
1. Incident Name: 2. Operational Period: Date From: Date To:
Time From: Time To:
3. Medical Aid Stations:
Name Location
Contact
Number(s)/Frequency
Paramedics
on Site?
 Yes  No
 Yes  No
 Yes  No
 Yes  No
 Yes  No
 Yes  No
4. Transportation (indicate air or ground):
Ambulance Service Location
Contact
Number(s)/Frequency Level of Service
 ALS  BLS
 ALS  BLS
 ALS  BLS
 ALS  BLS
5. Hospitals:
Travel Time
Hospital Name
Address,
Latitude & Longitude
if Helipad
Contact
Number(s)/
Frequency Air Ground
Trauma
Center
Burn
Center Helipad
 Yes
Level:_____
 Yes
 No
 Yes
 No
 Yes
Level:_____
 Yes
 No
 Yes
 No
 Yes
Level:_____
 Yes
 No
 Yes
 No
 Yes
Level:_____
 Yes
 No
 Yes
 No
 Yes
Level:_____
 Yes
 No
 Yes
 No
6. Special Medical Emergency Procedures:
 Check box if aviation assets are utilized for rescue. If assets are used, coordinate with Air Operations.
7. Prepared by (Medical Unit Leader): Name: Signature:
8. Approved by (Safety Officer): Name: Signature:
ICS 206 IAP Page _____ Date/Time:
3. Organization Chart
IINNCCIIDDEENNTT OORRGGAANNIIZZAATTIIOONN CCHHAARRTT ((IICCSS 220077))
1. Incident Name: 2. Operational Period: Date From: Date To:
Time From: Time To:
ICS 207 IAP Page ___ 4. Prepared by: Name: Position/Title: Signature: Date/Time:
Safety Officer
Public Information Officer
Liaison Officer
Incident Commander(s)
Operations Section
Chief
Staging Area
Manager
Logistics Section
Chief
Support Branch Dir.
Supply Unit Ldr.
Facilities Unit Ldr.
Ground Spt. Unit Ldr.
Service Branch Dir.
Comms Unit Ldr.
Medical Unit Ldr.
Food Unit Ldr.
Planning Section
Chief
Resources Unit Ldr.
Situation Unit Ldr.
Documentation Unit Ldr.
Demobilization Unit Ldr.
Finance/Admin
Section Chief
Time Unit Ldr.
Procurement Unit Ldr.
Comp./Claims Unit Ldr.
Cost Unit Ldr.
SSAAFFEETTYY MMEESSSSAAGGEE//PPLLAANN ((IICCSS 220088))
1. Incident Name: 2. Operational Period: Date From: Date To:
Time From: Time To:
3. Safety Message/Expanded Safety Message, Safety Plan, Site Safety Plan:
4. Site Safety Plan Required? Yes  No 
Approved Site Safety Plan(s) Located At:
5. Prepared by: Name: Position/Title: Signature:
ICS 208 IAP Page _____ Date/Time:


SEARCH AND RESCUE 25
.Incident Action Plan and Mission Objectives
The IAP may also include an incident map, traffic plan, and
subject information. Other pieces of information that might be
important to document the next operational time period can also
be included.
The ICS planning section is responsible for putting this plan
together. When completed, the plan is presented at a command
and general staff meeting, called the planning meeting. This
meeting is normally held during the middle of the current
operational time period. The purpose of this meeting is to
review the current period objectives and put together a plan
of action for the next operational period. The meeting has an
agenda and is chaired by the planning section chief.
All elements of the IAP are discussed and modified as needed.
The incident commander must approve the plan before it can be
implemented. The key is finding information that could be used to
help develop the IAP and completing the relevant forms. You might
not have enough information to fill out any one form completely,
while some information should be duplicated on every form, i.e.,
name of the SAR incident, next operational time period, date,
and time.
A Note About Practice Scenarios
To fulfill requirement 8, you may use any of the practice
scenarios presented in this pamphlet. If you prefer, your
merit badge counselor might also create one for you.
Search and rescue, like any other skill, is best learned by
practice. For this merit badge, you will not have a real
subject to search for; therefore, you and your patrol or
troop should test the skills you have learned by doing
practice search activities.
Some parts of the IAP might not be needed. For example,
a traffic plan would only be used if you needed to
reroute vehicle traffic to avoid congestion at the SAR
incident base.


26 SEARCH AND RESCUE
Incident Action Plan and Mission Objectives.
Practice Scenario 1
It is noon. You are assigned to the planning section and are asked to
prepare for the planning meeting to be held at 2 p.m. The information
available so far is the following: A Scout from Troop 1792 is missing.
Emily Lopez, age 14, was last seen yesterday about noon when her patrol
stopped for lunch on the Bear Canyon trail at Philmont. She was not
feeling well and thought she had eaten something that upset her stomach.
She has a history of stomach trouble and has medication that controls it;
however, she did not bring it with her yesterday. When found, she may
need medical attention. The closest ambulance is located in Cimarron and
can be contacted at 575-123-4568 if needed.
For this practice scenario, you might use the following.
Objective: Search from campground road to Silver Lake
Strategy: Use a K9 dog team and aircraft
Task Assignment: K9 team 4, Civil Air Patrol (CAP) aircraft
The Scoutmaster, who is a trained incident commander (IC), has
named the search the “Bear Canyon Search” and as IC has put together
the following objectives for today’s search actions.
1. Ensure the safety of all Scouts on the search incident.
2. Search Bear Canyon trail from the place last seen (PLS) to the old
log cabin.
3. Notify all campers at campgrounds within three miles of the PLS of the
missing Scout.
4. Ensure good radio communications cover the entire search area.
The IC, Stephanie Johnson, said she would stay on as the incident
commander during the next operational period. Rhonda Jackson is opera-
tions section chief, Ben Sakamoto is planning section chief, Charlene Greer
will stay with the family as liaison officer, and Bob Real is the logistics chief.


SEARCH AND RESCUE 27
.Incident Action Plan and Mission Objectives
The operations section chief has requested that all searchers in the
field use the local sheriff’s radios on channel 4. Logistics has requested
its section use channel 2. The sheriff’s department has advised the IC that
their radio network will cover the entire search area.
It has been reported that bears may be in the search area. All searchers
should be notified to be alert for signs of bears. Weather in the search area
tonight should be very cold. Temperatures may drop to 25 degrees, and
winds are predicted to be from the north at 15 mph with gusts to 25 mph
until about dawn.
The planning section is preparing posters advising all participants
of the possibility of bears in the search area, as well as the predicted
cold weather.
The operations section chief has requested that K9 team 4 search the
Bear Canyon trail tonight. She will advise the team to be aware of any
signs of bears. The K9 team will need transportation from the log cabin
back to the incident base. She has also requested that one of the sheriff’s
vehicles check all campgrounds within three miles of the PLS every four
hours tonight, as well as interview all campers about the missing Scout
and tell them to call 911 if they see her.





SEARCH AND RESCUE 29
.Special SAR Environments
Special SAR
Environments
When many people think about search and rescue missions, they
typically think of operations occurring in wilderness areas, such
as canyons, forests, and other remote locations. SAR operations,
however, can take place in any environment where people
are missing.
Urban SAR
An urban search involves looking for a subject in a populated area
as opposed to a wilderness setting. In addition to basic SAR princi-
ples, searchers working in an urban environment must also know
how to use equipment suited to the situation, be aware of safety
concerns relating to traffic and other hazards, and understand
subject behavior as it applies to an urban environment.
The subject of an urban search is often a small child or an
elderly person. Someone’s toddler or an Alzheimer’s patient
may have wondered away and be lost and confused. The care
and skill of urban search teams may turn a possible tragedy into
a happy reunion.
Type 1 Urban Search
Urban SAR teams work in cities, suburbs, and even rural areas.
The type 1 urban search is like a hasty search but emphasizes
notification of nearby residents and quick searches of areas open
to the public.
At times a search may originate in an urban area and
quickly move to a less populated neighborhood or even the
wilderness. An example of this might be if the last known point
(LKP) is near the edge of town.


30 SEARCH AND RESCUE
Special SAR Environments.
Searches in urban areas are most effective when conducted
at times when residents are at home and can be alerted. Often
neighbors have information about the subject that can be useful.
Being able to hand out fliers and photos of the subject and
interview neighbors will create a sense of urgency and may
result in a quick find of the subject. Search team leaders might
identify themselves as follows:
When searching a neighborhood, search team members ask
residents if they or any members of their family have seen or
know the subject. They are requested to search their own yards
and outbuildings or other places where a subject may seek shelter
on their property.
Searchers also ask about any known trails or possible places
in the area where the subject could seek shelter. (Children
sometimes know more about trails than adults.) Parks, beaches,
school yards, urban trails, trash bins, and open public buildings
should be quickly searched.
The team scribe or note taker will record information about
who has been contacted and their address, the public areas
that have been checked, and where additional SAR efforts are
needed. If the searchers find the person or something that might
help in the search, they should log the information and then
communicate via phone or radio with the SAR team base.
The teams must always understand that the search
may be related to a crime against the subject such
as abduction.
“Hello. My name is ________. I am with (name of search
organization). We are looking for (subject’s name). Can you
help us?”


SEARCH AND RESCUE 31
.Special SAR Environments
Any areas that present a safety concern or are occupied by a
suspicious person must be searched by law enforcement personnel.
The well-being of team members must always be considered.
Should these search tactics not be successful, a type 2
search is warranted.
Type 2 Urban Search
The type 2 urban search is a system-
atic search of yards and buildings and
all places within the assigned area.
The interview and introduction are
as in a type 1 search except that the
team members will seek permission
to do the search themselves. If a
residence is the LKP, it must be
searched by highly trained searchers.
The landowner or a representative
should be present if at all possible.
This type of SAR is generally used
within one-quarter mile of the
PLS or LKP.
Type 3 Urban Search
Although seldom used, a type 3 search may be necessary in
instances where a very thorough search is needed to cover
an area. This is very similar to how and when SAR would be
conducted in a wilderness setting.
As this search becomes more complicated, be aware that
the incident may be leaning toward the commission of a crime.
Additional personnel who have advanced skills and a positive
mental attitude, are very clue aware, and are able to fully document
their actions in writing will be used.
Areas that are woody, brushy, or have high grass may
have to be grid searched utilizing wilderness tactics.


32 SEARCH AND RESCUE
Special SAR Environments.
Water Rescue
Search and rescue is one of the Coast Guard’s oldest missions.
Preventing and minimizing the loss of life, injury, or property
damage or loss by rendering aid to people in distress in a
maritime environment has always been a Coast Guard priority.
The Coast Guard monitors distress (mayday) signals and
responds on the waters of the Atlantic and Pacific oceans, the
Gulf of Mexico, and several inland waterways.
The Coast Guard responds to a SAR situation using
cutters, small patrol boats, motor surf boats, and aircraft (both
fixed wing and helicopters), all linked by a very high-tech
communications network. The Coast Guard also provides
maritime safety programs, including recreational boating safety
and commercial vessel safety.
On an average
day, the U.S. Coast
Guard responds to
64 SAR cases and
assists 117 people
in distress.
All families should have a list of emergency numbers
posted near their phone. If you live near a large body
of water, you should include the phone number of the
nearest U.S. Coast Guard Rescue Coordination Center.


SEARCH AND RESCUE 33
.Special SAR Environments
Rescue 21
Rescue 21 is the Coast Guard’s advanced command, control, and
direction-finding communications system. It was created to
better locate mariners in distress and to save lives and property
on the water. Rescue 21 harnesses technology to enable the
Coast Guard to execute its search and rescue missions with
greater agility and efficiency.
The state-of-the-art system provides search and rescue radio
communications and supports digital-selective calling (DSC). It
allows boaters with properly installed equipment to transmit an
automated distress signal, including vessel location and other
information, at the
push of a button. It
also features high-
quality audio
recording and
playback to help
watchstanders
(or lookouts)
better understand
distress calls and
monitor multiple
channels
simultaneously.
The system is
operational along
the coasts of the
contiguous United
States; Hawaii;
Puerto Rico; Guam;
the U.S. Virgin
Islands; the
Northern Marianas
Islands of Saipan, Tinian and Rota; in parts of Alaska; and in
much of the Mississippi, Missouri, and Ohio rivers and their
major tributaries.
Rescue 21 helps identify the location of callers via towers
that generate lines of bearing to the source of radio
transmissions, thereby significantly reducing search time.
Rescue 21 extends coverage to a minimum of 20 nautical miles
from the coastline. It improves information sharing and
coordination with the Department of Homeland Security and
Looking up a Rescue 21 radio tower in Cape May, New Jersey.


34 SEARCH AND RESCUE
Special SAR Environments.
Reporting an Emergency to the Coast Guard
By Telephone Look in the front of your telephone directory for an
emergency number listing for the U.S. Coast Guard.
or
Dial 911.
or
Call the nearest U.S. Coast Guard Rescue
Coordination Center listed in the front of most
telephone directories.
By VHF-FM Radio (This is the
preferred method for reporting
emergencies from vessels on
the water.)
Follow this procedure to call the Coast Guard:
1. Make sure the radio is on.
2. Select channel 16 VHF-FM (156.8 MHz).
3. Press and hold the transmit button.
4. Clearly say, “Mayday, mayday, mayday.”
5. Give the name and description of the vessel, the
position or location, the nature of the emergency,
and the number of people on board.
6. Release the transmit button.
7. Wait for 10 seconds. Repeat the call until you
receive a response.
By Cell Phone Look in the front of your telephone directory for an
emergency number listing for the U.S. Coast Guard.
or
Dial 911.
or
Call the nearest U.S. Coast Guard Rescue
Coordination Center listed in the front of most
telephone directories.
By Email If you are in distress or need to report an emergency,
do not send a message via email or text messaging.
Contact the Coast Guard via telephone or radio. You
must have a two-way voice conversation.
By Other Methods There are nationally and internationally accepted
visual and sound distress signals (using flares,
horns, mirrors, flashing lights, and flags).


SEARCH AND RESCUE 35
.Special SAR Environments
other federal, state, and local first responders, and can also help
watchstanders recognize potential hoax calls by identifying
discrepancies between callers’ reported and actual locations.
Rescue 21 meets the safety requirements needed for the
expanding Marine Transportation System and for International
Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea standards. It also
provides modernized command and control capabilities and
improved maritime domain awareness, both critical to the
performance of Coast Guard missions.
Rescue 21 has supported more than 98,000 rescue cases
since November 2005, when the first rescue attributed to the
system occurred off the coast of the Eastern Shore of Virginia.
The U.S. Coast Guard has been a regular participant in National Scout
Jamborees. At the 2013 event, the USCG ran a simulation to show Scouts
how to use wood to plug leaks in a pipe in event of an emergency.


36 SEARCH AND RESCUE
Special SAR Environments.
FLAMES IN A BUCKET
CODE FLAGS NOVEMBER
AND CHARLIE HANDHELD FLARE
OR SMOKE
PARACHUTE WITH
A RED FLARE
Standard Marine Distress Signals
Unofficial but still widely recognized distress symbols include flying an
inverted U.S. flag or waving a red-orange flag of any size.
MORSE CODE SOS SIGNAL
BLACK SQUARE AND BALL
ON ORANGE FIELD
RADIO DISTRESS ALERT
RED METEOR FLARESWAVING ARMS
WATER DYE MARKER
OF ANY COLOR
FOGHORN SOUNDED
CONTINUOUSLY
MAYDAY CALL BY RADIO
SQUARE FLAG AND BALL
SHOTS FIRED IN THE AIR
AT ONE-MINUTE INTERVALS
RADIO BEACON


SEARCH AND RESCUE 37
.Special SAR Environments
Searching in Snow
When people become lost, the environment in which they find
themselves is often a critical factor in their survival. The weather,
along with poor decision-making, often causes problems for both
the searchers and the subject. Some of the most demanding SAR
environments are those in which snow is a factor.
Snow can be a challenging weather condition in which to
perform search and rescue. However, one nice thing about snow
is that often you can visually track a subject, although the tracks
can be lost quickly due to wind and additional snowfall. Among
the many considerations when preparing to search in snow are
proper clothing, additional gear, terrain, and specialized teams
and training.
As when dealing with any challenging search and rescue
situations, be careful to keep yourself safe and know when to stop
and ask for help before you are in over your level of training and
experience. Do not become an additional subject.
When looking for someone who is lost or injured in a snowy environment,
among the primary concerns are hypothermia and other cold- or exposure-
related injuries. In such cases, you need to be almost as aware of your
own health and that of the searchers around you as the subject’s.
Hydration is key, as well as fueling your hard-working body, so you need
to make sure you have plenty of water and food and maybe even a stove
and fuel to prepare some morale-lifting hot food and drinks.


38 SEARCH AND RESCUE
Special SAR Environments.
Only trained personnel should participate in avalanche rescue. To find
an organization in your state that provides such training, search on the
internet for your state’s emergency management agencies.
Avalanche Rescue
Avalanches are one of nature’s most powerful events and can cause
a great deal of damage and loss of life. Avalanches occur when three
variables combine—snowpack, terrain, and weather. Each of these
aspects is important, but avalanches are not hazardous without the
addition of property or people. Avalanche rescue is conducted only by
trained and qualified personnel and never by Scouts.


SEARCH AND RESCUE 39
.Special SAR Environments
Practice Scenario 2
You and your troop are camping out at Oak Flats
campground for the weekend. It is a sunny spring
Saturday and everyone in the troop has been busy
working on skills and merit badge requirements.
Suddenly, a woman looking distraught and worried
approaches your group. She explains to your troop
leader that her 4-year-old daughter, Annie, has
disappeared from their picnic site just across the
campground. She says that Annie was playing with the
family’s dog, and the next thing she knew, her daughter
and the dog were gone. She is asking for help.
Annie is wearing a blue cotton top, red cotton
shorts, and tennis shoes. She is in good health and has
never wandered off before. The surrounding terrain has
a lot of scrub oak trees and bushes, and it is hard for a
short person to pick out landmarks. Your troop leader
says he will call the Forest Service to alert them about
the missing girl and request they start a search and
rescue mission.
He instructs you, as the senior patrol leader, to
have your patrols conduct a hasty search of the area,
including checking all structures in the area. They should
tell other campers they encounter about the missing
girl and give them a description. If anyone finds
her, they should come to your troop’s campsite. He
tells you to instruct the patrol search teams to use
attraction to find Annie by calling out her name and
the dog’s name and then listening for an answer. He
reminds you to be clue aware and to look for her tracks
while searching.
Finally, he tells you to have all search teams return
to the troop campsite in one hour to report their findings
and be ready for a new assignment when the SAR
coordinator arrives.





SEARCH AND RESCUE 41
.Be Prepared…Safety First
Be Prepared…Safety First
Before searchers go into the field, some thought must be given
to their and their fellow team members’ personal safety. It does
the subject no good if the search is delayed because a team
member gets injured.
The physical condition of the searchers and their equipment,
and the suitability of their clothing must be checked by the safety
officer or team leader. There will also be an environmental briefing
describing possible hazards and weather conditions the searchers
are likely to encounter.
Staying Found
For more than a century, Scouting has taught young people
and adults the skills needed to safely enjoy the outdoors. Scouts
who read the Scouts BSA Handbook and Fieldbook and practice
good hiking and camping principles will become proficient
in outdoor skills. As you progress in the earning of this merit
badge, you will learn more about skills that are important
for search and rescue. Here are some pointers to keep from
becoming the subject of a search and rescue.
• Always have a trip plan and share it with your parents.
• Stick to your trip plan.
• Know what the weather is like where you are going and be
aware of how quickly the weather can change.
• Never hike or camp alone; go with your patrol or troop.
• Use the buddy system.
• Have proper gear and clothing and take care of it.
• Log into trailhead log sheets if available.
• Get and stay in top physical condition; be prepared for the
level of activity planned.


42 SEARCH AND RESCUE
Be Prepared…Safety First.
If your plans must change while on an outing, be sure to
alert your parents. Call ahead to your destination if someone is
expecting you.
And finally, discuss safety and good decision making
with all the members of your patrol and troop. Get everyone’s
agreement to be safe and prepared.
After you discover how search and rescue missions for
lost people are reported in your area, discuss the procedure
with your parents. Post the phone number of the local agency
responsible for search and rescue along with other emergency
telephone numbers.
Buddy System
The buddy system is a way for Scouts to look after one
another, especially during outdoor adventures. You keep
track of your buddy, and your buddy keeps track of you.
The buddy system should always be used when a troop
or patrol is hiking, camping, and participating in any
aquatic activities. The chances of a Scout becoming lost
decrease when use of the buddy system is encouraged.
In December 2011, members of PhilSAR (Philmont
Search and Rescue) rescued a family whose vehicle
had become disabled in a blizzard not far from the BSA
high-adventure area. Their SUV was completely buried
in the snow. The family had packed food and water for
their trip and was able to survive for two days trapped
in their vehicle. They called the state police on their cell
phone and gave their approximate location. The PhilSAR
team found the vehicle by using ski poles like avalanche
probes and rescued the occupants as they were getting
low on oxygen. This rescue had a happy ending because
the family was prepared and did the right things to
“stay found.”


SEARCH AND RESCUE 43
.Be Prepared…Safety First
First Aid
Searchers should also be prepared to handle some typical first-aid
situations that may arise, including snakebites, dehydration, shock,
environmental emergencies such as hypothermia or heatstroke,
blisters, and ankle and knee sprains.
Shock
The circulatory system of a person who is injured or under great
stress might not provide enough blood and oxygen to the tissues
of the body. This condition is called shock. Left untreated, it can
be deadly (as organs can begin to fail). A shock victim can have
some, all, or none of the following symptoms:
• Restlessness or irritability
• A feeling of weakness
• Confusion, fear, and dizziness
• Skin that is moist, clammy, cool, and pale
• A quick, weak pulse
• Shallow, rapid, and irregular breathing
• Nausea and vomiting
• Extreme thirst
Serious injuries and sudden illnesses are almost always
accompanied by some degree of shock, but the victim might
not be affected right away. Treat every accident victim for shock
even if no symptoms appear. Prompt first aid may prevent shock
from setting in.
1. Try to eliminate the causes of shock by restoring breathing
and circulation, controlling bleeding, relieving severe pain,
and treating wounds.
2. Summon emergency aid.
3. Monitor the victim closely to make sure the airway stays
open for breathing.
4. If the victim is not already doing so, help him or her lie
down. If you do not suspect back, neck, or head injuries,
or fractures in the hip or leg, raise the feet about 12 inches
to move blood from the legs to the vital organs.
5. Keep the victim warm with blankets, coats, or sleeping bags.


44 SEARCH AND RESCUE
Be Prepared…Safety First.
Blisters
A hot spot—the tender area as a blister starts to form—is a sig-
nal to stop immediately. To treat a hot spot or blister, cover the
pinkish, tender area with a piece of moleskin or
moleskin foam slightly larger than the hot spot.
Use several layers if necessary.
If you must continue your activity even though
you think a small blister will burst, you might want
to drain the fluid. First, wash the skin with soap and
water, then sterilize a pin in the flame of a match.
Prick the blister near its lower edge and press out
the fluid. Keep the wound clean and covered with a sterile bandage
or gel pad and moleskin. Change bandages every day and treat the
area to help keep wounds clean and avoid infection.
Sprains
A sprain occurs when an ankle, wrist, or other joint is bent or
twisted far enough to overstretch the ligaments, the tough bands
that hold joints together. Minor sprains cause only mild discomfort,
but more serious sprains might be temporarily disabling. A
sprained joint will be tender and painful when moved and might
show swelling and discoloration.
Assume that any injury to a joint also may include a bone
fracture. To treat sprains and prevent further injury, have the
victim take any weight off of the injured joint and instruct him
or her not to use the joint. Do not try to move or straighten an
injured limb. Cover any open wounds with a sterile dressing.
Apply ice packs or cold compresses to the affected area for no
more than 20 minutes at a time. Be sure to place a barrier
such as a thin towel between the ice pack and bare skin.
Seek medical treatment if the pain is persistent or severe.
Hypothermia
A hypothermia victim may experience numbness, fatigue, irritability,
slurred speech, uncontrollable shivering, poor judgment or decision
making, and loss of consciousness. Treat a hypothermia victim by
preventing the person from getting colder. After summoning help,
use any or all of the following methods to help bring the body
temperature back up to normal:
• If the person is fully conscious and able to swallow, have him
or her drink warm liquids (soup, fruit juices, water; no caffeine
or alcohol).


SEARCH AND RESCUE 45
.Be Prepared…Safety First
• Move the person into the shelter of a building or a tent.
Remove wet clothing. Get him or her into dry, warm clothes
or wrap the person in blankets, clothing, or anything handy
that could be used, like jackets or a sleeping bag.
• Wrap towels around water bottles filled with warm fluid, then
position the bottles in the armpit and groin areas.
• Monitor the person closely for any change in condition. Do not
rewarm the person too quickly (for instance, by immersing the
person in warm water); doing so can cause an irregular and
dangerous heartbeat.
Dehydration
To treat mild dehydration, drink plenty of water or a sports drink
to replace fluids and minerals. Drink one to two quarts (or liters)
of liquids over two to four hours. See a physician for moderate
dehydration. Severe dehydration requires emergency care; the
victim will need intravenous fluids. Rest for at least 24 hours and
continue drinking fluids. Avoid tiring physical activity. Although
most people begin to feel better within a few hours, it takes about
36 hours to completely restore the fluids lost in dehydration.
Heatstroke
Left untreated, heat exhaustion can develop into heatstroke,
which can lead to death if not treated immediately. In heatstroke,
the body’s cooling system begins to fail
and the person’s core temperature rises to
life-threatening levels (above 105 degrees).
One type of heatstroke develops in young,
healthy people from dehydration and
overexertion in hot weather, especially in
high humidity. Signals of exercise-related
heatstroke can include any signals of heat
exhaustion as well as hot, sweaty, red skin;
confusion; disorientation; and a rapid pulse.
The other type of heatstroke usually
happens in elderly people when the weather
is very hot, especially with high humidity.
The signals are similar to exercise-related
heatstroke except that the skin is hot and dry
because there is no sweating.


46 SEARCH AND RESCUE
Be Prepared…Safety First.
Heatstroke is always a life-threatening condition. Call for
medical assistance immediately. While waiting for medical
personnel to arrive, work to lower the victim’s temperature.
Move the person to an air-conditioned or shady area. Loosen
tight clothing and further cool the victim by fanning and applying
wet towels. Wrap ice packs in a thin towel and place them under
the armpits and against the neck and groin. If the person is able
to drink, give small amounts of cool water.
Snakebites
The bite of a nonvenomous snake causes only minor puncture
wounds and can be treated as such. Scrub the bite with soap
and water, treat with an antiseptic, and cover with a sterile
bandage. However, a venomous snakebite requires special care.
The venomous snakes of North America are pit vipers and
coral snakes. Pit vipers, including rattlesnakes, copperheads,
and cottonmouths, have triangular-shaped heads with pits on
each side in front of their eyes. Signs of a pit viper bite include
puncture marks, pain (perhaps extreme) and swelling (possibly
severe), skin discoloration, nausea and vomiting, shallow
breathing, blurred vision, and shock.
Coral snakes have black noses and are marked with side-
by-side red and yellow bands, separated by bands of black.
They inject a powerful venom that affects the victim’s nervous
system. Signs of a coral snakebite include slowed physical
and mental reactions, sleepiness, nausea, shortness of breath,
convulsions, shock, and coma.
The bite of a venomous snake can cause sharp, burning
pain. The area around the bite might swell and become
discolored; however, a venomous snake does not inject venom
every time it bites. Here are the steps for treating the bite of
venomous snakes.
1. Get medical attention for the victim as soon as possible so
that physicians can neutralize the venom.
2. Remove rings and other jewelry that might cause problems if
the area around the bite swells.
Because snakes
are not
warm-blooded,
they cannot
carry rabies.
Copperhead
Cottonmouth
moccasin
Rattlesnake
Coral snake


SEARCH AND RESCUE 47
.Be Prepared…Safety First
3. If the victim must wait for medical attention to arrive, wash
the wound. If it is a bite of a coral snake, wrap the area
snugly (but comfortably) with an elastic roller bandage.
4. Have the victim lie down and position the bitten part lower
than the rest of the body. Encourage him or her to stay calm.
5. Treat for shock.
Do not make any cuts on or apply suction to the bite, apply
a tourniquet, or use electric shock such as from a car battery.
These methods could cause more harm to the victim or are
not proven to be effective.
Gear and Clothing
Search team members are called out on very short notice, so
having a pack ready to go, called a ready pack, is important.
The kind of clothing and gear a team member must have is
dictated by the climate in the area. Most search teams require
their members to have sufficient clothing and gear to enable
them to stay in the field for at least 24 hours.
For more
information about
first aid, see the
First Aid merit
badge pamphlet
and the Scouts
BSA Handbook
for Boys or
Scouts BSA
Handbook
for Girls.
Clothing
• Sturdy hiking boots
• Sturdy work gloves
• Head cover(s)
• Gloves and/or mittens
• Socks and sock liners (and extras)
• Inner layer of basic underwear* and
long underwear* (bottoms and top)
• Middle layer(s) for warmth (pants*
and shirt*)
• Outer layer for wind and water protection
(bottoms and top with hood)
(Waterproof/breathable clothing
is recommended. Items marked
with an asterisk [*] should be
made of wool or a warm synthetic
fabric. Remember: “Cotton kills.”)


48 SEARCH AND RESCUE
Be Prepared…Safety First.
Fabrics for Outdoor Wear
Wool can keep you warm even when it is damp from
rain. If wool feels scratchy against your skin, wear long
underwear or a T-shirt beneath it.
Cotton is good for warm, dry weather. Once wet,
though, cotton will not keep you warm. That can make it
dangerous to wear on trips when conditions might turn
chilly, rainy, or snowy.
Many synthetic fabrics offer the comfort of cotton
and the warmth of wool. Clothing made of polypro-
pylene, polar fleece, and other modern materials can
insulate you whether it is wet or dry.
When preparing
your gear, be sure
to take into account
the weather,
temperature, and
potential storms.
Gear
• Pack or container to carry/hold the required gear and clothing
• Eye protection (such as sunglasses
or goggles)
• Food for 24 hours (should be high in
caloric content and able to sustain your
energy over a long period of time)
• Water (2 quarts minimum)
• Swiss Army knife or Leatherman
multitool type knife (one that has
several blades and other attachments)
• Fire starter
• Compass with 5 degree accuracy
• Map of search area
• Whistle
• Signal mirror
• List of phone numbers including the number for Incident Base


SEARCH AND RESCUE 49
.Be Prepared…Safety First
• Two light sources (flash-
light and/or headlamp,
plus extra batteries and
replacement bulbs)
• Personal first-aid kit
• Space blanket
• Pencil or pen and waterproof paper
• 20 feet of 1-inch tubular nylon webbing
The following items are optional:
• Tools needed for particular functions such
as navigation, record keeping, marking,
and communication
• Subject find and stabilization supplies, such
as basic first-aid equipment and an extra
space blanket to keep the subject warm;
these can be based on weather and
availability of medical services
• Safety equipment, generally
including an ANSI Class 2 vest
and other equipment required by
command team
Practice Scenario 3
At approximately 9:15 p.m. Sunday, a Scout was
reported missing at summer camp. She was last seen
hiking back to the troop campsite after the Sunday eve-
ning opening campfire. She is a Second Class Scout,
11 years old, and dressed in Scout shorts, a T-shirt, and
tennis shoes. It is her first time at this camp and it is her
first summer camp. The limited information available
makes it extra challenging for SAR officials.





SEARCH AND RESCUE 51
.Interviewing and Investigation
Interviewing and
Investigation
When a person is believed to be missing, it is considered an
emergency, and someone must report it to the proper authorities.
That person is called the reporting party and the lost person is
called the subject of the search. Gathering as much information
as possible, as soon as possible, about the subject is important
for a successful search.
To fulfill requirement 4 for the Search and Rescue merit
badge, you need to find out which agency in your area
has the jurisdiction and responsibility for search and
rescue. This varies from state to state and community to
community, so you will need to do a little investigating
on the internet, but that is also a skill a good searcher
must have. Also, make sure you know the reporting
process in your town and in the area where you will be
hiking or camping.


52 SEARCH AND RESCUE
Interviewing and Investigation.
Interviewing
After a person is reported missing, a police officer or other trained
investigator interviews the reporting party and any other witnesses
who may have some knowledge about the subject. The interviewer
is trying to get an accurate physical description, including type of
clothing the subject was wearing, the equipment he or she may
have had, and the subject’s level of outdoor training and skill. It is
also important to have an idea of the subject’s mental state at the
time he or she went missing.
It is important that the interview be done as carefully as
possible. Remember that it is an interview, not an interrogation.
The subject’s friends or fellow Scouts may harbor feelings of guilt
because their friend is lost. Most often the interviewer will ask
questions of individuals rather than a group because there may
be a strong personality in the group who offers the most—but not
always the correct—information. By interviewing several people,
the interviewer can get a much clearer idea of the circumstances
that caused the subject to go missing. The interviewer will ask
questions calmly so that the information gained can be as
accurate as possible. This helps the incident commander begin
to formulate a search plan or Incident Action Plan (IAP).
If it is determined that a search is necessary, a series of
events unfolds in rapid succession.


SEARCH AND RESCUE 53
.Interviewing and Investigation
A number of forms can be used during the interview to
help the IC and command staff plan the search. These forms
typically ask for the source of information, the reporting party,
the reporting party’s relationship to the subject, how to contact
the reporting party later if he or she leaves the search scene, and
what the reporting party believes happened to the subject.
The interviewer next seeks out basic information about the
subject, including the following:
• The name of the subject
• Address and phone number
• Age and date of birth
• Height and weight
• Physical description including distinguishing marks
• Whether the subject wears glasses or contacts and whether
these have been left behind or lost
• Type, style, and color of all clothing the subject was wearing
when last seen
If the subject left his or her pack or an article of clothing
behind, it might be used as a scent item for a canine search.
This is discussed later in the “Specialized SAR Teams” section.
Finally, the interviewer will ask what the
subject’s plans were. This basic knowledge
helps determine the degree of urgency that
the search must take.
A search manager (the IC)
is then appointed and teams
are activated.
Having a
photograph of the
subject can really
help the search.


54 SEARCH AND RESCUE
Interviewing and Investigation.
Evaluating Search Urgency
Occasionally during a high-adventure backcountry experience
an entire group can go missing. Hikers may have made a wrong
turn at a trail intersection or failed to consult their map. If they
have their gear, food, and water with them, and if weather
conditions are favorable, the group may be considered overdue
rather than missing. They very well may self-evacuate and get
back on their planned itinerary. Searching for such a group
would not hold very high urgency.
On the other hand, a missing young child or elderly person
is an urgent situation.
Factors to be considered in determining search urgency
include the subject’s medical condition, his or her outdoor
experience, the equipment he or she may be carrying, current
weather conditions and the eight-hour forecast, and the terrain
or hazards in the area. Each of these factors is assigned a
number value. The lower the number, the greater the urgency.
See the resources section for links to examples of search
urgency worksheets.


SEARCH AND RESCUE 55
.Interviewing and Investigation
Lost Person Profiles
By analyzing the behavior of previous lost people, it may be pos-
sible to “predict” what subjects in similar situations might do,
where they might go, or where they might be. This will be help-
ful as you complete your IAP (Incident Action Plan) and work
on your clue awareness and tracking.
The analysis of thousands of search and rescue reports
has found that people of certain ages and with certain interests
have some of the same reactions to being lost. This section lists
some examples.
Children Ages 1 to 3 Years
Children this young are unaware of the concept of being lost.
Their navigation skills and sense of direction are almost
nonexistent, and they tend to wander aimlessly. They tend
not to respond to whistles or calls.
These children often seek out a place to lie down and go
to sleep. This could be under thick brush, an overhanging rock,
or a picnic table; inside a car trunk, camper, or building; or
curled up with a pet. Other places to look are nearby bodies
of water. Young children are difficult to detect and rarely walk
out by themselves.
Children Ages 4 to 6 Years
Children this age have a developing concept
of being lost and will attempt to return home
or go to a familiar place. They may panic and
become further lost as they attempt to “find”
themselves. They are more mobile than 1- to
3-year-olds and may also use tracks, trails,
or shortcuts that do not readily appear
well-defined to an adult. These children
sometimes become lost when they follow an
animal or a group of older children. Children
this age are often found in the same places as
children ages 1 to 3.


56 SEARCH AND RESCUE
Interviewing and Investigation.
Children Ages 7 to 12 Years
While children in this age group have more developed navigation
and directional skills than 1- to 6-year-olds, the “mental maps”
they have constructed of their environments may be highly
inaccurate, and they frequently become lost while attempting a
shortcut to a familiar location. They may also become lost during
fantasy play or adventuring, and may become upset or confused
and react irrationally, which can include trail running, putting
them some distance from the PLS/LKP (place last seen/last
known point). They may respond more maturely if they are with
a friend or sibling. While they will attempt to find themselves,
they often lack adult tactics.
To find children this age, check with friends about tracks,
trails, shortcuts, and any “secret” or favorite places, hideouts, or
routes. These children may have followed wildlife into wooded
areas. Other places to search are buildings, parked vehicles,
bodies of water and watercraft, and children’s attractions such
as playgrounds.
Youth Ages 13 to 15 Years
This is the age of many Scouts BSA high-
adventure participants at national and
council bases. Those in this age group have
more highly developed navigation and
directional skills than 7- to 12-year-olds,
and frequently become lost in groups while
engaged in exploring or adventure activity.
They rarely travel far if in a group and
will usually respond to calls and whistles.
Some may try “direction sampling” as they
look for a familiar place. While they will
attempt to find themselves, they often lack
adult tactics and may panic and resort
to irrational tactics. Places to search for
this age group include tracks, trails, and
shortcuts. Check with friends about any
“secret” or favorite places, hideouts, or
routes. Also be sure to search landmarks,
high points, and water features.
Using the buddy system whenever you
are enjoying outdoor activities like hiking
makes it less likely that you will get lost,
because you keep track of each other.


SEARCH AND RESCUE 57
.Interviewing and Investigation
Trained searchers and search managers know the
characteristics of many more categories of lost subjects.
They also know how people who are despondent or
have developmental delays or cognitive disorders may
behave if lost.
Practice Scenario 4
On August 2, a Scout troop from Iowa hiked to the
search and rescue camp at Philmont Scout Ranch as
part of their prearranged itinerary. Because one of
the hiking leaders took a wrong turn, the group lost
valuable daylight and arrived at the camp after sunset.
They pitched their tents, hastily ate dinner, and fell into
their sleeping bags, exhausted.
At 7 a.m. the next day, a group of boys sharing one
of the tents woke up to find that one of them, Tommy,
age 13, was missing. The boys vaguely remembered
that he had left the tent in the middle of the night,
saying he had to go to the latrine. The boys fell back to
sleep but later were awakened slightly when thunder
rumbled and a light rain began to fall.
No one knows exactly what time Tommy left or
what he was wearing, as it was dark, but most of his
gear is in the tent and undisturbed. He had brought a
soft pair of moccasins to wear as camp shoes, and they
are missing. The boys walked to the latrine to look for
Tommy, but there was no sign of him.
Tommy, who is a cross country runner at his school
in Iowa, is known to be afraid of the dark. He has not
been in Scouting very long, and this is his first time
to Philmont.





SEARCH AND RESCUE 59
.Orientation and Navigation
Orientation and
Navigation
Navigating in search and rescue requires the constant determi-
nation of distances, including distances the search team will
travel and has traveled, distances within the search area, and
distances to and from landmarks. The most important tools for
any search and rescue team member are a map, compass, GPS
unit, and the knowledge to use them.
Map and compass are fantastic tools and don’t need batteries,
but you must have a map of the area you are searching. Sometimes
a reporting party will sketch a map of the area, which can be
helpful. GPS units are great, too, as they can be very precise
about your location and can carry lots of maps, but they require
a power source.
So what is the best answer? Use the map, compass, and
GPS unit together.
Maps and Compasses
Several kinds of maps are commonly used in search and rescue.
Online maps are popular but are limited because most portable
computer devices are too small for the maps to be useful. Road
maps, the kind you can pick up at a gas station or convenience
store, are most useful in an urban search. Maps called charts are
used in water-based search and rescue, and are readily available
through nautical supply stores. The type of map that is most often
used in search and rescue, especially in wilderness settings, is a
United States Geological Survey (USGS) or topographic map.
Maps provide a lot of useful information in the margins. If you
are using a map that was not printed by the USGS, double-check
that the scale uses the same distance ruler; this is usually in the
bottom margin. Latitude and longitude and usually the Universal
Transverse Mercator (UTM) grids are along the edges of the map
as well.


60 SEARCH AND RESCUE
Orientation and Navigation.
One of the most important margin notes is called the map datum;
this is a reference to the base of information used to build the map.
Most maps in the United States use North American Datum 1927
(NAD 1927) and the World Geodetic System 1984 (WGS 1984),
which is also used commonly in GPS units. You need to make sure
that the datum is consistent throughout your team and that you
have communicated which you are using to the incident command.
Some additional helpful features include a declination scale
or adjustment of some sort, a sighting mirror, and a clinometer
for measuring slopes or inclines.
Using a map and compass together is a skill any searcher
must have. Maps alone can be useful, as can a compass.
However, their combined use allows searchers or rescuers
to more effectively communicate and navigate with incident
command’s help.
Declination corrections are further discussed in the
Fieldbook chapter on navigation and other sources
listed in the resources section of this pamphlet.


SEARCH AND RESCUE 61
.Orientation and Navigation
Latitude/Longitude and
Universal Transverse Mercator
Something common to all accurate navigation systems is the use
of a method to indicate where you are. Saying “I’m by the house
on the river” is a very imprecise method of orientation in search
and rescue. Instead, the coordinate systems, or grids, most often
used are latitude/longitude (or lat/lon) or Universal Transverse
Mercator (UTM). Each grid type uniquely identifies each point
on a map.
The grid most people are familiar with is lat/lon in which
the world is divided into lines of latitude and lines of longitude.
Latitude lines are parallel to the equator and divided into 90
degrees north and south. Longitude lines run from pole to pole
and are divided into 180 degrees east and west.
More information
about using a map
and compass can
be found in the
Orienteering merit
badge pamphlet,
Scouts BSA
Handbook, and
the Fieldbook.


62 SEARCH AND RESCUE
Orientation and Navigation.
In each case, the full designation is read hemisphere, degrees,
minutes, and seconds. For example, the national office of the
Boy Scouts of America is designated N 32º 53’ 5.8” W 96º 58’
13.7”. Lat/lon is often utilized in air and sea SAR operations and
is understood worldwide.
The grid used in most
nonurban searches is the
UTM grid. In this system,
Earth is divided into 60
zones, each of which is 6
degrees of longitude and
8 degrees of latitude. The
numbers across the top of
the map are eastings and the
numbers along the side of
the map are northings. As
you read a location on a map
using the UTM designation,
you read “right and up.”
In UTM terms, the BSA
national office is located
at 14* 6 89 852m E 36 40
358m N.
Coordinates for the Boy Scouts of America’s national
office in Irving, Texas, are N 32º 53’ 5.8” W 96º 58’ 13.7”.


SEARCH AND RESCUE 63
.Orientation and Navigation
To find a location on a USGS topographic map, you will
need to know whether it is a 7.5-minute map (also known as a
1:24,000 scale or quad map) or a 15-minute map. In most cases,
it will be a 7.5-minute map. Once you have this information, you
can start to estimate the location you want to find. A useful tool
here is the grid tool or a corner ruler, both of which help you
identify a point on the map by overlaying a clear plastic gridded
template or ruler scaled to your map. If you don’t have such a
tool, you can still estimate your location somewhat accurately
because each UTM square represents 1 kilometer by 1 kilometer
and is divided into 10 100-meter segments. Distances are easy to
calculate using UTM because it is accurate to 1 meter.
By starting with a UTM coordinate or an estimated location on
a map, you can estimate your location using lat/lon coordinates by
reading the side and top of the map. This method is approximate
at best. Your two best options are to use a computer or phone
application to convert the coordinates, or to use your GPS unit
and enter the coordinates and switch from UTM to lat/lon and
back as needed.
Why would you need to switch back and forth? In some
instances, the subject may be using lat/lon and has given his or her
location in that format and the search team is working in UTM.
See the
Geocaching merit
badge pamphlet for
more information
about latitude/
longitude and the
UTM system.


64 SEARCH AND RESCUE
Orientation and Navigation.
GPS Units
GPS units have become standard navigation tools around the
world and are very useful in search and rescue. One particularly
useful feature that most units have is a track log that stores your
location at regular, preset intervals while the unit is turned
on. At the end of a search period, the incident base team can
download that information into their computers so that they
know exactly which areas have been searched.
Note that, just like a map and compass, you must master
your GPS unit prior to relying on it in the wilderness. Always
carry the instruction manual with you. GPS units do have
limitations, most notably battery life and “shadowing” of the
satellite signals by trees, tall buildings, or steep hills and cliffs.
They do not work well, or at all, inside buildings, tunnels, caves,
and narrow steep canyons and require a straight line of sight of
most of the sky (as that’s where the GPS satellites are).
Both lat/lon and
UTM methods
are common, and
each has benefits
and shortcomings.
You can practice your GPS and map skills using an online
mapping system such as Google Maps and others. A detailed
topographic map and a Google Earth map used together make
it fun.


SEARCH AND RESCUE 65
.Orientation and Navigation
A GPS unit can be easy to use. One of the easiest
things to do with your GPS unit is to determine your
exact location right now. The
first step is to turn on the unit.
The next step depends on your
individual unit; in many cases the
first screen indicates your current
coordinates, while in other cases
you will need to move through
a menu or two. Your location
will likely be noted in either
lat/lon or UTM. To switch back
and forth between these
systems, you need to change
the coordinate system on the
unit setup screen. It is best
to consult the owner’s
manual for the GPS unit
you are using.
The technical
details of using
GPS units can
be extensive.
If you decide to
purchase and use
one, be sure to
read the owner’s
manual. You can
also refer to the
Geocaching merit
badge pamphlet
or check the
resources section.
Be sure to hold the GPS unit just like you would hold
a regular magnetic compass, level and with the top
of the GPS receiver pointing straight ahead (see the
picture). Otherwise it will think it is going backward.
When the arrow is pointing straight ahead, you are
on the correct track.





SEARCH AND RESCUE 67
.Search Tactics
Search Tactics
Search managers and teams use many tactics but always start by
establishing the search area. This is called confinement, an effort
to establish a search perimeter that encompasses the subject
and beyond which he or she is unlikely to pass without being
detected. Confinement may involve setting up roadblocks or trail
blocks and posting lookouts of individuals in strategic locations
on high ground. Searchers may build track traps and frequently
check for footprints indicating that the subject has moved through
the perimeter.
Barriers made of
string lines, light
sticks, or flagging
tape may lead
the subject to
the searchers.
SAR personnel establish
confinement by plotting on
a map the PLS (place last
seen) or LKP (last known
point) and then drawing
a large circle around that
point to coincide with the
distance an average person
can walk in that terrain
during the time the
person has been missing.
For example, if the subject
has been missing for one hour and the average person walks about 4 mph,
the outside diameter of the circle has to be four miles from the PLS in all
four directions. This theoretical search area is about 50 square miles; after
two hours it is about 200 square miles, and so on. This is why it is important
to establish confinement and get searchers in the field as soon as possible.
Within the circle the planning section chief identifies features such as roads,
trails, streams, or ridges that can be considered natural confinement areas.


68 SEARCH AND RESCUE
Search Tactics.
Where Do You Search First?
As hasty teams are being sent into the field to do quick searches,
the planning section back at the incident base is busy formulat-
ing a more detailed search plan. One important task they will do
is determine the probability of area.
There is also a way to determine the probability or chance
that the searchers would have found the subject or clues relating
to the subject had the subject or clue been in the area searched.
This is called probability of detection (POD). POD is usually
expressed as a percentage value, i.e., “we searched our assigned
area with a 50 percent POD.” Many factors have to be considered,
such as the terrain, weather conditions, experience level of the
team, critical separation, and even past searches in the same area.
In a wilderness setting, achieving a 100 percent POD is next
to impossible, but the goal is to always search—and sometime
re-search—all areas of high probability until a POD of at least
85 percent to 95 percent is reached.
The probability of area (POA) is the probability that the
subject or clues leading to the subject are in a specific
area. This is based on the terrain, time of day, subject,
details of the subject’s disappearance, and other factors.
Teams use this information to decide where the subject
is most likely to be and search those areas.


SEARCH AND RESCUE 69
.Search Tactics
Determining Search Tactics
Search tactics are categorized as passive, where you make the
subject come to you, and active, where you go find the subject.
An active search is carried out by teams in the field in a deliberate
attempt to find the subject or clues left by the subject.
A passive tactic that is often effective is an attracting
lookout. A two-person team is sent to a high location to try
to spot the subject’s campfire or tent, or another sign that the
subject may be in the area. The team may build a campfire or
use strobe lights, whistles, air horns, sirens, or other signals in
the hope that the subject will respond.
Information gathered during the interview and investigation
phase of the search will dictate the first response. The subject
may have shared his or her plan to hike to a certain place along
a certain trail. An appropriate search method might be a trail
sweep by a hasty team. Teams are sent out to search a subject’s
suspected travel route, a trail, a ridgeline, a creek bottom, or a
forest road. Searchers must look very carefully close in and far
out. They must look on both sides of the trail to detect whether
the subject left the trail. Team members should walk beside the
trail so as to not disturb any footprints that may be the subject’s.
If the PLS is known but the direction the subject went is
unknown, a quick perimeter search is done. This is also a tactic
for sign cutting, or looking for clues that will help searchers
find the subject’s trail. Another fast, systematic search is where
a team of five to six members checks a larger area such as a
canyon, valley, or ridgeline using fairly wide spacing and good
critical separation between searchers.


70 SEARCH AND RESCUE
Search Tactics.
During this type of search, team members do not walk in a
straight line. Instead they wander around in a purposeful manner,
stopping often to look around and check behind trees, boulders,
and other objects. This is known as purposeful wandering. This
is an important tactic, as it forces the searchers to stay focused
and attentive so they don’t walk right by the subject if he or she
is unresponsive.
If these tactics yield no results, a highly systematic search
using very close spacing and more team members (six to 12)
may be ordered by the IC (incident commander). This search
is often done in an area of high probability if the subject is
expected to be immobile or where a valid clue has been found.
Critical Separation
How far team members are spaced apart and still able to search effectively
is called critical separation. Here is how it works.
1. Place an object on the ground that bears some relation to the size of the
subject being sought. For example, a backpack standing upright may
be about the size of a small child. The vegetation and terrain should be
similar to that in the area being searched.
2. The team walks around the object so that it is kept in view. The distance
between two opposite searchers is the critical separation.
3. To make sure the distances are correct, after making the initial estimate,
turn 90 degrees to the object and scan as if you are searching. If you can
no longer see the object, you may have to adjust your critical separation.
More clues will be
found than belong
to your subject.


SEARCH AND RESCUE 71
.Search Tactics
Sound Sweeps
A very effective tactic that is often done at Philmont is a
sound sweep. This tactic can often help locate a subject quickly.
To conduct a sound sweep, each searcher must have a radio
and a whistle. They space themselves along the search area
boundary at a distance of 500 to 600 feet, depending, of course,
on the terrain and how far sound may travel. As they enter
the search area, the team leader or incident base may transmit
“whistle blast in five seconds” and then count down “5-4-3-2-1.”
All searchers blow their whistles simultaneously and then listen
for a response from the subject. A modified tactic would be for
the searchers, spaced closer, to call out the subject’s name.
Searching at Night
Night searches are very difficult and present added hazards. They
should only be done after the command staff takes into account
the search urgency, the best tactics to be used, the probability of
success, and the safety of the searchers.
People are often reported missing late in the day after friends
or relatives have spent considerable time looking for the lost person
with no success. Therefore, getting a rapid-response team into
the field as quickly as possible to effectively use the last hours
of daylight is crucial.
Advantages and Disadvantages
of Night Searches
Some advantages of night searches are that dogs work better at night,
tracks show up better when illuminated by flashlights, footprints do not
dry up as quickly, human voices carry farther, and subjects usually hole up
rather than travel at night.
A major disadvantage to night searches is that searchers have an
increased risk of accidents because of the darkness. Other disadvantages
include that it is more difficult to transport a subject if found, clues may
be destroyed or missing, lights hamper searchers’ night vision, and it is
difficult for the team leader to see and guide team members. Additionally,
the same area may have to be searched again in daylight.


72 SEARCH AND RESCUE
Search Tactics.
Becoming Clue Aware
Scouts take pride in using Leave No Trace principles; however, it is
almost impossible to be in the woods without leaving behind some
evidence. Clues often are very subtle, and searchers need to be
extremely vigilant to find them and determine their importance.
A simple footprint, a dropped article of clothing, or disturbed
vegetation might just be the clue that leads searchers to the
subject. It is more likely that a series of found clues will lead to
the subject. Remember, there are many more clues out there
than there are subjects.
Clues can be categorized into six broad areas:
• Physical —The subject’s vehicle, lost or discarded items, footprints, scent
• People—Witnesses, family, friends
• Recorded—Trail register, summit log, trip plan, photo at an ATM
• Event—A light, campfire, signal, human voice
• Investigative—Information, often subtle, generated by
investigative techniques
• Analytical—Probability calculations, lost subject behavior statistics,
subject’s personality profile, terrain analyses (such as identifying travel
aids and barriers)


SEARCH AND RESCUE 73
.Search Tactics
Some clues last
longer than
others. A footprint
may be blown
away by the wind
or washed away
by rain in just
minutes; a plastic
wrapper may last
up to 30 years.
Practicing SAR Skills
An excellent SAR practice drill is one in which the IC
(incident commander) writes a scenario and completes
a lost person questionnaire, then scatters sample clues
over a one- to two-acre area. Teams are briefed, using
the scenario and interviewer, and then sent into the field
to see how many clues they can find. Some clues will
tie directly to the subject and must be considered valid
clues, some will be bogus, and others are “unknown,”
meaning they may or may not relate to the subject. The
team marks the location of the clue on a map and radios
it in to the incident base where the clue is logged on a
clue log sheet.
At the end of the practice, the IC debriefs the teams,
and each discovered clue is discussed. The team decides
whether each clue is real, bogus, or unknown. The IC
who planned the activity will then inform the team
about the validity of each clue.
Finding a clue known to be left by the subject
will often change the action plan and search
tactics. Searchers must always be “clue aware”
and should mark and record all clues. Teams
should radio or phone the type of clue and
its location to the incident base and make
every attempt to preserve the clue without
disturbing it. Clue locations should be
precisely documented and surrounded
with surveyors tape. As a Scout, you have
learned to be observant of the things around
you. These same skills apply to SAR as team
members become clue aware.





SEARCH AND RESCUE 75
.Specialized SAR Teams
Specialized SAR Teams
Now that you understand how searches and rescues are reported,
who is in charge of them, something about the behavior of missing
persons, who does the actual searching and some tactics they use,
it is time to learn about some specialized teams and how they save
lives in the woods and cities where their skills are used.
Search and Rescue Dogs
Search and rescue dogs are a valuable resource on a search
mission. They can search large areas efficiently and determine
which direction the subject went from where he or she was last
known to be. SAR dogs work together with other SAR teams and
can play a key role in the overall effort to find a lost person.
Search dogs tend to love socializing with people and other
dogs. They are confident and not easily scared by sights or
sounds. They have energy, stamina, agility, and are physically
sound. SAR dogs almost always have a high drive for toys and
food. Breeds well-suited for SAR include those from working
dog bloodlines such as retrievers, herding dogs, hounds, and
German shepherds.
Drive is the dog’s strong desire to persist in
certain behavior. Dogs are born with traits for
drive that will develop as they mature, but dogs
with high drive will show these traits as early as
six weeks of age. These drive traits determine the
dog’s basic personality, so drive is only mildly
influenced by training. A high toy drive dog, for
example, may be obsessed by a ball, constantly
pestering nearby humans to play a game of fetch
or tug of war. Most SAR dog handlers use toys or
food as rewards, so the dog needs to have a high
interest in those things.


76 SEARCH AND RESCUE
Specialized SAR Teams.
What Is Scent?
Humans constantly shed dead skin cells known as rafts, which are dis-
carded from the body at a rate of about 40,000 skin cells per minute. Each
raft carries bacteria and vapor representing the unique, individual scent of
the person. Rafts fall all over our clothes, bedding, home, and car interiors,
as well as outside. They are picked up and carried by wind currents, drift to
the ground, and stick to vegetation. They combine with the smell of crushed
vegetation along a person’s traveled path.
Scent eventually dies as it dehydrates, so
moist, humid conditions help preserve scent
longer. (Scent can, however, be washed away
by torrential rain.) If there is no wind, the
scent drops off the body and lands nearby.
If wind is present, the scent is dispersed
downwind in a cone-like shape that is narrow
at first but widens as the distance from the
body grows. This is called a scent cone. The
scent then catches on downwind vegetation,
fences, and buildings.
Terrain features, vegetation, and wind
conditions determine the path of scent
dispersal. Heavy brush, light brush, woods,
drainages, and slopes all affect scent
differently. Over time, scent can travel and
collect in areas far away from where the person actually walked. This
creates an interesting, yet puzzling, “scent picture” for both the dog and
handler to figure out.
WIND
DIRECTION
RAFT
VAPOR
BACTERIA
DEAD
SKIN
CELLS


SEARCH AND RESCUE 77
.Specialized SAR Teams
Dogs make good searchers because they are incredible
athletes and have such a good sense of smell. However, they
tend to overheat easily, cooling themselves by panting. Drinking
water helps dogs cool off, so handlers have to carry a lot of
water. The SAR dog’s training sessions and missions are usually
scheduled in the cool of the day. Dogs detect scent mostly
through their noses, so if they are having to mouth breathe
(pant), they are less effective. Dogs use all of their senses to
search, but their sense of smell is the strongest.
Dogs can be taught any of several ways to search, including
area air scent, trailing, and disaster. Before responding to missions,
the dog and its handler should have an active training schedule
and current certification to qualify for SAR deployment. Most
dog teams are affiliated with and deployed by their local state or
county law enforcement organizations. Incident base staff must
be familiar with the various search dog disciplines to give each
dog team an appropriate search assignment. Each field-assigned
dog team consists of a dog, handler, and at least one field support
person who may also act as a navigator. As with all searchers, the
handler must be fully prepared with appropriate equipment for
the assignment, as well as extra water and food for the dog.
Area Air Scent Dogs
Area air scent dogs are worked off leash and usually wear a bell
and glow stick at night, as well as an ID vest. They move away
from their handler in search of the subject’s scent on air currents
and frequently return to keep track of their handler. The bell
allows the handler to hear the dog moving about. The glow stick
allows the handler to see the dog at night.
A typical search assignment for an air scent dog is to clear an
area of land that is defined by natural borders, such as a stream
or road. The area borders could also be defined by navigational
markers such as latitude/longitude or UTM coordinates. This
type of area-specific search assignment is also commonly given
to ground search teams.
The handler is the team leader and must have a plan in mind
to approach the search assignment. This search plan is determined
by the terrain of the area, vegetation, and wind direction. The
search area may dictate that the most efficient way to cover the
area for a high probability of detection is to search in a back-and-
forth pattern, called a grid search. In some cases, the topography
may dictate that the search is best accomplished by following
a ridgeline or searching a canyon floor.
Additional dog
gear may also be
required depending
on the search
conditions; this
could include a dog
first-aid kit, booties,
and a cooling or
warming dog coat.


78 SEARCH AND RESCUE
Specialized SAR Teams.
An effective air scent dog responds to voice and/or visual
directions from the handler and can be sent into specific areas.
This way, the dog can cover areas that the handler may not be
able to easily access. In ideal conditions, consistent wind direc-
tion and speed conditions can cause scent to travel long distances.
This allows the dog to “clear” certain areas even though it may
not have physically gone into the area. Air scent dog teams can
also provide a hasty search along a hiking trail and adjacent area.
An air scent dog checks for scent mainly by keeping its head
up and checking the wind. The dog needs to be downwind of the
subject in order to detect him or her, and it is the handler’s job
to work the dog in a pattern that will achieve this. The handler
watches the dog for changes in body language that indicate scent
has been detected and modifies the search plan accordingly. GPS
waypoints are often marked at areas of interest.
When the dog finds someone, it performs an alert (a trained
behavior) that lets the handler know it has made a “find.”
Examples of an alert are for the dog to stay and bark at the subject,
or for the dog to return to the handler and bark or jump on the
handler, then return again to the subject (called a “recall/refind
alert”). The type of alert the dog uses is determined by what comes
naturally to the dog and what the handler teaches it to do.
Think of area air
scent dogs as
ground searchers
with four legs
and an excellent
sense of smell.
Ginny, a Dutch shepherd, is the first SAR dog ever trained
to assist with both surface and underground mine rescues.


SEARCH AND RESCUE 79
.Specialized SAR Teams
Usually area air scent dogs are not scent specific, which means
that they will find any person in the area, not just the subject of
the search. They may occasionally find other searchers in the area,
hikers, or bystanders. When this happens, the handler rewards the
dog and tells it to continue to search. If the dog has been trained
to be scent specific, a scent item of the subject’s will be required.
(See the following section for an explanation of scent items.)
Area air scent dogs work best on a mission where a trail or
area needs to be searched, in moderate to cool temperatures, with
light to moderate steady breezes. They work quickly and are good
for night searches and searches involving nonresponsive subjects.
Trailing Dogs
Trailing dogs usually work on a long leash and harness, but
occasionally work off leash. The handler starts the search where
the subject was last seen, using a scent item from the subject,
and the dog follows the general trail of scent that the subject left
behind. Trailing dogs are scent specific, which means they
search specifically for the subject and ignore other scents that
may be in the area. Bloodhounds have traditionally been used
to trail, but many breeds can be used.
A scent item is an article of clothing or another object that
belonged solely to the subject and therefore is saturated with his
or her scent. It should not be freshly cleaned or laundered, or
have been directly touched by another person. It is given to the
dog to sniff at the beginning of the search assignment so that the
dog knows who it is searching for.
Collecting a Scent Item
Scent items must be collected in a way that
prevents the item from being contaminated
by anyone else’s scent. This is accomplished
by using a one-gallon resealable plastic bag
to collect the item. With the bag inside out,
collect the item, then pull the bag over it. You
could also use a stick or coat hanger to place
the item in the bag. Scent items are collected
by trained incident base staff or a dog handler.


80 SEARCH AND RESCUE
Specialized SAR Teams.
An appropriate search assignment for a trailing dog is to
start at the place the subject was last known to be or to start
at a footprint positively identified as belonging to the subject.
Trailing dogs can also be used to cut track, which is to sweep
through an area hoping to cross the subject’s path. Once the dog
has been given the scent item or footprint to smell and is on the
scent trail, it can determine the direction of travel of the subject
and will follow the scent path wherever it goes. Trailing dogs
usually work with their noses close to the ground, unlike area
air scent dogs, which hold their heads higher when working.
The dog generally follows the scent on the ground, rather
than on the air currents. It may follow the actual footprint track
or may parallel the track, depending on how the scent may have
drifted since the subject passed through the area. As the scent
trail ages, there is less scent available for the dog to detect due
to dehydration of the subject’s skin rafts.
Trailing dogs are scent specific, and a scent item or positively
identified footprint are required. A nonresponsive subject and
nighttime searching conditions do not pose a problem. These
dogs are best utilized when the place the subject was last seen
is known, so they can determine the direction of travel. Because
scent dehydrates and deteriorates with time, it is best to deploy
the trailing dog as soon as possible. They are most effective with
calm wind conditions, light moisture, and cool temperatures.
Disaster Dogs
Disaster dogs are used to search areas of
natural or human-made disasters, such
as earthquakes, hurricanes, or destruction
from terrorist activities, to find trapped
subjects in piles of debris. Many of these
dogs were deployed in the aftermath of the
September 11, 2001, disaster. Most of these
dog/handler teams are part of the FEMA
Urban Search and Rescue system or belong
to state teams that are similarly structured.
They are certified by and deploy with their
rescue teams based on directives from the
federal or state government.
Searching for a
lost person is like
putting together a
puzzle based on
many clues. These
include information
from onlookers
and friends of
the subject, the
dynamics of the
situation, and alerts
or indications
of interest from
dog teams.


SEARCH AND RESCUE 81
.Specialized SAR Teams
Dogs trained to deploy to disaster situations must have
all the qualities of previously described search dogs and must
also be acclimated to stressful conditions. They must remain
focused and not be distracted or stressed by their unusual search
environments, which commonly include noisy generators,
unnatural lighting, collapsed buildings, and large piles of debris
with unstable footing. Many strong odors are present in a disaster
setting, and the dogs work intensely. For this reason, they are
worked for short periods such as 30 to 60 minutes, then rested
and rehydrated before working another session.
Disaster dogs are trained to search in the same way as area
air scent dogs. They are used off leash but without ID vest or collar
to prevent entrapment by debris. They search areas of rubble and
destruction, moving quickly to search and clear the area. The dogs
are carefully trained in obedience and will search areas as directed
by the handler from a distance. The required alert of the disaster
dog is a “stay and bark” at the spot where live human scent is
detected. While humans can search the rubble and call out to
trapped subjects, the dogs are especially adept at quickly detecting
those who are alive but nonresponsive. When a dog alerts, the
handler approaches the dog and marks the spot with GPS
waypoints and flagging tape. Rescue personnel are then brought
in to the area to find and rescue the trapped subject.
Search Teams
There are many kinds of teams
that work in SAR. Ground teams
and dog teams search on foot,
while other teams search from
horseback, ATVs, mountain bikes,
or aircraft. There are also dive
teams that search underwater;
emergency locator transmitter
(ELT) teams whose responsibility
is to home in on a radio signal
from a downed aircraft; and
SAR support teams that provide
communications support, radio
relay stations, and food for
hungry searchers.





SEARCH AND RESCUE 83
.Technical Rescues
Technical Rescues
Rescue as a part of search and rescue can occur in one of two
situations. The first and most common is that a person in the
wilderness or another remote area is injured or incapacitated such
that evacuation to a hospital for further medical care is required.
The second situation is that a person who has become lost or
disoriented in a suburban or wilderness setting becomes the object
of a search mission and, once located, requires evacuation for
medical treatment. Rescue missions tend to be shorter in length
than search operations but are much more focused and intense
events that require good planning, quick decision making, and
directed effort with the right resources to evacuate the subject.
During the initial report of an incident requiring the rescue
of a subject, information is often sketchy and incomplete. This
forces the incident commander to assess probable scenarios and
then make a plan to execute using resources that will evacuate
the patient in the most efficient and safe manner possible.
Rescues should follow a procedure known as LAST:
L = Locate
A = Access
S = Stabilize
T = Transport
Locate the site of the emergency, safely Access the
patient, medically Stabilize the patient, and safely
Transport the patient out of the situation. Following this
simple principle helps to quickly prioritize what needs
to be done to accomplish the successful evacuation of
a patient.


84 SEARCH AND RESCUE
Technical Rescues.
The patient’s medical condition needs to be determined as
soon as possible to dictate the urgency and resources needed
to evacuate him or her in a prompt and safe manner. Patients
are classified by applying a trauma classification system to their
symptoms. Rescuers must have a high level of training (EMT or
above) to be able to apply this system.
Dispatch as soon as possible a hasty medical team, which is a
quick response team made up mostly of medical personnel. There
should be a minimum of two medically qualified personnel (EMT,
paramedic, physician’s assistant, medical doctor) to assess and
stabilize the patient and report back to the operations section their
evaluation of the patient’s condition and their recommendation
for manner of evacuation. It is essential that the medical hasty
team have good communications with incident base to keep the
operations section advised of the mission’s progress. In certain
situations, it is also necessary for the hasty medical team to have
rope access and rescue capabilities, as many injured parties are in
vertical terrain.
Helicopter Rescue
Critically injured patients may require immediate evacuation
via helicopter. Once the operations section has determined
the appropriate means of evacuation and has weighed the risk
versus benefit of using air resources, the operations section
requests the IC (incident commander) to call for launch of the
aircraft. A general rule of thumb to decide whether a helicopter
is needed to evacuate a patient is to determine whether the
patient will die or lose a limb or eyesight. These cases warrant
helicopter evacuation.
Trauma Classification System
1st Priority (Immediate)—Patient who has injuries that are critical and needs
immediate intervention by a medical provider and transport to definitive
medical care.
2nd Priority (Secondary)—Patient who has debilitating injuries but does
not require immediate attention.
3rd Priority (Delayed)—Minor injuries. These patients, often called “walking
wounded,” can wait for treatment and can even be used in certain situations
to help with the rescue effort.


SEARCH AND RESCUE 85
.Technical Rescues
Helicopters provide an excellent resource to assist in search
and rescue operations in harsh or remote locations. Unlike
fixed-wing aircraft, helicopters can operate and land virtually
anywhere without the need for airports, runways, or improved
concrete surfaces. However, the use of a helicopter requires
taking many factors into consideration, the most important
of which are available light, weather conditions, and the
safety of the aircrew. Helicopter medical
evacuations can be surprisingly hazardous.
When planning a helicopter rescue
mission, it is essential that the IC also plan
for a backup evacuation method in case the
need arises. The most common of these is an
over the ground litter evacuation utilizing a
wheeled litter. This method requires at least
24 people making up three teams of eight
people each to keep the litter moving at
an approximate rate of 1 mph down trail.
This method is also most preferred for less
critical patients who may not qualify for
helicopter evacuation.
Helicopter rescues—while a vital SAR function—are not approved BSA activities.
For more information about litter evacuation,
see the Fieldbook.


86 SEARCH AND RESCUE
Technical Rescues.
Rescue Hoist Operations
There may be situations when a helicopter will be unable to land
due to terrain, obstructions, or other hazards. Some helicopters are
equipped with a rescue hoist system. See the helicopter hoist
system depicted here. This system allows the aircrew to hover
the helicopter over a selected area, insert an aircrew member with
the hoist, then extract the aircrew member and patient in the same
manner. Helicopters that are equipped with rescue hoist systems
provide the aircrews with more options to safely complete their
mission. The aircrew will assess a number of factors when plan-
ning rescue hoist operations including weather, winds, temperature,
altitude, and aircraft weight.


SEARCH AND RESCUE 87
.Technical Rescues
Technical and
terrestrial rope
rescues are
not approved
activities for
Scouts or
Scout units.
Civil Air Patrol
All youth ages 12 to 18 may join the Civil Air Patrol
(CAP) as cadets and receive education and training
toward their certifications to participate in search and
rescue. CAP is the official civilian auxiliary of the U.S.
Air Force. CAP has three primary missions mandated
by the U.S. Congress: aerospace education, cadet
program, and emergency services.
Active membership in a local CAP unit will open the
door to a variety of emergency services activities that
include disaster relief efforts working with Homeland
Security and FEMA (Federal Emergency Management
Agency), communications support to operations both
in CAP and in your community, and active support to
SAR incidents managed by the U.S. Air Force Rescue
Coordination Center or local authorities responsible
for managing SAR incidents.
Some public service agencies charter Venturing crews
that specialize in firefighting, law enforcement, and
search and rescue. Venturing crews are open to young
men and women ages 14 through 20 and function in a
manner similar to a troop but frequently with a special
area of interest.
Technical or Terrestrial Rope Rescue
This is a specialty of rescue that deals with evacuating injured
patients from high to low angle cliff faces, out of canyons,
crevasses, or caves, off of snow fields, and out of industrial areas
or damaged buildings. Rescuers who participate in this type of
rescue must be proficient in rock and ice climbing and also have
advanced levels of medical training to be able to manage an
injured patient for hours in difficult terrain. This type of rescue
takes many hours of training and practical experience to become
proficient. There are many organizations in the United States
that are accredited by the Mountain Rescue Association to per-
form such rescues.





SEARCH AND RESCUE 89
.Careers in Search and Rescue
Careers in Search
and Rescue
The experience of helping others in need while combining one’s
passion for the wilderness and the adventures it offers may seem
like a natural fit for you.
Search and rescue operations in the United States are primarily
conducted by volunteer teams. Many of these teams are members
of professional organizations such as the National Association
for Search and Rescue or the Mountain Rescue Association. They
usually are run by local sheriff’s offices or city or state agencies
and may have paid positions. The Las Vegas Metropolitan Police
Department Search and Rescue is a prime example.
The National Park Service also employs SAR personnel
throughout many national parks, most notably Denali, Grand
Canyon, and Yosemite national parks. Many of these national and
state park positions require emergency medical, law enforcement,
and fire/rescue credentials. They may also prefer certifications from
organizations like the American Mountain Guides Association.
If you are thinking about a military career, you may
want to look into the U.S. Air Force Pararescuemen
(PJs) or Combat Rescue Officers (CROs). You may have
heard the motto “That others may live.” This motto
originally came from the PJs, who are the only full-
time special operations unit of the military that focuses
solely on SAR.


90 SEARCH AND RESCUE
Careers in Search and Rescue.
SAR careers also exist within fire departments and ambu-
lance services throughout the United States. This depends on
the capabilities and training of local resources. For employment
with either a fire department or ambulance service, an EMT
or Paramedic license is needed. A good example of a SAR
ambulance service is the American Medical Response Reach
and Treat Team. There are also many colleges across the United
States offering degrees in Emergency Medicine, as well as
some offering degrees in Austere and Mountain Medicine, and
Emergency and Disaster Management.
SAR careers dealing with the Incident Command System
and emergency management can be found from the lobbying
floors of Washington, D.C., to disaster zones such as areas hit
by hurricanes or earthquakes. Many of these professionals lead
urban search and rescue teams or Disaster Medical Assistance
Teams (DMAT).
Outside of the United States, search and rescue is primarily
provided by private entities that employ paramedics and mountain
guides. One such group is the Alpine Rescue Center by Air Zermatt
in Switzerland.


SEARCH AND RESCUE 91
.Careers in Search and Rescue





SEARCH AND RESCUE 93
.Search and Rescue Resources
Search and Rescue Resources
Scouting Literature
Scouts BSA Handbook for Boys; Scouts
BSA Handbook for Girls; Fieldbook;
Backpacking, Climbing, Emergency
Preparedness, Fire Safety, First Aid,
Geocaching, Hiking, Lifesaving,
Motorboating, Orienteering, Radio,
Rowing, Safety, Scuba Diving,
Small-Boat Sailing, Swimming,
Weather, Whitewater, and Wilderness
Survival merit badge pamphlets
Books
Cook, Mike, Guy Kerr, Rick LaValla, et. al.
Urban Search Management for the
Initial Response Incident Commander.
ERI Canada Inc. and ERI International
Inc., 2004.
Eng, Ronald C., ed. Mountaineering:
The Freedom of the Hills, 9th ed.
The Mountaineers Books, 2010.
King, Rick, and Chuck White, eds.
Mountain Travel and Rescue Manual.
The Mountaineers Books, 2012.
Kjellstrom, Bjorn, and Carina Kjellstrom
Elgin. Be an Expert with Map and
Compass: The Complete Orienteering
Handbook. John Wiley & Sons, 2009.
Letham, Lawrence, and Alex Lethham.
GPS Made Easy: Using Global
Positioning Systems in the Outdoors.
The Mountaineers Books, 2008.
NASAR. Fundamentals of Search
and Rescue, 2nd ed. Jones and
Bartlett Publishers, 2018.
NASAR, Introduction to Search and
Rescue. National Association for
Search and Rescue, 2008.
Setnicka, Tim J. Wilderness Search
and Rescue, 1981.
Smith, Richard; Rick LaValla; Rick Hood;
Norm Lawson; and Guy Kerr. Basic
Search and Rescue Skills: A
Practitioner’s Guide to Search
and Rescue. ERI Canada Inc., 2007.
Online Resources
ICS Forms
training.fema.gov/icsresource/icsforms.
aspx
Mapnitude Coordinates Mobile App
mapnitude.com
With your parent’s permission, visit
the Boy Scouts of America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org,
for a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


94 SEARCH AND RESCUE
Search and Rescue Resources.
National Association for Search and
Rescue (NASAR) Hug-A-Tree program
nasar.org/education/hug-a-tree
National SAR Plan
www.dco.uscg.mil/Portals/9/CG-5R/
manuals/National_SAR_Plan_2016.pdf
New Mexico SAR Field Certification
Study Guide
www.nmsarc.org/resources.html
Suunto’s ‘The Lost Art of Navigation’
www.suunto.com/en-us/sports/News-
Articles-container-page/The-lost-art-of-
navigation/
Urgency Determination Worksheet
www.k7rdg.org/ICSforms
A Note About Unauthorized
and Restricted Activities
The BSA’s Guide to Safe Scouting states
under “Unauthorized and Restricted
Activities” that flying in aircraft as
part of a search and rescue mission
is an unauthorized activity for youth
members. For complete information,
see www.scouting.org/health-and-
safety/gss/.
Organizations and Websites
Air Force Rescue Coordination Center
www.1af.acc.af.mil/units/afrcc/
American Avalanche Association
www.americanavalancheassociation.org
American Institute for Avalanche
Research and Education
www.avtraining.org
American Medical Response Reach
and Treat Team
www.summitpost.org/amr-reach-and-
treat-who-we-are-and-what-we-
do/172226
American Mountain Guides
Association
www.amga.com
CalTopo
sartopo.com
Colorado Geological Survey
www.avalanche.state.co.us
Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA)
Telephone: 202-646-2500
For literature requests only:
800-480-2520 or email femapubs@gpo.gov
www.fema.gov
Inland SAR School
www.forcecom.uscg.mil/Our-
Organization/FORCECOM-UNITS/
TraCen-Yorktown/Training/Maritime-
Search-Rescue/Inland-SAR/
Mapnitude Coordinates App
www.mapnitude.com
Mountain Rescue Association
www.mra.org
National Association for
Search and Rescue (NASAR)
P.O. Box 232020
Centreville, VA 20120-2020
www.nasar.org
National SAR School
www.forcecom.uscg.mil/Our-
Organization/FORCECOM-UNITS/
TraCen-Yorktown/Training/Maritime-
Search-Rescue
National Ski Patrol
www.nsp.org
New Hampshire Fish and Game
Department Specialized Search
and Rescue Team
www.wildlife.state.nh.us/
law-enforcement/sar.html


SEARCH AND RESCUE 95
.Search and Rescue Resources
New Hampshire Outdoor Council
www.nhoutdoorcouncil.org
New Mexico Search and
Rescue Council
www.nmsarc.org
New Mexico State Police Search and
Rescue
www.sp.nm.gov/search-and-rescue
Urban Search and Rescue
www.fema.gov/urban-search-rescue
U.S. Air Force Pararescuemen
www.airforce.com/careers/combat-and-
warfare/special-warfare/pararescue
U.S. Coast Guard
www.uscg.mil
U.S. Geological Survey
www.usgs.gov
USGS Topo Maps
www.usgs.gov/programs/national-
geospatial-program/topographic-maps
Acknowledgments
The Boy Scouts of America thanks the
following members of the Search and
Rescue Merit Badge Development Team,
who diligently worked to develop the
requirements and content for this
merit badge.
Doug Palmer, chair—retired, associate
director of Program, Philmont
Scout Ranch; New Mexico Certified
Type II field co-coordinator/
Incident Commander
Mark Anderson—Eagle Scout; retired,
director of Program, Philmont Scout
Ranch; field coordinator, New Mexico
State Police Search and Rescue
Mary Berry, D.V.M.—founder, Sandia
Search Dogs, certified trainer, Search
and Rescue dogs in trailing, area
air scent, cadaver, and FEMA
disaster dogs


96 SEARCH AND RESCUE
Search and Rescue Resources.
Nathan Lay—Eagle Scout; wilderness
emergency medical technician;
paramedic; field coordinator,
New Mexico Search and Rescue;
health officer/chief of Support,
Philmont Scout Ranch
Owen McCulloch— Eagle Scout; associate
director of Program, Philmont Scout
Ranch; field coordinator, New Mexico
Search and Rescue
Michael H. Ritterhouse—Eagle Scout;
retired, backcountry manager,
Philmont Scout Ranch; instructor,
National Ski Patrol; instructor,
Wilderness First Responder
Gary D. Williams—Eagle Scout;
volunteer search and rescue area
and incident commander, New
Mexico State Police; lead instructor,
flammable liquids emergencies,
New Mexico State Fire School
Jason Williams—Eagle Scout; program
director, Paramedic programs,
University of New Mexico School of
Medicine; rescue leader, Albuquerque
Mountain Rescue
The following individuals served as
reviewers and contributors in a variety
of capacities: Scott H. Chappell, program
coordinator, urban search and rescue/
hazardous materials, Division of (Florida)
State Fire Marshal; Sid Covington,
logistics manager, Philmont summer
programs, Rick Goodman, retired,
New Mexico State Police Search and
Rescue Officer; Rick LaValla, president
and senior consultant, ERI International
Inc.; Roger Ramsdell, urban search
and rescue consultant; Tom Richardson,
University of New Hampshire Fire
Department, retired; Lt. Cmdr. Wayne A.
Stacey, Eagle Scout and USCG retired,
boating education specialist, Program
Operations Branch Boating Safety
Division, Department of Homeland
Security, U.S. Coast Guard, and Office
of Auxiliary and Boating Safety; and
John Van Dreese, director, Outdoor
Adventure, Orange County Council BSA.
Thanks also to the National
Association for Search and Rescue;
Camp Bell staff, Daniel Webster Council;
Chicago Area Council; Philmont
NAYLE summer class of 2011, and
Sea Scout Ship 911, Pottsboro, Texas,
for their assistance.


SEARCH AND RESCUE 97
.Search and Rescue Resources
Photo and Illustration Credits
Alpha Natural Resources, courtesy—
page 78
Mary Berry, courtesy—pages 11, 35,
72, 74, 75, 79, 80, and 95
Sid Covington, courtesy—page 67
Federal Communications Commission—
page 10 (FCC logo)
Federal Emergency Management
Administration—pages 10 (FEMA
logo) and 14
Rick Goodman, courtesy—cover
(dog); page 85 (green helicopter)
Google Maps—page 64
National Transportation Safety Board—
page 10 (NTSF logo)
Philmont Search and Rescue Team,
courtesy—cover (rescue team);
pages 82, 90, 91, and 96
Roger Ramsdell, courtesy—pages 68
and 88
Tom Richardson, courtesy—page 18
Stockphotosforfree.com, courtesy—
page 19
U.S. Coast Guard/Coast Guard Art
Program, courtesy—page 32
U.S. Coast Guard/Hon Leung, courtesy—
page 33
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service/Luther C.
Goldman, courtesy—page 46
(coral snake)
U.S. Forest Service—page 10 (USFS logo)
Wikipedia.org—pages 13 and 46
(copperhead, rattlesnake, and
cottonmouth moccasin)
Jason Williams, courtesy—pages 9
(crowd and helicopter), 27, 38, 40,
85 (red helicopter), 86, and 92
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property
of or are protected by the Boy Scouts
of America.
James Parker—page 35
John McDearmon—pages 36 (marine
signals) and 76 (scent illustrations)


98 SEARCH AND RESCUE
Notes


SEARCH AND RESCUE 99
Notes


100 SEARCH AND RESCUE
Notes