PULP AND
PAPER
STEM-Based


PULP AND PAPER
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


194
Pulp and Paper
1. Tell the history of papermaking. Describe the part paper products play in our
society and economy.
2. Learn about the pulp and paper industry.
(a) Describe the ways the industry plants, grows, and harvests trees.
(b) Explain how the industry manages its forests so that the supply of trees
keeps pace with the demand.
(c) Tell how the industry has incorporated the concepts of sustainable forest
management (SFM).
(d) Describe two ways the papermaking industry has addressed pollution.
3. Name at least four types of trees that are major sources of papermaking fibers.
Then do the following:
(a) Discuss what other uses are made of the trees and the forestland owned by
the pulp and paper industry.
(b) Describe two ways of getting fibers from wood, and explain the major
differences between them.
(c) Tell why some pulps are bleached, and describe the process.
4. Describe how paper is made. Discuss how paper is recycled. Make a sheet of
paper by hand.
5. Explain what coated paper is and why it is coated. Describe the major uses for
different kinds of coated papers. Describe one other way that paper is changed
by chemical or mechanical means to make new uses possible.
6. Make a list of 15 pulp or paper products found in your home. Share examples
of 10 such products with your counselor.
7. With your parent’s and counselor’s approval, do ONE of the following:
(a) Visit a pulp mill. Describe how the mill converts wood to cellulose fibers.
(b) Visit a paper mill and get a sample of the paper made there. Describe the
processes used for making this paper. Tell how it will be used.
(c) Visit a container plant or box plant. Describe how the plant’s products
are made.
(d) Visit a recycled paper collection or sorting facility. Describe the
operations there.
(e) Using books, magazines, your local library, the internet (with your parent’s
permission), and any other suitable research tool, find out how paper products
are developed. Find out what role research and development play in the
papermaking industry. Share what you learn with your counselor.
8. Find out about three career opportunities in the papermaking industry that
interest you. Pick one and find out the education, training, and experience
required for this profession. Discuss this with your counselor, and explain
why this profession might interest you.


46 PULP AND PAPER
Papermaking Resources.
Papermaking Resources
Scouting Literature
Chemistry, Energy, Engineering,
Environmental Science, Fish and Wildlife
Management, Forestry, Graphic Arts, Soil
and Water Conservation, Sustainability,
and Textile merit badge pamphlets
Books
Asuncion, Josep. The Complete Book
of Papermaking. Sterling, 2003.
Couzins-Scott, Elizabeth.
Papermaking: 25 Creative
Handmade Projects Shown Step
By Step. Lorenz Books, 2014.
Dawson, Sophie. The Art and Craft
of Papermaking: Step-by-Step
Instructions for Creating Distinctive
Handmade Paper. Sterling, 1997.
Draper, Allison Stark. Choosing a Career
in the Pulp and Paper Industry.
Rosen Publishing Group Inc., 2001.
Grummer, Arnold E. Arnold Grummer’s
Complete Guide to Easy Papermaking.
Krause Publications, 1999.
Hiebert, Helen. The Papermaker’s
Companion: The Ultimate Guide to
Making and Using Handmade Paper.
Storey Books, 2000.
Rainey, Rhonda. Papermaking for the
First Time. Sterling, 2005.
Reimer, Mary. 300 Papermaking Recipes.
Martingale and Company, 2006.
Saddington, Marianne. Making
Your Own Paper: An Introduction
to Creative Paper-Making. Storey
Books, 1992.
Saltman, David. Paper Basics: Forestry,
Manufacture, Selection, Purchasing,
Mathematics and Metrics, Recycling.
Krieger Publishing, 1991.
Toale, Bernard. The Art of Papermaking.
Davis Publications, 1983.
Woods, Samuel G. Recycled Paper: From
Start to Finish. Blackbirch Press, 2000.
Organizations and Websites
American Forest and
Paper Association
1101 K St., NW, Suite 700
Washington, DC 20005
Telephone: 202-463-2700
Website: http://www.afandpa.org
Visit the Boy Scouts of America’s
official retail website at http://
www.scoutstuff.org for a com-
plete listing of all merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


PULP AND PAPER 47
.Papermaking Resources
Robert C. Williams Museum
of Papermaking
Renewable Bioproducts Institute
Mail code 0620, Georgia Tech
Atlanta, GA 30332-0620
Website: http://www.ipst.gatech.edu/
amp/index.html
Society of American Foresters
5400 Grosvenor Lane
Bethesda, MD 20814-2198
Toll-free telephone: 866-897-8720
Website: http://www.safnet.org
Society of Wood Science
and Technology
P.O. Box 6155
Monona, WI 53716-6155
Telephone: 608-577-1342
Website: http://www.swst.org/index.html
Technical Association of the
Pulp and Paper Industry
Paper University
Website: http://www.tappi.org/paperu
Wisconsin Paper Council
5485 Grande Market Drive, Suite B
Appleton, WI 54913
Telephone: 920- 574-3752
Website: http://www.wipapercouncil.org
Acknowledgments
For assistance in updating the Pulp
and Paper merit badge pamphlet,
the Boy Scouts of America thanks
Terry Bliss, Ph.D., Ashland Water
Technologies Group; Michael J.
Kocurek; and John Sunderland,
Pulp and Paper Safety Association.
The Boy Scouts of America is
grateful to the men and women serving
on the Merit Badge Maintenance Task
Force for the improvements made in
updating this pamphlet.
Thanks also to those who contrib-
uted to previous editions of this
pamphlet, lending a level of expertise
that continues to guide the BSA’s
approach to this fascinating subject:
• Dick Madsen of Weyerhaeuser
Company, one of the world’s largest
forest products companies and
a winner of many awards for
social responsibility and
environmental protection
• T.J. Stenuf, Ph.D., and Richard A.
Horn of Pulp, Paper, and Composites
Research, USDA Forest Service, Forest
Products Laboratory, Madison,
Wisconsin, who helped revise
previous editions
• TAPPI, the Technical Association
of the Pulp and Paper Industry,
for its cooperation in the production
of the pamphlet