MULTISPORTMULTISPORT


MULTISPORT
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”
Scouting America is grateful to David “TriDave” Alexander and the TriDave
Legacy Trust for making this merit badge and pamphlet possible. We also thank
USA Triathlon for their assistance with information and photography.


Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Multisport or check Scoutbook for
the latest requirements.
35977
ISBN 978-0-8395-0154-1
©2025 Scouting America/Boy Scouts of America
2025 Printing
FPO


MULTISPORT 3


4 MULTISPORT


MULTISPORT 5
When referring to
race distances,
“m” stands for
meter (about 3.28
feet) and “km” or
simply “k” stands
for kilometer
(about 0.62 mile).


6 MULTISPORT


MULTISPORT 7
Contents
What is Multisport? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Multisport Safety . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
Being Prepared for Multisport . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
Gear You’ll Need To Get Started . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
Event 1: Swimming . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
Event 2: Biking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
Event 3: Running. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
Transitioning Between Events . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
Get Ready To Race! . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
Multisport Athletes Who Are Making a Difference . . . . . . . . 75
Multisport Glossary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80
Multisport Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86





MULTISPORT 9
.What Is Multisport?
What Is Multisport?
Multisport is a racing competition that consists of any
combination of running, biking, or swimming.
For the most part, it’s pretty simple: The fastest combined
time of all three events wins. However, the time it takes you to
transition from one sport to the next is included in your overall
time, making multisport a truly unique competition.
If you know how to swim, ride a bike, and run—even
casually—completing a triathlon is within your grasp. The sport
is beginner friendly, welcoming, and rewarding.
And with so many versions of those three sports, there
are many different ways to compete. You’ll find a variety of
disciplines to suit your interests:
• Triathlon: Triathlons allow athletes of all ages to challenge
themselves by covering various distances by swimming,
biking, and running, in that order.
• Aquabike: You’ll complete just the swim and bike portions
and head to the finish. This is an excellent option for those
who can’t or just don’t like running.
• Duathlon: There are still three segments, but it goes simply
run-bike-run.
• Aquathlon: Just the swim and run, with no cycling.
• Off-Road/Cross-Country: Think mountain biking and trail
running instead of paved roads.
• Relay: Teams of two or three people compete.
• Winter Triathlon: Running, mountain biking, and cross-
country skiing—all performed on snow.
• Paratriathlon: Many races have a particular category, or
entire special events, for athletes with disabilities.
The most common multisport event is the triathlon. You
can find triathlon events in every state and around the world
at a wide variety of distances, from shorter sprints to longer
endurance races. Most beginners start with events that require


10 MULTISPORT
.What Is Multisport?.
10 MULTISPORT
shorter distances or a relay triathlon so they can share the
load with a team.
One of the most recognizable triathlon events is the
Ironman World Championship held every year in Hawaii.
History of Multisport
Running has been a competitive sport for nearly 3,000 years.
One of the first organized running competitions was held at the
very first Olympic Games in ancient Greece in 776 BC.
Swimming is also ancient. There were swimming
competitions held in Japan as early as 36 B.C.
Biking as a sport is much younger. Historians say there
were bike races being held as early as 1868 in France.
Not long after that, somebody had the idea to put the three
sports together into one event.
In 1901, there was an event in France called Les Trois
Sports—”The Three Sports.” It consisted of a 3-kilometer run, a
12-kilometer cycling race, and … a canoeing race. Alas, shortly
after that, canoeing was replaced with swimming.
Over the next several decades, The Three Sports competition
spread throughout France, its popularity growing each year.
The first organized swim/run/bike event in the United
States was in 1974 at Mission Bay in San Diego, California.
One of the earliest known triathlon
photographs, taken in France at
the 1922 Course Des Trois Sports.


MULTISPORT 11
.What Is Multisport?
Forty-six participants paid $1 each to compete. Over the next
few years, the triathlon movement became more and more
organized, with multiple organizations coming together in an
attempt to make it an official sport.
In 1982, the U.S. Triathlon Association and the American
Triathlon Association merged under one unified national
governing body called the U.S. Triathlon Association. It had
around 1,500 members.
Today, USA Triathlon sanctions more than 3,500 events
each year and supports more than 300,000 unique active
members, making it the largest multisport organization
in the world. In addition to its work at the grassroots
level with athletes, coaches, and race directors—as well
as the USA Triathlon Foundation charity—USA Triathlon
provides leadership and support to elite athletes competing
at international events, including World Triathlon World
Championships, Pan American Games, and the Olympic and
Paralympic Games.
Triathlon was officially added to the Olympics at the 2000
Sydney Olympic Games and to the Paralympics at the 2016 Rio
Paralympic Games.
With 12 elite national team members and 14 para elite
national team members, the United States has a rich history of
performing and medaling at the highest levels.
Triathlon Distances
There is a triathlon for everyone. Most often, you’ll see sprint,
Olympic distance, half distance and full distance, but there are
many other variations. Swimming, the first event, is the shortest
distance. Biking, the second event, is the longest. Running, the
final event, is somewhere in between.
Here are the most popular distances and the combined
mileage of the swimming, biking, and running sections:
TOTAL RACE LENGTHS (Swim + Bike + Run)
16
MILES
31.9
MILES
70.3
MILES
140.6
MILES
Sprint
distance
Olympic
distance
Half
distance
Full
distance


12 MULTISPORT
What Is Multisport?.
Why Triathlon? 10 Reasons
1. It’s more fun when you train for different sports.
Being a single-sport specialist has its perks, but training for
one sport can become a drag. With triathlon, you have a wider
variety of training options, whether you’re expanding your
strength training or stacking workouts together by following
a bike ride after a swim. With more skills to train in a weekly
schedule, you have more to look forward to.
2. Cross-training makes you better at your main sport.
If you’re an avid biker, die-hard runner, or seasoned swimmer,
training in the two other sports will make you a better athlete
in your sport of choice. For example, swimming is an incredible
endurance builder. It taxes your breathing and builds your
diaphragm strength when you need to exhaust your lung
capacity, bike up a steep incline, or increase speed on the final
kick of your 5k. Training to control your cadence on the bike
is helpful for tempo runs and rhythmic breathing in the water.
And when you’re logging all of those hill repeats, the power
you’re building in your quadriceps and glutes will make you a
force to be reckoned with on any mountain in a bike race and
give you the energy burst to get around slower swimmers.
3. You get to experience amazing venues.
If you really get into the sport, you’ll find that triathlon races
can take you to the most beautiful and exciting places in the
world. That’s part of the fun! From races along white sand
beaches to courses that take you through the heart of some of
the world’s most stunning cityscapes, there’s no better excuse
to convince your family to spend a summer vacation traveling
to a fun race destination.
4. The triathlon singlet—the clothing worn by most
triathletes—really lets you make a statement.
With their bright colors, fun patterns, and compression fit, you
will feel like you can take on the world in that thing.
5. The other gear is super cool too.
If you love gear, then triathlon is the sport for you. From those
sleek tri singlets to aero helmets to moisture-wicking socks,
there’s no end to the gear you can purchase for a tri. And that’s
not even counting the big stuff like wetsuits, bikes, and other


MULTISPORT 13
.What Is Multisport?
training equipment you can take to your home gym to help you
prepare for your new favorite sport.
6. You’re automatically part of the coolest club ever.
There’s nothing like the camaraderie, friendship, and
encouragement you find within the triathlon community. From
training partners to keep you going to high-fives and cheering at
events, there’s no sport friendlier or more fun than multisport.
7. You can eat … while you race!
With triathlon, there are several opportunities to refuel during a
race, whether that means shoving a homemade protein bite into
your mouth during a transition or munching down a granola
bar on the bike.
8. Because you love a challenge.
You compete because you love crushing the competition,
smashing your goal times, and setting new personal records.
Triathlon is the same, only you dial up the intensity and break
off the knob. Give it all you’ve got in not one, not two, but
three sports back-to-back. The sense of accomplishment is
unparalleled.
9. Because of the race
within the race.
If the challenge of
completing the race wasn’t
enough, there’s one more
thing: the transitions. The
precious seconds you spend
moving from swim to bike
and bike to run count
toward your overall time, so
practicing those movements
can be just as important as
practicing for the race itself.
10. You get bragging rights.
Completing a triathlon is no small feat. Just think of the jaw-
dropping response from your friends, family members, and
classmates when you tell them you ran yet another excellent
10k … after you biked 25 miles … and swam a mile.





MULTISPORT 15
.Multisport SAfety
Multisport Safety
As with any sport, athletes need to be physically and mentally
prepared to compete in multisport. Swimming, biking, and
running each has hazards of which you should be aware.
The Most Likely Hazards
• Wildlife: One of the best things about multisport
is that you get to swim, bike, and run in
some gorgeous areas. Keep an eye out
for plants—such as poison ivy, oak, and
sumac—and animals—such as snakes and
insects—that could potentially be dangerous.
Wear bug spray and always remain aware of
your surroundings.
• Other Athletes: Drafting is the act of closely
following another athlete to reduce wind resistance and save
your energy. It’s always allowed in the swimming portion
of multisport, and it’s sometimes allowed in biking too. Be
aware of where athletes are around you to avoid collisions
and crashes.
• Weather: Just as you would on a hike, always bring
multiple layers of clothing so you can add or remove as
needed. Keep an eye on the forecast both before and during
a training session to keep track of approaching storms and
temperatures. In the event of fog during a bike ride, keep
your eyes ahead and be aware of other people around you
so you know where you are and can visualize other athletes
around you.
• Terrain: Be Prepared for the different terrains you may
encounter on a run or bike ride, including potholes and
unlevel concrete and cobblestone. In rainy weather, be on the
lookout for hazards such as wet grass or mud and sand that
can cause you to slip and be injured.


16 MULTISPORT
Multisport SAfety.
• Traffic: When crossing roads on foot or bike, be aware that
not all traffic may be completely blocked off, even during
events in which some roads are closed. Note where busy
roads are and look both ways before continuing. Although
athletes have the right of way at most pedestrian crossings,
be safe and watch out for people who may not see you
coming.
Multisport First Aid
Abrasions
An abrasion is a wound that
occurs as a result of the outer
layers of the skin being rubbed
or scraped off. Abrasions
may happen when the skin is
scraped against a hard surface,
for example, when a bicyclist
falls onto the pavement. The
wound may not bleed very
much. The greatest danger lies
in contamination and possible
infection of the wound.
Treat a minor cut or scrape
by flushing the area with clean
water for at least five minutes
or until all foreign matter
appears to be washed away.
You may need to scrub the area
gently. Apply triple antibiotic
ointment if the person has no
known allergies or sensitivities
to the medication, and then
cover with a dry, sterile
dressing and bandage or with
an adhesive bandage.
Blisters
Blisters are pockets of fluid that form when the skin is injured
by friction. Foot blisters are common injuries among runners,
whereas blisters on the hands might be more common among
bikers. To help prevent foot blisters, wear shoes that fit, change


MULTISPORT 17
.Multisport SAfety
The Danger of Concussions
A concussion is a traumatic brain injury that results from a blow to the
head causing an alteration of brain function. They may also be due to falls
or blows to the body that cause the brain to move back and forth.
A runner or biker who falls can easily suffer a concussion. A properly
fitted biking helmet helps but doesn’t completely eliminate the risk.
Concussions are difficult to diagnose. In 90% of all youth-related
concussions, there is no loss of consciousness. Most people recover quickly
and fully, but for some the symptoms can last for days, weeks, or longer.
Those who have had a concussion in the past are at greater risk for another
one, and recovery may take longer the second time.
Signs and symptoms of a concussion injury may include:
• Headache (the most common symptom)
• Confusion and/or forgetfulness
• Dizziness/loss of balance or
coordination
• Nausea/vomiting
• Blurry or double vision
• Sensitivity to light or noise
• Sleepiness or lethargy
• Personality changes
• Loss of consciousness,
either brief or prolonged
A person who has had a
concussion should rest in a quiet,
darkened area away from activities.
Keep the patient calm and quiet. Allow them to sleep if needed. Limit
reading and use of electronics.
If symptoms persist for more than 24 hours or become worse, or if
new symptoms appear, the person needs to be evaluated by a physician
even if it requires evacuation or removal from an activity.
Immediate medical treatment should occur if:
• The headache becomes worse
• There is repeated vomiting
• The patient suffers a seizure
• Drowsiness increases or the patient can’t be awakened
• Speech is slurred
• The patient seems confused or irritable
• There is increased dizziness or imbalance
• The patient feels weakness or numbness in the arms or legs
Anyone with a suspected concussion must be evaluated by a physician.


18 MULTISPORT
Multisport SAfety.
socks if they become sweaty
or wet, and pay attention to
how your feet feel. To help
prevent blisters on the hands,
wear gloves for protection
and pay attention to how
your hands feel.
A hot spot—the tender
area as a blister starts to
form—is a signal that a
blister is on its way. To treat
a hot spot or blister, cover
the pinkish, tender area
with a piece of moleskin or
molefoam slightly larger than
the hot spot. Use several
layers if necessary. There
are several products on the
market for treating hot spots
and blisters. Follow the
manufacturer’s instructions.
Change bandages every day
to help keep wounds clean
and avoid infection.
If you must continue your activity even though you think
a small blister will burst, you might want to drain the fluid.
First, wash the skin with soap and water, and then sterilize a
pin in the flame of a match. Prick the blister near its lower edge
and press out the fluid. Keep the wound clean with a sterile
bandage or gel pad and moleskin.
Contusions
Contusions, or bruises, are black-and-blue marks caused by
blood leaking into skin tissues. The skin is not broken but is
discolored. Bruises usually are not serious, but they can be,
especially if there are possible fractures or unseen injuries to
internal organs.
Most bruises can be easily treated. Keep a cold, wet towel
over the bruise for 30 to 60 minutes and rest the injured area.
This will prevent more blood from leaking into the tissues. To
help the bruise fade, apply a warm, wet cloth to the area the
next day.


MULTISPORT 19
.Multisport SAfety
Dehydration
The human body is 70% water, which is essential to maintain
our body temperature. Vital organs like the brain and kidneys
will not function well without enough water. Multisport athletes
lose water mostly by heavy breathing and sweating. When we
lose more water than we take in, we become dehydrated.
To avoid dehydration, hydrate early. Put as much effort
into properly hydrating during short distances as you do for
longer distances. Ensure that you’re consuming both water and
electrolytes, as your body needs both to avoid dehydration.
Signals of mild dehydration include fatigue, increased
thirst, dry lips, and dark yellow urine. Signals of moderate
to severe dehydration include
severe thirst, dry mouth with
little saliva, dry skin, weakness,
dizziness, confusion, nausea,
fainting, muscle cramps, loss of
appetite, decreased sweating (even
with exertion), decreased urine
production, and less frequent and
dark brown urine.
To treat mild dehydration,
drink plenty of water or a sports
drink to replace fluids and
minerals. Drink one to two quarts
(or liters) of liquids over two to
four hours. See a physician for
moderate or severe dehydration.
Severe dehydration requires emergency care; you will need
intravenous fluids. Rest for 24 hours and continue drinking
fluids. Avoid tiring physical activity. Although most people
begin to feel better within a few hours, it takes about 36 hours
to completely restore the fluids lost in dehydration.
Hypothermia
Hypothermia occurs when a person’s body is losing more heat
than it can generate. Temperatures do not need to be below
freezing. Hypothermia can happen when swimming in a cold
body of water or when a runner or biker is caught in a cool,
windy rain shower without proper clothing. Dehydration is
a common contributing factor to hypothermia. Hunger and
exhaustion can further compound the danger.


20 MULTISPORT
Multisport SAfety.
A hypothermia victim may
experience numbness, fatigue,
irritability, slurred speech,
uncontrollable shivering, poor
judgment or decision making, and
loss of consciousness. Shivering
that stops without rewarming is
a sign that the person’s condition
is worsening. He or she needs
immediate medical care.
Treat a hypothermia victim
by preventing the person
from getting colder.
After summoning help,
use any or all of the
following methods to
help bring the body
temperature back up to
normal:
• If the person is fully
conscious and able to
swallow, have him or her
drink warm liquids (soup,
fruit juices, water; no
caffeine or alcohol).
• Move the person into the
shelter of a building or a
tent. Remove wet clothing.
Get him or her into dry, warm
clothes or wrap the person in
blankets, clothing, or anything handy that could be used, like
jackets or a sleeping bag.
• Wrap towels around water bottles filled with warm fluid, and
then position the bottles in the armpit and groin areas.
• Monitor the person closely for any change in condition.
Do not rewarm the person too quickly (for instance, by
immersing the person in warm water); doing so can cause an
irregular and dangerous heartbeat.


MULTISPORT 21
.Multisport SAfety
Overheating
Heat exhaustion can be brought on by a combination of
dehydration and a warm environment. It is not uncommon
during strenuous outdoor activities conducted in hot weather,
especially if participants are not fully acclimated to the
conditions. Signals of heat exhaustion include severe lack of
energy, general weakness, headache, nausea, faintness, and
sweating; cool, pale, moist skin; and a rapid pulse.
Get the person in the shade (or an air-conditioned vehicle
or building). Encourage him or her to drink fluids, such
as cool water or a sports drink. Apply cool, wet towels
or cloths to the skin, wet the person’s clothing with
cool water, and fan the person to help the cooling
process. Raising the legs may help prevent a feeling
of faintness when the person stands. Usually
after two or three hours of rest and fluids,
the victim will feel better but should rest for
the remainder of the day and be extra careful
about staying hydrated.
Heatstroke—much more serious than
heat exhaustion—can lead to death if not
treated immediately. Left untreated, heat
exhaustion can develop into heatstroke.
With heatstroke, the body’s cooling
system begins to fail, and the person’s core
temperature rises to life-threatening
levels (above 105 degrees). Signals of
exercise-related heatstroke can include
any signals of heat exhaustion as well as
confusion, disorientation, a rapid pulse, shallow breathing,
vomiting, seizures, and hot, sweaty, red skin.
Heatstroke is a life-threatening condition. Call for medical
assistance immediately. While waiting for medical personnel to
arrive, work to lower the victim’s temperature. Move the person
to an air-conditioned or shady area. Loosen tight clothing and
further cool the victim by fanning and applying wet towels. If
possible, immerse or spray the person with cold water. If you
have ice packs, wrap them in a thin barrier (such as a thin
towel) and place them under the armpits and against the neck
and groin. If the person is able to drink, give small amounts of
cool water.


22 MULTISPORT
Multisport SAfety.
Sprains and strains
A sprain occurs when an
ankle, wrist, or other joint is
bent far enough to overstretch
the ligaments, the tough bands
that hold joints together.
Twisting an ankle while
running is one way a person
could sustain a sprain. A strain
occurs when muscles are
overstretched, creating tears in
the muscle fibers.
Minor sprains and strains
cause only mild discomfort,
but more serious sprains and
strains might be temporarily
disabling. A sprained joint
will be tender and painful
when moved and might show
swelling and discoloration.


MULTISPORT 23
.Multisport SAfety
Strained backs, arms, and legs will also be tender and can hurt
if activity continues.
Assume that any injury to a joint also may include a bone
fracture. Use the following procedure to treat sprains and strains
and prevent further injury. Have the victim take any weight off
the injured joint and instruct the person not to use the joint.
Do not try to move or straighten an injured limb. Cover any
open wounds with a sterile dressing. Apply ice packs or cold
compresses to the affected area for no more than 20 minutes at
a time. Be sure to place a barrier such as a thin towel between
the ice pack and bare skin. Seek medical treatment if the pain
is persistent or severe.
RICE
For sprains and strains remember RICE:
R = Rest
I = Ice
C = Compression
E = Elevation





MULTISPORT 25
.Being Prepared For Multisport
Being Prepared
for Multisport
Multisport will challenge you both physically and mentally. As
you begin your journey into multisport, there are a handful of
things you can do to greatly increase your chances of success.
The Physical Exam
All people who participate in multisport should have a
thorough physical examination by their health care provider.
An examination probably will
include measuring your heart
rate, blood pressure, height,
and weight; checking heart
and lung sounds; testing your
reflexes; and examining your
eyes. A health care provider
also may ask questions and
record observations about
your psychosocial (mental and
social) traits, nutrition habits,
physical activity, and family life.
During a physical exam,
a health care provider may
detect underlying conditions or
symptoms that need treatment
or correction or that could prevent or limit a person from
participating in multisport. The provider also may offer advice
about nutrition and how to train safely. Get the green light from
your provider before undertaking multisport activities.
Completing the Scouting America Annual Health and
Medical Record is a good way to make sure you’re maintaining
good health. The four-part form serves as a single place to


26 MULTISPORT
Section 0.
document a participant’s medical history and
recent medical examination. To keep up with
possible changes in health status, the form needs
to be updated annually or when a participant’s
health information changes.
Discuss the form with your doctor during
your physical exam.
Avoiding Harmful Substances
Drugs have no place in training or
competition. To be a strong, healthy
performer in multisport and in life, avoid
tobacco, alcohol, and other harmful
substances.
TOBACCO AND MULTISPORT DO NOT MIX
Athletes need to breathe. They need their lungs working at
peak capacity. Smoking makes you cough and wheeze, and
it interferes with proper lung growth and function. It injures
the airways and air sacs of the lungs. Using tobacco can leave
you gasping for air when you need it most. Smoking not only
reduces athletic performance and stamina, but it also damages
nearly every organ in the body.
The blood carries the poisons from smoking to all parts
of the body, damaging internal organs from the brain to the
bladder. Scientists now know that smoking causes cancers of
the mouth, the larynx (voice box), the lungs, and the kidneys.
It can also cause a type of leukemia—a cancer of the blood.
You might have heard that smoking causes heart disease, but
did you know that it raises the risk for stroke and damages the
body’s ability to fight infection? Smokers are at high risk of
dying from any number of tobacco-related diseases.
CIGARETTES CAN KILL
Cigarettes can contain dozens of dangerous and cancer-
causing chemicals, including arsenic (used in pesticides
and weed killers), benzene (a toxic solvent), formaldehyde
(used to embalm corpses), and polonium 210 (a highly
radioactive element). Smoking casually or occasionally
is the same thing as taking poison occasionally. If you
wouldn’t drink embalming fluid now and then, why
would you smoke, even once in a while?


MULTISPORT 27
..Being Prepared For Multisport
ALCOHOL IS A DEPRESSANT
Alcohol interferes with reflexes and coordination. It slows an
athlete’s reaction time and impairs balance, vision, hearing,
and judgment. Alcohol dehydrates tissues in the body. Drinking
water or a sports drink will replace body fluids that are lost
from exertion during athletic activities or workouts. Drinking
beer or other alcoholic beverages has the opposite effect:
Alcohol makes the drinker thirstier.
The long-term harmful effects of alcohol abuse can include
damage to brain and nerve function, weakening of the heart
muscle, abnormal blood clotting, and liver failure leading to
death.
STEROIDS ARE FAKES
Steroids mimic the effects of the natural male hormone
testosterone. Testosterone triggers the maturing of the male
reproductive system in puberty. Taking steroids disrupts the
body’s natural hormone balance, causing dangerous physical
and mental abnormalities. Though steroids are sometimes
called “performance-enhancing” drugs, they do not improve
agility, skill, or cardiovascular capacity. They act to artificially
increase muscle mass at a high cost to the user’s health.
Side effects range from acne, bloating, and rapid weight
gain to weakened tendons, blood-clotting disorders, liver
damage, and heart attacks and strokes. The damage to a steroid
user’s health can be irreversible and may not show up for
months, years, even decades after the abuse ends. Young people
who take steroids may stop growing. The drugs prevent young
bones from lengthening, so steroid users might fail to grow as
tall as they should. Athletes who start using steroids often have
trouble stopping. Evidence suggests that steroid abusers show
the classic symptoms of addiction, including cravings, difficulty
quitting, and withdrawal pains.
AMPHETAMINES ARE STIMULANTS
These highly addictive drugs create false feelings of power,
strength, and assertiveness. They do not give a user extra
physical or mental energy; they impair judgment and distort
the user’s view of reality. An athlete on uppers may ignore an
injury and suffer permanent physical damage. Amphetamines
suppress appetite and may cause extreme, life-threatening
weight loss.
Steroids can
cause severe
mood swings,
from deep
depression
to extreme
irritability. ‘Roid
rage is a term
for the explosive,
out-of-control
aggressiveness
associated with
steroid use.


28 MULTISPORT
.Being Prepared For Multisport.
Other side effects include nerve damage, uncontrollable
and abnormal movements of the face and jaw muscles,
convulsions, hallucinations, and mental disorders such as
paranoia and delusions similar to schizophrenia. Amphetamines
damage blood vessels throughout the body. Users may die from
ruptured blood vessels in the brain or from heart attacks.
Other drugs—cocaine and crack, heroin, inhalants, LSD,
marijuana—also have powerful effects on the body and the
mind. They can cause nightmares, depression, and severe
mental disturbances. An overdose can result in serious illness,
disability, or death.
The Importance of a Healthy Diet
Maintaining a healthy diet is especially important when
participating in multisport. Athletes need energy so they
can perform without tiring easily. Everyone’s dietary needs
are different, but it’s important to eat a well-balanced diet.
Make sure each day to eat something from each of the five
food groups: fruits, vegetables, grains, dairy products, and
proteins. This way, you will get enough carbohydrates,
proteins, and fat, plus the vitamins and minerals you need
to perform at your best.
Try to limit your intake of simple carbohydrates—foods
that include refined sugars and white flour found in most
soft drinks, cookies, pastries, and processed foods. Simple
carbohydrates break down quickly in the digestive system,
causing energy highs and lows.
The types of carbohydrates that you eat should be mostly
derived from whole grains, fresh fruit, and fresh or frozen
vegetables. Whole-grain bread, bagels, crackers, cereals,
lentils, brown rice, and pasta all are good sources of
carbohydrates.
Protein helps build and repair damaged tissue and
helps the body make antibodies to increase a person’s
resistance to disease. Good sources of protein include fish,
poultry, pork, beef, eggs, beans, and nuts.
Fat is important, too, for energy. It helps the body use
carbohydrates and insulates it in cold weather. Certain fats,
however, are healthier than others. You should limit foods high
in saturated fats, which increase your cholesterol level and risk
of heart disease. Foods that contain high quantities of saturated
fats include meat and dairy products—butter, eggs, cheese,


MULTISPORT 29
..Being Prepared For Multisport
and whole milk. Saturated fats typically remain solid at room
temperature.
Unsaturated fats are either polyunsaturated or
monounsaturated, depending on their molecular structure. Most
come from plant sources and are liquid at room temperature.
These are the good fats. Try to replace many of the saturated
fats in your diet with unsaturated fats to help you lower your
cholesterol level and maintain a healthy heart. Unsaturated fats
are found in oily fish, like salmon, albacore tuna, and sardines;
nuts; olives; avocados; canola and nut oils; and vegetable oils
from corn, safflowers, and sunflowers.
Trans fats are formed when vegetable oils are processed
into margarine or shortening through hydrogenation. This
process turns liquid oil into a solid fat at room temperature.
The body has difficulty using these chemically altered fats,
which are used to make french fries, doughnuts, crackers, and
cookies. Read the labels on packaged food products and try
to avoid eating foods that contain partially hydrogenated or
hydrogenated oil.


30 MULTISPORT
.Being Prepared For Multisport.
Keep your body hydrated by drinking plenty of water
each day. Eight to 10 glasses a day is recommended, though
multisport athletes will probably need more—especially during
workouts. Water helps you stay energized, deal with hot and
cold temperatures, and digest food.
Fiber is another important ingredient in your diet.
Sometimes called roughage, fiber cannot be digested, but it
helps push foods through the digestive tract, reducing the
likelihood of constipation. Many whole grains, seeds (such as
sesame and poppy), and fresh fruits and vegetables (especially
broccoli, cauliflower, and cabbage) are high in fiber.
Be sure you are also getting enough calcium. Calcium
is found in dairy products such as milk, cheese, and yogurt,
and foods such as nuts, beans, broccoli, and canned salmon.
Making sure you have at least four servings of calcium daily
will help ensure that your bones stay strong throughout your
life. If you do not get enough calcium in your diet while you
are young, you could be at risk for the bone-thinning disease
called osteoporosis.
Failing to fuel and refuel your body with good foods can
lead to fatigue and injury; you will also be more likely to get
sick. Develop good eating habits now so they will become
second nature to you throughout your lifetime.
Think Small
Many people follow the traditional three-square-meals-a-day
routine. However, many sports nutritionists recommend that
athletes eat five smaller meals per day. This will help normalize
blood sugar and insulin levels more efficiently than eating three
larger meals each day. When your blood sugar spikes, or rises,
you will get a quick burst of energy for a short period of time,
but you soon will experience a strong dip in energy. Smaller
meals—about one every three hours throughout the day—will
give you a more consistent energy supply.


MULTISPORT 31
The 4 R’s of Recovery During Training
• Replenish: Take in fluids and electrolytes during and after
training sessions to stay hydrated and maintain proper
physiological function. Calories are needed during longer
sessions.
• Refuel: After the workout, carbohydrates are needed to help
replenish glycogen stores, and protein is needed to help
repair the muscle damage done during the workout.
• Rebuild: Facilitating blood flow to deliver nutrients and flush
out metabolic waste is key. Athletes also need to maintain the
range of motion and flexibility of the muscle and connective
tissue.
• Relax: Improvement requires more than just great training
intensity. It also needs downtime to allow the body to heal
and careful planning over time to balance the rigors of
different training sessions.
..Being Prepared For Multisport





.Gear You’ll Need To Get Started
Gear You’ll Need
To Get Started
There’s a good chance you already have all the gear you need
to give multisport a shot. Over time, as you become more
involved with the sport, your experience will guide you toward
any extra items you might need. But for now, here’s a list of the
essential items required to begin to train and race the triathlon.
Basic Swimming Gear
Swimming is one of the more accessible disciplines to outfit
and practice. If you have access to an indoor pool or don’t have
to worry about the weather, all you need to start swimming is
a suit, cap, and goggles. Of course, there are several other items
and various training tools for swimming you can try out and
use to help you move from beginner and beyond.
Swimsuit: Start with whatever suit you are most comfortable
swimming in. Keep in mind, however, there are specially made
lap-pool suits for a reason: The more aerodynamic you are in
the water, the more efficient a swimmer you will be.
Swim cap: Any sporting goods store should have a cap that
will work, or you can shop online for different styles and
colors. Variations in cap thickness—or even
ones made from neoprene, that fancy rubber
used in wetsuits—may be an option if you
swim in colder temperatures.
Goggles: You can start with an essential
pair of swim goggles from your local
sporting goods store or any number of
online outlets. Fit is critical, so get gender-
specific when selecting and try them on
if possible. Lens choices include tinted,
smoked, or mirrored and may be a good


34 MULTISPORT
Gear You’ll Need To Get Started.
option if you regularly swim in open water or where the sun
may be a factor. You can get goggles with prescription lenses
like your eyeglasses, if you wear them.
Optional Swimming Gear
Wetsuit: There are many styles and brands, so consider
where and how often you may need a wetsuit. You may not
need one to practice in if you live where the water is warm.
That said, wetsuits offer the swimmer buoyancy and added
warmth and come in sleeveless, capped-sleeve, and
long-sleeve styles. They vary wildly in fit from
one brand to the next, so either try on the specific
one you intend to purchase or look closely at the
measurement guidelines before you buy. Invest in a glide stick
or spray for more effortless dressing and removal of your suit.
(In most races, USA Triathlon requires wetsuits when the
water temperature at an event is below 60.6 degrees Fahrenheit.
Refer to USA Triathlon’s competitive rules at usatriathlon.org
to understand when you’re allowed to wear a wetsuit.)
Tri Suit: A tri suit or kit is what you wear underneath
your wetsuit—or if the swim is not wetsuit legal,
as your outfit for the entirety of the race. Unlike a
unitard in style and fit, the tri suit is one piece of
material, usually sleeveless and with shorts, that
you can comfortably and aerodynamically wear for
each discipline.
Kickboard: This accessory aids your swim training and is
available at many indoor pools. Kickboards mainly assist in
training your kick speed and power but can also be used
between your legs as a pull buoy to work your upper body
exclusively in the swim.


MULTISPORT 35
.Gear You’ll Need To Get Started
Fins: Swim fins are another accessory and may be available
where you plan to swim. Wearing fins during training helps you
focus more on your stroke as they aid in guiding you fish-like
through the water.
Pull Buoy: Using a pull buoy negates the use of your legs while
keeping them afloat behind you, allowing you to strengthen
your stroke and upper body as you pull through the water. Pull
buoys may be provided where you intend to swim, and if not,
try using a kickboard instead.
Snorkel: When you eliminate the pesky ordeal of trying to
breathe every stroke or two, you can concentrate more fully on
your form. Use a snorkel to help fine-tune your mechanics in
the water.
Swim Bag: Everything in and around the pool, including your
swim bag, will get wet. There are a variety of sizes and styles
of waterproof bags available, so you can bring them right to the
edge of the pool with all your accessories safely stored.
Basic Biking Gear
The cycling portion of the triathlon may be the toughest of the
three disciplines in terms of gear. There is much to consider
and care for when riding a bike, not to mention the ability to
cycle indoors when the weather doesn’t cooperate.
Bike: Whatever bike you already have will do,
whether it’s a road, tri, or mountain bike, but
you may want to take it to your local bike shop
to ensure it’s tight, lubed up, and ready
for a race. The geometry of the road
bike frame differs from that of a
triathlon bike regarding the seat
tube angle. Also, a road bike will
most likely not be equipped with
aerobars. Road bikes are primarily
made for cyclists getting out of the
saddle and resting, not running. Triathlon bikes are specific to
triathlon in that the rider is more aerodynamic in the saddle
and, therefore, better able to save power and efficiency in their
quadriceps for the run portion of triathlon training and racing.
Helmet: They range in fit, style, and price, but be sure to get a
helmet with MIPS (multidirectional impact protection system)
so you know it will do its job if needed. Select one that closely


36 MULTISPORT
Gear You’ll Need To Get Started.
matches the size of your head and is comfortable. A properly
sized and fitted helmet is more likely to stay in the right
position and better protect you in case of an accident. Most
helmets come with a selection of replaceable pads
of various thicknesses that you can use to fit the
helmet to your head. Wear your helmet so it covers
your forehead to just above the eyebrows. Adjust
the straps so the helmet stays in this position on
your head.
Kit Bag: The best way to carry gear while cycling
is in bags specifically designed for bikes. Most
are constructed to hold gear securely and can be
mounted on a rack. The bag should include an extra
tube, a pump, and tire levers.
Shoes: If you wear ordinary shoes when cycling, tuck your
shoelaces inside your shoes. Otherwise, the laces could get
tangled in the chain or the chainrings, causing you to crash.
Gloves: Gloves cushion the shocks transmitted
through the handlebars from the wheel, and they
reduce damage to your hands if you fall. Most gloves
have padded palms for cushioning. Warm-weather
gloves are fingerless; cold-weather gloves cover the
whole hand.
Optional Biking Gear
Bike Shorts: The extra padding where you need it
and the tight fit of a bike short are essential to a
comfortable ride. Cycling shorts protect your skin
where it comes in contact with the saddle. These
shorts are made from a stretchable synthetic material and
have legs long enough to extend below the edge of the seat. A
special material is sewn into the crotch of the shorts to provide
padding and wick away moisture. Cycling shorts come in many
colors, but black is the most popular because it does not show
stains from dirty hands, chains, saddles, or tires.
Bike Shirt: A cycling shirt minimizes wind resistance and has
pockets for fuel, keys, and your phone. Cycling jerseys are
tight-fitting, short- or long-sleeved shirts made of fabric that
wicks away moisture. Jerseys are long enough to cover your
waist in the normal riding position and usually have pockets
sewn onto the back where you can carry food or other small
items while cycling.


MULTISPORT 37
.Gear You’ll Need To Get Started
Jacket, Rainwear, and Layers: In cold or wet weather, you
might need more than a standard bike shirt. Like jerseys,
cycling jackets have long tails and usually have back pockets.
They typically have a breathable back panel to let excess heat
escape; some feature armpit zippers and removable sleeves.
Rain clothing, such as high-tech, breathable-fabric rain jackets
or simple nylon windbreakers, should shed the rain and allow
air to flow around your body, keeping it at a comfortable
temperature. Rainwear should be a bright color such as
yellow or lime green and have retroreflective strips
to help others see you despite poor visibility.
Bike Shoes: Comfort and fit to your clips or
pedals are essential when purchasing bike
shoes. The best way to ensure the correct
fit is to visit your local bike shop with
your bike in tow. Usually lightweight, bike
shoes also have very stiff soles to protect
your feet and reduce fatigue.


38 MULTISPORT
Gear You’ll Need To Get Started.
Sunglasses: Not only do they reduce glare from
the sun, but sunglasses also protect your eyes
from flying debris on the roads. You can wear
any pair you have, as long as they fit with your
helmet, or you can purchase a cycling-specific
pair. High-quality, polarized sunglasses are good
when you need sun protection. When you don’t, clear
or amber riding glasses or goggles are useful.
Indoor Trainer: No matter where you live, a bike trainer—
often called a stationary bike—is great when weather or time
makes riding outdoors impossible. A wide range of trainers are
available, depending on your needs and requirements.
Cycling Computer/GPS: From primary data of speed and
distance to computing altitude and GPS, a computer will
come in handy to analyze stats so you can measure your
improvement or lack thereof.
Power Meter: A bicycle device that measures the rider’s power
output uses strain gauges to measure the torque applied, which,
when combined with angular velocity, calculates power. They
accurately measure your production so you can calculate your
effort throughout your ride. This lets you identify your strengths
and weaknesses over varying terrain to create better workouts
based on actual data.
Basic Running Gear
The triathlon’s run portion requires very little gear;
however, what it does require is extremely important.
The value of good running shoes must be balanced
and can very quickly make or break your training
and racing.
Running Shoes: If you’re looking for the right place
to invest in running and triathlon, make it here. Visit
a running specialty store to get fitted for a shoe that
fits your specific gait and biomechanics. Running in
the wrong shoes will quickly lead to injury.
Socks: To avoid blisters and toenail loss, choose
a running/sport-specific sock with sweat-wicking
materials to keep your feet dry and happy.
Shorts/Capris/Tights: You can get away with shorts
or sweats that allow good movement and will not
chafe your skin. Technical fabrics are your best bet,
but investing in expensive run-specific clothing is
unnecessary.


MULTISPORT 39
.Gear You’ll Need To Get Started
Running Shirts: Although shirts made with technical fabric
will allow for better breathability and therefore less chafing,
sweat, and general discomfort while running, you can wear any
athletic shirt you already own.
Optional Running Gear
Hat or Visor: Hats and visors reduce glare and block your
face and eyes from harmful rays. Plus, if you need to
squint to see the road, you waste valuable energy.
GPS Watch: There are so many to choose from,
it’s almost better to wait and see which will best
fit your training. You can get a reasonably priced
basic watch with GPS, pace, and distance or a
more expensive one with heart rate monitoring,
cadence count, and stride length.
Heart Rate Monitor: You can purchase a watch with
a built-in heart rate monitor or buy a separate chest strap
to monitor your heart rate during runs. Heart rate monitoring
on the run is useful for a variety of reasons, including tracking
progress, zone training,
and avoiding overtraining.
Hydration Packs: Bring
water and fuel if you plan
to run longer distances.
There are a wide variety
of options, so it’s best to
research, read reviews,
and maybe even test a few
before making a purchase.





MULTISPORT 41
.Event 1: Swimming
Event 1: Swimming
Most people know how to swim. Not many know how to swim
well enough that they move through the water quickly but also
in the most efficient way possible.
Here’s a series of skills and drills to follow to help you
progress your skill and confidence in the water. Include these at
the beginning of every swim workout. As you get better, you can
spend less time on them, but always practice the fundamentals.
They will save you when you are challenged the most.
Basic Swimming Drill
Start with 20 to 30 minutes, three times a week:
1. Breathing. Hold onto the pool wall with your arms
overhead and your face in the water and practice breathing.
Exhale big bubbles, turn your head to the side with one ear
to the ceiling and one ear in the water, and inhale. Then
turn your head so your face is back in the water and repeat.
2. Kicking. Hold onto the wall to practice your kick. Push up
with the back of your leg/bottom of your foot (upbeat).
Then push down with the top of your leg/top of your foot
(down beat). Repeat.
3. Kicking and breathing at the same time. Still holding
onto the wall, combine the two skills above. Using your legs
requires more oxygen and will challenge your breathing.
The key is to keep it as steady and smooth as you can.
4. Kicking and breathing with a kickboard. Now you can
work on your forward propulsion with your legs. Hold
the board at the bottom, arms stretched overhead, face in
the water. Turn your head to inhale as you move forward.
Keeping your breathing arm at your side can be helpful.
5. Add one arm stroke. The next progression is to kick,
breathe, and pull with one arm, bringing the coordination
together one arm at a time.


42 MULTISPORT
Event 1: Swimming.
6. Swim freestyle to the best of your ability. Freestyle, the
fastest and one of the most graceful of all swimming strokes,
is a combination of the skills you just worked on: the flutter
kick, the rotating arm stroke, and rhythmic breathing. By
“Freestyle” and
“crawl stroke”
refer to the
same technique.
Freestyle is the
usual term in
competitions like
multisport.
Front crawl, side and front views


MULTISPORT 43
..Event 1: Swimming
working on the individual pieces of the stroke, you can
focus and improve your whole technique. Always work to
put the whole stroke together to continue your progression.
Advanced Swimming Workouts
Once you’ve progressed through the basic skills of improving
your freestyle, it’s time to work on how to structure your pool
workouts. There are two basic options:
1. Intervals. Intervals do not always mean going fast and hard.
It simply means intermittent work and rest periods.
A structured interval workout would look like this:
• Warmup: Do the basic swimming drill listed above,
then four sets of 8x25 yards or meters easy swimming,
resting as needed between each set.
• Main set: Do six 12x25 sets of freestyle swimming
with 10-30 seconds rest between.
• Separate pull and kick drills: Do 6x25 kick drills and
6x25 pull-focused swim drills using strong arms,
relaxed legs, and a pull buoy if you prefer.
• Cool down with easy swimming, any stroke, around
100 yards or meters.
Total yards and meters in this workout will end up
between 500 and 750.
2. Long endurance swim. Increasing your distance or time
in the pool is a logical and basic place to continue your
preparation for a multisport competition. The triathlon swim
is an aerobic endurance event, and improving this aspect
is important. When you’re ready, build on a continuous
swim: 100, 200, 300, etc., from week to week. This may
be intermingled with some breaststroke, sidestroke, or
backstroke to keep the effort continuous.
Kicking Tips
Kicking during the swim portion of an actual triathlon should
be kept to a minimum to conserve leg strength for the bike
and run. But that doesn’t mean you should never kick during
practice. Kicking drills work on body position as well as
kicking.
A good flutter kick is about 12 to 16 inches deep in the
water. Only your heels should be popping out on the downward
kick. And don’t forget to kick up and down with flexible ankles.


44 MULTISPORT
Event 1: Swimming.
Don’t drive the kick from your thighs—it should be hip-
driven and snap your toes down with your knee bending
slightly. The advantage of a solid kick is that it creates the
balance needed to have a good stroke rhythm.
Stroke Tips
A triathlon swim is all about efficiency and stroke rate. The
best way to think of this is that you want to get the maximum
distance per stroke with the most efficient stroke rate to
maintain “steady state swimming.” It takes practice to find the
perfect ratio between the two, but working on creating excellent
technique will assist in getting the most out of your swim.
Increasing Your Comfort In Open Water
Pools are great places to practice swimming. However, since
most multisport competitions conduct their swimming events in
open water, you’ll want to practice some there too. Swimming
in open water is often completely different than swimming in a
pool. It could be colder. There could be currents. There might
even be waves.
Many triathletes describe experiencing sensations akin
to panic attacks during open water swims, characterized by
shortness of breath, tightness in the chest, dizziness, and strong
self-talk. These sensations may have physiological origins rather
than being purely psychological panic attacks.
Two physiological phenomena are identified as potential
causes of these discomforts. Carotid sinus reflex is when
pressure on the carotid artery triggers a reflex that increases
blood pressure and signals the heart to slow down, causing
sensations similar to panic. Mammalian diving reflex is


MULTISPORT 45
..Event 1: Swimming
when the face is submerged in cold water and the body’s
natural response is to slow down the heartbeat and redirect
blood flow, which can feel distressing during swimming.
Remedies to this experience include:
• Relieving pressure on the neck, ensuring that wetsuits or
swim caps don’t press on the neck area and trigger the
carotid sinus reflex.
• A proper breathing warmup before swimming, including
practicing gentle bobbing in the water and blowing bubbles
to acclimate the body, can alleviate the effects of the
mammalian diving reflex.
• Altered behavior due to panic attacks can be avoided by
addressing the physical causes and achieving a sense of
calmness in the water, making open water swimming more
enjoyable and rewarding.
You might want
to work some
breaststroke into
your training. It is
one of the
oldest strokes
used in Scouting
and is quite
efficient.
Breaststroke, side and front views


46 MULTISPORT
.
Ten Ways To Avoid Overtraining
1. Take dedicated easy or off days each week, with a recovery
week every three to five weeks.
2. A recovery day can include exercise done at a low to
moderate effort. For triathletes, something like an easy
swim, a short jog, or yoga class.
3. A recovery week does not mean you sit and do nothing—
just reduce the overall training by 30%-50% and keep your
efforts light for a few days.
4. Recovery days and weeks allow your body the time to heal
the microtrauma (muscle and soft tissue breakdown) that
occurs during exercise and give you a chance to mentally
and emotionally decompress.
5. Stay on top of sleep and nutrition, including post-workout
nutrition.
6. Sleep 7 to 8 hours each night, and you might need more as
your training intensity increases. A rule of thumb is to add
30 minutes to one hour of sleep per night for every 10 hours
of exercise per week.
7. On the nutrition front, unless you’re actively trying to lose
weight, you need your increased calorie expenditure to
match intake.
8. Have a methodical, specific approach to your training—
space out harder workouts with easy days.
9. New triathletes with an endurance background may try to do
it all every day. You go hard at swim practice, then hard on
the group ride, then hard at the interval run. But then your
body has no chance to recover. Build up your workouts into
longer sessions and learn to make the key sessions count.
10. It really all comes down to this: Listen to your body.


MULTISPORT 47
..Event 1: Swimming
Safe Swim Defense
All multisport swimming training activities must be conducted
according to Scouting America’s Safe Swim Defense standards.
The eight points of Safe Swim Defense are as follows:
1. Qualified Supervision
All swimming activity must be supervised by a mature and conscientious
adult age 21 or older who understands and accepts responsibility for the
well-being and safety of those in his or her care and who is trained in and
committed to compliance with the eight points of Safe Swim Defense.
2. Personal Health Review
A health history is required of all participants as evidence of fitness for
swimming. Forms for minors must be signed by a parent or guardian.
3. Safe Area
All swimming areas must be carefully inspected and prepared for safety
prior to each activity. Water depth, quality, temperature, movement,
and clarity are important considerations. Hazards must be eliminated or
isolated by conspicuous markings and discussed with participants.
4. Response Personnel (Lifeguards)
Every swimming activity must be closely and continuously monitored by a
trained rescue team on the alert for and ready to respond to emergencies.
5. Lookout
The lookout continuously monitors the conduct of the swim, identifies any
departures from Safe Swim Defense guidelines, alerts response personnel
as needed, and monitors the weather and environment.
6. Ability Groups
All youth and adult participants are designated as swimmers, beginners,
or nonswimmers based on swimming ability confirmed by standardized
swim classification tests. Each group is assigned a specific swimming area
with depths consistent with those abilities.
7. Buddy System
Every participant is paired with another participant. Buddies stay together,
monitor each other, and alert the safety team if either needs assistance or
is missing.
8. Discipline
Rules are effective only when followed. All participants should know,
understand, and respect the rules and procedures for safe swimming
provided by Safe Swim Defense guidelines. Applicable rules should be
discussed prior to the outing and reviewed for all participants at the
water’s edge just before the swimming activity begins.





MULTISPORT 49
..Event 2: Biking
Event 2: Biking
The bike is the most efficient human-powered vehicle ever
invented. There are important things to remember to keep it—
and the human who’s operating it—running smoothly.
The Basics
First things first: You need to wear a helmet. If you don’t already
own a bike, visit a local bike shop to buy one or consider
borrowing one from a friend to try out. Schedule a bike fitting,
where an employee will adjust the seat to fit your height. It
should sit just high enough for your leg to extend fully through
the stroke. Sitting too low results in knee pain while riding and
too high can cause Achilles and hamstring issues.
On rides, you should also carry bike maintenance and
repair tools with you, including an air pump, inner tube, and a
multitool for tightening loose gears.
Grab a trusted adult and check your favorite online map
to find the best bike route between two points—including
elevation gain and loss. Many fitness tracking apps with GPS
can help you find the most popular routes that others take.
Or reach out to your local cycling group. They’re always
willing to help.
Even if you’re clocking 20 mph paces during your cycling
class at the gym, don’t expect to transition seamlessly from
the spin bike to the streets. Road biking requires unique skills,
including navigation and defensive riding, shifting gears, and
clipping in.
Rules of the Road
Distracted drivers are the biggest risk to bikers out on the open
road. Often it seems that they simply don’t see you, regardless
of your neon jersey and flashing lights. They might appear to be
oblivious or out of control. There is little you can do about any
of this. But you do have control of your own riding habits.
Too far back
Too far forward
Correctly
positioned
The rule to
remember is:
If you are on a
bicycle—even
straddling it
without moving—
your helmet
should be properly
fastened on
your head.


50 MULTISPORT
.Event 2: Biking.
• Your No. 1 job when riding on the road is to maintain
situational awareness. If you hear a car approaching from
behind, stay balanced. They may come close. Don’t veer
into their path. Don’t veer off the road either—unless you
can tell they’re coming right at you. If it’s a truck, get
ready to have a lot of wind blown your way.
• Prepare for every driver to make the worst possible
decision. If they pass you, prepare for them to
immediately slow down and turn right—right in front of
you. If they stay behind you, prepare for them to come
perilously close when they finally do pass. Imagine that
virtually no approaching or cross-traffic drivers see you,
and expect them to fail to yield. It doesn’t matter if you’re
in the right. What matters is not getting hit by a 3,000-
pound vehicle.
• Wear bright clothing with reflective stripes. Put lights on
your bike. Riding a bike is a time to be seen, not to remain
inconspicuous.


...Event 2: Biking
• Avoid road cycling at dawn, dusk, and nighttime.
Visibility is poor at these hours, and your chances for
distracted or impaired drivers increase—especially in the
evening and at night. If you do ride at these times for
commuter or scheduling reasons, find the least traveled
roads you can. And turn on your lights.
• Avoid rush-hour cycling. People are angry, hungry, and
catching up on their social media feed. If you must ride at
or near rush hour, find a group to ride with. There is safety
in numbers.
• Maintain your bike. If the chain pops off on a steep climb,
you’re going to tip over. If you blow out the sidewall of
an old tire on a steep descent, you have a high chance of
crashing.
• Don’t wear headphones while riding. You lose situational
awareness. It doesn’t matter how good the song or podcast
is. It’s a bad idea.
• The safest sort of cycling you can do outdoors is on
greenways and bridle trails. Both are safer than roads
by a large margin. Where there are no cars, there’s no
chance of being hit by a car. (Though you can still crash
into a pedestrian or another cyclist.) Typically, you are
speed limited, but at some point, the lure of safety might
overpower your desire to ride as fast as you
can. And riding a fat-tire bike increases
resistance, so you can still get a good
workout if you so desire.
• Ride predictably—don’t catch any vehicle
drivers by surprise—by staying where you
can be expected to be seen, traveling in the same
direction as traffic, and signaling and looking over
your shoulder before changing lanes or turning.


52 MULTISPORT
.Event 2: Biking.
Bike Maintenance
Stay on track with routine maintenance. You’ll be protecting both
your investment and yourself. Maintenance will prevent bigger
problems down the road. Take pride in the equipment you use,
and it’ll make your life easier in the long run.
Pre-Ride Maintenance Checklist
Every time you hop on your bike, you should do a brief check
of your equipment. This will take only a couple minutes and is
well worth avoiding getting stranded miles from home.
o Tires. If you have a gash in your tire, you can have a
blowout. And if the tire blows, you’re going down. Look
at the sidewall of the tires for maximum and minimum
pressure. Always remember, it’s better to slightly under-
pump your tires than to over-inflate them.
o Brakes. Squeeze the brakes to make sure they are
functioning properly. The wheels should spin true in
the center with no wobble or brake rub.
o Wheel skewers. Check to see if the wheel skewers—the
mechanism that attaches the wheel to the bike—are
tight and seated properly. They should be snug to secure
the functionality of the wheels.
Weekly Maintenance Checklist
o Clean your bike. Even more important if you are riding
in wet conditions, as chains and gears get grimy.
o Drivetrain wash. Wash your chain, especially if you are
riding in mud and gravel. For exceptionally dirty chains,
use an adhesive remover and rinse it with a pressure
washer, keeping the nozzle away from the bearings.
o Drivetrain lube. Once your drivetrain is clean, apply
degreaser and chain lube. Use a biodegradable degreaser
and lube that’s made specifically for bikes.
Semiannual Maintenance Checklist
o Tuneup. Most bikes will need a full tuneup every six
months. It is a good idea to at least do a thorough once-
over a couple of times a year.
o Cables. Check your cables to see if they are fraying or if
the heads have snapped off in the shifters.
o Brake pads need to be replaced more often than most
triathletes expect, especially if you are riding on hilly
terrain where you use your brakes a lot.
Never wash
your bike with
high-pressure
water (like in a
drive-through car
wash) because
water will be
forced into
bearings,
causing rust.


MULTISPORT 53
...Event 2: Biking
o Tires. If you’re getting flat spots on your tires, you’re
going to need to replace those because that can be a
major safety issue. If you see any cuts, general damage,
bulges, or fiber casing that shows through the rubber,
it’s time for a replacement.
o Headset. Make sure your headset—the components that
provides a rotatable interface between the fork and the
frame—is tight so the handlebars are snug.
Annual Maintenance Checklist
o A yearly visit to your local bike shop. Many bike
shops will let you learn from the mechanics while they
are working on your bike.
o Bottom bracket and cassette. These places are often
neglected and a lot of times they need to be cleaned,
lubricated, and sometimes replaced.
o Chain. As a result of the wearing away of metal on the
chain, the drivetrain “stretches” and can end up tearing
out the cassette. If you replace the chain more often, the
other gears will actually last longer.
o Bearings. In servicing the bottom bracket, front and
rear wheel hubs, and the headset, it is also important to
check the bearings. This includes removing, cleaning,
and repacking or replacing them.





MULTISPORT 55
...Event 3: Running
Event 3: Running
Though there are different distances of triathlons, all of them
have one thing in common: Running is the last event. That
makes pacing—not just during the run, but during the entire
day—one of the most important keys to keeping up with your
competition.
The difference between well-paced and poorly paced runs
can be significant, with potential time variations of several
minutes, especially in longer events like Ironman.
Effective run pacing begins with smart pacing on the bike
leg. Overexerting on the bike can lead to fatigue and struggling
during the run.
Maintain a pace on the bike that you could sustain for an
additional 10%-15% of the total bike distance. There’s only one
way to learn the right pace for you: Practice, practice, practice,
while keeping track of your times down to the second.
It’s essential to avoid pushing too hard early on the bike to
ensure a strong run afterward.
To properly pace your run, divide it into two segments,
with the first slightly longer than 60% of the total distance.
Begin at a pace that allows for building speed in the latter part
of the run.
Save some energy for the second part of the race,
especially in longer distances.
Warming Up and Cooling Down
It’s important to warm up and cool down before running to
help lower injury risk and ease muscle soreness. Warming
up helps increase range of motion and blood flow, allowing
muscles to feel less stiff. Cooling down after your workout
lets your heart rate and blood pressure slowly recover to pre-
exercise levels, while also helping to get rid of metabolic waste
in muscles.


56 MULTISPORT
Event 3: Running.
The key to warming up is taking it slow and easy. Good
warmup exercises include jumping jacks, pushups, jumping
rope, arm rotations, and other calisthenics. Some athletes like to
end the warmup portion of their workouts by briefly running in
place to really get their blood flowing.
When your workout is over, don’t stop moving right
away. This could cause muscle cramps. Instead, jog slowly
or walk for at least a half mile, then continue to move and
stretch. Cooldowns can help promote faster recovery of the
cardiovascular and respiratory systems, as well as prevent
immune system suppression. Don’t neglect this part: After a
strenuous run, your total cooldown routine could take as long
as 10 minutes.
Rules of the Road for Runners
You can run safely in almost any neighborhood or park if you
follow the rules of the road.
• Bike With, But Run Against: When you ride a bike, the
rules dictate you do so in a bike lane because bikes are
treated as traffic, the same as cars. When it comes to
running or walking, however, experts recommend going
against the flow of traffic. Studies show pedestrians are
quickly and safely able to move to the side or stop if they
can see a car straight ahead.
• Stick to Sidewalks: In some states, if there is a sidewalk,
it’s illegal to walk or run in the street. Use your judgment,
and be careful of uneven, narrow, or blocked sidewalks.
• Run Single File: It’s tempting to run alongside your buddy,
but running in single file allows space on sidewalks for
others, making it safer for everyone. Use hand signals to
point out hazards or oncoming runners.
• See … and Be Seen: Visibility is key to safety. Make eye
contact with drivers to make sure they can see you. Wear
reflective gear and bright colors when running after dusk.
Adding a headlamp for extra shine at night will help you
avoid hazards and make you more visible to other people.
• Use Your Ears: Listening to the sounds around you will
keep you aware of drivers, animals, cyclists, and runners
that are approaching from the front or from behind.
Listening to music or podcasts while you run limits your
ability to sense what’s around you, especially if it’s out of
your line of sight. If you must run with music, keep the
volume down; or, even better, run with just one earbud.


MULTISPORT 57
.Event 3: Running
Drills To Improve Your Running Technique
Just as with swimming and biking, it’s important to practice
running in a manner that’s efficient as it can be, maximizing
every movement, wasting as little effort as possible.
Grab a comfortable pair of shoes, find a soft surface (such
as a gym floor or grassy yard) and work on your running by
practicing these drills:
HIGH KNEES
This exercise makes for a great warmup while
also working out your core and improving your
balance.
1. Stand tall, feet shoulder-width apart, arms
down at your sides.
2. Bring your right knee up toward your chest
and, at the same time, bring your left hand
up to your shoulder.
3. Lower your right knee and left hand, then
bring your left knee and right hand up.
4. Repeat for 30 seconds, then rest for 30
seconds. Continue until you’re tired.
BUTT KICKS
This exercise helps strengthen your hamstring
and glutes and will help improve your form
while running.
1. Stand tall, feet shoulder-width apart, arms
down at your sides.
2. Without moving your right knee forward,
slowly bring your right heel back to your
rear end.
3. Slowly bring your right foot back down and
repeat the same motion with your left heel.
4. Gradually increase the pace until it feels like
you’re running in place, being sure to keep
your knees from moving forward and get-
ting your heels as far back as you can.
5. As you go faster, swing your arms in a
running motion.
6. Repeat for 30 seconds, then rest for 30 seconds. Continue
until you’re tired.


58 MULTISPORT
Event 3: Running.
LUNGES
This exercise will work out almost all of the muscles in your
lower body. It will also help you improve your balance and
coordination.
1. Stand tall, feet shoulder-width apart, arms at your sides.
2. Take one big step forward with your left leg.
3. With your left foot on the ground a few feet in front of you,
lower your body forward toward the ground, with most of
your weight on your left leg.
4. Keep your back straight.
5. Push yourself back up, then repeat with the right leg.
6. Repeat for 30 seconds, then rest for 30 seconds. Continue
until you’re tired.
You can get even more benefit out of lunges by adding a couple
of light dumbbells or other weights as available.
Moving into an
inchworm. Next
step: pushup
position.
1 2


MULTISPORT 59
.Event 3: Running
INCHWORMS
This exercise improves flexibility and strengthens your core.
1. Stand tall, feet shoulder-width apart, arms at your sides.
2. Keeping your legs and back as straight as you can, bend
over at the waist until both hands are on the ground. You
know how an inchworm moves up and down? This is the
“up” portion of the exercise.
3. Keeping your feet in place, “walk” forward with both hands
until you are in a standard pushup position.
4. Pause here for a moment. This is the “down” portion of the
inchworm exercise.
5. “Walk” backward with your hands, then stand up straight
again, keeping your legs as straight as you can.
6. Repeat for 30 seconds, then rest for 30 seconds. Continue
until you’re tired.
SOLDIER KICKS
This is a great exercise for your hamstrings. Note that you’ll
need some space for this one, as it requires you to walk forward
as you perform the exercise.
1. Stand tall, feet shoulder-width apart, arms down at your
sides. Then step forward with your left foot.
2. Extend your left arm straight out in front of you and take a
step forward with your right foot, this time swinging your
right leg up so it almost touches your left hand.
3. Repeat with your right arm and left foot, swinging your foot
up as high as you can every time.


60 MULTISPORT
Event 3: Running.
Pacing Guidelines
• Sprint: Maintain a pace slightly easier than 1,000-meter
intervals on the track, with controlled breathing and
muscle relaxation.
• Olympic Distance: Maintain a fast pace but conserve
energy for later in the run.
• Long Distance: Aim for a floating sensation, akin to a
steady-state tempo run, saving energy for the latter part of
the race.
• Ultra Distance: Avoid racing the run until the final 10
miles, maintaining an aerobic pace throughout to prevent
fatigue buildup.
How To Build Up Your Endurance
Begin a training program that slowly builds up your mileage. By
gradually increasing the distance you run each week, you will
strengthen your muscles, tendons, and ligaments as your body
begins adapting to the extra stress. Depending on your physical
condition, you could start by running a half mile to a mile three
to four days a week. Keep your pace fairly slow; do not run
what you would consider an all-out effort.
Increase your mileage by no more than 10% per week to
avoid overtraining and injury. Gradually extend the length of
long runs and incorporate midweek semi-long runs to build
endurance. If you are running 3 miles a week, you could
increase the mileage to 3.3 miles the next week, and so on until
you reach the weekly mileage you desire. As with any training
program, it is important to make gradual increases in mileage
and intensity as you try to improve your speed.
Maintain a similar intensity level while training for longer
races, possibly reducing high-intensity workouts during mileage-
building phases. Emphasize the importance of maintaining
overall speed and cardiovascular fitness through consistent
high-intensity training, despite preparing for endurance-based
races.
Strength training becomes increasingly important as
race distance increases. Tailor strength workouts to address
individual weaknesses to prevent overcompensation injuries.
Strengthening muscles and joint connections reduces the risk of
injury and improves longevity in the sport.


.Event 3: Running
Pay close attention to your body’s signals and incorporate
adequate recovery days, especially after hard workouts and long
runs. Prioritize rest and recovery to prevent injuries and allow
for better training adaptation over time, leading to improved
race performance regardless of distance.
Common Running Mistakes
Some common mistakes that multisport athletes make during
their run training are:
Increasing running volume too quickly. Many triathletes push
their running volume and intensity too rapidly, risking injury due
to the high muscular damage caused by running. This is going to
take time, and rushing it does more harm than good.
The fix lies in consistent and frequent training, balancing
intensity with easy runs. A general guideline says that if you
are running and still able to hold a conversation with another
person, you are probably training efficiently.
Lack of specificity. Running at high intensity for most runs
leads to fatigue, muscular damage, and stagnant fitness gains.
Adding specificity to workouts by including both low- and high-
intensity runs improves overall performance and resilience.


62 MULTISPORT
Event 3: Running.
Poor running form. Neglecting proper running mechanics
can increase energy expenditure, reduce pace, and induce
fatigue. Emphasizing correct posture (stand tall with your head
in a neutral position, looking forward, not down), lean (it is
ideal for a distance runner to have a 3%-5% backward body
lean), arm carriage (focus on driving your elbows directly
behind you and naturally let them come forward), foot speed,
and leg drive (raise your knee high enough off the ground that
your muscles can provide more force with each stride) enhances
efficiency and reduces the risk of injury.
Neglecting strength training. Triathletes often overlook
strength training, leading to weaknesses, imbalances, and
increased injury risk, particularly in running. Functional
strength training is essential for improving coordination,
mobility, power, and resilience, contributing to overall triathlon
performance. You can train with weights, or you can use your
body’s weight as the resistance for exercises like pushups,
pullups and situps.
You are still growing, so it is important to start weight
training slowly. Whenever you participate in weight training
activities, it is important to do so only under the supervision
and guidance of a knowledgeable trainer.
Quality vs. quantity in running. Consistent training is
essential for success. It’s better to maintain a steady routine
over several weeks than to push too hard in isolated sessions
and risk injury or illness. The majority (at least 80%) of
your running should be easy, allowing for physiological
development and preparation for more intense workouts.
Incorporate short bursts of speed work (under 9 seconds) with
ample recovery time. Avoid long, strenuous repeats to ensure
longevity in training.
Once your body adapts to regular running and major races
are approaching, introduce quality workouts gradually.
Failing to train at race pace. Tailor your training paces to
the specific demands of your race. Focus on addressing your
biggest limiting factors, whether physiological or mechanical.
Regularly practice in conditions similar to race day to prepare
adequately for race challenges like hills, heat, and wind.
Monitor your form throughout races and training sessions,
adjusting your training based on what you observe.


.Event 3: Running
Every good run
or workout starts
with a quality
stretching session.





MULTISPORT 65
.Transitioning Between Events
Transitioning
Between Events
One of the unique things about multisport is that it’s not just
your race times that count. The time it takes you to move from
one race to another counts too. These are called “transitions,”
and learning proper transitioning techniques is just as important
as knowing how to swim, bike, and run.
Transitions are so important, they’re often referred to as the
“fourth discipline.”
Transition areas are designated before the race, giving you
time to scout them out and learn the lay of the land. Within
each transition area, you’ll have a designated spot in which you
can execute your transition, and you’ll have the opportunity
before the race to drop off the gear you’ll need in your spot.
Transition 1 (often simply called “T1”) is the process of
switching from cycling to swimming. If you are wearing a
wetsuit, taking that thing off is a lot harder than it sounds.
Practice in advance! You’ll definitely want to take off your
goggles, put on your helmet, and pull your bike off the rack.
You may also need to put on a bib with your race number.
Transition 2 (or T2) is the transition from biking to
running. This will require you to, at a minimum, remove your
bike helmet and change your shoes.
In some multisport events, there will be transition stations
where you can completely change clothes—if you need
to—in privacy. Often, though, you’ll need an underlayer
of clothing that you can wear for every discipline. A tri
suit made especially for triathlons is a common solution.
It’s also important to check the rules before each compe-
tition. In some races, for example, you could be dis-
qualified for getting on your bike before your helmet is
strapped on. Or you may have to roll your bike to a cer-
tain spot before getting on and beginning your ride.


66 MULTISPORT
.Transitioning Between Events.
Tips For a Smooth Transition
• Less Is More. Bring only what you will need for
your race into the transition area. Too many pieces of
unnecessary stuff can clutter your area and be a hazard
to you and your competitors. Have a list of your specific
transition needs and, the evening before your race, lay out
everything and check off the items as you place them in
your transition bag.
• Have a Plan. Mentally rehearse your movements through
transition. Before you get to your area, you should know
in which order you will take off and put on equipment—it
should be automatic. Work on a mantra for each transition:
“Shoes, helmet, glasses, number belt, bike, go!”
• Be Quick, But Don’t Hurry. Be calm and purposeful in
your movements. Rushing around will just cause you
to fumble with your equipment (slowing you down),
or worse, to forget something. It’s not all that rare for a
runner to have to head back into the transition area for
his or her race number, or for a runner to head out of
transition with his or her bike helmet still on.
• Expect the Unexpected. If something goes wrong (for
example, a piece of equipment is not where you put it,
or you arrive at your bike and a tire is flat), don’t let a
roadblock halt your race. Have a plan for these situations,
take care of them calmly, and keep on racing.
• Mind Your Manners. Transition areas are often very tight,
so keep your equipment in your area and try not to take
up too much space. Be sure that you re-rack your bike in
your original spot and that you grab your equipment, not
your neighbor’s. We heard of an athlete who once noticed
that his feet hurt during the run portion of his race. It was
not until he returned home that he noticed he had put
on someone else’s running shoes—same model, different
size. Ouch!
• X Marks the Spot. Use a brightly colored towel on which
to place your equipment and note landmarks around the
transition area that will help you locate your spot. Your
best bet is to count the racks to your section—towels or
other identifiers can fall off your equipment. Precious
seconds can be lost while you are searching for your spot.


MULTISPORT 67
..Transitioning Between Events
• Know the Flow. Walk through the transition area several
times from the swim exit to your bike to the bike exit, and
then from the bike entrance to your spot to the run exit so
that you familiarize yourself with the flow of the transition
area. This way you are sure to take the shortest and fastest
route. Also, be aware of where the bike mount/dismount
line is located. Your speedy transition could be nullified by
a time penalty if you mount too soon or dismount too late.
• Practice Makes Perfect. Practice transitions prior to race
day. Just as you work on other aspects of your racing,
you need to rehearse your transitions prior to race day.
Work on wetsuit peeling, running with your bike, mounts
and dismounts, racking and changing equipment. It takes
practice to execute these actions smoothly, quickly, and
safely. The more you practice, the more transitions will
become a seamless part of your race.
Transition Items Checklist
o Race suit o Swim cap
o Goggles o Wetsuit
o Towel o Bike
o Shoes o Helmet
o Sunglasses o Race number belt
o Water bottles and race fuel/gels o Running shoes and hat





MULTISPORT 69
.Get Ready To Race!
Get Ready To Race!
Welcome to your multisport training plan!
This plan is designed to give you an idea of what it takes to
Be Prepared for a multisport competition. If you chose one of the
two-event formats in requirement 3(d), substitute an extra run or
bike ride for the third event your chosen format does not include.
Don’t forget to warm up and cool down at each session.
WEEK 1
DAY EVENT WORKOUT
1 RUN
Walk at a reasonable pace for 5 minutes.
Then run at a medium pace for 5 minutes.
Rest for a minute, then repeat two more times.
2 SWIM
Swim 300 yards. (Most pools are 25 yards long,
meaning you’ll swim 12 lengths.)
Take breaks as needed.
3 BIKE/
RUN
Ride your bike for 20 minutes,
then transition to a run/walk for 10 minutes.
4 REST! None!
5 RUN
Walk at a reasonable pace for 5 minutes.
Then run at a medium pace for 10 minutes.
Rest for a minute, then repeat.
6 BIKE Bike for 20 minutes.
7 SWIM Swim 400 yards. Take breaks as needed.


70 MULTISPORT
Get Ready To Race.
WEEK 2
DAY EVENT WORKOUT
1 RUN
Walk at a reasonable pace for 5 minutes.
Then run at a medium pace for 10 minutes.
Rest for a minute, then repeat.
2 SWIM Swim 400 yards. Rest as needed.
3 BIKE/
RUN
Ride your bike for 25 minutes,
then transition to a run/walk for 10 minutes.
4 REST! None!
5 RUN
Walk at a reasonable pace for 5 minutes.
Then run for 15 minutes.
Rest by walking as needed.
6 BIKE Bike for 25 minutes.
7 SWIM
Swim around 500 yards in open water, following
all the rules of Scouting America’s Safe Swim
Defense, including proper supervision and the
buddy system.
Notes for Weeks 1 and 2
_______________________________________
_______________________________________
_______________________________________
_______________________________________
_______________________________________
_______________________________________
_______________________________________
_______________________________________
_______________________________________
_______________________________________
_______________________________________


MULTISPORT 71
.Get Ready To Race
WEEK 3
DAY EVENT WORKOUT
1 RUN
Walk at a reasonable pace for 5 minutes.
Then run at a medium pace for 15 minutes.
Rest by walking as needed.
2 SWIM Swim 500 yards. Rest as needed.
3 BIKE/
RUN
Ride your bike for 30 minutes,
then transition to a run/walk for 10 minutes.
4 REST! None!
5 RUN
Walk at a reasonable pace for 5 minutes.
Then run for 20 minutes.
Rest by walking as needed.
6 BIKE Bike for 30 minutes.
7 SWIM
Swim around 500 yards in open water, following
all the rules of Scouting America’s Safe Swim
Defense, including proper supervision and the
buddy system.
Notes for Weeks 3 and 4
_______________________________________
_______________________________________
_______________________________________
_______________________________________
_______________________________________
_______________________________________
_______________________________________
_______________________________________
_______________________________________
_______________________________________
_______________________________________


72 MULTISPORT
Get Ready To Race.
WEEK 4
DAY EVENT WORKOUT
1 RUN
Walk at a reasonable pace for 5 minutes.
Then run at a medium pace for 10 minutes.
Rest for a minute, then repeat two more times.
2 SWIM Swim 500 yards. Rest as needed.
3 BIKE Ride your bike for 30 minutes.
4 RUN
Walk at a reasonable pace for 5 minutes.
Then run at an easy pace for 15 minutes.
Rest by walking as needed.
5 REST! None!
6A
(Choose
6A OR 6B)
3
EVENTS
Complete all multisport activities: swim 100
meters (about 110 yards), bike 3 kilometers
(about 1.9 miles), and run 1 kilometer (about
.6 miles) … in that order. If you’ve been hitting
your benchmarks up to this point, you should
be able to complete those distances. Don’t
worry about doing them fast. Just worry about
doing them to the best of your ability.
You’ve got this!
6B
(Choose
6A OR 6B)
2
EVENTS
• Run for 1 kilometer, bike for 3 kilometers,
run for 1 kilometer;
OR
• Swim for 100 meters, run for 1 kilometer;
OR
• Swim for 100 meters, bike for 3 kilometers.
7 Rest … and celebrate!
You’re ready for a multisport race!


MULTISPORT 73
.Get Ready To Race
Carbohydrate Needs During Training
and Racing
The four-week training plan is a good
time to think about your carbohydrate
intake. Carbohydrate intake depends
on individual factors such as gender,
experience level, and race focus.
Hourly carbohydrate intake
recommendations vary widely—
anywhere from 30-90 grams—
making it challenging to
determine the ideal amount.
Metabolic efficiency
testing provides the most accurate
assessment of carbohydrate needs
during training and races, but without
access to that, athletes can experiment with
carbohydrate intake during training sessions.
Gradually increase carbohydrate intake until finding
a comfortable level that supports energy levels and avoids
gastrointestinal issues. Shorter, higher-intensity sessions
may require lower carbohydrate intake compared to longer,
endurance-focused sessions.
Fluid Intake Recommendations
• Your gut can safely process 24 to 32 ounces of
fluid per hour during exercise.
• Electrolyte replacement is crucial, with emphasis
on sodium, potassium, chloride, calcium, and
magnesium.
• Experiment to find the right electrolyte balance for
you, starting with lower sodium replacement and
adjusting based on performance and hydration
levels.
• Electrolyte needs can vary based on conditions,
particularly temperature.
• Sodium is the most important electrolyte lost
in sweat and should be prioritized in your
replacement strategy.


Get a taste of multisport by biking at Dave Alexander Low Gear at the Summit
Bechtel Reserve in West Virginia, home of the National Jamboree. Who knows—you
might become a multi-time world champion like Taylor Knibb (below and page 79).


MULTISPORT 75
.Multisport Athletes Making a Difference
Multisport Athletes Who
Are Making a Difference
The multisport community is one of the friendliest communities
you will find. Once you introduce yourself as someone who’s
interested in multisport, you’ve just made a friend for life.
It’s not surprising, then, that so many multisport athletes
have left a mark not only on the sport but also on the people
who have come to know them as well.
Dave Alexander
Alexander is a Distinguished Eagle Scout and a
recipient of the Silver Buffalo Award, Scouting’s
highest level of recognition for adult volunteers.
He’s also an accomplished triathlete, having
completed 287 triathlon competitions in 37
countries in his career.
Thanks to a historic donation made by
Alexander’s TriDave Legacy Trust, the USA
Triathlon Foundation can support current
and future women’s collegiate triathlon
programs competing at the NCAA varsity
level. The USA Triathlon Foundation
is the charitable arm of USA Triathlon
and raises funds for and makes grants in
support of three pillars—encouraging youth
participation, inspiring pathways to access
and inclusion, and igniting Olympic and
Paralympic dreams—to advance its mission
and create a direct line to individuals,
organizations, and initiatives across the
country that are dedicated to transforming
lives through swim, bike, and run.


76 MULTISPORT
.Multisport Athletes Making a Difference.
Abigail Adams
Known as Abigail
the Advocate, Abigail
Adams became the
first woman with
Down syndrome to
complete a sprint
triathlon. She has
finished at least 15
sprint triathlons.
When she is
not training or
competing, you
can find Adams
modeling, running
her makeup and
apparel business,
and supporting
various foundations
like the National Down Syndrome Society and the Down
Syndrome Foundation of Florida. In 2023, Adams spoke
at the USA Triathlon Foundation Gala and Hall of Fame
Induction at USA Triathlon Nationals in Milwaukee.
Mark Allen
USA Triathlon Hall of Famer Mark
Allen came up short in the Ironman
Triathlon Championships six times,
but he never gave up. On his
seventh attempt, he finally emerged
victorious, and that was just the
beginning. Allen went on to win
five more championships, his final
victory coming in 1995 at age 37,
making him the oldest champion
in the event’s history. He also won
the first-ever official triathlon world
championship in 1989 in Avignon,
France. ESPN once named Allen the
greatest endurance athlete of all time;
Outside magazine has called him “The
World’s Fittest Man.”


MULTISPORT 77
..Multisport Athletes Making a Difference
Gabriel Cobb
Gabriel Cobb, a 22-year-old
triathlete from St. Charles,
Missouri, is breaking barriers
one race at a time.
Cobb has completed
more than 10 triathlons
and wants to be an
example of perseverance.
A public speaker, Cobb in
2023 shared his story of
overcoming challenges and
the role triathlon has played
in his life at the United
Nations in New York.
“I have Down syndrome, and I have no limitations,” Cobb
says.
Cobb started swimming, running, and biking to help him stay
in shape. In 2018, friends invited him to check out the HSTriClub,
a USA Triathlon Club in St. Louis that assists high school kids in
living a healthy lifestyle through swim, bike, and run. A coach
at HSTriClub saw Cobb swimming at the YMCA and
encouraged Cobb to try his first triathlon.
“I like the swimming. I love meeting new
people. My legs are shaking and I’m tired after
finishing, but I love overcoming challenges,” he says.
Chris Nikic
A true iron man, Chris Nikic was the first man with
Down syndrome to finish a full-distance Ironman
in November 2020 in Florida. In 2022, Nikic raced
at the Ironman World Championships in Kona,
Hawaii, completing the race in a time of 16 hours,
31 minutes.
Nikic’s journey started in 2018 after he
graduated high school and focused on getting 1%
better every day. This inspired him to create the 1%
Better Challenge, which promotes Down syndrome
awareness by challenging yourself to get 1% better
for 30 days and help someone to do the same.
Nikic is a Special Olympics, Ironman, and
Laureus Global Ambassador.


78 MULTISPORT
Caleb Prewitt
At just 14 years old,
Caleb Prewitt became
the youngest person
with Down syndrome
to complete a sprint
triathlon. He has now
surpassed 30 triathlons
since his first one in
2021 and continues
to inspire others to
not only challenge
themselves, but also to
challenge others as well.
Caleb has been
a USA Triathlon
Foundation Ambassador
for 3 years and helps
grow the sport through
his inspiring story.
Morgan Pearson
Morgan Pearson followed his own path to triathlon success.
Unlike most elite competitors, he didn’t train and rise to world-
class status through a special development program. Instead,
he was discovered through the Collegiate Recruitment Program
while he was a student at the University of Colorado. The
program identifies top college swimmers
and runners who have the potential to
excel as triathletes. And Pearson certainly
has excelled. Along with Taylor Knibb
(see next page) as members of Team
USA, Pearson took home silver medals
for second place in Mixed Relay at both
the 2020 and 2024 Olympic Games.
Pearson grew up in Spring Lake,
New Jersey, where he was a competitive
swimmer, ocean lifeguard, and high
school runner. In 2017 he entered—and
won!—his first national-level triathlon,
the USA Triathlon Age Group Sprint
National Championships.
.Multisport Athletes Making a Difference.


MULTISPORT 79
Dave Scott
A six-time Ironman World Championships winner, Scott was the
first person inducted into the Ironman Hall of Fame. He earned
the nickname “The Man” for his intense training routine and
relentless attitude that set the standard for multisport athletes.
One of triathlon’s most recognizable names, Scott’s career began
with inception of the sport in 1976. He and Mark Allen (see page
77) were well known for their epic duels in many races.
Taylor Knibb
Multisport can take you around the world.
Just look at Taylor Knibb. At age 23, Knibb, of
Washington, D.C., made history by becoming
the youngest person ever to qualify for the U.S.
Olympic Triathlon Team. And she made the most
of her appearances at the Olympics in Tokyo,
Japan, in 2020 and Paris, France, in 2024, earning
silver medals for second-place finishes in the
Mixed Relay events. Also, Knibb earned three
consecutive 70.3 world championships at the
2022, 2023, and 2024 races in St. George, Utah;
Lahti, Finland; and Taupo, New Zealand.
Knibb was inspired to become a triathlete
after she watched her mom compete in a race and
noticed the friendship among the competitors. She tried a kids’
race and was hooked on the sport from there, working her way
through USA Triathlon’s youth elite and junior elite pipelines.
She made the most of those experiences, too, becoming one of
just three women ever to capture world titles at both the Junior
(twice) and Under 23 levels.
..Multisport Athletes Making a Difference


80 MULTISPORT
Multisport Glossary.
Multisport Glossary
70.3: Ultra distance triathlon or “Half Ironman.” 1.2-mile swim,
56-mile bike, 13.1-mile run (half marathon).
Active recovery: Shallow-intensity exercise or activity after
hard training or racing, e.g., easy cycling.
Aero: Short for “aerodynamics,” this is something to shoot for
on the bike. Your position, your wheels, your bottle, your bike,
etc., can be aero.
Aerobars: Bars attached to the
front of your bike, allowing
you to lean down and over to
ride in an aero position.
Aerobic: This term describes
workouts of low enough
intensity that the muscles
can derive all required energy
from the oxygen delivered to them from the lungs via the heart.
There is no buildup of lactic acid in the blood.
Aerobic threshold: The point at which exercise is possible
without significant lactic acid accumulation. In running, this is
roughly a standalone marathon pace.
Age-grouper: Amateur athletes are called age-group athletes.
They compete with others in 5-year age and gender groups. On
Dec. 31 of the race year, one’s age determines race age.
Anaerobic: When the oxygen delivered to the muscles cannot
break down glycogen and produce energy fast enough, lactic
acid accumulates and is used as a complementary energy
source. This energy system is less efficient than the aerobic
system and cannot be maintained as long.
Aerobars


MULTISPORT 81
.Multisport Glossary.
Anaerobic threshold: The point at which lactic acid
accumulates faster than the body can remove it. In running,
you can maintain the pace for 60 minutes in a
race situation. It corresponds to FTP.
Body mark: Race number on arm and age on
the calf with temporary tattoo or black marker.
Breathing pattern: This is used mainly in
swimming and even biking. In swimming,
breathing patterns can be categorized as
unilateral (always to the same side) or bilateral
(to both sides) and further specified to, e.g.,
3-stroke (breathing on every third stroke) and
4-stroke (breathing on every fourth stroke)
patterns, etc.
Brick: Workouts combining two or more
disciplines. Often, a ride followed by a run.
Build: A training period after a base period. The
build is typically when you start adding more
intensity to your training.
Cadence: The number of swim strokes, pedal revolutions, or
steps per minute in your swim, bike, and run. Corresponds to
RPM (revolutions per minute) in cycling.
Catch: The first of three underwater phases of your swim
stroke after your hand enters the water.
Choice: This is usually used in swim workouts, and it means
your choice of stroke (freestyle, breaststroke, or backstroke).
Clydesdale/Athena: Race categories for men over 220 pounds
and women over 165 pounds.
Cross-train: To engage in various sports or exercises, especially
for well-rounded health and muscular development.
Cooldown: A short period of very easy swimming/biking/
running at the end of your workout will bring your heart rate
down and lead to quicker recovery.
DNS/DNF: Did Not Start and Did Not Finish.
Drafting: Swimming behind a slightly faster person can save
your energy, and it is allowed. But drafting on the bike course—
where you closely follow another athlete to reduce wind
resistance—is allowed only in draft-legal races. In non-drafting
Body mark


82 MULTISPORT
Multisport Glossary..
races, participants must keep at least three bike lengths of clear
space between themselves and the cyclist in front of them. If
you move into the drafting zone, a rectangular area surrounding
each bicycle, you must pass within 15 seconds.
Drill: Common in both swimming and running, but also cycling,
these are exercises designed to improve your technique in one
or a few particular focus areas for that drill.
Fartlek: A workout that consists of nonstructured intervals.
Flip turn: This is a fast way to turn at the end of a swim
length and push off against the wall to return to the lane in the
opposite direction.
Foam roller: A tube of foam (or more rigid materials) that you
can use for myofascial release to improve muscle recovery and
release sore spots.
Foot strike: The way your foot hits the ground when you run.
It is typically categorized as forefoot, midfoot, or heel strike.
Functional threshold power (FTP): The highest average power
you can hold for one hour. You usually approximate based on
shorter test protocols, such as 20- or 30-minute tests.
Hand entry: The phase of the swim stroke where your hand
enters the water.
Hill reps/repeats: Bike or run workouts in which you
repeatedly go up a hill at a high-intensity level.
HR: Heart rate.
Intervals: A type of training in which you alternate periods of
higher intensity with periods of easy or recovery effort.
Kick: The action of kicking in swimming and the overarching
term for kicking drills (e.g., using a kickboard with and without
swim fins).
Kickboard: Swim training tool made of plastic foam held out
before you for kick practice.
Lactate threshold (LT): A point during exhaustive, all-out
exercise at which lactate builds up in the bloodstream faster
than the body can remove it.
Lactate tolerance: How your body copes with lactate buildup
in the bloodstream.


MULTISPORT 83
.Multisport Glossary.
Ladder: An interval workout with increasing and decreasing
interval distances/durations, such as swim intervals of 50 – 100
– 150 – 100 – 50 meters.
Long slow distance: Term for aerobic endurance training.
Main set: The focal part of a workout, often the whole
workout minus warmup and cooldown.
Mount line: You can’t get on your bike until you cross this line.
Multisport: A sport consisting of more than one discipline,
including triathlon, duathlon, aquathlon, aqua bike, off-road
triathlon, and winter triathlon.
Negative split: When the second half of a race or workout is
faster than the first.
Paddles: A training aid for swimming. Plastic paddles attached
to your hands increase water resistance, helping build strength
and increasing awareness of technical errors.
Positive split: When the second half of a race or workout is
slower than the first.
Pull: The second underwater phase of the freestyle stroke.
PR/PB: Personal
record and
personal best.
Good for you!
Pull buoy: A
floating swim-
training tool is
placed between
your legs to
keep your legs
up so you can
concentrate on
your stroke.
Push: The final
underwater
phase of your
stroke.
Racking your bike: Place your bike in the transition area on
the provided racks.
Racking


84 MULTISPORT
Multisport Glossary..
Rest interval: The recovery time/distance between the intense
intervals in interval workouts.
Rate of perceived exertion (RPE): A subjective rating of
intensity and effort level.
RPM: Revolutions per minute. See cadence.
Sighting: Follow the swim course by lifting your eyes out of
the water every stroke or two to see where you are about the
course buoys.
Speed laces: Elastic/bungee laces for your running shoes to
save time tying them.
Speedwork: Broad term for high-intensity intervals.
Spinning: Pedaling at a high cadence in low gear.
Strides/striders: Strides or pickups are accelerations of 10-30
seconds up to close to maximum speed during warmups before
races and speedwork and as part of technique sessions where
the focus is on good running form.
Swim waves: Based on gender, age, and speed, you’ll start the
swim with a subset of people, using your own starting horn.
This is to space out athletes on the course.
Taper: A short period before the race during which the training
volume is decreased so that accumulated fatigue disappears just
in time for the race without losing too much fitness due to the
decreased training volume.
Timing chip: To track your time, you’ll wear a chip attached to
an ankle strap throughout the race.
Transition (T1 + T2): These are areas where your bike and gear
are stored throughout the race. You’ll have an assigned spot.
After each leg of the race, athletes return to transition to swap
equipment before heading back onto the racecourse.
Tri suit: These are shorts and a top, or a one-piece style, that
you wear throughout the race.
TT bike/tri bike: Special road bikes made for triathlon racing,
with flat handlebars and a set of aerobars.
VO2 max: The maximum oxygen uptake and utilization rate in
the body. It is a widespread fitness measure.


MULTISPORT 85
.Multisport Glossary.
Warmup: Easy exercise or movements at the start of a
workout/before a race to get the blood flowing and the muscles
primed and prepared for the coming effort.
Wetsuit: A close-fitting rubber suit worn by swimmers in cold
water to keep their bodies warm. Wetsuits also make swimmers
more buoyant and faster.
A
tri suit, perfect
for swimming,
biking, and
running. (He’s not
biking barefoot.
To save time,
most multisport
athletes pre-attach
cycling shoes to
their bike.)


86 MULTISPORT
Multisport Resources..
Scouting Literature
Athletics, Cycling, Personal Fitness,
Sports, and Swimming merit badge
pamphlets; Scouts BSA Handbook for
Boys; Scouts BSA Handbook for Girls
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.
Books
Friel, Joel. The Triathlete’s Training
Bible: The World’s Most
Comprehensive Training Guide, 5th
Edition. VeloPress, 2024.
Friel, Joel. Your First Triathlon:
Race-Ready in 5 Hours a Week.
VeloPress, 2024.
Golding, Dan. Triathlon For Beginners.
Triathlon Hacks, 2012.
Hagerman, Patrick. Strength Training
for Triathletes: The Complete
Program to Build Triathlon Power,
Speed, and Muscular Endurance.
VeloPress, 2015
Organizations and Websites
Ironman
ironman.com
Triathlete
triathlete.com
USA Triathlon
usatriathlon.org
World Triathlon
triathlon.org
Acknowledgments
Scouting America is
grateful to the
TriDave Legacy
Trust, founded by
Dave “TriDave”
Alexander. The
Trust’s generous
donation made the
Multisport merit
badge possible.
As the trust’s founder, Dave is a
renowned triathlete who has competed
in 287 triathlons across 37 countries. He
is a Distinguished Eagle Scout and a
recipient of the Silver Buffalo Award,
Scouting’s highest level of recognition
for adult volunteers.
Dave’s passion for Scouting and
athleticism has inspired countless
Multisport Resources


MULTISPORT 87
. Multisport Resources.
individuals. His dedication and
perseverance have set an example for
Scouts. By completing this merit badge,
Scouts will gain a deeper understanding
of the challenges and rewards of
multisport athletics. They will learn how
to train effectively, set achievable goals,
and overcome obstacles.
We extend our sincere appreciation
to the team at USA Triathlon for its
support in providing detailed
information, training plans, and
photographs.
We also thank Aaron Derr, senior
editor of Scout Life and Scouting
magazines, for authoring this pamphlet
and Michael Goldman, Scouting
America’s publisher and editorial
director, for his editing and design work.
Scouting America is grateful to the
men and women serving on the
National Merit Badge Subcommittee for
all they do for Scouting.
Photo and Illustration Credits
Abigail the Advocate
(abigailtheadvocate.com),
courtesy—page 76/
Dave Alexander, courtesy—pages 74
(Low Gear) and 75.
Getty Images—cover (all except
runner) and pages 6, 13, 25, 35, 76
(Allen), 77 (Nikic), 79 (Scott), and
80
Jupiter Images—page 34
The Prewitt family, courtesy—page 78
(Prewitt)
Archi Trujillo/USA Triathlon,
courtesy—cover (runner) and pages
8, 24, 33, 34 (swimmer), 38, 40, 44,
48, 50, 54, 56, 64, 67, 81, 83, and 85
Jacob Wiegand—page 77 (Cobb)
Wikimedia Commons, public domain—
page 10
World Triathlon, courtesy—pages 74
(Knibb), 78 (Pearson), and 79 (Knibb)
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of or
are protected by Scouting America.
Tom Copeland—page 61
Rachid Dahnoun—page 19
W. Garth Dowling—pages 14, 16, 18,
32, and 53
John McDearmon—pages 42, 45,
and 49
Roger Morgan—page 86
Mary Oakes—page 63 (center and
bottom)
Brian Payne—pages 5, 21, and 46
Tommy Penick—pages 57 and 63 (top)
Michael Roytek—pages 20-23, 36, 38,
57, 58 (bottom), and 59
Tara Tamer—page 68


Get ideas for your next merit
badge adventure in every
issue of Scout Life magazine.
Subscribe TODAY at
go.scoutlife.org/subscribe
Use promo code
SLMBP15
for a special Scout price!