REPTILE AND
AMPHIBIAN STUDY
STEM-Based


REPTILE AND
AMPHIBIAN STUDY
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


35941
ISBN 978-0-8395-3288-0
©2023 Boy Scouts of America
2023 Printing
Requirements
FPO
Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Reptile-And-Amphibian-Study
or check Scoutbook for the latest requirements.


REPTILE AND AMPHIBIAN STUDY 3


4 REPTILE AND AMPHIBIAN STUDY
Tree frogs use their adhesive disk toes to climb
vertical surfaces.
Scouts must not use venomous reptiles in
fulfilling requirement 8a. When you decide
keeping your specimen is no longer pos-
sible or desired, be sure to find another
appropriate home for it or return it to the
wild at the location of capture. Check with
your merit badge counselor for those
instances where the return of these
specimens would not be appropriate.
Under the Endangered Species Act
of 1973, some plants and animals
are, or may be, protected by fed-
eral law. The same ones and/or
others may be protected by state
law. Be sure that you do not collect
protected species. Your state may require
that you purchase and carry a license to
collect certain species. Check with the wildlife
and fish and game officials in your state
regarding species regulations before you begin
to collect.


REPTILE AND AMPHIBIAN STUDY 5
Contents
What Are Reptiles and Amphibians? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Taking Count. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Identifying Reptiles and Amphibians . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
The Importance of Reptiles and Amphibians . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
Reproduction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
Venomous Reptiles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
Field Trips and Talks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
Facts and Superstitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
The Importance of Conservation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
The Professional Herpetologist . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
Reptile and Amphibian Study Resources. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67


Treat the animals you observe
with care and respect.
Treat the animals you observe
with care and respect.
Texas spiny softshell turtle


REPTILE AND AMPHIBIAN STUDY 7
.What Are Reptiles and Amphibians?
What Are Reptiles
and Amphibians?
Scouts always have been interested in snakes, turtles,
lizards, and alligators, as well as frogs and salamanders. Finding
one of these animals can create excitement on any Scout camp,
hike, or outing. Most reptiles and amphibians are harmless,
and many species can be kept in captivity with proper care and
attention.
Developing knowledge about these captivating creatures
leads to an appreciation for all native wildlife. Understanding
the life cycle of a reptile or amphibian and keeping one as a pet
can be a good introduction to natural history. Knowing about
venomous species, and what to do in case of a snakebite, can
help you to be prepared in case of an emergency.
Reptiles include turtles,
lizards, snakes, crocodilians
(alligators, crocodiles, and
relatives), and tuataras. Most
reptiles are covered with scales
that often are enlarged into shields
or plates, and their toes have
claws. As is often true in biology,
however, exceptions exist. For
instance, the great leatherback sea
turtle has flippers but no claws;
snakes and glass lizards have no
legs at all; and softshell turtles no
longer have scales, except for a
few on their limbs. Young reptiles
closely resemble their parents,
but their colorations and patterns
might be different.
A friend of ranchers and farmers, the Sonoran
gopher snake is a large, powerful constrictor that
feeds on crop-damaging rodents. This harmless
snake often bluffs by hissing and shaking its tail
to scare away would-be predators.


8 REPTILE AND AMPHIBIAN STUDY
What Are Reptiles and Amphibians?.
Amphibians include salamanders,
frogs, toads, and caecilians. Unlike reptiles,
they have moist, glandular skin instead
of scales and, except for a few species in
which the toes have hardened tips, none
have claws. Most amphibians pass through
a larval stage (called tadpoles in frogs and
larvae in salamanders), usually in the
water, before changing into the adult form,
a process called metamorphosis.
Reptiles and amphibians are
vertebrates, meaning they have a
backbone, just as mammals, birds, and
fishes do. Insects, worms, shellfish, and other animals without
backbones are called invertebrates.
Classifying Reptiles and Amphibians
Every type of animal has traits that set it apart from all other
animals. Zoologists (biologists who study the animal kingdom)
use those differences to organize animals into a classification
system. A species is a group of animals that can pass along
its distinctive characteristics to its offspring. Under most
conditions, the individuals of a species do not interbreed with
those of other species. A group of closely related species that
share common attributes constitutes a Genus.
Reptiles and amphibians within a species often vary little
in appearance. For example, a snake from your state may look
much like one of the same species from another state. But
species with wide distributions, in a few cases stretching from
coast to coast or from the South to New England, may have
geographic variations, and individuals in one part of the range
may look different from those in another part. Subspecies, these
geographic races of a species, can breed with one another
A specimen is a
single member of
any species.
The study of reptiles and amphibians is called
herpetology. The word is derived from the Greek
words herpeton, meaning a reptile or creeping thing,
and logos, meaning to study. A person who studies
these animals is called a herpetologist.
The pickerel frog’s strong legs are
well-adapted for leaping.


REPTILE AND AMPHIBIAN STUDY 9
.What Are Reptiles and Amphibians?
where the boundaries of their ranges
meet. A good field guide can help you
determine subspecies in your area.
The range of a species refers to its
natural distribution—that is, the geo-
graphical extent of its occurrence in
nature. This is usually given in terms
of the states, or sections of the country,
where a species is found.
An animal’s habitat is the type of
environment in which it lives. Some
species need to live in or near water, and
their habitats are said to be aquatic or
semiaquatic. Others are suited to hot, dry
conditions, so their habitat may be the
desert. Some kinds rarely leave the sur-
face of the ground, while others prefer to
live in trees or on rock faces. Some have
single specialized habitats such as caves,
springs, or around the edges of ponds.
Others live only in sandy areas or places
where certain types of vegetation grow.
Habits describe an animal’s behavior
and natural history—how it finds, cap-
tures, and swallows food; whether it lays
eggs or its young are born alive; whether
it hides most of the time or is active
above ground; whether it is active mostly
at night (nocturnal) or during the day
(diurnal); whether it climbs, swims, or
burrows, and so on.
A species’ scientific name is made up of the genus name, which is
placed first and capitalized, followed by the species name; both are
italicized. For example, the scientific name of the common king snake
is Lampropeltis getula.
Some species of reptiles and amphibians
require highly specialized habitats. The
mangrove salt marsh snake lives in the
brackish waters and saltwater mangrove
swamps of southern Florida.
In different parts of its geographic
range, the same species of snake
can vary in appearance, such as
the rat snakes shown above.
Black rat snake
Yellow rat snake


10 REPTILE AND AMPHIBIAN STUDY
What Are Reptiles and Amphibians?.
How Snakes Move
It is fairly easy to observe how
turtles walk and frogs leap, but fig-
uring out how snakes slither along
is not quite so obvious. Serpents
are very flexible, with a pair of
movable ribs for each of the large
ventral scales, or plates, on the
abdomen. A system of muscles
connects these ribs to the outer
edges of the ventral scales. As the
snake flexes these muscles, the
free, outer edge of the scales will
catch on any small projection or surface irregularity, giving the snake
locomotion. Using this method of crawling, many kinds of snakes can
move in a straight line. Few of them do, though. They usually take
advantage of the terrain and use various projections as pivots against
which they can push as they move forward. With this method, the body
moves in S-curves as it follows the head.
Like some other desert species around the world, the American
sidewinder flips sideways to achieve locomotion. Some aquatic snakes
swim by using the S-curve method against the resistance of the water.
To watch how a snake crawls, put an inch or two of fine sand or
gravel in an aquarium or large clear container and tamp the material
down. Then put a small or medium-size nonvenomous snake in the
container. Set the container on a shelf so your eyes are level with the
snake’s belly. You will see the movements of the scales as the reptile
crawls along.
The plains black-headed snake is a
secretive, harmless, rear-fanged species.
The Brazilian rainbow boa is
a beautiful and powerful boa
of the South American tropics.


REPTILE AND AMPHIBIAN STUDY 11
.Taking Count
Taking Count
It is impossible to determine exactly how many species of
reptiles and amphibians occur within the borders of the United
States because those numbers are constantly changing. New
species still are occasionally discovered, especially among the
amphibians. Formerly nonnative species from Mexico and other
tropical locations are starting to be found in southern states.
Research sometimes indicates that what once was thought to
be a pair of separate species is actually two subspecies; or,
despite outward appearances, it is discovered that two species
exist where previously there was thought to be only one. Still,
such additions and deletions do not occur very often, so an
approximate list of species is a good estimate for general study.
Like the iguana, above, some species of reptiles and amphibians
from other countries have become established in the United
States, especially in southern Florida.


12 REPTILE AND AMPHIBIAN STUDY
Taking Count.
General Distribution
More kinds of amphibians, and many more kinds of reptiles,
live in the southern part of the United States than in the
northern part. Unlike endothermic mammals and birds, most
reptiles and amphibians are ectothermic, meaning their body
heat comes from their environment, instead of from their
metabolism. Most reptiles control their body temperature
by their behavior, for example, by basking in the sun when
too cold or seeking shelter in the shade when too warm.
Most amphibians become the same temperature as their
environments.
Habitat preferences also influence distribution. Frogs,
salamanders, and most turtles need to live in aquatic or
moist environments, such as are abundant in the East and
Southeast. Frogs and salamanders also populate moist areas
of the Pacific states.
Approximate Number of Native North American Species*
Snakes 119
Lizards 91
Turtles (including sea turtles) 50
Crocodilians 2
Frogs and toads 82
Salamanders 113
Total 457
*These figures are estimates that apply only to species native to the
48 contiguous states.
Reptiles and amphibians are ectothermic—the external environment
dictates their body temperatures. Most reptiles use their behavior
to further heat or cool their bodies; most amphibians do not. The
Western painted turtle is commonly seen warming itself by basking
along ponds and streams in the western U.S.


REPTILE AND AMPHIBIAN STUDY 13
.Taking Count
Some kinds of snakes, as well as the American alligator,
are semiaquatic, spending some time in the water and some
time on land. Other snakes are at home in woods, mountains,
plains, or prairies. Still other snake species have adapted to life
in the desert, where they avoid the daytime heat by living in
underground burrows and emerge only at night.
In general, lizards prefer dry conditions and are most
abundant in the Southwest, although many kinds of lizards,
notably skinks, also abound in the more humid southeastern
states. Several kinds of toads and tortoises dig burrows that
can extend many feet underground to help them tolerate dry
conditions. For example, spadefoot toads in arid regions can
remain hidden underground for months at a time, emerging
suddenly, and in enormous numbers, when a rare heavy
rain forms temporary pools suitable for laying eggs and
developing tadpoles.
The greatest number of frog varieties is found in Texas,
followed by Florida, South Carolina, Georgia, and Alabama.
North Carolina, Georgia, Virginia, and Tennessee have the
most salamander types. Texas has the most species of snakes
and lizards, followed by Arizona and New Mexico. More turtle
species live in Alabama than in any other state, although Texas
and Georgia have almost as many. Alligators are found in all
the southeastern states, but southern Florida is the only region
in the United States with crocodiles.
Many harmless garter snake species
and subspecies can be found through-
out much of North America. They hunt
amphibians, worms, slugs, and other
small creatures in a variety of habitats.
The Eastern spadefoot spends most of its
time burrowed underground, emerging
only briefly after heavy rains to breed.
This unusual creature has vertical catlike
pupils and uses a single small projection
on its hind feet to burrow.


14 REPTILE AND AMPHIBIAN STUDY
Taking Count.
Off the Mainland
Scouts living in Alaska, Hawaii, Puerto
Rico, and the Virgin Islands will have
to take certain differences into con-
sideration. If you live in one of these
areas, consult with your merit badge
counselor on the best way to complete
requirements 6, 8, and 9.
Alaska has only three salamanders,
two frogs and a toad, and a single
species of snake. Most of these are
confined to the extreme southern part
of the state.
Hawaii has about two dozen kinds
of reptiles and amphibians, almost all
of them introduced from other parts of
the world. Many have restricted ranges,
living only in the areas where they
were introduced. Three kinds of sea
turtles occasionally appear along the shores of the Hawaiian islands,
and the venomous yellow-bellied sea snake has been seen there on
rare occasions.
Puerto Rico has fewer species and lower populations of reptiles
(fewer than 50 species) and amphibians (approximately two dozen
species of frogs and no salamanders) than mainland areas of
comparable size in the southern United States.
The Virgin Islands collectively have about as many species as Hawaii.
However, as in all archipelagos, some kinds are found on certain islands
and missing on others.
The well-camouflaged leaf-
tailed geckos are native to the
vanishing tropical forests
of Madagascar.


REPTILE AND AMPHIBIAN STUDY 15
.Identifying Reptiles and Amphibians
Most crocodilians
were seriously
overhunted for the
pet and leather
trades through the
mid-1960s and are
now protected by
strict laws.
Identifying Reptiles
and Amphibians
The best way to become skilled at recognizing, identifying, and
distinguishing species of reptiles and amphibians is to observe
the live animals. Use a field guide for your region to learn about
the different species. Most guides will tell you what features are
used to distinguish one species from others of similar appearance.
Alligators and Crocodiles
Crocodilians include alligators, crocodiles, caimans, gharials,
and others. The American alligator is the most common spe-
cies throughout the southern U.S., although American croco-
diles live in areas of the Caribbean (including south Florida)
and Mexico, and spectacled caimans live in Central America.
The easiest way to distinguish between the American alligator
and the American crocodile is to look at the head. The alligator
has a broadly rounded snout, whereas the crocodile’s head is
almost pointed. American alligators live primarily in freshwater,
The shape of
the snout can
be used to distin-
guish among the
three species of
North American
crocodilians. This
is an American
alligator.


Identifying Reptiles and Amphibians.
16 REPTILE AND AMPHIBIAN STUDY
while American crocodiles prefer saltwater coastal areas. Adult
alligators are almost black, while American crocodiles are more
of an olive brown color. The fourth tooth on each side of the
American crocodile’s lower jaw is quite large and in big
specimens fits into a groove on the outside of the upper jaw.
Frogs and Toads
Although all toads are scientifically considered to be frogs, the
common names “frog” and “toad” are often used by the lay-
person to describe two generally dif-
ferent animals. “Frogs,” in general,
have smooth, moist skins and lack
the conspicuous bumpy warts and
relatively dry skins characteristic of
Toads—like the Woodhouse’s toad—have dry, warty skins. Their
legs are relatively short and adapted for hopping.
Always handle amphibians as briefly as possible,
with clean, wet hands. Wash your hands after
handling any animals.
Bullfrogs have declined in some
areas, but they have been introduced
into areas outside their natural range
where they now thrive and compete
with native wildlife.


REPTILE AND AMPHIBIAN STUDY 17
.Identifying Reptiles and Amphibians
toads. Some frogs, such as the bullfrog and leopard frog, have
webbing between the toes of their hind feet that aids in swim-
ming. “Toads” have short hind legs, and when they move they
hop. Frogs have long hind legs and leap. Toads are much easier
to catch than frogs, so toads have another way of avoiding
enemies. Their warts secrete a fluid that is distasteful or even
poisonous to many small animals.
Lizards, Salamanders, and Newts
Lizards and salamanders are easy to tell apart. Lizards
(reptiles) are covered with scales, their toes have claws, their
skins are dry, and they are more likely to be found in the sun.
Salamanders (amphibians) have smooth, moist skins, their toes
are clawless, and they avoid exposure to the sun. Newts have
rougher, drier skins than other kinds of salamanders, but they
do not have claws. Newts are exclusively aquatic in the larval
and adult stages, but some have an intermediate land form,
known as an eft, that later readapts to the water.
Like most salamanders, the spring salamander has a smooth skin and no claws on its toes.


Like all lizards, the skink has claws on
its toes and scales on its head, body,
and limbs.
The chuckwalla is a large lizard
of the southwest deserts
that likes to sun itself
in rocky areas. When threatened, these
amazing herbivorous reptiles quickly
crawl deep into rock crevices, gulping
air to inflate their bodies and wedge
in tight.
Like the Gila monster,
most North American
snakes and lizards lay
eggs. However, water
snakes, garter snakes,
all North American
pit vipers, and some
horned lizards all are
live-bearers.
The Savannah
monitor lizard
is a popular pet
species that
often outgrows
its home. It is
important to
think long-term
about the adult
size and life span
of pets before
you adopt them.
18 REPTILE AND AMPHIBIAN STUDY
Identifying Reptiles and Amphibians.


REPTILE AND AMPHIBIAN STUDY 19
.Identifying Reptiles and Amphibians
Snakes and Legless Lizards
Most snakes have the same general body form—they are
limbless and usually slender. While most lizards have four
legs, the glass lizards of the South and the legless lizards
of California lack limbs entirely and are easily mistaken for
snakes. But unlike snakes, legless lizards have eyelids and their
bodies are rather stiff. In addition, glass lizards have external
ear openings, whereas snakes do not. The worm lizard of
Florida also is legless, and its eyes are covered by scales and
are often invisible.
Live-bearing reptiles retain the eggs in the mother’s
body until hatching time; the young are, in essence,
born alive.
The shy and beautiful trans-Pecos rat snake is a harmless,
secretive, nocturnal creature found in the rocky canyon area
of West Texas, where it hunts for desert rodents.


20 REPTILE AND AMPHIBIAN STUDY
Identifying Reptiles and Amphibians.
Sketching Live Animals
Making sketches from live animals is one way to become
familiar with their physical qualities. Even if you are not artistic,
this method is easy if you follow the outline drawings below.


REPTILE AND AMPHIBIAN STUDY 21
.Identifying Reptiles and Amphibians
Put a piece of tracing paper
over the drawing
of the reptile
or amphibian
similar to the one
you want to record.
In most cases you will need to
copy only the outline and the eyes,
but you may add other details if you
wish. When your drawing is complete,
use a pencil to sketch the outstanding
features such as spots, stripes,
or mottling just as
you see them in
your specimen.
These may be
filled in later with
hatching, stippling, or shading
to indicate the various tones of
coloration. The partially completed
drawing of a salamander, shown here, was
prepared this way from the specimen shown in the photograph.
You could also trace a picture from a magazine or book, or
make your own freehand sketches.
Photographing Live Creatures
Another approach for learning the identifying
characteristics of animals is photography.
Pictures of reptiles or amphibians
being held by someone are usually
not as lifelike as a candid shot of
the creature in its natural
habitat. Catch the creatures
first or use tame
specimens. Place each
subject in an open
area—on a rock, a
background of leaves
or pebbles, or some
other surface that is not
cluttered with weeds or
foreign matter that will partially
obscure them.
Albino Burmese
python


22 REPTILE AND AMPHIBIAN STUDY
Identifying Reptiles and Amphibians.
Some species always seem to be moving and are difficult to
photograph, so get another Scout to help you. Have your partner
hold the creature gently in place while you adjust your camera.
When you are ready, instruct your partner to release the creature.
In most cases the creature will remain still for at least a second
or two while you snap your picture. Try for close-ups, and be sure
that the characteristics important to identifying the species are
obvious in the photograph.
If you are working
with a protected
species, check
local regulations
and handle
it correctly.
If an animal
appears stressed
(excessively
trying to escape,
biting, heavy
breathing, drying
out, etc.) release
it immediately. Be
careful to replace
any logs or rocks
to their exact
original placement,
and always
release animals
exactly where they
were found.


REPTILE AND AMPHIBIAN STUDY 23
.The Importance of Reptiles and Amphibians
The Importance of
Reptiles and Amphibians
Reptiles and amphibians play vital roles as predators, prey, and
as part of the fundamental framework of nature.
In earlier times in North America, some species were
considered useful as food items, skins, or pets. Today, many
species that have commercial value are in serious trouble
because they have been overharvested or otherwise killed in
their natural habitats and now must be protected by federal
and state laws. In a few instances, reptiles and amphibians can
be raised commercially as food,but such ventures often
are unsuccessful.
Most lizards, frogs, toads,
and salamanders eat insects,
helping to control grasshoppers,
crickets, ants, beetles, and other
insects that can become pests
when overly abundant. Snakes that
prey on rats and mice help control
rodent outbreaks. Because of their
streamlined shapes, snakes can
pursue rodents into burrows and
other narrow spaces where other
predators cannot enter. Rat snakes,
milk snakes, king snakes, racers,
bull snakes, whip snakes, rattlesnakes,
and copperheads can be extremely
useful in this regard. Water snakes
and cottonmouths eat dead and
diseased fishes that might otherwise
infect healthy aquatic animals.
Snake venom is used in producing
many life-saving medications.
Numerous arboreal (tree-dwelling)
snakes have bright green coloration to
help them blend with foliage.


24 REPTILE AND AMPHIBIAN STUDY
The Importance of Reptiles and Amphibians.
Catching Prey
Methods of catching, killing,
and engulfing prey vary
among reptile and amphibian
species. Turtles simply seize
their food and attempt to tear
off pieces with their strong
beaks, sometimes securing it
with their forefeet. Many
turtles eat both plants and ani-
mals. Lizards, which eat mainly
insects and other invertebrates,
grab their prey in their mouths
and gulp it down. If the prey is large and struggling, they may press or
hit it against a stone, log, or the ground to subdue it. Alligators and croc-
odiles crush snakes, fish, ducks, and even turtles in their powerful jaws, or
they might drown larger prey, such as raccoons or deer.
Snakes eat only other animals and have a number of ways of sub-
duing prey. Some, such as king and rat snakes, are constrictors. They
tighten their coils around a mouse or other prey until its breathing
has ceased, and then swallow it. Racers and whip snakes seize prey in
their mouths and then throw a coil
over it, pressing the prey firmly
against the ground. Water and gar-
ter snakes hold their prey tightly
in their mouths while it struggles,
then gradually swallow it. Most
venomous snakes attack large prey,
such as rats, by striking, letting go,
and waiting for the venom to do its
work. They then crawl to the dead or
dying animal to consume it.
Many amphibians have long,
sticky tongues they flick out to
seize a moving insect. Some aquatic species suck in their prey like a
vacuum cleaner. Most adult amphibians eat only other animals, primar-
ily invertebrates, and not plants.
The diamondback terrapin is the only
species of turtle that lives in the brackish
waters of the salt marsh, between the
ocean and freshwater. It is found along the
coast from Cape Cod to Texas.
The corn or red rat snake is a
handsome constrictor found
throughout the Southeast. Large
numbers of corn snakes are bred in
captivity and make good pet reptiles.
Remember to carefully research the
needs of any pet to make sure it is
right for your family.


REPTILE AND AMPHIBIAN STUDY 25
.The Importance of Reptiles and Amphibians
Wildlife Protection Programs
An endangered species is defined as “any species in danger of
extinction throughout all or a significant portion of its range.”
The Endangered Species Act of 1973 is a powerful law that
makes it illegal for a person “to harass, harm, pursue, hunt,
shoot, wound, kill, trap, capture, or collect” any animal on the
endangered species list. Punishment for breaking endangered
species laws includes fines of up to $50,000 and imprisonment
for up to one year.
Many species are on the federal endangered species lists,
including the San Francisco garter snake, the Plymouth
red-bellied turtle in Massachusetts, the Wyoming toad, the
Texas blind salamander, and several species of sea turtles.
Most states have regulations protecting one or more kinds
of reptiles and amphibians. Some states protect all species.
Some states offer protection for species that are rare or whose
populations are declining. For example, Arizona protects the
Chiricahua leopard frog, Illinois protects the Illinois mud turtle,
California protects the blunt-nose leopard lizard, and New York
protects the northern cricket frog.
A species’ protected status can change, though. The
American alligator became a federal endangered species in
1975, but as its population increased its status was upgraded to
threatened, and then removed from the list altogether. Control
of the species was then turned over to the states to allow
restricted hunting.
All species of
sea turtles found
in the offshore
waters of North
America are pro-
tected federally
as endangered
species. Marine
turtles spend
their lives at sea,
but females go
ashore to lay
their eggs.


26 REPTILE AND AMPHIBIAN STUDY
The Importance of Reptiles and Amphibians.
Some state restrictions protect species during their breeding
seasons. Others protect rare and vanishing species at all times
from threats like commercialization, indiscriminate collecting,
or needless slaughter.
To be accurate and up-to-date about the laws in
your area, consult your merit badge counselor or
check with your state’s fish and wildlife agency. You
can check the agency’s website for this information.
To obtain a list of federally designated endangered
species, go to www.fws.gov/endangered/
The federally protected eastern indigo snake of the southern
United States can grow to be more than 8 feet long.


REPTILE AND AMPHIBIAN STUDY 27
.The Importance of Reptiles and Amphibians
White’s tree frog is a widespread
species from Australia and New
Guinea, where they prey upon
insects and other garden pests.
REPTILE AND AMPHIBIAN STUDY 27


Water dragons are light-loving, semiaquatic lizards of Australia and Asia.


REPTILE AND AMPHIBIAN STUDY 29
.Reproduction
Reproduction
Strictly speaking, all reptiles and amphibians hatch from eggs,
but the methods of courtship, fertilization, laying of eggs, and
incubation differ widely. Here, in brief, are what might be
called typical reproductive patterns.
Frogs and Toads
Most species of amphibians spend time
on land as adults but lay their eggs in
water. At mating time for frogs and
toads, the male grasps the female from
behind, placing his arms around her
waist or under her armpits in a position
called amplexus. As she lays her eggs
he releases sperm, some of which enter
the eggs. Fertilization is thus external,
as it is among most species of fish. The
eggs develop rapidly unless the water is
very cold.
Tadpoles hatch from the eggs, and
after a growing period ranging from a
few weeks to two years, depending on
the species, the tadpoles develop legs
and lungs and become froglets or
toadlets. Some kinds of frogs, notably
those in the tropics, lay their eggs in
damp places on land, and development
takes place entirely in the egg. Other
species beat the egg jelly into froth, and
the tadpoles live in the liquefied center
of the mass until rains wash them into
nearby pools.
Most frogs and toads mate in the water,
where the female deposits eggs to
be fertilized.
The draining of natural wetlands can
result in death for larval amphibians like
these tadpoles.


30 REPTILE AND AMPHIBIAN STUDY
Reproduction.
Salamanders
During spring or winter rains,
male and female salamanders go
to shallow wetland ponds. After
preliminary courtship maneuvers,
the males deposit spermatophores,
tiny white packets of sperm that
are roughly cone-shaped. The
female picks these up with her
vent, and her eggs are fertilized
internally. Once hatched from the
eggs, the fishlike salamander lar-
vae have external gills and live in
the water for varying lengths of time, depending on the species
and local weather conditions, before they transform into adults.
In some species, notably the mole salamanders that live
in most of the United States, some larvae may mature and
reproduce without transforming into land-dwelling adults. Some
types of woodland salamanders lay their eggs in moist under-
ground cavities or under rocks or logs, and development takes
place entirely in the egg. The large (more than 3 feet long)
aquatic salamanders of the Southeast, known as sirens and
amphiumas, lay their eggs in the water where they live.
Snakes
Fertilization is internal among reptiles. The mating process is
similar to that of mammals, except for the curious fact that
male snakes and lizards have two organs for copulation, called
hemipenes, that lie side by side, hidden inside the base of the
tail. One of the hemipenes turns outward during mating. In
many species, each hemipenis is covered with small spines that
help to hold the organ in position in the female’s body opening
until mating is complete.
In general, copulation among snakes and other reptiles
takes place a considerable time before the eggs are actually laid.
The sperm may remain active in the female’s body for varying
lengths of time, at least in the cases of some kinds of snakes
and turtles. In some species, more than one clutch of eggs may
be fertilized from a single mating, even after a year or more.
Mating in most parts of the continental United States usually
takes place in spring but also has been recorded at other sea-
sons, notably in autumn.
Many salamanders are terrestrial most of the
year but depend on temporary ponds to lay their
eggs. Some, such as the marbled salamander,
remain with their eggs prior to hatching.


REPTILE AND AMPHIBIAN STUDY 31
.Reproduction
Roughly half of North American snake species lay eggs,
which they deposit inside decaying logs or stumps, in rotting
leaves, in piles of rocks, or in other places where they are
completely out of sight. In a few species, such as the smooth
green snake, hatching may take place within a few days. For
other species, it might be many weeks before the young escape
from their shells. Usually the mother snake abandons her eggs
soon after laying them, although pythons and some cobras in the
tropics remain with their eggs. Examples of native snakes that
lay eggs are the racers and the worm, ringneck, rat, milk, king,
and coral snakes.
The other half of North American snake species retain the
eggs within the mother’s body until development is complete
and the young are born alive. Instead of being encased in
relatively tough, parchmentlike shells like the egg-laying snakes,
the young are covered by a thin membrane that they break
through shortly after leaving the mother’s body. Snakes with
this type of reproduction include the garter, water, and brown
snakes; rattlesnakes; copperheads; and cottonmouths.
Turtles
All turtle eggs are laid and hatched
on land. Even the great sea turtles go
ashore to lay their eggs, finding a suit-
able spot, often in slightly moist sandy
or loamy soil, and excavating a cavity
with the hind legs. When the eggs
are laid, the female turtle scoops and
packs the sand or soil back into the
hole. She may crawl back and forth,
dragging her shell, to conceal the nest.
Weeks or months later, depending on
the species and the weather condi-
tions, the eggs hatch.
Most freshwater and land turtles
lay eggs in late spring and early sum-
mer. Some kinds of turtles nest twice
or more in a season. Hatching for
most turtles takes place by early fall, but hatchlings of many
species do not leave the nest at that time. They remain in the
protected cavity through autumn and winter and emerge the
next spring. Hatchlings of aquatic species move toward the near-
est water; hatchling land turtles seek the nearest moist cover.
All turtles, including snapping turtles, lay
eggs that hatch after several months in an
underground nest.


Reproduction.
Alligators and Crocodiles
Alligators build nest mounds of vegetation debris—measuring 4
to 7 feet in diameter and 2 to 3 feet in height—near the water.
The mother alligator lays her eggs in the mound, where heat from
the decomposing vegetation helps incubate the eggs. The mother
may remain nearby to guard them and also to uncover them when
hatching time arrives. Crocodiles have similar nesting patterns,
although some deposit their eggs in the sand like turtles.
Young alligators and crocodiles are vulnerable to other predators
and stay in the vicinity of their protective mother for several
months after birth.


REPTILE AND AMPHIBIAN STUDY 33
.Reproduction
Lizards
Most North American lizards lay eggs in hidden, slightly
moist places. A few kinds, such as some of the horned
lizards and alligator lizards of the western United
States, bear living young in the same way many
snakes do. Many species of lizards guard their
eggs. Some assist in incubation by basking
in the sun and then returning to their
nests where some of the heat they
have absorbed is transferred to the
developing embryos.
In many reptiles, including all crocodiles and
alligators, most turtles, and some lizards, the gender
of the offspring is determined by egg incubation
temperature rather than genetics. In crocodiles,
warmer incubation temperatures produce males and
cooler temperatures produce females. In turtles this
tends to be just the opposite. Studies of some lizards,
such as leopard geckos, have shown temperature-
determined gender as well.
Lizards can be distinguished
from salamanders by their
dry, scaly skin, external ear
openings, and clawed toes.


The eastern diamondback rattlesnake is the largest venomous snake found in the
United States.


REPTILE AND AMPHIBIAN STUDY 35
.Venomous Reptiles
Venomous Reptiles
While most reptiles are harmless and all are beneficial to
the natural balance of life, knowing the distinctive traits of
venomous reptiles can help avoid unpleasant encounters.
Snakes
While potentially dangerous to humans,
snake venom was evolved to help snakes
kill and digest their prey. We have learned
that far more North American snakes are
venomous than was thought. Many com-
mon, harmless snakes like garter, water,
and ring-necked snakes are technically ven-
omous and rear-fanged, but their venom
is far too weak to be dangerous. For more
about rear-fanged snakes, see page 45. In
this guide, “venomous snakes” will refer to
dangerously venomous front-fanged snakes.
At least one kind of venomous snake is found in each of
the 48 contiguous states except Maine and Delaware. Native
venomous snakes are not found in Alaska, Puerto Rico, the
Virgin Islands, or Hawaii, except the yellow-bellied sea snake.
Learn to recognize venomous snakes on sight by studying
color pictures of them or visiting a zoo or natural history
museum. To incorrectly guess a snake’s identity could mean
disaster, so you must know the venomous species in your area.
Be familiar with the appearance of at least one species of each
of the three types of pit vipers and one of the coral snakes. The
safe and simple rule is never to pick up a snake unless you are
certain what kind it is and know that it is not dangerous.
In selecting six kinds of venomous snakes to complete requirement 7, include
any that live in your area. Field guide maps will quickly show you which
snakes live in your state. For example, there are three species of rattlesnakes
in North Carolina, eight in Texas, and 11 in Arizona.
The large, venomous western diamond-
back rattlesnake of the Southwest has a
distinctive raccoon-like banded tail.


36 REPTILE AND AMPHIBIAN STUDY
Venomous Reptiles.
Pit Vipers
All species of pit vipers—rattlers, copperheads, and cotton-
mouths—have a common characteristic: facial pits. These deep
openings on each side of the head, just below the middle of
an imaginary line drawn between the eye and the nostril, are
heat-sensitive and help in the detection of warm-blooded prey
such as birds and small mammals. They also help the snake
take aim when it strikes. The location and appearance of the
pits make the snake look almost as though it has four nostrils.
All snakes with such pits are venomous.
Pit vipers have two other characteristic traits. First, the
scales under the tail are arranged in a single row, except near
the tip, whereas in the coral snakes and most nonvenomous
North American snakes, the scales beneath the tail are in a
double row. Second, pit vipers have eyes with vertically
elliptical (catlike)
pupils, although
several other kinds,
notably rear-fanged
snakes, have
similar eyes.
For a while after its death, a venomous snake retains
much of its reflex action, and its venom remains
potent. Poke a “dead” snake vigorously with a long
stick to be absolutely sure the snake is dead before you
touch it, and do not risk catching your finger on a fang.
None of North America’s native snake species are nor-
mally aggressive. Snakes almost always will get out of
the way if they know you are there. However, an occa-
sional cottonmouth or rattler will stand its ground, and
any snake might defend itself by striking if provoked.
The heat-sensitive pit between the eye
and nostril on the pit viper’s head is
used to detect warm-blooded prey in
the dark. Pit vipers have elliptical pupils,
whereas most nonvenomous North
American species have round pupils.


REPTILE AND AMPHIBIAN STUDY 37
.Venomous Reptiles
These characteristics—pits, scale patterns under the tail,
and elliptical pupils—are not usually helpful in identification
as field marks because one must get dangerously close to the
snake, or actually handle it, to see the marks clearly. But they
are helpful in checking out a dead specimen.
During autumn, pit vipers in some northern and western
areas begin to congregate near dens or denning areas where
they will spend the winter. On warm autumn days and again
in early spring, they sun themselves near the den openings,
sometimes in large numbers. During warmer weather they
wander afield, but they return to the hibernaculum, or winter
den, when the days grow cold.
RATTLESNAKES
The rattle, characteristic of all rattlesnakes, is
composed of numerous dry, horny segments
that fit together loosely. At birth the baby rat-
tler is equipped with a button, but after the
first shedding of skin, a new rattle segment
appears at the base of the tail—and so on
with each subsequent shedding. At first, each
segment is larger than the previous one, but
by the time a rattlesnake is fully grown, all
the newer segments are about the same size.
It is unusual to find a rattlesnake with more
than 12 to 15 segments in its string;
the ones at the end generally are lost through
wear and tear.
Snakes have no
ear openings.
Venomous North American snakes rarely advance
more than half their own lengths to strike.
Many people think the shape of a snake’s head can distinguish whether
it is dangerous or harmless. Do not depend on that myth. Pit vipers have
heads that are noticeably wider than their necks, but so do a number of
nonvenomous species, such as some of the larger water snakes. The only
way to be certain is to know your snakes so well that you can distinguish
species at a glance. If you are not sure, do not take a chance.
Rattle and cross-section. The
individual segments of the rattle
fit loosely into one another and
produce a loud buzzing noise
when the snake vibrates its tail.


38 REPTILE AND AMPHIBIAN STUDY
Venomous Reptiles.
When a rattler is disturbed it vibrates its tail, producing
a continuous sound much like a loud hissing or buzzing.
In general, large rattlesnakes make loud noises and small
rattlesnakes make softer ones. The rattle of the pygmy
rattlesnake is so faint it can be heard only a few feet away.
The big diamondbacks have rattles loud enough to give you
a good scare from several feet back.
A venomous
snake does
not have to be
coiled to bite.
The timber rattlesnake is the widest-ranging large rattlesnake
of the eastern United States. Adults can be from 36 to 60 inches
long or longer. In the southern states, the species is called the
canebrake rattlesnake.
The rattler’s tongue is soft, moist, and flexible. It is a
sense organ.
The dusky pygmy rattlesnake is a small, pinkish
venomous species found in a variety of south-
eastern woodland habitats. These snakes have
nine large scales on the top of their heads com-
pared with the smaller scales found on most
larger rattlesnake species.


REPTILE AND AMPHIBIAN STUDY 39
.Venomous Reptiles
COPPERHEADS
The copperhead gets its name from the coppery-red color of
the upper surface of the head. In eastern localities, the snake is
marked with reddish-brown or chestnut hourglasses that cross
the back. In the far western part of the range, the markings are
much wider and take the form of rich, reddish, crisscrossing
bands. Over a large part of its range, the copperhead inhabits
rocky, wooded areas. It also is found on the
coastal plain and even in swampy areas in
the South, where it occasionally coexists with
the cottonmouth.
Several other species have reddish color-
ing and are often mistaken for copperheads
and killed. Never kill any snake out of fear.
Venomous snakes are important to the eco-
system and generally are not dangerous if
treated respectfully.
A buzzing noise in the field is not necessarily the
warning of a venomous snake. It could be one of many
harmless snakes, including racers, king, milk, and pine
snakes, that vibrate their tails rapidly when alarmed
and can sound much like rattlers if they happen to be
among dry leaves. Treat all such noises with caution.
Copperheads live in rocky,
forested uplands of the North and
throughout lowlands in the South.
The geographic range of
North American rattlesnakes


40 REPTILE AND AMPHIBIAN STUDY
Venomous Reptiles.
COTTONMOUTHS
This semiaquatic snake gets its name from the white lining of
the mouth, which it displays when alarmed. The jaws can snap
shut as quickly as a steel trap. Unlike most snakes, when a per-
son approaches, cottonmouths might stand their ground instead
of speedily retreating. Identification can be difficult because
many water snakes, particularly the larger, heavy-bodied ones,
strongly resemble cottonmouths, especially if they are coated
with mud. If you live within the range of the cottonmouth, be
cautious near all semiaquatic snakes until you have learned to
recognize them.
Young cottonmouths have bold and distinctive bands
and the tip of the tail is bright yellow, like those of baby cop-
perheads. When they grow older, the cottonmouth’s patterns
become much less prominent and the tip of the tail darkens.
Large ones often are uniformly black or dark olive in color.
In some regions, water snakes—including the cottonmouth—are dubbed
water moccasins, which can imply that all water snakes are venomous.
Because of this confusion, harmless water snakes are sometimes killed
on sight. Reserve the name cottonmouth for the single venomous
species, and call all the others water snakes.
The geographic range of North American copperheads


REPTILE AND AMPHIBIAN STUDY 41
.Venomous Reptiles
The cottonmouth lives primarily in lowland swamps, ponds,
and rivers but also invades nearby woodland or rocky habitats.
The average length of a cottonmouth is 30 to 48 inches.
The geographic range of North American cottonmouths


42 REPTILE AND AMPHIBIAN STUDY
Venomous Reptiles.
Coral Snakes
Coral snakes belong to the cobra family and, like their hooded
relatives, are potentially very dangerous. Fortunately, they are
elusive, small, and seldom seen.
Coral snakes are brightly colored with rings of red, black,
and yellow (often cream-colored or whitish in the western
species). They could be recognized on sight were it not for the
fact that several kinds of harmless snakes look very much like
them. Among the mimics are the scarlet snake, the scarlet king
snake, and some of the other king and milk snakes.
The geographic range of North American coral snakes
Coral snakes of the United States belong to two different genera
that are separated geographically. The eastern species ranges
from North Carolina to Texas, while the western species is found
in southwest New Mexico, Arizona, and northwest Mexico.


.Venomous Reptiles
The California mountain king snake has
a patch range from southern Washington
to Baja California. On this harmless coral
snake mimic, the red bands touch the
black bands.
A cousin of the king and milk snakes,
the Texas longnose snake is a harmless
mimic of the venomous coral snakes.
To distinguish venomous North American coral snakes from harmless
species, look at the arrangement of
the colors. In the coral snakes (see the
previous page),
the two warning colors
meet as in a traffic light:
red rings touch yellow
ones. In the harmless
milk snake shown
here, “red touch
black, venom lack.”
This simple rule
applies only
to North American
species. Use this rule
with caution, as it is not
always accurate in North
America and rarely accurate
elsewhere.


44 REPTILE AND AMPHIBIAN STUDY
Venomous Reptiles.
Venomous Lizards
The Gila monster (pronounced HEEla) and the Mexican beaded lizard
are the world’s only two venomous lizards. They are closely related
and look much alike. Only the fat-tailed, orange to pink-and-black Gila
monster occurs in the United States.
When it bites, the Gila monster
hangs on like a bulldog, and venom
flows into the wound from glands
in the floor of the mouth. The Gila
monster can be a dangerous
animal when handled and should
be treated with the same caution
as a venomous snake.
The only venomous North American
lizard, the Gila monster is found primarily
in Arizona. It also can be found in portions
of the adjacent states and ranges far
southward into Sonora in Mexico. Its
average length is 15 to 20 inches.
The geographic range of the
Gila monster


REPTILE AND AMPHIBIAN STUDY 45
.Venomous Reptiles
Rear-Fanged Snakes
Many North American snakes have fangs in the rear of the
mouth and weak venom produced in glands called “Duvernoy’s
glands.” Such snakes will seize a frog or lizard, swallow it far
enough for the fangs to reach it, and then wait for the venom
to take effect before swallowing completely. Among the rear-
fanged snakes are the cat-eyed snake of southern Texas, several
kinds of lyre snakes of the Southwest, garter snakes, hognose
snakes, water snakes, ring-necked snakes, and several others,
nationwide. Such snakes are normally classified as “non-ven-
omous” and are not dangerous, although a few that live in the
tropics, such as the boomslang of Africa, are deadly.
Fangs
All snakes have teeth, but pit vipers and
coral snakes have hollow fangs in the front
part of the mouth. Coral snakes have short,
permanently erect fangs, while pit vipers have
proportionately longer fangs that swing back
against the roof of the mouth when the mouth
is closed. Usually there is only one fang per
side. Sometimes two may be apparent on one
or both sides when new fangs are growing in.
Fangs normally are shed at regular
intervals, a new fang dropping down alongside
the functional one just before the latter is lost.
Dissection of the skull of a venomous snake
will show a series of fangs ready to grow into
place, each fang in turn smaller than the one
that lies ahead of it.
The tip of each fang is needle-sharp
and can penetrate leather and flesh with little
difficulty. Near the fang tip is an opening
through which the venom is injected into the victim. The base
of each fang connects with a tubelike duct that leads directly
from the venom-secreting glands (right and left) located at the
back of the head.
A snake can strike several times in succession,
injecting venom each time.
A rattlesnake skull shows numerous
reserve fangs. When something
happens to the function of a fang,
another one is ready to drop into
its place. A rattlesnake’s fangs lie
in the forward part of the mouth,
where they can be brought into
play instantly.


46 REPTILE AND AMPHIBIAN STUDY
Venomous Reptiles.
When a snake bites, it opens its mouth, raises its fangs,
and darts its head forward. After biting a person or other large
animal it withdraws immediately. The entire movement is so
rapid it takes a high-speed camera to record it. At the moment
the fangs penetrate, the snake’s head muscles are pressing on
the glands, forcing venom through the ducts and fangs into the
victim’s body. If the snake misses in striking, venom can be
ejected from the fangs for a short distance.
Venom
Snake venoms are liquid proteins. No two species of snake have
exactly the same type, but all individuals of a given species
have similar venom. Some snakes’ venom is amber in color;
in others it is clear. Some venoms attack the nervous tissues
of the victim; others affect the blood system.
Once absorbed by the victim, the venom works rapidly.
Small animals may die in less than a minute. In large animals,
such as human beings, the venom may take effect more slowly,
and an amount that would kill a small person might not be fatal
to a large one. The severity of a bite involves other factors, too,
including its location on the body, the physical condition of the
victim, and whether the snake actually delivered a full dose of
venom. Venomous snakes have been known to bite without
injecting venom.
A young cottonmouth has a pattern similar to the closely related
copperhead. Even newborn pit vipers are able to bite and inject
venom and should be treated with caution.
As a precaution,
use a hiking stick
to poke among
stones and brush
ahead of you
when you walk
through areas
where snakes are
common. Watch
where you put
your hands as you
collect firewood
or climb over
rocks and logs.


REPTILE AND AMPHIBIAN STUDY 47
.Venomous Reptiles
First Aid for a Snakebite
The bite of a nonvenomous snake causes only minor
puncture wounds and can be treated as such. Scrub the bite
with soap and water, treat with an antiseptic, and cover with
a sterile bandage. However, a venomous snakebite requires
special care.
The venomous snakes of North America are pit vipers
and coral snakes. Pit vipers, including rattlesnakes, copperheads,
and cottonmouths, have triangular-shaped heads with pits
on each side in front of their eyes. Signals of a pit viper bite
include puncture marks, pain (perhaps extreme) and swelling
(possibly severe), skin discoloration, nausea and vomiting,
shallow breathing, blurred vision, and shock.
Coral snakes have black noses and are marked with red
and yellow bands side-by-side, separated by bands of black.
They inject a powerful venom that affects the victim’s nervous
system. The signals of a coral snakebite include slowed physical
and mental reactions, sleepiness, nausea, shortness of breath,
convulsions, shock, and coma.
The bite of a venomous snake can cause sharp, burning
pain. The area around the bite might swell and become
discolored; however, a venomous snake does not inject
venom every time it bites. Here are the steps for treating
the bite of venomous snakes.
Step 1—Call 911. Get the victim under medical care as soon
as possible so that physicians can neutralize the venom.
Step 2—Remove rings and other jewelry that might cause
problems if the area around the bite swells.
Step 3—If the victim must wait for medical attention to arrive,
wash the wound. If it is a bite of a coral snake, wrap the area
snugly (but comfortably) with an elastic roller bandage.
Step 4—Have the victim lie down, and position the bitten
part lower than the rest of the body. The victim might be very
frightened, so encourage calmness with assurances that care is
being provided.
Step 5—Treat for shock.
Do not make any cuts on or apply suction to the bite. Do
not apply a tourniquet or use electric shock such as from a car
battery. These methods could cause more harm to the victim
or are not proven to be effective.
Since snakes are
not warm-blooded,
they cannot
carry rabies.
Do not give a
snakebite victim
alcohol, sedatives,
or aspirin. Do not
apply ice to the
snakebite. Ice will
not help the injury
but could damage
the skin and tissue.


48 REPTILE AND AMPHIBIAN STUDY
Field Trips and Talks
Observing at a Zoo or Nature Center
If you elect to study a reptile or amphibian at a local zoo or nature
center to fulfill requirement 8b, the local public library should be able
to help you locate these places. For zoos and aquariums, you also can
check with the American Zoo and Aquarium Association.
For your three-month study period, make sure you keep the same
specimen under observation, and try to select an individual that can be
expected to undergo some kind of change—for example, an immature
amphibian approaching metamorphosis, a snake preparing to shed its
skin, or a female preparing to give birth. A keeper or curator can help
you choose an appropriate subject for the study.


REPTILE AND AMPHIBIAN STUDY 49
.Field Trips and Talks
Field Trips and Talks
Taking field trips and giving a talk on reptiles and amphibians
makes earning the Reptile and Amphibian Study merit badge
even more fun and rewarding. Here are some pointers on how
to get started.
Hearing Frogs and Toads in the Outdoors
Hearing frogs and toads calling means getting into the country
at night. These amphibians call from ponds, puddles, roadside
ditches, swamps, and stream edges, usually where the water is
shallow and near where their eggs will be laid. In the northern
states, the choruses begin when the first warm rain arrives in
early spring. In the South, some species sing
during the winter. In most areas, some spe-
cies call during spring and summer. In the arid
West, sudden rainstorms start them calling.
Not all species of frogs and toads sing at
once. In the Northeast, for example, spring
peepers, chorus frogs, and wood frogs are the
first to be heard. They soon are followed by the
leopard and pickerel frogs, and American toads.
Cricket frogs and treefrogs usually sing later,
and Fowler’s toads and bullfrogs may be the
last to join the choruses. Weather plays a big
part. A warm, wet early spring may stimulate
many species to call at the same time. Later, a
rain may set them off out of season when a few
males call briefly, long after the breeding time
is over.
The red-eyed tree frog is
an arboreal species from
Central America.


50 REPTILE AND AMPHIBIAN STUDY
Field Trips and Talks.
Only male frogs call. During their first enthusiasm they may
sing day and night. After a day or two the choruses usually are
heard only after dark. It is well to venture out at dusk and listen
as you hike or drive along a road that runs through a swamp,
or in an area where there are ponds and puddles. Once you
locate a chorus, approach slowly and quietly; otherwise the
frogs will be alarmed and dive into the water, and you may
not see or hear them again all evening. It is normal for them
to stop calling when you get near. When that happens put
out your light and stand perfectly still until they start again. If
you are good at imitating their calls, they may respond to you
promptly. Then stalk slowly forward again, and repeat the pro-
cedure until you are close enough to make your observations.
In arid country, sudden rainstorms may bring toads out
in enormous numbers. They call vigorously for a night or two
and then disappear. Under these conditions you had better go
frogging at once and not wait for another night.
Some frogs sing
near shore, but
others do not.
Waders or hip
boots may be the
most comfortable
cold-weather
wear if you plan
to wade into
the water. If the
waters are not
too cold, you
may prefer
leather boots or
canvas sneakers.
Always take a bright flashlight and fresh batteries,
and put a small backup flashlight in your pocket in
case the main one goes out while you are in the
middle of a swamp. Also, you must always get the
landowner’s or land manager’s permission before
you start exploring.
Bullfrogs can grow as big as
6 inches long and, not surprisingly,
have big appetites.


REPTILE AND AMPHIBIAN STUDY 51
.Field Trips and Talks
Observing Frog and Toad Calls
There are many things to observe. Is the frog in a bush or on
a tree? Is it at the water’s edge? Is it floating at the surface?
How does it make its call? Frogs and toads have throat sacs
that inflate when they sing, serving as resonance chambers.
Is there a single, bubblelike sac, as in the case of many toads?
Or is it elongated like a sausage? Many frogs have a pair of
vocal sacs, one at each side of the throat. You should note all
these details.
Imitating the calls will take practice. Getting them right
can depend on how clever you are with your voice. Whistling
like a spring peeper is easy. A chorus frog call can be
simulated by running a finger slowly along a comb, touching
the smallest teeth last. Once you have heard the songs, you
can invent ways to imitate them.
Male frogs like
this tree frog use
their vocal sacs
to amplify their
calls and attract
females to the
breeding pond.
Join a local FrogWatch USA chapter to
help as a citizen scientist by monitoring
one or more local wetland sites to
identify local frog and toad species
by their breeding calls, and accurately
report your findings.


Field Trips and Talks.
Giving a Talk on Reptiles and Amphibians
The secret of success is to prepare your talk in advance. Make
an outline of what you want to say. Remember that the people
in your audience probably will know little about these animals.
Explain the differences between a reptile and an amphibian and
use live specimens or pictures to illustrate important points.
You will need to spend some time studying books on
reptiles and amphibians so that you know more about the
subject than your audience does. The resources section in the
back of this pamphlet lists a great variety of resources. Learn
the answers to such questions as how a snake crawls, why
it sticks out its tongue while you hold it, and why it has no
eyelids. Explain the difference between a land or box turtle
and the aquatic kinds, pointing out the webbed feet of the
latter. Tell your audience why many kinds of lizards have tails
that break off readily, or why turtle shells of different species
vary in shape and color. Explain the development of frogs and
toads from egg to tadpole to adult. Tell them what you find
most exciting about reptiles and amphibians or about your
observations of species in captivity or in the wild.
These are only examples of what you might talk
about. Select topics and facts that you feel comfort-
able with and that are compatible with your live
specimens. Be prepared to answer questions
after you have finished.
Bearded dragons are native to Australia
and are commonly bred in the pet
trade. Young dragons feed on insects,
while adults also consume plants.





The ornate horned frog is a well-camouflaged terrestrial (land) species from the
Amazon Basin region.


REPTILE AND AMPHIBIAN STUDY 55
.FACTS AND SUPERSTITIONS
Facts and Superstitions
Put that toad down or you’ll get warts! Don’t get too close to a
snake or it will chase you! And keep your mouth closed around
salamanders because they will jump in if you’re not careful!
These and other legends like them are some of the wild
tales that have been told about reptiles and amphibians over
the years. Although a few of these folktales have some factual
basis, most of them are just plain yarns spun for effect.
When it comes to snakes, some folks are willing to swallow
the most fantastic myths. While snakes do some amazing things,
there probably are more tall tales told about snakes than any
other animals. Here are some:
• A hoop snake rolls down hills with its tail in its mouth and
has a venomous stinger in its tail.
• Snakes that live around barns milk cows.
• Snakes swallow their young to protect them.
• The whip snake will chase a person down, wrap around
him, and thrash him to death.
• Snakes chase people.
• Snakes are slimy.
• Snakes go blind during the dog days of August.
• When a snake is killed, its tail wriggles until sundown.
• If a snake is cut into pieces, each piece will form a
new snake.
• Snakes are charmed by music.
• Snakes travel in pairs and seek revenge if one is killed.
• Snakes hypnotize their prey.
• A rattlesnake adds a new rattle each year of its life.


56 REPTILE AND AMPHIBIAN STUDY
.FACTS AND SUPERSTITIONS.
And while not as plentiful as the tales told about snakes,
superstitions about amphibians are just as interesting:
• Toads give people warts.
• Salamanders like fires.
• Tree frogs predict rain.
• Frogs and toads rain down from the sky.
• Salamanders poison springs and jump into people’s mouths.
None of the above statements is true, and some obviously
are absurd. But unless one is familiar with the facts about
reptiles and amphibians, some are believable. See if you can
add to the list of superstitions and false beliefs by talking to
people in your area, and see if you can determine what the
facts are that may have led to the misconception.
Stranger Than Fiction
Here are the facts behind some of the misconceptions
mentioned above:
Rat snakes eat many rats and mice, and barns and other
farm buildings often are excellent places to find food. So
finding snakes around dairy farms is to be expected. But the
rat snake’s mouth is full of needle-sharp teeth for holding
small animals and is not equipped for sucking milk from
a cow.
Many serpents, such as kingsnakes and racers, eat other
snakes—sometimes even their own kind. So if a person
happened to come along at the right moment, it would be easy
to jump to the conclusion that a mother snake was trying to
protect her offspring. The illusion would be strengthened if
the larger snake was disturbed and disgorged the smaller one,
enabling it to escape.
The eastern coachwhip is one of the longest snakes in
North America, reaching lengths of more than 7 feet. The tail
somewhat resembles a braided bullwhip. This may be the
source of the story about a snake that whips people.
No snakes in North America are habitually aggressive
toward human beings, and none is known to chase people. It
is more correct to say that a animal’s behavior is defensive,
rather than aggressive, because in most cases animals are
attempting to defend themselves by striking or other quick
movements that may be misinterpreted as aggression.


REPTILE AND AMPHIBIAN STUDY 57
..FACTS AND SUPERSTITIONS
A few, like the big diamondback rattlers and the
cottonmouth, will sometimes stand their ground, and
occasionally a snake will strike out if harassed. But the average
snake, given a fair chance to escape, will speedily get out of
a person’s way. Sometimes during the mating season racers
and other snakes may feign an attack. Or, in order to reach
their shelters, snakes may crawl directly toward persons who
happen to be in the way.
No snakes are naturally slimy. If they have just crawled
from the water, they may look that way. Some kinds are so
shiny and iridescent they appear oily. To the touch, however,
snakes feel much like soft, pliable leather.
When a snake has met a violent death, reflex action often
lasts quite a while afterward, and the tail can wriggle for some
time. But sundown plays no part in it.
Snakes do not have ears or even ear openings and therefore
cannot hear the normal airborne sounds, such as music, that
humans hear. They feel vibrations through their lower jaw,
primarily those transmitted through the ground’s surface.
Frogs like this gray tree frog often call on warm, rainy nights but
also will call at other times. Far from being good prognosticators,
they may call as loudly before good weather as before rain.


Giants of the tortoise world, the Galapagos tortoise can live more than 150 years and
grow to hundreds of pounds.


REPTILE AND AMPHIBIAN STUDY 59
.THE IMPORTANCE OF CONSERVATION
Remember,
extinction is
forever, but
endangered
means there is
still time if we
care enough to
act quickly.
The Importance
of Conservation
Reptiles and amphibians have taken a frightful beating over the
years. Snakes have been stoned or clubbed to death. Basking
turtles have been used for target practice by people with rifles,
as have lizards and frogs by children with slingshots. All kinds
of reptiles and amphibians have been killed for no good reason.
Fortunately, attitudes about protecting reptiles and amphibians
are changing.
Most people now recognize that reptiles and amphibians
serve an important environmental role. They prey upon other
animals, including great quantities of mice, rats, and insects,
and are in turn eaten by predators such as hawks, carnivorous
mammals, and other reptiles. They are important links in the
food chain of other native wildlife.
Our state and national park systems and the efforts
of many private groups are evidence of our attempt
to preserve wildlife communities. But the pressure of
a growing population makes it increasingly difficult
to keep these areas natural.
You can find out what plants and animals are
protected in your state by contacting your state’s
parks and wildlife department, or by visiting the
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service website. See the
resources section in this pamphlet.


60 REPTILE AND AMPHIBIAN STUDY
.THE IMPORTANCE OF CONSERVATION.
A deadly enemy of reptiles and amphibians today is habitat
destruction. When we drain or fill bogs, swamps, and other
wetlands for industrial sites, shopping centers, and housing
developments, we destroy the habitats of future generations of
frogs, salamanders, snakes, and turtles. Destructive lumbering
and atmospheric pollution can contribute to the reduction of
many species’ forest homes. Pollution in our streams can make
the water unsuitable for amphibians or aquatic reptiles. When
we spray our fields, forests, and roadsides with chemicals that
are deadly to reptiles and amphibians, we may be affecting an
important part of the ecosystem.
Many species of reptiles and amphibians, such as the closely
related gopher frog and crawfish frog, occur in isolated
populations over a wide geographic area. The destruction of small
wetland habitats threatens the survival of such species.
The handsome, sturdy-looking wood turtle is a vanishing
semiaquatic species native to riparian areas of the Northeast.


REPTILE AND AMPHIBIAN STUDY 61
..THE IMPORTANCE OF CONSERVATION
Another form of destruction comes from the pet trade. No
harm is done by keeping a turtle, frog, or harmless snake as a
pet, provided the animal receives good care and attention. But
native animals should not be collected from the wild to be kept
as pets. For some species, collection of even
one or two individuals can lead to the collapse
of the local population. But enormous numbers
of pets die needlessly every year through
ignorance and carelessness. Most people have
little or no knowledge of how to care for such
pets, many of which are purchased as novelties
or on impulse.
Hundreds of thousands of live reptiles
and amphibians are imported legally into the
United States each year, largely for the pet
trade. Many more than that are believed to be
imported illegally. They are handled in such
large quantities by some dealers that individual
care is impossible. Many die in shipment, or in
the hands of owners who do not know how to
care for them or who simply don’t care. The drain on native
species by unscrupulous collectors is also severe, causing many
species of native reptiles and amphibians to receive protection
from certain states, as well as from the federal government.
Loss of much of its specialized wetland
habitat to development, combined
with illegal collection for pets, has
made the small, rare, and secretive bog
turtle a federally endangered species.


62 REPTILE AND AMPHIBIAN STUDY
Venomous Reptiles..THE IMPORTANCE OF CONSERVATION.
You can help to protect reptiles and amphibians by bearing the
following rules in mind:
1. Never collect wild specimens, unless specially permitted
by your state’s wildlife agency for research or education
purposes.
2. When you overturn logs or rocks or boards while looking
for snakes or other specimens, put this cover back in place
to serve as shelter for the next animals that come along.
3. Provide proper food, shelter, and water for any animal you
keep in captivity, and make sure the temperature in the cage
is appropriate for the species.
4. When you are through examining them, release your
specimens at the same spot where you caught them. You
aren’t helping by turning it loose in a strange environment
where it has little or no chance to survive.
5. Teach your fellow Scouts, family, friends, and acquaintances
by telling them repeatedly that reptiles and amphibians
are an important component of our natural heritage and
should be protected. Even venomous species should be
treated with respect and safely moved by trained adults
when necessary. They deserve our protection in their natural
habitats, which may overlap with our campsites, houses,
etc. that we have built in their territories.
Aquatic turtles are well-streamlined for swimming.


REPTILE AND AMPHIBIAN STUDY 63
..THE IMPORTANCE OF CONSERVATION
Conservation Success
In recent years, an alarming number of reptiles and
amphibians have become threatened, endangered,
or even extinct due to habitat
loss, invasive species, pollu-
tion, and overconsumption.
However, conservation,
through strong education
with protected habitat and
enforced harvest regula-
tions—if done in time—can
lead to success stories of an
endangered species’ recovery,
such as with the American alligator.
In summary, give reptiles and amphibians
every break you can. Do not disturb them any
more than necessary, and teach others to let them
alone. Be a good conservationist.
The rattlesnake uses the
heat-sensing pits on its
snout to find warm-blooded
prey at night.





REPTILE AND AMPHIBIAN STUDY 65
.THE PROFESSIONAL HERPETOLOGIST
The Professional
Herpetologist
Herpetology makes a fascinating hobby. It can provide healthy
outdoor exercise and a sense of adventure if you have access
to a wild or suburban area and have permission to observe
or collect specimens. Indoors, it is fun to maintain a cage or
terrarium. Feeding and caring for them, watching their behav-
ior, and having a chance to make observations of possible sci-
entific value—either at home or in the field—are fun.
Becoming a professional herpetologist is a more serious
endeavor, and the career opportunities are limited. Most
professionals have college training in the field of biology.
Many biology teachers in colleges and universities devote
their research time to the study of reptiles and amphibians.
Some zoos and museums employ curators of amphibians
and reptiles. However, no matter how great your training
and enthusiasm, you might have to wait for an opening to
develop in any of these professions.
Most adults who are interested in herpetology earn their
living in other ways. They have careers not necessarily related
to science but use their spare time in pursuit of a side career in
herpetology. Many regions of the country have herpetological
societies that serve as excellent opportunities for amateur and
professional herpetologists to meet.


66 REPTILE AND AMPHIBIAN STUDY
.
If you want to explore the possibility of becoming
a herpetologist, you may wish to check out
the American Society of Ichthyologists
and Herpetologists and the Society for
the Study of Amphibians and Reptiles.
See the resources section in
this pamphlet.
Monitor lizards are
thought to be closely
related to snakes, and
this family includes the
world’s largest lizards.
The giant Komodo dragon
is also a member of this family.


REPTILE AND AMPHIBIAN STUDY 67
.Reptile and Amphibian Study Resources
Reptile and Amphibian
Study Resources
Scouting Literature
Reptiles and Amphibians pocket
guide; Bird Study, Fish and Wildlife
Management, Fishing, Fly-Fishing,
Hiking, Insect Study, Mammal Study,
and Nature merit badge pamphlets
Field Guides to North American
Reptiles and Amphibians
Behler, John L., and F. Wayne King.
The Audubon Society Field Guide
to North American Reptiles and
Amphibians. Knopf, 1988.
Conant, Roger, and Joseph T. Collins.
A Field Guide to Reptiles and
Amphibians of Eastern and
Central North America, 4th ed.
Houghton Mifflin, 1998.
Smith, Hobart M., and Edmund
D. Brodie Jr. A Guide to Field
Identification: Reptiles of North
America. Golden Guides from St.
Martin's Press, 2014.
Stebbins, Robert C. A Field Guide to
Western Reptiles and Amphibians,
3rd ed. Houghton Mifflin, 2003.
Tyning, Thomas F. Stokes Guide to
Amphibians and Reptiles. Little,
Brown, 1990.
Natural History Guides
Ernst, Carl H. Venomous Reptiles of the
United States, Canada, and Northern
Mexico: Crotalus (Volume 2). Johns
Hopkins University Press, 2011.
Ernst, Carl H., and Roger W. Barbour.
Snakes of Eastern North America.
George Mason University, 1989.
Ernst, Carl H., Roger W. Barbour, and
Jeffery E. Lovich. Turtles of the
United States and Canada, 2nd ed.
Smithsonian, 2009.
Greene, Harry W. Snakes: The Evolution
of Mystery in Nature. University of
California Press, 2000.
Hofrichter, Robert. Amphibians: The
World of Frogs, Toads, Salamanders
and Newts. Firefly Books, 2000.
Petranka, James W. Salamanders of
the United States and Canada.
Smithsonian, 2010.
With your parent’s permission, visit
the Boy Scouts of America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org,
for a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


68 REPTILE AND AMPHIBIAN STUDY
Reptile and Amphibian Study Resources.
Ross, Charles A. Crocodiles and Alligators.
Facts on File, 1989.
Zug, George R., Carl H. Ernst, et al.
Smithsonian Answer Book: Snakes, 2nd
ed. Smithsonian Books, 2015.
Caring for Reptiles and Amphibians
in Captivity
Bartlett, R.D. The 25 Best Reptile and
Amphibian Pets. Barron’s Educational
Series, 2006.
Frye, Fredric L. A Practical Guide for
Feeding Captive Reptiles. Krieger
Publishing, 1991.
Mattison, Christopher. The Care of Reptiles
and Amphibians in Captivity. Blandford
Press, 1987.
Rossi, John V. Snakes of the United States
and Canada: Keeping Them Healthy in
Captivity. Krieger, 1992.
Sounds of Frogs and Toads
These are records or tapes of the calls of a
great many of our native frogs and toads.
Bogert, Charles M. Sounds of North
American Frogs: The Biological
Significance of Voice in Frogs. CD or
download. Smithsonian Folkways
Recordings, 1998. www.folkways.si.edu.
Elliott, Lang. The Frogs and Toads of North
America: A Comprehensive Guide to
Their Identification, Behavior, and
Calls. Book and CD. Houghton Mifflin
Harcourt, 2009.
Kellogg, Peter P., and Arthur A. Allen.
Voices of the Night. CD. Library of
Natural Sounds, 1982. Cornell Lab of
Ornithology, 159 Sapsucker Woods
Road, Ithaca, NY 14850.
www.birds.cornell.edu.
Organizations and Websites
American Museum of Natural History
Central Park West at 79th Street
New York, NY 10024-5192
www.amnh.org
American Society of Ichthyologists and
Herpetologists
www.asih.org/jobs
AZA FrogWatch USA Program
Association of Zoos and Aquariums
8403 Colesville Road, Suite 710
Silver Spring, MD 20910
www.aza.org/frogwatch
National Fish and Wildlife Foundation
1133 15th St. NW, Suite 1100
Washington, DC 20005
www.nfwf.org
National Geographic Society
P.O. Box 98199
Washington, DC 20090-8199
www.nationalgeographic.com
National Wildlife Federation
11100 Wildlife Center Drive
Reston, VA 20190
www.nwf.org
North American Amphibian Monitoring
Program
www.pwrc.usgs.gov/naamp
Smithsonian National Zoological Park
nationalzoo.si.edu
Society for the Study of
Amphibians and Reptiles
www.ssarherps.org
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
1849 C St., NW
Washington, DC 20240
www.fws.gov


REPTILE AND AMPHIBIAN STUDY 69
.Reptile and Amphibian Study Resources
Dr. Roger Conant (1909–2003)
This Reptile and Amphibian Study merit badge pamphlet is dedicated
in memory of Dr. Roger Conant, former director of the Philadelphia Zoo
and author of numerous herpetology publications, including the first
edition of this book. (He is pictured here with his son, Skip, right, also
an avid naturalist.)
Acknowledgments
The Boy Scouts of America extends
thanks to Eagle Scout Gary M. Stolz,
Ph.D., U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.
A dedicated and enthusiastic Scouter,
Dr. Stolz updated previous editions of
the pamphlet and also provided many
of the photographs used herein.
The BSA gratefully acknowledges
the guidance of zoology professor
J. Whitfield Gibbons of the University
of Georgia’s Savannah River Ecology
Laboratory in the 1993 revision of
this pamphlet. Thanks also to Barbara
Dietsch, Tony M. Mills, Keith Mills,
Joseph H. K. Pechmann, and David E.
Scott for their assistance. Marie Fulmer
and Sarah Collie, also of the University
of Georgia’s Savannah River Ecology
Laboratory, provided administrative and
research support for the 1993 edition.
For reviewing and suggesting
updates to this edition of the
pamphlet, the Boy Scouts of
America thanks Brandon Swayser,
Wildlands Conservancy; Thomas
Goniea, Michigan Department of
Natural Resources; James Harding,
Michigan State University; and David
Mifsud, Herpetological Resource and
Management.


70 REPTILE AND AMPHIBIAN STUDY
Reptile and Amphibian Study Resources.
Photo and Illustration Credits
Bill Buchanan, courtesy—page 69
Bill Buchanan, U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service, courtesy—page 16 (bullfrog)
David Cappaert, Michigan State
University, Bugwood.org, courtesy—
pages 29 (toads) and 57
Isabelle Hunt Conant, courtesy—
pages 21 (salamander) and 45
Chris Evans, River to River CWMA,
Bugwood.org, courtesy—
page 18 (skink)
James Henderson, Gulf South Research
Corporation, Bugwood.org,
courtesy—page 15
Jeffrey J. Jackson, University of
Georgia, Bugwood.org, courtesy—
page 42 (coral snake)
Jerry A. Payne, USDA Agricultural
Resource Service, Bugwood.org,
courtesy—pages 25 and 26
Walter Stahel, Environmental Bay of
Plenty, Bugwood.org, courtesy—
page 11
Gary M. Stolz, Ph.D., courtesy—pages 6
(spiny softshell turtle), 7, 10 (black-
headed snake), 16 (toad),
18 (chuckwalla), 19, 24 (corn snake),
35, 38 (pygmy rattlesnake), 43 (long-
nose snake, mountain snake), 50,
60 (wood turtle), and 61 (bog turtle)
Wikipedia.org, courtesy—pages 8, 14,
17, 24 (terrapin), 29 (tadpoles), 31,
32 (alligators), 36, 38 (rattlesnake
tongue), 46, 51 (vocal sac), and
60 (frog)
Wikipedia.org/Public Health Image
Library, courtesy—pages 38 (timber
rattlesnake) and 41 (cottonmouth)
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property
of or are protected by the Boy Scouts
of America.
Brian Payne—pages 27 (boys with
ranger) and 53
Randy Piland—page 6 (boy
holding turtle)
John McDearmon—all illustrations on
pages 20–21, and 37


REPTILE AND AMPHIBIAN STUDY 71
.Notes


72 REPTILE AND AMPHIBIAN STUDY
Notes.