PERSONAL
FITNESS


PERSONAL FITNESS
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


35927
ISBN 978-0-8395-3286-6
©2022 Boy Scouts of America
2022 Printing
1. Do the following:
a. Before completing requirements 2 through 9, have
your health-care practitioner give you a physical
examination, using the Scout medical examination form.
Explain the following:
(1) Why physical exams are important
(2) Why preventive habits (such as exercising regularly)
are important in maintaining good health, and how
the use of tobacco products, alcohol, and other
harmful substances can negatively affect your
personal fitness
(3) Diseases that can be prevented and how
(4) The seven warning signs of cancer
(5) The youth risk factors that affect cardiovascular
health in adulthood
b. Have a dental examination. Get a statement saying that
your teeth have been checked and cared for. Tell how to
care for your teeth.
Note: If meeting any of the requirements for this merit
badge is against the Scout’s religious convictions, the
requirement does not have to be done if the Scout’s
parents and the proper religious advisers state in writing
that to do so would be against religious convictions. The
Scout’s parents must also accept full responsibility for
anything that might happen because of this exemption.
Requirements
Always check www.scouting.org for the latest requirements.


PERSONAL FITNESS 3
2. Explain to your merit badge counselor
verbally or in writing what personal fitness
means to you, including
a. Reasons for being mentally, physically,
socially, and spiritually fit
b. What it means to be mentally healthy
c. What it means to be physically healthy
d. What it means to be socially healthy
3. With your counselor, answer and discuss the
following questions:
a. Are you free from all curable diseases? Are you living
in such a way that your risk of preventable diseases
is minimized?
b. Are you immunized and vaccinated according to the
advice of your healthcare provider and the direction of
your parent(s)/guardian(s)?
c. Are you free from habits relating to poor nutrition and
the use of alcohol, tobacco, drugs, and other practices
that could be harmful to your health?
d. What are the advantages to getting a full night’s sleep?
e. Define a nutritious, balanced diet and why it is
important.
f. Do you participate in a regular exercise program or recre-
ational activities?
g. What are you doing to demonstrate your duty to God?
h. Do you spend quality time with your family and friends
in social and recreational activities?
i. Do you support family activities and efforts to maintain a
good home life?
j. Do you carry out daily activities without noticeable
effort? Do you have extra energy for other activities?
k. Are you free from habits relating to poor nutrition and
the use of alcohol, tobacco, drugs, and other practices
that could be harmful to your health?
l. Do you participate in a regular exercise program or
recreational activities?


4 PERSONAL FITNESS
m. Do you sleep well at night and wake up feeling ready to
start the new day?
n. Are you actively involved in the religious organization of
your choice, and do you participate in its youth activities?
4. Explain the following about physical fitness:
a. The areas of physical fitness
b. Your weakest and strongest area of physical fitness
c. The need to have a balance in in the four areas of
physical fitness
d. How a program like the President’s Council on Sports,
Fitness & Nutrition can lead to lifelong healthful habits.
e. How the areas of personal fitness relate to the Scout Law
and Scout Oath
5. Explain the following about nutrition:
a. The importance of good nutrition
b. What good nutrition means to you
c. How good nutrition is related to the other components
of personal fitness
d. How to maintain a healthy weight
6. Before doing requirements 7 and 8, do the following:
a. Complete the aerobic fitness, flexibility, and muscular
strength tests, as described in the Personal Fitness merit
badge pamphlet. Record your results and identify those
areas where you feel you need to improve.
b. Keep track of what you eat and drink for three days.
Identify three healthy eating goals you want to work on.
7. Outline a comprehensive 12-week physical fitness program
using the results of your fitness tests. Be sure your program
incorporates the endurance, intensity, and warm-up guidelines
discussed in the Personal Fitness merit badge pamphlet. Before
beginning your exercises, have the program approved by your
counselor and parents.


8. Complete the physical fitness program you outlined in
requirement 7. Keep a log of your fitness program activity
(how long you exercised; how far you ran, swam, or biked;
how many exercise repetitions you completed; your exercise
heart rate; etc.). Keep a log of your weekly healthy eating
goals. Repeat the aerobic fitness, muscular strength, and
flexibility tests every four weeks and record your results.
After the 12th week, repeat the three tests, record your
results, and show improvement in each one. Discuss how
well you met your healthy eating goals over these 12 weeks
Discuss the meaning and benefit of your experience, and
describe your long-term plans regarding your personal fitness.
9. Find out about three career opportunities in personal fitness.
Pick one and find out the education, training, and experience
required for this profession. Discuss what you learned
with your counselor, and explain why this profession
might interest you.


94 PERSONAL FITNESS
Personal Fitness Resources.
Personal Fitness Resources
Scouting Literature
Boy Scout Journal; Athletics,
Backpacking, Canoeing, Cycling,
Dentistry, Disabilities Awareness,
Family Life, Hiking, Kayaking, Public
Health, Rowing, Scuba Diving, Skating,
Small-Boat Sailing, Snow Sports,
Sports, Swimming, Water Sports, and
Whitewater merit badge pamphlets; Boy
Scout Handbook; Fieldbook
Books
Bluth, Karen and Neff, Kristin. The Self-
Compassion workbook for Teens:
Mindfulness and Compassion Skills
to Overcome Self-Criticism and
Embrace Who you are. Instant Help,
2017.
Branner, Toni. The Care & Feeding of an
Athlete. Blue Water Press, 2007.
Bushman, Barbara, ed. ACSM’s
Complete Guide to Fitness & Health,
2nd ed. Human Kinetics, 2017.
Chryssicas, Mary Kaye. Breathe: Yoga
for Teens. DK Children, 2007.
Covey, Sean. The 6 Most Important
Decisions You’ll Ever Make: A Guide
for Teens, updated edition,
Touchstone, 2017.
Dunham, Kelli. The Boy’s Body Book:
Everything You Need to Know
for Growing Up YOU, 5th ed.
Applesauce Press, 2019.
____________. The Girl’s Body Book:
Everything You Need to Know for
Growing Up YOU, 5th ed.
Applesauce Press, 2019.
Greene, Larry, and Russ Pate. Training
Young Distance Runners, 3rd ed.
Human Kinetics, 2014.
Hutchinson, Alex. Which Comes
First, Cardio or Weights?
HarperCollins, 2011.
KidsPeace. I’ve Got This Friend
Who: Advice for Teens and Their
Friends on Alcohol, Drugs, Eating
Disorders, Risky Behavior, and
More. Hazelden, 2007.
Kovacs, Mark. Dynamic Stretching:
The Revolutionary New Warm-Up
Method to Improve Power,
Performance, and Range of Motion.
Ulysses Press, 2021.
With your parent’s permission, visit
the Boy Scouts of America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org,
for a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


PERSONAL FITNESS 95
.Personal Fitness Resources
Kraemer, William J., and Steven J. Fleck.
Strength Training for Young Athletes,
2nd ed. Human Kinetics, 2004.
Lobster Press, ed. Let’s Clear the Air:
10 Reasons Not to Start Smoking.
Lobster Press, 2007.
Ratey, John J. Spark: The Revolutionary
New Science of Exercise and the
Brain. Little, Brown and Co., 2013.
Resch, Elyse. The Intuitive Eating
Workbook for Teens: A Non-Diet,
body Positive Approach to Building a
healthy Relationship with Food.
Instant Help, 2019.
Shanley, Ellen, and Colleen Thompson.
Fueling the Teen Machine, 2nd ed.
Bull Publishing Co., 2010.
Smolen, Jamie. Hooked. Casa de
Snapdragon, 2011.
Sumbal, Marni. Essential Sports
Nutrition: A Guide to Optimal
Performance for Every Active Person.
Rockridge Press, 2018.
Organizations and Websites
Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics
120 S. Riverside Plaza, Suite 2190
Chicago, IL 60606-6995
Toll-free telephone: 800-877-1600
www.eatright.org
American College of Sports Medicine
401 W. Michigan St.
Indianapolis, IN 46202-3233
Telephone: 317-637-9200
www.acsm.org
Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention
Toll-free telephone: 800-232-4636
www.cdc.gov/physicalactivity
The Cooper Institute
Exercise tips and resources
www.youtube.com/user/
TheCooperInstitute/videos
Fitnessgram
Exercise tips and resources
fitnessgram.net/solution
International Food Information
Council Foundation
1100 Connecticut Ave. NW, Suite 430
Washington, DC 20036
Telephone: 202-296-6540
foodinsight.org
KidsHealth
kidshealth.org
President’s Council on Sports,
Fitness & Nutrition
1101 Wootton Parkway, Suite 560
Rockville, MD 20852
Telephone: 240-276-9567
www.health.gov/our-work/pcsfn
Society of Health and Physical
Educators (SHAPE America)
PO Box 225, Annapolis
Junction, MD 20701
Toll-free telephone: 800-213-7193
www.shapeamerica.org
U.S. Department of Agriculture
www.choosemyplate.gov