FISH AND WILDLIFE
MANAGEMENT
STEM-Based


FISH AND WILDLIFE
MANAGEMENT
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


35898
ISBN 978-0-8395-3307-8
©2024 Scouting America/Boy Scouts of America
2024 Printing
FPO
Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Fish-And-Wildlife-Management
or check Scoutbook for the latest requirements.





4 FISH AND WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT


FISH AND WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT 5
Contents
Why Manage Fish and Wildlife? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
Basics of Fish and Wildlife Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
The Value of Fish and Wildlife . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
Who’s Responsible for Fish and Wildlife? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
Observe, Listen, and Learn . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
Careers in Fish and Wildlife Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
Fish and Wildlife Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61


6 FISH AND WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT
Why Manage Fish and Wildlife?.
Why Manage Fish
and Wildlife?
Wildlife management is the science and art of managing
wildlife—both animals and fish—with which we share our
planet. Maintaining the proper balance and the dynamics
that go with it requires humankind’s attention. This includes
managing and maintaining wildlife habitats of all kinds.
We use this stewardship tool to help minimize or eradicate
the possibility of extinction of any given species. We want our
descendants to have the opportunity to experience the same
animal diversity that we now enjoy. This is a role of the entire
wildlife management team to which we all belong, to constantly
help monitor and control the factors and conditions created by
humans that affect wildlife, to help wildlife adapt to what they
or humans cannot change.
Millions of bison once roamed the Great Plains, but by 1884,
only 300 of these massive creatures were left.


FISH AND WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT 7
.Why Manage Fish and Wildlife?
Throughout history, events caused by humans have greatly
affected the wildlife populations of the past. We cannot change
what has happened, and we cannot bring back the lost popu-
lations and extinct species of yesterday. However, with good
vision and wildlife management practices today, we can help
prevent similar wildlife tragedies in the future.
The Early Days
To understand the importance of fish and wildlife manage-
ment, keep in mind a general concept of what fish and wildlife
resources were like in the early years of this country’s settlement
and development. Before European colonization, most of the
North American continent was a vast wilderness, pristine and
pollution free, teeming with fish and wildlife wherever their
needs—food, water, shelter, and living space—were available.
Native Americans relied on these resources for subsistence. As
the settlers and civilization moved into the countryside and
pushed farther and farther west, they made changes to the
landscape for their benefit. These changes often were made
at the expense of the indigenous (native) wildlife populations.
For example, roughly 300 years ago the uninterrupted
prairies were home to vast herds of bison, estimated to number
some 60 million. Species such as the bison were so heavily
utilized to meet the needs of the growing population of
newcomers that in little more than 100 years after settlement of
the prairies, only a few hundred of these magnificent animals
were alive. Another example is the passenger pigeon, at one
time one of the most abundant birds in the world. This bird
is now extinct because of overhunting, storms and poor
reproductive strategies. The last surviving passenger pigeon
died in a Cincinnati zoo in 1914.
During those early days, America’s lakes, rivers, and
streams were free of pollutants. Our wild rivers allowed count-
less generations of salmon to migrate upstream, uninhibited,
from the sea to their historic spawning beds. Over time, exces-
sive sediment, chemicals and other manmade polluting factors,
and changes to the landscape have impaired water quality and
wildlife habitats because of more intensive development and
resource use. This includes factors such as draining wetlands,
agriculture, timber cutting, dams, mining, transportation, and
manufacturing. Dams slow water flow, allowing water to warm
faster, and rival overfishing as a major cause for declines in
migratory fish like salmon in the lower 48 states.
A species is a
classification level
of organisms,
such as the bison,
that are capable
of interbreeding
and producing
fertile offspring.


8 FISH AND WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT
Why Manage Fish and Wildlife?.
A marsh is an excellent habitat for a wide variety of wildlife, such as these egrets,
but as Americans’ need for space grew, some marshes were drained or filled
in favor of dry land for agriculture, towns, and cities.
Wetlands filter nutrients and provide valuable habitat for fish and wildlife.
Although the loss of wetlands continues to this day, that rate of loss has
been reduced considerably over the past 10 to 20 years. Experts have
estimated that between the 1780s and the 1980s, the contiguous 48
states lost approximately 221 million acres of wetlands—about a million
acres per year. By the 1970s to the 1980s, about 290,000 acres were lost
per year. Although the net loss between 1985 and 1995 had dropped to
117,000 acres per year, there still are great strides to be made toward
wetlands restoration and protection.


FISH AND WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT 9
.Why Manage Fish and Wildlife?
People and Nature
Humankind has had more influence in the loss and alteration
of our country’s wildlife habitat than any other factor in history.
In the past, people mistakenly believed that the frontier would
go on forever and that there was always more wilderness just
over the next mountain. This was not the case, of course, and
as the westward movement of the settlers of the 18th and
19th centuries moved onward they caused vast changes to the
landscape and wildlife habitats.
Today, we still are causing great change in the landscape
and wildlife habitats in the form of agriculture, highways,
dams, cities and suburbs, fences, golf courses, and airports.
All of these modern-day developments affect places where
wild animals and fish have lived and migrated through for
many years. Pollution in our rivers and streams, intense
suburban sprawl into wildlife corridors, noise pollution,
and pesticide and fertilizer usage all have played a role in
altering wildlife habitats.
Most fish and wild animals are potentially the “next”
meal for a predator. As a result, usually far more offspring
are produced than the land and water can support. This prey-
predator relationship is only one very basic element in the
risk of living in the wild. Disease, starvation, human actions,
Wildlife researchers do a biological workup on an alligator.


10 FISH AND WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT
Why Manage Fish and Wildlife?.
In fish and wildlife
management,
habitat refers to
the needs—food,
water, shelter,
living space—a
species requires
for survival.
the weather,
and natural
disasters such
as forest fires
and flooding
all play a role
in the survival
of animals in
the wild.
This all
might make
you wonder
what makes
the animals
that concern a fish and wildlife manager different from the
domestic animals we keep as pets. The most significant dif-
ference is that all of our domesticated animals live in environ-
ments controlled by humans. These animals have no need for
basic food hunting skills to survive because their keepers pro-
vide their dietary needs. They do not have to test the laws of
nature with regard to “survival of the fittest,” reproductive com-
petition, and seasonal migrations.
In fact, our pets in general have a
pretty good life compared with their
wildlife counterparts.
On the other hand, animals in
the wild live with some rather harsh
realities. Think about what a deer in
the deep snow of the Rockies would
need to do to survive. Consider
the salmon that is genetically
“tuned” to swim hundreds
of miles upstream, past hungry
bears, eagles, and human obstacles
just to reproduce. Envision the great
annual migrations undertaken by
caribou, Canada geese, and monarch
butterflies just to survive.
Whitetail deer
Researchers in Iowa take a biological
sample from a bobcat. They also will
fit the cat with a radio-collar, allowing
them to track its movements.


FISH AND WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT 11
.Why Manage Fish and Wildlife?
Mother Nature, a common term for the natural world
around us, has established some stringent rules for living in
her world. To survive, wild animals
require food, water, shelter, and living
space with their own kind; this is their
habitat. Each element is specific to
each species but in general they are
not much different from what humans
require.
We might never have the answer
to every question about the best
form of wildlife management for
every species. Managing wildlife
involves managing habitat, managing
species, and managing people. Each
component presents its own unique
challenges. Possibly the experiences
you gain from earning the Fish and
Wildlife Management merit badge
will encourage you to follow a career
in wildlife management and help find
answers to those challenges.
Enjoy the journey.
A predator is
an animal that
survives by
preying upon
others.
Mountain lions
In South Carolina, researchers use high-
tech tools to study a temporarily captured
alligator. The gator is sedated to keep both
human and alligator safe.


Bald eagle in flight


FISH AND WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT 13
.Basics of Fish and Wildlife Management
Basics of Fish and
Wildlife Management
A number of factors affect the health and well-being of fish
and wildlife, and any change in an animal’s food, shelter, water,
or living space can affect its ability to survive and thrive. Some
species are more resilient and adaptable to changing conditions.
Human actions, including practices adopted by land
managers, frequently play a part in plant and animal succession,
directly reflecting the health and well-being of a species.
Effectively managing fish and wildlife takes an intimate
understanding of animals, plants, and their environment.
At the Center—Habitat
The word might be familiar to you, but to many people, the
meaning of habitat is not well understood. In fish and wildlife
management, it refers to the needs of any given species, or
individual specimen, to survive. Those needs generally consist
of proper amounts of food, water,
shelter, living and reproduction
space, and timely arrangement of
these essential elements is also very
important. Fish and wildlife often
have very specific habitat needs.
Some fish require water of a
certain depth, clarity, temperature,
and flow rate. Other fish require
water of a totally different nature to
live. Certain species of wildlife need
precise temperatures, certain kinds
of trees or other vegetation, and
minimum or maximum amounts
of sunlight.
Bald eagle chicks


14 FISH AND WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT
Basics of Fish and Wildlife Management.
Different species might occupy the same territory at the
same time because certain requirements are the same, but
they might be consuming totally different food, and perhaps
utilizing totally different shelter. A rabbit might find shelter
in a brush pile and food in green leafy plants while directly
above, a squirrel might be living in a hollow tree and eating
acorns or other tree seeds. The Animal Foods and Cover
chart in this section compares the different requirements of a
number of animals.
Habitat needs may change drastically by season or by the age of a
given animal. A young wild turkey, for example, must have a rich
protein diet of insects to provide growth; later in the same year it will
require berries, seeds, acorns, and similar foods. This is a case of the
dietary needs of a species being well-matched to the habitat; in the
spring when the birds are small, the woodland habitat of the wild
turkey is teeming with insects, and in the fall the other foods the
birds need in their maturity are plentiful.
Whitetail deer
Porcupine
Knowing the
precise habitat
needs of any
species of fish
and wildlife, and
knowing how to
provide these
needs in certain
balances, is the
center of effective
fish and wildlife
management.


.Basics of Fish and Wildlife Management
Animal Foods and Cover
Foods Cover
Badger Ground squirrels, mice, prairie dogs,
birds, eggs
Hole in ground
Beaver Bark and twigs of aspen, cottonwood,
willow, other deciduous trees; corn
Lodge made of saplings
partially underwater, a den
in a bank
Black bear Acorns, beechnuts, grasses, roots,
fruits, berries, insects, honey,
mammals, birds, fish and frogs, carrion
Wooded area
Bluegill Insects, small invertebrates, small fish Aquatic vegetation,
submerged debris
Chipmunk Seeds, nuts, acorns, berries, insects,
birds’ eggs, young mice
Underground nest
Cottontail rabbit Dandelions, common plantain,
lance-leaved plantain, clover, and many
other types of vegetation
Brushy area
Largemouth bass Small fish, insects, crayfish, mice Submerged debris, docks,
rocks
Opossum Small birds, frogs, mammals, fish,
eggs, insects, fruit, carrion
Trees, burrows
Otter Fish, crayfish, mollusks, eggs, birds,
small mammals
Den in stream bank with
underwater entrance;
hollow log
Porcupine Bark and twigs of pines and other
trees; shrubs and grown plants
Trees, brush, caves,
rock crevices
Raccoon Frogs, fish, shellfish, small mammals,
birds, eggs, reptiles, insects, fruit,
corn, nuts
Hollow trees or logs
Rainbow trout Insects, crayfish and small fish Overhangs, submerged debris
Red fox Mice, other small mammals,
birds, fruit
Hollow logs or stumps,
burrows in banks, etc.
Striped skunk Insects, small mammals, eggs, snakes,
crayfish, carrion
Brush along watercourses,
woodlands
Weasel Small mammals and birds Rock pile, downed log,
burrow in stream bank
Whitetail deer Twigs and leaves of shrubs, trees;
mast, grasses, plants, corn
Heavy brush, woodlands
Woodchuck Grass, clover, crops, weeds, etc. Wood piles, stone walls,
burrows in ground


16 FISH AND WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT
Basics of Fish and Wildlife Management.
Wildlife Communities
Everything on Earth is interrelated, from its soil to its most
magnificent creatures—humans. We take plants from the Earth
to use in building our homes, making our clothes, and preparing
our meals. We depend on plants to manufacture the oxygen
we need to breathe. Likewise, all other animal life on Earth
is dependent on plants, and those plants depend on the soil.
The way humans and other large animals are linked to the soil
through smaller animals and plants is called a food chain.
The chain starts with plants. Known as producers, they
draw on the sun’s energy to combine carbon dioxide, water
and nutrients to grow. Many plants become food for all types
of animals, from the tiniest worm or insect to deer, caribou, or
moose. Typically, the food chain progresses from the plant to a
small animal then to a larger animal. When an animal dies or
is eaten, its remains decay returning nutrients to be used once
again by a newer generation of plants.
So, plants are critical to all wildlife communities. Plant life
creates a forest, a marsh, a desert, or a prairie and supports
A food chain
shows how energy
from producers
is passed from
one consumer to
another within
an ecosystem.
An ecosystem
is a community
of organisms and
their environment.
Foods Cover
Barred owl Birds, mice, frogs, crayfish Tree hollow in wooded
swamp or forest
Black-capped
chickadee
Seeds, insects, berries, other fruits Hole in tree, nest box
Cardinal Seeds, grubs, beetles, grasshoppers,
caterpillars, fruit
Hedgerows, trees, shrubs
House sparrow Grains, seeds, beetles, other
insects, worms
Trees, bird boxes, buildings
Meadowlark Caterpillars, beetles, cutworms,
grasshoppers, seeds, grain
Grassy areas of fields
Mallard Marsh plants, waste grain, insects,
mollusks, small fish
Freshwater marsh
Red-tailed hawk Small mammals, reptiles, frogs, insects Woodland
Robin Worms, fruit Trees, shrubs, buildings
Starling Insects, grains, seeds Brushy shrubs, nest boxes,
tree holes
Yellow Perch Insects, small invertebrates, small fish Aquatic vegetation, sub-
merged debris


FISH AND WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT 17
.Basics of Fish and Wildlife Management
the animals that live there. Even the ocean’s fish and wildlife
require plants to sustain that aquatic system.
Plant and Animal Succession
Another factor that the wildlife manager must understand is
plant and animal succession. Basically this means that when
land is cleared of vegetation (by fire, lumbering, volcanic
eruption, etc.), different kinds of vegetation appear in
successive stages. For example, annual weeds might appear
first, then perennial weeds, then shrubs, then certain kinds of
trees. Trees such as oaks, maples, and pines represent the final
stage, or climax. Generally with each successive stage of plant
growth the animal life changes also, depending on the habitat
needs of various species.
As deepwater habitats (lake, river, marine) and wetlands
(marsh, swamp, bog, fen, prairie) become older, they may well
undergo a process known as succession, a change in depth
and size, vegetation, and character through gradual filling. As
they age, depending on the location, some habitats change to
The plants that
will grow in a
particular wildlife
community are
dependent on that
area’s soil and
climate, and in
turn, so are the
animals that
make the wildlife
community
their homes.
Terrestrial
food chain
PLANT-EATER
PLANT- AND
ANIMAL-EATER
FLESH-EATER
DEATH
DECOMPOSERS
BASIC
NUTRIENTS
PLANTS


18 FISH AND WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT
Basics of Fish and Wildlife Management.
scrub-shrub wetlands, some become forested wetlands and
eventually forests, and others become prairie. Succession is
hastened by drainage and tillage practices that increase erosion
and sedimentation.
Aquatic
eutrophication is
when excessive
nutrients cause
excessive plant
growth.
An example
of natural
succession is the
natural process by
which a wetland
becomes more
mature and
more productive.
Wildlife managers can manipulate plant and
animal succession to accommodate certain wildlife
species and to discourage others. This is known
as enhancement of habitat.
As lakes and wetlands of various types age, they tend to be
filled in and replaced by prairie or forest. Humans hasten this
succession by drainage and land-use practices that increase
nutrient loading, erosion, and sedimentation.


FISH AND WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT 19
.Basics of Fish and Wildlife Management
A Model Community
To get an overall look at an ecosystem and its life cycles and food
chains, set up a freshwater aquarium. Monitoring the aquarium over
a period of time will help you get a sense of how animal species and
their environment work together.
To start, choose a 10- to 20-gallon rectangular tank with a large
surface area that will allow plenty of oxygen to dissolve into the
water. Clean the aquarium with water (no detergent or soap). Place
it on a level, sturdy surface away from dark corners, drafty places, or
where the temperature fluctuates a lot. Place it by a southward-facing
window so that the plants and animals get enough light, or use a
full-spectrum ultraviolet fluorescent light on top of the tank.
Complete your aquarium by adding a cover or hood to keep
the animal life in and the dirt out. Leave a small space open in the
hood along the back of the tank to provide access for other aquarium
equipment, such as tubes, filters, and heaters. A one- or two-bulb
reflector can be mounted on the cover to provide additional light.
Line the aquarium floor with sand or gravel, sloping it upward from
the back of the tank to the front. Then fill the tank with 2 to 4 inches of
tap water. Allow the tank to sit for 24 hours, so that the chlorine in the
water dissipates.
Next, add live aquatic plants. Keep them moist while you
work, and do not bury the crowns of the plants. Some plants have
stems that are bunched together, and they can be planted that way.
Creating an aquarium environment is not difficult, but to get
the balance of life just right, everything from the water to the
plants to the fish and other animals must be handled with care.
For more information on setting up an aquarium, see the Pets
merit badge pamphlet.
An easier and faster way to “age” the water is to use a
commercial dechlorinator, available at pet shops. Follow
the manufacturer’s instructions carefully, and always use
chemicals only under the close supervision of an adult.


20 FISH AND WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT
Basics of Fish and Wildlife Management.
However, do not plant indi-
vidual plants in bunches.
Spread the roots after you
set the plants, and care-
fully level the gravel or sand
around their bases.
The aquarium is now
ready to be filled with water.
Be careful not to dislodge
the plants or stir up the
gravel. Let the water stand
for about a week to ensure
that it has aged and is at
room temperature. Then it
is ready to support the
marine life you choose. In
general, plan on 1 inch of
aquatic animal per gallon
of capacity. For instance, a
10-gallon tank can support
two 5-inch salamanders.
You may purchase
aquatic life from a reputable
dealer (your merit badge counselor can tell you how to find one) or
catch some common species from small streams or ponds near your
home. You can choose a variety of species for your aquarium, including
many kinds of small fish, snails, tadpoles, freshwater shrimp, shiners,
and water insects like whirligig beetles. Fish will need to be fed with a
commercial fish food available at pet stores.
A complete aquarium can now be monitored for changes in life
cycles and management issues. When your studies are concluded
to your counselor’s satisfaction, with your counselor’s assistance,
determine whether the organisms can be safely returned to their
natural environment. Check with your local fish and game agencies,
as some species might be harmful and should not be released, while
others might be protected and require permits. If you decide to keep
your aquarium and organisms for a while longer, don’t forget to
follow up on this before you release any of your specimens.


FISH AND WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT 21
.Basics of Fish and Wildlife Management
Reproduction Rates
Most species of fish and wildlife have the ability to produce
far more offspring than the available habitat will support. This
is nature’s way of assuring that the species will survive and
providing energy for other species in the food chain. There are
some exceptions; a polar bear generally has two cubs every
three years, and a female condor usually produces only a single
egg every two years. This might reflect the traditional seasonal
availability of food.
High reproductive capability sometimes can work against
the best interests of fish and wildlife managers. For example,
when many large predatory fish are removed from a lake,
smaller fish such as bluegills become overpopulated and
One way that
fish are managed
is by removing
undesirable fish
populations
using an organic
toxin called
rotenone and
releasing desired
fish species to
replace them.
HIPPO is a way
to remember the
factors that cause
wildlife species
to disappear:
H: Habitat Loss
I: Invasive Species
P: Pollution
P: Population (human)
O: Overconsumption
or overharvesting.
The whitetail deer is a species well-known for
reproducing at rates far greater than the habitat
can support. Unless their numbers are kept under
control, generally by natural predators or human
hunting, they tend to overpopulate until the food
supply is depleted and disease and starvation set
in, cycling the population back to below what the
habitat can support.
Polar bear


22 FISH AND WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT
Basics of Fish and Wildlife Management.
deplete the food supply.
Without adequate food
they fail to grow to a
desirable size and no
longer may be of interest
to some anglers.
Sometimes a high
reproductive capability
fails to produce a desir-
able number of a given
species. The American
lobster found along the
coastal waters of New
England is a case in
point. An adult female
can produce more than
20,000 eggs once every two years, but because the harsh envi-
ronment, including natural predation, results in only a few
lobsters surviving to adulthood, wildlife managers must place
strict limits on the harvest of this species.
Management Practices
Methods of managing fish and wildlife are highly diverse and
are constantly changing. New ideas develop, research produces
new fish and wildlife information, land uses change, and grow-
ing human populations place ever-increasing pressures on the
environment and on Earth’s plants and animals. Some of those
management practices are discussed here.
As a forest matures, its value for certain wildlife species
generally diminishes. The wildlife manager might determine
that for wildlife needing early growth forest habitat, trees
should be thinned or removed completely (clear-cut) to open
the way for ground vegetation. This management method also
might involve favoring or sometimes even planting a certain
selection of trees to provide food and cover for particular
species of wildlife.
For the same reason, prescribed fire might be required to
discourage one kind of vegetation and stimulate the growth of
another that is preferred by certain wildlife. Along with remov-
ing undesired vegetation, planting a particular kind of plant or
mix of certain plants might provide critical habitat needed for
A prescribed fire
is a planned
and controlled
fire set by
land managers
with the specific
purpose of
benefiting a
specific
natural area.
Prescribed fire


FISH AND WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT 23
.Basics of Fish and Wildlife Management
certain wildlife species. This kind
of management often is merely a
substitute for natural forces like
forest and prairie wildfires that
must be controlled in order to protect other resources.
Improving stream habitat for fish might involve installing
physical structures like log dams and deflectors, large boulders,
and anchored trees. Stream bank vegetation and artificial shelter
can be established in inland lakes by immersing brush and
discarded Christmas trees.
Offshore oil and gas production platforms have proven to
create tremendous artificial fish habitats. In the Gulf of Mexico,
there are more than 4,000 such rigs intended primarily for oil
and gas production but that also provide a great fishery. The
early life stages of numerous algae, coral, barnacles, sponges,
and other marine organisms drift in currents until they find a
suitable habitat, or die. When they attach to the underwater
drilling platform framework, they can metamorphose or
change into adult forms, grow and propagate, and become a
food source for other marine creatures.
For an organism
to metamorphose,
it must have an
appropriate
habitat in which
to change from
one body form
to another.
Junk automobiles, tires, abandoned barges, ships, and construction
rubble are examples of materials that have been used to create
artificial reef habitat for fish in both freshwater lakes and coastal areas.
Today, many saltwater recreational
fishing trips originating in Texas,
Louisiana, and Mississippi head for
the offshore drilling rigs in central
and western parts of the Gulf of
Mexico to harvest the bounty of fish
provided by or attracted to the artifi-
cial fish habitat.


24 FISH AND WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT
Basics of Fish and Wildlife Management.
Platform legs also provide shelter from currents and
predators, as well as convenient navigational reference points
for fish. In essence, they create new habitats and increase the
number of animals a given area of ocean can support.
Much the same thing happens on platforms off the
California coast. Mussels grow so quickly and abundantly that
they must be constantly scraped off so that their added bulk
does not cause strong ocean currents to weaken the platform.
A Santa Barbara company now harvests thousands of pounds
of these mussels every week for sale to four-star restaurants
in a number of states. Huge schools of fish also can be found
beneath these oil drilling platforms.
Perhaps the best-known management methods are hunting
and fishing regulations. Generally the goal is to set regulations
so that only harvestable surpluses are removed by hunters and
anglers. Breeding populations are then maintained at the opti-
mum numbers the habitat can support.
If too many game animals are harvested from a certain
area, there would be too few of the species to make maximum
use of the habitat (food, water, shelter, space). Conversely,
if too few animals are harvested, the surpluses might run
short of habitat, depress prey species and as an extreme
result might die because of starvation or disease. Sometimes
fishery managers might over protect for a selected sport fish
species. If not monitored closely, certain desirable prey species
populations can be impacted to the detriment
of all.
Damage Control
Another part of fish and wildlife management
consists of damage control—practices to
reduce or eliminate conflicts between
humans and fish and wildlife.
A game species
is a species that
can be legally
hunted or fished
in an area.
Platforms no longer in use for drilling are increasingly being left in place
for use as fishing holes, to substitute or mitigate for environmental
damage elsewhere and generally to create habitat for fish and other
sea life.
Raccoon


FISH AND WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT 25
.Basics of Fish and Wildlife Management
Almost any animal at times can cause trouble for humans.
Some situations are just plain nuisances, like raccoons or bears
toppling trash cans. More serious cases occur when wildlife
cause financial losses, like thousands of blackbirds invading
a farmer’s cornfield, or coyotes killing sheep, or wild horses
overgrazing and destroying the range, thereby making forage
unavailable for antelope and other animals. The worst kind of
conflict occurs when wildlife threaten the health and safety
of humans, like a rabid fox wandering into a schoolyard or a
flock of starlings or wedge of geese colliding with a jet aircraft.
There are two general methods for reducing these
problems. First, the habitat can be made unacceptable for
the offending species, forcing it to move to a more suitable
area. Second, the targeted animal or group of animals can be
fenced out, repelled, live trapped and released elsewhere, or if
necessary, selectively destroyed by the safest and most humane
means available. Habitat management usually is the long-
term solution, because if an animal is deprived of food, water,
shelter, or living space, it will have to move elsewhere or die.
One thing holds true: Conflicts and competition with
wildlife will increase as more and more humans displace more
and more wildlife habitat.
SUCCESS STORIES
If fish and wildlife management had not been as tremendously
successful as it has been, things would be quite different today.
By the early 1900s, forests were fast disappearing in the
face of massive logging and uncontrolled fires. Rangelands
were being overgrazed and facing erosion. Market hunters
were slaughtering wildlife without restriction. The passenger
pigeon was almost gone, and relatively few beavers, antelope,
whooping cranes, elk, whitetail deer, wild turkeys, egrets,
herons, trumpeter swans, wood ducks, and fur seals remained.
It was assumed all the larger game animals soon would be gone.
The same was true for many fish species like trout and salmon.
To solve an animal damage problem, wildlife managers often use a
combination of safe, selective, effective, and humane control methods.
Anyone who needs to resolve a problem between wildlife and people
should be sure that the right method is used so that other animals and
the environment will not be hurt.


26 FISH AND WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT
Basics of Fish and Wildlife Management.
Since that time the human population has mushroomed
and land-use requirements that exclude fish and wildlife have
increased tremendously. However, in spite of all the factors
that indicate a continued downward trend in fish and wildlife
populations, there are many examples that show the downward
trend can be monitored, contained, and in some cases, reversed.
An interesting fisheries management story is shared
by inland states where striped bass were introduced in many
freshwater reservoirs throughout the nation. Like the salmon
and steelhead trout, the striped bass is an anadromous
species—it normally spawns (lays its eggs) in freshwater
coastal streams and returns to the ocean and bays to grow
and mature. Fisheries managers learned techniques for artifi-
cially spawning and rearing striped bass, making it possible
to stock this fish in freshwater reservoirs
where it reaches trophy sizes of 30 to 60
pounds. Another benefit of stocking striped
bass is their ability to consume competing
forage and nongame species, resulting in
better survival and faster growth rates for
the stripers.
Think about the grizzly or brown bear. These hefty
creatures will avoid humans whenever possible. However,
if surprised, cornered, or separated from offspring, a grizzly
bear would not think twice about defending itself. Therefore,
to protect both the bear and the public, wildlife managers
consider the grizzly’s habits and temperament as part of any
grizzly bear management plan.
Fisheries
management is
the active
knowledge and
technology having
to do with our
fish resources.
Location, Location
Many of us have read stories and seen pictures
of the black bear caught in a bear trap at
Yellowstone National Park or elsewhere. The
trapping and relocation of “nuisance” bears,
mountain lions, and other species is as much
for the safety and well-being of the animal as it
is for the humans it might encounter. The suc-
cess of this well-accepted program is saving the
lives of many animals.
Striped bass
Grizzly bear


FISH AND WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT 27
.Basics of Fish and Wildlife Management
As a result, very successful tactics have been developed
and instituted, including establishing what are called land
corridors for grizzly bears. These large passageways allow
the bears to travel unhindered over their normally extensive
natural range. Oftentimes these corridors may link two
separate but vital wilderness areas used by the bears. Such a
management plan shows how developing an understanding
of the grizzly bear and planning accordingly can help prevent
many human-bear incidents.
Many other examples can be cited. Through habitat
improvement, improved survey work, and better hunting
regulations, many species are more plentiful today than
decades ago, even though much of their former habitat has
been taken for other uses. Whitetail deer, wild turkeys, and
American bison are far more plentiful now, for example,
than they were at the turn of the century. Wood ducks, once
assumed headed toward extinction, are now plentiful enough
so that hunting bag limits and open seasons have been
extended.
Modern wildlife management also has been successful in
bringing a number of endangered and threatened species from
near extinction to comfortable reproducing numbers. The bald
eagle is a prime example of success, as is the eastern timber
wolf in Yellowstone National Park and Minnesota, and the
American alligator in Florida and Louisiana and sea turtles along
the Gulf Coast. Throughout the world many species that would
be gone by now are still with us, in many cases thriving,
because of modern wildlife management techniques.
Through their
licensing fees
and excise
taxes on fishing
and hunting
equipment,
hunters and
anglers have
paid much of the
bill for these
restoration efforts.
Gray wolf


28 FISH AND WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT
The Value of Fish and Wildlife.
The Value of Fish
and Wildlife
In any discussion of fish and wildlife
management and efforts to ensure the
existence of creatures in certain numbers
throughout the nation, it seems only
fair to question why. One answer is that
people simply enjoy watching and photo-
graphing fish and wildlife, and even enjoy
just knowing the creatures exist, even if
unseen. Fish and wildlife also help us
understand all living things and how all
plant and animal life forms exist in rela-
tionship to each other. There are many
other reasons, but perhaps the most com-
monly thought of reasons to maintain fish
and wildlife are hunting and fishing.
Hunting
All states use hunting as a tool to manage wildlife resources
as well as a source of funds for further wildlife management
activities. Hunting also serves as a recreational opportunity for
some of our citizens and a source of food for others.
For example, hunting can help prevent the overpopulation
of some species, like deer, which can damage their natural
habitat if they become too numerous. Individual deer in
overpopulated areas would most likely die of starvation, cause
crop damage, or spread diseases like Lyme disease unless
harvested by hunters. In addition, the subsequent destruction
of habitat from deer overpopulation generally leads to massive
losses of many other species because the land can no longer
provide sufficient habitats for all those species.
Duckling


FISH AND WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT 29
.The Value of Fish and Wildlife
Fishing
People were catching fish long before recorded history.
Archaeologists discovered that early humans fashioned
hooklike devices made of bones, antlers, shells, and stones.
One design, called a gorge, was nothing more than a short
shaft tapered to a point at both ends and was embedded
lengthwise in the bait. The line was attached to the middle
of the gorge. This line could be pulled when the bait
was swallowed, causing the pointed ends of the shaft to
lodge in the fish’s throat. Later versions consisted of a
recurved, single-pointed hook design, which bore a striking
resemblance to modern fishhooks.
These early fish catching efforts were intended solely to
provide fish for food. Although the earliest time that people
first fished for enjoyment as well as food remains shrouded in
antiquity, centuries-old prints depicting someone fishing with
a pole and line appear often in examples of Chinese art.
The quantity and diversity of fish habitat is undoubtedly
the main reason for the highly successful commercial
fishing industry and the popularity of recreational fishing
in the United States, which has more than 90,000 miles of
tidal shoreline and more than 300 species of commercially
harvested fish. Freshwater fishing is available in lakes, ponds,
rivers, and streams scattered across the country from coast to
coast and border to border.
More than half the U.S. population now resides in a
coastal area. This puts tremendous stress on our fragile coastal
ecosystem. Professional fish and wildlife managers and other
concerned citizens are taking responsibility for maintaining
this excellent fishery resource. They have kept a watchful eye
on our varied fishery habitat and fish populations in general.
For one reason, as we become more and more industrialized,
we are increasingly threatened with pollution that can ruin our
Wildlife managers
use hunting as
a tool to help
reduce the number
of animals in
any given area,
thereby, for
example,
minimizing the
damage to crops,
orchards, and
the wildlife
habitat in general.
Through the Sport Fish and Wildlife Restoration
program, excise taxes on most equipment used
for fishing and hunting and on motorboat fuels
are invested each year by state fish and wildlife
agencies. Combined with proceeds from the sale of
fishing and hunting licenses, these funds are used to
manage their fish and wildlife resources.


30 FISH AND WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT
The Value of Fish and Wildlife.
waters. The toxic red tide along the Gulf Coast of Florida is
one example. Also, as populations grow and fishing equipment
becomes more and more sophisticated, we also put a greater
stress on our fish populations.
Observing
While many wildlife enthusiasts are avid hunters and anglers,
many others pursue their wildlife and fish interests by way of
other hobbies. Some compile life lists as bird-watchers. Others
engage in fish and wildlife photography and art, both as art-
ists and collectors. Still others develop backyard habitats such
as nesting boxes, ponds, and plantings of vegetation for food
and shelter.
Many avid anglers and hunters develop additional, related
fish and wildlife conservation interests.
The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, from their
online national survey of over 106,000 respondents,
estimates that 40 million Americans went
recreational fishing in 2022. During the same
year, 14.4 million hunted and 148 million watched
wildlife. This means that 15% of all Americans 16
years or older fished, 6% hunted, and 57% watched
wildlife. These trips add up to an all-time high of 14
billion days and $394.8 billion spent in the field, on
the water and around the home viewing wildlife.


FISH AND WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT 31
.The Value of Fish and Wildlife
Endangered Species
Hunting, fishing, and other values of fish and wildlife are
obvious uses that provide food, hobbies, and simple enjoy-
ment. The subject of endangered species represents a very
real value, though perhaps more subtle and complex. The
principal reason animals are becom-
ing endangered at an ever-increasing
rate is that people are causing major
changes in the natural environment.
Because many animals have very
specific habitat requirements, what
appears to be a minor change to
humans might be devastating to
the animal.
It is easy to see
that the manage-
ment of all our
fishery resources
will be a highly
challenging and
rewarding career
activity in the
years ahead.


32 FISH AND WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT
The Value of Fish and Wildlife.
Abrupt changes
give sensitive
wildlife species
no time to adapt
and no place
to retreat.
Extinction is a natural process. Dinosaurs became extinct
well before humans walked the face of the earth. During the
past few hundred years, however, when the human population
has skyrocketed, the extinction process has accelerated drasti-
cally. Some animals became endangered species because they
competed with people. Wolves and grizzly bears are examples
of animals that were deliberately killed because they fed on
domestic livestock.
Some of the whales, sea turtles, spotted cats, and other
species have been reduced to the endangered status because of
their considerable commercial value. Others, like the badlands
bighorn sheep, Merriam’s elk, and eastern elk were extermi-
nated by meat and trophy hunters prior to 1910. Many of these
extinct animals were destroyed before most people thought
seriously about conservation.
We know now that very small
amounts of some pesticides
eaten by brown pelicans, bald
eagles, peregrine falcons,
and many other species may
kill them or make them
unable to produce young.
These three species nearly
became extinct some years
back through wide use of a
chemical known as DDT.
This pesticide found its way
into their diets and caused
their eggs to develop only
thin, fragile shells. Their
thin-shelled eggs tended to
break in the nest before the
young were hatched, causing
a rapid and drastic decline in
population of these species.
Loss of wildlife habitat by draining and filling wetlands (marshes,
sloughs, and swamps), building dams on rivers and streams, clearing
land, or building cities and airports can have an enormous impact on
animals that are not able to adjust to a new or changed environment.
Brown pelican


FISH AND WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT 33
.The Value of Fish and Wildlife
The introduction of foreign (or exotic) animals has resulted
in the loss of a number of our native species. Introduced birds
and animals such as mute swans, European starlings, and rats
coupled with plant and animal diseases and competition while
overgrazing by sheep and cattle have drastically affected native
animals and their associated habitats. Common cats kill as
many as 20% of North American birds annually.
The same causes that contribute to the endangered status
of mammals and birds also generally apply to fish. Harmful
environmental change brought about by human activity is
Humpback whale
Endangered
means that only
a few individuals
of a species
remain alive. They
are in danger of
becoming extinct.
Extinct means
that not one
individual of a
species is still
alive. The word
threatened is
used to describe
a species
that is almost
endangered.
Bighorn sheep


34 FISH AND WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT
The Value of Fish and Wildlife.
An exotic species
is any plant or
animal that is not
naturally occurring
in an area. An
invasive species
is an exotic that
spreads rapidly
and competes with
native species.
thought to be the most important cause. In fact, fish are even
more vulnerable than mammals or birds, as most fish are
captives of their stream or lake habitats. They are unable to
move at will to the next mountain or valley if disturbed by
human activity. On the brighter side, some success has been
achieved in recent years for improving chances for survival
of several endangered species.
A number of fish species once included on the endangered
list have been reclassified as threatened, a less critical category,
though still indicating the need for continued protection. A
few examples of such “downlisted” species include Alabama
cavefish, snail darter, and Apache trout. Some of these species
were at least partially restored as a result of successful trans-
plants to new and undisturbed habitats where they have a
better chance to survive. Others have benefited from habitat
improvement and the adoption of more protective regulations.
Endangered fishes and some freshwater mussels reared at fish
hatcheries will be useful in future restoration programs.
Birds and animals that
are native to islands are
especially vulnerable to
introduced predators.
For example, just a few
years ago the brown
tree snake gained
access to the Island
of Guam in the North
Pacific. In just a short
time these large tree-
climbing snakes virtually
wiped out the flourish-
ing bird populations. About 40 percent of Hawaii’s native birds are now
extinct; another 40 percent, like the Hawaiian stilt
(pictured here), are endangered.


FISH AND WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT 35
.The Value of Fish and Wildlife
Environmental Barometers
A somewhat subtle fish and wildlife value is that the creatures
serve humans as environmental barometers. A barometer is an
instrument used to help forecast weather.
Years ago, coal miners carried caged canaries with them
into deep underground mines. Someone kept a constant sharp
eye on the bird, because its behavior reflected the condition of
the air. Canaries are much more sensitive to impure air than
humans. If the canary died, the miners headed for the surface
because deadly methane gas was probably present.
In much more subtle ways, fish and wildlife can serve to
measure the quality of the environment. Clear, cool streams
that ought to support trout, but do not, suggest something may
be drastically wrong with the quality of the water. Similarly,
the populations of frogs and other amphibians have experienced
a significant drop in numbers globally. This trend has signaled
an environmental concern among scientists.
Ideally, we should strive to assure that most species
remain in abundance. If this were the case, the quality of the
environment for humans would be healthy, too.
Why should people try to save endangered species,
sometimes at a considerable cost? Perhaps the
answer is that extinction is final. If people are
responsible for endangering an animal, they have
an obligation to future generations of humans to
try to save that animal. Furthermore, it is in our
interest to preserve all species, because a variety of
living things provides a greater diversity of social,
recreational, scientific, and economic benefits
for everyone.
The presence or
absence of fish
and wildlife can
reflect the way
people live and
how well or
how poorly they
are treating
the environment.


36 FISH AND WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT
The Value of Fish and Wildlife.
Help Curb Invasive Species
Over eons of time, populations of plant and animal species
develop complex relationships in balance with nature. This
delicate balance can easily be destroyed when an invasive
species enters the picture.
When nonnative, exotic plants and animals are introduced
into an ecosystem, they often have no natural predators or
controls to keep them in check with the established habitat.
Such an environment allows them to aggressively spread out
and compete with native species for food, water, shelter, and
space, and to expose these native species to new diseases and
other hazards. This is why invasive species are a major threat to
nature—and also to recreational areas such as lakes and parks
that we all enjoy.
You can help curb the effects of invasive species. Remember
that people and human activity are the major transporters of
invasive species. Practice biological Leave No Trace by:
• After a hike, shake out your socks and remove any weeds and
seeds from your shoes and clothing before heading home.
• When you are through boating, inspect your equipment and
boat before leaving the site. You don’t want to transport any
plants, water, mud, leftover bait, or fish and other living
things to another area.
A fish die-off is often the first sign of pollution in a water supply.


FISH AND WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT 37
.The Value of Fish and Wildlife
• If you have caught any fish, release it
back only to the area where it was caught.
Never transport your catch and release it
somewhere else. In addition, never release
anything from your home aquarium to a
lake, pond, or other body of water.
• If you are riding a bike, motorcycle, horse,
or any other transportation across long
distances, be sure you don’t pick up any
“hitchhikers” along the way, such as
seeds, plant parts, and bugs.
Here are only a few examples of invasive
species. You might recognize them.
Phragmites are a wild, cane-like plant
that dominates thousands of acres of coastal
and interior wetlands. It spreads readily,
forming vast, dense reed beds that choke
out native plant species. The stalks and
plumes of phragmites can grow to 14 feet
high, making it even more difficult to control
and eliminate.
The invasive island apple snail came
from the aquarium and aquaculture trades
via South America. This agricultural pest
grows to about the size of a baseball, devours
any type of aquatic plant, has few natural
enemies, and multiplies quickly. In fact, one
female island apple snail can lay up to 1,000
eggs every 10 to 14 days.
The destructive Asian carp is an inva-
sive species imported to the United States
beginning in the 1960s. Now viewed as a
significant threat in the Mississippi River
and the Great Lakes, the carp consumes not
only native species’ food but also their eggs.
A female carp potentially can lay about 1
million eggs, and an adult carp can grow
as large as 5 feet and weigh 110 pounds.
Fortunately, U.S. government agencies have
taken steps, such as building electric barriers,
to limit the Asian carp’s further migration.
Phragmites
Island apple snail
Asian carp





FISH AND WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT 39
.Who’s Responsible for Fish and Wildlife?
Who’s Responsible for
Fish and Wildlife?
In a very real sense the responsibility for fish and wildlife
must be shared by everybody, but officially this responsibility
belongs to public agencies.
The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service within the Department
of the Interior has primary responsibility for the management
of migratory birds (ducks, geese, robins, and woodpeckers, for
example); for endangered and threatened species (whooping
cranes, California condors, grizzly bears); and for some marine
mammals (polar bears, walruses, and sea otters). A major part
of the service’s responsibility for these groups of wildlife takes
place on habitat within the National Wildlife Refuge System.
More than 568 refuges, totaling more than 850 million acres,
represent the largest system of lands and waters in the world
devoted to the management of wildlife and wildlife habitat.
The Department of Commerce, through its National Marine
Fisheries Service, is responsible for providing the scientific
and technical information needed to conserve, manage, and
develop living marine resources. The information and analyses
they provide are the basis for management and development
decisions that support the growth and stability of the U.S. rec-
reational and commercial marine fishing industries and
protection of endangered aquatic species.
Each of the 50 state governments has a conservation
department or game and fish division with the responsibility of
managing the state’s resident fish and wildlife species. In all,
some 50 million acres of habitat are managed by the states for
fish and wildlife, both game and nongame species.
Other federal
land management
agencies, such
as the USDA
Forest Service,
the National Park
Service, and the
Bureau of Land
Management,
administer millions
of acres of
public lands.
They also have
responsibilities
for wildlife by
virtue of their
management
of these lands.


40 FISH AND WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT
Who’s Responsible for Fish and Wildlife?.
Continue Your Interest
As you continue to develop your interest in fish and wildlife, it
might become a very enriching part of your life. You will come
to realize that our nation is blessed with an amazing amount
of highly diversified fish and wildlife habitat, much of it publicly
owned so that it can be enjoyed by all Americans. Those who
become heavily involved in fish and wildlife conservation
tend to develop a deep pride in our public lands. They often
serve by volunteering in local fishery or habitat improvement
projects and litter cleanup efforts, reporting vandalism,
supporting conservation organizations, and preventing
various forms of misuse and abuse.
As a parting thought: Hundreds of years from now, future
generations also will cherish fish and wildlife resources just as
many of us do today. If you elect to devote some of your time
and energy helping to conserve and improve fish and wildlife
habitats, you will undoubtedly gain a deep sense of satisfac-
tion in assuring these enjoyable benefits for future generations.
Besides government programs, many other organi-
zations contribute significantly to our nation’s fish
and wildlife management efforts (see the resources
section at the end of this pamphlet). In fact, many
private foundations and nonprofit conservation
organizations protect and manage lands that
provide valuable habitat for all kinds of wildlife.
These lands may serve as nesting sites and feeding
zones for wetland waterfowl and migratory birds,
or as corridors or buffer zones between fish or
wildlife habitats and human developments, or they
may house rehabilitation programs for injured
and disaster-affected animals (such as from oil
spills), to name a few. Many private foundations
also conduct research on specific fish and wildlife
species, sharing valuable input with wildlife
managers all over the world.


FISH AND WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT 41
.Who’s Responsible for Fish and Wildlife?
For most Scouts who earn the Fish and Wildlife Management merit
badge, the knowledge gained will be the beginning of a wonderful
lifetime hobby rather than a career. Wherever you end up living,
there will be opportunities for you to continue to learn about fish
and wildlife and to be active in conservation pursuits. National, state,
and local organizations offer memberships and activities in this field,
and if you are typical, others who share your interests will become
lifelong friends.


42 FISH AND WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT
Observe, Listen, and Learn.
Observe, Listen,
and Learn
The best way to learn about fish and wildlife is to get outdoors
and experience it. One can quickly find out the types of
materials a squirrel prefers for its nest, for example. Over time,
observers can notice such things as migratory patterns and
the effect of human influence on a habitat. Always remember,
though, that this Earth is the only one we have—do your best
to leave it the way you found it by following the principles of
Leave No Trace.
Safety
Nearly all animals will avoid people if they can.
However, some wildlife can be especially dangerous.
Always be careful when observing wild animals.
Never go out alone if there is the possibility of
encountering bears, mountain lions, or poisonous
snakes. The spines of some fish might also cause
injury or infection.


FISH AND WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT 43
.Observe, Listen, and Learn
Leave No Trace Seven Principles
and the Outdoor Code
Do your part to keep nature natural by following these principles.
1. Plan ahead and prepare. Proper planning increases safety,
reduces the impact of your visit on the environment, and
helps make your outdoor experience more enjoyable.
2. Travel and camp on durable surfaces. Natural environments
are easily damaged by foot traffic. Use existing trails or travel
on durable surfaces such as rock, gravel, sand, compacted
soil, dry grasses, or snow. Large groups should spread out to
avoid creating new trails. Keep campsites small.
3. Dispose of waste properly (pack it in, pack it out). Any
material people leave behind pollutes the environment and
might create a health hazard for wildlife or other visitors.
Pack out any trash and leftover food. Dispose of human
waste by digging catholes 6 to 8 inches deep and 200 feet
away from water, trails, and campsites.
4. Leave what you find. Observe the interesting things you
find, but do not disturb them. Use established campsites and
do not alter them in any way. Restore campsites to pristine
condition before you leave.
5. Minimize campfire impacts. Use a lightweight stove when
cooking in the backcountry. If you need to build a fire, keep it
small and use only dead or downed wood. Never cut down
limbs or trees for firewood.
6. Respect wildlife. Stay far enough away from animals that
your presence does not disturb their natural activity. Store
food, food scraps, and trash securely to prevent animals
from eating food that is not part of their natural diet. Never
feed wild animals.
7. Be considerate of other visitors. Let everyone enjoy nature.
Travel and camp quietly and away from other people. Blend
in by wearing subdued colors. Leave pets and portable
audio devices at home.


44 FISH AND WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT
Observe, Listen, and Learn.
Types of Wildlife
Take some time to learn a little about the types of wildlife and
fish that can be found in the wild, then go out and watch them.
This will help you determine their needs and could possibly
give you an idea for a project that will improve their habitat.
Mammals
Mammals are the only animals on Earth that nurse their young.
They are warm-blooded, which helps them adapt to all kinds of
climates. They also are intelligent. If you could give an IQ test
to every species of animal, mammals would score higher than
all other animals.
You are likely to spot a variety of mammals in any wild-
life community. Being familiar with some animals’ habits will
give you a greater chance of observing them in the wild. A
large percentage of mammals are nocturnal—that is, they stay
in their dens or burrows during the day, venturing out for food
at night. Hoofed animals, like the deer and sheep, usually are
found in more open wild areas, where they can feed on grasses
and leaves. Wooded areas are home to many types of mam-
mals, including members of the rodent family that live among
State fish and
wildlife agencies
can provide
information on
exotic animals,
game species,
furbearers, and
migratory game
birds that includes
a list of currently
endangered
animals that live
in your area.
The Arctic hare’s natural camouflage helps it blend into its
environment and evade predators.


FISH AND WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT 45
.Observe, Listen, and Learn
the leaf litter on the forest floor or in tunnels under lawns and
fields. You might sight a water mammal if you live near an
ocean; whales, seals, sea lions, sea otters, walruses, porpoises,
and dolphins all breathe air and must surface frequently for a
fresh supply.
Predatory mammals, including flesh-eaters like bears,
raccoons, skunks, opossums, foxes, wolves, coyotes, and
bobcats, are found in every kind of wildlife community. Some
of them eat plants, but all prefer to eat other animals and have
canine teeth for tearing flesh.
Most mammals are too shy to come out of their natural camouflage
and put themselves on display, so spotting them is not easy. If you
start looking for tracks or other signs, though, you will find that
mammals are much more common than you think. Look for the
following signs:
• Tracks in the mud, snow, or sand along waterways
• Signs of feeding around fruit-bearing shrubs or trees
• Rough bark around the hole in a hollow tree
• Droppings on animal runways in woods or fields
• Animal homes—holes in the ground, muskrat houses,
or beaver lodges or dens
Beaver-eaten tree


46 FISH AND WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT
Observe, Listen, and Learn.
Birds
The best way to learn to
identify birds is to venture
outside and look and
listen for them. Borrow a
pair of binoculars to make
watching more fun and
identifying the birds easier.
Then, learn something
about bird families and
where they usually are
found so that you will be
able to identify any bird
you see.
If you are near a lake
or a river, you might very
well see ducks, geese,
wading birds like herons
or egrets, or shore birds
like sandpipers or killdeer.
If you are near the ocean,
you might see gulls or terns. An area with lots of trees
could be home to woodpeckers, flycatchers, jays, warblers,
and orioles. Prairies and fields are good habitat for swallows,
pheasants, and meadowlarks. In almost all wildlife communi-
ties, bird watchers can find finches and sparrows.
As you watch birds,
find out as much as you
can about them. To help
you determine a bird’s
species and to recognize
it the next time you see
it, take note of its call,
size, shape, and habitat,
as well as its song, what
it eats, how it flies, the
trees or other plants it
favors, where it nests,
whether it walks or hops,
and specific markings
such as an eye stripe,
wing bars, and coloration. American robin
American kestrel


FISH AND WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT 47
.Observe, Listen, and Learn
Reptiles and Amphibians
Once you learn the differences between reptiles and amphibians,
you can easily tell them apart. Reptiles include snakes, lizards,
turtles, alligators, and crocodiles, while salamanders, frogs,
toads, and newts are amphibians. Reptiles hatch or are born on
land and look just like their parents, but most amphibians spend
their early life in the water and go through different body forms
as they mature to the adult form. Amphibians can live on land
or in water, while most reptiles are more terrestrial.
Desert tortoise Young desert tortoise
Life cycle of a frog


48 FISH AND WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT
Observe, Listen, and Learn.
The best time to look for reptiles and amphibians is in
the spring, as they emerge from hibernation seeking food,
the warmth of the sun, and their mates. Fall usually is the
next best season to see reptiles, as they seek sunshine for
warmth again; many gather near dens or burrows. Summer
searching is unpredictable. You might find turtles, water
snakes, and many varieties of frogs during hot weather, but
most shun the heat and the sun. Others prowl only at night;
sometimes it is worthwhile to look for them with a flashlight
after dark. In areas with harsh winters, these animals hibernate
during the cold weather and cannot be found.
When looking for reptiles and amphibians, leave no stone
unturned. Tip up and then make sure to replace all objects
beneath which something might hide, including boards, flat
or loose rocks, cracks in cliffs and ledges, rock slabs, and
boulders. Peeling the bark away from rotten logs or tearing logs
or stumps apart also can help; the sudden light temporarily
dazzles the uncovered animal to give you a chance to identify it.
While most reptiles are harmless and all are
beneficial, a few (like the broad-banded copperhead
shown here) can be dangerous. There are four
groups of venomous snakes, one venomous lizard,
and a few large turtles that can inflict painful bites.
There are venomous snakes in nearly every state
in the country.
Broad-banded copperhead


FISH AND WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT 49
.Observe, Listen, and Learn
Fish
Fish can be found just about anywhere there is water. Whether
as small as a backyard pond or as large as an ocean, bodies of
water are home to fish of all shapes and sizes. Some freshwater
fish you might catch include bass, panfish, catfish, and trout.
If you live near a coastal area, try fishing for saltwater fish
such as yellowtail, drum, pompano, redfish, salmon, snapper,
and spotted sea trout.
A few tips could make finding a place to catch fish in
freshwater or saltwater easier. Fish like edges, so look for
them where the bank meets the water, where a sandbar drops
off, and where two currents meet. Fish like to hide, too. Look
around weed beds; underneath overhanging trees, brush, and
docks; and where rocks jut out from shore. Fish like rapids
and currents. Rushing water carries food and lots of oxygen,
both of which fish need. Look for fish in plunge pools below
waterfalls.
Frogs and toads have distinctive calls. Some, like
the spring peeper, have a high, peeping call. Others,
like the leopard, wood, and pickerel frogs, make a
noise that sounds like a snore or a grunt; the call of
the green frog resembles a loose mandolin string;
and the bullfrog’s low “jug-o-rum” is well-known
to almost everyone.
Northern leopard frog


50 FISH AND WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT
Observe, Listen, and Learn.
You Are What You Eat
Optional requirement 7(c) asks you to examine the
stomach contents of three fish. As an angler, doing
so will tell you what those fish feed on in the wild—
insects, worms, smaller fish, vegetation, and so on.
It will give you a good idea of the best bait
or lure to use at that moment. Resource managers
use this same information to help ensure that the
species has access to the most appropriate food
sources.
Examining a fish’s entrails can be done easily
when cleaning a fish you intend to eat. If you are
not able to visit a cleaning station or to find a
similar alternative, you may need to gut a fish
yourself. (For tips on safe knife use, review your
Scouts BSA Handbook.) After skinning or scaling
the fish, follow these steps.
Step 1—Starting at the anal opening near the tail,
cut through the skin from the belly to the gills. Be
careful not to cut too deeply and destroy the organs.
Step 2—Open the belly and use your fingers to
carefully remove the gills from the fish. Scrape
out the kidney line (it’s reddish brown) along the
backbone. Detach the entrails from the fish by
cutting them away from the fish’s body; be careful
not to burst the stomach.
Remember to responsibly dispose of all remains.
Follow Leave No Trace principles, and treat this waste
as you would human waste by either packing it out
or burying it in a cathole that is 6 to 8 inches deep
and at least 200 feet from the water source, trails,
or campsites.


FISH AND WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT 51
.Observe, Listen, and Learn
Once you land a fish, you can learn a lot about it by
sampling a single scale, including its age. Like trees, a fish’s
scales show rings that give away its age. As the fish grows,
its scales grow with it, leaving behind circular ridges—widely
placed in warm months and closely placed in cooler months.
As the seasons pass, each band of wide and close ridges marks
one year of a fish’s life.
To take a scale sample from a fish, choose a mature
scale from behind the dorsal fin toward the top of the fish.
Slip needle-nose pliers under a scale and gently tug toward
the fish’s tail. Any scale that is removed can be regenerated
by the fish, so the live fish may be released once your sample
is taken. Growth seasons can be counted by rings on the
scale, much like the growth rings on a tree. To see the growth
rings on a small fish scale, use a good hand lens or low-
power microscope.
SCALES
SCALE
Catch and release is an important conservation
measure practiced by anglers. In some areas,
catch and release is the law. See the Fishing or
Fly-Fishing merit badge pamphlets for more
information on the sport.


52 FISH AND WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT
Observe, Listen, and Learn.
Observing Wildlife
A simple way to help make your backyard more inviting to
wildlife observation is to replace exotic plants with those that
are native to the region. Some ways to attract and pamper
local wildlife include adding birdbaths filled with clean, fresh
water, using natural insecticides rather than chemicals, build-
ing brush piles, and planting native trees that bear fruit or
nuts. When you go into the wild to observe wildlife, though,
follow these tips. Avoid going into the woods during hunting
season without appropriate hunter orange clothing.
Blend Into the Landscape
Find a comfortable spot to sit or lie prone. Stay absolutely still
and be patient. Some animals will lose their fear of you after
a time and venture out of hiding. If you want to make your
presence even less obvious, build a blind one day and go into
it a day or two later when the animals have gotten used to it.
Take binoculars if you have them.
Go Out at Night
With your parent, guardian, or
another Scout, visit a natural
habitat at night. Take a flashlight.
Shine the light at intervals on the
trail ahead, into treetops, and into
dense brush. Skunks, foxes, deer,
flying squirrels, raccoons, and
opossums might be looking at you.
Conducting a Creel Census
The results of a creel census are helpful in estimating the number
of fish the average angler catches in an hour at one body of water.
A simple survey will help compile the data. This data is used by fishery
managers to develop management prescriptions for a given body of
water. As anglers return to the dock after a day of fishing, poll them
about their catch. How many hours were they out, and how many fish
did they catch? The more anglers you poll, the more accurate your
results will be. You might also ask them for a few fish scales and the
fish’s stomach to determine what the fish had been eating that day.


FISH AND WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT 53
.Observe, Listen, and Learn
Take to the Water
Look along a stream bank or lakeshore for tracks in the mud
and sand. That night, go out in a boat with a bright flashlight
and row to a point offshore from where you saw the tracks. Sit
quietly, and at the slightest sound, aim your light toward it.
Or anchor near a beaver dam or muskrat house and shine
your light whenever you hear a sound. Whenever in a boat,
wear a personal floatation device and follow all Scouting rules
for watercraft safety.
Stake Out a Burrow
If you spot a hole in the ground while on a hike, poke some
pencil-sized sticks lightly into the ground around it. If the hole
is a mammal’s burrow, you will find the sticks knocked down
when you come back to look at it later. So sit down in a com-
fortable spot nearby and wait. If you are patient, you might be
rewarded by a look at a woodchuck, badger, ground squirrel,
pocket gopher, or chipmunk.
Look Along the Edges
As you observe wildlife communities, you will discover that the
best places to find animals are where two communities meet.
This edge attracts more wildlife than either of the communities.
Here, you will find a greater variety of plants, which supply
more food and more cover for more animals.
For example, rabbits find food in fields where clover grows,
but they need tangle or brush for cover from their enemies.
Where a field meets a shrubby wood, rabbits have food and
cover close together and therefore can live successfully.
However, even though a greater variety of wildlife can
be found along the edge, some animals avoid the edges and
require large stretches of a certain type of terrain, such as
an unbroken forest.
Where a prairie
meets a
woodland, where
a hay field meets
a cornfield, where
a marsh blends
into woods, or
wherever two
communities
come together,
you will find a
larger variety
of animals.
Anything that you can use to conceal yourself can be
used as a blind. A tent, a hollow tree, or a cave might
serve well. Set up your blind downwind from the spot
where you expect the animals to come. Camouflage
the blind with branches, grasses, and reeds to make it
look as much a part of the landscape as possible.


54 FISH AND WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT
Observe, Listen, and Learn.
Nest Boxes
The types of homes for different species
are, of course, different. Installing a nest
box that is specially suited for a particular
animal might give you the best opportunity
to observe the animals without disturbing
them. Nest boxes need to be maintained
by cleaning them out once a year.
Squirrels and raccoons normally make
their homes from large cavities in trees or
hollow logs. You can make them a good
home by fitting a wooden nail keg with
a “roof” and an entrance hole. Place the
hole on the side for easy entrance, and
cut the entrance hole a little larger for bigger mammals like the
raccoon. A raccoon box should be placed in a wooded area not
too far from water, while a squirrel box belongs in an oak or
nut tree woodland.
Many birds, like the Eastern bluebird, make their homes
in the hollow of a tree, while other birds are content to build
their nests anywhere among its branches. Robins, phoebes, and
barn swallows will nest on square wooden platforms mounted
beneath the eaves of barns, sheds, or buildings, out of the
wind and rain.
A good way to attract birds to your backyard is to provide
water. A simple, old-fashioned birdbath works well. Keep it
clean by scrubbing it every day or two with hot water and
adding fresh water with a hose. Otherwise, the standing water
will begin to attract mosquitoes. You need only the bowl from
a birdbath or a shallow plastic dish like those made
to go under potted plants. Place the bowl directly
on the ground near escape cover such as trees
or bushes.
Squirrel nest box
Raccoon nest box
Put a flat rock as big as your hand in the
middle of the bowl so that only an inch
or so of water covers it. Some birds do
not like to wade into deep water to bathe
and can stand on the rock.


FISH AND WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT 55
.Observe, Listen, and Learn
FRONT
ROOF
SIDE SIDE
FLOOR BACK
DRAINAGE CORNER CUTS
6 1⁄2"
4"
ABOUT 1'13⁄4"
9 1⁄4"
9 1⁄4"
93⁄8"
101⁄4"
101⁄2"
19⁄16"80º
PIVOT
SCREWS
RECESSED
BOTTOM 1⁄4"
PIVOT
SCREWS
VENT
DOUBLE-
HEADED
NAIL
DRILL HOLE THROUGH
“FRONT” AND SIDE OF
DOOR TO HOLD DOOR
CLOSED WITH NAIL.
1⁄4"
FRONTSIDEFLOOR
USE THE REMAINDER
OF THE BOARD
FOR THE BACK.
4"
4"
91⁄4" 93⁄8"101⁄4"
51⁄2" SIDE
Eastern Bluebird Nest Box
The nest box plans have been provided by the North American Bluebird Society. For
more information about bluebirds and their conservation, visit the NABS website:
nabluebirdsociety.org.
Eastern Bluebird
Nest Box
Materials List
■■ Standard 1" X 6",
4 feet long
■■ Standard board
1" X 10", 101⁄2" long
■■ 13⁄4" galvanized nails,
approximately 20
■■ Two 13⁄4" galvanized
screws for pivot point
■■ One double-headed
nail for holding
door closed





FISH AND WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT 57
.Careers in Fish and Wildlife Management
Careers in Fish and
Wildlife Management
If you are already serious about a career in fish and wildlife
management, earning this merit badge is the perfect introduc-
tion to the subject. Becoming a professional in the fish and
wildlife management field offers great challenges and personal
satisfaction. To pursue such a career, you should have a strong
interest in natural resources and the related sciences.


58 FISH AND WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT
Careers in Fish and Wildlife Management.
Wildlife biologist
Zoologist
Fish hatchery
superintendent
Hydrographer
Wildlife manage-
ment consultant
Conservation officer
Oceanographer
Outdoor recreation
planner
Watershed manager
Forest or
park ranger
Environmental
analyst
Soil conservationist
Fisheries officer
Fish and wildlife
technician
Tree farm manager
Environmental
interpreter
Conservation
educator
Mammalogist
Park naturalist
Teacher
Fisheries biologist
Marine resources
technician
However, many people involved in fish and wildlife
management are not professional biologists. Many of them
are professionals in other fields who combine their abilities
with a basic knowledge of and interest in fish and wildlife
management. For example, fish and wildlife agencies include
on their staffs lawyers, office administrators, writers, engineers,
foresters, and other experts. It is a challenging career field,
but opportunities are always available for those who have the
drive and are willing to work hard.
Preparing for such a career begins when you are still in
school. Taking courses in geography, math, history, biology,
and physical and social sciences will help you build a strong
base. Depending on the field you choose, you most likely will
need to develop technical writing skills—especially if your
work involves research.
Those who are serious about a career in the field of
fish and wildlife management know that the competition for
positions is stiff. This makes getting good grades in school
and a solid college education essential. Begin by pursuing a
broad-based education that strengthens your understanding of
natural resources as well as the social, economic, and political
forces that affect how decisions are made. Courses in subjects
such as wildlife, zoology, math, statistics, computer science,
English composition, and botany all are practical. Depending
on your major, as you become more focused on a specific area,
courses in embryology, taxonomy, genetics, and vertebrate
and invertebrate zoology will enhance your understanding of
conservation-related fields.
Most conservationists also are public speakers.
They might be called to address student groups,
civic and service clubs, and other organizations and
gatherings. So, get involved with the debate team
at school and take courses in public speaking and
communication to add value to your education.


FISH AND WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT 59
.Careers in Fish and Wildlife Management
Starting early with volunteer work also is a great way to
gain valuable experience while making friends and contacts in
the profession. Contact your state's fish and wildlife agency to
inquire about volunteer opportunities.
Keep in mind that career opportunities abound in fish
and wildlife management not only in the government (city,
county, state, federal) and nonprofit sectors but increasingly
in the private sector, too. More and more private utility, mining,
lumber, and paper companies are employing specialists in the
field. Chances are good that you will find a lifelong career
that is personally rewarding and enjoyable. For more specific
information about education and training requirements and
career opportunities, check out the many resources in the back
of this pamphlet.
College or univer-
sity professor
Recreation
specialist
Ornithologist
Parks planning
technician
Public information
specialist
Resource manager
Planning officer
Lumberyard
manager
Equipment operator
Refuge manager
Forester
Park superintendent
Environmental
educator
Zookeeper/curator
Veterinarian
Wildlife landscape
architect
Fish and wildlife
statistician
Fish and wildlife
administrator
Fish and wildlife
legal specialist


60 FISH AND WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT
Fish and Wildlife Resources.
Earn the Complete Angler Award
Once you earn the Fish & Wildlife Management merit
badge, the Fishing merit badge, and the Fly-Fishing
merit badge, you only need to complete one more
step to be eligible to receive the Complete
Angler Award.
Becoming a Complete Angler
gives you the opportunity to expand
your fishing and conservation
knowledge and experiences. Fishing
is a varied and interesting outdoor
activity. Every kind of fish, every
sort of tackle, and each season brings
variety and challenge for anglers. The
adventure of fishing is also a great way
to appreciate and protect the environment.
You are encouraged to share your
knowledge of fishing and teach others to enjoy
a positive fishing experience. Become a fishing
mentor for peers and younger Scouts.
Your last step to earn the Complete Angler Award is
to complete successfully one or more of the following:
1. Teach a Fishing or Fly-Fishing merit badge skill to
your troop, crew or team as part of a unit program
activity.
2. Help instruct Cub Scouts on fishing skills or fishery
management as part of a Cub Scout meeting or
outing.
3. Participate in a local fishing derby or tournament,
either a Scouting or community event.
4. Complete a conservation project that will benefit a
local fishery.


FISH AND WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT 61
.Fish and Wildlife Resources
Scouting Literature
Scouts BSA Handbook; Fieldbook;
Animal Science, Bird Study, Camping,
Environmental Science, Fishing, Fly-
Fishing, Forestry, Insect Study, Mammal
Study, Nature, Oceanography, Pets,
Reptile and Amphibian Study, Soil and
Water Conservation, Sustainability,
and Veterinary Medicine merit
badge pamphlets
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.
Books
Behler, John. National Audubon Society
First Field Guide: Reptiles. Scholastic
Trade, 1999.
Bartlett, R.D., Patricia Bartlett,
and Billy Griswold. Reptiles,
Amphibians, and Invertebrates:
An Identification and Care Guide,
2nd ed. Barron’s Educational
Series, 2010.
Dunn, Jon L., and Jonathan Alderfer.
National Geographic Field Guide to
the Birds of North America, 7th ed.
National Geographic, 2017.
Hollow, Michele C., and William P.
Rives, VMD. The Everything Guide
to Working With Animals. Adams
Media, 2009.
Jackson, Tom. The Illustrated
Encyclopedia of Animals of the
World. Anness, 2012.
Leopold, Aldo. Aldo Leopold: A Sand
County Almanac and Other Writings
on Conservation and Ecology. Edited by
Curt Meine. Library of America, 2013.
Mackay, Richard. The Atlas of
Endangered Species, 3rd ed.
University of California Press, 2017.
Morgan, Tiffany, and Jon Young.
Animal Tracking Basics. Stackpole
Books, 2007.
Page, Lawrence M., and Brooks
M. Burr. Peterson Field Guide
to Freshwater Fishes, 2nd ed.
Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2011.
Reader’s Digest editors. North
American Wildlife. Reader’s
Digest, 2012.
Reid, Fiona. Peterson Field Guide to
Mammals of North America, 4th ed.
Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2006.
Fish and Wildlife Resources


62 FISH AND WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT
Fish and Wildlife Resources.
Sibley, David Allen. The Sibley
Guide to Birds, 2nd ed.
Alfred A. Knopf, 2014.
Sousa, R.J. The 24 Greatest Flies.
Husking Bee Books. Warren, RI.
2010.
Organizations and Websites
American Birding Association
93 Clinton St., Suite ABA
Delaware City, DE 19706
800-850-2473
aba.org
American Fisheries Society
425 Barlow Place, Suite 110
Bethesda, MD 20814
301-897-8616
fisheries.org
Association of Fish and
Wildlife Agencies
1100 First St. NE, Suite 825
Washington, DC 20002
202-838-3474
fishwildlife.org
Leave No Trace Center
for Outdoor Ethics
P.O. Box 997
Boulder, CO 80306
800-332-4100
lnt.org
National Audubon Society
225 Varick St., 7th Floor
New York, NY 10014
212-979-3196
audubon.org
National Fish and
Wildlife Foundation
1133 15th St. NW, Suite 1100
Washington, DC 20005
202-857-0166
nfwf.org
National Wildlife Federation
11100 Wildlife Center Drive
Reston, VA 20190
800-822-9919
nwf.org
National Zoological Park
3001 Connecticut Ave. NW
Washington, DC 20008
202-633-4888
nationalzoo.si.edu
The Nature Conservancy
4245 North Fairfax Drive, Suite 100
Arlington, VA 22203-1606
800-628-6860
nature.org
NOAA Marine Fisheries Service
nmfs.noaa.gov
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
800-344-9453
fws.gov
Wildlife Conservation Society
2300 Southern Blvd.
Bronx, NY 10460
718-220-5100
wcs.org
Acknowledgments
Scouting America is grateful to
the men and women serving on the
National Merit Badge Subcommittee for
the improvements made in updating
this pamphlet.
In particular, we thank Robert
J. Sousa, Ph.D., and Gary M. Stolz,
Ph.D., both U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service retirees whose expertise and
accommodating support has been a
tremendous help.


FISH AND WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT 63
.Fish and Wildlife Resources
Photo and Illustration Credits
Florida Department of Environmental
Protection/Dana Denson, courtesy—
page 37 (island apple snail)
U.S. Department of Agriculture/Bob
Nichols, courtesy—page 22
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service,
courtesy—pages 11 (mountain lion),
23, 27, and 44
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service/Bill
Buchanan, courtesy—page 37
(phragmites)
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service/George
Gentry, courtesy—page 56
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service/Bill Gill,
courtesy—page 8
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service/John
and Karen Hollingsworth,
courtesy—pages 32 and 34
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service/Lee
Karney, courtesy—page 46 (robin)
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service/Dave
Menke, courtesy—pages 12–13
(both), and 46 (kestrel)
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service/LuRay
Parker, courtesy—page 57
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service/Ray
Rauch, courtesy—page 48
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service/Duane
Raver, courtesy—page 26 (bass)
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service; photo
by Tom Stehn, courtesy—
page 10 (fawn)
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service/Terry
Tollefsbol, courtesy—
page 26 (bear)
U.S. Geological Survey, Cooperative
Research Units Program, courtesy—
pages 4 (all), 5, 9, 10 (researchers),
11 (researchers), and 59 (researcher)
Wikipedia.org, courtesy—page 47
(baby tortoise)
Wikipedia.org/Mark A. Wilson,
courtesy—page 47 (adult tortoise)
Wikipedia.org/Whit Welles, courtesy—
page 33 (whale)
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of
or are protected by Scouting America.
Tom Copeland—page 41
Gene Daniels—page 59
Daniel Giles—cover (bird box)
John McDearmon—pages 17–18
(both), 47 (illustration), 51 (both),
and 54–55 (illustrations)
Brian Payne—pages 6, 30, and 52
Randy Piland—page 20


