SAFETY


SAFETY
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Safety or check Scoutbook for
the latest requirements.
35944
ISBN 978-0-8395-3347-4
©2025 Scouting America/Boy Scouts of America
2025 Printing FPO


SAFETY 3





SAFETY 5
Contents
Why Be Safe? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Safety From Criminals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
Safety on the Road . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
Safety in Your Home . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
Safety Online. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
Safety in Public Places . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
Safety Plans and Projects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
Careers in Safety . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
Safety Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78





SAFETY 7
.Why Be Safe?
Why Be Safe?
Whatever your reasons for wanting to earn the Safety merit
badge, the knowledge you gain can help you prevent accidents
and respond appropriately during an emergency situation. What
you learn while working on this merit badge can prepare you to
make the right choices and to take the best actions so that you
can help keep yourself and others safe.
This merit badge pamphlet will describe common safety
practices. Although it cannot cover every possible situation,
this pamphlet will teach you how to help protect yourself from
criminals, identify safety hazards and how to correct them, and
take the best possible actions to keep yourself and others safe.
Safety is part of doing your duty for your country.
When you go hiking, always tell someone where you are going
and when you plan to return.
You practice
safety when you
actively seek to
prevent accidents
or ward off
danger. Safety
is about taking
precautions—
stopping injury
or loss before
it happens.


8 SAFETY
Why Be Safe?.
You and Your Actions
You will find many unsafe conditions in your daily life.
However, most of them become hazards only as a result of
your actions when you take unnecessary risks. What might
cause you to act in an unsafe way?
• Taking chances (“We were just fooling around.”)
• Being unprepared (“I didn’t think we’d need flashlights
and batteries.”)
• Fatigue (“We were going to rest when we got there.”)
• Overconfidence (“I was sure I could swim a mile.”)
• Haste (“I didn’t have time to find a chopping block to cut
this on.”)
• Fear (“I was so scared, I couldn’t move.”)
• Excitement (“We didn’t want to miss the kickoff, so we told
Joe to step on the gas.”)
• Ignoring the rules or signs (“Sure, the sign said ‘No swimming,’
but I felt like swimming.”)
• Not using common sense (“I didn’t realize I had to know
how to swim to use a canoe.”)
• The lure of the forbidden (“I didn’t know the gun was loaded.”)
• Not taking responsibility (“No one ever told me that
could happen.”)
Next time you are
told to be careful
with electricity,
remember that
you are six times
more likely to die
from electric
shock than from
all the venomous
snakes, hornets,
and even killer
bees combined.
Nearly a third of all accidental deaths occur in motor vehicle accidents.


SAFETY 9
.Why Be Safe?
Accident Facts and Statistics
Do you feel safer riding in a car or flying in a plane? If you
picked riding in a car, think again. Recent statistics show that
passengers were 40 times more likely to die in a car crash than
in a plane crash. This fact shows the importance of safety every
time you ride in a car. Facts and statistics reveal potential risks
and the importance of certain safety practices.
On average, 15 accidental deaths occur every hour of every
day. About half of these deaths occur in motor vehicle acci-
dents. More than a third of the injuries occur in the home.
Safety experts classify accidents in four broad categories:
motor vehicle, work, home, and public. The public category
includes accidents involving sports and recreation, swimming,
and hunting. This category also includes air, water, and land
transportation (such as planes, boats, and trains). It excludes
motor vehicles and accidents in public buildings.
Always take
a moment to
consider whether
your actions are
safe for you and
others. The time
you spend is
short—but it
could save a life!
According to the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration,
“seat belts are the single most effective traffic safety device for
preventing death and injury.” However, in 2017, 2,549 passengers died
in accidents because they were not wearing seat belts. In the same
year, 2,790 lives were saved by frontal air bags. Motorcycle helmets
saved 1,870 lives, while another 750 would have been saved if the
riders had been wearing helmets.


10 SAFETY
Why Be Safe?.
Here are statistics given by the National Center for Health
Statistics for 2018. Notice the difference in the numbers of
deaths for the various causes.
Deaths in 2018 Due to External Causes*
From the National Center for Health Statistics
Cause Deaths
Poisoning 75,795
Falls 40,727
Motor vehicle accidents 37,595
Drowning 3,692
Smoke, fire, or flames 2,692
This table is simplified for clarity. Complete information is available at
cdc.gov/nchs/nvss/mortality_public_use_data.htm
23X
What’s 23X, you ask? According to the National
Highway Transportation Safety Administration, those
who text while driving are 23 times more likely to crash
than nontexters.


SAFETY 11
.Why Be Safe?
Don’t Be a Distracted, Inattentive Driver
Driving safely requires concentration and focus. Distractions interfere
with a driver’s ability to notice and respond to changing situations that
could lead to an accident. Driver inattention is a contributing factor in
many traffic crashes. Many states have laws that prohibit careless or
inattentive driving.
How do drivers get distracted? A few of the things that can break a
driver’s concentration include using a mobile phone, trying to catch or
clean up a spill, talking with passengers, tuning the radio, shaving or
applying makeup, having unrestrained animals in the car, reading a map,
and consulting computerized navigation systems. Minimize distractions
by pulling over the car any time the driver must pay attention to anything
but the road.
Mobile Phones
While there’s no shortage of driver distractions that can lead to accidents,
motorists using mobile phones to talk or text while they’re driving have
created a particularly widespread problem.
Because using a phone interferes
with the concentration required for
a safe trip, nearly all states have
passed laws regulating mobile
phone use while driving. Laws
differ between states, but most
ban texting, some ban hand-
held devices, and some restrict
usage by age. However, no
matter where you are driving or
how old you are, using a mobile
phone at the same time will always
be a dangerous distraction that
should be avoided.


12 SAFETY
Why Be Safe?.
Number of Occupational Injuries and Illnesses
Involving Days Away From Work, 2021
From the Bureau of Labor Statistics
Type of Injury or Illness Number of Injuries or Illnesses
COVID-19 390,020
Sprains, strains, tears 343,240
Soreness, pain 109,920
Cuts, lacerations, punctures 75,660
Multiple trauma 30,400
Heat burns 13,660
Carpal tunnel syndrome 8,620
Amputations 5,110
Tendonitis 3,160
All other 163,440
As a Scout, you will most likely participate in some type of emergency preparedness
drill, much like the one shown here.


SAFETY 13
.Why Be Safe?
Don’t Be a Statistic
It is not hard to imagine yourself becoming part of the accident
statistics. Just read the daily newspaper or watch the news on
TV. Not a day goes by without a story about some victim who
was hurt or killed in an accident. However, learning good safety
habits may help prevent an accident. Try to mix the following
safety ingredients with your favorite activities.
Seek Knowledge and Skill. Know when you need to use tools
or take actions to help you do an activity more safely. For
instance, a beginner taking a shop class might ignore safety
guards or not use a holder to safely drill a piece of wood. The
novice risks losing fingers and winds up with a rejected piece
of work. However, the more experienced woodworker uses safe-
ty guards and wears safety goggles to help ensure a safe experi-
ence. By following proper precautions, this woodworker turns
out a perfect piece without any accidents.
Complacency can create risks even for those with a lot of
experience. Experienced workers can go into “autopilot” and not
properly identify a newly developed hazard. For example, an
experienced woodworker might forget to check the setup of a
table saw and not see that someone had used
it and changed a setting, creating a hazard.
Emphasize that risks do not go away as you
gain more experience; rather, experience
helps you recognize and minimize those risks
before you put yourself in harm’s way.
Be Prepared. The safety-conscious mind
thinks ahead. To have a safer and more
pleasant experience, learn how to use the
right tools. For a safe and enjoyable outing,
plan your trip, check the weather, and go
prepared.
Know and Accept Your Limitations.
Learning as much as you can about an activ-
ity or sport will help you to enjoy it more
safely. For example, swimmers should know
and understand the hazards of swimming.
On a hike or a
camping trip,
which kind of
Scout are you,
the Scout who
just brings a pack
without checking
its contents or the
Scout who plans
and prepares?
Do you know someone with a broken
bone? Ask the person how it happened.
Ask yourself how this accident could
have been prevented.


14 SAFETY
Why Be Safe?.
Lifting and Carrying
Heavy Objects
If not done correctly, lifting or carrying heavy boxes and
other items—even a large pet—can hurt your back.
Follow these safety steps to help keep your back healthy.
• Make sure your footing is solid. Stand so that the
object is close to you.
• Keep your back straight.
• Pull in your stomach and lift by straightening your
legs. Lift using your strong leg muscles—not your
weak back muscles.
• Get help if the object is too heavy or bulky. Do not
try to carry anything that is too heavy for you.


SAFETY 15
.Why Be Safe?
Newspaper Stories
As you collect clippings about accidents in the home and
workplace, look for stories that give you clues about unsafe
conditions or acts that caused these accidents. Doing so
will help you determine how these accidents could have
been prevented.
Similarly, as you look for information about
crimes in your neighborhood, try to find out
what made the crimes possible. Were win-
dows left open? Could deadbolt locks on
doors have prevented burglaries?
Learning how drugs can affect you may help prevent accidents. Of course, do not take
illegal drugs in the first place. Also, avoid people who do drugs, because they can be
violent and are unsafe drivers.


16 SAFETY
Safety From Criminals.
To help protect your family and prevent a criminal from kicking
in or prying open the door, install 3-inch screws in the exterior
door strike plates.
Safety From Criminals
Years ago, many people left their homes unlocked, day and
night. Today, we not only lock all doors and windows in our
homes, but some also install alarm systems for added security.
Millions of burglaries and other crimes are reported to law
enforcement every year. What can you do to help keep yourself
and your family safe from criminals? One important step that
you and your parent or guardian can take to help protect your
home is to conduct the following home security survey.
Studies have
shown that most
burglars will
attempt entry for
only two minutes.
Burglars fear being
seen entering a
home, so lighting,
visibility, and
slowing their
entry will
discourage them.


SAFETY 17
.Safety From Criminals
Survey Your Home
Encourage your parent or guardian to take this Home Security
Survey Quiz with you. If you can answer “yes” to a question,
give yourself 1 point. Every checkmark in the “no” column
shows a weak point that could help a burglar. By eliminating
“no” checks, you improve your home and personal security.
Home Security Survey Quiz Yes No
1. Do you keep a list of all valuable property? Is this list made
in duplicate, with at least one copy kept in a place outside
your home? (In case of fire or burglary, the list will provide
information necessary for insurance claims and police reports.)
nn nn
2. Do you have a list of credit card numbers and the serial
numbers of your valuable property (cameras, computers,
TVs, stereo equipment)? Is the list in a secure location?
nn nn
3. Do you have a description and a photograph or video recording
of all valuables that do not have an identifying number? Is this
list kept in a safe deposit box?
nn nn
4. Do you avoid unnecessary displays of, or publicity about,
your valuables? (For example, a newspaper story about your
valuable coin collection could also catch a thief’s eye.)
nn nn
5. Do you keep excess cash and other valuables in a bank?
(Renting a safe-deposit box is a small investment compared
with the potential loss from theft or fire.)
nn nn
6. Do you have a security closet with a solid-core door, pinned
or nonremovable hinges, and a deadbolt lock? Or a secure,
fire-resistant safe? (Use a security closet or safe to store things
of value.)
nn nn
It is important to have your parent or guardian’s driver’s license number
engraved on valuable property that might be stolen. Numbers can be
engraved onto metal objects or marked with permanent markers on other
materials. Many police departments and sheriff’s offices have engraving
pens available for you to borrow.


18 SAFETY
Safety From Criminals.
7. Do you plan so that you do not need to hide a house key
under the doormat or in a similar location? (It is safer to
leave your house key with a close friend or reliable neighbor
so that a burglar nosing around will not find it.)
8. Do your family members know what to do if they discover
a burglar breaking in or already in your house? (If you return
to your home and find signs that it has been entered, do not
go inside. Phone the police or sheriff from a neighbor’s home.
If you enter your home and find a burglar inside, expect the
intruder to be frightened—and dangerous. Never struggle with
a burglar unless you are in danger of serious physical harm
and you are forced to defend yourself. Scream and kick—use
your hands, feet, and teeth to fight off your attacker. Target
painful points, including eyes, throat, temple, nose, chin,
groin, knees, shins, and insteps. Make a weapon of keys,
pens, pencils, or anything sharp.)
9. If they discover that a burglary has been committed, do
family members know to leave everything undisturbed and
call the sheriff or police? (It is important that evidence not
be moved or otherwise disturbed until police have checked it.)
10. Are your trees and shrubs trimmed to eliminate hiding
places? (Remember that shrubbery that provides privacy also
gives a burglar a place to hide.)
11. Have you made it difficult for burglars to enter an upper floor
of your home by locking up ladders and eliminating trellises
and drainpipes that could be used as ladders?
12. Is the outside of your home well lit, including a porch light?
(Light yards, windows, and each exterior doorway to eliminate
dark hiding places. Burn porch lights from dusk until dawn
with a 60-watt incandescent bulb or a 13- to 15-watt compact
fluorescent bulb. Consider installing photoelectric on-off or
motion-sensor devices. In rural areas that have no streetlights,
electric companies often will give group discounts to customers
who want to install security lighting.)
13. Is your house number easily visible from the street at
any hour? (Drivers of emergency vehicles prefer numbers
that are painted in high-contrasting colors.)
Yes No
nn nn
nn nn
nn nn
nn nn
nn nn
nn nn
nn nn


SAFETY 19
.Safety From Criminals
14. Do you have emergency telephone numbers listed on every
phone? (In most areas of the country, the 911 phone number
will connect you with emergency services. Often, a computer
immediately displays your address to the dispatcher who
answers your call.)
nn nn
15. Do you use good telephone security procedures? (Never give
personal information such as your name, age, or address to a
stranger over the telephone. Never let strangers on the phone
know when you will or will not be home. Never tell a stranger
on the phone that you are home alone. Instead, tell the caller,
“My mom can’t come to the phone right now. May I take
a message?”)
nn nn
Doors and Entry Areas
16. Are your exterior doors metal or made of solid-core construc-
tion? (A hollow-core door is fragile. Two blows with a hammer
and a burglar could break through a hollow door, reach in,
and unlock the door from inside. Replace hollow-core exterior
doors with metal or solid doors whenever possible.)
nn nn
17. Do your entry doors have wide-angle viewers called
peepholes (which let you see the visitor before deciding
whether to open the door), or do you have a doorbell camera
or security camera with two-way audio near the entry doors?
nn nn
Yes No
At night, light entryways to discourage burglars from hiding there.
Be sure you have
a plan to help
ensure your family
has telephone
access in case the
electricity goes
out or if the phone
lines go down.


20 SAFETY
Safety From Criminals.
Home Security
Devices
Sliding-door
stop
Double cylinder
deadlock
Thumb-turn
deadlock
Pinned window
Heavy bolt
1 INCH
ROTATING
CYLINDER GUARD
1 INCH
OPERATED
FROM INSIDE
WOODEN
DOWEL OR
BROOMSTICK
EYEBOLT
PIN
Hardware on
these home
security devices
should be
accessible
from inside the
house only. Pinned hinge
DRILL A 3⁄4-INCH-DEEP HOLE THROUGH THE
OPENING IN THE OPPOSITE HINGE PLATE ON
THE DOOR. AS THE DOOR CLOSES, THE PIN IN
THE JAMB WILL ENTER THE HOLE IN THE
DOOR AND HOLD THE DOOR IN POSITION EVEN
IF THE HINGE PINS ARE REMOVED.


SAFETY 21
.Safety From Criminals
18. Are the locks on your doors secure from being opened if a
burglar breaks out a pane of glass or a panel of lightweight
wood? (This situation calls for a lock that can be opened only
from the inside with a key. Some communities do not permit
this type of lock because it can prevent escape from a fire if
the key is not in place. If you use this type of lock, be sure to
leave the key in the lock when anyone is at home. Remove the
key only when the home is empty.)
nn nn
19. Do exterior doors have cylinder-type deadbolt locks with
at least a 1-inch throw and a beveled cylinder guard?
nn nn
20. Do doors without cylinder locks have a heavy bolt or
some similar security device that can be operated from
the inside only?
nn nn
21. Can all of your doors (basement, porch, sliding, French,
balcony) be securely locked?
nn nn
22. Do your basement doors have locks that allow you to isolate
that part of your home? (Basement windows are among the
easiest for a burglar to enter undetected. If your basement is
securely locked from the rest of your home, a burglar’s activi-
ties might remain limited to that area.)
nn nn
23. Are all of your locks in good repair? nn nn
24. Are door strike plates installed with 3-inch screws?
(Three-inch screws will reach the stud inside the wall.)
nn nn
25. Do you know everyone who has a key or passcode to your
home? (Do not carry house keys on the same ring as car keys.
It is very easy to leave the keys together when the car is
in a garage for repairs or left in a commercial parking lot
where an attendant parks cars. Anyone who handles your
house keys can easily have duplicates made.)
nn nn
26. Do all out-swinging doors in your home have the hinges
pinned or have nonremovable pins? (If they do not have
nonremovable pins, you can easily pin a door so that it
cannot be opened even if the hinge pins are removed.
See the illustration of the pinned hinge.)
nn nn
27. Are entry areas free of shrubbery and decorations that
limit visibility?
nn nn
28. Do sliding doors have a lock that locks both the door panels
together or locks the active side to the frame? (You can place
a wooden dowel or broomstick in the floor track to prevent a
sliding door from opening.)
nn nn
Yes No


22 SAFETY
Safety From Criminals.
29. Is the garage door secured with a padlock, hasp, or other
good lock? (Even garage doors with electric openers need
separate locks. In a double-car garage with a single long door,
it is important to place a lock on each side of the door to keep
a burglar from pulling out one side and crawling through.)
30. Do you lock your garage door and the door between your
house and garage at night? Do all family members know
how to unlock these doors in case of emergency?
31. Do you lock your garage door and the door between your
house and garage when you leave home?
32. Do you lock your car and remove the keys even when it is
parked in your garage?
Windows
33. Are all windows in your home equipped with key locks or
pinned? (You can secure a sliding window with a rod in the
same way as a sliding door.)
34. Are window locks properly and securely mounted?
35. Do you keep your windows locked when they are shut?
36. Do you use locks that let you lock a window left partly open?
37. Have you replaced or secured louvered windows? (Consider
replacing louvered windows; burglars find them easy to enter.
If you cannot replace a louvered window, use epoxy glue to
secure the louver to its frame.)
38. If you live in an area with a high burglary rate, do you use
window bars or ornamental grilles? (Take care that bars or
grilles do not create an escape hazard in the event of a fire.
They must have an inside quick-release mechanism that
allows those inside to swing the grilles out in an emergency.)
39. Do you have secure locks on garage windows?
40. Do you cover garage windows with curtains? (Curtains
on garage windows keep burglars from “window shopping”
the items in your garage.)
41. Are you as careful to secure basement and second-story
windows as you are to secure windows on the first floor?
Burglar or Robber? A robbery is when the thief attacks someone face-to-
face, such as stealing a person’s wallet. A burglary is when a thief breaks
into a building or home to commit a crime.
Yes No
nn nn
nn nn
nn nn
nn nn
Yes No
nn nn
nn nn
nn nn
nn nn
nn nn
nn nn
nn nn
nn nn
nn nn


SAFETY 23
.Safety From Criminals
Going Out of Town
42. Do you arrange for friends or neighbors to pick up newspapers,
mail, and other deliveries each day? (For extended absences,
contact the U.S. Postal Service at usps.com to hold your mail and
suspend delivery from three to 30 days.)
nn nn
43. Do you notify a neighbor that you will be gone? (Leave a
key with a friend or neighbor, and ask that your home be
checked every so often.)
nn nn
44. Do you notify your police or sheriff that you will be gone?
(In some communities, you may request a house check ser-
vice through the law enforcement agency while you are out
of town.)
nn nn
45. Do you arrange to make your home look lived-in while you
are away? (Leave some window shades up or curtains open so
that your home does not look deserted. Have someone periodi-
cally open and close drapes and turn different lights on and
off, or use timers to operate lights, so that the house appears
occupied. Consider asking friends or relatives to live in your
home while you are away. Leave a car in the driveway, or ask
neighbors to park in your driveway. Ask a neighbor to put some
trash in your trash cans. Arrange to keep your lawn mowed.)
nn nn
46. Do you store your valuables in a secure place while you are
gone, such as a safe-deposit box in a bank?
nn nn
When you go on a trip, ask a friend or neighbor to keep an eye on
your home.
Yes No


24 SAFETY
Safety From Criminals.
Safety Away From Home
Use the following tips for staying safe and protecting
your property when you are away from home:
• Never carry large amounts of cash or “flash” a wad
of bills where it can be seen.
• Do not resist an armed robber. Hand over your wallet
and other valuables quickly and quietly.
• Avoid dark streets. Walk with a companion whenever
possible. Stay away from dark alleys, bushes, and
any other place that could conceal an attacker.
• Lock all car doors and keep them locked while the
vehicle is in motion.
• Lock your car every time you leave it. When you
return to your car, look in, under, and around it to
be sure no attacker is lying in wait.
• Store valuables in your car trunk. Valuables are less
likely to be stolen when thieves cannot see them
through car windows.
• Never pick up hitchhikers. You cannot tell by looking
whether a person is harmless or dangerous.
If someone grabs you while you are riding your bike, hold on to your
bike. This makes you very bulky and heavy—too heavy to drag off. Yell,
“You are not my mom or dad!” to call attention to passersby.


SAFETY 25
.Safety From Criminals
Protecting Yourself
In today’s society, you need to know how to protect yourself
against abuse or abduction. There are more than 3 million
reports of child abuse each year.
If you have younger siblings, talk with your parent or
guardian about the dangers of children talking with strangers or
accepting rides from strangers. Abductors often lure children by
offering candy, claiming their family has an emergency, asking
for directions, or asking for help finding a pet. They sometimes
even use phony police or other badges.
If an attacker grabs your
wrist, spin your arm in a
circular movement toward
the attacker’s thumb to
free yourself. Try it with a
friend, and then teach it to
younger children.
Take a critical look at your home security every
three or four months. If you would like profes-
sional help for a home security inspection, call
your local law enforcement agency or consider
using a professional security company.


26 SAFETY
Safety From Criminals.
Three R’s of Youth Protection
1. Recognize situations that place you at risk of being
molested, how child molesters operate, and that
anyone could be a molester.
2. Resist unwanted and inappropriate attention.
Resistance will stop most attempts at molestation.
3. Report attempted or actual molestation to a parent,
guardian, or other trusted adult. This prevents further
abuse and helps to protect other children. Let the child
know he or she will not be blamed for what occurred.
What Is Child Abuse?
The first step to stopping child abuse is being able to recognize
it. There are four basic kinds of abuse: physical, emotional,
neglect, and sexual.
Physical child abuse is intentional injury to a child from
a caregiver, parent, guardian, or other adult. Physical abuse
often stems from unreasonable punishment, or from punish-
ment that is too harsh for the child.
Emotional child abuse occurs when an adult needlessly
hurts a child’s self-esteem. An adult’s words may correct or
instruct but should never ridicule, reject, wrongly blame, or com-
pare with siblings. This type of abuse is more difficult to recognize
because bruises are left not on the skin but on the child’s ego.
Neglect happens when the person the child depends on,
like a parent or guardian, deliberately (not because they are
underprivileged) fails to provide for the child’s basic needs.
Basic needs include showing affection and providing food,
clothing, shelter, medical care, education, and supervision.
Sexual child abuse is when an adult or older child, called
a molester, forces or manipulates a child to be involved in a
sexual activity. This can be any activity performed for the
sexual pleasure of the molester, from exposing sex organs to
fondling or even rape. Often the molester is someone the child
knows and trusts. Molesters usually try to threaten or bribe
children to keep them quiet.
If someone or some situation makes you or another child
feel uncomfortable, trust your instincts. Get away from the
situation and talk to your parent, guardian, or another trusted
adult, such as a teacher.


SAFETY 27
.Safety From Criminals
For more
information on
preventing crime
and getting a
Neighborhood
Watch group
started, see the
Crime Prevention
merit badge
pamphlet.
What Else Can You Do?
There are some precautions you can take to stay safe. First,
obey laws yourself. Avoid questionable situations that might
tempt you to break the law. You should also set a good example
for others, especially younger siblings and friends. Cooperate
fully with law enforcement officials; be willing to swear out
complaints and appear as a witness. Report suspicious activities,
such as an unfamiliar car driving slowly through the neighbor-
hood. Finally, participate in a Neighborhood Watch program.
Neighborhood Watch groups are established in neighbor-
hoods by law enforcement agencies working together with citi-
zens. Trained police officers meet with citizens and discuss how
people can protect themselves and their property from criminals.
The police encourage citizens in a Neighborhood Watch program
to be concerned about the safety of the entire neighborhood.
They ask residents to report unusual activities and strangers in
the area—strangers who might be “casing” a home (watching
the home closely) before a robbery. As citizens become involved
in looking out for the safety of others, their entire neighborhood
becomes safer.
Residents in Neighborhood
Watch communities learn
how to recognize and report
suspicious activities and
keep their homes secure.


Always wear a helmet while riding a bike.
Always wear a helmet while riding a bike.


SAFETY 29
.Safety on the Road
Safety on the Road
Road safety is a subject big enough to fill several books.
There is not room in this pamphlet for every detail that you
need to know. Be sure to check other pamphlets in the merit
badge series, especially Crime Prevention, Cycling, Railroading,
and Traffic Safety.
Pedestrian Safety
When a pedestrian and a car have an accident, the pedestrian
does not win. More than 6,000 people die in pedestrian acci-
dents each year. Use the following pedestrian rules every time
you take a walk:
• Cross streets only at intersections. Do not jaywalk.
• At intersections with traffic lights, cross only on green,
or when there is a “walk” sign lighted.
• Look both ways for cars, and look around the corner before
stepping off the curb.
Even at controlled
intersections, be
especially careful
when crossing in
front of a car that
is making a right-
hand turn. It’s
always best to
make eye contact
with the driver
before you cross
the street.


30 SAFETY
Safety on the Road.
• For added protection and sure footing, walk with
closed-toed shoes.
• Cross streets quickly, but do not run. Cross only at
designated crosswalks.
• When you are carrying something, hold it so you can still see
clearly in front of and on each side of you.
• At night, carry a light or something white. Wear light-colored
or reflective clothing.
• If there are no sidewalks, walk on the left side of the street
so that you face oncoming traffic. If there is no shoulder on
the roadway, it may be safer to walk on the grass or find an
alternate route.
• Do not play in the street.
• Stay alert. Do not walk and talk on a mobile phone at the
same time. If you wear earphones, be sure you can still
hear what is going on around you.
How many unsafe pedestrian acts can you see in these illustrations? How can
they be corrected?
If you are afoot when a loose dog threatens you, stand
still and quiet with your arms at your side, then slowly
back away. Do not turn and run. If you are knocked down,
curl into a ball with your arms protecting your head.


SAFETY 31
.Safety on the Road
Bicycle Safety
Riding a bicycle is fun. Review and follow the Scouting America
Bike Safety Guidelines to keep your peddling fun.
Bike Safety Guidelines
• Qualified Supervision. All unit, district, council, and
national event activities must be supervised by a mature
and conscientious adult at least age 21 who understands
and knowingly accepts responsibility for the safety of
children in his or her care, who is experienced with the
skills and equipment involved in the activity, and who is
committed to compliance with these safety guidelines.
• Physical Fitness. Biking is strenuous. Long treks and hill
climbing should not be attempted without training and prep-
aration. For Scouting activities, all participants must present
evidence of fitness with a complete health history from a
physician, parent, or legal guardian. The adult supervisor
should adjust all supervision, discipline, and protection to
anticipate any potential risks associated with individual
health conditions. In the event of any significant health
conditions, proof of an examination by a physician should
be required by the adult leader.
• Helmets and Clothing. All cyclists must wear a properly
sized and fitted helmet approved by either the Snell Memorial
Foundation, Consumer Product Safety Commission, or ASTM
International. Layer your clothing for warmth on cool days
so you can avoid chilling or overheating. Cover up for sun
protection on clear days.
Especially if you
will be riding at
dawn, dusk, or in
darkness, be sure
you wear clothing
that has reflective
properties. For
added visibility,
affix reflective
tape on your bike
and helmet.


32 SAFETY
Safety on the Road.
• Buddy System. When the program activity is a bicycle
expedition or trek, the buddy system must be used. When
a program element emphasizes individual performance
skills, one buddy observes while the other takes a turn.
In competitive activity where the buddy concept cannot be
applied practically, all activity must be directly observed by the
adult supervisor. (Youth members should be taught that biking
with a buddy is best. When biking alone, apart from Scouting
activities, youth members should be encouraged to tell someone
their route, schedule, and destination before departing.)
• Position in Traffic. Ride with the traffic flow, as far to the
right is safe. Avoid curbs, storm drains, soft or loose gravel
on shoulders, and other hazards.
• Safety Rules. Obey all traffic laws, signs, signals, and street
markings. Watch for changes in road conditions. Ride only
one to a bike. Do not ride after dark. No stunts—trick riding
is only for professionals who use special equipment. Yield to
motor vehicles even if you think you have the right-of-way.
Never hitch a ride on another vehicle. Keep your eyes and
ears open, and do not wear headphones while riding.
• Turns and Intersections. Look left, right, back, and ahead
before turning. Stop and search all directions when entering
a street from a driveway, a parking area, a sidewalk, or an
alley. Signal all turns using universal hand signals. Walk your
bike through or across busy intersections.
• Equipment. Ride only a bike that fits you. Select a bike that
permits you to put both feet on the ground while standing
over the top tube. The handgrips should be no higher than
your shoulders or lower than your seat.
• Bicycle Accessories. Every bike needs a horn or bell and
reflectors (front, back, and sides). Items should be carried
only in baskets, in saddlebags, or on a rear carrier rack. If
you must ride in traffic, a bike- or helmet-mounted mirror is
recommended. For long trips, a bike-mounted container for
drinking water is recommended.
• Maintenance. Keep your bike clean and well-maintained,
especially the brakes and drive chain.
When you are out
cycling, protect
yourself from a
territorial dog
by crossing the
street or even
going around the
block. Also stay
away from dogs
riding in the beds
of pickup trucks.


SAFETY 33
.Safety on the Road
Check with local
law enforcement
before you drive a
motor scooter or
pocket bike on
any public road,
even if you are a
licensed driver.
Because of the
increased risks in
operating these
vehicles, they are
not recommended
modes of
transportation for
Scout-age youths.
• Racing Open. Street racing is dangerous. Race only with
supervision on marked courses that have been set up to
exclude other vehicle or pedestrian traffic, to eliminate fall
hazards and minimize collision risks, and to clearly define
start and finish points.
• Planning. Plan both the route and timing of bike trips to avoid
heavy traffic and hazardous conditions. Biking is unsafe on wet
pavement and on windy days. Plan for at least hourly rest stops
and a maximum of approximately six hours on the bike per day.
• Discipline. All participants should know, understand, and
follow the rules and procedures for safe biking. All participants
should conscientiously and carefully follow all directions from
the adult supervisor.
Safety on Motorcycles, Scooters,
Motorbikes, Minibikes, and ATVs
To operate these vehicles, there are often special restrictions,
laws, and other constraints. For instance, there are laws about
how old a driver must be, as well as insurance, licensing, and
similar regulations. Be aware that there are several hazards posed
by such vehicles: They are powerful in relation to their weight,
the rider is exposed and has no built-in protection, and they are
less stable than cars.
Always wear a safety helmet when you ride one of these
vehicles. Choose a motorcycle helmet that meets standards set by
the Snell Memorial Foundation or the Department of Transportation
(DOT). Motorcycle helmets save more than 1,000 lives each year.
Whenever you are traveling on a motorcycle, always wear a helmet.


34 SAFETY
Safety on the Road.
According to the
National Highway
Traffic Safety
Administration,
3,142 people were
killed in 2019 in
vehicle crashes
involving
distracted drivers.
Drivers under the
age of 20
accounted for
10% of those
crashes, which
represents the
largest portion
of drivers who
were distracted.
Passenger Safety
You might think that passengers are at the mercy of the driver
or operator—and in many ways, they are. But there are some
important things passengers can do to keep safe. Follow these
rules, because the leading killer of Scout-age youth is motor
vehicle accidents.
Passenger in a Vehicle
Here are some safety tips for safe riding.
• Always use your safety belt. Talk to your family about
making a family rule that the driver does not start the
engine until everyone has buckled up.
• Wear your safety belt properly. Never tuck a shoulder belt
behind your back or under your shoulder.
• Keep quiet and turn off the radio in a difficult traffic situation.
Limit driver distractions by doing things for them like
changing radio stations or using the mobile phone or
navigation system.
Always use a car seat when transporting a young child in a
vehicle. Child restraints (car seats and seat belts) have saved the
lives of tens of thousands of children.


SAFETY 35
.Safety on the Road
• Talk to the driver when he or she is tired or bored. Doing so
will help keep the driver alert and awake.
• Urge the driver to stop every couple hours. Bring a ball and
play catch in a roadside park if you can. The driver needs to
stretch and relieve tense muscles.
• Plan route and review directions ahead of time. You can take
strain off the driver by giving good directions and telling the
driver where to turn well ahead of time.
• Keep younger children occupied with quiet games and activi-
ties. If necessary, ask the driver to pull over to stop quarrels.
• Lock all doors and see that hands, heads, and feet are kept
inside the vehicle, even when it is parked. A locked door is
less likely to spring open in a crash.
In 2022 about 20% of fatal traffic crashes were alcohol-
related. If your driver appears to be intoxicated, phone
for another ride. Do not get in the car if the driver
appears to be intoxicated.
When a news
report says that
a person was
“ejected” from
the car, it almost
always means
the person was
not wearing a
safety belt.
The National
Transportation
Safety Board
recommends all
passengers ages
12 and younger sit
in rear seats.
Try this. Put a penny between the tread
of a vehicle’s tires. If the tread does not reach
beyond Lincoln’s head, as in this illustration, then the tires
do not meet most states’ legal required minimum tread of
2
⁄32 inch. Worn tires are unable to properly grip the road.


36 SAFETY
Safety on the Road.
Passenger on a Bus or Train
Follow these tips whenever you ride a bus
or train.
• In case the vehicle starts or stops abruptly, use
the handrail to keep your balance.
• Wait for the vehicle to come to a complete
stop before you get on or off.
• Cross the street behind a bus, or after it has
left and you can see oncoming traffic. Do not
walk in front of a bus unless it is a school bus
and the driver motions you across while the
bus and traffic are stopped.
• Do not talk to or otherwise disturb a
bus driver. (This rule applies for school
buses, too.)
• Stay in your seat while the vehicle is moving.
Passenger in an Airplane
Here are a few tips for airline passengers.
• Pay attention to the flight attendant’s instructions about
exits, oxygen masks, life preservers, and buckling up.
• Use safety seat belts.
• During takeoff and landing, stay in your seat unless the
plane is stopped at the gate.
• Keep your feet and luggage out of the aisles. Store your
carry-on luggage as directed.
In Case of Emergency
Many people carry mobile phones these days, but not everyone carries
details of whom should be called on their behalf in case they are involved
in a serious accident. If you add the acronym ICE—for “In Case of
Emergency”—as a contact in your mobile phone, paramedics or other
rescue workers can quickly find someone to notify about your condition.
As a minor, you should choose an ICE contact—probably your parent or
guardian—who can give consent for emergency medical treatment.


SAFETY 37
.Safety on the Road
Fill Her Up!
The fumes from gasoline are highly flammable. Whenever you fuel a
vehicle at the pumps, follow these safety guidelines:
• Put the vehicle in park, and turn off the engine.
• Put the keys in a safe place like your pocket. Keys left in the ignition
are an easy theft target.
• Make sure people do not light matches, smoke, or use any other
ignition source.
• To avoid spillage, use only the refueling latch on the dispenser. If there
is none, do not jam something like a gas cap under the refueling latch
because it cannot automatically release when the tank is full. Do not
leave the nozzle unattended while it is pumping, and do not “top off”
or overfill the tank.
• A spark caused by static electricity could ignite gasoline fumes.
Before touching the nozzle or fuel door, touch the vehicle door to
release any static electricity. Do not reenter the vehicle during
fueling because this builds up static electricity.
• While fueling, avoid using battery-powered devices, such as mobile
phones or music players.


38 SAFETY
Safety in Your Home.
Safety in Your Home
Be aware of the dangers in your home and take steps to fix
these problems to keep your home safe.
Accidents at Home
Fixing problems does not mean rebuilding your home to make it
safe. Safety can be as simple as good housekeeping and getting
rid of hazardous items. A safe home has a place for everything.
Take a close look at the things you can do to help prevent
personal home accidents. Use the following Home Safety
Checklist. It is a detailed accident-prevention guide for you and
your family. If you follow the suggestions, they will soon
become safety habits.
Only motor
vehicle accidents
cause more
deaths than
accidents at
home, such as
falling down
stairs.
Choosing a Fire Extinguisher
There are four classifications of fires, and you need to
choose the appropriate extinguisher for each use.
Types of fires:
Class A: Ordinary solid combustibles (paper, wood, cloth,
some plastics)
Class B: Flammable liquids (alcohol, oil, gasoline, grease)
Class C: Electrical equipment, appliances, wiring
Class D: Certain flammable metals (sodium, potassium)
Types of fire extinguishers:
Type A (Pressurized water): Only used on Class A fires
Type ABC (Dry chemical): Effective on Class A, B, and C
fires. Best for general, all-purpose home use
Type BC (Carbon dioxide): For chemical or electrical fires,
only in well-ventilated spaces due to hazards associated
with excess carbon dioxide
Type K: Specifically for kitchen grease fires, usually in
industrial/commercial kitchens


SAFETY 39
.Safety in Your Home
Home Safety Checklist
Check off each item that describes the situation in your home.
Each item that gets no checkmark represents a potential hazard.
Stairways, Halls, and Outdoor Steps
nn Stairways with three or more steps have a strong handrail
and slip-resistant finish.
nn Stairways and halls are kept free of boxes, toys, shoes,
brooms, tools, and other tripping hazards.
nn Gates at the top and bottom of stairs keep children from falling.
nn The head and foot of stairs have no small or loose rugs.
nn Stair carpeting or covering is securely fastened.
nn Stairways and halls have adequate lights, controllable at
either end.
Kitchen
nn Matches are kept where children cannot get them.
nn Emergency numbers are posted next to the telephone,
including 911 and poison control (toll-free 800-222-1222).
nn Knives and sharp instruments are kept in a special knife
drawer or holder, out of children’s reach.
nn Can openers do not leave sharp edges on cans.
nn Bleach, disinfectants, and cleaning products are kept out of
children’s reach.
nn Pan handles are turned away from stove edges.
nn Spilled grease, water, or bits of food are wiped up immediately.
nn Pot holders are located near the stove, within easy reach.
nn A dry chemical fire extinguisher is mounted near the stove.
Find the five safety
violations in this
illustration.
Do not allow
young children to
operate garbage
disposals, trash
compactors,
blenders, or
other potentially
hazardous
appliances.


40 SAFETY
Safety in Your Home.
Bathroom
nn Tub and shower are equipped with strong handholds.
nn Tub floor has a nonslip surface.
nn Dangerous chemicals are clearly marked, sealed shut in
the original container with adhesive tape, and kept out of
children’s reach.
nn All medicines are out of children’s reach and stored in
childproof containers.
nn All cabinets and drawers that contain medications are locked.
nn No one takes medicine in the dark. Lights are turned on
and labels read.
Attic and Basement
nn Ladder is strong, solid, and sturdily constructed.
nn Stairway is sturdy and well-lighted.
nn Children keep skates and play gear in a specific place.
nn Walls and beams are free from protruding nails.
nn Fuses or circuit breakers are the proper size. (See the
Electricity and Home Repairs merit badge pamphlets.)
nn Rubbish and flammable materials are kept in covered metal
cans until their disposal.
nn Wastepaper is stacked neatly in a box or bag and is kept
away from the furnace and stairs while awaiting disposal—
clear of possible basement seepage.
How To PASS a Fire Extinguisher
Pull the pin on the extinguisher
Aim the nozzle at the base of the fire
Squeeze the trigger to release the extinguishing agent
Sweep the nozzle from side to side slowly
Make sure your fire extinguisher is always prepared for
an emergency:
nn Regularly check the dial on the fire extinguisher to
ensure the needle is still in the green section,
showing it is good to use. If it is not, replace it.
nn Replace the extinguisher (or refill it if appropriate)
after each use.
nn Place at least one extinguisher on each floor, near
and for specific fire hazards (such as stove/oven,
clothes dryer, garage, etc.).


.Safety in Your Home
SAFETY 41
Living Room and Dining Room
nn Furniture is arranged to allow easy passage.
nn Before bedtime, furniture placement is checked
for orderliness to prevent collisions in
the dark.
nn Furniture and woodwork are solid, in
good repair, and free from splinters and
rough spots.
nn Fireplace screen fits snugly.
nn Rugs are fastened or laid on nonslip pads.
nn Rugs are kept from curling at their edges.
nn Wax on floors is thoroughly buffed.
nn Fire in fireplace is thoroughly extinguished
at bedtime.
nn Candles are in stable holders. Candles are
carefully extinguished after use, before
bedtime, or before leaving home. Do not
leave a room that has a lit candle.
Bedroom
nn Smoke alarm battery is replaced every six
months (to coincide with the daylight
savings time seasonal switch) or has a
secure electrical connection. When replacing the battery,
write the date on it with a permanent marker. Test the
alarm monthly.
nn Carbon monoxide alarm has a fresh battery or secure
electrical connection and is tested regularly.
nn Furniture is placed to allow clear passage between bed and
door to avoid collisions in the dark.
nn Light switch or lamp is within easy reach from bed.
nn A night-light illuminates the bedroom or hall.
nn Dresser drawers are closed when not in use.
nn A bar across upper bunk bed helps prevent falls.
nn Children are taught not to lean against windows or
window screens.
nn Low-sill windows have sturdy screens to prevent children
from falling out.
nn Smoking in bed is prohibited.
nn Gas and electric heating devices are turned off at bedtime.
nn Rooms on upper floors are equipped with escape ladders.
The National Fire Protection
Association recommends that a
smoke alarm be installed in every
bedroom, outside every sleeping
area, and on every level of the home.
Smoke and
carbon monoxide
alarms don’t last
forever. Replace
these units every
10 years.


42 SAFETY
Safety in Your Home.
Nursery
nn Bars on crib are no more than 23⁄8 inches apart so baby’s
head cannot slip between them.
nn Crib is approved by Consumer Product Safety Commission
or a similar consumer safety group.
nn Crib is free from sharp edges or corners.
nn Sleeping garments and covers keep baby warm without
danger of smothering or strangling.
nn Pillows are kept out of bassinet or crib.
nn No thin, plastic material is in or near the crib.
nn No toys or objects in the crib or within reach for any child
under age 3 are less than 1 inch in diameter and 2 inches
long. No toys or objects have small parts such as eyes that
can be removed.
nn Children are taught not to give marbles, jacks, button-size
batteries, or other small toys and objects to children
younger than age 3.
nn Toys are sturdy, do not come apart easily, and have no
sharp edges or points. Toys should have a consumer
products group’s approval.
nn Make sure the paint on baby furniture and toys is nontoxic.
nn Ensure that all houseplants are nonpoisonous.
The Child Safety Protection Act of 1994 requires warnings on
toys with small parts for children under age 6. Always choose
age-appropriate toys without sharp edges or parts that can
be swallowed.


.Safety in Your Home
Stoves, Furnaces, and Heaters
nn Stoves are located away from windows to avoid setting fire
to curtains.
nn Stove and furnace pipes and flues are inspected and
cleaned annually.
nn Gas burners are properly adjusted and free from leaks.
nn Water heater and all small gas or oil room heaters are
equipped with vent pipes or flues to carry combustion
gases outside the house.
nn Water heater or boiler has a safety valve and is
checked annually.
nn Water heater temperature is set below 120 degrees
Fahrenheit to reduce the risk of serious burns.
nn Flames of gas burners are protected from drafts.
nn An insulating shield protects woodwork within 18 inches
of any furnace, stove, or heater.
nn Burnable materials are kept well away from stoves,
furnaces, and heaters.
nn An appropriate-size crescent wrench is stored near the
shutoff valve of the outside gas line.
nn The flue is opened before using the fireplace.
Porch, Yard, and Garage
nn Railings and banisters are sturdy and inspected periodically.
nn Steps and walkways are kept free from ice and snow.
nn Yard and play space are free of holes, stones, broken glass,
nail-studded boards, tools, and other litter.
nn Tools and other dangerous articles are kept out of
children’s reach.
nn Dangerous products and chemicals such as antifreeze,
insecticides, cleaning fluid, and lubricants are kept in
the original container, locked in storage areas, and
used according to the manufacturer’s instructions
on the container.
nn Wires and low fences are brightly painted
or marked with cloth strips to make them
clearly visible.
nn Wells, cisterns, and pits are kept securely covered.
nn Toxic materials are not burned outside.
nn An area is marked off in the garage for bicycles,
wagons, and other small vehicles.
nn Lawn mower is equipped with proper safeguards.
If your family has
a pool or spa tub,
it may be wise to
post rules as a
reminder for
family members
and guests to
keep safety in
mind at all times.
Have emergency
numbers handy,
and make rescue
equipment easily
accessible
(and know how
to use these
devices, too).
SAFETY 43


44 SAFETY
Safety in Your Home.
Workshop and Power Tools
nn Safety goggles (or face shield), hearing protection, and
appropriate clothing, including shoes, are worn when
working with or around power tools. Appropriate
eyewash is available.
nn Good ventilation exists, especially when sanding or painting.
Dust masks or respirators are worn when suggested by the
tool or product manufacturer.
nn Baking soda is kept handy to neutralize acid burns.
nn All electrical tools are either grounded with three-wire plugs
or clearly marked as double-insulated.
nn Work area is free of clutter, including lumber scraps and
oily rags.
nn Lighting over work area is adequate.
nn All tools and accessories have a place. Tools and accessories
are kept in their place except when being used on a project.
nn Guards are in place on all power tools.
nn A “push stick” is used with table saws. All saw guards and
shields are kept in place.
nn Tools are unplugged when not in use and before changing
blades, servicing, and repairing.
Electrical Devices and Fixtures
(Check for hazards wherever electrical fixtures are located.)
nn Electrical fixtures and appliances are UL- or FM-approved
and are located and used beyond arm’s length of sink,
stove, tub, shower, or other grounded metal objects unless
the outlet is protected by a ground-fault circuit interrupter.
Ground-fault protected outlets are tested regularly.
nn No one touches electrical fixtures or appliances with wet
hands or while standing on a wet floor.
nn Seldom-used electrical appliances are disconnected when
not in use.
nn Household appliances are disconnected before repairs
or adjustments.
Be sure you
have received
proper training
and have adequate
supervision before
operating power
tools and lawn
care equipment.


SAFETY 45
.Safety in Your Home
nn Light bulbs are installed in all lamp sockets.
nn Frayed and worn electrical cords are promptly replaced.
nn Long trailing cords are not visible.
nn Cords are kept out from under rugs, doors, and
movable furniture.
nn Extension cords are UL- or FM-approved, are the proper
wire size for the load, and are never overloaded.
nn Children are taught never to touch electrical sockets or fixtures.
nn Fuses are adequate for the load and are not bypassed.
nn Circuit breakers are labeled and are not overloaded.
General
nn Home has a smoke alarm system, with at least one alarm in
each bedroom, outside each sleeping area, on every level,
and additional alarms in the living room and basement. The
home has at least one carbon monoxide detector.
nn Everything has a place and is kept there when not in use.
nn A strong, rigid stepladder is kept in good repair and stored
out of the way.
nn Window screens and storm windows are securely fastened.
nn Guns are stored unloaded and in locked cases.
nn Guns and ammunition are stored separately.
nn Children are permitted to use only blunt-end scissors.
nn Clothing worn for housework is free from drooping sleeves,
sashes, or frills.
nn Shoes worn for housework and home repairs have low
heels and are in good repair.
nn Kerosene, gasoline, paint thinners, and other volatile
materials are stored in special, clearly marked metal con-
tainers, away from combustible materials, and out of reach
of children.
nn Oil mops, dust rags, painting equipment, and other greasy
materials are stored in open metal containers.
nn Everyone turns on a light before entering a dark room.
nn Matches are cold out before they are discarded.
nn Children are never permitted to play with matches.
nn Fire extinguishers are readily available and in good
working order.
nn The house is free of rodents, spiders, and other pests.
nn Unwanted paint, chemical, or aerosol containers are
promptly discarded in a safe and environmentally
sound manner.
Firearms Safety
If your family is
among the 47%
of households in
the United States
that keeps fire-
arms in the home,
help make sure all
guns are kept
secured, inacces-
sible to those who
should not use
them—especially
children and your
friends who visit.
Any ammunition
also should be
securely and sep-
arately stored. If
you encounter a
firearm, do not
touch it. Report
it to a responsible
adult or law
enforcement
agent.


46 SAFETY
Safety in Your Home.
Precautions Against
Bloodborne Viruses
Treat all blood as if it were contaminated with blood-
borne viruses. Do not use bare hands to stop bleeding.
Always use a protective barrier and thoroughly wash
exposed skin areas with soap and water immediately
after treating a victim. Scouting America recommends
that the following equipment be included in all first-aid
kits. This equipment should be used when rendering
first aid to those in need.
nn Protective nonlatex gloves, to be used when
stopping bleeding or dressing wounds
nn A mouth-barrier device, for rendering rescue
breathing or CPR
nn Plastic goggles or other eye protection, to prevent
a victim’s blood from getting into a rescuer’s eyes
in the event of serious arterial bleeding
nn Antiseptics, for disinfecting or cleaning exposed
skin areas, particularly if there is no soap or
water available
For Emergency
nn Know the 911 emergency number. (Dial 0 if the 911
emergency system is not available in your area.)
nn Know the location of water, gas, and electric shutoffs,
and be sure each shutoff is checked at least once a year.
nn Have a first-aid kit, approved by your doctor or the
American Red Cross, and replenish supplies as needed.
nn Know basic first-aid procedures.
nn Have a fire escape plan from your home (see later in
this chapter).
nn Have emergency water supplies stored in your home in
case the primary water supply fails.
nn Have handheld flashlights readily available for
emergency use.
nn Know how to get emergency help for any member of
your family.
For more
information about
first aid, see the
First Aid merit
badge pamphlet
and the Scouts
BSA handbooks.
Be sure you have
telephone access
if the electricity
goes out.


SAFETY 47
.Safety in Your Home
Your Family Escape Plan
Home fires are deadly. They often happen at night when families
are asleep. In the time it takes people to wake up and make
their escape, a house fire can become an inferno. Also, deadly
poisonous gases can spread throughout the home.
The best way to avoid injury or death in a home fire is to
get out quickly. Escaping from a fire in the home sounds easy,
but often people get trapped inside. Many fire victims are
untouched by flames but are asphyxiated (smothered) by
smoke or gases. A fire that never leaves the basement can kill
everyone on the second floor because hot air and smoke rise.
The only way to be reasonably sure of escaping a fire is
to have a plan. And, in case the fire keeps you from using your
main escape route, there should be an alternate procedure.
The National Safety Council recommends the following family
escape plan. (Because every house and every family is different,
use these rules to develop your own family escape plan.)
Your chances of escaping from a house fire are greatly improved
if your family has an escape plan, including a main escape route
and an alternate route.
Having working
smoke alarms
gives families the
warning time they
need to make a
safe escape.


48 SAFETY
Safety in Your Home.
• Keep bedroom doors closed at night. Closed doors
will delay the spread of fire and keep out deadly smoke
and gases.
• Draw a floor plan of your home. Lay out an escape route
for each room on each floor. Then choose an alternate route
for each room in case the planned escape route is blocked
by fire. Give special attention to the bedrooms, because fires
at night are usually the most potentially deadly. In an emer-
gency situation, sheetrock walls can be broken using a tool
or even kicking to allow you to escape.
• Plan how to help young children and disabled or elderly
people to escape. Children and seniors will need help in
any escape plan. You must plan ahead to protect their safety.
• Have a way for every member of the family to awaken
the others. You do not know who might discover a fire
while others are sleeping. You cannot count on being able to
reach all bedrooms; some may be blocked. Yelling, pounding
on walls, or blowing whistles may arouse others. Whistles
are inexpensive—buy one for every bedroom in the house.
• Teach everyone to escape without wasting time. Getting
dressed or gathering valuables will use up precious time.
DOWNSTAIRS
DINING ROOM KITCHEN
TO CELLAR EXIT
LIVING ROOM
FRONT PORCH
Family escape plan
UPSTAIRS
BEDROOM 2
(WINDOWS OPEN ONTO PORCH ROOF)
BEDROOM 1
BEDROOM 3
HALLWAY AND
DOWNSTAIRS
MAIN ROUTE ALTERNATE ROUTE
BATHROOM


SAFETY 49
.Safety in Your Home
• Teach everyone how to test a door. Rub
your hand along the door from the bottom
to the top. If cool, check the knob. If any
part is hot, leave the door closed and take
another route.
• If you must stay in a room, close the
door and stay near a slightly opened
window. Stuff door cracks with towels
or clothing. If you are trapped, blow your
whistle to help a rescuer locate you. In a
smoke-filled room, crawl with your head as
close to the floor as possible for visibility,
heat reduction, and lower smoke toxicity.
• Decide on a meeting place outside, like
a neighbor’s front porch, preferably across
the street. When you have all gathered
there, you will know that everyone is safe.
• Activate the emergency response system
as soon as you can by calling 911. If your
community does not have that service,
dial 0. Do not stop to call 911 from inside a burning building;
go to safe area outside. Teach everyone how to use different
kinds of phones, including mobile phones. Post family
emergency numbers such as poison control, the family
doctor, and parent or guardian’s work and mobile numbers
near every telephone in the house. Make copies for everyone
to carry with them.
Find out if your local emergency number is able to track your
address, as most can today. If you do not have this service,
post your address next to each phone in the house. In a crisis,
even adults have been unable to think of their address. On the
phone, speak clearly and state your emergency, name, and
address. Do not hang up until the other person does.
• Hold a practice drill. Repeat the drill from time to time,
making changes to allow for a new family member, different
sleeping arrangements, or other changes in your family or
home. If your family will need to use an escape ladder during
an emergency, practice putting the ladder in position so that
everyone will know how to set it up properly.
Explain to young children that a
firefighter with breathing apparatus
might look scary, but they must go
with the firefighter.


50 SAFETY
Safety in Your Home.
As part of the drill, family members should gather at the meet-
ing place outside the home, as specified in the family plan.
Some Cautions About Your Escape Plan
As you prepare your family escape plan, keep the following
cautions in mind:
• Make sure escape windows can be opened—including
screens and storm windows.
• Beware of windows that are high, painted shut, or blocked
by an air conditioner. These make poor or impossible
escape routes.
• Teach everyone how to break a window with a chair or
other heavy object and to clear away remaining pieces of
glass with a shoe, or cover broken glass with a blanket,
pillow, or towel.
• Unless they open onto some area of refuge like a roof or
deck, second-story windows need an emergency ladder,
rope, or other means of escape. If time allows, bedding can
be used in an emergency to aid an escape (by tying sheets
together to make a rope) or cushion a fall. If you must
jump to save your life, realize that you can recover from
broken bones.
Common Causes of Home Fires
How do fires in the home get started? Here are four major dangers.
Cooking. Cooking is the number one cause of residential fires.
Be sure to follow these precautions in the kitchen.
Fires occur
frequently during
the holidays and
times of seasonal
changes. For
safety tips about
holiday
decorations, see
the Fire Safety
merit badge
pamphlet.


SAFETY 51
.Safety in Your Home
• Stay in the kitchen while you are cooking, and keep small
children away from the stove.
• Turn cookware handles toward the back of the stove so hot
pots and pans will not accidentally be bumped.
• Keep items that could easily catch fire, like pot holders and
dishtowels, away from the stove.
• Wear close-fitting clothing or an apron when you cook. Be
careful to keep unfastened sleeves and other loose clothing
away from the stove.
• Wipe up all grease spills immediately.
• Put a lid on pan fires. Turn off the burner, don’t move the
pan, and keep the lid on until the pan cools completely.
• If there is an oven fire, close the oven door and turn off
the oven. If the fire does not go out immediately, call the
fire department.
• Make sure the vents of a microwave oven are clear of
obstructions. If a fire starts inside, keep the door closed
and unplug the microwave.
Heating. When the temperature drops in the winter months,
the chance of fires caused by furnaces, space heaters, and fire-
places rises.
• Keep things that could catch fire at least 3 feet away from
your furnace, space heater, and fireplace. Flammable items
include curtains and bedding, as well as paper.
• Always put a screen in front of the fireplace to keep embers
from escaping and igniting materials like rugs or clothing.
• Have your furnace, fireplace and chimney, and other wood
burners or solid-fuel devices professionally inspected as
recommended by the manufacturer or at least once a year
at the beginning of the heating season.
• Change your furnace filter regularly.
• Keep children away from a space heater, and make sure there
is adult supervision in the room at all times the heater is
turned on. Always shut off a space heater when you leave
the room and when you are sleeping.
• Never use a gas range for heat in place of a furnace or
space heater.
Never put water
on a grease fire.
Water will splatter
the grease or
cooking oil and
spread the fire.
Never attempt
to take a grease
fire outdoors.
The pan will be
too hot to carry.


52 SAFETY
Safety in Your Home.
Electrical appliances. All electrical appliances should be oper-
ated according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Exercise care
when using anything that has to be plugged into an
electrical outlet.
• Unplug appliances when they are not in use. This is especially
important for appliances such as toaster ovens, irons, and
other appliances that get hot.
• Keep things that can catch fire (such as curtains and
newspapers) away from heat-producing appliances.
• Do not drape material over lamps. Use the correct bulb wattage
for your lamp and shade; some lamp shades are flammable if
used with bulbs brighter than 30 watts. Make sure lamps are
secure and level, and that they will not easily fall over.
• Turn off halogen lamps whenever you leave a room because
halogen bulbs get especially hot.
• Keep appliances in good repair, and make sure the electrical
cords are not frayed or damaged.
• Keep electrical appliances away from water. If a plugged-in
appliance falls into the water, do not reach into the water to
retrieve it. The massive electrical shock the water would
deliver could kill you.
• If a circuit breaker trips or a fuse blows frequently, unplug
some devices on that line; it may be overloaded. If an outlet or
a switch feels warm, shut off the circuit and call an electrician.
Smoking. Smoking is the leading cause of deaths in residential
fires. The best way to keep cigarettes and pipes from starting a
fire in your home is to have no smoking in your home.
Cigarettes and matches, whether they are burning or merely
smoldering, are sources of ignition and can easily set things like
furniture and paper on fire. Fires caused by smoking can be
avoided easily.
• People should never smoke while sleepy, while in bed, or
when drinking alcohol or taking medication, as they might
be more careless in their handling of a lit cigarette.
• Cigarette butts should be cold out before they are discarded,
and ashtrays should be emptied into containers that will not
catch fire, like a metal trash can.
• Keep matches, lighters, and smoking materials away
from children.


SAFETY 53
.Safety in Your Home
Major Disasters
As you read the newspaper or watch TV newscasts, you
may see that major disasters can be grouped in the following
two ways:
• Things that disrupt your entire community, such as
earthquakes or floods, tornados or hurricanes
• Accidents, such as a house fire or wind damage, that
are centered on your home and do not involve the
whole community
Think about what kinds of natural and human-caused
disasters and emergencies could occur in your community. What
should your family do? If disaster strikes only your home, as in
a fire, your home might be destroyed but help from the outside
would arrive quickly. During communitywide disasters, such as
hurricanes or tornadoes, outside help might take days to arrive.
You must be prepared to survive a communitywide disaster
using only the resources in your home or an emergency shelter.
During a communitywide disaster such as massive flooding,
outside help might not reach you immediately.


54 SAFETY
Safety in Your Home.
Major Disaster Preparedness Items
We all hope to never face a major catastrophe that threatens
our survival. However, major disasters do happen to ordinary
people. Be prepared for them. Plan to store enough supplies for
everyone in your household for at least three days. Also,
assume you might have no electric power, water, or phone.
Store the following items, and periodically inspect perishable,
usable items like batteries and medications to ensure that they
are current and fresh.
nn One gallon of water per person per day
nn Drinking-quality water hose (available at hardware and
camping supply stores), kept near an outside faucet at all times
nn Nonperishable, high-protein food items, including energy
bars, ready-to-eat soup, peanut butter, and foods that require
no refrigeration, cooking, and little or no water
nn Food and water for pets
nn First-aid kit (including supplies of specific medicines used
by family members)
nn Copies of a Scouts BSA handbook and the Fieldbook
(which describe the procedures for many emergency situa-
tions and the proper first aid for many common injuries)
nn List of emergency telephone numbers (911 may be the
only number needed in your area)
nn Large flashlight with extra batteries
nn Portable, battery-operated radio with extra batteries
nn Fire extinguisher
nn Tool kit, including an ax, shovel, broom, screwdriver, pliers,
hammer, coil of half-inch rope, coil of baling twine, plastic
or duct tape, knife, razor blades, pen, paper, and adjustable
wrench for turning off gas and water


SAFETY 55
.Safety in Your Home
nn Simple chart showing where shutoff valves are located,
including the main electrical switch
nn Plastic sheeting and garbage bags with ties
nn Portable fire escape ladder for homes or buildings of
more than one story
nn Manual can opener
nn Cash (ATMs and credit cards require electricity)
nn Wooden matches, dipped in liquid wax and stored in a
waterproof container (not to be used until it is certain there
are no gas or chemical leaks or spills)
nn Portable stove that uses butane or charcoal (used outdoors
only because carbon monoxide poisoning is fatal)
nn Gloves and cloths for cleaning up chemical spills
nn Covered containers (capable of being tightly sealed) for
storing refuse
nn Clothing, sturdy shoes, and gloves for each member of
the household (sealed in plastic to keep them dry)
nn Medications (prescription and nonprescription) and
sanitary items like toilet paper
nn Map of the local area with your evacuation route marked
nn Copies of valuable documents, like insurance papers,
enclosed in a waterproof bag
nn Personal identification and a list of medications needed
for all family members
Calling 911
In most communities, dialing 911 will connect you with
a dispatcher for fire, police, and ambulance. Usually,
the address you are dialing from appears on the
emergency dispatcher’s screen.
However, an estimated 80% of 911 calls come from
mobile phones. Unlike a home or business phone, a
caller using a mobile phone could be calling from any-
where. Realize that when calling 911 from a mobile
phone, the dispatcher will need an address or location
description that might include the closest city or road.


56 SAFETY
Safety Online.
Safety Online
Before you log on to the internet, make sure you have your
parent or guardian’s permission. Besides having an abundance of
useful and accurate information, the internet also has its dark
side, including misinformation. Talk with your parent, guardian,
counselor, or other experienced internet users about ways to tell
the difference and about the precautions shared here.
• Follow your family’s rules for using the internet. Respect
any limits on how long and how often you are allowed to
be online and what sites you can visit. Your family also can
consider installing a software program that helps weed out
undesirable sites.
• Protect your privacy. Never exchange electronic pictures of
yourself with strangers. Never give out personal information
such as your telephone number, address, last name, where
you go to school, or where your parent or guardian works,
without first asking your parent or guardian’s permission.
• Do not open emails or files you receive from people
you do not know or trust. If you get something suspicious,
put it in the trash just as you would any other electronic
junk mail, which is known as spam. Many computer viruses
are sent via email attachments. You should have updated
virus protection software and, especially with cable or DSL
connections, a firewall. A firewall will help prevent a hacker
from obtaining information from your computer or placing
information and viruses on it.
• If you receive or discover any information that makes
you uncomfortable, tell your parent or guardian and let
them look at it. Do not respond to any message that is
disturbing or hurtful.
• Never agree to get together with someone you meet
online, unless your parent or guardian approves of the
meeting and go with you.
Families should
locate their
household
computer in an
open, shared
area, never in an
isolated place like
an attic room.


SAFETY 57
.Safety Online
• Never share your internet password with anyone
other than your parent, guardian, or other responsible
adults in your family. Sometimes a fraudulent email will
appear official (like from a company you use) and will
request personal information.
• Never shop online or offer a credit card number unless
you have your parent or guardian’s permission.
• Be a good online citizen. Do not do anything that harms
others or is against the law. Any information posted online,
such as notes and personal remarks, can be shared with
others. A good rule of thumb is to not post information
you do not want others, including strangers, to see.
Never give out
personal
information to
anyone you meet
online or without
your parent or
guardian’s
permission.
Identity Theft
Identity theft is the fastest-growing crime in the United States. When
a criminal steals someone’s personal information to impersonate this
person and make legal transactions, it is identity theft.
Online identification. Be careful not to share personal information about
you or your family including birth dates, address and phone numbers, your
mother’s maiden name, and especially Social Security numbers.
A criminal can use this information to apply for credit cards that can be
sent directly to the criminal’s address.
Online purchases. Do not buy anything online from a merchant unless you
have your parent or guardian’s permission. You also need a secure server.
The web address of a secure server begins with “https” instead of “http.”
The following are common ways that your identity can be stolen:
Stolen wallets and purses. Encourage your parent or guardian to reduce
the number of identification and credit cards they carry in their wallet or
purse in case of theft. They should especially not carry anything that
includes a Social Security number.
Mailbox. Unless your mailbox is locked, you can help protect your family
members’ identities by promptly removing the daily mail.
Trashy treasure. Criminals rummage through home and business trash
for personal information. Personal information, especially credit card
applications, should be shredded. Identity theft victims can contact the
Federal Trade Commission at the toll-free number, 877-IDTHEFT,
or online at identitytheft.gov.


Get in the habit of looking for exits in the public places you enter.


SAFETY 59
.Safety in Public Places
Safety in Public Places
Public places include schools, theaters, places of worship,
office buildings, and parks—any place outside the home
where people gather.
Public places generally are safe. Laws demand that public
places undergo regular safety inspections. Public places must
be built according to the latest safety codes and have adequate
supervision of the facilities. Yet, accidents can still happen.
And when accidents happen in public places, they can be
very serious.
The Hazard of Panic
Panic is giving in to a sudden, overpowering fear. When people
panic, they may feel they must run for their lives. Panic
anywhere can be dangerous, especially in a public place.
Imagine that you are in a theater and someone suddenly
shouts, “Fire!” Everyone reacts at once. People rush for the
door through which they entered the theater. In the madhouse
of people trying to escape, some fall and are
trampled. Panic attacks have caused serious
accidents and even death.
What can you do to avoid these dangers?
First, learn how to prevent your own panic.
Do not give in to terror, because fear will
cloud your judgment. Second, learn how
to keep others from panicking or causing
panic. Set an example through your own
self-confidence in the face of trouble.
Fire drills at school prepare students to leave the building safely
in case of a real fire emergency.


60 SAFETY
Safety in Public Places.
Be prepared before trouble strikes. Get into the habit of
looking for exits in any public place you enter. Ask yourself,
“How can I get out of this building if there is any trouble?
How can I help other people to get out?” Think of at least two
ways to exit public buildings you enter. Both should be exits
other than the door where you entered. This actually gives
you three possible escape routes.
You can help others by encouraging them to leave through
exits other than the door they used to enter the building. That
door is the most dangerous exit to use in case of panic, because
most people will try to get out through that single entrance.
As soon as a few start using alternate exits, others will follow.
Safety in Recreation
Every type of recreation has its own safety rules. Learn the
safety rules for any sport, game, or recreational activity in
which you will participate.
In case of fire in a multistory building, do not use
an elevator. During a fire, the elevator shaft becomes
a chimney. An elevator may even stop and the doors
open automatically where the fire is most intense.
Use the stairs and fire escapes to reach safety.
Always keep flames well away from tents. No tent material
is fireproof.


SAFETY 61
.Safety in Public Places
Safe Swim Defense Plan for Units
The Safe Swim Defense plan has been used successfully for
years to help Scouting units swim safely. The plan gives Scouts
an understanding of the basic principles of group swimming
under adequately supervised, safe conditions. Here are the
points of the plan.
1. Qualified Supervision. All swimming activity must be
supervised by mature and conscientious adults age 21 or
older. These adults must accept responsibility for the well-
being and safety of youth members in their care. They must
be experienced in the water and confident of their ability to
respond in the event of an emergency. They must be trained
in and committed to compliance with the eight points of
Scouting America Safe Swim Defense. (It is strongly
recommended that all units have at least one adult or older
youth member currently trained as a Lifeguard to assist in
the planning and conduct of all swimming activity.)
No Flames in Tents
Camping is a major activity for any Scout. Scouts need
to pay special attention to fire safety when camping.
Remember that no tent material is fireproof. All tents
can burn when exposed to heat or fire. Also, fires give
off poisonous carbon monoxide in even a ventilated
tent. For safety in tents, use the following rules:
• Never use liquid-fuel stoves, heaters, lanterns,
lighted candles, matches, or other flame sources in
or near tents. Permit only flashlights and electric
lanterns in tents.
• Do not pitch tents near open fire.
• Do not use flammable chemicals near tents,
including charcoal lighter fluid, spray paint,
bug killer, or insect repellent.
• Be careful when using electricity and lighting in tents.
• Always extinguish cooking and campfires properly.
• Obey all fire laws, ordinances, and regulations.


62 SAFETY
Safety in Public Places.
2. Physical Fitness. Require evidence of fitness for swimming
activity with a complete health history from physician, par-
ent, or legal guardian. The adult supervisor should adjust all
supervision, discipline, and protection to anticipate any
potential risks associated with individual health conditions.
In the event of any significant health conditions, the unit
leader should require proof of an examination by a physician.
People with physical disabilities can enjoy and benefit from
aquatics if the disabilities are known and necessary precau-
tions are taken.
3. Safe Area. When swimming in areas not regularly main-
tained and used for swimming activity, lifeguards and
swimmers should systematically examine the bottom of the
swimming area to determine varying depths, deep holes,
rocks, and stumps. Mark off the area for three groups:
• Not more than 31⁄2 feet deep for nonswimmers
• From shallow water to just over the head for beginners
• Deep water not more than 12 feet for swimmers
Participants should not be permitted to swim in areas
where they cannot easily recover and maintain their footing.
They should avoid areas where they cannot maintain their
position on the water, either because of swimming ability
or water flow. When setting up a safe swimming area in nat-
ural waters, use poles stuck in the bottom or plastic bottles,
balloons, or sticks attached to rock anchors with twine for
boundary markers. Set nonswimmer and beginner areas apart
For more
information about
Scouting
America’s Safe
Swim Defense,
see the Scouts
BSA Handbook for
Boys or the
Scouts BSA
Handbook for
Girls, and the
Swimming or
Lifesaving merit
badge pamphlets.


SAFETY 63
.Safety in Public Places
with buoy lines (twine and floats) between markers. Mark the
outer bounds of the swimmer’s area with floats. Be sure that
clear-water depth is at least 7 feet before allowing anyone to
dive into the water. Diving is prohibited from any height more
than 40 inches above the water’s surface. Feetfirst entry is
prohibited from more than 60 inches above the water. For any
entry from more than 18 inches above the water surface,
clear-water depth must be 10 to 12 feet. Only surface swim-
ming is permitted in turbid water. Swimming is not permitted
in water over 12 feet deep, in turbid water where poor visibil-
ity and depth would interfere with emergency recognition or
prompt rescue, or in whitewater, unless all participants wear
appropriate personal flotation devices. The supervisor must
also determine that swimming with personal flotation equip-
ment is safe under the circumstances.
4. Lifeguards on Duty. Swim only where there are lifeguards
on duty. For unit swims in areas without stationed lifeguards,
the supervisor should designate two capable swimmers as
lifeguards. Station them ashore, equipped with a lifeline
(a 100-foot length of 3⁄8-inch nylon cord). In an emergency,
one carries out the line. The other lifeguard feeds it out from
shore, then pulls in his or her partner and the person being
helped. In addition, if a boat is available, have two people,
preferably capable swimmers, take it out—one rowing and
the other equipped with a 10-foot pole or extra oar. Provide
one guard for every 10 people in the water. Adjust the num-
ber and positioning of guards as needed to protect the
particular area and activity.
5. Lookout. Station a lookout on the shore where it
is possible to see and hear everything in all areas.
The lookout may be the adult in charge of the
swim and may give the buddy signals.
6. Ability Groups. Divide participants into three
ability groups:
• Nonswimmers
• Beginners
• Swimmers
Keep each group in its own area. Nonswimmers have
not passed a swimming test. Beginners must pass this
test: Jump feetfirst into water over the head in depth, level
off, and swim 25 feet on the surface. Stop, turn sharply,
Diving injuries,
which include
paralysis and
even death, affect
teens more than
any other age
group. Think about
safety before
you jump or let
a friend jump.


64 SAFETY
Safety in Public Places.
resume swimming as before and return to the starting place.
Swimmers pass this test: Jump feetfirst into water over the
head in depth. Level off and swim 75 yards in a strong man-
ner using one or more of the following strokes: sidestroke,
breaststroke, trudgen, or crawl (the stroke used in a swim
meet freestyle event); then swim 25 yards using an easy
resting backstroke. The 100 yards must be completed in
one swim without stops and must include at least one
sharp turn. After completing the swim, rest by floating.
These classification tests should be renewed annually,
preferably at the beginning of the season.
7. Buddy System. Pair every youth with another in the same
ability group. Buddies check in and out of the swimming
area together. Emphasize that each buddy lifeguards his or
her buddy. Check everyone in the water about every 10 min-
utes, or as needed, to keep the buddies together. The adult in
charge signals for a buddy check with a single blast of a whis-
tle or ring of a bell and a call of “Buddies!” The adult counts
slowly to 10 while buddies join and raise hands. They remain
still and silent. Guards check all areas and count the pairs.
They compare the total with the number of swimmers known
to be in the water. Signal two blasts or bells to resume swim-
ming. Signal three blasts or bells for checkout.
8. Discipline. Be sure everyone understands and agrees
that swimming is allowed only with proper supervision
and use of the complete Safe Swim Defense. The applicable
rules should be presented and learned prior to the outing.
These rules should be reviewed for all participants at the
water’s edge just before the swimming activity begins.
Scouts should respect and follow all directions and rules
of the adult supervisor. When people know the reason for
rules and procedures, they are more likely to follow them.
Use the buddy
system whenever
you go swimming.


SAFETY 65
.Safety in Public Places
Safety in Public Swimming Areas
You can use Scouting America’s Safe Swim Defense
plan while swimming with your family or any other
group. Do not swim at a public pool or beach unless the
management provides a safe area, lifeguards, and
lookouts. Make sure to read and follow the posted rules
and regulations.
At a public pool or beach, be sensible and keep
within the proper area for swimmers of your ability.
Always swim with a buddy, regardless of where you
are swimming. If a check-in and check-out plan is not
provided by the management, make arrangements to
provide one for your own immediate group. Your plan
could be as simple as a scribbled list of swimmers by
buddies, with each name crossed off as the person
leaves the pool. Of course, any Scouting group must
always obey all the rules posted by the management
as well as use the Safe Swim Defense.
About 700 people die each year in boating accidents. Their lives
might have been saved if they had been wearing life jackets.


66 SAFETY
Safety in Public Places.
Lightning Strikes
Severe thunderstorms can develop quickly, so always
be alert to the weather. The National Weather Service says
if you can hear thunder, you are close enough to the
storm to be struck by lightning. During thunderstorms,
take these precautions.
• Avoid open areas and lightning targets such as trees,
flagpoles, or wire fences.
• Avoid anything metal, which conducts electricity. Remove
and stay away from metal-framed backpacks. In tents, stay
away from metal tent poles.
• Water conducts electricity; if you are on or in the water,
get to land immediately.
• If you are hiking near mountaintops, which are struck by
lightning often during summer, get downhill. If a storm
catches you, take shelter in a cave or low spot among the
rocks and in an area that is not likely to flood.
• Take shelter in a steel-framed building or hard-topped
motor vehicle (not a convertible) if you can. Such places
are safe because the charge stays within the building’s or
vehicle’s frame and is conducted safely to ground without
endangering the occupants. If you are taking shelter in a
car without a hard top, avoid touching the metal parts.
• When taking shelter in a building, remember that water
and metal conduct electricity. Avoid water and anything
metal. Do not take a bath or shower or run water. Do not
use the telephone or any objects connected to electrical
power, such as hair dryers, TVs, and computers.
• If you cannot find shelter, get small. Do not lie flat on the
ground, which makes you a bigger target than crouching
down. If you feel your hair stand on end or your skin get
tingly, crouch down immediately. Squat on the balls of
your feet, cover your ears with your hands, and put your
head between your knees. The less of you that is touching
the ground, the better.


SAFETY 67
.Safety in Public Places
Other Scouting Activities
Other Scouting activities that have their own safety rules
include things like rifle and shotgun shooting, archery, hiking,
canoeing, sailing, skiing, and horseback riding. Set an example
in all of your activities by learning and following the rules for
each activity that you do. Remember to follow the Scouting
America “SAFE Checklist,” which embodies good judgment and
common sense and is applicable to all activities.
Fireworks
Fireworks also are considered explosives and require special
safety tips. Fireworks are not an approved Scouting activity. In
2019, according to the Consumer Product Safety Commission,
fireworks were involved in an estimated 10,000 injuries treated in
U.S. hospital emergency rooms. Nearly half of those injured were
under the age of 20, and 1,100 of them had suffered eye injuries.
Learn and follow
the safety rules
for every activity
you do.





SAFETY 69
.Safety Plans and Projects
Safety Plans
and Projects
To fulfill requirements 5 and 6 for the Safety merit badge,
you must do some careful accident-prevention planning and
complete a safety project.
Accident Prevention Planning
As a young adult, you will need to look out for your own safety
more and more. This exercise will help you learn to think like a
safety technician by developing an accident prevention plan.
You must have
your merit badge
counselor’s
approval before
you begin your
safety project.
Discuss the
details with your
counselor, who
can give you
many tips on the
types of projects
to consider.
What potential safety hazards could mar this family’s fun?


70 SAFETY
Safety Plans and Projects.
Safety Projects
Planning and completing a safety project may take you outside
your home and into the community, including your school or
your place of employment. If you do a project for the whole
community, you will also need to involve community leaders.
For projects at your workplace, be sure to get proper approval
before proceeding.
Your project probably will not be a one-person
undertaking. You can involve Scouts who are also working
for their Safety merit badges, or any other Scouts who might
be interested in this effort. You will do the planning and
direct the efforts of other people. In other words, the success
of the project will be in your hands.
Any terrorist
event in the
United States is
a federal crime.
The National Terrorism
Advisory System
Because of the terrorist attacks on Sept. 11, 2001,
President George W. Bush and Congress established
the U.S. Department of Homeland Security. This
government agency communicates information about
terrorist threats, as well as secures and manages U.S.
borders, administers immigration laws, safeguards
and secures cyberspace activities, and coordinates
responses to natural disasters and emergencies.
When officials receive information about a terror-
ist threat, the Department of Homeland Security’s
National Terrorism Advisory System (NTAS) will issue
an NTAS alert. There are two types of alerts: elevated
and imminent. An elevated alert warns of a credible
terrorist threat. An imminent alert warns of a credible,
specific, and impending terrorist threat.
With your parent or guardian’s permission, check
the Homeland Security website to find out about any
current alerts. Explore the site to learn how to prepare
for, help prevent, or mitigate (lessen the effects of)
an attack. For more information, see the resources
section at the end of this pamphlet.


SAFETY 71
.Safety Plans and Projects
Types of Projects
As you decide what type of project you want to do, consider
opportunities in your home and community. One Scout
organized a bicycle safety program for their troop. In the
Scout’s small town, the troop program spread to be a citywide
event. Bikes were inspected on weekends. Experts gave
instruction in safe riding, and a “safe bike” riding contest was
the highlight of the safety campaign.
Another kind of safety project might be more useful or
appropriate in your neighborhood or community. The
suggestions listed here will get you thinking about specific
projects to discuss with your counselor.
• With your Scout leader’s permission, stencil “No Flames in
Tents” on the flaps of your unit’s tents.
• Conduct a safety poster contest, with posters placed in neigh-
borhood store windows.
• Develop an emergency evacuation plan for your troop
meeting place.
Your safety project could involve learning about home security—and maybe even
sharing what you learned with others.


72 SAFETY
Safety Plans and Projects.
• Make copies of the Home
Safety Checklist in this
pamphlet and distribute
the copies to homes in
your area.
• Keep kids safe during
the Halloween season
by collecting donated
flashlights and reflective
tape from local hardware
stores and distributing
them to parents of small
children. The Centers for
Disease Control and
Prevention estimates four times as
many children between ages 5 to 14 are killed
on Halloween than on any other night of the year.
• Order and post in your place of worship a set of safety
posters. Get permission from both your place of worship and
parent or guardian before you do. Posters may be ordered for
free from the website of Church Mutual Insurance. (See the
resources section at the end of this pamphlet.)
• Plan and build a safety float for a
parade such as a school or community
event.
• Plan and run a safety booth
at a fair.
• Conduct a study of the books
and other materials on safety
that are available in your local
library. Create a list of additional
resources that could be added
such as books, pamphlets, and
videos. Present this list to the
librarian and explain that you
are working on the Safety
merit badge.


SAFETY 73
.Safety Plans and Projects
• Work with the local police to organize a Neighborhood
Watch in your area. For information on organizing a
Neighborhood Watch program, see the Crime Prevention
merit badge pamphlet.
• After using the Home Safety and Home Security checklists,
plan and complete a project to update your home in all areas
that are shown to be deficient.
• If you live on a farm, you will probably choose a farm safety
project. A farm is a good place for a project because there are
so many kinds of safety hazards posed by farm machinery,
pesticides, flooding, lightning, electricity, and other dangers.
See the Farm Mechanics merit badge pamphlet or contact the
National Safety Council for its material on farm safety.
• With your parent or guardian’s permission, visit the National
Highway Traffic Safety Administration’s website, NHTSA.gov.
Make a chart or a poster of the safety star ratings for a
passenger car, a pickup, an SUV, and a van. Then present
what you learned to your counselor, Scout unit, or a
Cub Scout pack.





SAFETY 75
.Careers in Safety
Careers in Safety
Saving and protecting the lives of other people can be a
rewarding career.
Fire and Rescue Service
Firefighters rescue people, but they also raise ladders, hook
hoses to water hydrants, and enter burning buildings. Fire
inspectors help prevent fires from happening by checking
buildings to be sure fire ordinances, laws, and codes are
followed. Fire investigators are like detectives. By using clues
left after the fire, they determine the starting point and cause
of the fire. Fire safety technicians also work to prevent fires
by planning fire protection systems like the ceiling sprinkler
systems in public buildings.
To be a firefighter, you must have a high school diploma
and advanced first-aid training. In many areas, firefighters must
also be trained as paramedics. Fire investigators, inspectors, and
safety technicians must have two to four years of college in one
of the following programs: fire service,
fire protection, fire technology, or fire
protection engineering. In addition,
a position may require state fire
protection certification, paramedic
certification, public education
specialist certification, or other
special qualifications.
An applicant for a fire inspector,
investigator, or technician often
needs two or more years of experi-
ence as a firefighter.
Because
firefighters are
first responders,
they must also
have advanced
training in first aid.


76 SAFETY
Careers in Safety.
Safety Engineer
A safety engineer is responsible for reducing or minimizing the
number of preventable accidents in the workplace by anticipating
hazardous conditions. Often this is in a warehouse or a manu-
facturing, chemical, or oil and gas plant.
Several years of experience as either a safety technician
or assistant safety engineer are often required to obtain a safety
engineering position. In addition, certification as a safety engi-
neer or safety consultant in the state in which you wish to
work is recommended.
A four-year degree in industrial engineering is preferred.
Law Enforcement
Law enforcement agents such as police officers have a wide range
of responsibilities to protect the public. They enforce the law, pre-
serve the peace, control crowds, and arrest and stop criminals,
among other duties. Detectives obtain information about criminals
and their activities through surveillance, interviews, and research.
A high school education is required, but a two- or four-year
college degree in law enforcement is preferred. Another option is
joining the armed forces, which offer law enforcement training.
A detective needs a wide range of knowledge, so a four-year col-
lege degree in general studies is preferable.
Educating
employees in safe
practices and
promoting pride
in the number
of hours worked
accident-free are
important parts of
a safety engineer’s
responsibilities.
A detective needs
a memory for
detail, good verbal
and writing skills,
and a curious mind.


SAFETY 77
.Careers in Safety
Candidates must pass a written test that checks for intelli-
gence and the ability to understand police work. Candidates
also are checked for character and to verify they have no arrest
record. Physical fitness for strength and agility is also an impor-
tant qualification.
After being hired, a police officer typically must pass special
training and then work side-by-side with an experienced officer
for several months. Usually only a police officer with at least
three years of experience may apply for a detective position.
Other Careers in Safety
Risk Management. Municipalities, insurance companies, research institutes,
safety advocacy organizations, and other companies and organizations,
including Scouting America, have risk managers who assess the safety of
activities.
Code Enforcement. Private companies, city governments, trade groups,
and other organizations have code enforcement personnel that assess the
implications of safety codes on
the trades and the consumers.
Fire Marshal Services. All types
of municipalities have persons
trained in how fires start and
the damages that can occur.
Occupational Safety Analysis.
Industry and government hire
experts in industrial functions
and products to anticipate how
on-the-job accidents can
occur and how they can
be prevented.
Safety Advocates.
Organizations, companies, and
consumer groups employ
consultants to advocate
safety in the environment,
transportation community,
and institutions.


78 SAFETY
Safety Resources.
Safety Resources
Scouting Literature
Scouts BSA Handbook for Boys and
Scouts BSA Handbook for Girls (both
including How to Protect Your Children
From Child Abuse); Safe Swim Defense;
Safety Afloat; Climb On Safely;
Fieldbook; Crime Prevention, Emergency
Preparedness, Fingerprinting, Fire Safety,
First Aid, Lifesaving, Public Health,
Search and Rescue, Traffic Safety,
Weather, and Wilderness Survival merit
badge pamphlets
Books
Allman, Toney. Hot Topics: Distracted
Driving. Lucent Books, 2015.
American Red Cross. First Aid/CPR/
AED Participant’s Manual.
Staywell, 2014.
American Red Cross. Responding to
Emergencies. Staywell, 2012.
American Red Cross. Wilderness and
Remote First Aid. Staywell, 2010.
Are You Ready? An In-Depth Guide
to Citizen Preparedness (IS-22).
FEMA, 2013. Order a free copy
at 800-480-2520.
Dadd, Debra Lynn. Home Safe Home.
Penguin Publishing Group, 2005.
Heberle, David, and Richard Scutella.
The Complete Guide to Making Your
Home Safe. Betterway Books, 1998.
Morkes, Andrew, ed. Careers in
Focus: Public Safety, 3rd ed.
Ferguson Publishing, 2007.
Vacca, John, and Mary E. Vacca.
Cybersafety: Identity Theft. Chelsea
House Publishing, 2012.
Warde, John. The Healthy Home
Handbook: All You Need to Know to
Rid Your Home of Health and Safety
Hazards. Three Rivers Press, 1997.
Organizations, Government
Agencies, and Websites
AAA Foundation for Traffic Safety
Telephone: 202-638-5944
aaafoundation.org
American Association of Poison
Control Centers
Toll-free hotline: 800-222-1222
aapcc.org
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


SAFETY 79
.Safety Resources
American Red Cross
Toll-free telephone: 800-733-2767
redcross.org
American Society of
Safety Professionals
Telephone: 847-699-2929
assp.org
ASTM International
Toll-free telephone: 877-909-2786
astm.org
Church Mutual Insurance
Toll-free telephone: 800-554-2642
churchmutual.com
Federal Emergency
Management Agency
Toll-free hotline: 800-621-FEMA
fema.gov
FM Global (FM)
fmglobal.com
National Fire Protection Association
Toll-free telephone: 800-344-3555
nfpa.org
National Highway Traffic
Safety Administration
Toll-free telephone: 888-327-4236
nhtsa.gov
National Safety Council
Toll-free telephone: 800-621-7615
nsc.org
Occupational Safety and
Health Administration
Toll-free telephone: 800-321-OSHA
osha.gov
Ready Campaign
FEMA/U.S. Department
of Homeland Security
ready.gov
Safe Kids
Telephone: 202-662-0600
safekids.org
Underwriters Laboratories Inc. (UL)
Telephone: 877-854-3577
ul.com
U.S. Consumer Product
Safety Commission
Toll-free hotline: 800-638-2772
cpsc.gov
U.S. Department of
Homeland Security
dhs.gov
U.S. National Library of Medicine
nlm.nih.gov
Acknowledgments
Scouting America is grateful to the
following for their assistance in
preparing the Safety merit badge
pamphlet.
• Members of the Safety merit badge
review committee, in particular
Sven Rundman (chair), Norman
Butman, Mike Donaghue, Ed
Haywood, Glen Henderson;
Tom Seymour, and Tom Watson
• Members of the Scouting America
Health and Safety Committee, in
particular David Bell, Ph.D.; William
W. Forgey, M.D.; John E.
Hendrickson, American Red Cross
National Headquarters; Charles
Mitchell, National Rifle Association
of America; Arthur H. Mittelstaedt
Jr., Ph.D., Recreation Safety Institute;
and Paul Young, R.S., M.P.H.
Thanks also to Bryan Caldwell,
retired captain, Hawaii County Fire
Department; Michele Campbell and
Kevin Fearn, Research and Statistics
Department, National Safety Council;
and Ralph W. Russell II, Institute of
Electrical and Electronics Engineers.


Safety Resources.
Special thanks to staff members
of the Recreation Safety Institute,
Ronkonkoma, New York, for providing
their assistance, time, and expertise.
Scouting America is grateful to the
men and women serving on the
National Merit Badge Subcommittee for
the improvements made in updating
this pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration Credits
AT&T, courtesy—page 10 (It Can
Wait logo)
Church Mutual Insurance Company,
courtesy—page 72 (brochure)
Joseph O’Brien, USDA Forest Service,
courtesy—page 53
NHTSA.gov/National Highway Traffic
Safety Administration, courtesy—
page 73
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of
or are protected by Scouting America.
Dan Bryant—page 54 (cooking gear)
Darrell Byers—page 42 (children)
Daniel Giles—page 67 (background)
Roy Jansen—page 31
John McDearmon—all illustrations on
pages 20, 30, 35, 39, and 48
Brian Payne—page 12
Randy Piland—page 65
Scouting America is grateful to TXU Electric Delivery
for providing expertise, photo assistance, time, and
other resources in the production of this edition of
the Safety merit badge pamphlet. In particular,
thanks to Tom Baker, Gordon Bius, Tim Burke, Gailee Cardwell, Ray
Cumpton, John Frentress, Lonnie Green, Jay Greene, Bill Harper, Art
Miller, Carol Peters, and Randy Smith.