CANOEING


CANOEING
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Note to the Counselor
Canoeing Merit Badge Counselor Requirements
All counselors should have formal training in the knowledge and skills indicated
by the requirements, experience in teaching such skills to youth and experience
in identifying and managing risks associated with the activities involved. For
the Canoeing merit badge, appropriate credentials include: current or previous
certification as a Scouting America Aquatics Instructor, designation as an
instructor or successful completion of council-sponsored or council-approved
training courses in canoeing such as Paddlecraft Safety, or current or previous
certification as an instructor in canoeing by the American Canoe Association
Level One. With the assistance of the council aquatics committee, the council
advancement committee may approve counselors with similar experience and
training in knowledge, skill, safety, and instruction.
Notes on 2025 Requirement Changes
This edition completes a 30-year transition of the Canoeing merit badge from
requirements that placed a greater emphasis on solo maneuvers, self-rescue, and
individual strokes to an emphasis on tandem paddling using a limited number
of basic strokes. At a focus group held during a National Aquatics Workshop, the
recommendation made to bring into line the skills in the merit badge with the most
common ways in which they are applied in Scouting—tandem paddling on unit
outings either on calm or moving water.
Although there is value in learning to paddle solo, there is rarely the
opportunity in Scouting to paddle a canoe alone. Scouts are taught the buddy
system for important reasons. It is much easier for two Scouts to reach a destination
paddling together than two Scouts paddling by themselves in solo boats. In
inclement weather conditions, two paddlers are often essential to paddle against
wind and waves.
To be effective in tandem paddling, Scouts must learn the primary roles of the
bow and stern positions. Teamwork is essential. Good tandem paddling requires
good communication, both verbal and nonverbal. In the best tandem paddling,
communication is mostly unspoken. Each paddler in each position knows the
purpose of each stroke and how to use them effectively together to move the boat
in a desired path. One of most important lessons learned in tandem paddling is the
principle of synergy, with the boat moving at a greater speed with both paddlers
doing their strokes simultaneously rather than independently at different times.
After learning to paddle tandem, learning to paddle solo is an easy transition.
Solo canoe paddling canoe skills can now be found in the Whitewater merit badge.
35867
ISBN 978-0-8395-3305-4
©2024 Scouting America/Boy Scouts of America
2024 Printing


CANOEING 3
Other changes in the requirements have been made to better align them with
the instructional system of the American Canoe Association (ACA), the premier
organization in the U.S. for teaching paddlecraft skills. The requirements now
closely mirror the skills and maneuvers taught at the beginner level in the ACA
learning system, Level 1. Thus, when seeking an appropriately trained Canoeing
merit badge counselor, it can be assumed that a Level 1 ACA canoe instructor
would be qualified. Another reason that tandem and solo paddling skills are no
longer mixed is that experience in ACA courses has shown these skills are best
taught in separate courses. Lastly, the terminology for the canoe strokes has been
standardized to the names used in the ACA. The unique names previously used in
Scouting, such as the pullover stroke, quarter sweep and diagonal draw, have been
replaced by names generally accepted in the paddle sport community.
Another national-standard-setting group, the American Boat and Yacht
Council, has published the Skills-based HUMAN-propelled Boat Standard as part of
its National System of Standards for Recreational Boat Operation. This new national
consensus-based standard is intended to guide the design and student assessment of
courses involving entry level on-water, skills-based instruction in human-propelled
recreational boats such as canoes and kayaks. The Canoeing requirements meet
these standards, and the language of the requirements reflects the wording as
suggested in the standard. Several current and previous members of the National
Aquatics Subcommittee were participants in the development of these standards.
Finally, several new techniques have been added. Canoe rescues now include
the parallel tandem canoe rescue, which was first developed for this merit badge.
Entries now include the heel-hook, between-the-boat, and the use of a rescue sling.
Use of a throw bag, which is new with this edition, also has been added along with
new methods of coiling and throwing a rope or rescue bag. Swamping is now done
in a controlled fashion to avoid the possibility of the canoe flipping over on the
paddlers and injuring their heads.
Notes on Teaching the Canoeing Merit Badge
The majority of Scouts who earn the Canoeing merit badge do so at a council
summer camp or aquatic center. In these settings, time available for instruction is
limited. To be taught correctly, a minimum of 5 hours of instruction is required. The
elimination of the many solo paddling skills and self-rescue now affords more time
to focus on the teaching and deeper learning of tandem skills. These skills now are
based on performing maneuvers correctly, not on demonstrating individual strokes.
Different combinations of strokes can be used to perform the basic maneuvers
required in this merit badge. The seven required tandem maneuvers are: paddling
forward in a straight line, paddling forward along a curved line, turning 90 degrees
in either direction while moving forward, stopping, paddling back, pivoting in


4 CANOEING
both directions, and moving sideways to both sides. It is
recommended that the strokes required for each maneuver be
taught as part of the maneuver.
For example, after introducing the requirement for
moving abeam, the draw and pushaway strokes should be
demonstrated, taught and practiced as the way to perform this
maneuver. This associates the stroke with what happens to
the boat when the strokes are used. In place of asking a Scout
to demonstrate a draw or pushaway stroke, the Scout must
now demonstrate moving a canoe sideways with his paddling
partner. Knowing the name of a stroke is important but not as
important as knowing what it does and how to use it correctly.
After successfully learning to move the canoe abeam, pivots can
be taught using the same draw and pushaway strokes but with
the addition of the forward and reverse sweeps as alternative
combinations. These are turning strokes that can be used not
only in pivots but also in paddling in a straight or curved line.
Paddling forward in a straight line is the most fundamental
skill; the most essential stroke for both the bow and stern
paddlers to do this is the forward stroke. This stroke must be
learned and practiced correctly as it will be used thousands of
times on any canoe activity. Performing it badly or poorly will
lead to ineffective paddling and overuse of the arm muscles.
Consistently doing the forward stroke in its proper form will
require repeated practice and correction.
One of the best ways to engage Scouts is the use of
appropriate games, the object of which is not entertainment
but rather a method of providing controlled practice. They
should focus on the use of specific skills and should never
be just about winning. A game of Green Light–Red Light is a
fun way to practice paddling in a straight line while stopping
and starting multiple times. Alternatively, a competition to
determine which set of paddlers can cover a specific distance
in the fewest number of strokes will cause them to focus on
efficiency and teamwork.
A summary of each of the strokes with Minimum
Performance Criteria has been included with each maneuver.
These criteria should be used to first teach and then evaluate
and correct the performance of each stroke as part of the
required maneuver. Scouts who fail a maneuver are likely
failing because they are not performing the strokes according
to these Minimum Performance Criteria. Angled paddles,
poor blade placement, and incorrect grip hand positions can all
contribute to an ineffective stroke and consequently a poorly
performed maneuver. All instructors should be able to model
and teach to these paddling standards.


CANOEING 5
Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Canoeing or check Scoutbook for the latest requirements.


6 CANOEING


CANOEING 7
Contents
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
Safety and First Aid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
Canoes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
Paddles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
Launching, Paddling Positions, and Landing. . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
Paddling Tandem and Maneuvers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
Exits and Entries on the Open Water . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
Rescues and Swamping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
Canoeing Terms. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 98
Canoeing Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
b. Move a canoe sideways (abeam) in one direction for 10 feet
and then return to the starting position using the draw and
pushaway strokes.
c. While in forward motion, stop the canoe within two boat
lengths using the backstroke.
d. While in the stern position and without assistance from the
bow paddler, paddle in a straight line 15-20 boat lengths using
an appropriate steering stroke, e.g., the J-stroke or thumb-
down rudder stroke with or without a stern pry.
e. Move the canoe in a straight line 15-20 boat lengths with
the bow paddler using as necessary the forward stroke, draw
stroke or forward sweep and the stern paddler using an
appropriate steering stroke, e.g., the J-stroke or thumb-down
rudder stroke with or without a stern pry.
f. While maintaining forward motion, turn the canoe 90° in
an arc to the right in 5-10 boat lengths with the bow paddler
using as necessary either the draw stroke or forward sweep
and the stern paddler using only the forward stroke. Repeat
the maneuver turning the canoe 90 degrees to the left.
g. Move the canoe backward in a straight line 3-4 boat lengths
using as necessary the back stroke, reverse sweep or draw
stroke in the bow or the stern.
h. Complete a figure of 8 course around markers 3-4 boat
lengths apart using appropriate strokes including the draw
stroke, and the forward and reverse sweeps.


8 CANOEING
Introduction.
Introduction
Earning the Canoeing merit badge
will introduce you to the wonderful
world of canoeing. The skills you
learn will embark you on a lifetime
of canoeing experiences.
The word canoe originates with
Christopher Columbus and his report
that the Arawak Indians from the West
Indies used a seagoing boat, or kenu,
made from a hollowed-out tree trunk.
The American Indians of the northeastern
woodlands used the boats that we call
canoes. The birch-bark canoe they perfected
had a wood frame covered with sheets of birch
bark that were sewn together with white pine
root and sealed with pine or spruce resin.
When European explorers arrived in North
America, they quickly adopted the birch-bark canoe
as the best way to move people and goods. For several
centuries, the canoe was a primary method of travel for
explorers and settlers. During the 1880s, canoe companies in
Old Town, Maine, began making canoes of wood and canvas.
These boats became very popular, and canoeing became a
fashionable weekend activity.
In the 20th century, canoes made of new materials in new
shapes and designs replaced the wood-canvas canoe. Aluminum
canoes appeared in large numbers after World War II, when
several aircraft manufacturers retrofitted their production lines
to build canoes from metal. Today, plastics and other advanced
materials are used to make boats for many kinds of recreational
and competitive paddling.


.Introduction
The benefits of earning the Canoeing merit badge will
continue throughout your life. Canoeing in Scouting America
most commonly is a two-person activity, teaching communi-
cation, teamwork, and physical fitness. Other benefits
include being in and observing nature. You will
experience the ecology of lakes and rivers, which
will help you understand why it is important
to preserve these resources for future gen-
erations.
Whether you become a lifelong
paddler or try canoeing for the first
time at Scout camp, remember
to enjoy your experience. If it
isn’t fun and rewarding, it
is not canoeing.
Birch-bark canoes were
lightweight and easy to
carry, and they could
hold a load of paddlers
and supplies.


10 CANOEING
Safety and First Aid.
Safety and First Aid
When earning any of the aquatic merit badges, it is important
to follow safety rules and use self-discipline and good judg-
ment. Canoeing will be among the most memorable of your
Scouting experiences if you understand and follow the nine
points of Safety Afloat. These guidelines were developed to
promote boating and boating safety and to set standards for
safe unit activity afloat. They apply to all canoeing activities.
Safety Afloat
The following version of the Safety Afloat policy has been mod-
ified for this merit badge. The complete version is found in the
Guide to Safe Scouting.
1. Qualified Supervision. All canoeing activities must be super-
vised by a mature and conscientious adult age 21 or older who
understands and knowingly accepts responsibility for the well-
being and safety of those in his or her care and who is trained
in and committed to compliance with the nine points of Safety
Afloat. That supervisor must be skilled in safe canoeing, knowl-
edgeable in accident prevention, and prepared for emer-
gency situations. If the adult with Safety Afloat train-
ing lacks the necessary canoe operating and safety
skills, then he or she may serve as the supervisor
only if assisted by other adults, camp staff per-
sonnel, or professional tour guides who have the
appropriate skills.
Additional leadership is provided in ratios
of one trained adult, staff member, or guide per 10
participants. At least one leader must be trained in first
aid, including CPR. Any swimming done in conjunction with
the activity afloat must be supervised in accordance with Safe
Swim Defense standards. It is strongly recommended that all
units have at least one adult or older youth member currently
trained in Aquatics Supervision: Paddle Craft Safety to assist in
the planning and conduct of all canoeing activities.


CANOEING 11
.Safety and First Aid
2. Personal Health Review. A complete
health history is required of all participants
as evidence of fitness for boating activities.
Forms for minors must be signed by a
parent or legal guardian. Participants
should be asked to relate any recent
incidents of illness or injury just prior to
the activity. Supervision and protection
should be adjusted to anticipate any
potential risks associated with individual
health conditions. For significant health
conditions, the adult supervisor should
require an examination by a physician and consult with parent,
guardian, or caregiver for appropriate precautions.
3. Swimming Ability. Operation of any canoe is limited to
youth and adults who have completed the Scouting America
swimmer classification test: Jump feetfirst into water over
the head in depth. Level off and swim 75 yards in a strong
manner using one or more of the following strokes: sidestroke,
breaststroke, trudgen, or crawl; then swim 25 yards using an
easy, resting backstroke. The 100 yards must be completed in
one swim without stops and must include at least one sharp
turn. After completing the swim, rest by floating.
Anyone not classified as a swimmer may paddle or ride in
a canoe as a buddy with an adult swimmer skilled in that craft.
4. Life Jacket. Properly fitted, U.S. Coast Guard–approved life
jackets must be worn by every person in a canoe. Type III life
jackets are recommended for general recreational use.
5. Buddy System. All participants are paired as buddies who
are always aware of each other’s situation and prepared to sound
an alarm and lend assistance immediately when needed.
When several canoes are used on a trip, each canoe should
have a buddy boat. All buddy pairs must be accounted for at
regular intervals and checked off the water by the qualified
supervisor at the end of the activity. Buddies either ride in the
same canoe or stay near one another in single-person canoes.
6. Skill Proficiency. Everyone in a canoeing activity must
have enough knowledge and skill to participate safely.
Passengers should know how their movement affects the
canoe’s stability and should have a basic understanding of
self-rescue. Paddlers must meet government requirements,
be able to control the canoe, know how changes in the
environment influence that control, and participate only in
activities that are within their or their group’s capabilities.


12 CANOEING
Safety and First Aid.
• Participants should be instructed in basic safety procedures
prior to launch and allowed to proceed once they have
demonstrated the ability to control the canoe adequately
to return to shore.
• Before embarking on a long float trip or outing lasting more
than four hours, paddlers should have either three hours of
canoe training and supervised practice or should be able to
successfully complete a 100-yard course and recover from
a capsize.
• Unit trips on Class III whitewater must be done with either a
professional guide in each canoe or after all participants have
received American Canoe Association or equivalent training
for the class of water and type of craft involved. Unit trips
on Class IV whitewater are allowed only in rafts with a pro-
fessionally trained guide in each raft. Trips above Class IV are
not allowed.
7. Planning. Proper planning is necessary to ensure safe, enjoy-
able canoeing. All plans should include a scheduled itinerary,
notification of appropriate parties, communication arrangements,
contingencies in case of inclement weather or equipment failure,
and options for emergency response.
Preparation. Any canoeing activity requires access to the
proper equipment and transportation of gear and participants.
Determine what state and local regulations are applicable.
Get permission to use or cross private property. Determine
whether personal resources will be used or whether outfitters
will supply equipment, food, and shuttle services. Lists of group
and personal equipment and supplies must be compiled and
checked. Even short trips require selecting a route, checking
water levels, and determining alternative pull-out locations.
Changes in water level, especially on moving water, may pose
significant, variable safety concerns. Obtain current charts and
information about the waterway and consult those who have
traveled the route recently.
Float Plan. Complete the preparation by writing a detailed
float plan, noting put-in and pull-out locations and waypoints,
along with the approximate time the group should arrive at
each. Travel time should be estimated generously.
Notification. File the float plan with parents, the local council
office if traveling on running water, and local authorities if
appropriate. Assign a member of the unit committee to alert
authorities if prearranged check-ins are overdue. Make sure
everyone is promptly notified when the trip is concluded.
Minimum training
takes at least
3 hours.


CANOEING 13
.Safety and First Aid
Weather. Check the forecast just before setting out, and keep
an alert weather eye. Anticipate changes and bring all canoes
ashore when rough weather threatens. Wait at least 30 minutes
before resuming activities after the last thunder or lightning.
Contingencies. Planning must identify possible emergencies
and other circumstances that could force a change of plans.
Develop alternative plans for each situation. Identify local
emergency resources such as EMS systems, sheriff depart-
ments, or ranger stations. Check your primary communication
system, and identify backups, such as the nearest residence to
a campsite. Cellphones and radios may lose coverage, run out
of power, or suffer water damage.
8. Equipment. All canoes must be suitable for the activity
and seaworthy, and must float if capsized. All canoes and
equipment must meet regulatory standards, be
properly sized, and be in good repair. Spares,
repair materials and emergency gear must
be carried as appropriate. Life jackets and
paddles must be sized to the participants.
Properly designed and fitted helmets must
be worn when running rapids rated Class II
and above. Emergency equipment such as
throw bags, signal devices, flashlights, heat
sources, first-aid kits, radios, and maps
must be ready for use. Spare equipment,
repair materials, extra food and water, and
dry clothes should be appropriate for the activity. All
gear should be stowed to prevent loss and water damage.
9. Discipline. Rules are effective only when followed. All par-
ticipants should know, understand, and respect the rules and
procedures for safe canoeing activities provided by Safety Afloat
guidelines. Applicable rules should be discussed before the out-
ing and reviewed near the boarding area just before the activity
afloat begins. People are more likely to follow directions when
they know the reasons for rules and procedures. Consistent,
impartially applied rules supported by skill and good judgment
provide steppingstones to a safe, enjoyable outing.
Prevention goes hand in hand with mitigation, which
means “to lessen in force or intensity” and “to make
less severe.” By taking precautions to manage risk
and the possibility of injury, you can be prepared
to anticipate, help prevent, mitigate, and respond to
just about any incident that might happen.


14 CANOEING
Safety and First Aid.
First Aid
Following the nine points of Safety Afloat reduces many of the
serious risks in canoeing, but some major and minor injuries
still might occur. First aid for some of the temperature-related
injuries can be lifesaving while treatment for other conditions is
less urgent.
COLD-RELATED INJURIES
There are two primary cold related dangers encountered in
canoeing. The first is cold-water shock which a paddler can
experience by falling into very cold water. The second danger
is hypothermia, which is a gradual lowering of the body’s core
temperature caused by spending minutes to hours in water or
being in wet clothing when the air is cooler than 70 degrees.
Cold-water shock occurs when a paddler falls into
very cold water, especially below 60 degrees. The colder the
water, the more severe the effects. The first response will be
the reflex to take a deep, gasping breath, which is dangerous
if the paddler is underwater. Wearing a life jacket could save
the paddler’s life in this case. Next the paddler will start tak-
ing many quick, short breaths, as if panting for air. This can
make the paddler light-headed and dizzy, unable to hold his
or her breath. The paddler will also likely lose any sense of up
and down, and his or her heart rate and blood pressure will
go up. All of these effects can occur in about 60 seconds. It is
important that you concentrate on self-rescue initially. If that is
not possible, minimize your exposure to the water by using the
HELP position (see box below) and wait for help.
For all activity afloat on cold water or in cold weather,
appropriate clothing should be worn for warmth,
with the life jacket worn at all times. A dry change
of clothes should be available in case of a spill.
Activity afloat should include procedures and
equipment for warming anyone showing symp-
toms of chill.
If alone in cold water and more than a
short distance from safety, you can reduce
heat loss by avoiding movement, using cloth-
ing and the life jacket for insulation, keeping
your head above water, and maintaining a tuck
position. This is called the heat escape lessening
posture (HELP).
Because canoe-
ing is a physical
activity that takes
place in the out-
doors, participants
are at risk for a
range of injuries.


CANOEING 15
.Safety and First Aid
The only treatment for cold-water shock is to get
the paddler out of the water immediately. They
might need to be treated for hypothermia. Take care
when paddling in cold waters. The best prevention
for cold-water shock and related injuries is to dress
appropriately for the weather and stay dry.
Hypothermia occurs when the body’s core temperature
falls below the normal range. Exposure to cold, or even cool,
water can lower your core temperature dangerously. Early signs
of heat loss include bluish lips and shivering. Further cooling will
upset the ability to think clearly and to do simple tasks. Further
chilling will lead to unconsciousness and, eventually, death.
Treatment for hypothermia involves carefully removing the
person from the water, removing wet clothing, and drying the
person. Put them in warm, dry clothes and wrap him or her in
blankets. Be sure to cover the head, as most heat loss occurs there.
Warm the trunk first, not the hands and feet as this can cause
shock. If using hot-water bottles or chemical hot packs, wrap them
in cloth; don’t apply them directly to the skin. Place the heating
sources on the chest, neck, and groin. Avoid rough handling of the
person, especially if they are lethargic or unconscious. This may
cause the heart to develop life-threatening irregular rhythms. If
conscious, give the person a warm drink. Avoid caffeine or alco-
hol. Once the body temperature begins to rise, keep the person
dry and in a warm blanket with the head and neck covered. Avoid
rapid rewarming, as it can induce fatal heart rhythms.
HEAT-RELATED INJURIES
Heat-related illnesses result when the body cannot keep itself
cool enough. When the surrounding temperatures are above
normal body temperature, the body will begin to absorb heat.
An important way to cool the body is through sweating. If a
person is dehydrated and cannot sweat, the risks of heat-related
illnesses go up dramatically. For this reason, avoid exercising
outdoors when the temperature and humidity are high.
Before setting out during hot weather, check with the
National Weather Service to find out the predicted heat index.
If the air temperature is 90 degrees and the relative humidity is
100 percent, the heat index—how hot it feels—is 132 degrees.
Heat index values are calculated for shady conditions with a
light wind; direct exposure to sunlight can increase heat index
values by as much as 15 degrees. Strong winds, especially with
very hot, dry air, can also be extremely hazardous.
Frightened or
anxious victims
might breathe
too heavily or too
deeply, which
can result in
hyperventilation.
Calmly encourage
the person to
relax and breathe
slowly.


16 CANOEING
Safety and First Aid.
A body temperature of 106 degrees or greater is a life-
threatening medical condition and requires immediate
medical treatment by health-care professionals.
If someone feels dizzy, faint, nauseated, or weak; develops
a headache or muscle cramps; or looks pale and is sweating
heavily, treat for heat exhaustion. Have the person rest in a
cool, shady spot. Loosen or remove clothing to promote heat
loss. Wet the skin with a damp cloth and then fan to promote
cooling through evaporation. Have the victim sip water or
a diluted sports drink. Gently massage and stretch cramped
muscles. If the condition worsens, get medical help. Recovery
should be rapid but may take up to 24 hours.
Heatstroke can be caused by dehydration (water loss),
overexercising, or both when the heat index is high. The victim
may be wet or dry but always will be flushed and hot. The
pulse will be extremely rapid, and the person may be disorient-
ed or unconscious. Cool the victim immediately by placing cold
packs in the groin area and armpits. Increase the body’s fluid
level by having a conscious victim sip water. Seek emergency
help immediately and treat for shock.
Sunburn is a familiar condition commonly associ-
ated with aquatic activity. Remember that sunlight
reflected from the water surface can be as damaging
as direct exposure. Cover up and use a waterproof
sunscreen with a sun protection factor (SPF) of
at least 15. Apply every two hours, and limit your
exposure time. If your skin begins to redden or if
you feel discomfort, get out of the sun or cover the
area with clothing that will block the sun’s rays.
OTHER MINOR INJURIES
A blister is a small pocket of fluid that forms when the skin is
irritated. Blisters often occur when the paddle shaft rubs against
the paddler’s thumbs or the pads of the fingers. Help prevent
blisters by keeping your hands and fingers as dry as possible.
Wearing gloves designed for paddling will help. Protect a hot
spot or blister with a piece of moleskin or molefoam and a
waterproof bandage. Blisters are best left unbroken, but if a
blister bursts, treat it as you would a minor cut or abrasion.


CANOEING 17
.Safety and First Aid
Losing more water than you take in can lead to dehydration.
Symptoms of mild dehydration include increased thirst, dry lips,
and dark yellow urine. Symptoms of moderate to severe dehydra-
tion include severe thirst, dry mouth with little saliva, dry skin,
weakness, dizziness, confusion, nausea, cramping, loss of appe-
tite, decreased sweating (even with exertion), decreased urine
production, and dark brown urine.
For mild dehydration, drink one to two quarts of water or
a sports drink over two to four hours. Rest for 24 hours and con-
tinue drinking fluids. See a physician for moderate dehydration;
severe dehydration requires emergency care. Prevent dehydration
by drinking plenty of fluids while you are canoeing, both in hot
and cold weather. Drink enough so that your urine stays clear.
A sprain usually indicates that a ligament was over-
stretched or possibly torn, such as when the joint is put in an
unnatural position and force is suddenly applied to the joint.
For canoeists, sprains are more likely to affect the arm and
shoulder joints.
A strain can happen when muscles are made to work extra
hard or are overused. Because a canoeist uses the same muscles
repeatedly, the muscles and tendons can become strained.
Pain, swelling, and spasms often accompany sprains and
strains. The pain from a joint sprain is immediate. Muscle strains
may not be painful until the day after a muscle is used over and
over. The muscle/tendon or ligament will then begin to swell.
Once pain and swelling occur, the muscles surrounding the
injured area often will begin to contract and tighten (spasm).
Treating Sprains and Strains
The treatment of sprains and strains involves rest, immobilization,
cold therapy, and elevation, or RICE therapy.
R = Rest. Avoid any movements or activities that cause pain.
I = Immobilize. Stabilize the injured area in the position that it was found
or that is most comfortable. If the person must be moved, a splint and/or
sling may be needed.
C = Cold. Use a cold pack or crushed ice wrapped in a thin towel to
reduce pain and swelling. Apply to the injured area for no more than
20 minutes to avoid ice burn or frostbite. Remove the pack for 40 to 60
minutes before repeating.
E = Elevate. If possible, hold the injured area above the level of the heart
to reduce swelling.


Safety and First Aid.
Life Jackets
A life jacket should be worn properly every time you paddle
a canoe, whether on a peaceful lake, a slow-moving stream,
or a whitewater river. The labeling on life jackets has changed
recently, combining the requirements of the United States and
Canada into a single standard and providing a simple way of
understanding how the life jackets should and should not be
used. The standard is similar to the standard used in Europe,
so an approved life jacket can also be worn there.
In the 1980s, the U.S. Coast Guard created four wearable
life jacket “types” and one throwable flotation “type” for recre-
ational boaters. These categories of Type I, II, III, and V (wear-
ables) and Type IV (throwable) are no longer being used. Life
jackets with labels using these categories that were previously
approved by the U.S. Coast Guard can still be worn until they
do not meet USCG standards. This means the straps, zippers
and buckles must all work, the label is legible and there are no
rips or tears in the fabric or changes to its construction.
In the new classifications, there are still two categories of
life jackets, wearable and throwable, but they are classified into
four levels depending on their buoyancy. Buoyancy measures
the force that pushes an object up when it is floating and is
measured in Newtons. The new life jacket buoyancy or perfor-
mance levels are 50, 70, 100, 150 and 275 Newtons. Here are
how these levels compare with the older “types” of life jackets:
Performance
Level/Icon
Previous
“Type” Uses
None
Not currently approved for boating
by the USCG. Will be used for water
skiing, wakeboarding.
Types II
and III
Near Shore Buoyant Vest (Type II),
horse-collar shape. Flotation Aid
(Type III), best for paddling; level 70 is
recommended for canoeing.
Type I
Offshore Life Jacket, Used for
passengers on cruising vessels, such
as ferries on large bodies of water.
Type I
Level 150 life jacket will be similar to
current offshore inflatable life jacket.
Not recommended for canoeing.
275 Type I
or V
Used for extreme conditions.
Intended for commercial users.
Type II
Type V
Type III
Type I
Type IV


CANOEING 19
.Safety and First Aid
Besides the buoyancy level, the label will show the ability
of the life jacket to turn an unconscious person from floating
face down to floating face up. The label will also indicate for
what types of water sports the life jacket should not be used.
The new labels will use icons or pictures instead of words
for the performance levels, turning ability and usage warnings:
Meaning
Has no self-turning ability
Will turn most unconscious wearers face up
Warning symbol
Do not use with towing water sports
Do not use for towing tubes
Do not use for personal watercraft
Do not use for whitewater (Class II or higher)
Before you put on a life
jacket, check that there
is a U.S. Coast Guard
approval number on it.


20 CANOEING
Safety and First Aid.
Sizing a Life Jacket
To be effective, a life jacket must be fitted
and worn properly. Make sure that all
side straps are adjusted to fit snugly, all
ties are appropriately tied, all zippers are
zipped, and all buckles are fastened. To
check the fit, perform the shoulder strap
test with a partner: Stand behind your
partner and firmly pull up both shoulder
straps. If you can pull the shoulder straps
up to ear level, your partner should
readjust the life jacket or try a different
style or size. In calm, shallow water,
test the fit of your life jacket by relaxing
your body and tilting your head back. A
properly fitted and sized life jacket will
keep your chin well above water. If this
does not occur, readjust your life jacket
or try one with a higher buoyancy rating
(found on the label).


CANOEING 21
.Safety and First Aid
Zip up and clip buckles.
Tighten buddy’s
side straps.
Life jacket is too loose.
Life jacket fits correctly. Life jacket fits snuggly;
straps stay on shoulders.
Check buddy’s
buckles and straps.


22 CANOEING
Safety and First Aid.
Common Paddling Hazards
Safe canoeing includes being aware of potential weather and
water-related hazards such as storms, wind, and waves. Always
be prepared for unexpected weather and water conditions.
Check weather advisories before starting, and know what to do
when hazardous conditions occur.
STORMS
Depending on the area and the time of year, storms can be
predicted with some regularity. However, storms can develop
at any time and with a speed that surprises even the National
Weather Service.
Once you notice an approaching storm, get off the water as
quickly as possible. Carry the canoes onto shore and use ropes
to secure them from blowing winds and large waves. If caught
in a storm, stay low and get to shore. Be prepared to bail water
out of the canoe if the rain is heavy.
If you see lightning, keep a low profile in the canoe until
you reach shore. During a lightning storm, get off and stay off
the water and away from open or exposed shorelines. On shore,
stay away from tall geographical features such as trees. Remove
your life jacket, place it on the ground, and squat on it.
Knowing the local weather patterns, such as the
direction from which storms come during certain
times of the year, will help you spot a storm before
it is upon you.
WIND AND WAVES
Wind and the waves it creates have the potential to give you
a thrilling ride or to swamp your boat. Learning about wind
and waves and the hazards they create is an essential part
of canoeing.
Wind is created when air moves from a high-pressure area
to a low-pressure area. Usually absent in the early morning, wind
increases as the rising sun heats the ground and air throughout
the late morning and early afternoon. Winds often reach maxi-
mum strength by midafternoon. By sundown, they usually sub-
side to an occasional breeze.
Waves result when wind collides with the water. A keen
eye will see the ripple effect on the water surface as a gentle
wind moves across it. As the wind increases, so will the size
Near an ocean
or a large body of
water, winds blow
toward the land
during the day and
toward the water
at night.


CANOEING 23
.Safety and First Aid
of the waves until they become frothy whitecaps. Waves can
become so big that they can easily swamp a canoe.
Always anticipate wind as part of any canoeing activity.
If you are on a canoe trip, start before the winds increase
and land before midafternoon to avoid the peak wind periods.
Paddle along the shoreline to minimize the effects of wind and
waves. Whether paddling with or against the wind, it is wise to
work your way gradually to the downwind side of an island or
point of land. If strong winds make paddling difficult, go ashore
and take a break until the winds die down enough to make
paddling safe and fun again.
When the wind starts really blowing and waves begin to
build, kneel in the canoe to keep your center of gravity low and
reduce the chances of the boat capsizing.
Do not attempt to paddle across a large lake when
strong winds are likely.
Storms result when air masses of different barometric
pressures meet. When cold, dry air meets warm, moist
air, the cold air wedges under the warm air and cools
it. As the warm, moist air cools, it condenses into rain.





CANOEING 25
.Canoes
Canoes
The canoes you learn to paddle are likely to be whatever boats
are handy—at a camp or local watercraft organization, or boats
available to your family or neighbors. As you move beyond the
basics, you might want to find a canoe that better matches your
activities on the water.
Parts of a Canoe
The body of the canoe is the hull. The front end is called
the bow, and the back end is called the stern. Each end is cov-
ered with a triangular reinforcement called a deck plate. Ropes
attached to the bow and stern are called painters. Amidships
is the midsection of the canoe. The length of a canoe spans
from the tip of the bow to the tip of the stern, and the width of
the canoe at amidships is its beam. The length of the hull that
comes in contact with the water is the waterline.
AFT AMIDSHIPS
BOW
SEAT
THWARTS THWARTS
STERN
SEAT
STERN BOW
DECK PLATE GUNWALE CENTER
LINE
BEAM
GUNWALE
FREEBOARD
WATER LINE
DRAFT
KEEL
TUMBLEHOME
DEPTH
In this pamphlet,
the first mention
of terms found
in the glossary is
shown in bold.


26 CANOEING
Canoes.
Gunwales (pronounced “gunnels”) are rails that run along
the top edge of both sides of the canoe. Gunwales add strength
to the hull and help it keep its shape. Braces, called thwarts
(pronounced “thorts”), span the width of the canoe and pro-
vide rigidity and support. Some canoes also have a small keel,
a ridge that runs the length of the bottom of the canoe along
its center line. A keel improves a canoe’s ability to travel in a
straight line but hinders its ability to turn. When you are facing
forward in your canoe, ahead is the direction in front of the
bow, and astern is the direction behind the boat.
Canoe Shape and Performance
A canoe’s dimensions affect how the canoe will perform on
water. For example, a longer waterline enhances speed and
improves tracking, the ability to go straight. A keel further
improves a canoe’s tracking ability.
LENGTH
The length of the waterline of a canoe varies depending on the
length of the hull and the shape of the canoe’s ends. Canoes
with a longer waterline glide farther and go faster with each
stroke and can carry a heavier load than a shorter boat. A
17-foot canoe on flat water would hold more cargo and go fast-
er than a 13-foot canoe. The ability of a canoe to go straight is
called tracking. Longer canoes track better than shorter boats
because they are harder to turn out of a course once in motion.
The contour of the ends of a canoe as seen from the side is
called the stem. Stems can be straight (plumb), slated (raked)
or curved inwards (recurved). The curve of the hull from bow
to stern is the rocker, like the bottom of a rocking chair. The
more curve in the rocker, the shorter the waterline. A canoe
with a lot of rocker can turn and spin easily and is suited for
whitewater paddling, which often involves quick navigation
The canoe with the longest
waterline length will have a
plumb stem and will track
better and go faster.
A raked, or slanted, stem
prevents waves from
splashing into the canoe.
A recurved stem, or one that
curves inward, gives the
canoe its traditional shape.


.Canoes
WIDTH
The width of a canoe, or its beam, mainly affects stability. Wider
canoes can carry bigger loads and are less likely to tip over. The
width of the bow also is a factor in a canoe’s performance. A
narrow, pointed bow cuts through the water like a knife. A wider,
blunt bow more easily navigates waves and deflects rocks. A
bow that is longer and narrower than the stern—asymmetrical,
or irregular in shape—will slice through the water better than a
symmetrical one, increasing the speed of the canoe.
DEPTH
The taller the sides of the canoe, the more equipment and
weight the boat can carry. More depth also prevents waves
from washing into the canoe. But taller sides mean the canoe
is more vulnerable to wind. A canoe of lesser depth resists the
wind, but it is more likely to take on water on a windy day
when the waves are choppy.
HULL SHAPE
Canoes with flat bottoms are easy to turn, allow for better side-
ways movement, and feel more stable. Canoes with rounded
bottoms are easy to lean to one side and lean back up again,
but they can feel easy to tip over. Shallow V-shaped hulls have
some characteristics of each type.
Flared sides curve outward to deflect waves. Whitewater
canoes often have flared sides. Inwardly curved sides, or tumble-
home, decrease the distance between the gunwales, making it
easier to paddle efficiently.
CANOEING 27
FLAT HULL ROUNDED HULL V-SHAPED HULL
FLARED TUMBLEHOME


28 CANOEING
Canoes.
The point of the hull where the bottom curves into the
side of the canoe is the bilge. A chine in boating refers to the
angle between the side and the bottom of the hull.
A canoe with straight sides and a flat bottom has a hard
chine with almost a 90-degree angle where the side and bottom
meet. This canoe has primary stability; that is, it does not eas-
ily tip and will stay upright if leaned over quite far. However,
once the tipping point is exceeded, the boat will easily flip over
and cannot be stopped by leaning back in the opposite direc-
tion. Aluminum canoes are good examples of boats that have
good primary stability.
A canoe with a soft chine is rounded where the side and
bottom meet and might feel unstable. This is called secondary
stability. A canoe with a soft chine and good secondary stabil-
ity is easy to lean over but can be quickly leaned back to an
upright position. Whitewater boats and canoes used in freestyle
paddling are designed to have good secondary stability so they
can be purposely leaned to help in making a turn or performing
an artistic maneuver
It is acceptable
for Scouts to use
an outrigger
canoe to fulfill
the Canoeing
merit badge
requirements.
Recreational canoes range in length from 9 feet for
a solo boat to 18 feet for a tandem boat. For most
Scouts, a 15- to 17-foot canoe is about right.


CANOEING 29
.Canoes
Canoe Care and Maintenance
Store canoes out of the water and upside down in a
covered area away from direct sunlight and extreme
heat or cold. Do not store canoes with wooden gun-
wales on the ground. To prevent damage, do not drag
a canoe across the ground or run it up onto the shore
or into trees or rocks. Make sure to wipe sand, mud,
and other debris out of the canoe after each trip, and
make repairs as needed. Oil wooden gunwales, seats,
and thwarts of a canoe at least twice a year.


RECTANGULAR
BLADE PEAR GRIP
T-GRIP
BEAVER-TAIL
BLADE
BENT-SHAFT
PADDLE
TULIP-SHAPED
BLADE
ASYMMETRICAL
GRIP
CURVED-FACE
BLADE


CANOEING 31
.Paddles
Paddles
On even the shortest canoe journey, you will lift your paddle
thousands of times, making a lightweight paddle worth plenty.
Canoe paddles are made of wood, fiberglass, metal, plastic,
or combinations of these. Shorter blades are best for shallow
rivers, while blades that are long and narrow can be quieter
and more manageable. A blade width of 7 to 8 inches is good
for beginners.
The top of the paddle, where one hand is placed, is called
the grip. The grip of your paddle should fit your hand smoothly
and comfortably. The T-grip runs parallel to the blade (forming a
T shape), giving the paddler precise control over the angle of the
blade in the water. Paddlers who do a lot of turning, especially
whitewater paddlers, prefer the T-grip. The pear grip looks like
an upside-down pear on the end of the paddle. It is larger than
a T-grip and allows for different hand placements. Symmetrical
(looks the same on both sides) pear grips can be flipped over so
that either side of the paddle blade can be used. Asymmetrical
(each side looks different) pear grips are molded to fit the
curve of the palm to improve comfort and help reduce fatigue.
Flatwater paddlers usually prefer a pear grip.
Below the grip is the shaft or loom of the paddle. The
shaft may be round or oval shaped. Oval shafts can be much
more comfortable to hold onto while paddling. The throat is
where the shaft and blade join.
The blade is the wide part of the paddle that is placed into
the water. Blades have different shapes, lengths, and widths.
Paddle blades have names that describe their shapes. A beaver
tail blade has a rounded blade tip, an even width and tapers off
at the throat. The otter tail has a slightly less rounded blade tip
and is narrower at the bottom of the blade. Because these blades
are narrower, usually about 6 inches wide, they are also longer.
These blade shapes don’t catch as much water with each stroke,
which can make for less tiring and more enjoyable paddling on
extended flatwater trips.
GRIP
SHAFT
OR
LOOM
THROAT
BLADE
TIP


32 CANOEING
Paddles.
When not in use,
hang paddles
away from direct
sunlight and
extreme heat or
cold. Make sure
they have been
wiped clean.
Sizing a Paddle
The length of the paddle you need depends in large
part on the kind of canoeing you will be doing,
whether you will be sitting or kneeling in your canoe,
and whether the paddle is straight or bent. If you can,
size your paddle while you are in the canoe in paddling
position, either sitting or kneeling. Sitting or kneeling
makes a difference because it changes the height of
your torso above the waterline, and thus the length
of the paddle shaft.
Place the blade in the water up to the throat.
Keep the paddle vertical in the water while you do
this. The grip should be between your shoulder and
your chin for a proper fit.
To size a paddle while you are on land, crouch
about the height you would
be above the water if you
were kneeling or sitting in
the canoe. Put the grip on
the ground. The throat of the
paddle should be between
your shoulder and nose.
Economy paddles come in
standard sizes from 4 to
51
⁄2 feet in 1⁄2-foot increments.
More expensive paddles come
in finer increments. Proper
paddle length is a matter of
preference and feel rather
than a precise measurement.
As long as your paddle is
within a few inches of the
suggested guidelines, you
will be able to learn the strokes
properly. Before you buy a
paddle, try out a range of sizes
to see which best suits your
paddling style.


CANOEING 33
.Paddles
Rectangular shaped blades with rounded or square corners
at the bottom are usually wider and shorter. They are designed
to catch more water with each stroke. They are used when a
powerful stroke is needed such as in whitewater or in competi-
tion. Blades can also be flat or curved. A curved face
blade is more efficient for strokes like the forward stroke
but are awkward to use for turning.
The end of the blade is called the tip. The tip of a
paddle is easy to damage. To prevent damage to the tip,
never rest the paddle on its tip on the ground or use the
tip to push away from the shore or rocks. Place the tip
on top of your foot if you need to rest it somewhere.
Paddles are made of a variety of materials. For
many years, paddles were always made of wood. Today
wooden paddles are made from solid pieces of wood
or wood laminates. They can range from being plain
and inexpensive to beautiful creations using multiple
kinds of wood and can be very expensive. Most well-
made wood paddles will have a protective layer made
from a synthetic resin to prevent them from getting wet.
Inexpensive wood paddles will have a simple coat of
marine varnish that often wears off quickly and must
be revarnished frequently to prevent them from splitting
and cracking. Most paddles used by Scouts are made
with plastic blades and grips with shafts made from alu-
minum. They are moderately priced and maintenance
free and if properly cared for, will last for many years. The most
expensive paddles are made from carbon fiber and fiberglass.
They are extremely light and very strong. For any long trip or
competition, these paddles are highly preferred. Even a differ-
ence of only a few ounces in weight over a multiday trip or in a
race can provide a big advantage.
Tips on the toes,
not in the dirt





CANOEING 35
.Launching, Paddling Positions, and Landing
Launching, Paddling
Positions, and Landing
Before launching a canoe, put on your life
jacket and shoes that you won’t mind
getting wet. Team up with another
person to carry the canoe to the water.
Moving the Canoe
From Rack or Trailer
Step 1—Face your paddling partner
on opposite ends of the upside-down
canoe. Place your top hand on the
keel and your bottom hand on the
deck plate. If the rack is permanent
and has one level, turn the boat
over and rest it on the rack before
removing it. If the rack is on a trailer,
lift the canoe up and move it clear
of the rack.
Step 2—Decide in advance which
way you will turn the canoe, then
turn it over while holding on to
it and without letting it touch the
ground. If the canoe is too heavy
to turn safely in the air, set it on the
ground upside down and turn it over.
Step 3—From opposite sides,
carry the canoe by the deck
plates or handles.
1
2
3


36 CANOEING
Launching, Paddling Positions, and Landing.
Launching a Canoe
Moving a canoe from where it is stored on land to where it is
to be launched and then safely getting into it requires team-
work and good communication. Most canoeing injuries take
place while entering and exiting the canoe. For this reason, you
should enter and exit the canoe only when it is completely in
the water. Never bridge a canoe by having a part of one end
above the water on the shore or dock with the other end float-
ing. A bridged canoe is unstable and stepping into one can
result in injury to the paddler or damage to the boat.
• Never enter or exit a canoe with something in your hands.
Place all equipment including paddles, pads, water contain-
ers, sunscreen, etc. in the boat before entering it. When
entering, exiting, or moving about the canoe, keep three
points of contact with the boat: your hands on opposite gun-
wales while moving one foot at a time or keeping your feet
in one place while moving your hands along the gunwales.
• Never stand in a canoe without three points of contact. Bend
over and stay low as you move, keeping your center of grav-
ity low. This will help prevent you from losing your balance
as you move around in the boat and tip over the canoe.
• Never launch when part of the canoe is on the shore. The
canoe must be floating when you enter it and remain floating
after both paddlers are situated. Avoid contact between the
bottom of the canoe and rocks, gravel, and sand because it
can wear away the bottom of any canoe.
Tandem Perpendicular Launch
On a sloping shore or beach, the easiest and most stable
way to launch the canoe is stern first at a right angle, or per-
pendicular, to the shore. After carrying the canoe to the water’s
Enter, exit, or
move about the
canoe only when
both hands are
free of equipment
or gear.


CANOEING 37
.Launching and Landing..Launching, Paddling Positions, and Landing
edge with one paddler holding the bow and the other holding
the stern, each paddler moves toward the middle of the canoe
while holding on to the gunwales and walking hand-over-hand
along the gunwales until they are facing each other. The canoe
should not touch the ground. They walk to the shoreline and
hand-over-hand slide the canoe into the water, stern first, until
the boat is floating and the bow is at the water’s edge.
If the paddlers do not have the strength to hold the canoe
while walking hand-over-hand to the middle, they can carefully
set the boat down at the water’s edge, walk to the middle of the
canoe and pick it up by the gunwales. They can then place the
canoe stern first into the water by moving hand-over-hand until
the canoe floats free. Before anyone enters the canoe, the tip of
the bow must be at the edge of the water.
When paddling tandem, only one paddler moves at
a time. Having one paddler stabilize the canoe while
the other moves is an easy way to prevent accidents.
Once in the canoe, one paddler can use a paddle to
keep the boat steady while the other paddler enters,
exits, or moves about the canoe.
Step 1—The bow paddler
steadies the bow with his
or her knees while holding
on to the bow deck plate.
Step 2—With his or
her paddle already in the
canoe, the stern paddler
steps into the boat on the
center line, facing the bow,
then backs up to the stern
and sits or kneels, keeping
three points of contact.
1
2


38 CANOEING
Launching, Paddling Positions, and Landing.
Step 3—To steady the boat, the stern
paddler places his or her paddle in the
water up to the throat and holds the paddle
shaft against the side of the canoe, locking
the thumb of the shaft hand over the gun-
wale. The paddle blade should be parallel
to the side of the boat to reduce side-to-
side movement of the boat.
Step 4—Facing the stern paddler, the bow
paddler uses three points of contact and
moves to the middle of the canoe until the
bow floats off the shore, then turns around
and moves to the bow paddling position.
Step 5—As the bow floats free, the stern
paddler backstrokes to move the canoe away
from the shoreline and the bow paddler moves
forward to his or her paddling position.
If you are launching into a current or wind,
or if a turn would be difficult after launch, a
bow-first launch might be appropriate. The
same procedure as with the stern-first launch
is followed, except that the bow paddler
enters the boat first, facing the bow. Once
the bow paddler is settled, the stern pad-
dler enters from the water’s edge and moves
amidships, allowing the stern to float free of
the shore. After the bow paddler has moved
the canoe forward a few feet, the stern pad-
dler can back up to paddling position.
Tandem Parallel Launch
When launching from a dock, riverbank, or lakeshore with a sharp
drop off, the canoe should be parallel instead of perpendicular to
the launch site. If standing on a dock or riverbank, place the canoe
in the water just as you would for a stern-first launch. Standing
amidships and facing your paddling partner, pass the canoe hand-
over-hand into the water. Bring the canoe parallel to the dock or
shore and place the paddles and equipment in the boat.
While the bow paddler holds the gunwale (kneeling or sitting
if launching from a dock or shore), the stern paddler enters the
boat at amidships and using three points of contact, moves to the
stern and gets in a kneeling or sitting paddling position. Once in
3
5


CANOEING 39
..Launching, Paddling Positions, and Landing
position, the stern paddler can steady the canoe for the bow pad-
dler by placing a paddle in the water. The shaft should be vertical,
with the blade parallel to the side of the boat and the shaft held
against the side of the canoe with the thumb of the shaft hand
locked over the gunwale. The bow paddler then enters the canoe
amidship and using three points of contact and moves to the des-
ignated paddling position in the bow.
If the middle of the canoe is loaded with gear, then the bow
paddler steadies the boat by holding the gunwale amidship. The
stern paddler enters at the stern with one hand on each gunwale
and places one foot into the boat over the center line while the
other foot is on the dock or shoreline. The weight of the paddler is
then shifted onto the foot in the canoe and the other foot is moved
into the boat. The bow paddler does the same while the stern pad-
dler steadies the canoe with the paddle blade in the water and the
paddle shaft locked over the gunwale with the thumb.
Executing the
Tandem
Parallel Launch
1
654
32


40 CANOEING
Launching, Paddling Positions, and Landing.
Shallow Water Launch
If entering the canoe from shallow water, walk the canoe into
the water until the canoe is fully afloat and parallel to the
shore. Be sure to load all equipment, including paddles, in the
boat before putting it in the water. The water should be deep
enough that the canoe will float with both paddlers in it but
not so deep that it is difficult to raise a foot and put it in the
canoe. One paddler should steady the boat while the other
gets into position by stepping carefully onto the centerline of
the boat. The first person in the boat then steadies the boat
while the second person gets into position. If there is current,
carefully consider which direction to point the boat, and who
enters first. It is usually easier to point the boat downstream
and the bow paddler enters the boat before the stern paddler.
When launching
from a dock or
bank, place each
hand on top of
the paddle shaft
where it touches
each gunwale.
Lock your
thumbs around
the paddle shaft
and hold onto
the gunwales
with your fingers.


CANOEING 41
..Launching, Paddling Positions, and Landing
Paddling Positions
Good position and body mechanics lead to effective paddling.
Sitting Position
Canoes usually come with seats in the bow and stern.
Consequently, the paddling position most commonly assumed
by new paddlers in a canoe is a sitting one. This position is
generally the most comfortable for long paddle trips. The legs
should be extended in front of the paddler. When the legs
are flexed at the knees and the knees are lifted, they interfere
with the normal arm movements of the forward stroke. The
lower the seats in the boat, the more stable the seated position
becomes. The sitting position is appropriate for quiet water con-
ditions. However, if there are winds and waves, then a kneeling
position is the safest and most stable position in the canoe.
While paddling in the sitting position, sit up straight and do not bend forward.


42 CANOEING
Launching, Paddling Positions, and Landing.
The cruising
position is the
most stable
kneeling
position and
it lends the
most power
to a variety of
strokes.
Kneeling Position
In the kneeling position, the paddler’s center of gravity is
lower than in the seated position. This puts the paddler in a
more stable position in the boat. When kneeling in the canoe,
the paddler should sit up straight with their buttocks leaning
against the seat or thwart behind them. Avoid kneeling with the
back and upper legs in alignment. The body should be slightly
shifted to the paddling side of the paddler so the knee is in the
curved part of the hull. A kneeling cushion or pad of closed
cell foam is almost always needed for the kneels even for short
trips. Some canoes are not designed for the kneeling position
with little room under the seat for the feet and lower legs. In
these canoes, avoid getting the legs entangled by using only the
sitting position.
A well-designed
canoe will have
seats positioned
to provide com-
fort along with
reasonable sta-
bility. In some
designs, your feet
may be tucked
under the seat.
In other designs,
that might be
awkward or risk
entanglement.


CANOEING 43
Launching, Paddling Positions, and Landing
Relief Position
Paddling in the kneeling position for extended periods of time
can be uncomfortable for the knees and legs. An alternative
position to either the full sitting or kneeling positions is the
relief position. In this position the knee opposite the paddling
side may be raised with the leg extended forward.
In the relief position, kneel on the knee closest to the paddling
side and wedge it into the bilge. Extend the other leg in front of
you, keeping the knee slightly bent.
Whether you canoe with a partner or alone,
either kneel in the canoe or sit solidly on a seat
for stability and more efficient paddling. Think of
yourself as part of the canoe, locked in place.


44 CANOEING
Launching, Paddling Positions, and Landing.
Landing a Canoe
Land a canoe by reversing the steps you took to launch it.
Tandem Perpendicular Landing
Bring the canoe perpendicular to the shore with the bow at the
water’s edge. No part of the canoe should be resting on the
shore. While the stern paddler stabilizes the boat in the stern
with the paddle, the bow paddler should step out of the boat
onto land. The canoe should remain fully afloat during this
process. The bow paddler should exit first and stabilize the
boat by holding the bow with their hands and between their
knees. The stern paddler stows the paddle in the bottom of the
canoe, moves to the bow using three points of contact, and
steps onto the shore.
If the boat is going to be moved to a location for storage,
remove paddles and gear before carrying the canoe onto land.
Facing each other on opposite sides of the canoe, the paddlers
should lift the bow of the canoe by the gunwales and walk
toward the middle of the canoe while moving hand over hand
on the gunwales. Once they are amidships, the boat is carried
away from the water. When the canoe is completely clear of
the water, the paddlers move back to their respective ends
while holding on to the gunwales and walking hand-over-hand
until they reach the bow and stern. The paddlers can then
carry the boat to its desired location without the bottom of the
canoe ever touching the ground.
If the paddlers do not have the upper body strength to
walk hand-over-hand to the ends of the boat, they may put
the boat on the ground, go to the bow and stern, and carry the
boat by its handles or deck plates.
When landing,
do not drive the
canoe up onto
shore. Over time,
this will cause
the bottom of the
bow to wear all
the way through
the hull.


CANOEING 45
..Launching, Paddling Positions, and Landing
Tandem Parallel Landing
When landing a canoe against a dock or a bank, or in shallow
water, bring the canoe parallel to the shore or dock. Using an
appropriate combination of strokes, e.g. draws and pusha-
ways, bring the side of the canoe next to the landing site.
The stern paddler stabilizes the boat by holding on to the
dock or bank, or by keeping the paddle in a locked vertical
position on the opposite side. The bow paddler stows her or
his paddle and backs up to amidships. Holding on to the gun-
wales, the paddler puts one foot ashore or into shallow water
and exits by shifting weight to the landed foot.
Once out of the boat, the bow paddler turns to steady the
canoe by holding on to the gunwales for the stern paddler.
The stern paddler stows his or her paddle, moves amidships,
and exits just as the bow paddler did. Both paddlers can lift
out the boat by the gunwales or turn it so it is perpendicular
and lift it out as though they had landed on the shore.
1 2 3
4
5





CANOEING 47
.Paddling Tandem and Maneuvers
Paddling Tandem
and Maneuvers
Tandem paddling provides Scouts with the opportunity to
learn to work together in ways that complement each other.
There are two paddling positions in the canoe, the bow and
stern positions. Using the same stroke but in different paddling
positions can make the boat perform differently. Tandem
paddling requires learning both positions so that the two
paddlers can work together to produce the desired result, e.g.
going straight, pivoting, moving sideways.
Good Communication
Good communication is essential for effective tandem
paddling. This communication can be both verbal and
nonverbal. Usually the stern paddler, gives the verbal
commands to paddle such as “paddle ahead,” “hold water”,
“curve to the onside,” etc. If the bow paddler wants to slow the
pace, the bow paddler simply slows the rhythm and the stern
paddler follows suit without having to say a word. Initially,
until both paddlers
have more experience
with each other, an
overabundance of
verbal communication
is required.
The two paddling
positions, bow and
stern, share common
roles as well as have
some important
differences. Because
the bow paddler
cannot see the stern
paddler, the bow
Paddling Commands
Ready?: Asks if the other paddler is ready to start
Paddle ahead: Move the canoe forward
Paddle back: Move the canoe backward
Hold water: Brake the canoe, stop it from moving
Let it run: Stop paddling and let the boat coast
Move abeam: Move sideways
Pivot to the onside: Spin the boat to the paddling
side of the bow paddler.
Curve to the offside: Paddle in a curved path
away from the paddling side of the bow paddler


48 CANOEING
Paddling Tandem and Maneuvers.
paddler sets the pace of the strokes that are used in each
maneuver. If the bow paddler wants to slow the pace, they
can do so without having to verbalize it to their stern partner.
However, if the stern paddler wants to change the pace, this
will have to be communicated verbally.
Usually, the stern paddler does not specify which strokes
the bow paddler will use when a command is given for a
specific maneuver. Rather, the bow paddler chooses the most
appropriate stroke for the conditions and the stern paddler
follows with the appropriate, complimentary stroke. This is
usually done without any verbal communication.
Synergy: Paddling in Unison
One of the most important principles of tandem paddling is
“synergy.” Synergy means both paddlers performing their
strokes together at exactly the same time which produces a
combined effect that is greater than the individual strokes
performed separately. Thus, the stern paddler is constantly
watching the bow paddler who sets the pace of the strokes.
Each phase of each stroke should be matched identically. This
includes power and turning strokes.
Paddling on Opposite Sides
Kayakers use double-bladed paddles to paddle on one side and
then the other. The effects of a stroke on one side is countered
by the effects on the other side. Canoeists use single-bladed
paddles. Instead of switching sides as solo kayakers do, tandem
paddlers in a canoe paddle on only one side and their partner
paddles on the opposite side. It is essential then for tandem
paddlers in a canoe to pick one side and only paddle on that


CANOEING 49
.Paddling Tandem and Maneuvers
side. Switching sides should only be done when it is agreed
that both paddlers will switch, as commonly happens when
the muscles on the paddling side get tired.
Effective Paddling
Mechanics
Each paddling stroke can be
divided into three phases in a
specific order. Think CRP:
Catch: When the paddle
blade is placed in the water
and pressure is applied by
the upper-body muscles so
that a resistance is felt.
Power: Energy is
transferred from the muscles
to the paddle. This is met by
the resistance of the water.
This transfer should be
done as rapidly as possible
to produce the greatest
movement. Think of this
part of the stroke as planting
the blade in the water and
pulling the canoe toward it.
Recovery: The paddle is
returned to the catch position
using the least amount of
energy and as slowly as
needed to give muscles an
opportunity to relax and
recover until the next stroke
begins.
Paddle Blade Position:
Vertical
To generate the most power
during a canoe stroke it is
important to keep the paddle
blade as vertical as possible
to the water for the forward, back, draw and pushaway strokes
and as horizontal as possible for the forward and reverse
sweeps strokes. The blade should kept as perpendicular to
the water as possible for the longest period of time possible.
Power
Recovery
Catch


50 CANOEING
Paddling Tandem and Maneuvers.
This principle is based on the law of physics that states that
for every action there is an equal and opposite reaction.
The greater the angle of the paddle blade is from being
perpendicular to the water, the less power there will be directed
toward moving canoe in the desired direction.
Maintain good posture. Sitting straight will allow you
to balance the boat more easily and to use your muscles more
efficiently. Avoid hunching or leaning forward and overreaching
with your arms, especially in the forward stroke.
Center your body over the boat. Keeping your head over
your upper torso where your center of mass (CM) is located
above the boat’s center of buoyancy (CB) will help keep the
boat balanced. Even when sitting or kneeling close to the side
of the boat, you can still maintain good balance by following
this principle.
Left: Paddle shaft vertical, top
hand directly above the lower hand.
Above: Paddle shafts vertical,
hands stacked.
Sitting up with good posture,
leaning back against the seat.
Avoid leaning forward.


CANOEING 51
.Paddling Tandem and Maneuvers
Paddle in the box. Imagine a box about as wide
as your shoulders, as high as the top of your head, and
as low as the top of the gunwales. It extends forward
from your back to as far as your arms will reach while
keeping good posture. Keeping your hands and arms
in this box while you paddle will help prevent muscle
strain and help you use the larger muscle groups of
your abdomen, shoulders, and back to power your
strokes. It is also the safest way to paddle because
staying in the box protects your shoulder joints from
being put in unstable positions.
Rotate from the waist. If you rotate your upper
body to perform each stroke, the large, strong muscles
of the torso will power the stroke and prevent fatigue.
As you paddle, imagine your torso twisting around your
backbone. Following the paddle blade with your eyes
will help you learn to rotate your torso through each
stroke.
Course Direction is a Team Effort
The paddler in the stern position is better able to steer the
canoe since the stern paddler is closer to the pivot point of the
boat. That is why the J-stroke and Thumb-down rudder stroke
are only performed in the stern. However, the bow paddler can
also affect the direction of the canoe by making continuous
course corrections with either the forward sweep and the draw
stoke in concert with the stern paddler.
Maneuvers
There are seven required tandem maneuvers for the Canoeing
merit badge:
• Moving sideways to both sides.
• Pivoting or spinning in both directions
• Paddling forward in a straight line
• Stopping
• Paddling back
• Paddling forward along a curved line
• Turning 90 degrees while moving forward
Moving sideways (abeam) to both sides.
Moving sideways or abeam in the canoe requires the use of
the draw and pushaway strokes at the same time but using
opposite strokes in the bow and stern positions. If the bow


52 CANOEING
Paddling Tandem and Maneuvers.
paddler does a draw stroke, the stern paddler does a pushaway
and the boat moves to the onside. If the bow paddler does a
pushaway stroke, the stern paddler does a draw stroke, and the
boat moves to the offside.
Direction Bow Stern
Onside Draw stroke Pushaway stroke
Offside Pushaway stroke Draw stroke
To be effective, each paddler must perform each of the
three stroke phases at the same time with the bow paddler
taking the lead. The maneuver should be done slowly and in a
controlled fashion using a minimum of strokes.
Draw stroke moves the canoe toward the side of the paddler:
• The paddler rotates their body 60-90 degrees from the front
of the boat. Shoulders are parallel to the gunwale.
• For the catch, arms are fully and equally extended over the
water with the hands stacked one above the other on the
grip and paddle shaft. The blade should not be angled, and
the paddle shaft should be vertical to the water. Grip hand
should be no higher than shoulder level. Insert the blade
into the water until it is fully submerged to the throat.
• The power phase is made by the torso muscles drawing
the canoe toward the point in the water where the paddle
is planted. The power phase is an accelerated motion.
• For flatwater conditions, an in-water recovery is
preferred with the paddle blade remaining in the water.
In whitewater, an out-of-water recovery is used if there
Moving abeam—onside. Moves
the boat sideways toward the
bow paddler’s paddling side.
STERN—
PUSHAWAY
BOW—
DRAW


CANOEING 53
is a chance of the blade hitting obstacles under the water.
The in-water recovery begins with the paddle reaching the
side of the canoe. The grip hand rotates the paddle shaft
and blade 90 degrees so the grip thumb is pointing away
from the paddler. The paddle blade is perpendicular to the
side of the canoe. The hands move away from the canoe
until the arms are fully extended again while keeping the
paddle shaft vertical and the grip hand directly above
the shaft hand. Finally, the grip thumb is rotated back 90
degrees, so the blade is parallel to the side of the canoe.
•
MiniMuM PerforMance criteria: Draw Stroke
Catch
• Paddler rotates 60-90 degrees toward the paddling side and faces
outward toward the water.
• Paddle shaft is vertical, and arms are fully extended when blade is
placed in water.
• Unacceptable: Paddle shaft is more than 30 degrees from a vertical
position.
• Grip hand is over the water not inside the boat; shaft hand is directly
below grip hand.
Power
• Grip hand remains directly above shaft hand until paddle blade is
next to the side of the boat. Unacceptable: Grip hand is pulled into
boat past the shoulder or in front of the face.
• Grip hand is at the level of the shoulder.
Recovery
• In-water recovery with blade at right angle to side of canoe and grip
thumb pointing away from boat.
.Paddling Tandem and Maneuvers
Draw stroke: Catch. Draw stroke: Power. Draw stroke: Recovery.


54 CANOEING
Pushaway stroke is performed in exactly the same manner as
the draw stroke but in reverse order.
• The paddler rotates their body so it is 60-90 degrees from
the front of the boat and their shoulders are as parallel to
the gunwale as possible.
• For the catch, the paddle shaft should be 90 degrees to the
water, the blade next to and parallel to the side of the boat.
The grip hand should be no higher than shoulder level.
The blade should be inserted into the water until it is fully
submerged at the level of the throat.
• The power phase is made by the upper body and arm
muscles pushing the shaft and blade away from the boat
until the arms are fully extended and the hands are directly
above and below each other on the paddle shaft. The power
phase should be performed as an accelerated motion.
• Like the pushaway stroke, an in-water recovery is
preferred. As the arms reach their maximum extension, the
grip hand rotates the paddle shaft and blade 90 degrees
so that the grip thumb is pointing toward the paddler. The
hands move toward the side of the canoe until the edge
of the blade reaches the side of the boat. Finally the grip
thumb is rotated back 90 degrees so the blade is parallel to
the side of the canoe.
Paddling Tandem and Maneuvers.
3
1
2
The stern paddler
must follow the
bow paddler while
performing the
opposite stroke
during the moving
abeam maneuver.


CANOEING 55
.Paddling Tandem and Maneuvers
Common Errors for the Draw and Pushaway Stokes
No Body Rotation: Although it is more
comfortable for the paddler to remain fac-
ing forward, this greatly limits the effective-
ness of the stroke. The more rotation the
paddler can do, the more the arms can be
extended and the longer and more efficient
the stroke will be.
Paddle Angled-Grip Hand Too High or Inside Boat: Instead
of keeping the shaft vertical, the paddler tries to
reach out too far and angles the paddle away from
the side of the boat with the top hand closer to the
boat than the hand on the shaft. This can occur
either on the entry of the paddle into the water
for the draw stroke or at the end of the pushaway
stroke. When the paddle is angled, the pressure of
the paddle on the water lifts or pushes down on the
boat instead of moving them sideways either toward
the paddle (draw stroke) or away from the paddle
(pushaway stroke).
MiniMuM PerforMance criteria: PuShaway Stroke
Catch
• Paddler rotates 60-90 degrees toward the paddling side and faces
outward toward the water.
• Paddle shaft is vertical and the blade is placed next to the side of
the boat.
• The shaft hand is directly below grip hand.
• Unacceptable: Grip hand is not out over the water and inside the
boat.
Power
• Arms fully extend keeping the paddle shaft vertical.
• Unacceptable: Paddle shaft is >30 degrees from a vertical position.
• Grip hand remains directly above shaft hand until paddle blade is
next to the side of the boat. Unacceptable: Grip hand is pulled into
boat past the shoulder or in front of the face.
• Grip hand is at the level of the shoulder.
Recovery
• In water recovery with blade at right angle to side of canoe and grip
thumb pointing away from boat


56 CANOEING
Paddling Tandem and Maneuvers.
Out-of-Water Recovery: Lifting the paddle
out of the water to recover it at the end of
the pushaway stroke when the arms are
fully extended or at the end of the power
phase of the draw stroke is wasted motion.
Instead of lifting the paddle out of the water
only to put it back in is unnecessary and
unproductive motion. The in-water recovery
is simple and a more economic use of the
arm and shoulder muscles.
Rotating the Grip Hand Incorrectly During Recovery: At the
end of the power phase of both the draw and the pushaway
strokes, the grip hand must
rotate the paddle shaft 90
degrees so that it is perpen-
dicular to the side of the
canoe. The wrist and hand
are designed to comfortably
rotate the thumb so it is
pointing away from the pad-
dler. However, it much less
flexible rotating the thumb
toward the paddler and usu-
ally requires that the entire upper arm be moved to rotate the
paddle. This is much less efficient and should be avoided.
Pivoting or Spinning in Both Directions
The strokes needed to pivot or spin the boat are a combination
of the draw or pushaway strokes or the forward and reverse
sweeps. If using the draw or pushaway strokes, both paddlers
use the same stroke. If using the forward and reverse sweeps,
the paddlers do opposite strokes. Pivots are performed either
to the onside, to the paddling side of the bow paddler or to the
offside, the opposite side on which the bow paddler is paddling.
Each paddler must perform each of the three stroke phases
at the same time, with the bow paddler taking the lead. The
maneuver should be done slowly using a minimum of strokes.
Direction Bow Stern
Onside Draw stroke Draw stroke
Offside Pushaway stroke Pushaway stroke
Onside Reverse sweep Forward sweep
Offside Forward sweep Reverse sweep


CANOEING 57
.Paddling Tandem and Maneuvers
Sweeps: Forward and Reverse
During a sweep, the paddle moves in a curved direction, about a
quarter of a circle. The goal is to make the arc as long as possible
with the blade in the water and the tip as far away from the boat
as possible. The shorter the arc, the less powerful the stroke.
Forward sweeps turn the canoe away from the paddling side;
reverse sweeps turn the boat toward the paddling side.
THE BOW FORWARD SWEEP
• The onside shoulder is rotated toward the bow.
• The grip hand is kept low, about the level of the waist, and
the shaft hand slides up the paddle shaft away from the
throat as the blade is placed alongside the bow with the
edge perpendicular to the water. This is the catch position.
• The power phase begins as the hand on the shaft pulls
the blade away from the canoe as the upper body rotates a
quarter of a circle until the paddle shaft is at a right angle
(perpendicular) to the side of the canoe. The blade is kept
under the water to the throat.
• In recovery, the blade is lifted straight up until it is just
out of the water. The grip hand turns the blade so it is
parallel to the water by pointing the thumb of the grip
hand away from the paddler. With the lower arm relaxed
and straight, the hand on the shaft swings the paddle back
toward the bow. At the bow, the grip hand rotates the
blade back into a vertical position.
Bow forward sweep
1. Catch.
2. Power.
3. End of power phase;
shaft perpendicular
to the gunwale.
4. Recovery.
21
3 4


58 CANOEING
Paddling Tandem and Maneuvers.
THE STERN FORWARD SWEEP
• Similar to the bow forward sweep except the starting and
ending points are shifted to the second quarter of a circle.
• The catch begins with the shaft perpendicular to the
canoe. The blade is placed in the water in a vertical
position up to the throat.
• The power phase starts with the lower arm straight and
the body rotating so the paddle moves toward the stern of
the canoe. The phase ends when the blade is next to the
side of the side of the boat.
• Recovery begins with the grip hand rotating the paddle
shaft so the blade is parallel to the water and the grip
thumb is pointing away from the paddler at waist level.
The lower arm is straight and swings the paddle forward
until the shaft is perpendicular to the side of the canoe.
The thumb on the grip hand turns upward until it is
pointing straight up, and the blade is vertical to the water.
Drop the blade back into the water until it is at the throat.
Stern forward sweep
1. Catch.
2. Power.
3. End of power phase;
blade next to stern.
4. Recovery with grip-
hand thumb pointing
away from paddler.
2
3
1
4


CANOEING 59
.Paddling Tandem and Maneuvers
THE BOW REVERSE SWEEP
The bow reverse sweep is the same as the bow forward sweep
but in reverse. It is rarely used in except in doing pivots.
• The catch begins with the shaft perpendicular to the side
of the canoe and the paddle blade is placed in the water
up to the throat with the blade vertical. The grip hand is
kept low, about the level of the waist.
• The power phase begins as the upper body rotates a
quarter of a circle toward the bow of the canoe until the
paddle blade is next to the side of the bow of the canoe.
The lower arm remains straight and the phase ends when
the shaft is perpendicular to the side of the canoe. The
blade is kept under the water to the throat.
MiniMuM PerforMance criteria: Bow anD Stern forwarD SweeP
Catch
• Bow: Blade and shaft are placed parallel to the side of the
canoe next to the bow.
• Stern: Paddle shaft is at right angle to side of canoe
• The paddle blade is in the water to the throat.
Power
• Grip hand is at the waist, Unacceptable if hand is in middle
of chest or in front of face.
• Shaft hand moves in a quarter circle while torso rotates.
Acceptable if shaft arm is slightly bent at elbow.
• Bow: Paddle stops when at right angle to side of canoe.
• Stern: Paddle stops when paddle blade is next to the side of
the stern.
Recovery
• Blade is recovered parallel to water.
• Grip thumb is pointing away from paddler.
Bow reverse sweep
1. Catch.
2. Power.
3. Recovery.
1 2 3


60 CANOEING
Paddling Tandem and Maneuvers.
• In recovery, the grip hand turns the blade so it is parallel
to the water by pointing the thumb of the grip hand away
from the paddler. With the lower arm relaxed and straight,
the hand on the shaft swings the paddle back toward the
bow with the blade just above the water. At the bow, the
grip hand rotates the blade back into a vertical position.
THE STERN REVERSE SWEEP
The stern reverse sweep is similar to the bow reverse sweep
except the starting point is next to the stern and the ending
point is a quarter circle from the stern toward the bow when
the paddle shaft is at a right angle to the side of the canoe.
• The catch begins with the shaft parallel to the side of the
canoe and the paddle blade is placed in the water up to the
throat with the blade vertical. The grip hand is kept low,
about the level of the waist.
• The power phase begins as the upper body rotates a
quarter of a circle from the stern toward the front of the
canoe until the paddle blade is perpendicular to the side
of the canoe. The lower arm remains straight during the
rotation of the upper body. The blade is kept under the
water to the throat.
• In recovery, the grip hand turns the blade so it is parallel
to the water by pointing the thumb of the grip hand away
from the paddler. With the lower arm relaxed and straight,
the hand on the shaft swings the paddle back toward the
stern with the blade just above the water. At the stern, the
grip hand rotates the blade back into a vertical position.
MiniMuM PerforMance criteria: Bow anD Stern reverSe SweeP
Catch
• Bow: Blade is at right angle to side of canoe
• Stern: Paddle is parallel to side of canoe next to stern.
Power
• Grip hand is at the waist
• Shaft hand moves in a quarter circle while torso rotates
• Bow: Paddle stops when the blade is next to the bow of the
canoe.
Recovery
• Blade is recovered parallel to water.


CANOEING 61
.Paddling Tandem and Maneuvers.
Common Errors for the Forward and Reverse Sweeps
Holding the
Grip Hand Too
High: When
the grip hand is
in the center of
the chest or in
front of the face,
the arc of the
paddle is greatly
reduced. The grip
hand should be
at about the level
of the gunwale.
Sweeping More Than a Quarter Circle: Since the
bow paddler is located in front of the pivot point of
the boat, doing a 180-degree sweep turns the boat
away from the paddling side for the first 90 degrees
but then pulls the boat back toward the paddling
side for the second 90 degrees. These two motions
cancel each other out. The same is true for the
stern paddler who starts at the 90-degree position
and finishes at the 180-degree position.
Grip Hand Rotates Incorrectly on Recovery: The
thumb of the grip hand should point away from the
paddler during the recovery phase so that the paddle blade
is parallel to the surface of the water as the blade is brought
back to the catch position. Although rotating the thumb in
the opposite direction toward the paddler does place the blade
parallel to the water, the wrist is not constructed to do this
without having to move the entire lower arm bending at the
elbow instead of just flexing the wrist.
D I R E C T I O N
O
F
C
A
N
O
E
Grip thumb correctly pointing away from
paddler during recovery.
Grip hand incorrectly toward
paddler during recovery.


62 CANOEING
Paddling Tandem and Maneuvers.
Paddling Forward in a Straight Line
The direction and speed of a canoe is the sum of the power,
turning and steering strokes used by the paddlers in it. To
paddle in a straight line, all Scouts must learn an effective
forward stroke combined with appropriate turning and a
steering stroke in the stern and turning strokes in the bow.
The forward stroke is called a power stroke because it is
the primary force that moves the canoe forward. An efficient
forward stroke is essential for any canoeing activity, especially
for canoe trips over long distances.
• The catch begins with the shaft and blade as vertical as
possible to the water with both the grip and paddle shaft
hands stacked one above the other. Both hands are over
the water outside of the boat. Ideally the torso is rotated
so the shoulder and arm of the paddler on the paddling
side reach forward while the opposite shoulder is rotated
back. The paddle blade is placed in the water up to the
throat with the blade vertically and without splashing.
The grip hand is kept at about the level of the shoulder.
• The power phase uses the muscles of the abdomen and
back to pull the canoe ahead toward the paddle. The
paddler should remember that water is not moving but
that the hull of the boat is sliding across the top of water.
The paddlers plant their paddles ahead of themselves in
the water and pull the boat forward to where their paddles
are located. The most important part of the power phase
is using all the muscles of the upper torso and not just the
arms. To avoid using only the muscles of the upper arm,
the paddler must keep both arms relatively straight. There
should be only a slight bend in the elbow. The power
phase ends somewhere before the paddle shaft reaches
the hip. For additional time to relax the arm and shoulder
muscles between strokes, it is acceptable to allow the
paddle blade to drift past the hip as long as there is no
pressure being applied to the blade before the recovery
phase.
• In recovery, the grip hand drops down to the waist and
turns the blade so it is parallel to the water by pointing
the thumb of the grip hand away from the paddler. With
the lower arm relaxed and straight, the hand on the shaft
swings the paddle forward toward the bow with the blade
above the water. Just before reaching the full extension
of the arms, the grip hand rotates the blade back into a
vertical position for the next stroke.


CANOEING 63
.Paddling Tandem and Maneuvers
MiniMuM PerforMance criteria: forwarD Stroke
Catch
• Paddle blade tip enters water as vertical as possible without
splashing
• Unacceptable: Paddle blade enters water more than 30
degrees off vertical
Power
• Lower arm remains straight and upper torso rotates
• Acceptable: Slight bend in elbow, minimal rotation
• Unacceptable: Pulling only with lower arm and finishing
with more than 45-degree bend at the elbow
Recovery
• Grip hand drops to waist level above the gunwale
Forward stroke
1. Entry is about
30 degrees from
vertical, top hand
is over the water,
outside the boat
about shoulder level.
2. Catch.
3. Power.
4. Recovery.
2
3
1
4


64 CANOEING
Paddling Tandem and Maneuvers.
If both paddlers simply perform forward strokes, the
canoe generally curves away from the paddling side of the
stern paddler or toward the paddling side of the bow paddler.
Instead of the two paddlers trying to alternate paddling sides,
the canoe can be kept on course and moving at a good speed if
the paddler in the stern position using a steering stroke. There
are two steering strokes that the stern paddler can use to keep
the boat on track toward the desired destination, the thumb
down rudder stroke with a stern pry or the J-stroke. The
J-stroke is preferred, but by learning the thumb down rudder
stroke with a stern pry, a paddler can more easily transition into
doing the J-stroke. If the stern paddler cannot do an efficient
J-stroke, the thumb down rudder stroke with a stern pry is a
good alternative.
THE THUMB DOWN RUDDER STROKE WITH A STERN PRY
Begin with the forward
stroke. At the end of the
power phase, the grip
(top) hand rotates the paddle shaft and blade by turning the
thumb of the top hand away and down so that the thumb is
pointing down at the water. The grip hand must turn the shaft
and blade a full 90 degrees so that the blade is now parallel to
the side of the canoe like a rudder on a ship. The stern paddler
can hold the paddle in the rudder position and steer the boat
like a ship but that leaves the bow paddler doing all of the
work to move the boat forward while the stern paddler rudders.
However, if the paddler places the shaft of the paddle
against the gunwale and makes a sharp, short pull of the
grip hand toward the boat, the stroke will move the bow of
the boat toward the paddling side of the stern paddler. To be
effective, the pry stroke must begin with blade next to the


CANOEING 65
.Paddling Tandem and Maneuvers
stern of the boat and top hand down toward the gunwale. The
stroke must be done quickly, and the blade should move only a
short distance from the side of the boat, less than a foot. Once
completed, the grip hand returns to its normal recovery position
with the thumb pointing away and the paddle blade parallel
to the water. The recovery of the paddle is identical to the
recovery of the forward stroke.
THE J-STROKE
There are several versions of the J-stroke. The J-stroke taught in
Scouting is sometimes also called a hook-J because the last part
of the stroke looks like the hook part of the letter “J.”
The J-stroke follows the same steps as the forward stroke
and the rudder stroke with the blade turning to a 90-degree
position parallel to and next to the side of the canoe. But
instead of moving the top hand in toward the boat with the
paddle shaft against the gunwale, the bottom hand pushes
the blade away from the side of the boat without the shaft
touching the canoe. This causes the bow of the boat to move
toward the paddling side of the stern paddler. The paddle blade
moves away from the side of the boat for only a short distance
similar to the stern pry and must be done very
quickly.
This allows the stroke to be done in
almost the same amount of time as the
forward stroke allowing for the two paddlers
to continue
paddling in
unison.
Rudder
stroke
position


66 CANOEING
Paddling Tandem and Maneuvers.
Common Errors for the Forward Stroke
Angling the Paddle and Reaching
Too Far Forward: Reaching too far
forward usually results in the paddle
blade entering the water at an angle
greater than 30 degrees. This results
in a force that lifts the boat instead
of pulling it forward.
Pulling Only with the Upper Arm
Muscles: Moving the paddle by
using only the biceps muscles of
the upper arm is very tiring instead
of keeping the arms straight and
rotating the upper torso. The stroke
is characterized by the elbow being
bent more than [TEXT MISSING IN
MASTER DOCUMENT]
Grip Hand is Not Above the Hand
on the Shaft During Catch and
Power Phases: Most beginner
paddlers find it unnatural and
uncomfortable to bring the grip hand
across their body to the other side
so it is directly above the hand on
the shaft instead of keeping the top
hand in front of their face or chest.
However, without correct hand
placement, the forward stroke can become a forward sweep
causing the boat to curve away from the paddling side.
Common Error for the Rudder and J-Stroke
Not Rotating the Grip Hand 90
Degrees: Rotating the grip hand 90
degrees for the rudder stroke and the
J-stroke takes some practice and at first
it can feel uncomfortable. However,
only partially rotating the paddle to a
position that is less than 90 degrees
significantly reduces the ruddering
effect of the blade making it function
more as a fin than as a rudder.


CANOEING 67
.Paddling Tandem and Maneuvers
Common Error for the Stern Pry and J-Stroke
Performing a Reverse Sweep Instead of a Pry or the Hook
of the J-Stroke: A common error made by novice paddlers in
performing either the stern pry or hook part of the J-stroke, is
to move the paddle blade an excessive distance, more than 12
inches, away from the stern as though doing a stern reverse
sweep. This greatly slows the forward motion of the canoe and
kills the synergy of the two paddlers that comes from paddling
in unison. To prevent this, the bow paddler can slow the
paddling rhythm so the stern paddler has more time to make
the corrective stroke and stern paddler can shorten the distance
the blade moves away from the side of the canoe.
Paddling in a straight line requires constant assessment
and adjustments using the turning and steering strokes by
both paddlers. First, the two paddlers should try to match the
strength of their strokes so one does not overpower the other.
If the bow paddler is overpowering the stern paddler, the canoe
will move to the opposite side of the paddling side of the
bow paddler, the offside. To correct this, the Scout in the bow
position can paddle less forcefully or the paddler in the stern
position can paddle harder. However, there are several other
ways to keep a canoe on course.
If the canoe is curving toward the offside, the side away
from the paddling side of the bow paddler, the bow paddler
can do an occasional draw stroke instead of a forward stroke to
move the bow back toward the onside. If the canoe is veering
toward the onside, the paddling side of the bow paddler, the
bow paddler can perform a forward sweep which not only
moves the canoe forward but also the bow toward the offside.
Correct rudder
position with
blade next to
the stern
Stern pry or hook of
the J-stroke: Paddle
moves short distance
from side of boat
Paddle moves less than
12 inches during stern
pry or hook of J-stroke


68 CANOEING
Paddling Tandem and Maneuvers.
In the stern position, the paddler can keep the canoe on
course with a good steering stroke. When conditions such as
winds or waves make this difficult, the stern paddler can use
the turning strokes of the draw and forward sweep like the bow
paddler to do course corrections. If the stern paddler wishes to
move the bow of the canoe to the onside, the bow paddler’s
paddling side, a forward sweep can be done instead of the
forward stroke. In the stern to move the boat toward the offside,
the opposite paddling side of the bow paddler, one or two quick
draw strokes can get the boat back on course.
Turning 90 Degrees While Moving Forward
Changing the course direction by 90 degrees can be done by a
variety of strokes but the easiest is for the bow paddler to use
one of the two turning strokes while the stern paddler continues
moving the canoe forward by using the forward stroke. Turning
toward the offside can be accomplished by the bow paddler
doing only a forward sweep. Turning to the onside can be easily
done by performing draw strokes until the course change has
been made. The stern paddler can assist by switching to only a
forward stroke with varying levels of strength or force.
Forward Course
Correction
Bow Paddler
Performs
Stern Paddler
Performs
Moving to the
offside (away
from the bow
paddler’s
paddling side)
• Weaker forward stroke
• Draw stroke
• Stronger power phase of
the steering stroke
• Weaker stern pry or
hook of the J-stroke
• Draw stroke
Moving to
the onside
(toward the
bow paddler’s
paddling side)
• Stronger forward stroke
• Forward sweep
• Weaker power phase of
the steering stroke
• Stronger stern pry or
hook of the J-stroke
To Turn… Bow Paddler
Performs
Stern Paddler
Performs
Onside (the
bow paddler’s
paddling side)
• Draw stroke
• Weaker forward stroke • Strong forward stroke only
Offside
(opposite from
bow paddler’s
paddling side)
• Forward sweep
• Stronger forward stroke • Weak forward stroke only


.Paddling Tandem and Maneuvers
Paddling Back in a Straight Line
If tandem paddlers can paddle forward in a straight line, they
are prepared to paddle back as well, using the back stroke.
In this maneuver, the roles of the two paddling positions are
reversed with the bow paddler responsible for steering.
• The catch phase stroke begins where the power phase of
the forward stroke ends. The paddle shaft is next to the
side of the paddler with the grip hand at the level of the
shoulder. The blade is at a 90-degree angle to the side of
the canoe with the water at the throat of the paddle.
• The power phase starts with the arms straight and the
torso rotated slightly backward on the paddling side.
The paddle is pushed forward with the shaft next to the
gunwale with the top hand directly over the hand on the
shaft until the arms are fully extended.
• Recovery is performed in water with the blade remaining
in the water for the entire stroke. The top hand is rotated
90 degrees, so the thumb of the grip hand is pointing
toward the paddler’s shoulder on the paddling side. With
the blade parallel to the side of the canoe, the paddle is
moved back toward its
starting position when
the shaft hand reaches
the paddler’s hip. The top
hand rotates 90 degrees
until it is perpendicular to
the side of the canoe.


70 CANOEING
Paddling Tandem and Maneuvers.
Although some paddlers lift the paddle out of the water for
the recovery, this is unnecessary unless the canoe is in shallow
water or where there are hidden obstacles like large rocks. In
those circumstances, the blade is removed from the water by
dropping the grip hand to a level just above the gunwale and
turning the grip hand so the thumb is pointing away from the
paddler. This puts the paddle blade parallel to the water. The
lower arm swings the paddle back to the hip where it is again
placed in the catch position.
To keep the canoe going straight, the bow paddler who
is now in the steering position, uses either a reverse sweep or
draw stroke to keep the canoe on course. If the boat is moving
to the offside of the bow paddler, a reverse sweep is performed.
If the boat is curving to the onside, a draw stroke is used until
the boat is straight again. During this time, the paddler in the
stern position should be doing a back stroke.
Stopping the Canoe
To stop the canoe in the water, the stem paddler gives the
command “Hold water”
and both paddlers perform
a single, strong backstroke
in unison. Focus on a
clean, deep catch, and
at the end of the power
phase, lock the arms
with the paddle shaft in
a vertical position. Don’t
recover until the canoe
has stopped. It may be
helpful to lock the thumb
of the lower hand over the
gunwale at the end of the
stroke.
Backward Course Correction Bow Paddler
Performs
Stern Paddler
Performs
Moving to the offside (away
from the bow paddler’s
paddling side)
• Reverse sweep • Reverse sweep
Moving to the onside
(toward the bow paddler’s
paddling side)
• Draw stroke
[NO TEXT IN
MASTER
DOCUMENT]


CANOEING 71
.Paddling Tandem and Maneuvers
Paddling a Figure of 8 Course
Paddling a figure of 8 course is an excellent method of
developing and demonstrating the maneuvers taught in this
merit badge. Two buoys are anchored 45-60 feet apart. The
course begins on one side of the first buoy and the paddlers
then paddle a straight course for the opposite side of the second
buoy where they then make a turn around it.
After making a 180 degree turn around the buoy, they
then paddle a straight line toward the first buoy aiming for the
opposite side from which they started. After reaching the first
buoy, the paddlers make another turn around it until they have
reached their original starting position.
Paddling a figure of 8 course should be done at typical
paddling speeds and not as an attempt to race. Paddling at
faster than normal speeds will usually result in overrunning
the buoy and then having to stop the canoe to begin the turn.
Upon reaching the buoy, the canoe should pass the buoy until
the pivot point is just past it and then begin the turn. Although
the boat can go past the buoy, stop and then can do a pivot, it
is generally easier to use a combination of sweeps and draws to
go around the buoy without having to stop.
Direction of Turn Bow Paddler
Performs
Stern Paddler
Performs
Onside • Draw stroke • Forward sweep
Offside • Forward sweep • Reverse sweep or
pushaway stroke
Use a combination of draw stroke
and forward sweep to make an
onside turn around a buoy.


72 CANOEING
Exits and Entries on the
Open Water
Sometimes, on a hot day, you might hop overboard to cool off.
Other times, you might find yourself overboard by accident. In
either case it is important to learn how to safely exit the boat
and reenter it.
Under supervision, practice in open water close to shore
in an area that has been checked for and determined free
of underwater hazards. Dress appropriately for the weather
and water temperature. Dress may range from a T-shirt and
bathing suit to a wet suit. A properly fitted life jacket is
required for each participant.
Going Overboard—Exiting the Canoe
Tandem paddlers can use the following technique. Although
tandem paddlers can time their exits so they land in the water
at the same time, it is safer to exit the canoe one person at a
time. In this way, one person always has control of the boat.


CANOEING 73
.Exits and Entries on the Open Water
Step 1—If possible, move amidships, where there is more room
to exit. However, you can exit safely from the bow and stern
as well. Stay as close as you can to the seat or thwart in front
of you to maximize the amount of free space behind you. Lean
over with a hand on each gunwale and balance on your toes.
Step 2—Place your hand on the gunwale on the side of the
canoe from which you will exit. Turn the hand that is on the side
of the boat from which you will exit so that your thumb points
toward the stern and your elbow points away from you. The
other fingers of that hand should be inside the boat and wrapped
over the inside part of the gunwale.
Step 3—Holding on to the gunwale with the hand that is turned
inward, let go of the other gunwale. Without losing your grip
on the canoe, swing your free arm around toward your back as
you turn your body and fall out of the canoe backside first. You
should land facing the opposite direction from where you started.
3
1
Exiting the canoe—going overboard
2
Never lose
contact with the
boat when going
overboard. If you
fail to hold on to
the canoe as you
go overboard, you
might go under
the water and the
canoe might drift
away from you.


74 CANOEING
Exits and Entries on the Open Water.
Reentering the Canoe
You can reenter a canoe in open water at either end of the
canoe where there is enough open space, but amidships usually
provides the most room for maneuvering. Amidships also has
the smallest freeboard, so there is less height to overcome when
pulling yourself up and over the gunwale.
Here are a few simple techniques for reentering a canoe
in open water that you can use with a partner. Practice these
techniques under supervision so you can learn how to do
them correctly.
Duck-and-Roll Reentry—When the canoe has a middle sec-
tion free of thwarts and portage yoke, the duck-and-roll reen-
try works best. At the most open section of the middle of the
canoe, place your hands inside the canoe, resting in the bilge.
Straighten your arms so that the weight of your upper body
rests on your hands and your waist is even with gunwale. Keep
your head as low as possible and lean into the canoe. Push,
kick, and lean forward until your hips are on top of the gun-
wale. Bend one arm and drop your shoulder toward the bottom
of the boat. Then roll onto your back and swing your legs into
the canoe.
Do not push
down on the
gunwale at the
point where you
are entering—
you could swamp
the boat.


CANOEING 75
.Exits and Entries on the Open Water
Arms-Across Reentry—This reentry technique can be used
when the middle of the canoe is open or when entry must be
made on the ends because the middle is blocked by equipment
or thwarts and a portage yoke. First, grab the gunwale closest
to you and bring your body up to the surface of the water. Lay
as flat as possible on the surface with your feet behind you on
top of the water. It is much easier to enter the canoe from this
horizontal position rather than trying to pull up your body from
below the water’s surface in a vertical position.
With one hand on the gunwale, rapidly reach across the
canoe with your other hand as far as you can to the opposite
side. Grab the opposite gunwale or a nearby thwart. Then do
the same with your other hand so that both hands are in front
of you. Kick and pull your body toward the opposite gunwale
until your hips rest on top of the gunwale. Roll your body over
and sit down in the canoe with your legs and feet hanging out-
side the canoe. Now bring in your feet and take your paddling
position. Avoid trying to put your knee or foot in the boat. Just
turn onto your back and sit down.
For both of these entries, the buddy paddler can assist in
several ways. If both paddlers are in the water, the paddler not
entering the boat can be positioned on the other side of the
canoe hanging onto the gunwales. If the paddler who is attempt-
ing to reenter the canoe is using the duck-and-roll technique, the
other paddler can help by leaning the canoe toward the reenter-
ing paddler and counterbalancing their weight as they pull them-
selves into the boat. If the partner is in the boat, they can do the
same by first leaning the canoe toward the entering paddler and
then leaning away to counterbalance their entry.
Arms-across reentry


76 CANOEING
Exits and Entries on the Open Water.
Simultaneous Reentry—If both paddlers are about equal in
weight and size, they can work together to enter the canoe at
the same time. First they position themselves on opposite sides
of the canoe, one slightly forward and one slightly back of amid-
ships. On signal, both of them scissor kick and push down on
the gunwale to raise themselves up to the point where their arms
are straight and their waists are even with the gunwale. If both
have done this successfully, they each simply lean forward and
duck-and-roll into the canoe. If one slips off, falls backward, or is
unable to pull up, the other should immediately drop back into
the water to prevent the canoe from capsizing.
2 3
4 5
1





A bilge pump can be a real lifesaver
when your canoe takes on water.


CANOEING 79
.Rescues and Swamping
Rescues and Swamping
Every paddler should have and know how to use basic safety
and rescue equipment. These include a sound signal device,
extra paddle, sponge, bailer, bilge pump, rescue sling, ropes
and throw bag.
Sound Signal Device—U.S. Coast Guard regulations require
that all vessels less than 26 feet long must carry a whistle,
horn, or some other mechanical sound
device. The device must be audible for
a half mile. The easiest sound device
that a paddler can carry is a whistle.
Do not get a metal whistle which can
become corroded or one with a little
ball in it that can get stuck in the whis-
tle chamber. There are several well-
made and relatively inexpensive plastic
whistles on the market. It should be
kept on a short cord in a pocket of the
lifejacket. Avoid attaching it to the out-
side of your life jacket where it can get
caught or snag on parts of the boat or other pieces of equip-
ment. In an emergency, paddlers usually blow a whistle three
times on a river or five times in coastal areas or harbors with
larger vessels. In some locations, paddlers also might blow a
whistle once to get another person’s attention or five times to
signal danger.
Sponge—A sponge can
be a useful item to have in
a canoe to soak up water
that may have splashed into
the boat or to wipe out the
inside of the boat when it
gets dirty. Tie a cord or short
rope around the sponge and
attach it to a thwart so you
can access it easily if water
gets into your boat.


80 CANOEING
.Rescues and Swamping.
Bailer—A bailer is a scoop that can be used to empty out water
out of a canoe. Bailers are not commercially available and so
they are frequently made from a large, plastic bottle or jug with
a handle such as a one-gallon bleach, liquid detergent or food
bottle. The bottom quarter of the bottle is cut away on the
same side as the handle and attached with a piece of rope or
cord inside the boat.
Bilge Pump—This hand-operated
pump can remove a large volume
of water quickly, from 5-20 gallons
per minute depending on the pump
and the operator. They can be used
any place in the boat making them
easier to use than a bailer. Be
sure that there is a hose firmly
attached to the spout from
the pump which is long
enough to pump the water
outside the canoe and
that there is flotation of some
type attached to both the pump
and the hose since both will sink if dropped
overboard.
You can make a bailer for emptying water from your
canoe by cutting the bottom off of a 1-gallon plastic
jug. Secure the bailer to your canoe with a short piece
of line, leaving no slack.
Bilge
pump


CANOEING 81
..Rescues and Swamping
Rescue Sling—A rescue sling is simply
a loop of rope that can be secured to a
thwart where it connects at the end to the
gunwale. The loop extends down into the
water where it can act as a stirrup for a
paddler’s foot as an aid in reentering the
canoe. A short piece of PVC pipe can be
added to the loop to make it easier for the
paddler to stand on.
Ropes—A rope in the canoe—in addition
to the ropes used as painters—is a good
item to have for rescues, especially if you are in moving water.
The rope should be made of polypropylene because it will float
while materials such as
cotton or nylon will sink.
It should be long enough
that you could reach a vic-
tim or boat in the water
that is at least 30 feet
away. Throwing a coiled
rope can be done in mul-
tiple ways. First the rope
needs to be secured by
the non-throwing hand.
It can be simply held in
the hand or a loop can
be made around the back
of the wrist and held in
the palm of the hand. A
permanent loop should
NEVER be made and
placed around the wrist.
The rope can be thrown either with the all the loops of rope
in the throwing hand and the loose end in the non-throwing
hand or the loops can be split between the two hands. The sec-
ond method is recommended as it is much less likely that the
rope will become tangled. When throwing the rope by the sec-
ond method, the throwing hand throws its loops first followed
immediately by the second hand holding the end of the rope.
Rescue/Throw Bag—All paddlers should carry a throw bag
and know how to use it. They allow paddlers to throw a line to
a person in distress by extending their reach by 30 or more feet.
They are available in various sizes depending on the length and
size of the rope. Bags keep the rope from becoming tangled,
Rescue sling hanging
from the thwart


82 CANOEING
.Rescues and Swamping.
ensuring it is ready for use when needed. Ropes are typically a
quarter-inch to three-eighths inch diameter and at least 50 to 70
feet long. Ropes generally are made of highly visible, brightly
colored polypropylene because it floats and is relatively inex-
pensive. Although the bag can be thrown underhand, overhand,
or sidearm, the underhand method is recommended for Scouts.
Before throwing a bag, identify a good throwing location.
Ideally, this should be on flat ground near the water’s edge,
with no obstruction or loose debris. Rescuers should be able to
move up and down the shoreline without difficulty.
To throw the bag, stand on the shoreline and:
1. Step as close to the water as possible.
2. Completely open the bag at the drawstring and pull
out about 3 feet of the rope and hold it in the non-
throwing hand about 3 feet from the end.
3. Firmly grab the edge of the bag with the hand of the
throwing arm and stand in the throwing stance with
the foot on the throwing side moved back, e.g right
hand throwers would have their left foot forward and
their right foot back.
4. Hold the rope from the bag in the opposite hand and
point it toward the target.


CANOEING 83
.Rescues and Swamping
5. Just before throwing the bag, yell “Rope, Rope, Rope”
to get the attention of the person in distress.
6. While bending at the knee of the back leg, swing the
bag back with a straight arm and a slight rotation of
the upper body.
7. Move the throwing arm and hand forward in an
underhand throwing position and release the bag
when the throwing hand is somewhere between the
waist and the level of the shoulder.
Aim the bag should so the rope lands over the
victim’s shoulder. Once the victim has caught hold of
the rope, the victim should be instructed to roll over
on their back and put the rope over their shoulder
while holding the bag to their chest. The rescuer then
hauls in the victim by pulling the rope hand-over-
hand while keeping one leg back and bracing against
the weight of the victim and the drag of the water.
If the intended target is missed, recover the bag
as quickly as possible. Although the most efficient
way to throw a rescue bag is with the rope in it, it
would take an excessive amount of time to restuff the
bag for a second throw. Consequently, the rescuer
must be ready to quickly make a second throw.
There are several ways to retrieve the bag and rapidly
make a second attempt.
1. An easy way to prepare for a sec-
ond throw is to let the rope fall
to the ground as the retrieval of
the bag is made. When the bag is
at the shoreline, pick it up with
a small amount of water in it to
provide enough weight that it can
be easily tossed again. Holding
the loose end of the rope with the
other hand, throw the bag again
toward the victim and let the rope
trail behind from the ground.
2. Another way is to pull the bag in
while coiling the rope using the
“butterfly method.” This involves
alternating the loops of rope so
the coiled rope looks like butter-
fly wings. This prevents the rope
from becoming tangled. Pinch the Method 1: A little water in the bag
will make it easier to toss.


84 CANOEING
.Rescues and Swamping.
standing end of the rope
between the thumb and
palm of the non-throwing
hand. Use the throw-
ing hand to place a “U”
shaped loop of rope about
two feet long into the non-
throwing hand, with the
loop dropping out of the
thumb side of the hand.
Next, place a similar “U”
loop so it comes out of the
pinky side of the hand.
Alternate side to side until
the rope is fully recovered.
This creates the “wings”
of the butterfly method.
Then, still holding the
loose end of the rope in the
non-throwing hand, grasp
the entire coil of rope and
empty bag and throw them
together toward the victim
using an underhand throw.
3. The rope can also be retrieved with the throwing hand
creating loops of rope in a continuous, clockwise pat-
tern and putting them in the opposite hand which is
held against the leg on the opposite side. Pinch the
standing end of the rope between the thumb and palm
of the non-throwing hand. Use the throwing hand to
Method 2: “Butterfly”
the rope to prevent
tangles upon retrieval.
Method 3: The non-throwing hand is held against the
knee and does not move.


CANOEING 85
..Rescues and Swamping
place a coil of rope into the palm of the non-throwing
hand. By only moving the throwing hand to create the
loops, they are less likely to become tangled. When
the length of the rope has been retrieved, the empty
bag and coil of rope can be thrown to the victim while
the opposite hand holds the other end of the rope.
Depending on how the rope has been coiled, the rope
may or may not become tangled. To reduce the chance
of the rope tangling, the coil can be split between the
two hands and the coils thrown one after the other
while holding on to the end of the rope with the sec-
ond throwing hand.
4. An alternative method is to gather the rope in either
the butterfly loops or clockwise loops and instead of
throwing the empty bag and loops together, throw
only the coiled rope and hold on the end of the rope
with the bag.
At no time should a loop be tied on the loose end of the
rope. This will avoid the possibility of an inexperienced rescuer
placing their hand through the loop and then not being able to
release the rope should the need arise. For this same reason, the
loose end of the rope should not be wrapped around the wrist
or hand. It would be unlikely that a rescuer would need to let
go of the loose end of the rope in the conditions in which this
merit badge is to be taught. However, this could easily occur if
the victim was in a river and the force of the current was too
strong for the rescuer to maintain hold of the rope. To avoid
being pulled into the water, the rescuer must be able to release
the loose end of the rope. More detailed discussions about using
a rescue bag in moving water or whitewater conditions can be
found in the Whitewater Merit Badge pamphlet. Regardless of
the circumstances, all paddlers should learn the correct way to
use a throw bag.
Restuffing A Throw Bag
Before restuffing the bag, inspect it to be sure that it does
not have any tears, that the knot at the outside end of the bag
is tight and that the closed cell foam disc inside the bag is
intact. The rope should be dry unless you are planning to reuse
the bag immediately. There is more than one way to restuff a
bag but the most important principle is that the rope not be
coiled but rather “stacked” into the bag. Many paddlers choose
to place the rope over their shoulder so it goes down directly
into the bag but this is a matter of personal preference.


86 CANOEING
.Rescues and Swamping.
One way to get the rope back into the bag without tangling
it, is to hold the edge of the bag with the non-throwing hand
and place the rope so it is under the palm and between the
pointer and index fingers. Grab the rope with the thumb and
pointer finger of the throwing hand and push a length of rope
the bottom of the bag. Repeat until all the rope is in the bag.
Canoe Rescue of a Conscious Swimmer
Sometimes a swimmer is beyond the reach of a rope thrown
from shore. In this case, the canoe can be used as a rescue
craft. If the canoe is going to launch from shore to rescue a
distressed swimmer, the paddlers should carry a flotation aid of
some type that can be given to the swimmer. The most conve-
nient aid would be an extra life jacket. Units on float trips may
also be in a position to rescue swimmers or boaters without a
life jacket who have been separated from their craft. In either
situation, the paddlers should approach the distressed swimmer
with vocal reassurances that they are there to help.
The rescue boat should keep a safe distance from the
swimmer while they offer assistance. At no time should the
rescue boat attempt to bring the swimmer aboard the canoe.
The rescuers should determine the exact nature of the swim-
mer’s condition and specifically what they can do to help. If
possible, throw a flotation aid to the swimmer. After the subject
has grasped the aid, or if there is no aid available, the bow pad-
dler reaches out with a paddle. Once the subject grabs hold,
the bow paddler
swings the subject
and bow together
to allow the subject
to grasp the end of
the canoe. The bow
paddler should give
clear instructions
throughout.


CANOEING 87
..Rescues and Swamping
Swamping
Every paddler manages to swamp a boat now and then. To be
prepared for this, you should intentionally capsize your craft
in calm water and practice rescues and recoveries until they
become familiar to you.
Regardless of the cause, one of the most important rules
of boating is to stay with the boat if you capsize. You are much
more likely to be seen if you stay with a swamped canoe than if
you swim away alone.
If the shore is not too far away, try to move the boat to
shallow water where you can empty it out. Otherwise, stay with
the boat until help arrives. A canoe can stay afloat even if it is
full of water. You can rest inside a swamped canoe, sitting on
the bottom and facing the same direction as your partner.
One important
boating safety
rule is “Stay
with the boat.”
Controlled Capsize
To safely capsize a canoe, sit next to your paddling
partner in the bottom of the canoe facing the same
side and with your
legs hanging over
the gunwale. Put the
arm that is closest
to your partner
on the gunwale
behind you. Put the
other hand on the
gunwale in front of
you. Rock forward
and backward until
the gunwale in front
of you goes below
the water level and
the canoe begins
to fill with water.
Keep rocking until
the canoe is full of
water.


88 CANOEING
.Rescues and Swamping.
Moving a Swamped Canoe
You can swim, tow, or paddle a swamped canoe. An empty
canoe can be paddled to shore. Sit in the bottom and use the
paddles or your arms to paddle the boat forward. Use different
combinations of forward strokes and backstrokes to turn the
boat if necessary. Back paddle well short of landing to slow the
canoe and avoid colliding with a dock or the shore.
If the canoe is full of gear and there is no place for the
paddlers to sit in the boat, one paddler can push it from the
stern using the breaststroke kick. The other paddler can pull
it from the bow using a one-arm sidestroke. The paddlers can
also tow the canoe by holding on to a bow or stern painter and
swimming side stroke together toward shore.


CANOEING 89
..Rescues and Swamping
To tow a canoe to shore, two paddlers can hold on to the same painter, either
the bow or stern, and together pull the canoe using a one-armed sidestroke.


90 CANOEING
.Rescues and Swamping.
Shallow Water Emptying
The easiest way to empty a swamped canoe is to pull the canoe
to shallow water and remove any gear that might be in the way.
Roll the canoe on its side to empty out half the water and then
turn it upside down, without lifting the
canoe out of the water, to empty out the
remaining water. Once the water is out, turn
the canoe right side up.
If you and your partner cannot lift the
canoe completely clear of the water, you can
move the canoe to shallower water where
one end of the canoe can be rested on the
shore. Stand at the other end of the canoe,
where the water is deeper. Together, turn the
canoe on its side and then completely over,
with the other end of the canoe supported
by the ground. Once emptied, turn the canoe
upright and stow the gear.
Shallow Water Capistrano Flip
The Capistrano flip usually is performed in
deep water, but it also can be done in shal-
low water. With your paddling partner, stand
in waist-deep water and turn the canoe
upside down. Squat under the gunwale and
come up into the air pocket underneath the
canoe. Facing each other and with one hand
on each gunwale, tip the canoe slightly to
one side until one gunwale is raised above
the water line and the air seal is broken.
Then stand up quickly, lifting the canoe up
and over to the side. Make sure to tip the
canoe toward the shoreline and to hold on
to it so that it does not float away.


CANOEING 91
. .Rescues and Swamping
Canoe Rescues
When using a canoe for a rescue, remember these priorities:
• The first priority in any canoe rescue is the safety of the
paddlers in the water, then their boat, and finally their
equipment.
• Approach the victims in the water cautiously, keeping their
canoe between you and them so they do not try to hold
onto your canoe and attempt to enter it.
• Call out to them and given them instructions to hold onto
their canoe and that you are there to help them.
Canoe-Over-Canoe Rescue
If paddlers capsize far from shore, a canoe-over-canoe rescue
can be used to empty a swamped canoe. Perform the rescue
quickly, especially if the water is frigid and the paddlers are
at risk of hypothermia. Ignore the free-floating gear until the
paddlers are safely back in their boat. You can retrieve the
gear later and return it to them. Before approaching the cap-
sized canoe, instruct the paddlers in the water to move to the
side of the canoe opposite the side you are going to approach.
Step 1—The rescue canoe comes alongside the capsized canoe
on the side away from paddlers in the water.
Step 2—The rescuers hold onto the capsized canoe and direct
the paddlers in the water to maintain contact with the rescue
boat and move hand over hand to the far side of the rescue
canoe with a paddler holding on to each end.
Step 3—Facing each other, the rescuers move toward the middle
of the rescue boat and kneel. Together they move capsized canoe,
so it is at right angle to rescue boat. Both rescuers will be needed
to turn the canoe over, so it is bottom up. Then the capsized boat
must be turned slightly to one side to break the air seal and the
end lifted up so it is resting on the gunwale of the rescue boat.
If the rescuers do not have enough strength to raise the
end of the canoe up to the gunwales, one of the paddlers in the
water can be sent to the opposite end of the swamped canoe
and instructed to push down on the far end of the boat while
the rescuers lift the end nearest to the rescue boat.
Step 4—Once the end of the swamped boat is resting upside
down on the gunwale of the rescue boat, the rescuers face each
other and move the canoe across the gunwales of the rescue


92 CANOEING
.Rescues and Swamping.
boat until the middle of the swamped boat is resting and bal-
ances in the middle of the rescue boat.
Step 5—When the water has drained from the boat, the two
rescuers decide on which way they will roll the capsized canoe,
so the bottom is resting on the rescue canoe’s gunwales. The
boat is then pushed back toward the side of the rescue boat
where it was first located.
Step 6—The emptied boat is
brought parallel to the rescue
boat and the paddlers are
instructed to maintain contact
with the boat and assisted in
reentering their canoe.
3
4
5
6


CANOEING 93
..Rescues and Swamping
Parallel Canoe Rescue
Step 1—The swamped canoe is brought paral-
lel, alongside the rescue boat. The paddlers in
the water are instructed to move to the oppo-
site side and ends of the rescue boat.
Step 2—Both rescuers turn and kneel in their
boat, facing the swamped canoe.
Step 3—Both rescuers reach across the
swamped canoe and take hold of the gunwales
on the side farthest from the rescue boat.
Step 4—Pulling on the gunwales of the
swamped canoe toward the gunwales of the
rescue boat, the canoe is turned so the bottom
is up and its gunwales are resting on the gun-
wales of the rescue boat.
Step 5—The rescuers then pull the swamped
canoe up on the gunwales of the rescue boat
until the gunwales on the opposite side are
completely out of the water. The canoe is held
in this position until all the water has drained
from it.
Step 6—Together at the same time, the rescu-
ers flip the canoe away from the rescue boat
while holding
on to a thwart
or to the gun-
wale of the
empty canoe.
Step 7—With
the canoe now
empty and
upright next
to the rescue
boat, it is
ready for the
paddlers in
the water to
reenter their
canoe.
1
2
3
4
55
6
7


94 CANOEING
.Rescues and Swamping.
Reentering after Rescue
The heel-hook assisted reentry requires less upper-body
strength and flexibility of a tired paddler who is overboard but
it can only be done with the assistance of another canoe and its
paddlers.
Step 1—Bring the empty canoe next to the side of the buddy
boat.
Step 2—Have the paddler in the water float on their back and
hold on to the gunwale. The buddy boat paddlers raise the
nearest gunwale of the empty canoe so the gunwale closest to
the paddler is just above the water.
Step 3—The paddler in the water rolls toward the lowered
gunwale and places their outside leg inside the canoe, under
a thwart, and rolls onto the gunwale without pushing it down
under the water. At the same time, the paddler extends their
arm farthest from the boat, and reaches toward the paddlers in
the other boat. They clasp the paddler’s hand and forearm. If
the paddler in the buddy boat cannot reach the hand and arm
of the paddler in the water, the paddler in the water should
grab the seat or thwart as far across the canoe as possible.
Step 4—Once the paddler in the water has completed steps 2
and 3, the buddy boat paddlers say, “Roll into the canoe on the
count of three.” On “three,” the paddler straightens their leg,
lets go of the rescuers arm, and rolls into the canoe while at the
same time the buddy boat paddlers push down on the boat’s
gunwales closest to them. This will help lever the paddler into
the boat.
Step 5—The paddler should continue to roll into the canoe
until they are sitting on the bottom of the canoe. If a second
paddler needs to reenter the craft, the process is repeated, with
the first paddler kneeling in the canoe and assisting in the
boat’s stability.


CANOEING 95
..Rescues and Swamping
Between-the-Boat Reentry
Another method to reenter a canoe
from the water is to use the buddy
boat.
Step 1—The paddlers in the buddy
boat bring the two canoes together
while the paddler in the water lies on
their back between the two canoes.
The paddler in the water then grabs
the gunwale on the right with the right
hand and the gunwale on the left with
the left hand.
Step 2—The paddler in the water then
places the right foot and right lower leg
in the canoe on the right, and the left
foot and left lower leg in the canoe on
the left.
Step 3—Pulling up between the
canoes, the paddler uses their arms and
legs to lift themselves out of the water.
Step 4—After the paddler’s body has
reached the level of the gunwales, they
shift their weight to their legs and feet
and begins to stand with a foot in each
canoe.
Step 5—Once the paddler has risen to
a low standing position, they step into
their own canoe and settles into a pad-
dling position.
1
2
3
5 4


96 CANOEING
.Rescues and Swamping.
Reentry Using a Rescue Sling
A simple device to assist a paddler in reentering his or her
canoe is a rescue
sling. The sling can
be made from a loop
of rope or webbing.
The loop should be
long enough so that
the end in the water
is just below the
bottom of the canoe.
In this position, the
rescue sling is like a
stirrup on a saddle.
Step 1—Attach
the rescue sling
to a thwart or the
end of a paddle
in the middle of
the canoe. The
opposite side of the
canoe is balanced
by the paddlers in
the buddy boat, a
paddler in the water
on the opposite side,
or the paddler in
the boat leaning the
other way.
Step 2—The paddler
places a foot in
the loop and puts
both hands on the
gunwales.
Step 3—The paddler
steps down on the
rescue sling and
pulls themself up.
Once they are out of
the water, they can
reach across the boat
and use the arms-across reentry or enter the canoe using the
duck-and-roll reentry technique.
1
2
3





98 CANOEING
Canoeing Terms.
Canoeing Terms
abeam. The direction that is perpendicular, or at a right angle,
to the center line.
ahead. The direction in front of the bow.
amidships. The middle section of a canoe.
astern. The direction aft, or behind, the canoe.
bailer. A scoop used to empty water from the canoe.
beam. The canoe’s width at the widest point.
bilge. The part along the hull of a canoe where the bottom
curves into the side. Sometimes confused with chine, which is a
seam line between flat portions of a hull.
catch. The phase of a paddle stroke during which the paddle is
placed into the water.
chine. The angle between the bottom and side of the canoe.
deck plate. A triangular reinforcement that overlays the
gunwales at each end of the canoe.
feather. Turning the paddle sideways, so that its edge leads
first, to reduce wind resistance during the recovery phase of
a paddle stroke.
flare. The outwardly curved sides of a canoe. Flared sides more
easily deflect waves.
freeboard. The distance between the surface of the water
and the gunwales.


CANOEING 99
.Canoeing Terms
grip. The top of the paddle, where one hand is placed. A T-grip
is shaped like a T and allows for precise control of the paddle.
A pear grip is shaped to fit in the curve of the palm to improve
comfort when paddling.
gunwales. The rails that run along the top edge of both sides
of the canoe.
keel. A ridge that runs along the center line of the bottom
of a canoe.
offside. For solo paddlers, the opposite side from the paddling
side. Or, in tandem paddling, the side opposite from the
bow paddler.
onside. The solo or bow paddler’s paddling side.
painters. The lines attached to a canoe’s bow and stern.
port. The left side of the boat.
portage yoke. A detachable or built-in shoulder frame for
carrying a canoe.
primary stability. The ability of a canoe to stay steady and
not tip. The flatter and wider the bottom of the canoe, the more
primary stability the canoe has.
recovery. The phase of a paddle stroke when the paddle blade
exits the water and moves toward the catch position.
rocker. The curve of the hull from the bow to the stern.
The more curve in the rocker, the shorter the waterline length
of the canoe.
secondary stability. The ability of a canoe to return upright
when leaned to the side.
starboard. The right side of the boat.
stem. The vertical portion of the center line where the sides
come together at the canoe’s bow and stern. A plumb stem
is straight, a raked stem is slanted, and a recurved stem
curves inward.
tracking. The ability of a canoe to travel straight.
thwart. A brace that spans the gunwales and gives rigidity and
support to the canoe.
trim. The horizontal position of a canoe in the water when it is
balanced from end to end and side to side.
tumblehome. The inward curve of a boat’s sides; narrows the
distance between the gunwales without affecting the width of
the canoe, making it easier to paddle.
waterline. The boundary along the hull between air and water.


100 CANOEING
Canoeing Resources.
Scouting Literature
Basic Illustrated Canoe Paddling; Basic
Illustrated Canoeing; Deck of First Aid;
Emergency First Aid pocket guide;
Scouts BSA handbooks and Fieldbook;
First Aid, Kayaking, Rowing, Small-
Boat Sailing, and Whitewater merit
badge pamphlets
With your parent’s permission,
visit Scouting America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org,
for a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.
Books
American Canoe Association.
Introduction to Paddling.
Menasha Ridge Press, 1996.
American Canoe Association; Dillon,
Pamela S. and Oyen, Jeremy, eds.
Canoeing: Outdoor Adventures.
Human Kinetics, 2008.
McGuffin, Gary and McGuffin,
Joanie. Paddle Your Own Canoe:
An Illustrated Guide to the Art of
Canoeing. Boston Mills Press, 2003.
Westwood, Andrew. Canoeing The
Essential Skills & Safety: An Essential
Guide—The Essential Skills and
Safety. The Heliconia Press, 2012.
Organizations and Websites
American Canoe Association
P.O. Box 7996
Fredericksburg, VA 22404-7996
Telephone: 540-907-4460
www.americancanoe.org
American Whitewater
P.O. Box 1540
Cullowhee, NC 28723
Telephone: 866-262-8429
www.americanwhitewater.org
United States Canoe Association
www.uscanoe.com
Canoeing Resources
Scouting
Canoe Adventures
The Northern Tier National
High Adventure Base offers
wilderness treks through
Minnesota and Canada.
Information is available at
www.ntier.org. Several local
councils offer high-adventure
canoe treks and whitewater
experiences.


CANOEING 101
.Canoeing Resources
Acknowledgments
This edition of the Canoeing merit
badge pamphlet culminates more than
30 years of writing and editorship by
Richard Thomas in the three previous
editions of the merit badge as the
National Aquatics Subcommittee lead
subject-matter expert on canoeing and
other paddle sports. Besides being an
aquatics instructor, council aquatics
committee chairman, and camp aquatics
director, he has spent many years as an
ACA canoeing instructor and instructor
trainer. For this edition, he gratefully
acknowledges the contributions and
support of Robin Pope, Lynn Brennard,
John Brennard, David Bell, and Cal
Banning.
Scouting America also recognizes
the significant contributions made
to canoeing by the American Canoe
Association in terms of safety,
paddling technique, and teaching. The
information contained in this pamphlet
is consistent with American Canoe
Association curriculum and safety
training.
Scouting America has a long and
proud canoeing tradition. Many of the
early pioneers in safety and canoeing
instruction were staff members and
volunteer Scouters. Scouting America
acknowledges the contributions of
these pioneers to canoeing and to this
pamphlet: Fred C. Mills, W. Van B.
Claussen, Dr. John B. May, and Ernest F.
Schmidt. Recognition is also given to a
previous author of this pamphlet,
K. Gregory Tucker.
Scouting America is grateful to
the men and women serving on the
National Merit Badge Subcommittee for
the improvements made in updating this
pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration Credits
All photos and illustrations are the
property of or are protected by
Scouting America.
David Bell, courtesy—page 18 (Type I;
Type V)
Dan Bryant—cover (bags; Type III life
jacket); pages 13, 18 (Type III), and
30-31 (paddles)
Charles Kilbourn—page 97
John McDearmon—all illustrations
Brian Payne—pages 18 (Type II; Type
IV), 35-38, 41, 44, 72-76, 87, 88, 90,
and 92
Randy Piland—pages 32, 46, 49, 70, 76,
93, 95, and 96
Michael Roytek—page 77
Richard Thomas—pages 21, 39, 45, 48,
50, 53, 55-59, 63-67, 69, 71, and 78


102 CANOEING
Notes.


CANOEING 103
.Notes


Find more merit
badge ideas in
Subscribe today at go.scoutlife.org/subscribe
Use promo code SLMBP15 to get a special
print + digital bundle offer.
Special Scout Rate!