CANOEING

BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES

CANOEING

“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”

Canoeing
1. Do the following:
(a) Explain to your counselor the most likely hazards you may encounter
while participating in canoeing activities and what you should do to anticipate, help prevent, mitigate, and respond to these hazards.
(b) Review prevention, symptoms, and first-aid treatment for the following
injuries or illnesses that could occur while canoeing: blisters, cold-water
shock and hypothermia, dehydration, heat-related illnesses, sunburn, sprains,
and strains.
(c) Discuss the BSA Safety Afloat policy. Tell how it applies to canoeing activities.
2. Before doing the following requirements, successfully complete the BSA
swimmer test: Jump feetfirst into water over the head in depth. Level off and
swim 75 yards in a strong manner using one or more of the following strokes:
sidestroke, breaststroke, trudgen, or crawl; then swim 25 yards using an easy,
resting backstroke. The 100 yards must be completed in one swim without
stops and must include at least one sharp turn. After completing the swim,
rest by floating.
3. Do the following:
(a) Name and point out the major parts of a canoe.
(b) Describe how the length and shape of a canoe affect its performance.
(c) Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of the different materials used
to make canoes.

4. Do the following:
(a) Name and point out the parts of a paddle. Explain the difference between
a straight and bent-shaft paddle and when each is best used.
(b) Demonstrate how to size correctly a paddle for a paddler in a sitting
position and a kneeling position.
5. Do the following:
(a) Discuss with your counselor the characteristics of life jackets most
appropriate for canoeing and tell why a life jacket must always be worn
while paddling.
(b) Demonstrate how to select and properly fit the correct size life jacket.
6. Discuss with your counselor the general care and maintenance of canoes,
paddles, and other canoeing equipment.
7. Do the following:
(a) Discuss what personal and group equipment would be appropriate for a
canoe camping trip. Describe how personal and group equipment can be
packed and protected from water.
(b) Using the containers and packs from requirement 7a, demonstrate how to
load and secure the containers and other equipment in the canoe.
(c) Using appropriate knots, including a trucker’s hitch, tautline hitch, and
bowline, demonstrate how to secure a canoe to a vehicle or a trailer, or if
these are not available, a rack on land.
8. With a companion, use a properly equipped canoe to demonstrate the following:
(a) Safely carry and launch the canoe from a dock or shore (both, if possible).
(b) Safely land the canoe on a dock or shore (both, if possible) and return it
to its proper storage location.
(c) Demonstrate kneeling and sitting positions in a canoe and explain the
proper use for each position.
(d) Change places while afloat in the canoe.
9. With a companion, use a properly equipped canoe to demonstrate the following:
(a) In deep water, exit the canoe and get back in without capsizing.
(b) Safely perform a controlled capsize of the canoe and demonstrate how
staying with a capsized canoe will support both paddlers.
(c) Swim, tow, or push a swamped canoe 50 feet to shallow water. In the
shallow water, empty the swamped canoe and reenter it.
(d) In deep water, rescue a swamped canoe and its paddlers by emptying
the swamped canoe and helping the paddlers safely reenter their boat
without capsizing.

10. With a companion, use a properly equipped canoe to demonstrate the following
paddling strokes as both a bow and stern paddler:
(a) Forward stroke
(b) Backstroke
(c) Draw
For stern paddling only:
(d) J-stroke
(e) Pushaway
(f) Forward sweep
(g) Reverse sweep
(h) Rudder stroke
(i) Stern pry
11. Using the strokes in requirement 10, and in an order determined by your
counselor, use a properly equipped canoe to demonstrate the following tandem
maneuvers while paddling on opposite sides and without changing sides. Each
paddler must demonstrate these maneuvers in both the bow and stern and on
opposite paddling sides:
(a) Pivot or spin the canoe in either direction.
(b) Move the canoe sideways or abeam in either direction.
(c) Stop the canoe.
(d) Move the canoe in a straight line for 50 yards.
12. Use a properly equipped canoe to demonstrate solo canoe handling:
(a) Launch from shore or a pier (both, if possible).
(b) Using a single-blade paddle and paddling only on one side, demonstrate
proper form and use of the forward stroke, backstroke, draw stroke, pushaway
stroke, forward sweep, reverse sweep, J-stroke, and rudder stroke. Repeat
while paddling on the other side.
(c) Using a single-blade paddle and paddling only on one side, demonstrate
proper form and use of a combination of a forward stroke, rudder stroke, and
stern pry by canoeing to a target 50 yards away. Repeat while paddling on the
other side.
(d) Make a proper landing at a dock or shore (both, if possible). Store canoe
properly (with assistance, if needed).
13. Discuss the following types of canoeing:
(a) Olympic canoe sprint

(e) Freestyle

(b) Flatwater and river touring

(f) Whitewater

(c) Outrigger

(g) Canoe poling

(d) Marathon

Canoeing Resources.

Canoeing Resources
Scouting Literature
Basic Illustrated Canoe Paddling; Basic
Illustrated Canoeing; Deck of First Aid;
Emergency First Aid pocket guide;
Boy Scout Handbook and Fieldbook;
First Aid, Kayaking, Rowing, SmallBoat Sailing, and Whitewater merit
badge pamphlets
Visit the Boy Scouts of America’s
official retail website (with
your parent’s permission) at
http://www.scoutstuff.org for a
complete listing of all merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.

Books
American Canoe Association.
Introduction to Paddling.
Menasha Ridge Press, 1996.
Davidson, James West, and John Rugge.
The Complete Wilderness Paddler.
Vintage Books, 1983.
Gordon, I. Herbert. The Complete Book
of Canoeing, 3rd ed. Globe Pequot
Press, 2001.
Jacobson, Cliff. Basic Essentials:
Solo Canoeing, 2nd ed.
Globe Pequot Press, 1999.

94

CANOEING

Jennings, John, ed. The Canoe: A Living
Tradition. Firefly Books, 2002.
Poling Sr., Jim. The Canoe: An
Illustrated History. Countryman
Press, 2001.
Rock, Harry. The Basic Essentials of
Canoe Poling. ICS Books, 1992.
Rounds, Jon. Basic Canoeing: All the
Skills You Need to Get Started.
Stackpole Books, 2003.
Warren, Graham, and David Gidmark.
Canoe Paddles: A Complete Guide
to Making Your Own. Firefly
Books, 2001.

Organizations and Websites
American Canoe Association
108 Hanover St.
Fredericksburg, VA 22401
Telephone: 540-907-4460
Website: http://www.americancanoe.org
American Whitewater
P.O. Box 1540
Cullowhee, NC 28723
Telephone: 866-262-8429
Website:
http://www.americanwhitewater.org

.Canoeing Resources

USA Canoe/Kayak
725 S. Lincoln Blvd.
Oklahoma City, OK 73129
Telephone: 405-552-4040
Website: http://www.usack.org
United States Canoe Association
Website: http://www.uscanoe.com

Scouting
Canoe Adventures
The Northern Tier National
High Adventure Base offers
wilderness treks through
Minnesota and Canada.
Information is available at
http://www.ntier.org. Several
BSA local councils offer highadventure canoe treks and
whitewater experiences.
Visit the Council HighAdventure Directory at
http://www.scouting.org.

The Boy Scouts of America has
a long and proud canoeing tradition.
Many of the early pioneers in safety
and canoeing instruction were BSA
staff members and volunteer Scouters.
The Boy Scouts of America gratefully
acknowledges the contribution of these
pioneers to canoeing and to this
pamphlet: Fred C. Mills, W. Van B.
Claussen, Dr. John B. May, and
Ernest F. Schmidt. Recognition also is
given to the previous author of this
pamphlet, K. Gregory Tucker.
The Boy Scouts of America recognizes the significant contributions made
to canoeing by the American Canoe
Association in terms of safety, paddling
technique, and teaching. The information
contained in this pamphlet is consistent
with American Canoe Association curriculum and safety training.
The Boy Scouts of America is grateful to the men and women serving on
the Merit Badge Maintenance Task Force
for the improvements made in updating
this pamphlet.

Acknowledgments
This new edition of the Canoeing merit
badge pamphlet is the work of a team
of experienced paddlers, instructors,
and Scouters. The team was headed by
Richard Thomas. Other team members
included David Bell, John Brennard,
Lynn Brennard, Scott Cameron, Jeff
Cannon, Kevin Cordray, Michael
Donigan, Douglas Kennedy, J. David
McClary, Jeremy R. Oyen, Richard
Shank, and Jim Virgin.

CANOEING

95

Canoeing Resources.

Photo and Illustration Credits
Shutterstock.com, courtesy—
cover (canoe on water’s edge,
©Wildnerdpix/Shutterstock); pages
21 (©Patryk Kosmider/Shutterstock),
22 (©mradlgruber/Shutterstock), 42
(©David Gallaher/Shutterstock), and
92 (©Mountainhardcore/Shutterstock)
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of
or are protected by the Boy Scouts
of America.
David Bell, courtesy—page 18 (Type I,
Type V)
Dan Bryant—cover (bags; Type III life
jacket); pages 18 (Type III), 30–31
(paddles), and 35 (all bags
and containers)
John McDearmon—all illustrations on
pages 14, 25–27, 36, 38, 55, 56,
58–61, 62 and 81
Frank McMahon—page 6
Brian Payne—pages 18 (type II, type
IV), 43–45 (moving a canoe;
perpendicular launch), 46 (two
canoeists), 49, 52, 63 (two canoeists),
64 (changing places), 69, 72–73
(exiting; going overboard), 79, 80,
81 (emptying a canoe), and 82–83
(canoe-over-canoe rescue)
Randy Piland—pages 32, 56–57
(backstroke; draw stroke and
pushaway stroke), 67 (onside pivot),
86, and 90
Steve Seeger—page 41

96

CANOEING

