PERSONAL
FITNESS


PERSONAL FITNESS
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


35927
ISBN 978-0-8395-3286-6
©2024 Scouting America/Boy Scouts of America
2024 Printing
Note: If meeting any of the requirements is against the
Scout’s religious convictions, the requirement does not
have to be done if the Scout’s parent or guardian and the
proper religious advisers state in writing that to do so
would be against religious convictions. The Scout’s parent
or guardian must also accept full responsibility for
anything that might happen because of this exemption.
Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Personal-Fitness or check
Scoutbook for the latest requirements.
FPO


PERSONAL FITNESS 3


4 PERSONAL FITNESS








PERSONAL FITNESS 7
Contents
Strive for a New Level of Personal Fitness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Maintaining Good Health. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
Social, Mental, and Spiritual Fitness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
Healthy Eating: Good Nutrition Made Easy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
Physical Fitness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
Creating a Personal Fitness Program . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
Analyzing Your Record. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78
Careers in Personal Fitness. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86
The Scout Oath and the Scout Law. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 90
Personal Fitness Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 94





PERSONAL FITNESS 9
.Strive for a New Level of Personal Fitness
Strive for a New Level
of Personal Fitness
Personal fitness is the result of your efforts to have the healthiest
life possible as well as having the capacity to achieve the best
quality of life. Personal fitness includes many aspects of health; it
is often called wellness. Personal fitness and physical fitness are
not the same thing. Physical fitness is part of having a healthy
body (see box below) and is just one part of being personally fit.
If you are personally fit, you are healthy.
Regardless of your current level of personal fitness, in the 12
weeks it will take you to complete all the physical activity
requirements for this merit badge, you will be in better shape,
feel better about yourself, have more energy, and gain self-
confidence in your overall abilities.
To reach your goal, think about how your body works in
various situations and about the things that affect your quality
of life.
There are many different elements that make up
personal fitness. These elements involve your:
• Mental Fitness/Mind—mental willpower and
alertness, positive sense of how you feel and act,
emotional balance, and good social skills
• Physical Fitness/Body—physical health, good eating
habits nutrition, and athletic fitness
• Spiritual Fitness—faith, core values, how you take
care of yourself and reach out to help others
It is important to strengthen each element of your
personal fitness. Each affects the total person you are.
and your development and well-being.


10 PERSONAL FITNESS
Strive for a New Level of Personal Fitness.
All elements of personal fitness work together, interacting
and influencing one another. If you are strong in body but weak
in spirit, your overall level of personal fitness will drop. Just as
a high level of fitness in one area will boost another area, a low
level of fitness in one element will limit your accomplishments
in the other elements.
Think of a bridge your troop lashes together with ropes.
How strong would that bridge be if some of the poles or boards
were rotted, or if some of the knots were loose? The bridge
would be only as strong as its weakest lashing or rotted post.
If we replace the rotted boards and poles and tighten the
lashings, the bridge will be much stronger. Think of your personal
fitness in the same way. By replacing bad habits with good ones
and reinforcing our overall health in simple but surefire ways, your
quality of life can dramatically improve. This puts you on better
footing in every aspect of your life.
Rate Your Own Personal Fitness
You will need to rate yourself as far as your personal fitness.
Objectively rating your social, mental, emotional, and spiritual
status is not easy. You might never have thought about your
level of personal fitness. You may go from day to day taking
part in activities without appreciating the benefits of a healthy
body. Do not take personal fitness for granted!
A bridge is only as strong as its weakest element, just like your personal fitness.
In earning this
merit badge, you
will learn how to
evaluate your
personal fitness
level and begin an
exercise program
for improvement.


PERSONAL FITNESS 11
.Strive for a New Level of Personal Fitness
Having a healthy level of fitness means that your body is in
such good condition that you feel energetic and look healthy. It
also means you have the confidence, energy, and endurance to
enjoy yourself. And this is the very best time, during your preteen
and teen years, to set a lifestyle pattern that will help you stay fit
throughout your life. That is why, in earning this merit badge,
you will learn to evaluate your physical fitness level and begin
an exercise program that you can use for the rest of your life.
For example, your personal fitness program must be well-
balanced. If you eat properly but do not exercise regularly, you
will not be able to perform well in physical activities. If you
exercise regularly but do not eat well, you might find you don’t
have much energy, are much more easily tired out, and get sick
more often. If you work out and eat well, you will probably be
physically healthy. But if you don’t have many friends, then
you are not socially healthy. So when life gets stressful, you
might not have a social support system to help you handle the
stress. If you are highly active at Scout camp but do not prepare
a nourishing meal or sleep enough hours that night, you will
probably be dragging behind on the next day’s hike.
If you become as fit as you can be, your confidence will
grow because you will know you are making the best possible
use of your physical characteristics and makeup. Fill your days
with study, sports, and family, troop, or other social activities.
Do not waste away your days with lots of idle time like
watching TV.
Regular exercise is necessary for a high level of physical fitness.


12 PERSONAL FITNESS
Strive for a New Level of Personal Fitness.
If you exercise, eat balanced meals, and get enough sleep, you
will discover that you have boundless energy to carry you
through day-to-day living, as well as any emergencies that arise.
Being personally fit can also help you fulfill the respon-
sibilities of being a Scout. A Scout is cheerful, strong, mentally
awake, helpful, and prepared, and does a Good Turn daily.
Think about it. It is hard to be prepared for any situation
without an excellent level of personal fitness. And having
a high level of social fitness will enable you to be kind,
courteous, and helpful.
Signs of Poor Personal Fitness
1. Obesity, getting “winded” or short of breath when
doing something active, or struggling to lift a
slightly heavy object (low physical fitness)
2. Not having many friends (low social fitness)
3. Often feeling pressured, sad, anxious, or stressed;
anxiety, (low mental fitness)
4. Not faithful in your religious duties, struggling to
respect the religious convictions of others (low
spiritual fitness)
Playing sports with friends will boost your level of personal fitness.


PERSONAL FITNESS 13
.Strive for a New Level of Personal Fitness
Your Personal Fitness Test
To begin an evaluation of your personal fitness, ask
yourself these questions:
1. Are you free from all curable diseases? Are you
living in such a way that your risk of preventable
diseases is minimized?
2. Are you immunized and vaccinated according to
the advice of your health-care provider?
3. Do you understand the meaning of a nutritious
diet and know why it is important for you? Does
your diet include foods from all food groups?
Are you careful to curb your intake of high-fat
and high-calorie foods?
4. Are your body weight and composition what
you would like them to be? Do you know how
to modify them safely through exercise, diet,
and lifestyle?
5. Do you carry out daily activities without
noticeable effort? Do you have extra energy
for other activities?
6. Are you free from alcohol, tobacco, drugs,
and other practices that could be harmful to
your health?
7. Do you participate in a regular exercise program
or recreational activities?
8. Do you sleep well at night and wake up feeling
ready to start the new day?
9. Are you actively involved in the religious
organization of your choice, and do you take
part in its youth activities?
10. Do you spend quality time with your family and
friends in social and recreational activities?
11. Do you support family activities and efforts to
maintain a good home life?





PERSONAL FITNESS 15
.Maintaining Good Health
Maintaining Good Health
The first step in starting any personal fitness program is to get a
physical examination from your doctor. And to maintain your good
health, you need to learn how to avoid diseases and other illness.
The Physical Exam
Before you fulfill the requirements for the Personal Fitness merit
badge, have your health-care provider give you a physical exam.
Be sure to use the Annual Health and Medical Record form. Use
the form provided by your counselor, or go to www.scouting.org
for the online version, or request the form from your local council
service center. Your family physician probably has most
of your personal information and medical history on file.
When you meet with your doctor, you will fill out a personal
and medical questionnaire. It will ask about any diseases that are
common in your family, your personal medical history, any allergic
reactions to medicine, whether you are taking any medicine, and
some personal information.
The physical examination will probably include
• Measuring your heart rate, blood pressure, height, and weight
• Checking heart and lung sounds
• Examining your ears, mouth, and throat
• Conducting an eye exam
• Testing your reflexes
Your dental health
also affects your
physical health,
so a checkup from
your dentist is
also important.
Combine basic daily eye care with annual screenings by your health-
care practitioner. Be sure to wear sunglasses with lenses that filter
ultraviolet (UV) rays; use adequate lighting to read; wear protective eye
gear for outdoor activities and sports; and see a physician if you have
persistent eye irritations or notice changes in your vision.


16 PERSONAL FITNESS
Maintaining Good Health.
The health-care professional should also ask questions
and record observations about your psychosocial (mental and
social) traits, nutritional habits, physical activity, and family
circumstances. The physician will keep a permanent record
of your health history, growth patterns, immunizations, and
other data.
During a physical exam, your health-care provider may
identify symptoms or conditions that need treatment or correc-
tion. It is wise to have regular physical exams so that your
physician can monitor and keep a record of your health. The
records are useful later in life when it is necessary to review
your medical history.
“Average” and “Normal” Growth Rates
Your body type and rate of growth and development will be
unique to you. In an average high school freshman class, for
example, the height of the boys can range from 4 feet 8 inches
to 6 feet tall. While the average height might be about 5 feet
4 inches, you probably will not find many “average” students
who are precisely 5 feet 4 inches. Obviously, what is “normal”
involves a wider range.
There is no reason for concern if you check charts and
graphs and find results that do not match your measurements.
These charts do not take into account your own special hered-
ity and growth pattern. Find out from your health-care provider
what your position on the chart means.
Real growth problems are rare. A person might be extraordinarily slow
to mature or do so at an early age. If you regularly consult your doctor,
there is probably no need to become concerned about growth prob-
lems. Your doctor will gladly answer any questions you have about your
growth and maturity.
Injuries to the ear can occur through improper cleaning, noise, illness,
and inadequate protection while playing sports. Delicately clean only
the outer ear with a washcloth or cotton swab, and protect your ears.
Lower the volume on listening devices; wear earplugs at concerts and
similar venues; and wear appropriate protective headgear for outdoor
activities. See a physician if you have trouble hearing or experience an
injury to the ear.
The main factors
affecting growth
are never the
same for any
two people.


PERSONAL FITNESS 17
.Maintaining Good Health
The Dental Exam
and Daily Care of Your Teeth
For requirement 1b, you need to have a dental exam and get a
statement from your dentist stating that your teeth have been
checked and cared for. You also need to be able to tell your
counselor how you
properly care for your
teeth on a daily basis.
Your dentist can tell
if you have cavities or
plaque buildup on your
teeth and if your gums
look healthy. Poor den-
tal care can harm your
health and your appear-
ance. Proper daily care
and regular dental check-
ups can help keep your
teeth in good condition.
Although there is
probably no single rea-
son why teeth decay,
you can do a few things
to help protect your
teeth. For example, a
nutritious diet helps
keep teeth in good con-
dition. Usually, a diet
that is good for general
health is good for dental health. Do not fill up on pastries and
sweets after or between meals. Sugary foods stick to teeth and
cause them to decay over time.
Also, make it a habit to brush your teeth immediately
after eating. If you cannot brush, rinse your mouth to get rid
of food particles. When particles remain in your mouth, they
form acids that attack your teeth and eventually form cavities.
Toothpaste is helpful in cleaning, but thorough, proper brushing
of all surfaces is the most important thing in preventing plaque
buildup and fighting gum disease.
Visit your dentist
every six months
and follow his
or her advice.
Keeping your
teeth clean and
avoiding gum
disease can
ensure an
attractive smile
and greatly
enhance your
general health.
A dentist can explain how to properly
care for your teeth.


18 PERSONAL FITNESS
Maintaining Good Health.
If the water you drink contains fluoride, your teeth will be
more resistant to cavities. If it does not, ask your dentist whether
you should use a dietary supplement. You can also use a
toothpaste that contains fluoride. Studies have shown that using
toothpaste with fluoride helps prevent tooth decay.
Your dentist may also discuss
your occlusion, or bite. If your teeth
do not close on each other properly,
they may wear down quickly and
you may develop other dental
troubles. Your dentist will tell you if
your teeth need to be straightened.
Because of recent advances in
dental care, gum disease now causes
more tooth loss than actual tooth
decay. It is also now believed that
bacteria that cause gum disease can
harm the tissue and muscles of the
heart, so flossing and other measures
to help prevent gum disease may also
protect your cardiovascular health.
Talk to your dental professional about
how to prevent gum disease.
Disease Prevention
Your body is an amazingly complex creation. Learn to listen to
your body so you can recognize its warning signs. Most illnesses
have recognizable symptoms. When your body shows symptoms,
it generally means something is wrong. Heed the warning signs.
Consult your health care provider. Your doctor depends on your
accurate description of what you are feeling to diagnose the
disease or illness so proper treatment can be given.
Most common diseases are entirely preventable, so regular
visits to your health care provider are important. He or she can
advise you in preventive habits. Your daily habits might expose
Scouts can still care for their teeth at
a campsite.
How to Brush
Brush your teeth away from the gums instead of toward them. The brush
should have a small head with firm but not hard bristles and a flat brushing
surface. Most dentists also recommend flossing at least once a day. Flossing
removes food particles and plaque between teeth and in the gums.


PERSONAL FITNESS 19
you to people with a communicable disease or make you more
susceptible to non-communicable diseases. Communicable diseases
are contagious; you typically catch them from someone else.
Examples are colds, the flu, and COVID-19. Non-communicable
diseases are not contagious, and you can’t get them from someone
else. The most common ones today are usually the result of poor
lifestyle choices. For example, not enough physical activity or
eating too much junk food can lead to having an unhealthy
weight, high blood pressure or heart disease.
Poor lifestyle choices can also make you more prone to
some communicable diseases. For example, not washing your
hands frequently might increase your chances of catching a
cold or the flu from someone else.
Primary prevention involves developing good health habits
and either changing bad ones or preventing bad habits from
forming. This means taking measures to combat risk factors for
illness before an illness actually develops. (See “Risk Factors”
later in this chapter.) For example, communicable diseases like
a cold or the flu are often acquired from persons who are
already sick. One way you can avoid catching a cold is by
staying away from someone who has a cold.
Many non-communicable health problems, like obesity, are
acquired due to poor lifestyle habits. In this case, you can reduce
your risk of becoming unhealthily overweight by eating a healthy
diet and staying physically active.
Primary prevention is a good idea but is not always easy to
do. People often have little immediate reason to watch out for their
health. So they allow themselves to form bad habits. When good
habits develop in a person’s youth, most people keep those habits
as adults and stay healthy. That is why this merit badge is focused
on helping you develop these good habits.
A Scout Is Clean
Showering daily and washing your hands with soap and warm water
several times a day can help prevent you from picking up or spreading
airborne diseases such as flu and colds. It is also important to wash
your hands after every time you go to the bathroom.
Never drink from someone else’s cup. Cover your mouth when you
sneeze or cough, and use tissues. Use clean drinking and eating utensils.
Being around people who are sick may expose you to communicable
viruses or bacteria. If someone is sick, keep your distance.
The damage that
bad habits like
smoking, drinking
alcohol, and using
drugs cause to
all organs of
the body may
not show up for
many years.


20 PERSONAL FITNESS
Maintaining Good Health.
When you are young, it is sometimes difficult to
understand the habits you develop now might influence whether
you develop health problems later on. Think of your body as a
new car. A new car will run well even if it is not properly
maintained. But, sooner or later, it will break down and be
expensive to fix—if it can be fixed. With your body, you want it
to run smoothly for many decades. Now is the time to start
taking care of yourself and making sure your body, mind, and
spirit get what is needed not just to survive—but to thrive.
Unfortunately, even good habits and youth cannot prevent
all diseases. A person with a healthy lifestyle can still be struck
with a disease or die unexpectedly. Smokers get lung cancer,
but nonsmokers can get lung cancer, too. Symptoms might not
always be obvious, making the disease hard to detect. In other
cases, symptoms are simply ignored. Now is the best time for
you to develop the good lifestyle habits that will help you have
excellent overall health for years to come.
Immunizations
Having immunization shots during childhood minimizes your
risk of getting many dangerous diseases, such as the following.
• Diphtheria, an infectious disease affecting the membranes
of the nose and throat, results in fever, pain, and respiratory
obstructions. The toxins (poisons) that cause diphtheria may
also cause myocarditis (inflammation of the heart).
• Pertussis is the medical name for whooping cough, an
infectious disease that causes severe and rapid coughing.
• Tetanus is an often-fatal disease marked by general muscular
spasms and vocal cord spasms, seizures, respiratory spasms,
and paralysis. The toxin that causes the disease enters the
body through wounds. For example, if you step on a rusty
nail and drive it into your foot, you could get tetanus if
you do not get immunized for this disease.
• Meningitis is an inflammation of the membranes
surrounding the brain and spinal cord.
• Polio is a viral disease that may result in muscle atrophy,
paralysis, and/or permanent deformity.
The ages at which Scouts should receive vaccines and boosters
are shown in the table. Because of the risk of being infected
with the tetanus toxin through open wounds, the tetanus shot
is given every 10 years, even through adulthood.


PERSONAL FITNESS 21
.Maintaining Good Health
Recommended Immunizations for
Scout-age Youth in the U.S.
Age Vaccine
10 years Flu
11-12 years Flu, Tdap (tetanus,
diphtheria, pertussis),
MenACWY
(meningococcal conjugate),
human papillomavirus
13-15 years Flu
16-18 years Flu, MenACWY booster
For all ages, if previous vaccines were missed, then
catch-up vaccinations can be given for all these
diseases and for Hepatitis A and B, polio, MMR
(measles, mumps, rubella) and chickenpox.
Source: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Advisory Committee
on Immunization Practices
Immunization shots are important for the prevention of
some diseases.


22 PERSONAL FITNESS
Maintaining Good Health.
Other Preventable Diseases
The disease COVID-19 (short for “coronavirus disease 2019”)
has affected millions of people worldwide. COVID-19 affects
people in different ways. Some do not get very sick, or they
think they “only” have the flu. Others get a fever, cough, or
have difficulty taking deep breaths. And some people become
so sick they must be hospitalized because of life-threatening
complications. The disease is thought to spread mainly through
close contact from person to person. When an infected person
breathes out droplets and very small particles, these can be
breathed in by other people or land on their eyes, nose, or
mouth, or contaminate surfaces that other people touch.
The medical community has made progress in discovering
drugs to help treat COVID-19. But the best way to treat this
disease is to prevent it—which is why getting vaccinated,
wearing a mask when appropriate, staying 6 feet apart from
others, and washing your hands often are so important.
Rheumatic fever is another disease that can be prevented
with better understanding of good health practices. Rheumatic
fever starts with a simple throat infection that leads to strep
throat. Left untreated, the disease may affect the joints and
even the heart. Symptoms include sore throat, fever, fatigue,
and pale complexion.
Not many people with strep throat get rheumatic fever,
but if a sore throat lasts for several days, consult your doctor.
A simple throat culture can diagnose strep throat and rheumatic
fever can be prevented. Rheumatic fever that progresses to the
point of heart damage becomes a permanent disease.
Risk Factors
Some diseases, like COVID-19 and the common cold, are
acquired from others. But in the case of cancer and heart
disease, years of research and observation have shown that
lifestyle behaviors increase the risk of getting the diseases.
These behaviors are called risk factors.
Some risk factors such as age or family history cannot be
changed. Other risk factors such as dietary habits, too much
sun exposure, lack of physical activity, and smoking can be
modified.


.Maintaining Good Health
Exercise helps reduce the risk of heart disease.
Except for when the COVID-19 pandemic was at its worst,
the single greatest cause of death and disabilities in the United
States has been heart (coronary) disease. It is responsible for
almost 400,000 deaths each year. On average, one American
suffers a heart attack every 40 seconds. Many people can
reduce this risk through lifestyle changes. Other than not using
tobacco, physical activity and healthy eating are the most
important lifestyle changes a person can make.
Exercise alone will not prevent or cure heart disease,
but it is one effective way to reduce the risk of cardiovascular
(heart and blood vessel) disease. Inactive people have twice the
risk of heart attack compared with those who regularly exercise.
Any kind of physical activity will work, but the best for heart
health is “aerobic” exercise.
Modifiable risk factors for heart disease that Scout-age
youth might have::
• High blood pressure (hypertension)
• High blood cholesterol
• Lack of exercise
• Not eating healthy foods
• Excessive body weight
• High blood glucose (diabetes)
• Tobacco use


24 PERSONAL FITNESS
Maintaining Good Health.
“Aerobic” means the body uses oxygen to produce the
energy that is needed for the activity. Running, swimming, and
biking are good examples of aerobic exercises that get your
heart rate up and increase blood flow to muscles. However,
anything that gets your heart rate up and your blood flowing is
good cardiovascular exercise. Think about it—mowing the yard
could be good exercise.
Healthy eating is important, too. Besides helping to reduce
your risk for high blood pressure, high blood cholesterol, and
diabetes, healthy eating can reduce your risk for having an
unhealthy body weight (or being obese).
Obesity greatly increases the likelihood of developing
health concerns, such as low self-esteem, depression, high
blood pressure, high cholesterol levels, and diabetes. But being
physically active and eating healthfully, even if your weight
does not change, can go a long way towards helping you to be
healthy as a Scout and, in the future, as an adult!
Let’s review other risk factors that can affect your physical
fitness.
TOBACCO: A RISK FACTOR YOU CAN CONTROL
Although hanging out on the couch and eating fast food are
significant risk factors, smoking triples your risk of developing
cardiovascular disease. The good news is that recent studies
have shown the body has an amazing ability to repair itself
once a person stops smoking. Within two weeks of stopping,
your body will respond by becoming healthier.
Within a few years, your lung capacity (that
is, your ability to breathe easy) will nearly
double.
The bad news is that many smokers often
find it extremely difficult to kick the habit,
because tobacco contains nicotine, a highly
addictive drug. Many smokers who want to
break their addiction must try repeatedly. Before
they can stop smoking for good, they suffer the
pains of withdrawal each time they try to quit.
Not only are smokers at higher risk of
developing heart disease, they greatly increase
their chances of getting cancer. Cigarette
smoke contains many cancer-causing chemi-
Try cycling with friends instead of
hanging out on the couch and
watching TV. Your heart will
thank you.
Strength exercises
(weight, resistance
training) help build
muscles and tone
your body but do
little to promote
cardiovascular
fitness.


PERSONAL FITNESS 25
.Maintaining Good Health
cals, including arsenic (used in pesticides and weed killers),
benzene (a toxic solvent), formaldehyde (used to embalm
corpses), and polonium 210 (a highly radioactive element).
The blood carries the poisons from smoking to all parts
of the body, damaging internal organs from the brain to the
bladder. Scientists now know that smoking causes cancers of
the mouth, the larynx (voice box), the lungs, and the kidneys.
It can also cause a type of leukemia—a cancer of the blood.
Smoking not only causes heart disease, it also raises the risk
for stroke and damages the body’s ability to fight infection.
Smokers are at high risk of dying from any number of tobacco-
related diseases.
Vaping is becoming increasingly common. The substances
contained in vaping chemicals vary, but the most common
Cancer—Seven Danger Signs
If you recognize any of these seven danger signs, seek further testing
for cancer. Awareness of these seven signs will increase the chances of
diagnosing cancer at an early stage and therefore increase your chance
of survival.
1. Change in bowel or bladder habits could be a sign of colorectal cancer.
2. A sore that does not heal on the skin or in the mouth could be a malig-
nancy and should be checked by a doctor.
3. Unusual bleeding or discharge from the rectum or bladder could mean
colorectal, prostate, or bladder cancer.
4. Thickening of breast tissue or a new lump in the breast is a warning
sign of breast cancer. A lump in the testes could mean testicular cancer.
5. Indigestion or trouble swallowing could be cancer of the mouth,
throat, esophagus, or stomach.
6. Obvious changes to moles or warts could mean skin cancer.
7. Nagging cough or hoarseness that persists for four to six weeks could
be a sign of lung or throat cancer.
Closely watch for these signs, which are your body’s way of alerting you
to potential problems. If you experience any of them, schedule an
appointment with your physician immediately.


26 PERSONAL FITNESS
Maintaining Good Health.
Myth: “Smokeless
tobacco is safe.”
Fact: Smokeless
tobacco—snuff
or chewing
tobacco—causes
health problems
ranging from gum
disease to mouth
cancer. No
tobacco is safe.
include nicotine, marijuana or “flavorings” to make the vape
smoke taste better. It’s hard to know what’s being vaped since
labeling is inconsistent. But e-cigarettes are not a safe alternative
to tobacco. They contain chemicals like nicotine, and metals like
lead and cadmium. Like real tobacco products, they increase your
risk of heart disease.
OTHER HARMFUL SUBSTANCES
Besides eating right, exercising regularly, and not smoking, you
can help to protect your health by avoiding alcohol and drugs.
Drinking and taking drugs “for fun” or recreationally are high-
risk behaviors, both for the damage they do to your body and
for the harm they can cause to others.
Alcohol is a depressant. It interferes with reflexes and
coordination. It slows reaction times and impairs vision,
hearing, and judgment. When a young person drinks, he
may make risky or poor decisions that hurt himself or others.
Alcohol’s effects on the body and mind make driving extremely
dangerous for anyone who has been drinking even small
amounts. Traffic crashes are the leading cause of death for 15-
to 20-year-olds, and alcohol is a factor in a large percentage of
teen driver fatalities.
Marijuana increases your risk for heart disease and some
cancers. It also impairs memory and learning.
Opioids are leading to an epidemic of overdose deaths.
These include illegal drugs like heroin, but also legal drugs
that were initially prescribed by physicians to relieve pain, like
Teens who drink may do poorly in school and suffer long-term emotional
and physical damage. High school students who use alcohol are five
times more likely than others to drop out of school. Alcohol use among
young people has been linked to depression and suicide, as well as a
greater risk for developing diseases such as cirrhosis of the liver,
pancreatitis, stroke, and some forms of cancer. Long-term effects of
alcohol use can include damage to brain and nerve function, memory
loss, loss of appetite, malnutrition, weakening of the heart muscle, and
liver failure leading to death.


PERSONAL FITNESS 27
.Maintaining Good Health
Myth: “Smoking
occasionally
is safe.”
Fact: Smoking
“casually” or
“occasionally” is
the same as
taking poison
occasionally. If
you wouldn’t drink
embalming fluid
now and then,
why would you
smoke, even once
in a while?
methadone, oxycodone, and hydrocodone. Opioids, whether
legal or illegal, are highly addictive and potentially deadly.
Amphetamines are stimulants. Commonly called
“uppers,” these highly addictive drugs create false feelings of
power and assertiveness. They do not give a user extra physical
or mental energy—they impair judgment and distort the user’s
view of reality. Amphetamines suppress appetite and may cause
extreme, life-threatening weight loss. Other side effects include
nerve damage, uncontrollable and abnormal movements of
the face and jaw muscles, convulsions, hallucinations, and
mental disorders such as paranoia and delusions similar to
schizophrenia. Amphetamines can damage blood vessels. Users
may die from ruptured blood vessels in the brain or from heart
attacks.
Other drugs—like cocaine and crack, inhalants, and
LSD—also have powerful effects on the body and the mind.
They can produce temporary feelings of pleasure or energy, but
they can also cause nightmares and severe mental disturbances.
Overdoses are common and can result in serious illness,
disability, or death.
Stay Off Steroids
Steroids mimic the effects of the natural male
hormone testosterone. They are abused to artificially
increase muscle mass at a high cost to the user’s
health.
Steroids can cause severe mood swings, from
deep depression to extreme irritability. ’Roid rage is
a term for the explosive, out-of-control
aggressiveness associated with steroid use.





PERSONAL FITNESS 29
..social, mental, and spiritual fitness
Social, Mental, and
Spiritual Fitness
Important parts of personal fitness that are often overlooked are
social, mental, and spiritual fitness. These are just as important
to your overall health as your physical fitness. Living the Scout
Oath and Scout Law, the Scout motto, and the Scout slogan helps
every Scout live a healthy life. What would your social interaction
be if you were not trustworthy, loyal, helpful, friendly, courteous,
kind, obedient, cheerful, thrifty, brave, clean, and reverent?
In obeying the Scout Law, you should try to show those
personal qualities every day, in all situations, and with
everyone you meet. The Scout who is recognized as a
Scout by his actions rather than by a uniform has truly
lived the Scout Law.
You know now that living the Scout Law affects
your social fitness. To understand why, think what
each point of the Scout Law means. Review the Scout
Oath and Scout Law in your Boy Scout Handbook or
at the back of this pamphlet.
Social Fitness
There are many things to consider in developing
good social skills. Making friends is easy if you extend yourself
in an open and engaging way. Remember that everyone is dif-
ferent but almost everyone has interesting and unique qualities.
Think about the characteristics you value in a good friend.
Your friends value some of the same characteristics in you.
Good friends share feelings and emotions with trust and
confidence. Everyone needs someone to talk to about his or her
feelings, emotions, and problems, as well as someone to have
fun with. Friends help one another through bad and good times
and are able to speak honestly to one another.
By taking the
Scout Oath, you
promise to obey
the Scout Law
and to help others
at all times.


30 PERSONAL FITNESS
.social, mental, and spiritual fitness
Good communication requires two people—a talker and
a listener. These are not skills that come naturally; they need
to be learned. When you express your feelings and emotions,
it is important to express them appropriately. When you listen,
do so with sincerity and concern for your friend’s feelings and
problems. By sharing your own feelings and emotions, you allow
others to become involved with your life. And by being a good
listener, you can help others to confront problems, emotions,
and struggles in their lives.
Being a good listener is just part of being a good friend.
Accepting others is important to your social health as well as
to theirs. Everyone, including you, has the need to be accepted.
You do not need to approve of a person’s behavior, but you can
accept him or her as an individual. Friends do not judge each
other but accept each other unconditionally.
Peer Pressure
Dealing with peer pressure is tough. You will not always be
fortunate enough to have acquaintances who are positive
influences in your life and share the same values and standards
that you have. You can accept these people as individuals
without doing what they do. You cannot stop peer pressure, but
do not allow people to tease you or push you to join activities
that make you uncomfortable or that are unlawful.
For example, your friends might try to get you to go
swimming in a dangerous rock quarry where swimming is not
allowed. You could do one of two things. You could walk away
Social fitness means knowing how to be a good friend.


PERSONAL FITNESS 31
.social, mental, and spiritual fitness
It is important for
good friends to
spend time with
each other; it
helps strengthen
friendships by
building
understanding,
trust, and respect.
from the situation or offer another activity that is more
appropriate, such as going to the public swimming pool. By
walking away, you show your unwillingness to participate, but
by offering an alternative, you are providing positive
leadership. If your friends do not accept your alternative, you
can still walk away. If they accept your suggestion, chances are
that everyone will have just as much fun at the pool and will
be much safer.
Always try to help others raise their own standards and do
the right thing. Do not stand back and watch your friends
make the wrong decisions. You may feel as if you are all alone
at times when facing peer pressure. But rest assured that
staying true to your values as a Scout will make a long-lasting
impression on others.
Some young people suffer from low self-esteem, low self-
confidence, and insecurity. Some kids are too strict with
themselves, expecting perfection. They may try to be like
someone else because that person seems to attract friends. This
may lead to behavior that removes them from achieving their
potential.
You do not need to choose drugs, smoking, or harmful
behavior. If you know you are taking good care of your body,
accepting responsibility, taking pride in your accomplishments,
living the Scout Oath and Scout Law, and participating in
healthy activities with friends and family, then you probably
feel good about yourself and what you are doing. Although
peer acceptance is important, your self-esteem, self-confidence,
and sense of identity ultimately come from within.
Positive activities
with friends help
maintain good
emotional fitness.
If school, peer pressure, personal relationships,
constantly being on the go, or any other kind of
circumstance has you feeling overwhelmed, you are
not alone. A little stress is OK; it might make you
work harder for good grades. A lot of stress is not
OK. Take time to manage your stress, and don’t
sweat the small stuff. Relax. Watch a funny movie,
play with your pet, read for pleasure. Make sure you
get enough rest and eat the right foods. Don’t try to
do too much, and don’t try to be perfect. Take better
care of yourself, and you will start to think more
clearly and have a positive outlook.


32 PERSONAL FITNESS
.social, mental, and spiritual fitness.
Mental Fitness
Your emotional well-being is closely tied to the other components
of personal fitness. Your activities, exercise, diet, sleep, family life,
religious involvement, and physical health all affect your emotional
and mental fitness. Everyone worries a little. It is normal to have
some temporary anxiety or depression while overcoming major
transitions or obstacles in life. But if anxiety and worry are
excessive and interfere with school, family, friendships, and a
healthy social life, you should seek professional help.
Many emotional problems can be prevented in the home.
A good family life is essential to a healthy mind and body. Not
every family is the same. Some Scouts have parents or
guardians who are divorced or deceased. These youth can have
a happy home life with a single parent or guardian. As a family
member, your contributions are important to your family’s well-
being. Support family efforts for a peaceful and meaningful
home life. Just as your parents or guardians help you overcome
your problems, you can help overcome some family problems.
Help plan family outings and activities. Spend quality time
with your brothers, sisters, and parents or guardians. “Quality
time” means sharing through communication and joint activity.
If you talk about common interests, work together on a family
project, plan for a special occasion, share a pleasant or
meaningful experience, or play together, you are getting and
giving healthy benefits through your family activity. Your family
can be your most important possession.
Know Your Priorities For your own social well-being, it is
helpful to list your priorities. Your
priorities will be different from
someone else’s. Your list might
include yourself, your family, reli-
gion, friends, education, recreation,
health, and work. You should be the
first priority. You cannot help others,
do Good Turns daily, or be a friend if
you neglect your own body, mind,
and spiritual needs.


PERSONAL FITNESS 33
..social, mental, and spiritual fitness
Earlier you learned that being a good communicator means
being able to express your emotions and feelings to a good friend.
This friend might be your parent or guardian, your Scoutmaster, a
brother or sister, another Scout, or your religious leader.
Of course, you must be aware of your feelings and
emotions to be able to express them. Examining your feelings is
the first step. For example, if you have ever been in a situation
like the one at the rock quarry described previously, how did
you feel? Be honest. Were you disappointed in your friends?
Ashamed? Angry? Your feelings are your own and should be
expressed as such. When you talk to your friend, say, “I felt
angry when they asked me to go with them. They know we
should not go there.” Do not say, “They made me angry.” It is
healthy to admit your feelings, but remember that they are your
feelings. No one made you feel that way.
Positive activities
with friends help
maintain good
mental fitness.
How To Tell If Someone Is Depressed
A person suffering from depression might:
• Be sad or irritable
• Lose interest in things they used to enjoy
• Gain or lose weight unintentionally
• Sleep more or less than usual
• Change their usual activity level
• Be fatigued
• Feel worthless or guilty
• Have difficulty concentrating or be indecisive
• Frequently think about death or have planned or attempted suicide.
A person suffering from depression needs prompt and professional
help. Depression is treatable and should not be ignored.


34 PERSONAL FITNESS
.social, mental, and spiritual fitness.
Spiritual Fitness
Scouting America is an integral part of nearly every place of
worship. This is because every Scout has a duty to God. A troop
that is chartered to a religious group provides Scouts the oppor-
tunity to recognize and fulfill their duty. Active involvement in
your religious group is essential to your being
a good Scout. You are expected to recognize your duty to God,
and the religious principles you learn will enable you to live
by the Scout Law.
Religions around the world use Scouting as a way to pro-
vide meaningful activities for young men. Most of them have
special recognitions for the young people who recognize and
fulfill their duty to God. Some of these emblems are the Ad
Altare Dei, Alpha Omega, God and Country, Living Faith, Ner
Tamid, and On My Honor. Check with your religious leaders
to find out the requirements for receiving the emblem affiliated
with your religion. Religious emblems are not required for
advancement but are honorable to wear on your uniform and
demonstrate your dedication to your religion and to Scouting.
Be a friend to your family. Your contributions are important to your family’s well-being.
Professional
counselors can
help people
facing difficult
emotional issues.


PERSONAL FITNESS 35
..social, mental, and spiritual fitness
Your religious practices will help you to live by the Scout Law.





PERSONAL FITNESS 37
.Healthy Eating: Good Nutrition Made Easy
Healthy Eating: Good
Nutrition Made Easy
Healthy eating plays an important role in all components of
personal fitness. If your body does not get the nutrients it
needs, it will not function at its best. Eating too many
unhealthy foods might result in lack of energy, slow healing of
injuries, dehydration, an increased risk for some cancers, and
an unhealthy increase or loss of body fat. The word “diet” does
not always mean cutting back on calories to lose weight. Your
diet is what you eat every day, whether you are trying to lose,
maintain, or gain weight.
Healthy eating is an important part of treating some diseases
and preventing others. Failure to eat properly may be fatal for a
person with diabetes. Good nutrition is especially important for
people who either have heart disease or are trying to reduce their
risk for it. People with mild high blood pressure can lower it by
eating less salt and having a desirable body weight. People can
often lower their blood cholesterol levels by increasing exercise
and reducing the amount of fat and cholesterol they consume.
Eating healthfully is especially important for people
who are trying to lose weight.
What does healthy eating mean? It
means making good choices about the
foods you eat and the beverages you
drink. The goals are to eat enough
calories to keep you at a healthy
weight, get the nutrients you need
so your body can function well, and
eat foods that do not increase your
risk for diseases like heart disease,
high blood pressure and obesity.
Eating less fat and more fiber might
also help prevent some cancers.
Variety is not only
the spice of life,
it is important to
your overall
health. A balanced
diet includes all
the food groups.


38 PERSONAL FITNESS
.Healthy Eating: Good Nutrition Made Easy
Nutrients
A healthy diet provides six basic nutrients: protein, fat,
carbohydrates, water, vitamins, and minerals. Eating a variety
of foods will provide your body with all the nutrients needed
for good health.
Proteins are essential to every cell in the body. They are
needed for the structure, function, and regulation of your
body’s tissues and organs, such as muscles. Proteins are made
up of smaller units called amino acids. It is important to eat a
variety of foods high in protein to be sure you get all the amino
acids your body needs.
Fats are also essential to health. Your body can make some
fats, which is why people can gain weight if they eat more
calories than their body needs. But some fats are needed in the
food you eat. They act as messengers to help proteins do their
job, help control growth, and help the defense system of your
body (immune function) work. Too much of some kinds of fats
in your diet is unhealthy since they can increase your risk of
diseases like heart disease and obesity. Good sources of healthy
fat include olive oil, canola, soy, corn, sunflower, peanut, and
other vegetable oils, as well as fatty fish such as salmon.
The key to good
nutrition is to eat
a varied diet.
A balanced diet
includes all the
food groups.


.Healthy Eating: Good Nutrition Made Easy
Carbohydrates (sugars and starches) are the main source
of energy for your muscles and nervous system, especially
during exercise. Simple carbohydrates—sugars—add flavor to
foods and yield high energy in the body. Foods high in sugar
often have many calories but few nutrients. Nutritionists
sometimes call them “empty calorie” foods. Avoid these
types of foods, or eat them only in moderation. Complex
carbohydrates, such as whole-grain products, are digested
more slowly, provide energy over a longer time, and are less
harmful to your teeth.
Water is essential to life. Your body is about 60 percent
water. Water helps to regulate body temperature and aids in
digestion. Water is also important in just about every chemical
reaction in your body. Daily water losses need to be replaced
continually. Eight glasses of water a day is recommended.
Vitamins are the most frequently talked about nutrient
because most people believe they are important and good for
them. Unfortunately, people also have the notion
that “if a little is good, then more is better.”
Taking a daily multivitamin supplement
will help ensure that your body gets
all the nutrients it needs.
Minerals such as calcium,
iron, iodine, potassium, and
magnesium have specific
purposes in the body.
Minerals are excreted
after they are used. For
a balanced diet, minerals
must be continually
replaced through
proper diet and
daily supplements.
Drink water with
meals and snacks
rather than drinking
soda pop.
PERSONAL FITNESS 39


40 PERSONAL FITNESS
.Healthy Eating: Good Nutrition Made Easy
Food Groups
You get all these nutrients from the foods you eat. Foods are
classified into basic food groups: grains, fruits, vegetables,
proteins, and dairy. Try to eat a wide variety of foods but
choose ones that are low in fats or do not have a lot of sugar
added to them.
Grains are foods like rice, oatmeal, popcorn, bread,
cereal, and pasta. They are a major source of carbohydrates.
They can be whole-grain, containing the entire kernel of the
grain, such as whole-wheat bread, brown rice, or oatmeal. If
part of the kernel is removed, they are called refined grains—
white breads, cookies and most crackers and pastas. Whole-
grain foods are healthier; try to eat more of these.
The vegetable and fruit groups provide many vitamins,
minerals, and dietary fiber. They include fresh, frozen, canned,
and dried forms. They can be cooked, raw, or in juices.
Vegetables differ in their combination of nutrients, so it is
important to eat a variety of them. There are five subgroups of
vegetables—dark green, red and orange, legumes (beans and
peas), starchy (like potatoes), and others. The fruit group
includes whole fruits and 100% fruit juice. Fruit juices are
often higher in calories and lack dietary fiber, so it’s better to
eat whole fruits. Canned fruits are fine, too, but can also be
high in extra sugar. Most people need to increase their intake
of fruits and vegetables. Try to eat at least three different colors
You should have
vegetables and
fruits two to three
times a day, or at
nearly every meal.
Foods made from whole grains are healthier than foods made
from refined grains.


PERSONAL FITNESS 41
.Healthy Eating: Good Nutrition Made Easy
of fruits and vegetables each day, like an orange (orange),
broccoli (dark green), and cauliflower (white).
The protein group includes foods from animals and some
plants. Examples: meat, fish, poultry and eggs, nuts, and
seeds. They are important sources of protein, vitamins and
some minerals. Like the other food groups, it is important to
eat a variety of proteins since they all differ in the nutrients
they provide.
The dairy group includes low-fat milk, cheese, low-fat
cottage cheese, yogurt, puddings, creamed soups, and ice
cream. Dairy products provide calcium for the body and are
often fortified with vitamins A and D. While dairy products
also provide fat in your diet, skim milk and low-fat cheese
provide healthy alternatives. If you enjoy dairy foods, which
provide bone-building calcium, and you need vitamin D, stick
with no-fat or low-fat products. Calcium supplements are
another way to get your daily calcium if your body cannot
handle milk products.
Foods that contain a lot of empty calories should be eaten
sparingly. Desserts, snack foods, and drinks like sports/energy
drinks and soda pop often include unhealthy fats and high
levels of sugar. They cause fast increases in blood sugar that
can lead to weight gain, diabetes, heart disease, and other
health disorders. Whole-grain carbohydrates cause slower,
steadier increases in blood sugar that do not overwhelm your
body.
Remember: Eat fats and sweets sparingly because
they often provide little or no nutritional value and
are high in calories.
Foods in the same
category provide
similar nutrients.


42 PERSONAL FITNESS
.Healthy Eating: Good Nutrition Made Easy
Healthy Eating Goals
The federal government created MyPlate to help Americans
learn better eating habits. Each food group is represented by a
space on the plate, so you can figure out what you should eat
and how much you should consume each day. For this merit
badge, you can choose any healthy eating goals you want to
work on to help you meet your specific needs and interests.
1. Focus on whole fruit. Aim to choose whole fruits over fruit juice
for extra fiber. Fruits may be fresh, canned, frozen, or dried and
may be whole, cut-up, or pureed.
2. Vary your veggies. Select a variety of colorful vegetables to get the
vitamins, minerals, and fiber your body needs to be healthy. This
includes fresh, frozen, or canned varieties.
3. Vary your protein routine. Meat, poultry, seafood, beans and peas,
eggs, processed soy products, nuts, and seeds are all proteins. Select
leaner cuts of beef and pork and eat turkey and chicken without skin.
4. Make more of your grains whole. Read the ingredients list and
choose products that list a whole-grain ingredient first, such as
whole wheat, brown rice, or oatmeal.
5. Move to fat-free or low-fat dairy. Dairy products, as well as soy
milks, offer calcium, vitamin D, and many other nutrients your
body needs.
6. Drink water instead of sugary drinks. Regular soda and other drinks
such as fruit drinks and energy drinks can have added sugars. Instead,
reach for a tall glass of water.
7. Select foods with less sodium. Read the nutrition facts label to
compare sodium in packaged foods like soup, canned vegetables,
and frozen meals; choose the foods with lower amounts.
8. Limit added sugars. Added sugars, syrups, and sweeteners
increase calories without contributing essential nutrients.
9. Replace saturated fats with unsaturated. Most saturated fats
come from animal products. Choose lower-fat dairy and lean
options for meat and poultry—like lean beef and grilled chicken
breast without the skin.
The sectioned colors on the plate stand for the
following food groups:
Orange—grains
Green—vegetables
Red—fruits
Blue—milk and dairy products
Purple—meat, beans, fish, and nuts


PERSONAL FITNESS 43
.Healthy Eating: Good Nutrition Made Easy
Energy and Calories
The foods you eat provide energy for your body when they are
broken down in your stomach or intestinal tract, absorbed into
the bloodstream, and stored in the cells of your body. When
your body demands energy, stored supplies of carbohydrates or
fats are broken down and transported to the cells that require
energy. In the cells, carbohydrates (in the form of sugar) and
fats are used in chemical processes that release energy and
cause muscles to contract. Energy also is used to carry on other
bodily functions, including those of your stomach and digestive
tract, liver, kidneys, and nervous system.
Your body’s energy needs are spoken of as calories. Only
carbohydrates, fats, and proteins provide calories in your diet.
Although foods contain vitamins and minerals, these elements
do not provide calories. Water also has no calories. Labels tell
how many grams of carbohydrates, fat, and protein are in food.
Labels also list total calories.
Carbohydrates have 4 calories per gram, fats have 9
calories per gram, and proteins have 4 calories per gram. It
would almost seem logical that it would be better to eat more
fatty foods since they provide the most energy (calories). Gram
for gram, they do provide the most energy, but eating lots of fat
can cause many problems. Excess dietary fat can lead to
various cardiovascular diseases as well as obesity.
The more intense an exercise, the more calories you need.
If you were to walk and run for the same amount of time,
running would require the most calories. How long the exercise
lasts (its duration) also has an impact on caloric requirements.
If you were to exercise for 20 minutes one day and then do the
same type of exercise the next day for 30 minutes, you would
need more calories to carry out the exercise for 30 minutes.
Your heart beats
all the time,
even while you
sleep, and needs
a constant supply
of energy.
The quality of calories is just as important as the
proper quantity of calories. Receiving 1,000 calories
from empty-calorie foods and 1,000 calories from a
well-balanced diet is not the same. Both plans provide
1,000 calories, but only the balanced diet will provide
the required vitamins and minerals.


44 PERSONAL FITNESS
.Healthy Eating: Good Nutrition Made Easy
To monitor your food intake,
it is necessary to be aware of
your body. If you are not eating
enough, you may feel lazy and
tired. You will not have enough
energy to participate in many
activities. You also may be more
vulnerable to colds and flu.
If you are constantly eating
more than your energy needs, you
may feel bloated and uncomfort-
able. Over time, you may notice a
weight gain. Weight gain is often
slow enough that you do not
notice it right away. In fact, you
may not notice until you put on a
favorite shirt and discover your
clothing does not fit anymore.
Weight control is more than
just maintaining an ideal body
weight throughout your life. Weight control involves fat control. If
you are inactive and eat poorly, your body composition may have
a large portion of fat. If you are active, exercise regularly, and eat
nutritious meals, though your body weight may be the same as
that of someone who is fatter, your body will have better muscle
tone and less fat than someone who is inactive and eats poorly.
Some people (athletes, for example) may weigh more but are
lean. Other people might not weigh as much but can still be
classified as obese. With respect to how you look and feel, it is bet-
ter to think in terms of “fat control” rather than “weight control.”
Behavior Modification
Exercise and good nutrition are two of the elements of having a
healthy weight; the other is behavior modification. Behavior
modification means the techniques, tips, and tricks you use
when you’re trying to become more active or to eat healthier.
One example of behavior modification is getting a reward for
succeeding at the behavior. When used together, these three
components can help you control the amount of fat on your
body. By eating properly, your dietary intake will be balanced
and adequate in calories. By exercising, you will use the calories
that you consume.
With planning, healthy meals can be prepared
even in the wilderness.


PERSONAL FITNESS 45
.Healthy Eating: Good Nutrition Made Easy
Most vegetables, grains, and fruits are high in nutrition and
low in fat compared with dairy products and meats. Emphasize
the high-priority foods when planning meals and snacks.
Remember that it is important to eat a well-balanced diet of
foods from all food groups. Serve yourself smaller portions to
begin your meal. Eat until you are comfortably full, then stop.
Good Snacks Help Build
Better Bodies
For some people, snacking between meals is a good
idea. In fact, it is healthier to eat a light snack between
breakfast and lunch, and between lunch and dinner.
Of course, nutritious snacks are best, and too much
snacking will spoil your appetite for a healthy lunch
or dinner. Snack on fruit or finger vegetables such as
celery and carrots. Try not to eat just because you are
bored. You could easily devour a whole bag of potato
chips or half a bag of cookies when you are watching
television or doing homework. Make a point to notice
what you are eating and how much.
A menu plan not only helps you prepare nutritious meals, but also
helps cut down on the expense of unplanned food purchases.
Exercise at least
60 minutes a day.
Your exercise
program should
include a mix of
aerobic activities
(such as bicycling
or brisk walking),
muscle-
strengthening
activities (such as
resistance
training),
and bone-
strengthening
activities (such as
running or
lifting weights).





PERSONAL FITNESS 47
.Physical Fitness
Physical Fitness
Personal fitness is the result of your efforts to have the healthiest
life possible. Social, mental, and spiritual fitness are important
parts of achieving personal fitness. Physical fitness is an
important part, too. Physical fitness means different things to
different people. Many fitness experts say physical fitness is a
state of well-being with low risk of premature health problems
and reduced risks of diseases like heart disease and obesity. A
physically fit person has the energy to participate in a variety of
physical activities, to enjoy daily recreational and social activities,
and to meet the energy demands of unforeseen emergencies.
A personal physical fitness program is important because
the ordinary tasks of daily living do not provide enough regular
vigorous exercise to maintain good body composition,
cardiovascular endurance, or muscle tone.
Several studies have shown that Scout-aged people in the
United States lack physical fitness. Most adults do not exercise
regularly, and school-age children (ages 6 through 17) have
become less fit in recent years. Today’s young people generally
have more body fat and perform worse in cardiovascular endur-
ance events than youth in the past.
The President’s Council on Sports, Fitness & Nutrition
reports that children and teens today have poorer physical fitness
than those of 20 years ago. Many young people cannot run a
mile or do a single pull-up. These things are important because
the habits and attitudes you develop as a Scout and young adult
are the habits and attitudes you will carry with you as an adult.
Physical fitness includes the following four components:
1. Cardiorespiratory fitness
2. Muscular fitness (strength and endurance)
3. Flexibility
4. Body composition
Choose now the
kind of lifestyle
you want to have.


48 PERSONAL FITNESS
Physical Fitness.
No matter how physically fit you are now, you need to
know why, how, and when to start an exercise program. The
benefits of exercise include weight control, less stress, better
muscular tone, greater cardiovascular endurance, greater
flexibility, a better self-image, and just feeling good about
yourself and about the way you look.
Mapping Out a Course
Ask your parent or guardian to help you map out a 1-mile
course around your neighborhood by driving you in a vehicle
so you can check the odometer reading. Once you and your
parent or guardian have selected a safe course, go out and walk
or run that mile.
Create an index card for each week and write how long
it takes you to complete that mile every day you walk or run
the course. Keep your record posted on your refrigerator so you
can see your progress. You and will be amazed at the results.
If you have to walk most of the course the first few days,
do not be discouraged. Just try to run a little more of your route
each day. You will be amazed at how quickly you can progress
from barely being able to walk and run a mile to breezing
through it and adding more miles to your daily routine.
Team sports are
a great way to
combine exercise
and fun.


PERSONAL FITNESS 49
.Physical Fitness
One of the amazing things about the human body is how
well it responds to being physically active. But it might take a
few weeks for you to really notice the results. Stick with your
exercise plan and be patient—you will get in better shape. You
will find yourself creating a good habit that you will want to
stick with because you will be able to see and feel the results.
Persevere! You are worth it.
Cardiorespiratory Fitness
Cardiorespiratory fitness is the ability to perform aerobic
exercise for prolonged periods of time. Aerobic exercises are
defined as those exercises that involve a large portion of your
body’s muscle mass and are continuous and rhythmic. Aerobic
exercises are used mainly for fun and to reduce stress, control
weight, and improve cardiovascular endurance. Your body
adapts to regular aerobic exercise in about six to eight weeks.
Adaptations that help reduce stress happen quickly. Adaptations
that help reduce fat and control weight take a little longer.
No single aerobic exercise is best suited for everyone.
The best exercise for you is the one that you enjoy, and that
you have opportunity to do, including access to any necessary
facilities or equipment.
Exercises differ in the muscle groups they use. While run-
ning, walking, and bicycling use mainly leg muscles, swimming
also uses back and arm muscles. Many health professionals
consider swimming to be a superior aerobic exercise because
it is a full-body, no-impact activity.
When choosing an exercise, you must first consider your
purpose in exercising. Then choose an appropriate exercise that is
fun and that you can do regularly. Cross-training—varying your
workouts to strengthen both the muscular and the cardiovascular
systems—helps prevent injury and boredom or burnout from too
much repetition.
Handling a Side Stitch
If you experience a condition called “side stitch” when running, do not
be alarmed. Slow down to a slow jog, then breathe deeply in through
your nose and out through your mouth until the side stitch goes away.
Normally, you can run through this minor discomfort as long as you
breathe deeply and correctly when you run.
To decrease
the chances of
cramping, delay
your exercise for
an hour or two
after a meal.


50 PERSONAL FITNESS
Physical Fitness.
After you choose an exercise, determine how much
to exercise. Follow the FITT Scout principles:
• Frequency: Exercise 3 to 5 times each week.
• Intensity: Exercise at a comfortable intensity. On a
scale of 0 to 10, where 0 is resting and 10 is
maximum effort, you should be in the 5 to 8 range.
• Time: Exercise 15 to 60 minutes each time, with a
goal of at least 30 minutes each time.
• Type: Exercise using aerobic activities.
An exercise
program is
progressive.
Start out slowly.
Aerobic Exercises Get You Moving
Types of aerobic exercises include walking, backpacking,
bicycling, aerobic dance, jogging, running, and
swimming. Different types of aerobic exercises vary
greatly in intensity, or the difficulty of the exercise.


PERSONAL FITNESS 51
.Physical Fitness
It is important to exercise correctly. Remember that an
exercise program is progressive. Let’s use running as an example.
You might not be able to run for 20 minutes continuously the
first day. If you need to, start out the first few days just walking.
Then alternate several minutes of running and walking. In a few
weeks, you will be running the entire 20 minutes. Remember,
start slowly! Do not forget to warm up and stretch.
The intensity of the exercise is inversely related to the
amount of time you can continue the exercise. In other words,
if you jog slowly, you may be able to exercise for 20 minutes at
first. But if you were to sprint, you might last only a few minutes.
You should have a sense of how you feel when you are
exercising. Do not exhaust yourself. Pace yourself to finish the
20 minutes. A good running pace is a “run-talk” pace, slow
enough that you can carry on a conversation with someone
running beside you. If you are running too fast, you will be
too tired and unable to talk comfortably.
Another way to monitor your
intensity is to check your heart rate
about five minutes after you start
exercising. To do this, stop exercising
and place the index and middle finger of
your right hand on the radial artery of
your left wrist. When you feel the
heartbeat pulsations, count the number
of beats you feel in 15 seconds. Multiply
the number of beats you count by four
to get your heartbeat per minute. Your
exercising heart rate should be between
125 and 170 beats per minute.
The first few minutes of exercise may seem uncomfortable
because it takes a few minutes for your body to adjust each
time you exercise. You can lessen the initial discomfort by
starting with an appropriate warm-up.
A suitable warm-up includes five to 10 minutes of low-
intensity movements followed by several minutes of stretching
exercises. The best way to start a warm-up is to actually do your
aerobic exercise but at a very light intensity. For example, if you
run, your warm-up might include walking or a slow jog. Warm-up
activities help decrease the chance of injury and increase blood
flow to active muscles, body temperature, and metabolism (the
chemical processes that release energy in the body). All these
changes help make for a smoother flow into your exercise.
The harder you
exercise, the
higher your heart
rate, and the less
time you will be
able to continue
the exercise.


52 PERSONAL FITNESS
Physical Fitness.
Muscular Strength and Endurance
Muscular strength is the ability of your muscles to contract and
exert force against an opposing force. Muscular strength is
usually measured in terms of how much force your muscles
can exert—for example, lifting a certain amount of weight.
Muscular endurance is the ability of your muscles to con-
tract repeatedly or hold a contraction against an opposing force.
For example, hiking up a mountain or carrying supplies to a
camp requires great muscular endurance. Every activity you
do requires some muscular strength and endurance.
Strengthening exercises such as weight lifting build denser,
stronger bones and will help a person maintain bone density
later in life. These types of exercises can also enhance
coordination and reaction time, and build stronger ligaments
Maintaining strong muscles throughout your life will
let you take part in more activities when you get older.
Many people lower their physical activity so much as
they age that muscles weaken quickly and stop them
from doing simple household chores.
Include stretching
exercises in your
warm-up.
Gain Without Pain!
While exercising (or doing the exercise tests for this
merit badge), if you experience shortness of breath,
pain in your chest or arms, nausea, or difficulty
breathing, or if you feel physically exhausted, ease
into a slow walk. Do not overexert yourself to the
point of extreme discomfort.


PERSONAL FITNESS 53
.Physical Fitness
and joints to help prevent injury. Strong muscles also help
support the bony structures of your body and help with good
posture.
The abdominal muscles are some of the most neglected
muscles of the body. Weak abdominal muscles are a major
cause of lower back pain. This muscle weakness also may
contribute to spinal curvature abnormalities, poor posture,
and a bulging belly. Strong abdominal muscles help support
the spine and maintain good posture.
You do not need an expensive weight room or a health
club to do strengthening exercises. Sit-ups, push-ups, and pull-
ups are great exercises to strengthen your shoulders, chest,
back, arms, and abdomen. Spending 10 to 20 minutes each day
doing these three exercises will make a difference.
Start by seeing how many sit-ups, push-ups, and pull-ups
you can do without stopping. Take one-third to one-half of that
number and do that many sit-ups, push-ups, and pull-ups as a
set three times. Rest a minute or two between each set. As you
become more fit, you will be able to do more repetitions of
these exercises. Try to push yourself with the goal of being tired
but not exhausted at the end of each set. This will help you to
get stronger over time.
Some strength-training programs require special training
techniques such as alternating body parts so muscles can get
Hiking is a great way to build muscle endurance.
Remember to
avoid “bouncing”
when counting
how many sit-ups
you can do.


54 PERSONAL FITNESS
Physical Fitness.
the rest they need. For your training program, you can do sit-
ups, push-ups, and pull-ups as many as four to six days each
week, or each day that you do your aerobic exercise. Make
sure that you rest about two minutes between each set of exer-
cises. Breathe out (exhale) when you exert yourself such as in
the pulling position of a pull-up or the pushing portion of the
push-up.
As your training progresses, you will notice increased
strength. You can keep a progress record by testing yourself
every week. Use the results from the previous weeks to gauge
your overall progress and to decide whether your exercise sets
should be increased.
Flexibility
Flexibility is defined as a joint’s range of motion. The more a
joint can move through a range of motion, the greater its
flexibility. All joints in your body have some degree of flexibility.
While the joints for which flexibility is most important depend
on the sport or activity in which you are involved, overall good
flexibility in all areas of the body is very important.
Stretching exercises are also an important part of
your warm-up for an aerobic exercise. Stretching helps
get blood circulating into the working muscles, and
warms them up to help prevent injury during an
activity. Stretching is easy to learn, but there is a
right way and a wrong way. Do your stretching
exercises at the end of your warm-up, when
your body is warmed to a light sweat, and
again when you have completed your
exercises. The right way is to hold each
stretch for about 20 to 30 seconds.
Try to focus your attention on the
muscles being stretched, and relax.
Do not bounce up and down or
Weight training routines are built around repetitions and sets. A repetition
is a series of a single exercise. A set is a group of repetitions of that
exercise. For example, to complete two sets of 15 repetitions for the chest/
bench press, you must do the chest/bench press 15 times in a row to
complete one set, rest, and then do the chest/bench press another 15
times in a row to complete your second set.


PERSONAL FITNESS 55
.Physical Fitness
stretch past the point of pain. Stretch the muscle to the point
where you feel a light tension on the muscle. As you feel the
tension release, increase the stretch just a little until tension is
felt again. Continue this for about 30 seconds, then rest and
repeat the stretch two or three times. Breathe normally as you
hold the stretch.
The sit-and-reach test is an easy way to measure flexibility
of areas such as the lower back and the back of the thighs. This
test uses a special “sit-and-reach” box or similar improvised
device such as a yardstick taped to a bench. This stretch works
many joints and muscles, including hips, shoulders, and ankles.
To assume the starting position, remove your shoes and
sit facing the sit-and-reach box. Keep your knees fully extended
and flat on the floor, and place your feet against the box. Extend
your arms forward
with your hands
placed on top of each
other, palms down.
Bend at the hips (not
curling the shoulders),
reach forward along
the measuring scale,
hold for at least one
second and relax. Take
the best measurement
of four trials.
Sit and reach to measure lower-back flexibility.


56 PERSONAL FITNESS
Physical Fitness.
As an alternative to the sit-and-reach
box, tape a yardstick to the top of a
bench. Or, tape a yardstick to the edge
of a bench laid on its side so that the
seat is the panel against which the
feet are placed. Make sure to mount
the yardstick so that the 9-inch mark is
in line with the panel against which
the feet are placed.
Making a Sit-and-Reach Device
To make the box, cut the following pieces, using any
sturdy wood or 3⁄4-inch plywood.
• Four 12-by-12-inch pieces
• One 12-by-21-inch piece
Assemble the pieces using wood
screws and glue.
Inscribe the top panel with
gradations so that the 23-centimeter (or 9-inch) mark is
in line with the vertical panel against which the feet will
be placed. The measuring scale should extend from 0 at
the front edge to 53 centimeters at the far end. You may
choose to simply tape a yardstick to the top panel.
9"
9"
12"
0 MARK
12"
12"
12"


PERSONAL FITNESS 57
.Physical Fitness
Body Composition
Body composition is the proportion of your body that is fat or
muscle. It normally is given as a percentage of body fat. For
example, if you weigh 120 pounds and have 15 percent body
fat, then you have 18 pounds of fat on your body.
A certain amount of fat is necessary to sustain life. This
essential fat is located in your bones, in your nervous system,
and around your internal organs. Too much fat can be unhealthy
and lead to diseases like Type 2 diabetes, high blood pressure,
and other cardiovascular diseases. For these reasons, there is a
lot of pressure on Scout-age youth to have a “normal” body
composition and weight. There are many factors that affect a
young person’s body composition that are outside of their
control, such as their genetics. But, fortunately, eating healthfully
and being physically active are very effective at reducing the risk
for these diseases even if your weight does not change! In other
words, you are will be much healthier if you do your best to eat
healthy and be active rather than focusing solely on trying to lose
weight. You can be healthy at any size.
If you are trying to lose fat, it is important to exercise for
longer periods of time to burn more calories. Picking an aerobic
exercise you like will help you stick with it longer. If you have
the time and interest, it will be helpful to include resistance
exercises such as weight lifting or calisthenics in your program.
If your goal is to lose weight, remember that eating healthfully
is just as important as exercising, so be sure your routine
includes eating the right foods in reasonable quantity.
Weight control is a slow, unpredictable process. When fat
needs to be lost, a one-pound-per-week goal is best. This is an
average rate. Some weeks you might not experience any fat
loss, and other weeks, more. Rapid fat and weight loss is not
healthy. If you stick with a good exercise program and eat
If you are concerned about having an unhealthy amount of body fat, the
most effective way to lose it is to burn calories by being more physically
active and eating healthfully. Part of this is to reduce eating “empty
calories.” These are foods that have a lot of calories but not many
nutrients—like regular soda, candy, and fried chips. Replace these with
healthier choices like fruits, veggies or low-sugar or low-fat alternatives
to your empty calorie choices.


58 PERSONAL FITNESS
Physical Fitness.
healthfully,
you will
probablylose
weight. But
remember:
Eating
healthfully and
being more active are far
more important to your personal
fitness than is having a certain
body weight.
Just as you would see a
physician for health and
medical problems, professionals are
available to give exercise and nutrition guidance. Exercise
physiologists and registered dietitian nutritionists from a nearby
college or university usually are more than willing to meet with
you or your troop.
Measuring Body Composition
You can measure body composition in more than one way. In fact,
some medical professionals use very expensive equipment
for the most accurate results. However, many
health care professionals use a simple tool
called a body fat caliper that can quickly
calculate body fat percentages and
other body composition
measurements with reasonable
accuracy.
Another method is by using a
tape measure. You can take
measurements of several places, such
as the thighs, arms, abdomen,
shoulders, and chest, once a month.
While these measurements will not tell
you your body fat percentage, they can
be used to monitor the progress of your
exercise and nutrition program. It’s best to
have someone help you, and to have the same
person take your measurements whenever you
are ready to be remeasured.
Tape measure with
BMI calculator
Using a body fat caliper


PERSONAL FITNESS 59
.Physical Fitness
An efficient way for you to determine your body
composition is by using what is called the body mass index, or
BMI. Your BMI is computed by using a formula. Like all
“home” methods for measuring body fat, the BMI is not
entirely accurate. This is especially true if you are a fit athlete
with a very high muscle mass. That may very likely elevate
your weight and cause your BMI assessment to identify you as
overweight or obese. For the average person, though, the BMI is
a useful method.
BMI is calculated the same way for children and teens as it
is for adults. But because most young people are still growing,
it is interpreted differently. Your health care provider can tell
you if your BMI is appropriate for your age. This is called BMI-
for-age. (See “Calculating Your BMI” on page 69.)
Even if you don’t
lose weight,
you will still be
healthier than you
were before you
started exercising
regularly.





.Creating a Personal Fitness Program
Creating a Personal
Fitness Program
Other than not smoking, eating healthy foods and exercising
regularly are the two most important things you can do to live a
long and healthy life. Studies of people who live to great age—into
their 90s and beyond—show that these people have at least one
thing in common: regular exercise. People who avoid the major
health issues of today, like heart disease, hypertension and Type 2
diabetes, also eat a healthy diet. Because of their importance, the
major goals of your 12-week personal fitness program are for you
to become more physically active and eat healthier.
Exercise Records
Remember that an important part of healthy exercise is the
discipline of staying on a regular program. To help with this
discipline, keep an accurate record of your fitness program.
(This is also a merit badge requirement.) Your exercise log
should record the date, describe the activity, and show the
comparative measurement. If it is aerobic exercise, record the
frequency, intensity, time and type of exercise; if it is a
muscular-fitness exercise, record the number of repetitions,
time, distance, number of sets, and weight used.
Two forms are included on the next pages to use for your
personal record, or you can create your own forms. On the
Exercise Log, describe your planned
exercises in the left column and then
simply check off each item completed
on the indicated dates. On the Exercise
Journal, enter a daily description of your
activity with one journal page for each
week. Use either the log or journal
format for your daily record.


62 PERSONAL FITNESS
.Creating a Personal Fitness Program.
Exercise Journal
Week ____________________
Date Description of Activity


PERSONAL FITNESS 63
...Creating a Personal Fitness Program
Exercise Log Week ______________ Week _______________ Week _______________
Exercise Description Su M T W Th F Sa Su M T W Th F Sa Su M T W Th F Sa


64 PERSONAL FITNESS
.Creating a Personal Fitness Program.
Healthy Eating
Besides trying to exercise regularly, another important part of
personal fitness is doing your best to eat healthfully. Keep track
of the number of healthy eating goals you achieve each week.
These can be any eating goals you want to work on. On page 42
are listed tips for achieving nine possible goals; see how many
you can achieve each week. You can create your own separate
record or use the one above from the President’s Council on
Sports, Fitness & Nutrition.


PERSONAL FITNESS 65
..Creating a Personal Fitness Program
The Connection Between
Good Health and Exercise
Regular exercise can provide important benefits for your overall
health. People who exercise regularly are less likely to be
overweight because exercise burns up calories. Blood pressure
is reduced by exercise. In fact, the combination of exercise
and weight reduction often allows people with hypertension
(high blood pressure) to control their blood pressure without
the use of medication. This control may be better than was
possible with drugs.
It is common for smokers to quit smoking as they begin
exercise programs. Research has shown that active joggers
have lower total cholesterol than men of the same age who
do not run. There is no substitute for exercise when it comes
to protecting your heart.
Without sufficient exercise, bones lose their calcium and
become brittle. This demineralization of bones has been docu-
mented in astronauts returning from space, where the lack of
gravity robs activity of its exercise value. Weak and brittle
bones, caused by lack of exercise, are common in the elderly.
Strong bones contribute to personal fitness by keeping an
active person energetic.
It’s important to find the activities you like to do best, and
there are lots of choices when it comes to exercise options. For
people who are limited by choice or circumstances to one form
of exercise, a full-body exercise is strongly recommended. In
full-body exercise, all muscles and joints are moved and flexed.
Such forms of exercise include brisk walking, running, cycling,
rowing, and swimming.
Types of Exercise
People who exercise regularly feel and look younger than those who
do not. Improvements in muscle tone and circulation undoubtedly
contribute to freedom from fatigue and the feeling of well-being that
the physically fit enjoy.
The connection between being in good shape and being productive
is also a powerful one. Research has shown that healthy people are
more productive and efficient than those who are not healthy.


66 PERSONAL FITNESS
.Creating a Personal Fitness Program.
Walking, particularly brisk “power walks” of several miles
on a daily basis, can give many of the same benefits as running
without most of the injury risks. Walking can also be done at
any age without special equipment or facilities. Cycling, too,
matches and even enhances the health benefits of running by
eliminating impact stress. However, it does have a relatively
high injury rate and requires special equipment.
Rowing and swimming are to some degree superior to other
types of full-body exercise because both the upper and lower
body are fully involved (assuming you are rowing a sliding-seat
craft or simulator). The injury rates for rowing and swimming
exercise are very low, and there is no impact stress in either
activity. Joint stress is further reduced in swimming by the
buoyancy effect of water immersion. But rowing requires rela-
tively expensive special equipment, and swimming requires
access to a suitable, safe facility.
Many sports incorporate full-body exercise such as tennis,
golf (if you walk the course), and team sports such as soccer
or basketball. The fun and competition of sports add further
incentive for healthy exercise. In terms of healthy lifestyle,
every person should choose a form of exercise or sport that
can be pursued and enjoyed for a lifetime. Among the many
benefits will be a significantly healthier—and longer—life.
Water sports are
popular during
the long, hot days
of summer.
Sports like snowboarding help people keep fit during cold
winter months.


PERSONAL FITNESS 67
..Creating a Personal Fitness Program
Physical Fitness Tests
It is important to know your current level of fitness to create
the best possible exercise program for you. The following tests
will help you measure your physical fitness. You will also use
these tests to fulfill your merit badge requirements. Each test
must be administered by, or under the supervision of, your
merit badge counselor. After you’ve completed the fitness
testing, compare your scores to the tables that begin on page
80. If you scored at or below the 20th percentile, work on
improving in that test. If you scored above the 20th percentile
and would like to do even better, you might want to consider
including this in your 12 weeks of exercise training.
Aerobic Fitness Test
Run or walk one mile as fast as you can.
Flexibility Test
Using a sit-and-reach box constructed according to
specifications in this pamphlet, make four repetitions and
record the fourth reach. This last reach must be held steady for
one second to qualify. (Remember to keep your knees down.)
Strength Tests
You must do the curl-ups exercise and one other (either push-ups
or pull-ups). You may also do all three for extra experience and
benefit. (Measurements should be in numbers and repetitions.)
1. Curl-ups—Record the number of curl-ups done correctly in
60 seconds. The curl-ups must be done in the form explained
and illustrated in the merit badge pamphlet.
2. Pull-ups—Record the total number of pull-ups completed
correctly in 60 seconds. Be consistent with the procedures
presented in the merit badge pamphlet.
3. Push-ups—Record the total number of push-ups completed
correctly in 60 seconds. Be consistent with the procedures
presented in the merit badge pamphlet.


68 PERSONAL FITNESS
.Creating a Personal Fitness Program.
Curl-Ups
To assume the starting
position, lie on your back
with knees flexed, feet on
the floor, and heels
between 12 and 18 inches
from the buttocks. Cross
arms on your chest with
the hands on the opposite
shoulders. The feet are
held by a partner to keep
them on the floor. Curl to
the sitting position until
the elbows touch any-
where between knees and
hips). Arms must remain
on the chest. Return to the
starting position, with
lower back and shoulder
blades touching the floor.
Pull-Ups
Begin the exercise
hanging from the bar
with arms fully extended
and hands on the bar,
palms forward and
directly above the shoul-
ders. Pull up until you
can touch the top of the
bar with the bottom of
your outstretched chin.
Note: The bar should be about 6 inches
above your upper reach.


PERSONAL FITNESS 69
..Creating a Personal Fitness Program
Push-Ups
Begin in a prone position with
the palms flat on the floor and
placed under or slightly wider
than the shoulders. The feet are
flexed up with the ball of the foot
and the toes on the floor. Push
up by fully extending the arms.
Try not to lock the elbows. The
shoulders, hips, and legs should
remain in a straight line from the
heels to the head. A correct
push-up is when the elbows are
extended when “up” and the
elbows are at, or less, than a 90
degree angle when “down.”
Calculating Your BMI
Step 1—Multiply your weight in pounds by 703.
Step 2—Divide the figure you get in No. 1 above by your height
in inches.
Step 3—Divide the figure you get in No. 2 above by your height
in inches.
Here is how you would calculate your BMI if your weight is 130 pounds
and your height is 68 inches:
Step 1—130 x 703 = 91390
Step 2—91390 ÷ 68 = 1344
Step 3—1396 ÷ 68 = 20
Body Composition Test
While the BMI, or body mass index, does not measure actual
body fat, it is a practical method to screen for weight problems.
If you have an interest in changing your body composition as
you work on this merit badge, then you may want to determine
your BMI. These measurements should only be used as one
indicator of the progress you make as you pursue your personal
physical fitness program; they should not be used as an
indicator of your overall fitness.


Fitness Measurements
Aerobic Fitness Start 4th Week 8th Week 12th Week Goal
1-Mile Run/Walk
(In minutes and seconds)
Strength Start 4th Week 8th Week 12th Week Goal
Curl-Ups
Push-Ups
Pull-Ups
You must do the sit-ups exercise and one other (either push-ups or pull-ups). You may also do all three for extra experience and
benefit. (Measurements should be in numbers and repetitions.)
Flexibility Start 4th Week 8th Week 12th Week Goal
Reach (In centimeters)


PERSONAL FITNESS 71
..Creating a Personal Fitness Program
Your Fitness Program
Your comprehensive fitness program should be individualized
to you. Consider the four components of physical fitness
(cardiorespiratory fitness, muscular fitness, flexibility, body
composition) and your current fitness level. What do you want
to accomplish? What are your goals or objectives?.
While your program will be specific to you, it
should include these five elements:
1. Warm-up
2. Aerobic exercises
3. Strength exercises
4. Flexibility exercises
5. Cool-down
For good health, move 60 minutes every day. Most of this
can be unplanned and casual, like walking the dog, biking to
school or playing in the park. But to improve cardiorespiratory
fitness, include vigorous intensity aerobic exercise at least three
days per week and, to improve muscular fitness, strengthening
exercises at least three days per week. To help build healthy
bones, some of this activity should include jumping and landing,
like jumping rope, basketball, tennis, and hopscotch.
Warm-Up
The warm-up routine should be several minutes of low-intensity
movement and then some muscle stretching. For example, you
could do a light jog or run in place for two to three minutes;
skip rope at a moderate pace for one to two minutes; walk briskly
for three to five minutes; or swim a crawl or trudgen stroke at
slow to medium speed for 50 to 100 yards. This low-intensity
exercise should then be followed by two to three minutes of
stretching exercises.
Swimming
provides good
aerobic exercise.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has a quick calculator
for teens to find out their body mass index. This can be handy for
requirements 6 and 8. With your parent or guardian’s permission, go to
www.cdc.gov/healthyweight/bmi/calculator.html, plug in the numbers,
and you will almost instantly find out your BMI.


72 PERSONAL FITNESS
.Creating a Personal Fitness Program.
Aerobic Exercises
To improve cardiorespiratory fitness, think of the FITT idea from
page 50. The goal for any type of aerobic exercise is to have a
Frequency of 3 to 5 days per week, an Intensity of 5-8 on a 10
point scale, and a Time of 15-60 minutes per day. The Type of
move is up to you.
Start your program by using a plan that alternates periods of
vigorous and slow/resting activity. For example, if your fitness
goal is to jog for 30 minutes, start by jogging for one minute,
walking for two minutes, and repeating the cycle. Do what you
can without exhausting yourself, even if it’s only 5 minutes, and
work up to completing a 30-minute session. With each workout
you will find yourself getting more fit. Over time, you will find
you can jog the entire 30 minutes. Tou can create your own
program like this for almost any aerobic activity.
Strength Exercises
There are over 650 muscles in the human body. So, when
thinking of how to exercise them, group them together: upper
body, core (or torso), and legs. Exercise these three groups
three times per week. After your aerobic and stretching
routines, complete an exercise for your upper body (such as
push-ups or pull-ups), your core (planks, curl-ups), and your
legs (wall sits, body squats). Alternate between “front” and
“back” exercises on different days, if possible. Use your body
weight, a set of weights, or a machine routine. For exercise
ideas, talk to your merit badge counselor or, after getting your
parent or guardian’s permission, do an internet search on
“bodyweight exercises.”
Try to do three sets for each body part and with each set, try
to push yourself so your muscles are tired at the end of each set.
You might want to do your exercises in several sets with a few
minutes of rest between sets of the same body part. (For
example, you could do a set of 15 push-ups, a set of 15 curl-ups,
and a set of body squats; then repeat this cycle two more times.)
Keep a log of your activity. Doing this will remind you to
rest your muscles for at least a day after a strength-training
workout before working the same muscles again.


PERSONAL FITNESS 73
.Creating a Personal Exercise Program
Flexibility Exercises
Follow your strength exercises with a flexibility workout.
1
2
3
Cats and Camels
Step 1—Get on your hands and knees as shown, with
your hands and knees a shoulder’s width apart.
Step 2—Slowly arch your back upward, toward the ceiling,
then lower it toward the floor.
Step 3—Straighten your back to a comfortable position.
Slowly repeat steps 1 through 3, five times.
.Creating a Personal Fitness Program.


74 PERSONAL FITNESS
.Creating a Personal Fitness Program.
1
Lower Trunk Rotations
Step 1—Lie flat on your back with your knees bent
as shown.
Step 2—Keep your knees together and slowly lower them
to the left. Hold this position for 10 to 15 seconds.
Step 3—Raise your knees back to the starting position,
then slowly lower your knees to the right and hold this
position for 10 to 15 seconds.
Repeat steps 1 through 3, three times on each side.
2
3


PERSONAL FITNESS 75
..Creating a Personal Fitness Program
Cool-Down
After your last exercise, get up and walk around or take a casual
swim. If you are walking, move your arms back and forth, then
up and down. Do not simply roll over and play dead after your
last exercise. The cool-down routine helps prevent muscle cramps
and enhances the aerobic and flexibility benefits of your exer-
cise. If you simply “play dead,” when you do try to get up you
may feel light-headed or dizzy and risk fainting or nausea.
Sample Program
Refer to the Sample Physical Fitness Program starting later in this
chapter. This program is for a Scout who just earned First Class.
They have been physically active because of the activity require-
ments needed to earn Tenderfoot, Second Class and First Class
ranks. They also have access to some special exercise equipment.
For variety, the sample program has several warm-up and
exercise options. You can include options or alternative routines
in your program, or choose one specific routine. Remember to
consider access and convenience in making these selections.
After your
cool-down
exercises, check
your pulse for
regular beat.
1
Hamstring Stretch
Step 1—Lie flat on your back and extend one
knee toward your head, as shown, with your
hands clasped together at the back of your knee.
Step 2—Slowly lift your foot upward, toward the
ceiling, until you feel a stretch in the back side of
your thigh or calf. Hold this position for 15 to 20
seconds. (To obtain a better stretch, use a towel
or belt wrapped around your foot to pull with
your hands and arms.)
Step 3—Slowly lower your leg and return to the
starting position. Repeat steps 1 through
3, three times for each leg.
2


76 PERSONAL FITNESS
.Creating a Personal Fitness Program.
If you are going swimming, biking, skating, or whatever
your routine, be sure to follow all safety rules and requirements.
Do not attempt to use weights or other special equipment with-
out getting instruction on the safe use of this equipment from
a coach, instructor, or experienced user.
Now, using the sample program as a model, list your per-
sonal fitness test results and personal goals to plan your own
12-week fitness program. Begin by filling in the last column
(Goals) on your fitness measurement sheet. Decide what you
want to achieve on each of the aerobic, flexibility, and strength
measurements. Be realistic, but challenge yourself to make a
substantial improvement on each measure. Then figure out
what routines will get you from your starting measurements
to your goals. Plan your fitness program accordingly. You may
want to adjust and revise your program every week or two
as you progress. Be sure that your program is reviewed and
approved by your counselor before you begin the exercises.
Sample Physical Fitness Program
Warm-Up
Frequency: Before each aerobic or strength routine
1. Do ONE of the following:
a. Jog or run in place two to three minutes.
b. Do an easy rope skip for one to two minutes.
c. Walk briskly for three to five minutes.
2. Do stretching exercises for three to five minutes.
Cardiorespiratory Fitness
Frequency: Three times per week (MWF); Intensity: 5-8 on 10-point scale;
Time: Start with 15 minutes, work up to 30 minutes; Type: Jog, walk; Do
muscular fitness exercises on Tuesday and Thursday.
Review and adjust distance, repetitions, and rest intervals each week as
your performance improves.
Jog-walk program:
Jogging 2 minutes _________ Repetitions __________
Walking 1 minute __________ Repetitions __________
Repeat this cycle five times (15 minutes total).
Each week, increase either number of cycles or time spent jogging.


PERSONAL FITNESS 77
..Creating a Personal Fitness Program
Muscular Fitness
Frequency: Two times per week (T-Th); 15-20 repetitions (stop when tired);
Time: Two sets; Type: Bodyweight exercises. Review weights, repetitions,
and rest intervals weekly and adjust as appropriate.]
Weight lifting:
1. Press:
Weight ______ Repetitions _______ Sets _______
2. Core (torso):
Weight ______ Repetitions _______ Sets _______ Rest time _______
3. Squats:
Weight ______ Repetitions _______ Sets _______
Complete 1 set of squats, then 1 set of toe raises, and repeat
Flexibility Routine
Frequency: Five times per week
1. Hamstring stretch. Lie flat; extend one knee toward the head, with
hands clasped together behind the knee. Slowly lift the foot upward,
hold 15-20 seconds, then slowly lower back to the starting position.
Repeat with the other leg. Do three repetitions.
2. Lower trunk rotations. Lie flat with knees slightly bent. Keep the knees
together and slowly lower them to the left; hold 10-15 seconds. Raise
the knees back to the starting position, then slowly lower the knees
to the right; hold 10-15 seconds. Do three repetitions.
3. Cats and camels. Get on hands and knees, with hands and knees a
shoulder’s width apart. Slowly arch the back upward, then lower it
toward the floor. Straighten the back to a comfortable position.
Do five repetitions.
Cool-Down
(Five-minute “walk-and-talk” after each aerobic or strength routine)
Do not neglect the cool-down period, which helps prevent muscle
cramps after exercise and enhances the benefits of your physical
fitness program.


78 PERSONAL FITNESS
Analyzing Your Record.
Analyzing Your Record
After week 12, compare your last test results to your first.
Requirement 8 says you must show improvement on the aerobic,
flexibility, and muscular strength tests. If you have shortened
your time for the mile run or doubled your number of pull-ups,
the quantity of your performance has improved. But think also
about your fitness quality:
• What is your recovery time after strenuous exercise? (How
long does it take for your heart rate to return to
its normal, resting rate?)
• What changes have occurred in your overall
stamina and endurance? Are you more or less
sleepy during the day?
• Have your eating habits changed?
• Do you enjoy participating in physical activities?
Consider how your body shows the results of personal and
physical fitness changes you have made in the last 12 weeks.
• Have exercise and improved eating habits caused changes
to your weight? How do your clothes fit now: bigger in
some spots but smaller in other areas? You may notice
changes to your body composition after 12 weeks of exer-
cise. Have changes to your body occurred because of
increased muscle mass and reduced body fat?
• How successful are you with your effort to eat healthier?
Did it become easier to eat healther during this 12
weeks? Was there a Healthy Eating Goal that was more
challenging than the others?


PERSONAL FITNESS 79
.Analyzing Your Record
• How have exercise and a healthy diet factored into any
positive changes? How can eating a wide variety of nutritious
foods contribute to a healthy growing body? How does
physical activity help make you stronger overall?
• Do you think you look and feel different? If you feel different,
describe and explain this difference to your counselor.
Ask yourself what this experience has taught you about
commitment and self-discipline. Think about what you have
learned about your body’s adaptability and response to activity.
Many fitness experts today believe that, on average, today’s
young people are significantly less physically fit than previous
generations. The charts that follow reflect test performance for
American young people.
Find your percentile level on the various measurements.
How do you compare on both your beginning and final scores?
How far up the scale did you progress after only three months
of regular exercise?
In terms of your own goals, what was your success? Did
you achieve the performance level you targeted for each of the
aerobic, endurance, flexibility, and strength measurements?
If not, your goals may have been unrealistic or your fitness
program may not have been sufficiently challenging. Or maybe
you simply did not make the full effort that you could have.
Based on your experience, what would you do differently
in designing another fitness program for yourself? Will personal
fitness be a priority for you in the future? If so, what will you
do to keep fit?


80 PERSONAL FITNESS
Analyzing Your Record.
Percentile Norms for the 1-Mile Walk/Run
for Boys
Age 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17+
Percentile Time (In minutes and seconds)
90 8:13 7:25 7:13 6:48 6:27 6:23 6:13 6:08
80 8:35 7:52 7:41 7:07 6:58 6:43 6:31 6:31
70 9:02 8:12 8:03 7:24 7:18 7:00 6:50 6:46
60 9:26 8:38 8:23 6:46 7:34 7:13 7:07 7:10
50 9:52 9:03 8:48 8:04 7:51 7:30 7:27 7:03
40 10:15 9:25 9:17 8:26 8:14 7:50 7:48 7:59
30 10:44 10:17 9:57 8:54 8:46 8:18 8:04 8:24
20 11:25 10:55 10:38 9:20 9:28 8:50 8:34 8:55
10 12:26 12:07 11:48 10:38 10:34 10:13 9:36 10:43
Source: The National Children and Youth Fitness Study
Percentile Norms for the 1-Mile Walk/Run
for Girls
Age 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17+
Percentile Time (In minutes and seconds)
90 9:09 8:45 8:34 8:27 8:11 8:23 8:28 8:20
80 9:56 9:35 9:30 9:13 8:49 9:04 9:06 9:10
70 10:27 10:10 10:05 9:48 9:31 9:49 9:41 9:41
60 10:51 10:35 10:32 10:22 10:04 10:20 10:15 10:16
50 11:14 11:15 10:58 10:52 10:32 10:46 10:34 10:34
40 11:54 11:46 11:26 11:22 10:58 11:20 11:08 10:59
30 12:27 12:33 12:03 11:55 11:35 11:53 11:49 11:43
20 13:12 13:17 12:53 12:43 12:10 12:48 12:32 12:30
10 14:20 14.35 14:07 13:45 13:13 14:07 13:42 13:46
Source: The National Children and Youth Fitness Study


PERSONAL FITNESS 81
.Analyzing Your Record
Percentile Norms for Curl-Ups
for Boys
Age 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17+
Percentile Number of Curl-Ups
90 47 48 50 52 52 53 55 56
80 43 43 46 48 49 50 51 51
70 38 40 43 45 45 46 48 49
60 36 38 40 41 43 44 45 46
50 34 36 38 40 41 42 43 43
40 32 34 35 37 39 40 41 41
30 30 31 33 34 37 37 39 39
20 26 28 30 31 34 35 36 35
10 22 22 25 28 30 31 32 31
Source: The National Children and Youth Fitness Study
Percentile Norms for Curl-Ups
for Girls
Age 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17+
Percentile Number of Curl-Ups
90 43 42 46 46 47 45 49 47
80 39 39 41 41 42 42 42 41
70 36 36 39 39 40 39 39 39
60 33 34 36 35 37 36 37 37
50 31 32 33 33 35 35 35 36
40 30 30 32 31 32 32 33 33
30 27 28 30 28 30 30 30 31
20 24 24 27 25 27 28 28 29
10 20 20 21 21 23 24 23 24
Source: The National Children and Youth Fitness Study


82 PERSONAL FITNESS
Analyzing Your Record.
Percentile Norms for Push-Ups
for Boys
Age 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17+
Percentile Number of Push-Ups
90 25 30 34 41 41 44 46 56
80 21 26 30 35 37 40 41 50
70 18 23 25 31 30 35 36 44
60 16 19 20 28 25 32 32 41
50 14 15 18 24 24 30 30 37
40 12 14 15 20 21 27 28 34
30 11 10 13 16 18 25 25 30
20 10 8 10 12 15 21 23 25
10 7 3 7 9 11 18 20 21
Source: The President’s Council on Fitness, Sports & Nutrition
Percentile Norms for Push-Ups
for Girls
Age 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17+
Percentile Number of Push-Ups
90 21 20 21 22 21 23 26 28
80 19 18 20 17 19 20 22 22
70 17 17 15 15 12 18 19 19
60 14 15 11 13 10 16 15 17
50 13 11 10 11 10 15 12 16
40 10 8 8 10 8 13 12 15
30 9 7 5 7 5 11 10 12
20 8 6 3 5 5 10 5 9
10 4 2 1 3 2 5 3 5
Source: The President’s Council on Fitness, Sports & Nutrition


PERSONAL FITNESS 83
.Analyzing Your Record
Percentile Norms for Pull-Ups
for Boys
Age 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17+
Percentile Number of Chin-Ups
90 8 8 8 10 12 14 14 16
80 5 5 7 8 9 11 12 14
70 4 4 6 7 8 10 11 12
60 2 3 5 5 6 9 10 11
50 1 2 4 4 5 8 9 10
40 1 1 2 3 4 6 8 9
30 0 0 1 1 3 5 6 7
20 0 0 0 0 1 3 5 5
10 0 0 0 0 0 1 2 3
Source: The National Children and Youth Fitness Study
Percentile Norms for Pull-Ups
for Girls
Age 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17+
Percentile Number of Chin-Ups
90 3 3 2 2 2 2 2 2
80 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
70 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 1
60 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
50 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
40 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
30 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
20 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
10 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Source: The National Children and Youth Fitness Study


84 PERSONAL FITNESS
Analyzing Your Record.
Percentile Norms for the Sit-and-Reach
for Boys
Age 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17+
Percentile (In inches)
90 13.0 13.5 13.0 13.5 14.0 15.0 16.0 16.5
80 12.0 12.5 12.0 12.0 13.0 14.0 15.0 15.0
70 11.5 11.5 11.5 11.5 12.0 13.0 14.0 14.0
60 11.0 11.0 10.5 10.5 11.0 12.0 13.0 13.0
50 10.5 10.0 10.0 10.0 10.5 11.0 12.0 12.5
40 9.5 9.5 9.0 9.5 10.0 10.5 11.0 11.5
30 9.0 9.0 8.5 9.0 9.5 9.5 10.5 10.5
20 8.0 8.0 7.5 7.5 8.0 8.5 9.0 9.5
10 7.0 7.0 5.5 6.0 6.0 6.5 7.0 7.5
Source: The National Children and Youth Fitness Study
Percentile Norms for the Sit-and-Reach
for Girls
Age 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17+
Percentile (In inches)
90 14.5 15.0 16.0 17.0 16.5 17.0 17.5 17.5
80 13.5 14.0 15.0 16.0 16.0 16.0 16.5 16.5
70 13.0 13.5 14.0 14.5 15.0 15.5 16.0 16.0
60 12.0 12.5 13.0 14.0 14.5 15.0 15.0 15.0
50 11.5 12.0 12.5 13.0 14.0 14.0 14.5 15.0
40 11.0 11.0 12.0 12.5 13.0 14.0 14.0 14.0
30 10.0 10.5 11.5 11.5 12.0 13.0 13.5 13.0
20 9.0 10.0 10.5 10.5 11.0 12.0 12.5 12.0
10 7.5 8.5 9.0 9.0 9.5 10.5 11.0 10.5
Source: The National Children and Youth Fitness Study





86 PERSONAL FITNESS
Careers in Personal Fitness.
Careers in
Personal Fitness
There are many exciting careers in the field of personal fitness.
Exercise Physiologist
An exercise physiologist can prescribe exercise programs for
cardiac and pulmonary patients referred by physicians. They
teach people about the benefits of exercise. Exercise
physiologists also evaluate cardiovascular and metabolic effects
in people, and help active athletes improve and maintain their
health and athletic performance.
Most exercise physiologists hold a master’s degree in
exercise science and have taken numerous courses in human
anatomy and physiology, chemistry, biomechanics, kinesiology,
exercise testing and prescription, and sports nutrition. An
internship is part of the curriculum.
Colleges and universities, rehabilitation clinics, hospitals,
sports and athletic programs, and health/fitness facilities hire
exercise physiologists. They frequently serve as sports and
wellness program instructors and directors, teachers, or
academic researchers.
Personal Trainer
A qualified personal trainer has an education in physiology,
health promotion, athletic training, kinesiology, or a similar
field. They should hold first-aid and CPR certifications.
Once considered a luxury for wealthy people who needed
help keeping up with an exercise routine, personal training has
undergone an overall transformation in the past several years,
emerging as one of the fastest-growing professions of this decade.
Personal trainers
should have
written policies
explaining their
services, costs,
cancellations,
length of contract,
and emergency
procedures.
They should also
require a medical
clearance form
to be completed
before they work
with individual
clients.


PERSONAL FITNESS 87
.Careers in Personal Fitness
Today, fitness professionals have an in-depth knowledge of
anatomy and physiology. Some are even qualified in rehabilita-
tion, nutrition, psychology, and fitness therapies, as well as
strength, conditioning, and flexibility programs.
Good trainers have excellent communication skills and can
motivate, lead, instruct, and guide their clients to make better
decisions regarding their own personal fitness. Some courses
can be studied and passed in as little as 25 hours of study,
while others can take three to four years to complete.
Dietitian
To become a dietitian, you need a four-year degree in dietetics
or nutrition with a nine- to 12-month internship or completion
of an undergraduate program that combines classroom and
clinical experience.
A Registered Dietitian Nutritionist (RDN) must earn a
bachelor of science or higher degree in nutrition science from an
accredited college, complete an internship, and pass an
examination required by the American Dietetic Association. Most
states require a license for professional dietitians. Dietitians work
with clients to figure out individual nutritional needs and
develop individual nutrition plans. They educate, advise, counsel,
monitor, and provide support to their clients. Doctors often refer
their patients to dietitians for dietary counseling.


88 PERSONAL FITNESS
Careers in Personal Fitness.
Coaches and Scouts
As a coach, you will need to work hard to instill both motivation
and determination in your players, even when your athletes go
through plateau periods when they cannot seem to beat their
own best time or are on a losing streak. Coaches help evaluate
athletes’ personal strengths and weaknesses to help them
improve their performance.
Coaches are responsible for the training and development
of athletes and sports teams. Scouts conduct searches for
talented players for various team sports on the college and
professional levels.
For high school coaching positions, schools normally hire
teachers willing to work at coaching part-time. If you feel you
can help motivate athletes, plan and manage practice sessions,
instruct groups or individuals in the basics of sports, and find
and recruit athletes for college-level or professional leagues,
and if you like to travel, this may be the career for you.
Many scouts played a sport at the college or professional
level, which helps them pick out promising players from the crowd.
To get into the coaching field, you will need to earn a
teaching degree in secondary education or a physical education
teaching degree.
Certified Athletic Trainers
A certified athletic trainer is an expert in preventing,
recognizing, managing, and rehabilitating injuries
that result from physical activity. They must
earn an advanced degree at a nationally
accredited college and pass exams required
by the National Athletic Trainers’
Association. As part of a complete health-
care team, the certified athletic trainer
works under the direction of a licensed
physician and in cooperation with other
health-care professionals, athletic
administrators, coaches, and parents or
guardians. A certified athletic trainer’s day
may include preparing athletes for practice
or competition, including taping, bandaging
and bracing; evaluating injuries to determine
their management and possible referral to
another health-care practitioner; and developing
treatment and rehabilitation programs.


PERSONAL FITNESS 89
.Careers in Personal Fitness
Physical Therapists
People who have trouble moving or performing everyday
activities need the help of a physical therapist. Elderly people
recovering from knee-replacement surgery, injured athletes,
children with muscular diseases and birth defects, and young
people with brain disorders are all potential clients for physical
therapists.
These health professionals use exercises and many other
techniques to get their patients moving. They also teach them
how to get around using crutches and wheelchairs, and using
prosthetic limbs.
You need a doctorate degree from an accredited four-year
college or university and a passing score on a licensing exam to
become a physical therapist. You should be good at
communication skills, moving or performing everyday activities.
Physical therapists not only create treatment plans
and help patients carry them out, but they also serve
as teachers and coaches, inspiring patients to lead
more complete lives.


90 PERSONAL FITNESS
The Scout Oath and the Scout Law.
The Scout Oath
and the Scout Law
As part of your personal fitness program, demonstrate
Scout spirit by living the Scout Oath and Scout Law in
your everyday life.
The Meaning of the Scout Oath
Before you pledge yourself to any oath or promise, you must
know what it means.
On my honor ...
By giving your word, you are promising to be guided by the
ideals of the Scout Oath.
... I will do my best ...
Try hard to live up to the points of the Scout Oath. Measure
your achievements against your own high standards and do not
be influenced by peer pressure or what other people do.
... To do my duty to God ...
Your family and religious leaders teach you about God and the
ways you can serve. You do your duty to God by following the
wisdom of those teachings every day and by respecting and
defending the rights of others to practice their own beliefs.
The Scout Oath
On my honor I will do my best
To do my duty to God and my country
and to obey the Scout Law;
To help other people at all times;
To keep myself physically strong,
mentally awake, and morally straight.


PERSONAL FITNESS 91
.The Scout Oath and the Scout Law
... and my country ...
Help keep the United States a strong and fair nation by learning
about our system of government and your responsibilities as a
citizen and future voter.
The United States is made up of countless families and
communities. When you work to improve your community
and your home, you are serving your country. Natural resources
are another important part of this country’s heritage worthy of
your efforts to understand, protect, and use wisely. What you
do can make a real difference.
... and to obey the Scout Law; ...
The 12 points of the Scout Law are guidelines that can lead
you toward wise choices. When you obey the Scout Law, other
people will respect you for the way you live, and you will
respect yourself.
... To help other people at all times; ...
There are many people who need you. Your cheerful smile
and helping hand will ease the burden of many who need
assistance. By helping out whenever possible, you are doing
your part to make this a better world.
... To keep myself physically strong, ...
Take care of your body so that it will serve you well for an
entire lifetime. That means eating nutritious foods, getting
enough sleep, and exercising regularly to build strength and
endurance. It also means avoiding harmful drugs, alcohol,
tobacco, and anything else that can harm your health.
... mentally awake, ...
Develop your mind both in the classroom and outside of school.
Be curious about everything around you, and work hard to make
the most of your abilities. With an inquiring attitude and the
willingness to ask questions, you can learn much about the
exciting world around you and your role in it.
... and morally straight.
To be a person of strong character, your relationships with oth-
ers should be honest and open. You should respect and defend
the rights of all people. Be clean in your speech and actions,
and remain faithful in your religious beliefs. The values you
practice as a Scout will help you shape a life of virtue.


92 PERSONAL FITNESS
The Scout Oath and the Scout Law.
The Meaning of the Scout Law
The Scout Law is the foundation of Scouting. It is expressed
in just 12 simple points, but the standards they set for you are
high. Use the Scout Law to guide your actions when you are
alone and as a member of your family, community, and nation.
The Scout Law will show you how to live as a boy and as
a man.
The Scout Law
A Scout is trustworthy, loyal, helpful, friendly,
courteous, kind, obedient, cheerful, thrifty, brave,
clean, and reverent.


PERSONAL FITNESS 93
.The Scout Oath and the Scout Law
A Scout is trustworthy. A Scout tells the truth. He is honest,
and he keeps his promises. People can depend on him.
A Scout is loyal. A Scout is true to his family, friends, Scout
leaders, school, and nation.
A Scout is helpful. A Scout cares about other people. He will-
ingly volunteers to help others without expecting payment
or reward.
A Scout is friendly. A Scout is a friend to all. He is a brother
to other Scouts. He offers his friendship to people of all races
and nations, and respects them even if their beliefs and cus-
toms differ from his own.
A Scout is courteous. A Scout is polite to everyone regardless
of age or position. He knows that using good manners makes
it easier for people to get along.
A Scout is kind. A Scout knows there is strength in being gentle.
He treats others as he wants to be treated. Without good reason,
he does not harm or kill any living thing.
A Scout is obedient. A Scout follows the rules of his family,
school, and troop. He obeys the laws of his community and
country. If he thinks these rules and laws are unfair, he tries
to have them changed in an orderly manner rather than dis-
obeying them.
A Scout is cheerful. A Scout looks for the bright side of life.
He cheerfully does tasks that come his way. He tries to make
others happy.
A Scout is thrifty. A Scout works to pay his way and to help
others. He saves for the future. He protects and conserves
natural resources. He carefully uses time and property.
A Scout is brave. A Scout can face danger although he is afraid.
He has the courage to stand for what he thinks is right even if
others laugh at him or threaten him.
A Scout is clean. A Scout keeps his body and mind fit.
He chooses the company of those who live by high standards.
He helps keep his home and community clean.
A Scout is reverent. A Scout is reverent toward God. He is
faithful in his religious duties. He respects the beliefs of others.


94 PERSONAL FITNESS
Personal Fitness Resources.
Personal Fitness Resources
Scouting Literature
Boy Scout Journal; Athletics,
Backpacking, Canoeing, Cycling,
Dentistry, Disabilities Awareness,
Family Life, Hiking, Kayaking, Public
Health, Rowing, Scuba Diving, Skating,
Small-Boat Sailing, Snow Sports,
Sports, Swimming, Water Sports, and
Whitewater merit badge pamphlets; Boy
Scout Handbook; Fieldbook
Books
Bluth, Karen and Neff, Kristin. The Self-
Compassion workbook for Teens:
Mindfulness and Compassion Skills
to Overcome Self-Criticism and
Embrace Who you are. Instant Help,
2017.
Branner, Toni. The Care & Feeding of an
Athlete. Blue Water Press, 2007.
Bushman, Barbara, ed. ACSM’s
Complete Guide to Fitness & Health,
2nd ed. Human Kinetics, 2017.
Chryssicas, Mary Kaye. Breathe: Yoga
for Teens. DK Children, 2007.
Covey, Sean. The 6 Most Important
Decisions You’ll Ever Make: A Guide
for Teens, updated edition,
Touchstone, 2017.
Dunham, Kelli. The Boy’s Body Book:
Everything You Need to Know
for Growing Up YOU, 5th ed.
Applesauce Press, 2019.
____________. The Girl’s Body Book:
Everything You Need to Know for
Growing Up YOU, 5th ed.
Applesauce Press, 2019.
Greene, Larry, and Russ Pate. Training
Young Distance Runners, 3rd ed.
Human Kinetics, 2014.
Hutchinson, Alex. Which Comes
First, Cardio or Weights?
HarperCollins, 2011.
KidsPeace. I’ve Got This Friend
Who: Advice for Teens and Their
Friends on Alcohol, Drugs, Eating
Disorders, Risky Behavior, and
More. Hazelden, 2007.
Kovacs, Mark. Dynamic Stretching:
The Revolutionary New Warm-Up
Method to Improve Power,
Performance, and Range of Motion.
Ulysses Press, 2021.
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


PERSONAL FITNESS 95
.Personal Fitness Resources
Kraemer, William J., and Steven J. Fleck.
Strength Training for Young Athletes,
2nd ed. Human Kinetics, 2004.
Lobster Press, ed. Let’s Clear the Air:
10 Reasons Not to Start Smoking.
Lobster Press, 2007.
Ratey, John J. Spark: The Revolutionary
New Science of Exercise and the
Brain. Little, Brown and Co., 2013.
Resch, Elyse. The Intuitive Eating
Workbook for Teens: A Non-Diet,
body Positive Approach to Building a
healthy Relationship with Food.
Instant Help, 2019.
Shanley, Ellen, and Colleen Thompson.
Fueling the Teen Machine, 2nd ed.
Bull Publishing Co., 2010.
Smolen, Jamie. Hooked. Casa de
Snapdragon, 2011.
Sumbal, Marni. Essential Sports
Nutrition: A Guide to Optimal
Performance for Every Active Person.
Rockridge Press, 2018.
Organizations and Websites
Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics
120 S. Riverside Plaza, Suite 2190
Chicago, IL 60606-6995
Toll-free telephone: 800-877-1600
www.eatright.org
American College of Sports Medicine
401 W. Michigan St.
Indianapolis, IN 46202-3233
Telephone: 317-637-9200
www.acsm.org
Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention
Toll-free telephone: 800-232-4636
www.cdc.gov/physicalactivity
The Cooper Institute
Exercise tips and resources
www.youtube.com/user/
TheCooperInstitute/videos
Fitnessgram
Exercise tips and resources
fitnessgram.net/solution
International Food Information
Council Foundation
1100 Connecticut Ave. NW, Suite 430
Washington, DC 20036
Telephone: 202-296-6540
foodinsight.org
KidsHealth
kidshealth.org
President’s Council on Sports,
Fitness & Nutrition
1101 Wootton Parkway, Suite 560
Rockville, MD 20852
Telephone: 240-276-9567
health.gov/pcsfn
Society of Health and Physical
Educators (SHAPE America)
PO Box 225, Annapolis
Junction, MD 20701
Toll-free telephone: 800-213-7193
www.shapeamerica.org
U.S. Department of Agriculture
www.myplate.gov


96 PERSONAL FITNESS
Personal Fitness Resources.
Acknowledgments
The Scouting America thanks Warren D.
Franke, Ph.D., for his assistance with
updating the Personal Fitness merit badge
pamphlet. Dr. Franke is a professor with
the Department of Kinesiology at Iowa
State University in Ames. We appreciate
the time and subject expertise he pro-
vided for this revision.
Scouting America is grateful to the
men and women serving on the
National Merit Badge Subcommittee for
the improvements made in updating this
pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration Credits
President’s Council on Sports,
Fitness & Nutrition—page 64
U.S. Department of Agriculture,
courtesy—cover (MyPlate.gov logo),
page 42
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of
or are protected by Scouting America.
Tom Copeland—pages 10 and 36
John McDearmon—page 56
Roger Morgan—page 30
Mary Oaks—page 85
Olivia Ogren-Hrejsa—page 55 (bottom)
Brian Payne—pages 24, 32, and 34
Randy Piland—pages 33, 48, and 53
Scott Stenjem—page 44
Tara Tamer—page 50