


Scouting America’s Commitment to Safety
In Scouting, we will not compromise the safety of our youth, volunteers, and employees.
Safety is a value that must be taught and reinforced at every opportunity. We are all
responsible and must hold each other accountable to provide a safe environment for
all participants.
We are committed to abuse prevention by utilizing:
• Mandatory youth protection training.
• Criminal background checks.
• Banning one-on-one adult and youth interactions.
• Mandatory reporting of suspected abuse to law enforcement.
• A volunteer screening database.
We are committed to injury and illness prevention by integrating safety measures in
our handbooks, literature, and training materials including the Guide to Safe Scouting.
We expect leaders to use the four points of SAFE when delivering the program. SAFE
Scouting measures include:
• Youth are Supervised by qualified and trustworthy adults who set
the example for safety.
• Activities are Assessed for risks.
• Pre-requisite Fitness and skill levels are confirmed before
participation.
• Appropriate Equipment is utilized, and Environmental conditions
are monitored.
When incidents do occur, we expect a timely, clear, and complete incident report.
We are committed to learning from the data and modifying program guidance for the
prevention of future occurrence


Aquatics Supervision
A Leader’s Guide to Youth Swimming and Boating Activities
This guide is distributed via free download of a PDF file at:
https://www.scouting.org/outdoor-programs/aquatics/forms/
The document, or portions there of, may be printed and bound locally when used to support
Scouting America programs.
ADDENDUM
This 2025 update is a major revision and replaces all content of previous versions. Included
links and QR codes were valid when uploaded but are subject to change.
Future updates will be summarized here.
34356
ISBN 978-0-8395-4346-6
(C) 2025 Scouting America


Scouts and their parents expect all Scouting America
activities to be conducted safely. To ensure the safety
of participants, Scouting America expects leaders to use
the four points of SAFE when delivering the Scouting
program.
S UPERVISION
Youth are supervised by qualified and trustworthy adults who set the example for safety.
A SSESSMENT
Activities are assessed for risks during planning. Leaders have reviewed applicable program
guidance or standards and have verified the activity is not prohibited. Risk avoidance or
mitigation is incorporated into the activity.
F ITNESS AND SKILL
Participants’ Annual Health and Medical Records are reviewed, and leaders have confirmed
that prerequisite fitness and skill levels exist for participants to take part safely.
EQUIPMENT AND ENVIRONMENT
Safe and appropriately sized equipment, courses, camps, campsites, trails, or playing
fields are used properly. Leaders periodically check gear use and the environment for
changing conditions that could affect safety.
Aquatics Supervision is a resource for leaders to apply the four points of
SAFE when delivering swimming and boating activities as part of the Scouting
program. This guide covers programs, policies, training courses, skills,
equipment, environments, risks, risk mitigation, and prohibited activities.
However, every possible contingency may not be covered with a hard-and-
fast rule, and rules may be poor substitutes for experience. Ultimately, each
and every leader must decide if they are sufficiently trained, experienced,
and informed to make rational decisions to meet SAFE expectations.


Section I - Introduction to Scouting America Aquatics
Chapter 1: Qualified Supervision: Roles and Responsibilities of Unit Leaders
Chapter 2: Scouting America Aquatics: A Wealth of Opportunities
Chapter 3: Safety First
Chapter 4: Health Considerations
Chapter 5: Swim Classification Tests
Review Questions for Section I
Section II - Swimming Skills and Safety
Chapter 6: Safe Swim Defense
Chapter 7: Swimming Locations
Chapter 8: Learning to Swim & Water Competency
Chapter 9: Swimming Strokes & Water Proficiency
Chapter 10: Water Rescue
Chapter 11: Safety Team Preparation
Chapter 12: The Underwater World
Review Questions for Section II
Table of Contents
When viewed as a PDF on a digital device, chapter headings are linked to the beginning page of each chapter.
The end page of each chapter is also linked back to the Table of Contents (TC) via a Center of Effort icon.
The FIND function may be used to locate specific topics. Tabs may be added for printed copies. Chapters are
numbered separately to facilitate updating printed copies.


Section III - Boating Skills and Safety
Chapter 13: Safety Afloat
Chapter 14: Life Jackets
Chapter 15: Cold-Water Survival
Chapter 16: Boating Basics
Chapter 17: Kayaking
Chapter 18: Canoeing
Chapter 19: Stand Up Paddleboarding
Chapter 20: Paddling on Flowing Water
Chapter 21: Whitewater
Chapter 22: Float Trip Preparation
Chapter 23: Rowing
Chapter 24: Sailing
Chapter 25: Boardsailing
Chapter 26: Motorboating
Chapter 27: Tow Sports
Review Questions for Section III
Section IV - Program Delivery
Appendix 1: Council Aquatics Committees
Appendix 2: Merit Badge Counselors
Appendix 3: Award Requirements and Applications


Introduction to
Scouting Aquatics Section
I





Qualified Supervision: Roles and
Responsibilities of Unit Leaders
All program divisions of Scouting America, from Cub Scouting through Venturing, use responsible outdoor adven-
ture programs to promote character development and values-based leadership training. Activities in and on the
water constitute a large subset of the programs that attract youth to and retain youth in the movement. Over a
million youth participate yearly in aquatics activities during Scout outings under the leadership of thousands of
adult volunteers.
The Scouting program is delivered through small local groups led by volunteers and sponsored by local civic
clubs, churches, schools, and other organizations. Those groups, known generically as units, vary in size and
name depending on the age of the youth being served. Units within a geographic division, or district, are assisted
by professionals employed by a council. Individual units often take advantage of council summer camps where
trained staff members assume the responsibility for quality program delivery, but many units also conduct aquat-
ics activities under their own leadership. Youth camps conducted by other organizations are often standalone
programs limited to a short duration in the summer. Scout camps are simply one element of a year-round unit
program. Scouting America encourages unit aquatics initiatives, whether it is a den leader taking advantage of
a parent’s offer of a backyard pool, or a crew taking off on its own Boundary Waters canoe trek from a Northern
Tier National High Adventure base camp.
Chapter
1


1-2 Chapter : Qualified Supervision: Roles and Responsibilities of Unit Leaders
A key to safe, effective unit aquatics activities is informed and conscientious unit leadership. Serious mishaps during
Scouting America events are rare. Although various aquatics activities can involve some degree of risk, those risks
are mitigated by the training and commitment of Scouting’s volunteer leaders. Properly conducted swimming and
boating programs are usually safe as well as fun, exciting, and rewarding.
Supervision is the first point of Scouting America’s SAFE. According to the Guide to Safe Scouting, supervision for
unit aquatics activities includes the following:
All swimming and activity afloat must be supervised by mature and conscientious adults,
age 21 or older, who
• understand and knowingly accept responsibility for the well-being and safety of youth
members in their care,
• are experienced in the particular activity,
• are confident in their ability to respond appropriately in an emergency, and
• are trained and committed to the nine points of Scouting America’s Safety Afloat and/
or the eight points of Safe Swim Defense.
The Den Leader, Cubmaster, Scoutmaster, crew Advisor, or Skipper who accompanies the unit on an outing is
responsible for the first and last bulleted points. However, Scouting America policies do not specify that the unit
leader must be the one who satisfies all of the above criteria. Under appropriate circumstances, the unit leader
may delegate responsibility to others. For example, a Scout troop at a water park with trained lifeguards on duty
need not assign separate unit personnel to perform water rescue. A Venturing crew on a whitewater excursion
may rely on a licensed outfitter to provide the necessary equipment and trained guides.
As the above examples demonstrate, a unit can participate in fun and challenging aquatics activities even if unit
leaders lack the knowledge and skill to conduct the activity themselves, provided leaders ensure that others, such
as venue staff, provide the required components. On the other hand, a troop on its way to a jamboree need not
forgo the use of a hotel pool just because the facility does not employ a professional lifeguard, provided unit lead-
ers are properly prepared.
This publication provides unit leaders with information needed to determine when proper safeguards are in place
for a unit aquatics activity, whether those safeguards are provided by a facility operator or the unit itself. Basic
skills needed by the unit to function on its own are reviewed, as well as what to look for in a facility or operator.
After a review of this material, unit leaders should be confident in their ability to judge when an aquatics activ-
ity is safe, when the risk is unacceptable, or when their background is insufficient to make that determination.
Experienced, informed leaders often develop a sixth sense or intuition with regard to an action. When an activity
exceeds the leader’s comfort zone, it should be curtailed or modified.


Chapter 2: Scouting America Aquatics: A Wealth of Opportunities 2-1
Scouting America Aquatics:
A Wealth of Opportunities
A review of program opportunities is appropriate before discussing how to conduct those activities safely. This
information also provides a basic Scouting background for volunteers whose aquatics training is from other agencies.
Probably no other organization provides its members the range of aquatics pursuits that Scouting offers. Scouting
tailors these programs to match the maturity of the youth in various divisions, from Lions in kindergarten through 20
year-old Venturing members.
All aquatics program activities comply with Scouting America’s Safe Swim Defense and Safety Afloat standards,
which will be covered extensively in the following chapters. Most of the aquatics activities also require the Scout
to pass a basic 100 yard swimmer classification test. Therefore, teaching the nonswimmer to swim is of primary
importance, both for safety and to give youth members the opportunity to participate with their peers in all aspects
of the program.
Chapter
2


Chapter 2: Scouting America Aquatics: A Wealth of Opportunities
2-2
Cub Scout Aquatics Programs
The basic Cub Scout unit is a den of six to eight youth of the same sex in the same grade served
by an adult den leader. Dens are organized into packs under a Cubmaster.
The Cub Scouting program is based on age or school year. A child in the third grade who joins
Scouting begins the program at that stage without completing the kindergarten, first- and
second-grade modules.
Children in kindergarten and the first grade participate in Lion and Tiger programs with an adult partner. Youth
in second and third grades work toward Wolf and Bear ranks. Cub Scouts in the fourth and fifth grades undertake
more advanced activities while working on the Webelos and Arrow of Light ranks.
Cub Scouts experience a series of adventures either individually with their family or as part of their den. There
are required adventures for each rank plus electives. Each rank has an elective adventure that focuses on
swimming skills and safety. In addition, four of the ranks have boating adventures. Immediately after completing
an adventure, the Cub Scout is presented with the appropriate belt loop or pin.
Youth resource materials for the elective aquatics adventures are found in the handbooks for each grade level.
Step-by step resource material for den leaders is available online at www.scouting.org/programs/cub-scouts/
adventures/. The material is progressive and age appropriate. For example, Lions learn Safe Swim Defense
concepts by coloring pages in a workbook, whereas Webelos practice the buddy system and other aspects of Safe
Swim Defense during a recreational swim. Tigers learn how to build a boat from a sheet of paper, whereas Bears,
who can pass the swimmer test, get to paddle a boat on the water.
Swimming is an important life skill. Children may be introduced to the water as toddlers, or even younger, but
they don’t become proficient at swimming until later. The early school years are a good time to teach children
to swim, either individually by a knowledgeable parent or in a group with a qualified instructor (see Chapter 8)
Since a single set of lessons typically does not impart the desired water competency, it is important to continue
instruction and to closely supervise activities until comfort in the water approaches that of walking. Cub Scouts
whose dens consistently choose the water electives will be well served. Ideally, all Cub Scouts should progress from
nonswimmer, to beginner, to swimmer during their Scouting experience.
Den leaders need not be water competent themselves to successfully guide their dens through several of the
aquatics adventures. All of the swimming adventures may be earned by youth who participate in accredited learn-
to-swim programs. Leaders should check for swimming lessons offered by local communities, YMCA’s, and Red
Cross providers. Financial assistance is often available as well. Den leaders may also seek guidance from their local
council aquatics committee. That committee may help arrange learn-to-swim opportunities for dens and may also
help districts incorporate water adventure elements into Cub Scout day and resident camps. (If your council lacks
such a committee, see Appendix 1.)
Lion: Time to Swim Tigers in the Water, Floats and Boats Wolf: Paws for Water
Arrow of
Light
Swimming, Padddlecraft
Webelos:
Aquanaut, Paddle OnwardBears Afloat, Salmon Run
K 2 nd1 st
3 rd 4 th 5 th


Chapter 2: Scouting America Aquatics: A Wealth of Opportunities 2-3
Scouts BSA Aquatics Programs
A youth, age 10 or older, can join a Scouts BSA troop near completion of the fifth grade
and may continue with the program through age 17. Youth may join at any age within that
range and need not have participated in Cub Scouts.
Troops are served by adult Scoutmasters and are subdivided into patrols of eight to ten
under youth leadership. Scouts BSA advance in rank from Tenderfoot to Eagle Scout.
Recognition is achieved by meeting standards of performance. That is in contrast to the
Cub Scouting program where youth are rewarded for “doing their best,” or some outside
sports programs with an emphasis on competition. Each Scout progresses through the
ranks in order, regardless of the age they join.
Many troops are single gender. However, two linked troops, one for boys and one for girls, may share a single
sponsoring organization and troop committee. A combined, coed troop option is being piloted in 2025.
For Scouts BSA, both Second Class and First Class ranks require demonstration of basic swimming skills and
aquatics safety. Those requirements are found in the Scouts BSA Handbook. To advance to Eagle Scout rank, a
Scout must know how to swim.
Specialty skills are learned by earning merit badges that also count toward rank advancement. There are several aquatics
merit badges, described below. Each of those requires the Scout to first pass aswimmer classification test. If youth have
not learned to swim at earlier ages, troops should arrange for basic swimming instruction so that Scouts are able to
meet the Second and First Class rank requirements and continue with the aquatics merit badges. Instruction can be done
at the troop level by working directly with individual Scouts or arranging for them to enroll in various learn-to-swim
programs. Some districts offer winter programs that include basic swimming instruction. All troops have access to council
summer camp programs where basic swimming instruction is offered and tied to rank requirements as an incentive.
Merit Badges
Scouts BSA earn merit badges by working with an approved counselor registered
with Scouting America. Scouts are connected with counselors through their
Scoutmaster. Adults wishing to serve as counselors should review Appendix 2 and
contact a Scoutmaster or the council office. Pamphlets for each merit badge list
requirements and performance standards. Counselors are expected to present and
evaluate the skills as specified in those pamphlets. Counselors are often aware of
alternative or advanced techniques. However, merit badge material is specifically
designed for those of Scout age and serves as an introduction to a subject requiring
basic skills rather than professional expertise. Merit badge material is reviewed
regularly. Scouts and counselors should check that they have the most recent
pamphlet by comparing the requirements with those listed at scouting.org. Since
special equipment is required for some of the aquatics merit badges, Scouts earn
many of them when the troop attends a week long summer camp with trained
counselors on-site. However, all merit badges may be earned year-round by a Scout
and a buddy working with a counselor.
The Swimming merit badge is among the most popular, second only to First Aid for many
years and ranking third, out of 138, in 2024. Over 6.6 million have been earned since the badge
was first introduced in 1911. That’s an average of 60,000 per year. Requirements include
proficiency in several strokes as well as associated swimming and safety skills. Many children
learn the basics of swimming at an early age but stop formal lessons before becoming proficient
in the strokes. The Swimming merit badge polishes the skills needed for a person to be
competent, and confident, in the water. The Swimming, Hiking, or Cycling merit badge is
required for Eagle Scout rank.SMALL-BOAT
SAILING
7 3 0 1 7 6 3 4 5 2 9 1
SKU 634159
35950 2016 Printing
The Supply Group is
r eady to be a partner
on your tr ail to
Eagle through high
adventur e. The
adventur e is your s,
and we ar e r eady
with the gear you
will need. You can
depend on the latest
in light weight,
dur able, qualit y
gear that will
meet and sur pass
your toughest
r equir ements.
w w w.scoutstuff.org
tier
base
anch
cout
mmit
to
ture
STEM-Based


Chapter 2: Scouting America Aquatics: A Wealth of Opportunities
2-4
The Lifesaving merit badge teaches the Scout a progression of water-rescue techniques. It
is one of the few remaining programs in the United States that instructs good swimmers how
to deal with the range of emergency situations likely to be encountered inadvertently in and
around the water. Those include in-water rescues that are essential to save a victim from the
bottom of a backyard pool. Swimming merit badge is a prerequisite.
The need for a broad water-rescue course, even for those of Scout age, is easily demonstrated.
Over many decades, Scouting America has awarded thousands of medals to Scouts and Scouters
of all ages, including Cub Scouts, who rescued people from drowning. Those rescues are
reported by active members. Rescues performed by the millions of former members are not as
easy to track. Many of those performing rescues have not earned the Lifesaving merit badge,
which is one reason basic water-rescue techniques are discussed throughout the program
rather than only for this specific badge. Scouts of all ages do encounter situations where their
actions are critical for saving lives. Most children faced with a friend or sibling in danger will
attempt some action. Scouting America strives to give youth the tools needed to make proper
decisions in such circumstances. Rescuer safety is a major emphasis of the program. A Scout
must earn either the Lifesaving or the Emergency Preparedness badge for the Eagle rank. In
2024, Lifesaving merit badge ranked 29th in popularity out of 138. It was introduced in 1911
with over 3 million earned to date.
The Kayaking merit badge teaches basic kayaking skills and safety for calm water. Those skills
support the very popular use of kayaks for recreational activities and also serve as a lead-in
to advanced paddle sports such as sea/touring and whitewater kayaking. It was introduced in
2012 and rapidly became one of the most popular outdoor merit badges with 36,000 earned
the following year. In 2024, it ranked 21st in popularity.
The Canoeing merit badge is designed to provide a Scout with tandem skills to safely and
efficiently travel on flat water. Over 3 million have been earned since it was introduced in
1927. In 2024, it ranked 25th in popularity.
The Whitewater merit badge extends skills learned in earning Canoeing or Kayaking badges,
either of which is a prerequisite, to cover Class I and Class II flowing water. Because special
equipment, settings, and instruction are required, this merit badge is not accessible to as many
Scouts. In 2024, it ranked 108th in popularity.
The Rowing merit badge covers basic rowing techniques applicable to conventional and sliding-
seat rowing. Although craft designed and equipped for rowing are not that common, this remains
a popular merit badge, particularly at summer camps. It ranked 75th in popularity in 2024.
The Small-Boat Sailing merit badge gives an introduction to basic sailing techniques and
seamanship. It ranked 37th in popularity in 2024.


Chapter 2: Scouting America Aquatics: A Wealth of Opportunities 2-5
The Motorboating merit badge covers basic boat handling and safety. Scouts are not allowed
to operate a motorboat without a counselor on board and must adhere to state regulations that
sometimes mandate additional age and skill requirements. It ranked 62nd in popularity in 2024.
The Water Sports merit badge requires basic skills in either waterskiing or wake boarding. It
ranked 125th in popularity in 2024.
The Scuba Diving merit badge requires the Scout to first earn the Swimming merit badge
and to then obtain Open Water Diver Certification from a dive training agency recognized in
Scouting’s policy on scuba. This high-adventure, environmental awareness program sets the stage
for lifelong recreational and professional pursuits. Numbers are lower than other badges due to
cost along with specialized equipment and instruction. However, more than 25,000 have been
earned since the merit badge was introduced in 2009. It ranked in 126th in popularity in 2024.
Venturing Programs
Venturing is a youth led, coed program for young men and women ages 14 to 20, or 13 with
completion of the eighth grade. The program runs under the A-L-P-S model with four content
areas: adventure, leadership, personal growth, and service. Leadership of a Venturing crew
is provided by the members under consultation with adult Advisors. Venturers may earn the
Venturing, Discovery, Pathfinder, and Summit awards which include participation in Crews
in various adventure treks. Those may involve aquatics activities such as wilderness
canoeing, whitewater rafting, sailboat cruising, and scuba diving. Aiding them in such
efforts is a network of Scouting America high-adventure bases.
Sea Scouting
Sea Scouting is a youth led, coed program for older youth who love to have fun on, in, or
under the water. Sea Scout units, called ships, may be found in all areas of the country,
not just near the coasts. The program is based on four pillars: Seamanship, Scouting,
Service, and Social. Depending on personal aspirations, Sea Scouts can build adventures
around recreational boating, marine industry, and/or military tracks. Members may work on
advancement, culminating in the Quartermaster award. The 2025 edition of the Sea Scout
Manual is available for free download at https://seascout.org/manual-resource-center/


Chapter 2: Scouting America Aquatics: A Wealth of Opportunities
2-6
Special Aquatics Awards
Several Scouting America aquatics activity awards, not tied to advancement, promote water safety and are
available to Scouts BSA, Venturers, and Sea Scouts, but not Cub Scouts. Material covering skills for the awards
is presented in this publication, and application forms are provided in Appendix 3. Training cards and patches
are also available.
In Scouting, the emphasis is on programming for youth. However, some of these awards promote important skill
and safety information that will help a unit leader conduct a safe unit activity. Therefore, these awards may
also be earned by unit leaders and other registered volunteers (collectively known as Scouters). Often, training
sessions are more effective when conducted separately for different age groups, but in some situations it is more
practical for unit leaders to attend the same training sessions as unit members. Generally, Scouts should be given
priority over Scouters when equipment is limited.
Mile Swim This award promotes water competence as well as physical fitness. The main
requirement is to swim a continuous mile in safe conditions. The distance may be covered in
a pool, a designated swim area, or in open water. Policies for distance swimming in open
water are covered in detail in Chapter 7. Although the Mile Swim recognition helps to build
stamina, those who has mastered restful swimming strokes such as the elementary backstroke,
the sidestroke, or the restful breaststroke should be able to complete the distance with ease.
There is no time limit for completing the swim.
Snorkeling This award encourages the development of basic skills using a mask, snorkel, and
fins. The requirements must be completed in clear, confined water. Snorkeling award skills are
prerequisites to unit snorkeling activities in open water. Such activities are covered by Safe Swim
Defense and similar guidelines reviewed in Chapter 12 along with a presentation of the skills.
Scuba In earning this award, Scouts and Scouters get an introductory scuba experience in
clear, confined water conducted by a professionally trained scuba instructor. It is not a scuba
certification program. Details on Scouting America scuba policies are provided in Chapter 12.
.
Kayaking This award recognizes the popularity of kayaking both in the public and in Scouting.
It was introduced several years prior to the advent of Kayaking merit badge, which covers
similar skills. The award was retained after the merit badge became available since it may
be earned by youth in Venturing and Sea Scout programs as well as adults. Kayaking award
skills are covered in Chapter 17.
Boardsailing This award was introduced when boardsailing first became popular and remains
a basic introduction to the sport. Skills necessary for the award are discussed in Chapter 25.


Chapter 2: Scouting America Aquatics: A Wealth of Opportunities 2-7
Stand Up Paddleboarding This award provides basic skill and safety instruction for stand up
paddleboarding in calm water. Skills are covered in Chapter 19.
Whitewater Rafting Many Scouting units participate in rafting trips conducted by outfitters or
councils. This award recognizes the challenge and adventure of such activities. Requirements
focus on safety and basic paddling skills on white water up to Class III. All instruction and skill
completions are directly supervised by a professionally trained or licensed rafting guide. A
qualified raft captain must be in each raft during the required trip. Participants help power
and control the raft with paddles—simply riding in a raft rowed by a guide is not sufficient. A
review of skills and advice on choosing an outfitter are provided in Chapters 20 - 22.
Training Programs for Adults (and Older Youth)
Such diverse and extensive aquatics programs mean Scouting America must recruit and/or train volunteers to
provide the program at the unit level, as well as professionals, full-time and seasonal, to assist units via camp
operations. Several training options, in addition to the special awards, are available to registered adults and older
youth to meet unit and summer camp staff needs.
Safe Swim Defense and Safety Afloat
Commitment Training
Safe Swim Defense and Safety Afloat procedures apply during all
Scout swimming and boating activities, and are covered in detail
later in this manual. The plans emphasize prevention but also
cover emergency recognition and response. Leaders supervising
aquatics activities must have current training in the appropriate
online modules. The requirement that leaders renew the online
training every two years helps ensure that everyone receives the
same information. The training is available at my.scouting.org.
Safe Swim Defense and Safety Afloat Skills Training
The introduction to rules and procedures provided by online training should
allow conscientious leaders to assess their readiness to conduct a unit
aquatics activity. However, the policies suggest or mandate various skills
that cannot be learned online. To fill that gap, there are optional hands-on
courses to provide unit leaders with basic skills. Aquatics Supervision:
Swimming and Water Rescue provides training for swimming activities.
Aquatics Supervision: Paddle Craft Safety modules cover canoeing
and kayaking skills for still and moving water environments. Situations
requiring more advanced skills are reviewed, along with sources for
such training. These courses are highly recommended for unit leaders
whenever a unit swims at a location without professional lifeguards, or
undertakes a boating expedition without a trained guide. This publication
serves as the manual for the courses. Requirements are given in Appendix
3. The courses are taught by authorized instructors following standardized
guidelines.


Chapter 2: Scouting America Aquatics: A Wealth of Opportunities
2-8
Scouting America Aquatics Instructor
Scouting America Aquatics Instructor, introduced around 1935, is the highest level of
training, achievement, and recognition for adults in Scouting aquatics. The training
prepares adults for leadership roles in year-round council aquatics programs and summer
camps. Topics include a review of the goals, requirements, policies, and procedures for
all Scouting aquatics programs; skills for swimming, snorkeling, lifesaving, and human-
powered boating; how to teach those skills to participants of various ages; and how to
manage the aquatics program at Scouting America camps. The training is recognized as
both a Progressive Swimming Instructor rating and a Lifeguard Management/Supervisor
course. The training is offered only in conjunction with a Scouting America National Camping School (NCS).
Participants must be approved by their local council and must have current professional lifeguard training.
Scouting America camp standards require that aquatics directors at camps are 21 years of age or older, have
current lifeguard, CPR, and first-aid training, and have current Aquatics Instructor training. However, Aquatics
Instructor training is available to those age 18 or older. Councils are encouraged to send aquatics staff members who
are below 21 years of age for Aquatics Instructor training. They can serve as assistant aquatics directors to fulfill
supervision requirements for divided program areas and help provide quality programing. The experience they gain
makes them excellent candidates to assume the camp aquatics director position without needing to attend NCS that
year. Such a succession plan makes it easier for councils to manage staffing needs.
Council Camp Aquatics Programing
Few units have the resources to
independently provide all of the programs
listed above. However, local councils
provide significant support to units by
offering various camp facilities and
programs. Most council camps offer
multiple aquatics activities. The chart
shows the percentage of Scouts BSA
resident camps offering various aquatics
programs. The Kayaking award is seldom
offered in addition to Kayaking merit
badge (Kay), which is provided in 90 % of
camps.(Data from a 2019 survey of 191
camps from all fifty states.)
Council Aquatics Committees
Council camp resources are themselves sometimes limited. Formation of a volunteer council aquatics committee
can help foster local programs, provide training, help recruit camp aquatics staff, and oversee council resources.
Additional information on aquatics committees is found in Appendix 1.


Chapter 2: Scouting America Aquatics: A Wealth of Opportunities 2-9
Aquatics Adventure and Trek Programing
Some council camps offer units the option of a float trip, on or off council property. Some are simple day trips on
flat water; others are week-long excursions on flowing water.
The National Council has approved roughly 60 council camps as high-adventure bases. While some feature various
land based activities such as backpacking and climbing, others offer overnight canoeing, kayaking, rafting, or
sailing treks. Some offer scuba certification, dive trips, or other advanced resident programs. The Adventure Plan
(TAP) is a tool to guide unit leaders- Cubs, Scouts BSA, Venturers, and Sea Scouts - through all stages of Adventure
planning, whether units use Scouting America camps, private outfitters, or “go-it-alone”.
Scouting America also operates four national high-adventure programs, three of which offer aquatics programs.
Northern Tier National High Adventure
Northern Tier stages canoe treks from two base camps. As is the model for Scout
camping in general, a troop or crew that meets year-round comes with its own
adult leadership, although a council may recruit a contingent from several units and
individual Scouts may be accommodated in special crews . Northern Tier normally
provides a trained staff member to accompany inexperienced groups, but experienced
units may elect to travel without guidance. Each summer, roughly 5,000 Scouts in
groups of six to 11 take wilderness canoe trips lasting six to 10 days.
The Charles L. Sommers base camp near Ely, Minnesota, has been the starting point for trips into the Boundary
Waters Canoe Area Wilderness since 1923 and has been an important part of the emergency response system for
the area. The Rogert base camp near Atikokan, Ontario, accesses Quetico Provincial Park from the Canadian side.
High Adventure Sea Base
The Sea Base began operations in the 1970’s and now operates two centers and
a private, undeveloped island in the Florida Keys, as well as staging areas in the
Bahamas and Virgin Islands. The Sea Base operates one of the largest scuba training
programs in the United States with roughly 1,500 participants yearly. While many
participants seek scuba certification, those already certified may dive from boats
stationed at the base or from live-aboard catamaran sailboats. Another 9,000 or so
engage in various boating activities. Some kayak to a 110 acre island owned by the
base and camp Robinson Crusoe–style. Others sail on live-aboard vessels from which
they snorkel and fish. The Sea Base also runs a coral restoration program.
Summit Bechtel Reserve
The newest Scouting America national facility is the Summit Bechtel Reserve in West
Virginia. The Summit site includes the Paul R. Christen High Adventure Base and the
James C. Justice National Scout Camp. The Summit is not limited to aquatics: It
has world-class climbing, canopy tours, mountain biking, and other high-adventure
activities. However, it is adjacent to the New River Gorge National River managed
by the U.S. National Park Service. Because the New River Gorge is home to some of
the world’s best white water, whitewater programs are central experiences at the
Summit. The Summit is also the home of Scouting America’s National Jamborees and
hosted the 2019 World Jamboree with over 40,000 youth and leaders from 152 nations.


Chapter 2: Scouting America Aquatics: A Wealth of Opportunities
2-10
Relationships with Other Organizations
Scouting America recognizes that other organizations provide expertise in specialized activities, such as
waterskiing, and works with those organizations to keep Scout aquatics programs up-to-date. In particular, the
National Council has agreements or understandings with the American Red Cross, the Professional Association of
Diving Instructors, the American Canoe Association, the United States Coast Guard Auxiliary, and America’s Boating
Club. Scouting America is also a founding member of Water Safety USA, a roundtable of seventeen national not-
for-profit and government organizations that promote water safety and drowning prevention.
Training provided by other organizations extends the base of volunteers with the necessary background to offer
quality Scouting programs. However, Scouting America programs are not simply copies of programs offered by
other agencies. In areas such as Safe Swim Defense, Scouting is a recognized leader in the field. In other areas,
such as scuba training, an instructor rating from an outside agency is required to offer the Scouting programs. In
that case, the Scout program may be more limited than similar programs offered by the instructor’s certifying
agency. Therefore, outside instructors need to become familiar with specific Scouting America policies and
requirements, including youth protection, before conducting activities for Scouts. This manual provides a useful
overview, but activity-specific literature, such as merit badge pamphlets, should be consulted. Also note that
each merit badge pamphlet solicits suggestions for improvement and provides an address for sending comments.
American Academy of Pediatrics American Red Cross
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Diversity in Aquatics
National Drowning Prevention Alliance National Park Service
National Safe Boating Council Pool & Hot Tub Alliance
Safe Kids Worldwide Scouting America
U.S. Coast Guard U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers United States Lifesaving Association
United States Swim School Association USA Swimming Foundation YMCA of the USA
Interested in sampling Scouting aquatics programs as a family? Check
out the Family Adventure Camp opportunities at the Summit and the Sea
Base. https://www.scouting.org/outdoor-programs/family-adventure-camp/


Chapter 2: Scouting America Aquatics: A Wealth of Opportunities 2-11
Age Appropriate Guidelines for Aquatics
Click HERE for complete chart showing activities other than aquatics.


Chapter 2: Scouting America Aquatics: A Wealth of Opportunities
2-12
Prohibited and Unauthorized Activities
This chapter highlights numerous aquatics activities that are part of the Scouting program. The rest of the
manual covers how to safely and effectively manage such opportunities. However, there are some activities
not compatible with the Scouting program. Some have unacceptable risks. Others are not consistent with the
Scout Oath and Scout Law.
The Guide to Safe Scouting lists specific activities that are strictly prohibited. Several involving aquatics are
summarized below and then addressed elsewhere in this manual. The list is not comprehensive. No organization
can anticipate every possible activity that might be considered as part of a unit, district, or council event.
For any planned aquatics activity, leaders should determine if it complies with Safe Swim Defense and Safety
Afloat policies during a Scouting America SAFE assessment.


Chapter 2: Scouting America Aquatics: A Wealth of Opportunities 2-13
Resources
Check with your council service center or online at www.
scoutshop.org for printed materials and patches. There
is extensive material on all aspects of Scouting available
from the Scouting America website www.scouting.org.
Aquatics information is found mainly under the OUTDOOR
PROGRAMS tab in the selection bar. Important safety
information is found under the SCOUTING SAFELY tab.
Access to online training for Safe Swim Defense and Safety
Afloat is found via the MY.SCOUTING icon.
Rather than navigate through the numerous web pages,
it is often easier to use an internet search engine for the
item you want, for example, typing in “Guide to Safe
Scouting” will often provide a direct link.
A few links and QR codes for select items are provided
below.
Remote Area Setup
Video
Kayaking Video Canoeing Video
Guide to Safe Scouting
Rivers and Rapids
Video


Chapter 2: Scouting America Aquatics: A Wealth of Opportunities
2-14
SCOUT LIFE GUARD: A century of swim protection training
The original purpose of Scout Life Guard, later Scout Lifeguard, and then BSA Lifeguard, was to provide troops
and councils with trained auxiliary personnel to supplement paid and volunteer experts providing protection
and instruction for Scout swimming and boating activities during unit events and council camps. The 1924 goal
was for each patrol to have one or more youth so trained, or at least two per troop. Completion of American
Red Cross Junior or Senior Lifesaving , or Lifesaving merit badge, was a prerequisite. Additional requirements
included a long-distance swim; proficiency in rowing technique and rescue; timed, accurate use of a ring
buoy; organization of a lost swimmer search; resuscitation; and knowledge of swimmer protection, including
swim classifications, use of the buddy system, and lifeguard placement and duties. Each candidate was also
trained in basic learn-to-swim instruction and had to instruct fellow Scouts in swimming, lifesaving, rowing, or
canoeing skills sufficient to qualify for associated awards. Those requirements were tweaked throughout the
years, particularly in terms of in-water rescue procedures, and the addition of supervised intern service as a
lifeguard. In 1990, the teaching requirement was dropped and completion of Swimming, Lifesaving, Rowing,
Canoeing, and First Aid merit badges became prerequisites. Other changes followed, culminating in the 2009
shift from protection for unit activities to professional lifeguard training to meet regulatory requirements for
council camp lifeguards. However, evolving standards for tracking instructor training and performance made it
impractical for Scouting America to maintain its own professional lifeguard program, particularly when quality
programs are available from other agencies. BSA Lifeguard was retired at the end of 2024.
graphics from 1924 and 1967 precursors to this manual


Safety First
Simple tasks can become risky if basic safety precautions are ignored, and apparently dangerous
activities can be done with minimal risk with proper planning and safeguards. For any activity,
several items foster safety. A review of common causes of accidents is a good place to start. With
that knowledge, rules and procedures can then be established to avoid risky situations. Prevention
is the first and most important safety consideration. Contingency plans are also important if an emergency does
arise. Both are covered by the key components of Scouting America’s SAFE checklist and expanded in Safe Swim
Defense and Safety Afloat plans.
SUPERVISION ensures that adults are adequately trained, experienced, and skilled to lead the activity and
provides the discipline necessary to ensure compliance with rules and procedures. ASSESSMENT establishes
program standards prior to the activity, including the training, resources, and experience to meet those standards.
FITNESS AND SKILL confirm that participants’ health and skills are appropriate for the activity and that any
skill training during the activity is suitably conducted. EQUIPMENT AND ENVIRONMENT ensure that activity
equipment is properly sized, in good working order, and used appropriately. The activity area is checked as
suitable during the assessment, confirmed as appropriate at the beginning of the activity, and monitored, along
with the weather, for changing conditions throughout the activity.
Prompt recognition of a developing crisis is a nontrivial task that requires conscientious effort and a plan for
adequate surveillance of everyone in the activity. The buddy system is used in Scouting to provide one-on-one
observation to augment the scrutiny provided by the unit leader and rescue personnel. Appropriate response
to an emergency is easier when a prearranged emergency action plan is implemented by those trained in the
process.
Chapter
3


Chapter 3: Safety First
3-2
The rest of this section will review common causes of drowning, introduce the basic elements of Safe Swim
Defense and Safety Afloat procedures for drowning prevention, and outline the general elements of an
emergency action plan for swimming and boating activities. Subsequent chapters will expand on rules and
procedures, surveillance, emergency action plans, and rescue skills for specific activities at various sites.
Should an emergency arise, water rescue is relatively safe and simple when care is taken to operate in a safe
setting with appropriate rescue aids at hand. Even so, situations in which rescue skills are needed should
be extremely rare. The overall safety of an aquatics activity or facility should be judged by the absence of
crisis and rescue. If rescues are commonplace, inadequate precautions have been taken to ensure the highest safety
standards, even if all the rescues are successful.
Millions of Scouts and millions more in the general public enjoy water sports year-round without any adverse
experience. Water and people mix well when simple precautions are taken. However, not everyone realizes the
need for such precautions. Each year, several thousand people die from drowning in the United States. Thousands
more are taken to emergency rooms due to water-related incidents, and not all of those people completely
recover. Many others are saved from injury by alert lifeguards or other rescuers.
“Drowning is an unlovely thing.” - Wilbert Longfellow
early Scout water safety consultant and later head of American Red Cross water safety program.
Two unfortunate tragedies dramatically illustrate how the public at large sometimes underestimates the danger
in a seemingly benign situation.
A mother arranged to chaperone a group of teenaged girls at an overnight stay at a hotel as a treat for
her daughter’s birthday. While the group was using the hotel pool, the daughter, who could not swim,
moved into water over her head. The mother noticed the daughter acting strangely and jumped into the
water when the daughter did not respond to her calls. The mother, as her feet hit the bottom, managed
to push her daughter a short distance to the side, where the other girls helped her out. With all their
attention focused on the daughter, no one noticed that the mother, also a nonswimmer, could not move
herself the short distance to safety. The mother fatally drowned, unable to call for help.
Two well-meaning and conscientious adults took a newly formed youth group on an overnight campout.
The campsite was near a small, slow-moving river, and the group waded into the water from a shallow
sandbar. Two boys, who could not swim, stepped off the sandbar into the channel where the water
was over their heads. They did not call out for help, submerged, and fatally drowned without anyone
realizing they were in trouble.
Both incidents illustrate a common drowning response. True nonswimmers—that is, those who have never
supported themselves in deep water—are often in danger as soon as they enter depths where they cannot stand
to breathe. Such persons, from toddlers through adults, are unable to call for help and unable to move even a
few feet to safety, whether safety is a pool side, the other side of a drop-off, or a flotation device they fell from.
To an uninformed observer, such victims may even appear to be playing in the water.
Drowning by the Numbers
This section provides graphical displays of drowning statistics and discusses those to provide the reader with
background to understand the justification for, and importance of, Scouting America water safety rules and
procedures that follow.
Not all trends are illustrated. For example, it should be no surprise that drowning incidents occur more often in
the summer than in the winter.


Chapter 3: Safety First 3-3
• When Scouting America was founded in 1910,
the drowning rate in the US was around 9.5 per
100,000. Thanks to the efforts of the YMCA,
Scouting, the American Red Cross, and others,
the rate had dropped by over half to 4.2 by 1950.
• Drowning rates continued to drop until the turn
of the century, but have remained relatively
constant since then.
• When yearly drowning deaths are examined by
age, there is a large, consistent peak for ages
1-3, a low from roughly 6 through 15, and a fairly
constant frequency from 18 to 65.
• Although there are obvious trends related to age,
people of all ages are at risk. 80 % of all fatal
drownings occur to adults aged 18 and above.
• When location is considered, the peak for
toddlers is mainly associated with drowning
deaths in residential pools, with other toddler
deaths occurring in natural waters and while
bathing.
• After age 12, there is a significant increase in
the proportion of drownings that occur in natural
waters.
• There is a peak in the drowning deaths for infants
while bathing which is attributed to inadequate
supervision.
• However, drowning deaths while bathing persist
beyond youth. Those are often associated with
seizure disorders or other debilitating medical
conditions.
• Boating activities account for roughly one tenth
of all fatal drownings.
• When drowning deaths are separated between
males and females, both peak at young ages.
• After roughly age 12, the drowning deaths for
males increase significantly while the numbers for
females hold relatively constant with increasing
age
• The shape of the increase for male drowning
deaths with age is similar to the increase shown
for drownings in natural waters.


Chapter 3: Safety First
3-4
Drowning in Perspective
Deaths in the United States are grouped by disease
and injury. For youth of Scouting age, deaths from
injuries can match or exceed those from disease. For
those aged 1-4, who could be involved in Scout family
camping, drowning is the leading cause of unintentional
injury deaths, and exceeds the number of deaths from
specific diseases. For children aged 2 and 3, more than
1 in 8 of all deaths are from drowning.
For children aged 5-14, drowning is the second
leading cause of unintentional injury deaths, after
motor vehicle incidents involving both crashes and
pedestrians.
After teens begin to drive, deaths from motor vehicle incidents increase significantly beyond the number of
drowning deaths, but those remain sizeable.
______________________________________________________________________________________
While not the focus of this manual, this chart reveals two other items of import to keeping youth of Scout age
safe. The number of suicides rises markedly after age 11 for the US population as a whole. The number of deaths
from poisoning, mainly from accidental drug overdose, show a similar jump upwards beginning around age 15.
______________________________________________________________________________________
Drowning Situations The chart shows a relative comparison of various
factors that contribute to drowning fatalities. The
values are estimates derived from multiple sources.
Several of the categories overlap, but listed numbers
indicate primary cause.
Such information, combined with the statistics
provided earlier, suggest ways to avoid risks and reduce
drowning.
Nonswimmers entering water deeper than they
can stand to breathe, whether intentionally or by
happenstance, is by far the largest risk factor.
Alcohol use is involved in many fatal drowning incidents
but is estimated as a primary cause in 10 to 30% of
cases.
Medical impairment while both bathing and swimming
is another major factor.
Risky behaviors, excluding alcohol abuse, involve
several activities that are examined in more detail on
the next page and are grouped under poor judgement
and unsafe areas.
Note that a significant number of drownings involve
those who had no intention of entering the water.


Chapter 3: Safety First 3-5
Reasons People Drown - and what to do about those
The data presented on the previous pages, combined with case studies, support the following reasons people
drown. When one or more of these contributing causes of drowning are present, tragedy can result. Lack of
attention to any one factor may result in inadequate regard for the others. Fortunately, informed leadership can
implement procedures to minimize the risk from each factor.
• Poor swimming skills. Many people who drown lack the skill to swim only a few feet to safety. Knowing
how to swim provides important protection against drowning. Although poor swimmers can safely participate
in shallow-water or near-shore activities, a conscientious Scout leader will encourage everyone in the unit to
advance at least to Scouting’s “swimmer” level. Exhaustion is often cited as a factor in drownings when poor
swimmers overestimate their swimming ability. A swimmer who has learned restful swimming strokes seldom
has that problem.
• Medical complications. Drowning can result when strokes, heart attacks, diabetic reactions, or seizures
occur in the water. Such conditions can cause an otherwise good swimmer to become incapacitated. Prevention
relies on medical screening. Supervisors should review the health histories of all participants and physicians’
recommendations. Special precautions may be needed for those with certain medical conditions.
• Unsafe areas. Unsafe situations for swimming and boating include swift water, submerged obstacles, ocean
rip currents, high waves, and cold water. Even a simple drop-off is unsafe for a nonswimmer, which means
extra precautions are needed for poor swimmers engaged in water sports. Although it is often possible to
determine that an area is unsafe simply by looking, confirming that an area is safe may take an underwater
search of a swimming area or advanced scouting of a river.
• Poor judgment. Often, the skill of those taking part influences the safety of an area or activity. However,
skills are only part of water competency. Water smarts are also critical. Participation in an unsafe activity
often reflects a lack of knowledge or judgment. Examples include overestimating swimming or boating skill,
failing to wear a life jacket, diving into shallow water, and alcohol or other drug abuse. Education is one
key to prevention. Rule enforcement, through persuasion and discipline, is another. Risk aversion varies,
particularly with age. Not everyone who is aware of a risk will avoid it.
• Inadequate supervision. A toddler left unattended near a pool is an example of inadequate supervision.
Allowing youth groups to engage in unsafe activities is another. Prompting adult leaders to review their
training and skills to lead activities is provided by the first point in both Scouting America’s Safe Swim
Defense and Safety Afloat.
Accident Prevention: Elements of Safe Swim Defense and Safety Afloat
Each of the above factors contributing to drowning is specifically covered by elements of the Safe Swim Defense and
Safety Afloat plans. The primary emphasis of each plan is prevention.Qualified supervision and discipline guard against
unsafe activities and ensure that each point is properly implemented. A personal health review addresses medical
complications. Ability groups, swimming ability, and skill proficiency match activities, areas, and equipment to
abilities. Safe swimming area, equipment, including life jackets, and planning concern safe physical arrangements.
Each plan covers preparation, including recognition and response, should an accident occur. The buddy system,
lookouts, and response personnel provide eyes and ears alert for trouble and ensure that someone is available
to provide safe and effective assistance. They are integral parts of emergency action plans.
Safe Swim Defense and Safety Afloat are the backbones of safe unit swimming and boating activities. They define
standard operating procedures for Scout water sports and the standard of care expected of unit leadership.
Aquatic activities that fail to comply with either are listed as prohibited activities in the Guide to Safe Scouting.
The points are introduced here to show their close relationship to factors that lead to drowning. However, a
simple listing does not provide sufficient information to actually implement the procedures. Each item will be
fully explained in subsequent chapters. Online training is provided at my.scouting.org.


Chapter 3: Safety First
3-6
Qualified Supervision
At least one adult, trained in Safe
Swim Defense: responsible, informed,
knowledgeable in accident prevention, and
prepared for emergencies.
Personal Health Review
Review Annual Health and Medical Record,
check for recent illness or injury, adjust
activities to anticipate potential risks
associated with health conditions.
Safe Area
Check water for depths, obstructions, quality,
temperature, movement, and clarity.
Response Personnel
Assign and coach trained rescue team to
recognize and respond to emergencies.
Lifeguards at public venues satisfy this need
Lookout
Identifies any departure from policy and
monitors weather and environment. The
lookout, qualified supervisor, and response
personnel act together as a safety team.
Ability Groups
All participants tested as Nonswimmers,
Beginners, or Swimmers and assigned water
depths consistent with ability.
Buddy System
Every participant paired with another.
Buddies monitor each other and alert safety
team as needed. Buddy checks conducted to
reinforce that responsibility.
Discipline
All participants should know, understand,
and respect rules and procedures for safe
swimming, which are imposed consistently
and fairly by the safety team. Rules should
be discussed prior to the outing and
reviewed just before the activity begins.
Safe Swim Defense
(summary only - details in Guide to Safe Scouting)


Chapter 3: Safety First 3-7
Qualified Supervision
Adults, trained in Safety Afloat, skilled in
safe operation of the craft, knowledgeable
in accident prevention, and prepared for
emergencies.
Personal Health Review
Review Annual Health and Medical Record,
check for recent illness or injury, adjust
activities to anticipate potential risks
associated with health conditions.
Swimming Ability
Independent operation of craft limited to
youth and adults who have completed BSA
Swimmer classification.
Life Jackets
Properly fitted, approved life jackets worn
by all participants in small recreational
craft
Buddy System
Every participant paired with another and
always aware of the other’s situation.
Skill Proficiency
Everyone must have sufficient knowledge
and skill to participate safely. Appropriate
training varies with type of craft and
water conditions.
Planning
Includes Preparation, Float Plan,
Notification, Weather, and Contingencies.
Equipment
All craft and gear must meet regulations,
be properly sized, and in good condition.
Discipline
All participants should know, understand,
and respect rules and procedures for safe
boating. Rules should be discussed prior to
the outing and reviewed just before the
activity begins.
Safety Afloat
(summary only - details in Guide to Safe Scouting)


Chapter 3: Safety First
3-8
Risk Management
Safe Swim Defense and Safety Afloat guidelines give the conscientious unit leader tools to prevent emergencies
specific to aquatics activities. In effect, they are well-established risk management guidelines, which, if followed,
should reassure the unit leader that the group is prepared for safe enjoyment of the aquatic world.
To some degree, the extent to which Safe Swim Defense and Safety Afloat guidelines manage risk depends on the
willingness of each person in the group to take an active role. Scouting encourages youth to take responsibility
for their behavior and safety. Ideally, all participants should feel concern and accountability for the safety of
their buddy. A leader who empowers group members with resources, training, and responsibilities will often find
that they can be trusted to do their own part to manage risks. If Scouts understand the rationale behind each
point of Safety Afloat and Safe Swim Defense, they are more likely to comply.
‘An injury that doesn’t
happen needs no treatment. An emergency
that doesn’t occur requires no response.’
—Chapter 11, “Emergency Preparedness,” in the 2014 Scout Fieldbook.
However, the ultimate responsibility for risk management rests with the adult leader. Lions can easily become caught
in the excitement of a moment, completely forget the rules, and become oblivious to their surroundings, without
being at all intentionally disrespectful or irresponsible. Teenagers are generally more aware of circumstances
about them, but the teen brain is still in development and may not perceive risk the same as an adult mind. Part
of risk management on any youth outing is understanding how to guide youth of a certain age toward desired
behaviors. A list of rules will not instill that capability. However, the leader who has that skill can apply it to
unfamiliar activities. As an aid, the chart at the end of Chapter 2 presents age-appropriate guidelines for aquatics
activities.
A leader’s responsibilities seldom begin and end when a Scout enters and exits a swimming area. Swimming and boating
are normally components of a unit outing, whether part of a den meeting or an extended wilderness trip by a Venturing
crew. As an aquatics event moves farther from an emergency medical service (EMS) system, and Scouts become
dependent on the food and gear they carry into the back country, unit leaders need to consider risk management of
situations that will not be covered in this text, such as shelter, food preparation, sanitation, and dangerous wildlife.
Other training materials provided by Scouting America should fill those gaps. The Fieldbook quoted above can help with
outdoor adventure planning.
Although risks can be managed, they are seldom completely eliminated. Therefore, the
prepared leader always has an emergency response plan and the skills and materials
to implement it. Preparedness requires preparation. The next section will introduce
generic components of emergency response plans, and other sections will provide details
specific to swimming and boating.
However, the text may not cover some fundamental items, such as first aid skills, that apply
to all unit activities whether in the water or on dry land. It is highly recommended
that an adult is present at all unit gatherings who is trained in standard first
aid and CPR. In urban settings, unit leaders should know the approximate
response time and how to contact emergency medical services. For back
country trips, where communication is more difficult and response
delayed, leaders may wish to consider courses in American Red
Cross Wilderness First Aid and Wilderness First Responder.


Chapter 3: Safety First 3-9
Emergency Response Plans
In 1908, Baden-Powell, founder of the Scouting movement, offered the following observation on being prepared
for an accident:
Be prepared to do that thing the moment the accident does occur. I will explain to you what ought to
be done in the different kinds of accidents, and you must practice them as much as possible. But, the
great thing for you Scouts to bear in mind is that wherever you are, and whatever you are doing, you
should think to yourself: “What accident is likely to occur here?” and “What is my duty if it does?”
That statement is still excellent advice for anyone charged with supervising an activity. The first sentence means
you have planned for emergencies. The second suggests you are trained in how to respond and that you keep your
skills current through practice. The third means you are conscientious and continually on the alert. Perhaps you
become a little on edge about how you and your group would respond to the scenarios you are running through
your mind as conditions change and the activity progresses. If you aren’t comfortable with the answers to the
questions, you take immediate steps to reduce risk and improve preparedness.
Skilled planners “live” the experience in advance by thinking their way through every detail of an activity
and likely emergency situation. Key skills, such as rescue techniques, are practiced. Equipment is tested; for
example, you check that a cell phone has a signal. Drills are conducted to ensure that everyone in the unit
understands their responsibility. Such preparation helps eliminate surprises. If an emergency occurs, uncertainty,
confusion, and panic are ideally replaced by self-confidence and prompt and appropriate action.
Emergencies confronting a unit leader during a unit swim or trip afloat may be either major or minor. Generally,
minor emergencies are more likely but easier to deal with. Minor emergencies during aquatics activities include
simple first aid cases, misuse of equipment, scuffles, approaching inclement weather, and capsize in calm, warm
water. Major emergencies include cardiac arrest, spinal injury, drowning, and boaters pinned by current. Major
emergencies, though rare, may require focused planning to handle well. Keys to proper response are foresight,
recognition, coordination, and practice.
Emergency action plans should exist for all Scouting activities, not just aquatics. They are not always long and
complicated, even for major emergencies. For a backyard swim, they may be very simple and require only a short
discussion or review just before the activity. For a heart attack at a backyard pool, a trained adult starts CPR while
another person dials 9-1-1, opens the side gate, and waits out front to direct EMS when they arrive. Other adults or
youth leaders check the status of the rest of the participants and move them from the area. For a spinal injury, a
trained adult provides in-line stabilization and waits in the water for paramedics to arrive.
Emergency action plans for those or other life-threatening emergencies on a wilderness canoe trip will require more
extensive planning and coordination. EMS may take a long time to arrive and may not be able to access the location
of the incident. Plans should be reviewed with all the adults and senior youth leaders on the trip, and some items
may need practice before the outing.
Although various templates exist for writing emergency action plans, a generic form may not capture critical
items for all situations. This section offers guidance rather than a one-size-fits all prescription.
The first step in formulating an emergency action plan is to assess the various risks that should be covered. Some
items, such as a small cut or a superficial burn, can be grouped together under a general first aid heading. Serious
emergencies will generally share a common communication procedure and evacuation plan. Some situations,
such as what to do if someone is caught in a hydraulic, may stand alone.


Chapter 3: Safety First
3-10
Each emergency response plan should address the following basics:
• When and how the plan is activated
• Who takes charge of the overall response
• Who conducts the rescue or provides aid to the victim
• What equipment will be needed, and where it is
• Communication between victim and rescuer
• Communication with and supervision of the rest of the unit members, who may assist with the effort or
need to be removed from danger
• Who summons EMS, law enforcement, or other authorities, under what circumstances, and how
• After the victim is stabilized or removed from immediate danger, what follow-up care is needed, including
(if necessary) how to evacuate the person or the entire unit
Details will be provided in subsequent discussions of specific activities and locations. There is one additional item
to be discussed here:
• Notification of parents and council office as appropriate
Whenever a person loses consciousness or needs medical care beyond simple first aid, such as transport by EMS
to a hospital emergency room, or cannot be found after a quick search, leaders should immediately notify the
parent or other person designated in advance as an emergency contact. The emergency action plan should
include such a contact list.
Unit leaders are also responsible for informing their council office as soon as possible. The Scout Executive or
designee will provide trained help with notification of next of kin, dealing with the press, counseling for others in
the unit, and insurance claims. The council office should also complete and file a timely incident report with the
National office.
Youth Protection
Scouting America places the greatest importance on
creating the most secure environment possible for our
youth members. To maintain such an environment,
Scouting has implemented mandatory Youth Protection
training for all registered volunteers. Please visit
scouting.org for Scouting’s Barriers to Abuse and other
important resources.
Even though Safe Swim Defense or other aquatics
policies may designate that only one trained adult is
needed to supervise the activity, Scouting’s Barriers
to Abuse mandate that at least one other responsible
adult is present. Although that person may not be
trained in water safety, they should be available help
maintain discipline and to assist with implementing an
emergency action plan.
The Youth Protection policies of Scouting America also address privacy and appropriate attire. Adult leaders
must protect their own privacy and respect the privacy of youth members in situations such as changing into
swimsuits, whether in a changing room at a public water park or at a remote campsite. Neither skinny-dipping
nor revealing bathing suits are appropriate as part of Scouting.


Chapter 3: Safety First 3-11
Transportation
Since traffic accidents are a primary cause of accidental death in the United States, with the number of fatalities
far exceeding those from drowning, unit members may be more at risk traveling to an aquatics area than when
engaged in the activity. Scouting Amerieca has established transportation policies and guidelines to minimize such
risk. The complete policies are in the Guide to Safe Scouting and should be reviewed before the unit goes on an
outing. By way of review, recall that:
• Transport by commercial carriers, such as chartered buses, is recommended, particularly for large groups.
• Except in special circumstances, all drivers must be at least 18 years of age with a valid license for the type
of vehicle in use, and must observe traffic regulations, including speed limits.
• All occupants of cars, vans, and trucks must wear seat belts.
• Driving time is limited to a maximum of 10 hours per day and must be interrupted by frequent rest, food,
and recreation stops.
• Fatigue is a major cause of highway accidents. Don’t drive while drowsy.
• All driving, except for short trips, should be done in daylight.
Highway transport of boats, by trailer or on roof carriers, requires special consideration and will be discussed
further in sections on various craft.
Planning checklists
There is no national policy that requires units to file a formal tour plan with local councils. However, informed planning
at the unit level is a practical concept that fosters successful, safe activities and is recognized as such in policies and
procedures. There are various activity checklists available on scouting.org that may assist leaders in planning outings
that include swimming or boating. For example, see the Campout Safety Checklist.
Legal Considerations
Leaders’ moral obligation to protect the youth under their supervision should overshadow any concerns about
legal accountability. Nevertheless, some volunteers may have concerns about legal exposure should something
happen despite their diligent efforts. The best way to avoid litigation is to prevent physical or mental trauma
through safety awareness, preparation, consistent application of policies, and other tools of risk management.
The material reviewed here is presented as an additional aid to ensure preparedness, not as a reason to forego
the pleasure, challenges, and satisfaction that arise from participating in aquatics activities.
Most legal actions that result from an accident during a supervised youth activity are civil: an injured party,
or plaintiff, charges a person or organization, the defendant, with responsibility for the accident. Legal
responsibility, or liability, is the issue, and the court may award compensation for both actual damages and as
punishment (a punitive award). In a criminal case, the government charges the defendant with violating a law.
The issue is guilt, which if proved, causes the court to impose punishment.
Although civil suits may be initiated under a wide variety of circumstances, the plaintiff generally must establish that
harm has resulted from negligence, or the failure to act properly. Negligence need not be intentional or willful.
It arises when the defendant fails to act appropriately, or acts improperly. Negligence can result from carelessness,
poor judgment, forgetfulness, inexperience, ignorance, or failure to notice and/or correct a hazardous situation.
To establish negligence, the plaintiff must first show that the defendant had a duty to act. A duty to act, or
duty of care, is established when a person or organization accepts responsibility for the safety of another. A
parent has a duty to a child. In loco parentis means that another person has temporarily assumed a parent’s
responsibility. A person who invites a neighbor’s child to play in a backyard wading pool has a duty of care, as
does a Scoutmaster supervising a troop swim on a campout.


Chapter 3: Safety First
3-12
After a court determines that a duty of care exists, the next step is to determine the standard of care that
applies to that duty. The parent watching neighborhood children in a wading pool may only be required to act as
a “reasonable” or “prudent” person would under the circumstances. A bystander applying first aid at an accident
scene is generally held to a lesser standard of care than an on-duty emergency room physician. Lay persons are
often afforded some legal protection by Good Samaritan laws, so long as they act in accord with and within the
limits of any training they have received. Note that the standard of care expected of a volunteer leader may be
modified by the training and policies imposed by a sponsoring organization. For example, a plaintiff may establish
negligence by showing that the actions of a Scout leader were not in accord with Scouting America policy or that
they were inconsistent with how similarly trained persons would have acted.
Failure to perform the duty of care to the appropriate standard is called a breach. A breach by itself does not
constitute negligence. Harm or damage has to result from the breach.
The following examples, some of which may fit in more than one category, may support a claim of negligence.
Numerous other examples can be constructed simply by taking the inverse of any previously stated safety policy.
Failure to provide a safe environment:
• No boundary line is used between deep water and the nonswimmer area.
• Youth are provided with adult-sized life jackets.
• A tripping hazard exists where sections of a floating dock are attached.
Improper action:
• The unit leader leaves swimmers unattended.
• Youth are pressured to attempt a skills they are uncomfortable doing.
• Dangerous actions are encouraged, such as racing starts in shallow water or running a low-head dam.
Lack of action:
• First aid is not provided, or is stopped too soon.
• Rapids are not scouted.
• Rules are not enforced, or are enforced inconsistently.
According to respondent superior doctrine, an organization or employer can be held responsible for the
negligence of a volunteer or employee. The Scoutmaster, the local council, and the National Council may all
be named in a suit that originates from the actions of an assistant leader. While the attorneys representing the
plaintiff may prefer to go after the “deep pockets” that can afford both the legal fees and the care due an injured
party, lack of personal wealth does not protect any defendant from the wrath of an aggrieved parent and the
indignation of a jury. Future earnings may be garnished in civil actions.
To help protect the financial resources of volunteers and employees, Scouting America provides Comprehensive
General Liability Insurance for claims arising out of an official Scouting activity, which is defined as consistent
with the values, Charter and Bylaws, Rules and Regulations, operations manuals, and applicable literature of
Scouting America.
Many Scout volunteers also assist other organizations, such as schools, churches, and sports leagues. The prudent
volunteer should realize that not all nonprofit organizations provide volunteers support at levels similar to
Scouting America. Such groups may offer liability insurance coverage only to volunteers on the boards of directors.


Chapter 3: Safety First 3-13
District and Council Activities
This manual is directed primarily at volunteer leaders conducting aquatics
activities at the unit level. However, those volunteers may also serve at district
and council levels, and units may take advantage of programs, such as camporees
and summer camps, where councils provide equipment and supervision as well
as manage the property.
The standards of care for such activities are often influenced by government
regulations, typically at the state level, imposed on aquatic venues and youth
camps. The National Office of Scouting America provides several resources,
beyond the Guide to Safe Scouting, to help conduct such programs and navigate
the complexity of codes that may vary significantly among jurisdictions. Those
include the National Camp Accreditation Program, National Camp Standards,
and National Camping Schools for training key camp staff members. Additional
guidance is provided by the Program Hazard Analysis tool and the Aquatics
Play Structure Policy. Anyone interested in learning more should consult those
resources. Ideally, questions at the local level can be addressed by a council
aquatics committee, which ideally has one or more members with National
Camping School training as a Scouting America Aquatics Instructor.
An example of how regulations influence standards of care is the need for professionally trained lifeguards to watch
swimmers. Private, backyard pools are consistently exempt. A few cities and counties require lifeguards at hotel
pools but most simply require isolation fencing, signage, and a limited depth range. Most states require public
pools, such as those at state parks, to have lifeguards, but may or may not require lifeguards at designated swim
areas at a lake in other parks. Enough states require lifeguards for swimming areas in youth camps to establish
that as an “industry standard” for both pools and swim beaches. So, Safe Swim Defense requires “Response
Personnel” for a unit backyard swim, while Scouting America National Camp Standards require professionally
trained lifeguards at council camps serving multiple units.


Chapter 3: Safety First
3-14
Water Safety Advice for Parents
Scouting’s safety polices and procedures focus on the age groups in Scouting programs, from kindergarten to
adulthood. However, drowning data reveal that toddlers experience a high risk of death from drowning. Since
Scout age youth often have younger siblings, it is important for families to be aware of drowning prevention
strategies for their younger members who lack the understanding to look out for themselves. Close, constant
supervision is extremely important any time toddlers are allowed in or near bodies of water. Since toddlers are
mobile and prone to explore, restricted access to water is also vital.
Water Watchers
Water Safety USA recommends designating a “Water
Watcher” whenever children are in the water. For
toddlers, the water watcher should provide “touch
supervision”, that is, be within arms reach at all
times. The water watcher should pay constant,
undistracted attention and not be involved in
any other activity such as cooking, talking on the
phone, or reading.
An appropriate water watcher:
• Is at least 16 years of age (adults preferred).
• Has the skills, knowledge, and ability to
recognize and rescue someone in distress or can
immediately alert someone nearby who has that
capability.
• Knows CPR or can quickly summon someone with
that skill.
• Has a working phone to dial 9-1-1.
• Has a flotation or reaching device for rescues.
• Is alert and not influenced by drugs or alcohol.
Non-swimmers should be kept away from deep
water. Properly fitted Coast Guard approved life
jackets are appropriate in some situations. Never
rely on “floaties” or other toys for non-swimmer
protection.
Pool Barriers
Parents owning or visiting residential pools should
address the risk when toddlers have unsupervised
access to the water. Pool barriers, such as
surrounding fences with self closing and locking
gates, are highly recommended and mandated by
statue in many areas. Studies confirm that such
codes reduce drowning rates. If the house itself
forms part the barrier, then doors and windows to
the pool area should be locked and alarmed. See
the US Consumer Product Safety Commission’s Pool
Safety website for details.
Do NOT rely on inflated devices or other
floats to protect nonswimmers.
Secure pool barriers save lives!
Keep young children within arm’s reach.


Health Considerations
Reviewing Required Medical Information
Both Safe Swim Defense for swimming and Safety Afloat for boating require the unit leader to assess whether
there are any health conditions that require special consideration:
A complete health history is required of all participants as evidence of fitness for swimming and boating
activities. Forms for minors must be signed by a parent or legal guardian. Participants should be asked to
relate any recent incidents of illness or injury just prior to the activity. Supervision and protection should
be adjusted to anticipate any potential risks associated with individual health conditions. For significant
health conditions, the adult supervisor should require an examination by a physician and consult the par-
ent, guardian, or caregiver for appropriate precautions.
The Scouting America has established minimum standards for providing medical information before participa-
tion in various activities. The type of information required depends on the duration, location, and rigor of the
event. Forms are available from at www.scouting.org. Only those forms may be used for Scouting activities.
Participants who need a separate form for school or sports events are encouraged to have both forms com-
pleted during the same visit to their health care provider.
Chapter
4


Chapter 4: Health Considerations
4-2
Scouting America’s Annual Health and Medical Record (AHMR) consists of three parts with a supplement for high
adventure. Part A is an informed consent, release agreement, and authorization that needs to be signed by every
participant (or a parent and/or legal guardian for all youth under 18). Part B covers general information and health
history. Parts A and B are to be completed at least annually by participants in all Scouting events.
Part C is a pre-participation physical certification to be completed and signed by a certified and licensed health-care
provider—physician (MD or DO), nurse practitioner, or physician assistant. Scouting America recommends that everyone
who participates in a Scouting event have an annual medical evaluation. However, Part C is only required for events that
exceed 72 consecutive hours, for high-adventure base programs, or for activities that are strenuous and demanding.
The height/weight limits in Part C may limit participation in events that will take the unit more than 30 minutes away
from an emergency vehicle–accessible roadway.
Each national high-adventure base has provided a supplemental risk advisory that explains in greater detail some of the
risks inherent in those programs. All high-adventure participants must read and share that information with their medical
providers during their pre-participation physicals.
Medical information for scuba divers at the National High Adventure Sea Base includes a diver questionnaire and guide-
lines for health care providers. Scouts working on the Open Water Diver Certification requirement for the Scuba Diving
merit badge will be subject to a similar medical review process by the agency conducting their training.
The unit leader should carry copies of participant AHMRs on remote trips so that important information, such as
drug allergies and contact numbers, will be readily available if professional treatment is needed.
The adult supervisor should review the health history of every participant, youth and adult, for swimming or boating
activities and respect any recommendations of the physician or other person licensed by the state to perform
physical examinations. Some medications increase sensitivity to the sun. Individuals with severe allergic reactions to
insects and marine life will need immediate access to self-administered medication. Certain chronic conditions such
as epilepsy, asthma, or diabetes may require special precautions. For example, a person with seizures controlled
by medication may be able to participate in normal swimming activities in a pool when accompanied by a buddy
familiar with the situation, but be required to wear a flotation device when engaged in an open-water snorkeling
exercise. The unit leader should discuss such situations with parents or guardians and respect the privacy and the
dignity of the person involved. Medical information should be requested only when safety is an issue, and shared
only with permission with those who need to know.
The most common medical conditions that require restricted water contact are temporary and may not be noted on
a health history completed before the condition arose. Those include ear infections, healing wounds, eye irritations,
and rashes. Since such conditions are not always visible, the adult supervisor should ask parents about any recent
medical problems just before the outing. Such a question can be combined with standard permission slips that
inform parents of the nature of the activity and allow emergency medical treatment for a youth in case of injury or
illness when a guardian cannot be contacted.
Aquatics activities often offer unique opportunities for those with physical or learning disabilities. Any youth who
is able to join in unit activities on land can probably also join in unit swimming and boating activities. Special
precautions may be needed for those with impaired mobility, sight, or hearing. Check with the participant and
his or her caregivers on appropriate safeguards and activities.
HIPAA
The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act does not apply to Scouting volunteers who do
not receive payment for medical treatment. However, all units should take reasonable steps to maintain
confidentiality of medical histories, birth dates, and other personal information.


Chapter 4: Health Considerations 4-3
Work with unit members, parents, and caregivers to provide
safe and fun aquatics activities for everyone in the unit.
Check medical forms for any
conditions that necessitate
special precautions. If in
doubt, check with parents.
Don’t forget to check for recent illness or injury not noted
on your forms.
Some conditions may require
prompt treatment with
medications. Arrange for easy
access for those in or on the
water. Know how to assist the
person if needed.


Chapter 4: Health Considerations
4-4
Health Protection
The supervisor of an aquatics activity needs to be alert for health concerns that may occur during an activity.
Sun Protection. Youth may regard a minor sunburn as a badge proclaiming their outdoor adventure and the
first step to a summer tan. However, exposure to the sun should be carefully monitored. Only a short time in the
sun can lead to a painful burn that will spoil the rest of the trip. Also, skin damage caused by the sun during the
first 18 years of life is a major cause of skin cancer as an adult. Insist that participants use sunscreen as appropri-
ate. Pink skin that turns pale with touch is a sign of too much exposure and a signal to either cover the skin with
opaque clothing or limit activities to the shade.
Sunscreen with an SPF rating of at least 30, with both UVA and UVB
blockers, should be applied before exposure and reapplied after sweat-
ing or swimming even if the product claims to be waterproof. Although
sunscreen will prolong the safe exposure time, the period of protection is
limited no matter how high the SPF number. A white T-shirt will provide
some but not complete protection, particularly if the shirt is wet.
Bright sunlight can also damage the eyes. A hat with a bill that shades
the eyes is useful, and sunglasses with UV protection help protect against
glare off the water. Polarized glasses are recommended because reduction
of glare offers eye protection and makes it easier to observe activity on or
beneath the surface.
Heat Reactions. Exercise in high temperatures and humidity can
lead to dehydration, heat exhaustion, and heatstroke. Avoid such conse-
quences by making sure that all participants have ready access to drinking
water. Drinking when thirsty should prevent dehydration. Eating regular
meals will help prevent electrolyte imbalance that may lead to cramps.
Anyone beginning to feel dizzy, faint, nauseated, or weak should rest in
the shade.
Cold Reactions. Too little heat is as dangerous as too much heat.
Even when the air is warm, exposure to cool or cold water can quickly
remove heat from the body. Watch all participants for early signs of heat
loss such as shivering, goose bumps, and bluish lips. When those occur,
get the person out of the water and wind and into dry clothing. When
exposure to cold water is a possibility, consider the use of wet suits, and
include treatment for hypothermia in your emergency action plan. See
Chapter 15 for more information.
Waiting until a sunburn appears means you have waited too long to protect your skin. Sun exposure while young
can lead to life-threatening conditions when older. Check with a physician about suspicious skin features.


Chapter 4: Health Considerations 4-5
Hyperventilation - Hypoxic Blackout Breathing is triggered by a buildup of carbon dioxide rather
than depletion of oxygen. Repeated deep and rapid breathing, or hyperventilation, before underwater swimming
can result in hypoxic blackout, that is, loss of consciousness from a delayed urge to breathe. That in turns means
the person will drown if not quickly rescued.
Breath-holding is an important stage in learning to swim, and the ability
to swim underwater is an important skill for snorkeling and lifesaving.
However, one or two deliberate breaths should be sufficient. Caution any-
one obviously breathing heavier than normal before submerging. Because
of concerns with hyperventilation leading to hypoxic blackout, competi-
tive underwater swimming events are not permitted in Scouting. (Hypoxic
blackout is sometimes referred to as “shallow water blackout”. Water
Safety USA agencies recommend not using that term since the effect has
nothing to do with water depth.)
Ear Infections. Organisms in natural bodies of water can multiply
when water remains in the ear canal after swimming, causing irritation and
infection. Over-the-counter ear drops contain ingredients that inhibit organ-
ism growth (mild acid), help remove the water (alcohol), and prevent over-
drying (glycerin). Scouts may use such preparations as a preventive measure
with parental approval. Avoid homemade solutions. Don’t place anything in
the ear if pain is present; instead, seek medical help.
Infectious Disease. Illness may be spread via contaminated water,
particularly water polluted with fecal matter. Avoid swallowing water while
swimming, in either a pool or a lake. Don’t swim in small stagnant bodies of
water or where livestock or waterfowl are prevalent. Observe any warning
signs posted by health officials. Popular beaches may be temporarily closed
due to unexpected sewage release, low water, or other factors.
Water in swimming pools is actively disinfected. However, typical pool chlorine
levels do not immediately kill all pathogens in water contaminated with fecal
matter. If fecal matter is released in a pool—from a toddler with diarrhea, for
example—cancel the swimming activity until another time.
Breath-holding contests are
prohibited in Scouting.
International research indicates that children with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) have
an increased risk of drowning. Children with ASD are 160 times more likely to experience
nonfatal and fatal drowning as their neurotypical peers. Wandering to nearby bodies of
natural water is the most commonly reported activity leading to drowning. Children with
ASD like the visual simulation of water, which can explain their attraction to it. However,
they may not realize the danger that water poses. Even if a child with ASD learns how to
swim, it is sometimes difficult for them to generalize those skills to other areas they may
not have been before, such as a lake or river. Supervision by those aware of the link be-
tween autism and drowning is needed, as well as targeted learn-to-swim programs.


Chapter 4: Health Considerations
4-6
The Greatest Risk:
In good years, no one drowns at Scouting events. However, year after year, adult deaths occur during
Scouting activities. The number one cause of death in Scouting and for the public at large is heart
disease. Statistically, unit leaders are less likely to need to rescue a youth from drowning than they
are to need aid themselves to survive cardiac arrest in, on, and near the water.
In response, Scouting America has implemented various initiatives such as
annual physicals, activity restrictions based on height/weight ratios, and CPR/
AED training. Leader fitness is also a common program theme. All adults
should review the risk factors for heart disease and do what they can to
mitigate those risks, particularly through exercise and a heart-healthy diet.
Although the first obvious symptom of a problem often appears
to be a fatal heart attack, nearly all patients have warning
signs such as chest pains and breathlessness immediately
before the attack.
During Scouting events, adult leaders need to watch
out for each other as well as the youth under their
care.


Swim Classification Tests
Safe Swim Defense and Safety Afloat guidelines tailor activities to swimming ability. Therefore, the unit leader
needs to provide opportunities for swimmer classification before aquatics outings. Swim tests conducted by coun-
cil personnel during or just before summer camp give the unit one way to determine swimming ability. However,
not all unit members attend camp, new members may join the unit at any time, and some units plan aquatics
activities in lieu of summer camp. Therefore, the unit should be able to safely conduct its own swim tests.
Any conscientious leader, currently trained in Safe Swim Defense, who is familiar with basic swimming strokes
and who understands and abides by the guidelines in this chapter can administer swim tests for the unit. Units
seeking to pre-certify members who will attend council events may need to follow additional guidelines imposed
by a local council committee. There is a generic form for council use in Scouting America’s Aquatics Management
Guide. However, local rules may vary and are dependent on state regulations for youth camp operations. Other
procedures may apply to pre-certify participants for aquatics programs at national high-adventure bases.
Anyone who has not administered the swim classification tests before should review the video content for the
procedure that is included in Safe Swim Defense online training.
Chapter
5


Swimming Classifications
Scouting recognizes three basic swimming classifications: swimmer, beginner, and nonswimmer. Swim classifica-
tion tests should be renewed annually, preferably at the beginning of the season.
Swimmer The swimmer test demonstrates the minimum level of swimming ability required for safe deepwa-
ter swimming. The various components of the test evaluate several distinct, essential skills necessary for safety
in the water. A precise statement of the swimmer test is:
Jump feetfirst into water over the head in depth. Level off and swim 75 yards in a strong manner using
one or more of the following strokes: sidestroke, breaststroke, trudgen, or crawl; then swim 25 yards
using an easy, resting backstroke. The 100 yards must be completed in one swim without stops and
must include at least one sharp turn. After completing the swim, rest by floating.
The test administrator must objectively evaluate both the ease of the overall performance and the purpose of
each test element. Any conscientious adult who is familiar with basic swimming strokes and who understands and
abides by the following guidelines can administer the test.
Swim goggles may be worn by the participant. Face masks, snorkels, nose clips, hand paddles, fins, and buoyancy
aids, such as life jackets, may not be used.
1. “Jump feetfirst into water over the head in depth. Level off . . .”
The swimmer must be able to make an abrupt entry into
deep water and begin swimming without any aids. Walking
in from shallow water, easing in from the edge or down a
ladder, pushing off from the side or bottom, and gaining
forward momentum by diving do not satisfy this require-
ment. If the swimming area available for the test is not
quite over the swimmer’s head in depth, or does not pro-
vide a platform for jumping into deep water, then a person
may be provisionally classified as a swimmer if able to eas-
ily bob repeatedly up and down in the water, then level off
and begin swimming. The head must submerge without
the legs touching bottom. Ideally, the feetfirst entry should
be tested at the next available opportunity.
2. “. . . swim 75 yards in a strong manner . . .”
The swimmer must be able to cover distance with a
strong, confident stroke. The 75 yards is not the expected
upper limit of the swimmer’s ability. The distance should
be covered in a manner that indicates sufficient skill and
stamina for the swimmer to continue to swim for greater
distances. Strokes repeatedly interrupted and restarted
are not sufficient. The sidestroke, breaststroke, or any
strong over-arm stroke, including the back crawl, are allowed in any combination; dog paddling and
underwater strokes are not acceptable. The strokes need to be executed in a strong manner, but perfect form is not
necessary. If it is apparent that the swimmer is being worn out by a poorly executed, head-up crawl, it is appropri-
ate for the test administrator to suggest a change to a more restful stroke. A skilled, confident swimmer should be
able to complete the distance with energy to spare, even if not in top physical condition. There should be little
concern if a swimmer is out of breath because the distance was intentionally covered at a fast pace. However, a
swimmer who barely has the energy to complete the distance will benefit from additional skill instruction.
Chapter 5: Swim Classification Tests
5-2


3. “. . . swim 25 yards using an easy, resting backstroke.”
The swimmer must demonstrate a restful, free-breathing
backstroke that can be used to avoid exhaustion during
swimming activity. It is placed at the end of the distance
requirement to emphasize the use of the backstroke as a
relief from exertion and may actually be used by some
swimmers to catch their breath if they swam the first part
more strenuously than needed. The change of stroke must
be done without support from side or bottom. Any effective
variation of the elementary backstroke is acceptable. The form need not be perfect. For example, a modified scissors
kick may be substituted for a whip kick. Restful strokes are emphasized in Scouting as important safety skills that can
be used whenever the swimmer becomes exhausted or injured. Some swimmers, particularly current or former mem-
bers of competitive swim teams, may not be familiar with the elementary backstroke. A back crawl will suffice for the
test if it clearly provides opportunity for the swimmer to rest and catch the breath. However, individuals successfully
completing the test with the back crawl should be encouraged to learn the elementary backstroke.
4. “The 100 yards must be completed in one swim without stops and must include at least one sharp turn.”
The total distance is to be covered without rest stops. It is
acceptable for someone to float momentarily to work out
a kink in a muscle or to tread water to avoid collision with
another swimmer, but not to make up for a poorly executed
stroke by repeatedly floating, grasping the side, or touching
the bottom. The sharp turn demonstrates the important skill
of reversing direction in deep water without support. There
is no time limit for completion of the test.
5. “After completing the swim, rest by floating.”
This critically important component evaluates the
swimmers’ ability to support themselves indefinitely in
warm water when exhausted or otherwise unable to
continue swimming. Vigorously treading water will tire
the swimmer and is therefore unacceptable. The dura-
tion of the float is not significant, except that it should
be long enough for the administrator to determine that
the swimmer is in fact resting and could continue to do
so. A back float with the face out of the water is preferred, but restful facedown floating is acceptable. If the
test is completed except for the floating requirement, the swimmer may be immediately provided brief instruc-
tion and then retested on the floating only, provided the test administrator is confident that the swimmer can
initiate the float in deep water when exhausted.
Beginner A precise statement of the beginner test is:
Jump feetfirst into water over the head in depth, level off, and swim 25 feet on the surface. Stop, turn
sharply, resume swimming and return to the starting place.
The entry and turn serve the same purpose as in the swimmer test. The swimming may be done with any surface
stroke. Underwater swimming is not allowed. The stop assures that the swimmer can regain the stroke if it is
interrupted. The test demonstrates that the beginner swimmer is ready to learn deepwater skills and has the
minimum ability required for safe swimming in a confined area in which shallow water, sides, or other support is
less than 25 feet from any point on the water.
Chapter 5: Swim Classification Tests 5-3


Nonswimmer Anyone who has not completed either the beginner or the swimmer test is classified as a
nonswimmer. The title is descriptive and non judgmental. It may represent those just learning to swim who
do not yet have the skills to safely venture beyond shallow water. It may also apply to those who have not yet
been tested or who have elected to forego the test and to accept the limitations on activities imposed by the
classification.
Both nonswimmer and beginner classifications prevent a Scout
from gaining the full benefit of aquatics programming. Unit lead-
ers should promote swimming ability to all members and strive
to have everyone in the unit classified as swimmers. Such a goal
increases each Scout’s safety and confidence, provides more
recreational and instructional opportunities, and makes it easy
for units to administer their own aquatics programs. Note that
the beginner test is a requirement for Scouts BSA Second Class
rank, whereas the swimmer test is a requirement for First Class
rank. A troop’s ability to conduct swim classification tests also
makes it easier to administer rank advancement.
Testing Procedure
All swimming activities, including swim classification tests, follow
the elements of Safe Swim Defense. The health history of each indi-
vidual should be reviewed before testing. No one should be allowed
in the water against the recommendations of parents, guardian, or
physician. Those who are not allowed to enter the water for what-
ever reason do not automatically fall into the nonswimmer category.
Normally, nonswimmers are encouraged to participate in aquatics
activities as an incentive to improve their skills. If the aquatics
activities are conducted by the unit, then the adult in charge of
the event should know the difference between those classified as
nonswimmers on the basis of skill, and those not allowed to swim
due to a chronic or temporary physical condition that limits water
contact. The unit may be asked to conduct swim classification
tests before participation in a multiple-unit event, such as sum-
mer camp or jamboree. In those cases, care should be taken to
preclude participation in an event as a nonswimmer by someone
who should not be in the water. The unit leader should discreetly
communicate such situations to the event supervisor. Youth should
be privately put on their honor not to circumvent any restrictions.
Beginners:
• Jump into deep water.
• Swim 25 feet.
• Turn.
• Return.
Total: 50 feet with entry and turn
Swimmers:
• Jump into deep water.
• Swim 75 yards with strong forward
stroke.
• Swim 25 yards with restful
backstroke.
• Rest by floating.
Total: 100 yards with entry and turn
Swim tests are done one-on-one, with the
examiner and youth as buddies.
Beginners: jump in, level off, swim 25 feet, stop, turn return for 25 feet
from Safe Kids Worldwide B roll
Chapter 5: Swim Classification Tests
5-4


Situations may arise when special consideration should be
given to those with temporary medical conditions. For exam-
ple, yearly swim classification renewals may be scheduled
just before a canoe trip. A physician may approve a person
with an ear infection or a sutured wound to go on the trip,
but caution against submerging the head or the bandage.
Since it would be difficult to administer the swim test with-
out getting the ears or the wound wet, the adult leader might
classify the Scout temporarily as a nonswimmer. That, how-
ever, would prevent the Scout from paddling in a canoe with
their buddy. If the unit leader has sufficient evidence that
the Scout is indeed a good swimmer—one who has earned
the Lifesaving merit badge, for example, or is a member of a
swim team—then an extension of the Scout’s previous swim-
mer classification is appropriate until healing sufficiently to
retake the test.
The ideal place to conduct a swim test is a swimming pool with
straight stretches of 25 to 50 yards and clear water at least
7 feet deep at the point of entry. Those taking the swimmer
test can then be instructed simply to swim either four or two
lengths as appropriate. A pool 25 or 50 meters in length is eas-
ily adapted by placing a turning mark or line at the yard mark,
or by having the person swim the short extra distance. (Recall
that the swimmer test is not meant to demonstrate the maxi-
mum distance a person can swim.) The course may also be laid
out such that the swimmer follows a circular pattern around
the pool rather than back and forth, but be sure to incorporate
the sharp turn required by both beginner and swimmer tests.
Very small backyard or apartment pools (less than roughly 20
feet in the maximum direction) are fine for a unit swim, but
should be avoided as locations for swim classification tests since
likely contact with the sides and bottom during all the turns
makes it difficult to judge how well the person can swim. Such
pools may also be too shallow to meet the criterion for a feet-
first entry into water over the head in depth.
Any natural body of water that satisfies Safe Swim Defense
requirements may be used for swim classification tests. Clear
water is preferred over murky water; warm water over cold
water. A pier that extends from shore to deep water is ideal for
the feetfirst entry in the requirements, but a floating platform
can also be used.
If a pool open to the public is used for testing, try to schedule
a time when the pool is less crowded. Inform pool personnel of
what you are doing. A guard may be willing to clear an area briefly
if you have only one or two Scouts who need the test.
During swim classification tests, the swimmer and the test
administrator form a buddy pair. If there is a large group need-
ing tests, then several testers are useful. Individual testing is
required. Unit members should not be aligned at each lane and
started at once, as in a swim competition.
Participant is asked to describe test and
confirm comfort with each task. If there is any
hesitation, check ability first in shallow water.
Tests measure comfort in the water but do not
require perfect form.
Rest stops are not allowed. However, the course
should be close to the side to allow for resting
and easy assists if needed.
Chapter 5: Swim Classification Tests 5-5


Although the tests may be explained to the unit as a whole, test administrators should briefly review the tests
with each participant. Each person should be asked if they would like to first try the beginner or the swimmer
test. If the person asserts the ability to easily swim 100 yards, then it is not necessary to take the beginner
test before the swimmer test. If a person is hesitant, they may take the beginner test first and follow it with
the swimmer test if that seems appropriate. Those who fall just short of the required distances may be given a
few pointers, a rest, and another try. Those who cannot complete the tests should be congratulated on how far
they got, encouraged to practice, and told that they will be able to retake the test at a later date. If a person
in a swimsuit at the swimming area decides not to take either test, then they should be encouraged to slip into
shallow water and show what they do know. That is, professed nonswimmers should be part of the overall unit
activity, not shunted aside in the interest of time. Everyone should be encouraged to try to swim to the best
of their ability, but no one should be coerced into the water.
Some participants may be willing to jump into water over their head even though they have never done it. Therefore,
every participant should be asked if they have jumped into deep water before. If they have not, first confirm that they
can swim in shallow water and then see if they are comfortable in deep water with a slide-in entry at the edge. The test
may proceed once the person demonstrates comfort in deep water.
With proper screening, those taking the test should not be at risk of a bad experience. Nevertheless, test admin-
istrators should be ready and able to provide immediate assistance if the swimmer does need help, perhaps due
to a cramp or exhaustion. Ideally, the course for the beginner test should be alongside a pool deck or pier so
that the swimmer is always within a hand’s reach or a single stroke from support. The course for the swimmer
test should be within reach of a pole. The best way to keep poles ready for use is to lay them along the edge of
the pool or pier. A pole is then within easy, unobtrusive access at all times. If the course incorporates a floating
dock in a natural body of water, then the feetfirst entry and first few strokes should be within easy reach. If the
course then extends beyond the reach of a pole, the swimmers should be either within reach of rescue personnel
in a rowboat or canoe or within easy throwing distance of a ring buoy on a line or a throw bag. If a person taking
the test succeeds in leveling off after the feetfirst jump, then the most likely need will be to encourage a tired
swimmer to come to the side under their own power. In a few cases, a reaching assist may be needed immedi-
ately after the feetfirst entry. Test administrators should be skilled in basic rescue techniques to satisfy Safe Swim
Defense guidelines for trained safety personnel. If there are others in the water not taking part in the testing,
then additional response personnel (lifeguards) are needed. In either case, a lookout is required to monitor all
in-water activity.
Swim Test Anxiety
Both the unit leader and the test administrator should be sensitive to those
who may be fearful of the water, uncertain of their ability, worried about peer
reaction, otherwise apprehensive, or simply confused about the process and
what is expected of them. The unit leader should work with the test admin-
istrator to help prepare such Scouts for the swim test, particularly when it is
conducted by someone the Scout is unfamiliar with, such as staff at resident
camp or at a multiunit, council-organized swim test prior to camp.
The first day of a camp program may be an overwhelming experience for
Scouts for many reasons—being away from home and the support systems
that home provides, the thrill but uncertainty of what they will experience
at camp, and perhaps thoughts of how they will measure up in comparison
to their buddies. At summer camps, the swim test is often the first program
activity where Scouts both interact significantly with those outside the unit
and are asked to perform to a standard. That experience may produce signifi-
cant anxiety for a small number of youth. However, there is no justification
for fears to be realized. The unit leader can help prepare those Scouts both
before and at camp so that the swim test is a positive experience. The follow-
ing items should help leaders recognize and reduce anxiety about the testing
process:
Chapter 5: Swim Classification Tests
5-6


• Early identification. Scouts who may be anxious around the water or with the swim test process should be identi-
fied well before summer camp or other event for which the test is required. Comfort around the water should
be included in the leader’s discussion with parents for youth who join the unit. The leader should also talk to the
youth themselves. For Cub Scouts, check to see if swimming is an interest. For Scouts BSA, comfort in the water
should arise naturally during discussions of advancement requirements for Second Class, which includes the begin-
ner test, and for First Class, which includes the swimmer test. Be sure to watch for nonverbal cues to see if their
body language matches what they say.
• Year-round swimming programs. A year-round swimming program provides meaningful and fun activities and
allows the leader to observe firsthand the comfort level of Scouts around the water. It also provides an oppor-
tunity to see how unit members respond to those reluctant around the water or with lesser swimming ability.
For troops, it will help move Boy Scout advancement along faster. Ideally, the first time the Scout takes a swim
test is during a learn-to-swim class with a familiar, trusted instructor conducting the exercise. Subsequent tests
are just repeats of tasks the swimmer knows they have accomplished before.
• Consider precamp swim tests. Some councils arrange precamp swim tests for units. If that option is available, con-
sider whether youth with swim test anxiety might perform better away from the other first-day camp activities.
If allowed, reluctant members of the unit might arrive early to get adjusted to the water and take a “mock” test
prior to the “real” test. (Note that the camp aquatics director may retest any Scout or leader whose skills appear
inconsistent with their classification.)
• Prepare the unit for the test. The leader should familiarize Scouts with the swim test process as part of the
unit’s camp readiness discussions. Explain the purpose of the test and how it will be conducted. Explain that
each youth’s swimming ability may be different and that the better swimmers are expected to encourage and
support those with lesser ability. Remind everyone that opportunities to retake the test will be provided to
those who don’t make it as far as they would have liked. Encourage any youth who needs to speak with the
leader in private to do so. And remember that no one should be forced—whether by anyone’s statement or
through peer pressure—to take either test if they choose not to.
• Work with the camp aquatics director. The camp aquatics director should approach the unit leader when the
unit arrives at the swimming area for orientation before the test. That is an intentional opportunity for the
leader to identify any medical concerns and to discuss any youth who may be anxious about the swim test.
Make sure the aquatics director assigns an empathetic, experienced staff member to work with each such
youth and stay with the youth until the staff member establishes a reasonable rapport. The tests will be con-
ducted one-on-one, so it should be possible for leaders to stagger interactions with more than one Scout. If
the Scout remains anxious, the leader may request the aquatics director to arrange a special time to conduct
the test for that individual when there is less activity in the area and more time for the youth to become
comfortable before taking the test.
Chapter 5: Swim Classification Tests 5-7


Review Questions for Section I
1.1 Unit leaders accompanying Scouts on an
outing are absolved of all responsibility
when a professionally trained individual
leads an activity.
T F
1.2 Unit leaders need not be skilled in an activ-
ity if they are assisted by a professionally
trained individual.
T F
1.3 Unit leaders conducting an activity must
be experienced in the activity and able to
respond appropriately in an emergency.
T F
2.1 Cub Scouts earn awards by
A. Doing their best
B. Meeting performance standards
C. Winning competitions
D. Attending required classes
2.2 Scouts BSA earn awards by
A. Doing their best
B. Meeting performance standards
C. Winning competitions
D. Attending required classes
2.3 Which of the following must a youth accom-
plish to advance to Eagle Scout rank?
A. Swimmer classification
B. Swimming merit badge
C. Lifesaving merit badge
D. All of the above
3.1 Which of the following is not an allowed
activity for Cub Scouts?
A. Learn-to-swim programs
B. Snorkeling in confined area
C. Riding in a motorboat
D. Commercial trips on white water
3.2 Which of the following is not an allowed
activity for Scouts BSA?
A. Snorkeling in open water
B. Cliff diving into deep, clear water
C. Canoe trips on moving water
D. Driving a motorboat
3.3 Which of the following is not an allowed
Venturing activity?
A. Scuba diving in open water
B. Triathlon events
C. Commercial trips on white water
D. Parasailing
4.1 Drowning is a statistically significant cause of
accidental death for 1- to 4-year-olds.
T F
4.2 Drowning follows motor vehicle accidents as
the second leading cause of accidental death
for Scout-aged youth.
T F
4.3 Because many people swim at public pools,
most drownings occur at supervised pools
even with lifeguards on duty.
T F
5.0 List three contributory factors to drowning.
1.
2.
3.
6.1 Ultimate responsibility for safety rests with
the unit member, not the unit leader.
T F
6.2 If adequate preventive steps are in place, an
activity can safely proceed without emer-
gency response plans.
T F
6.3 Risks can be managed but seldom completely
eliminated.
T F
7.0 List three items common to all emergency
action plans.
1.
2.
3.
R-1Review Questions for Section I


8.0 Policies allow a single adult to supervise a
den on a remote hike to a swimming beach
provided Scouts BSA are available to serve
as lifeguards.
T F
9.1 A tour and activity plan must be submitted
for council review for all unit swimming
activities.
T F
9.2 An emergency plan is not needed for a
swimming activity at a parent’s backyard
pool.
T F
10.1 A ruling of negligence must establish that
harm resulted.
T F
10.2 A ruling of negligence must establish the
intent to harm.
T F
10.3 Good Samaritan laws completely protect a
unit leader from charges of negligence.
T F
11.1 All swimming and boating activities require
a current health history for every partici-
pant.
T F
11.2 Part C of the Annual Health and Medical
Record is to be completed and signed by a
certified health-care provider.
T F
11.3 Youth and adults require a medical evaluation
within the previous 12 months for any event
exceeding 72 hours.
T F
12.1 Which is the more common medical condition
that will limit access to the water?
A. Cardiovascular disease
B. Use of medication to control seizures
C. Ear infection
D. Allergy to jellyfish venom
12.2 Which of the following mandates exclusion
from the water?
A. Cystic fibrosis
B. Use of medication to control seizures
C. A parent’s or physician’s instruction on the
medical form
D. All of the above
12.3 Which of the following may require addi-
tional safety measures while swimming?
A. Epilepsy
B. Asthma
C. Diabetes
D. All of the above
13.1 Special precautions for those with chronic or
temporary medical conditions are based on
A. Consultation with the parents
B. A physician’s written recommendations
C. Instructions from a caregiver accompany-
ing the individual
D. All of the above
13.2 Competitive breath-holding events are not
allowed due to concerns with
A. Hyperventilation
B. Hyperthermia
C. Hypothermia
D. Ear infections
13.3 Which of the following is not a symptom of
the early stages of hypothermia?
A. Shivering
B. Goose bumps
C. Pink skin
D. Bluish lips
14.1 Frequent, minor sunburn is a long-term as
well as a temporary concern.
T F
14.2 Frequent application of sunscreen with an
SPF larger than 30 extends safe time in the
sun indefinitely.
T F
14.3 Fecal incidents in a well-maintained pool are
not a cause for concern.
T F
R-2 Review Questions for Section I


15.0 During Scouting events, statistically the most
prevalent cause of death is
A. Car accidents
B. Drowning
C. Cardiac arrest
D. Falls
16.0 List the components of Scouting’s Beginner
classification test.
17.0 List the components of Scouting’s Swimmer
classification test.
18.1 Anyone who declines to take or fails to
complete the Beginner classification test is
classified as a Learner.
T F
18.2 The Beginner classification test is a
requirement for Scouts BSA Second Class
rank.
T F
18.3 The Swimmer classification test is a
requirement for Scouts BSA Second Class
rank.
T F
19.1. A person must first complete the Beginner
test before taking the Swimmer test.
T F
19.2 Anyone reluctant to take either the Begin-
ner or Swimmer classification test is not
allowed in the water during the testing pro-
cedure.
T F
19.3 A single test administrator may watch up
to four participants taking the Swimmer
test simultaneously.
T F
20.1 Those who are not allowed to enter the
water are automatically classified as
Nonswimmers.
T F
20.2 Prior to water entry, how does the test
administrator determine whether the par-
ticipant has been in deep water before?
A. Asks, and asks again if in doubt
B. Takes clues from body language
and/or hesitation
C. Asks the person to first swim
in shallow water
D. Any or all of the above as appropriate
20.3 During the swim classification test, who is
the participant’s buddy?
A. The next Scout in line for that particular
test
B. The unit leader
C. The test administrator
D. No one
R-3Review Questions for Section I


Swimming Skills
and Safety
Section
II





Safe Swim Defense
All swimming activities in Scouting are required to follow the eight basic principles known collectively as the Safe
Swim Defense plan. The elements of Safe Swim Defense were formulated during the 1930s through careful study
of swimming emergencies. At the 1953 National Scout Jamboree in California, thousands of Scouts swam in the
ocean with the plan in place. Water-safety consultants cautioned Scout officials to expect a large number of fatal
drownings, based on public statistics. There were none. Small refinements have been made to the plan over the
years, but the basics have not changed. The emphasis has always been on prevention. A unit that follows the plan
should expect a safe, enjoyable experience.
Safe Swim Defense should be familiar to Scout leaders who participated in the program as youth. New leaders
without a background in water safety may initially find the details provided in this manual somewhat daunting.
However, new leaders may ease into program. Council camps provide models, and venues with professionally
trained lifeguards provide essential layers of protection for units not ready to undertake swimming activities on
their own. Scouting America aquatics programs are designed for both adults and youth learn and grow through
experience. Scouting’s Commitment to Safety expects trustworthy adults to determine when they are sufficiently
qualified to supervise particular Scouting activities. The first step in that determination is for leaders considering
a unit swimming activity to complete online Safe Swim Defense training.
Chapter
6


Chapter 6: Safe Swim Defense6-4
A summary of Safe Swim Defense, along with details on Personal Health Reviews and classification tests for
Ability Groups were provided in previous chapters. The complete text is given here in bold type with additional
explanatory material in regular print. Additional details on Safe Areas and training for Response Personnel are
provided in following chapters.
Scouting America groups shall use Safe Swim Defense for all swimming activities. Adult leaders supervising a
swimming activity must have completed Safe Swim Defense training within the previous two years. Safe Swim
Defense standards apply at backyard, hotel, apartment, and public pools; at established waterfront swim
areas such as beaches at state parks and U. S. Army Corps of Engineers lakes; and at all temporary swimming
areas such as a lake, river, or ocean. Safe Swim Defense does not apply to boating or water activities such as
waterskiing or swamped boat drills that are covered by Safety Afloat guidelines. Safe Swim Defense applies
to other nonswimming activities whenever participants enter water over knee deep or when submersion is
likely, for example, when fording a stream, seining for bait, or constructing a bridge as a pioneering project.
Snorkeling in open water requires each participant to have demonstrated knowledge and skills equivalent to
those for Snorkeling award in addition to following Safe Swim Defense. Scuba activities must be conducted in
accordance with the Scouting America scuba policy found in the Guide to Safe Scouting. Because of concerns
with hyperventilation, competitive underwater swimming events are not permitted in Scouting.
Safe Swim Defense training may be obtained from my.scouting.org. Additional information on various swimming
venues is provided in the Aquatics Supervision guide.
1. Qualified Supervision
All swimming activity must be supervised by a mature and conscientious adult age 21 or older who
understands and knowingly accepts responsibility for the well-being and safety of those in his or her
care, and who is trained in and committed to compliance with the eight points of Safe Swim Defense. It
is strongly recommended that all units have at least one adult or older youth member currently trained
in Aquatics Supervision: Swimming and Water Rescue to assist in planning and conducting all swimming
activities.
The purpose of this publication is to provide unit leaders with sufficient information to confidently know when
they meet the expectations set forth in the first point. This book also serves as the text for training in Swimming
and Water Rescue. Check with your council service center for course offerings.
2. Personal Health Review
A complete health history is required of all participants as evidence of fitness for swimming activities. Forms for
minors must be signed by a parent or legal guardian. Participants should be asked to relate any recent incidents
of illness or injury just prior to the activity. Supervision and protection should be adjusted to anticipate any
potential risks associated with individual health conditions. For significant health conditions, the adult supervisor
should require an examination by a physician and consult with the parent, guardian, or caregiver for appropriate
precautions.
This important item is shared with Safety Afloat and was covered in detail in Chapter 4.
3. Safe Area
All swimming areas must be carefully inspected and prepared for safety prior to each activity. Water depth,
quality, temperature, movement, and clarity are important considerations. Hazards must be eliminated or
isolated by conspicuous markings and discussed with participants.
• Controlled Access: There must be safe areas for all participating ability groups to enter and leave the
water. Swimming areas of appropriate depth must be defined for each ability group. The entire area must
be within easy reach of designated rescue personnel. The area must be clear of boat traffic, surfing, or
other nonswimming activities.


Chapter 6: Safe Swim Defense 6-5
• Bottom Conditions and Depth: The bottom must be clear of trees and debris. Abrupt changes in
depth are not allowed in the nonswimmer area. Isolated underwater hazards should be marked with
floats. Rescue personnel must be able to easily reach the bottom. Maximum recommended water depth
in clear water is 12 feet. Maximum water depth in turbid water is 8 feet.
• Visibility: Underwater swimming and diving are prohibited in turbid water. Turbid water exists when
a swimmer treading water cannot see their feet. Swimming at night is allowed only in areas with water
clarity and lighting sufficient for good visibility both above and below the surface.
• Diving and Elevated Entry: Diving is permitted only into clear, unobstructed water from heights no
greater than 40 inches. Water depth must be at least 7 feet. Bottom depth contours below diving boards
and elevated surfaces require greater water depths and must conform to state regulations. Persons
should not jump into water from heights greater than they are tall, and should jump only into water
chest deep or greater with minimal risk from contact with the bottom. No elevated entry is permitted
where the person must clear any obstacle, including land.
• Water Temperature: Comfortable water temperature for swimming is near 80 degrees Fahrenheit.
Activity in water at 70 degrees or less should be of limited duration and closely monitored for negative
effects of chilling.
• Water Quality: Bodies of stagnant, foul water, areas with significant algae or foam, or areas polluted
by livestock or waterfowl should be avoided. Comply with any signs posted by local health authorities.
Swimming is not allowed in swimming pools with green, murky, or cloudy water.
• Moving Water: Participants should be able to easily regain and maintain their footing in currents or
waves. Areas with large waves, swiftly flowing currents, or moderate currents that flow toward the open
sea or into areas of danger should be avoided.
• Weather: Participants should be moved from the water to a position of safety whenever lightning
or thunder threatens. Wait at least 30 minutes after the last lightning flash or thunder before leaving
shelter. Take precautions to prevent sunburn, dehydration, and hypothermia.
• Life Jacket Use: Swimming in clear water over 12 feet deep, in turbid water over 8 feet deep, or in
flowing water may be allowed if all participants wear properly fitted, Coast Guard–approved life jackets
and the supervisor determines that swimming with life jackets is safe under the circumstances.
The detailed application of some Safe Swim Defense principles, such as area safety, depends on location. Less effort is
needed to ensure area safety if the unit takes advantage of established swimming areas, but temporary swimming areas
may also be used with appropriate preparation.
Established swimming areas include public pools and waterparks; lake and ocean beaches maintained by federal,
state, or local agencies; and private residential, apartment, and hotel pools. Some will have trained lifeguards
on duty; others will not. Avoid venues where crowds hinder supervision.
Temporary swimming areas may be set up on the shores of lakes, quarries, rivers, or oceans, or be laid out in
relation to a boat anchored away from shore. In areas not designed and regularly maintained for swimming, unit
leadership should use a limited number of skilled swimmers to systematically examine and prepare the area. The
buddy system and rescue personnel must be in place anytime anyone is in the water during area setup.
Diving boards, water slides, rope swings, floats, and other play equipment must meet state requirements for
construction and supervision. Established areas should have signs warning against diving into shallow water. In
the absence of such signs, all participants should be cautioned against possible injuries caused by impact with
the bottom or the water. Dives into shallow water, competitive-style dives, or cliff dives are not allowed. Diving
areas must be clear of other swimmers.
There is no set height from which a feetfirst entry is always safe below that height and always risky an inch above
the limit. Those learning to swim may be asked to jump feetfirst from the side into depths where their feet will
touch the bottom. For any heights above a few inches, the water must be deep enough that contact is not made
with the bottom. The unit leader should carefully assess the safety of any activity, such as an abandon-ship drill,
whenever the height of a jump exceeds the height of the person.


Chapter 6: Safe Swim Defense6-6
4. Response Personnel (Lifeguards)
Every swimming activity must be closely and continuously monitored by a trained rescue team on the alert for
and ready to respond during emergencies. Professionally trained lifeguards satisfy this need when provided
by a regulated facility or tour operator. When lifeguards are not provided by others, the adult supervisor must
assign at least two rescue personnel, with additional numbers to maintain a ratio of one rescuer to every 10
participants. The supervisor must provide instruction and rescue equipment and assign areas of responsibility
as outlined in this book. The qualified supervisor, the designated response personnel, and the lookout work
together as a safety team. An emergency action plan should be formulated and shared with participants as
appropriate.
If the other elements of Safe Swim Defense are in place, water rescues will seldom be needed. Most lifeguards at
Scout summer camps, many of whom work several seasons, are never called upon to make a rescue. The same should
be true at unit swims. Even so, there is always some chance of an unexpected medical emergency or other situation
that could incapacitate a person in the water. Fortunately, rescues in a controlled situation are relatively safe,
simple, and easy to learn. Danger could arise if a would-be rescuer is a poor swimmer ill-trained and ill-equipped
for the situation, or if water conditions are hazardous. However, hazardous water situations would violate the third
tenet of Safe Swim Defense and should not be present at a unit swim site. Chapter 10 will alert the reader to skills
that should be mastered to ensure victim and rescuer safety, the equipment that supports those skills, and situations
that should be included in emergency action plans. Older youth and adults who have completed the Lifesaving merit
badge, Swimming and Water Rescue, are candidates for response personnel, as are those who have American Red
Cross or other professional lifeguard training. Other good swimmers may be used to maintain the required 1 to 10
ratio if coached in basic surveillance and rescue techniques. The line-and-tender procedure for the First Class rank is
one such technique.
Adult leaders, including the qualified supervisor, may serve as response personnel for an entire activity that
is not too long. Short breaks in concentration are provided during buddy checks. If youth are used, they will
generally need to be rotated so that they too may enjoy the activity. The emergency action plan may specify
that response personnel with more training will handle special situations, such as a spinal injury, whereas all
response personnel may respond when a reaching rescue is indicated. Response personnel will generally work as
buddy pairs, with each buddy monitoring the other.
Note that council maintained and operated swimming areas, such as those at council camps, are subject to state
codes and typically must have professionally trained lifeguards on duty. Regulatory requirements for the number,
training, and supervision of those lifeguards supercede Safe Swim Defense protocols for response personnel for
unit swims. That is, council camps are “regulated facilities” that must use professionally trained lifeguards in
numbers mandated by statutes. The 1:10 ratio for lay rescue personnel does not apply.
5. Lookout
The lookout continuously monitors the conduct of the swim, identifies any departures from Safe Swim
Defense guidelines, alerts response personnel as needed, and monitors the weather and environment. The
lookout should have a clear view of the entire area but be close enough for easy verbal communication.
The lookout must have a sound understanding of Safe Swim Defense but is not required to perform rescues.
The adult supervisor may serve simultaneously as the lookout but must assign the task to someone else if
engaged in activities that preclude focused observation.
Failure of timely recognition of a drowning situation is a common factor in the rare fatalities that occur where
trained lifeguards are on duty. At public facilities, it is not uncommon for a single guard to scan an area that
contains several dozen swimmers of various abilities. Safe Swim Defense adds an extra margin of safety by
increasing the likelihood that a person in trouble will quickly be noticed. The ratio of watchers to swimmers is
high, and there is redundancy in surveillance. A buddy looks after a partner, multiple response personnel watch
assigned areas, and a lookout watches overall.


Chapter 6: Safe Swim Defense 6-7
6. Ability Groups
All youth and adult participants are designated as swimmers, beginners, or nonswimmers based on swimming
ability confirmed by standardized Scouting America swim classification tests. Each group is assigned a specific
swimming area with depths consistent with those abilities. The classification tests should be renewed
annually, preferably at the beginning of the season.
• Swimmers pass this test: Jump feetfirst into water over the head in depth. Level off and swim 75 yards in
a strong manner using one or more of the following strokes: sidestroke, breaststroke, trudgen, or crawl;
then swim 25 yards using an easy, resting backstroke. The 100 yards must be completed in one swim
without stops and must include at least one sharp turn. After completing the swim, rest by floating.
• Beginners pass this test: Jump feetfirst into water over the head in depth, level off, and swim 25 feet on
the surface. Stop, turn sharply, resume swimming, and return to the starting place.
• Anyone who has not completed either the beginner or swimmer tests is classified as a nonswimmer.
• The nonswimmer area should be no more than waist to chest deep and should be enclosed by physical
boundaries such as the shore, a pier, or lines. The enclosed beginner area should contain water of
standing depth and may extend to depths just over the head. The swimmer area may be up to 12 feet in
depth in clear water and should be defined by floats or other markers.
Details for administering the swim classification tests were covered in Chapter 5. Anyone may stay in the
nonswimmers’ area without taking a test. If conducting swim classification tests is not practical for a special
occasion, then everyone may be classified by default as a nonswimmer and accommodated in an enlarged
shallow-water area. Areas for the three ability groups only need to be specified for those groups that are
present. For example, if a unit has only nonswimmers and swimmers, there is no need to define a beginner
area. If a small pool is everywhere less than 5 feet deep, and the unit has only beginners and swimmers, then
the entire pool can be a single area.
7. Buddy System
Every participant is paired with another. Buddies stay together, monitor each other, and alert the safety
team if either needs assistance or is missing. Buddies check into and out of the area together.
• Buddies are normally in the same ability group and remain in their assigned area. If they are not of the
same ability group, then they swim in the area assigned to the buddy with the lesser ability.
• A buddy check reminds participants of their obligation to monitor their buddies and indicates how
closely the buddies are keeping track of each other. Roughly every 10 minutes, or as needed to keep
the buddies together, the lookout, or other person designated by the supervisor, gives an audible signal,
such as a single whistle blast, and a call for “Buddies.” Buddies are expected to raise each other’s hand
before completion of a slow, audible count to 10. Buddies who take longer to find each other should be
reminded of their responsibility for the other’s safety.
• Once everyone has a buddy, a count is made by area and compared with the total number known to be
in the water. After the count is confirmed, a signal is given to resume swimming.
The supervisor must establish a system for tracking everyone who enters the water and their ability. Any system
that identifies each swimmer, their buddy, and their ability group is sufficient. A handwritten list on a leader’s
clipboard is easy and adequate. Buddy boards and tags are useful when more than one unit is involved in a district
or council activity. Everyone in the area has a buddy and is counted as part of a buddy check, including the lookout
and response personnel. If the number of participants is odd, there may be one triple assigned as buddies.
When swimming from a boat, it is critical that both the qualified supervisor and the boat driver confirm all buddies
are onboard, and that no one is nearby in the water, prior to starting the engine.


Chapter 6: Safe Swim Defense6-8
8. Discipline
Rules are effective only when followed. All participants should know, understand, and respect the rules and
procedures for safe swimming provided by Safe Swim Defense guidelines. Applicable rules should be discussed
prior to the outing and reviewed for all participants at the water’s edge just before the swimming activity begins.
People are more likely to follow directions when they know the reasons for rules and procedures. Consistent,
impartially applied rules supported by skill and good judgment provide stepping stones to a safe, enjoyable
outing.
Like the bread that holds together a sandwich, discipline and qualified supervision are the foundation and the
cover that make safe Scouting a reality. Scouts are accustomed to following rules in other situations and will
likely also be well-behaved during swimming events. That is particularly true if the Scouts are reminded of their
dual responsibility for their own safety and that of others in the unit. Likewise, youth leadership should share in
decisions and guidance. However, youthful exuberance may at times cause momentary lapses in attention; fun
and a sense of adventure can overwhelm common sense. Dealing with such situations is a learning experience
for youth and leaders, but leaders should realize that youngsters cannot always be expected to act rationally in
the interest of their own safety. Adult leaders should therefore accept that they, not the Scouts, are ultimately
responsible for implementing Scouting America rules and procedures.
Divide and Conquer. The effectiveness of supervision and discipline, as well as instruction, may depend
on group size. Certain activities are often easier to oversee with a patrol of eight Scouts and two adults
rather than with an entire troop of 30 Scouts and three adults. Particularly when trying things for the
first time, leaders may wish to subdivide large groups to enhance the experience for all. Subdividing a
large group is also useful when the activity requires special gear, such as snorkeling equipment, that is in
short supply. Scouts having to wait a long time for their turn at an activity naturally become bored and
restless. That, in turn, may lead to discipline problems.


Swimming Locations
The application of Safe Swim Defense principles varies somewhat based on the setting. Means for designating areas
for ability groups at an ocean beach differ from those at a small above-ground pool. Rescue equipment available on
a backpacking trip may vary from that on a canoe trip. Professional medical assistance may be minutes away from
an urban backyard pool but hours away from a remote camping site. So long as the basic concepts of each point of
Safe Swim Defense are in place, flexibility is allowed in their execution. The following review of common settings
should help the unit leader adapt the principles to various situations. All eight points of Safe Swim Defense apply
at all times. If an item is not discussed under a particular heading, it is likely common to other situations that have
already been covered.
Chapter
7
Acknowledgement: Some of the content in this chapter is based on the Swim Area
Safety material posted on the Water Safety USA website. In turn, that material drew
from a previous version of this manual.


Chapter 7: Swimming Locations7-27-2
Common Considerations
Water Depth
Underwater Hazards
Water Quality
Water Clarity
Water Temperature
Deep water poses
a significant risk to
nonswimmers. “Deep”
is any depth where a
person cannot easily
stand to breathe, and
varies with a person’s
height.
Drop-offs, rocks, trash,
debris, weeds, muddy
bottoms, and some
aquatic life threaten
safety and enjoyment.
Check before use.
Limit time in water that
feels cold*.
typical pool settings:
therapy 86-89 o F
seniors 84-86o
instruction 82-86o
competition 79-81o
Pollution and
contamination pose
health risks. Obey
signs. Avoid foam,
scum, algae, and areas
soiled by water fowl.
Do not use pools with
green or murky water.
Visibility varies in
natural waters. Murky
water hides hazards
and hinders rescue.
Life jacket use is
prudent for deep,
murky conditions.
* See Chapter 15: Cold Water Survival
3 yrs 6 yrs 12 yrs 21 yrs


Chapter 8: Swimming Locations7-3
Moving Water Current and waves in rivers, lakes,
and oceans pose risks for all
swimmers. Exercise caution in all
cases. Currents may be hard to see
and difficult to swim against. Rip
currents are particularly hazardous.
If necessary, relax and swim across
the current or float with it.
Swimming Venues
Swimming is one of the most popular recreational activities in the United States, so it is not surprising that
there are numerous locations and venues, both public and private, where such activities occur. The following
categories will be discussed in more detail, along with variations such as differences between in-ground and
above ground pools, and swimming from boats. The order is roughly based on the effort needed to comply with
Safe Swim Defense procedures.
Council Camps
Scouting America’s camp standards require adherence
to all points of Safe Swim Defense for swimming
activities under council supervision. Camp personnel,
rather than unit leaders, bear primary responsibility
and will provide guidance with regard to pre-camp
swim classification options and buddy assignments
both for swimming and moving about camp. Unit
members that take advantage of such opportunities
are also provided with models for conducting their own
swimming activities at other locations.
Public Facilities with Lifeguards
Public swimming pools, water parks, and guarded swim
beaches have good safety records. Units are encouraged
to swim in regulated areas where the facility operator
provides trained lifeguards. Safe Swim Defense application
in such situations is less complicated since the unit is not
solely responsible for area safety and emergency response.
However, the unit leader is not relieved of all safety concerns.
Scout Camps OceansRiversLakesPrivate PoolsGuarded Areas
Scout camps provide reliable swimming locations
without significant effort from unit leaders.
At guarded facilities, the unit is still responsible
for medical screening, ability groups, the buddy
system, discipline, and supervision.


Chapter 7: Swimming Locations7-47-4
Safety records at regulated facilities are good when lifeguards quickly recognize and respond to crisis situations.
However, Safe Swim Defense guidelines generally mandate a higher standard for crisis prevention. The proven
preventive strategies of Safe Swim Defense should be implemented to complement nominal facility procedures.
That can generally be done without being obvious or obtrusive.
Even though many rescue situations arise from poor swimming ability or health conditions, few public facilities screen
for either. Poor swimmers are seldom excluded from deep water, and water depths may not be well marked in natural
bodies of water. When a Scouting America unit uses a guarded facility, the adult supervisor remains responsible for
knowing the swimming ability of each unit member and pointing out areas of appropriate depth for those in different
skill classifications. The supervisor should then watch to see that such instructions are followed. Any special safety
precautions indicated by a temporary or chronic medical condition must be observed.
The few drownings that do occur where trained lifeguards are on duty are often blamed on lack of timely recogni-
tion that someone is in trouble. Swimming areas at a public facility may be scanned by only a single guard who is
responsible for dozens of people. Ideally, guards are highly skilled and motivated and closely supervised. Rarely, a sole
teenage lifeguard can become complacent or overwhelmed and may not perform as trained. A moment of distraction
to deal with an unruly patron at a critical time is all it takes for a drowning person to slip unnoticed to the bottom.
To increase the margin of safety, Safe Swim Defense suggests a much larger guard-to-swimmer ratio than mandated
by most state regulations. The unit leader need not assign unit personnel to act as guards to maintain the recom-
mended ratio, but should act as a lookout wherever the unit swims, particularly if the facility is crowded. Additional
surveillance is provided by the buddy system. Although it may be impractical to conduct buddy checks at a public
facility, each member of the unit should still be assigned a buddy and given the responsibility to notify guard per-
sonnel immediately if their buddy needs help. At Cub Scouting events for Lions and Tigers when parents participate
with their children, parent and Cub Scout should be paired as buddies.
At the end of a session at a public facility, the unit leader is responsible for ensuring that everyone is accounted
for. A time and a meeting place should be given to everyone at the start of the activity. Buddies should be told that
they are responsible to make sure their partners are present on time. Generally, swim periods should last roughly
an hour.
Some guarded facilities have safety protocols not specifically covered in Safe Swim Defense. Some rides at water
parks may have minium height requirements. Flags at surf beaches may indicate zones for various activities, such
as swimming and surfing, and hazards, such as rip currents. During the activity tailgate review, unit leaders should
cover facility specific rules with unit members.
At large water parks where several activity features are spread over a large area, unit leaders should base supervi-
sion on age. Den leaders should accompany Cub Scouts from area to area, serve as lookouts, and assemble everyone
before moving en masse to the next feature. Although it may not be practical for the entire den to line up together
for each activity, buddies should be in line together. Scoutmasters should ask patrol leaders to keep patrols together
and to report together as a patrol at the end of the session. Venturers may proceed in small groups from one activity
to another so long as they remain with their buddies.
During major holidays, public swimming facilities and beaches near major urban areas can be extremely crowded.
Units should avoid planning trips to such locations at those times.
Learn and follow area specific rules. Plan ways to track Scouts at
venues with multiple attractions. Avoid crowded pools and beaches.


Chapter 8: Swimming Locations7-5
Private Residential Pools
The most common drowning incident at private backyard pools occurs when an unsupervised toddler enters the
water. A second risk factor arises from headfirst dives into shallow water. Otherwise, the small size, shallow depth,
and clear water can provide a good venue for units following Safe Swim Defense procedures. Rescues, if needed,
are relatively simple, and EMS services are often close at hand. However, the familiarity and apparent simplicity
of the setting can lead to complacency. Unobserved youth drownings sometimes occur at private, non-Scout, pool
parties even when several adults are present. As always, it is essential for supervisory personnel to maintain close,
uninterrupted surveillance of the area. Many private pools are too small to comfortably accommodate an entire
pack or troop at once. Rather than allow Scouts to move at will from one backyard activity to another, tracking
those in the water may be easier if only a single den or patrol is allowed in the water at one time, with everyone
checking in and out together.
Appropriate rescue equipment includes reach poles and flotation devices, such as a rescue tube or ring buoy. The
emergency action plan (EAP) should cover extension assists for active victims, wading rescues for unconscious
victims, and the location of a phone for calling emergency services. The “tailgate” review before the swim should
include the importance of watching your buddy, signals and procedures for buddy checks and emergencies, and
prohibition of headfirst entry. Review Chapters 10 and 11 for rescue equipment and EAPs for various situations.
Considerations for backyard in-ground pools:
• Too shallow for diving
• Swimmer and beginner or beginner and nonswimmer areas may be combined depending on size and depth
• Will need to assess and deploy response personnel with appropriate rescue equipment
• Extension assists from the side may suffice for active victims; wading assists may reach passive victims
• Lookout may be placed at shallow end with response personnel on opposite sides at deep end
• Lines across pool may provide temporary area boundaries, if needed, but should not pose tripping hazards
• EMS response time often short
• May be too small to effectively conduct swim classification tests
This section assumes a unit has chosen a swimming
location where professionally trained lifeguards are
provided by the facility operator. State codes often
mandate the presence of lifeguards, particularly for
public pools. However, regulations vary by state and
some commercial venues, particularly in natural
waters, may provide staff and amenities but not
lifeguards. Unit leaders should always check when
planning an outing.
Scouting America’s Aquatics Play Structures Policy,
which guides inflatable use at council camps, may
help evaluate commercial water parks featuring
similar attractions. Those should provide lifeguards as
well as other safeguards.
Check venue staffing and safety protocols when doing
a SAFE assessment prior to an activity.
In-ground. Above-ground with deck. Above-ground without deck.


Chapter 7: Swimming Locations7-67-6
Considerations for above-ground pools:
• Similar to private in-ground pools; e.g., no diving
• The entire pool may be a single ability area, given the fixed depth and small size
• Fixed depth may be too deep for short nonswimmers, who may need approved flotation devices
For above -ground pools without a raised deck:
• May need to station lookout on the entry ladder, with other safety team members in the water.
• Removal of incapacitated persons from the pool needs consideration.
Private pool owners are responsible for
maintaining water quality standards.
Units should not swim in pools with
green or cloudy water.
If there is a fecal incident, that is,
stool or diarrhea released in the pool,
the activity must be cancelled.
Recreational water illnesses (RWIs) from contact with contaminated water are generally not severe but can be life
threatening.
Hotel, Apartment, and Condo Pools
Semiprivate pools without lifeguards on duty are similar to
private backyard pools but are shared with others. Moving
lines across the pool to shift areas for ability groups may not
be practical. It may be necessary to instruct nonswimmers
not to go past a certain point, such as a ladder, and station
the lookout at that location as a reminder and to enforce the
rule. Many newer pools have a maximum depth of 5 feet, so
separate beginner and swimmer areas may not be needed.
If the unit is small enough, and the pool not crowded, unit
safety team members can do frequent head counts in lieu of
formal buddy checks. Otherwise, a visual signal for a buddy
check may be substituted for an audible one, with the unit all meeting at one end of the pool. (Recall that the primary
purpose of a buddy check is to reinforce the concept of each person watching another. A slightly prolonged procedure
still accomplishes that goal. Buddy checks are not conducted often enough to serve as the primary indication that
a person has submerged. Prompt recognition of an emergency is the joint responsibility of the buddy, the response
personnel, and the lookout.)
Pool Barriers Save Lives!
Although most Scouts are old enough to circumvent various pool barriers
such as fencing, any Scout leader or parent with a backyard pool should
understand the risk posed when toddlers have unsupervised access to
pools. Chapter 3 noted that drowning is a major cause of death for young
children, with higher rates for ages 1- to 3- years. Many of those occur
in backyard pools when a child, not then at the pool, is left momentarily
unsupervised. Pool barriers, such as surrounding fences with self locking
gates, and some pool covers, are highly recommended and mandated
by statue in many areas. Data confirm that such codes reduce drowning
rates. See the US Consumer Product Safety Commission’s Pool Safety
website for details.


Chapter 8: Swimming Locations7-7
Most states require semiprivate pools to post rules, depth markers, no-diving signs, and rescue equipment such as
a reach pole (likely a shepherd’s crook), a ring buoy, and sometimes a backboard. Before the swim, make sure the
equipment is in working order. Determine how best to summon EMS, for example, by cell phone, through an atten-
dant, or by house phone to the office. Make sure you know how to provide directions. The dispatcher may not be
able to bring up your location if a cell phone is used, and responders may need instructions on how to find the pool
from the main entrance.
The emergency action plan should include how to deal with situations involving those in the pool who are not
members of the unit. It is perhaps more likely that unit response personnel will need to aid other users rather than
Scouts.
Considerations for hotel and apartment pools:
• Dealing with other users
• Assigning response personnel
Designated Lakefront Swimming Areas
Swimming is often done in lakes, ponds, dammed rivers, and quarries. Although clear-water springs can provide water
quality and clarity close to that of a swimming pool, visibility is impaired in many natural bodies of water. In clear water,
swimmers and those in trouble may be tracked underwater, and a search for a submerged person takes only seconds
when safety team members are positioned with clear views of the surface and the bottom. In murky water, the mar-
gin for error is reduced. Prompt rescue requires that an emergency is spotted before a person submerges. Locating a
submerged person in turbid water may take more time than the victim has. Every aspect of Safe Swim Defense needs
rigorous attention.
Public lakefront swimming areas are maintained at many state and federal parks. Even though such areas often
do not have lifeguards on duty, they may be equipped with changing facilities, sandy beaches, floating platforms,
buoys that restrict boating, and other amenities that make them reasonable choices for a unit swim.
The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, which manages over 400 lake and river projects, reports five times the number
of swimmer fatalities at undesignated versus designated swim areas, or seven times if swimming from boats is
included. That is, the Safe Area requirement in Safe Swim Defense is an important level of protection. Units that
choose maintained, designed swim areas are a step ahead, but must still consider the other seven points.
• How to define ability areas
• Checking rescue equipment
• How to track buddies
• How to summon EMS


Chapter 7: Swimming Locations7-87-8
Design standards for designated swim areas in lakes vary depending on the jurisdiction that maintains them. Buoy
lines may be positioned to mark a boundary at 4, 5, or 6 foot depths. Generally, the bottom slopes gently from zero
depth to well past the boundary line.
Uniform bottom slopes typically range from 5% to 12.5%, that is, from 1 foot in depth for every 20 feet, to 1 foot in
depth for every 8 feet from shore. That places a boundary line marking the 5 foot depth from 40 to 100 feet from
shore. Such gentle slopes may provide a large wading area for nonswimmers and allow beginners and swimmers
to share the entire area up to the boundary line. However, response personnel stationed on shore for visibility may
have a long distance to wade and/or swim to a person in need. It may be that a person’s nearby buddy will provide
aid prior to backup by the response team.
Limiting the activity area to a within a boundary at a depth of 4 or 5 feet should also make it easier to find a sub-
merged victim in murky water. Note however that not all designated swim areas are limited to such depths. Unit
leaders should confirm depth contours and provide for the different ability groups as appropriate.
If possible, a unit should conduct its swim in an otherwise unoccupied portion within the designated swimming area.
The unit will likely need to bring its own rescue equipment. Reach poles will be of limited usefulness on a sloping
beach. Instead, equip rescue personnel with lines and flotation devices. Emergency action plans need to consider the
possibility of submerged victim recovery. To make that task easier, the adult leader may wish to limit the extent of
the swimmer area and the depth to less than the 8 feet allowed in Safe Swim Defense. Depending on the area and
the experience of the safety team, it may be prudent to have all participants wear life jackets. Also check with park
personnel on access to EMS.
Considerations for unguarded designated swimming areas in lakes:
• Dealing with other users
• Defining ability areas using existing markers
• Providing rescue equipment
• How to summon emergency aid
Obey signs posted at designated swim areas. If the area includes a pier or dock, restrict diving as appropriate and
keep swimmers from going beneath structures.
Rarely, people will be apprehensive of turbid water even though they can swim well
in a pool. Such people will probably self-limit activities in a natural body of water and
may need patient encouragement along with remedial exercises before they become
comfortable with a swim test or boat swamping exercise. They should not be assigned as
response personnel in murky water if they are uncomfortable with the setting.
• Checking depths
• Assessing and assigning response personnel
• Submerged victim recovery
• Potential life jacket use


Chapter 8: Swimming Locations7-9
Temporary Lakefront Areas
A unit may take advantage of lakefront areas at a private residence, near a campsite, or on a break during a lake
canoe trip. Setting up a safe swimming area in such settings obviously requires more effort than using a purpose-
built pool or a beach maintained in a park. However, the benefits are often worth the effort, and the task can
strengthen unit teamwork.
The first task is to find a promising location free from obvious pollution or other hazards with easy access to the
water. Location scouting is generally done in advance by a small group rather than by the complete unit ready to
swim. A sandy beach sloping into shallow water is ideal. Access may also be provided from piers.
Areas with flooded trees above and below the waterline,
mud bottoms which make walking difficult and stir up sedi-
ments, rocks large enough to hinder walking, or weeds that
impede walking and swimming may not be suitable. Lakes in
abandoned quarries may have steep sides that restrict exits
and sudden drop-offs into very deep water.
After a promising area has been identified, it then needs to
be checked for underwater hazards and whether or not there
are suitable depth ranges for the various ability groups.
Nonswimmers must be limited to water depths were they can easily stand, about waist to chest deep. Beginners
should have water of standing depth within a few strokes. Areas for swimmers are limited to twelve feet in clear
water and eight feet in murky. (Those depths are set based on the ability of response personnel to find and recover
submerged victims.)
However, swimmers need not have water over their heads in depth to enjoy a cool dip. It may be prudent to limit
everyone in the unit to standing depths. That’s particularly appropriate if the unit lacks experience in conducting
remote swims. It is also reasonable if the bottom slope is so gradual that deep water is an extended distance from
shore.
Clear water can be checked for underwater hazards by a pair of swimmers at the surface, with response personnel
watching from shore. Depths can be checked by one of the buddies doing a feet-first surface dive while the other
watches. If the bottom can’t be seen from the surface, the procedure is more involved, as shown on the next page.


Chapter 7: Swimming Locations7-107-10
Remote Swimming Area Setup
1. Prior to the setup, check health histories. 2. Determine swimming abilities.
3. Review and refresh rescue training. 4. Assemble a swim kit with rescue aids
and setup materials.
5. For large units, use a small group of older 6. Safe Swim Defense applies during setup:
youth or adults and clearly explain roles. assign buddies.
7. Assign, coach, and station response personnel. 8. Post a lookout, who may be the Qualified
Supervisor guiding the activity.


Chapter 8: Swimming Locations7-11
9. Check shallow water with a line of swimmers 10. Sweep parallel to shore and check for depths
wearing shoes. If debris cannot be removed, and drop offs as well as debris.
find a different location.
11. Use a single good swimmer to check deeper 12. A safety line and safety swimmer may be used.
water using feet first surface dives. In murky water, consider limiting the maximum
depth to less than the allowed 8 feet.
13. After checking for depths and hazards, mark 14. Use floating rope to enclose nonswimmer and
the area for ability groups. Only groups actually beginner areas. Participants should encounter
in the unit need defined areas. a physical barrier at the edge of their areas.
15. Boundary floats or distinct features are sufficient 16. For more detail, view the
for the swimmer area. Remote Area Set-Up video.


Chapter 7: Swimming Locations7-127-12
Considerations for Temporary Lakefront Areas:
• Selecting potential area
• Setting up ability areas
• Providing rescue equipment
Some bodies of water, particularly lakes formed by dams, are bounded in areas by rock cliffs and ledges. Such sites
often tempt youth to test their mettle by diving or jumping into the water from as high as possible. Recall that
diving is allowed from a maximum height of 40 inches into clear, deep water. There is no magic height above the
water at which feetfirst entry goes from safe to hazardous, but Safe Swim Defense guidelines caution against jump-
ing from heights greater than a person is tall.
Rivers
After a hard day of paddling, a dip in the river can be refreshing, but safe swimming in a flowing river requires an
understanding and appreciation of river currents. Currents define how depths vary across a river as well as present-
ing the potential hazard of pushing a swimmer downstream. Free-flowing rivers as unit swim sites are best suited
to Scout or Venturing units with a majority of members classified as swimmers. Such rivers are not recommended
sites for Cub Scout swimming or for units with a large percentage of poor swimmers.
Because rivers differ significantly from still-water bodies and from one to another, an overview of river properties
is useful before discussing how to set up a safe swim area in a river. There will be numerous situations to avoid, but
also several options for a safe area. Conducting a safe swim in a river likely requires the unit leader to exercise more
judgment than setting up a safe swim in a small backyard pool. If all factors do not fall into place, the unit leader
should find another area or cancel the swimming activity.
Rivers change dramatically between low water and flood stage. At low water in a large river, there may be more
than one channel separated by sandbars. The main channel may still have significant water flow, but subsidiary
channels tend to be slow and shallow. The secondary channels may be good candidates for a simple wading area. All
ability groups can splash around and cool off even if the water is not deep enough for swimming.
Rivers at flood stage are dangerous. Do not swim or wade during high flows—when the river is out of its banks, for
example. Debris flowing past is also a sign of high water.
• Checking area for hazards
• Assessing and assigning response personnel
• Developing and sharing an Emergency Action Plan
Electric Shock Drowning
Electric current from faulty wiring on piers or boats can result in a fatal
shock or incapacitate swimmers, causing them to drown. That situation
is rare since electrical codes require ground fault circuit interruption
devices to be installed on circuits near the water. However, faulty circuits
leaking current, particularly into fresh water, claim lives yearly. Units
should avoid setting up swim areas around marinas with AC electrical
power even if the area is free of boat traffic.
Low Normal High


Chapter 8: Swimming Locations7-13
River levels between extremes can be decep-
tive. Even an apparently gentle river without
waves can conceal a major current. Look for
partially submerged vegetation at the edge
of the river to determine whether it is higher
than normal. Also monitor the water level dur-
ing a swim. Rains or dam releases far upstream
can quickly increase currents and flows.
Although ever changing, river currents do behave in generally
predictable ways. When an unobstructed river flows straight, the
deepest water and fastest current will be near midstream. The
faster water in the center of the channel draws water from the
edges along the surface. A swimmer floating near the river’s edge
will slowly be drawn into the main current.
When the river makes a turn, the deepest water and fastest cur-
rent will be on the outside of the bend. A steep bank and undercut
trees often characterize the outside of the bend; the inside of the
bend may have shallow, relatively slow water. Swimmers unfamil-
iar with rivers may get into trouble because they do not realize
that both the depth of the water and the strength of the current
can vary rapidly as they wade out from the flat, sandy area on the
inside of a bend. If unwary swimmers, or capsized boaters, are
caught in a river current free of obstructions, they should swim
for shore, ideally toward the side on the inside of a bend. Because
of the current, the swimmer will actually move downstream at an
angle to the shore.
If the bend in the river is sharp, a countercurrent, or eddy, may
form on the backside of the turn, as shown in the illustration.
That is, the water actually flows upstream. Crossing the eddy line
may cause problems for unwary swimmers and boaters. (Learn
more about eddies and other river features in Chapter 20 and 21
on river boating.)
Water depths in many small rivers or streams are too shallow for
swimming and boating except in pools created by small dams con-
structed for irrigation or recreation. Such dams impede but don’t
stop the flow. The pools may be very long even behind a low dam
and generally make good swimming areas. However, be aware
that bottom contours and debris may change from one visit to
the next, particularly after floods. In dry summer months, the
water may fall below the outlet and become stagnant and unfit
for swimming.
When the water is flowing, the current in the pool is generally
slight, but nevertheless present. Swimmers should stay well away
from the outlet, which might be a large, barely submerged pipe,
an adjustable chute at the bottom of the dam, or a small cut and
spillway with water flowing over the top of the dam.
Water in grass & bushesWater in grass & bushes
indicates high waterindicates high water
Avoid high waterAvoid high water
Flow should be in channelFlow should be in channel
Flow varies across a river bendFlow varies across a river bend
In a staight river segmentIn a staight river segment
current & depth are greatest in thecurrent & depth are greatest in the
centercenter
fast & deepfast & deep
slow & shallowslow & shallow
Eddies arise from tight bends orEddies arise from tight bends or
obstaclesobstacles
Some dams form reasonalbeSome dams form reasonalbe
swimming areas in low volume riversswimming areas in low volume rivers


Chapter 7: Swimming Locations7-147-14
In some cases, the entire length of the dam serves as the outlet. Such dams were designed to dissipate the energy
of the water by recirculating the flow back toward the dam. That creates an extremely dangerous situation called
a hydraulic, also known as a “drowning machine.” A person caught between the dam and the boil line will be end-
lessly tumbled. The only ways out—both risky—are to work toward the side abutments or to dive for the bottom in
search of a downstream flow not blocked by debris or design barriers. Hydraulics, also known as holes, are addition-
ally formed by ridges and ledges in whitewater rivers. Never swim near a hydraulic!
A whitewater rapid is no place for a swimmer and does not meet Safe Swim Defense standards for a safe swimming
area. However, some whitewater rivers are the “pool and drop” variety. Most of the change in elevation occurs near
stepped falls or ledges followed by sometimes lengthy sections of relatively slight gradient. The pools between the
drops can be good places for a swimming break, provided the current is not strong enough to sweep swimmers into
the next rapid.
To establish a safe swim area in a river, first consider the current. Avoid currents strong enough to impede walking or
swimming and places where a weak current is likely to carry swimmers into an area of danger, such as a strainer, a
hydraulic, or a series of rapids. Look for safe areas on slow-moving rivers on the inside of a bend, in a pool between
small drops, or behind a low dam that has only a slight water flow over an isolated spillway.
A sand or gravel beach on the inside of a river bend makes a likely spot. Locate the swimming area on the upstream side
of the beach so that swimmers have the rest of the beach as a safe haven if needed. Check the depth and the current
toward the main channel using a good swimmer holding a line. Make sure the line is held securely on shore: a single
person may not be able to hold a swimmer stepping into the current. If the current in the channel is strong enough that
swimmers will be moved downstream, then limit the swimming area outside of the channel. It is not necessary for Scouts
to have water over the head in depth for them to cool off and have fun. Safe Swim Defense policies define maximum, not
minimum, swimming depths.
A ‘Safe Swim Area’: slight current, shallow water, lifejackets worn, response personnel
defining area with floating line, line & tender team, supervisor also serving as lookout.


Chapter 8: Swimming Locations7-15
BOUNDARY, SAFETY LINE
SWIMMING
AREA
LOOKOUT LINE & TENDER
TEAM
GUARD
WITH
THROW
BAG
STANDBY
RESCUE
BOAT
NO BEGINNERS
OR NONSWIMMERS
CURRENT
Although makeshift buoys or other isolated
objects are often sufficient to define a swim-
mer area, floating lines can provide additional
assurance that swimmers remain away from
off-limit areas. Stretching a line diagonally
across the width of the river is sometimes fea-
sible, but not always practical, particularly if
boaters are using the area at the same time.
If the depth of the swimmers area is less than
chest deep, then an alternative to anchors is to
have the line held by safety personnel. Attach
one end of a long line onshore at the down-
stream end of the area. Have two members of
the safety team wade out with the rope to just
over waist deep. One person remains there to
define the maximum distance from shore and
supports the line in place. The other person
continues with the line upstream and paral-
lel to the shore. The resulting L-shaped corral
defines the swimmers area. If needed, either
person can drop the line to assist a person in
trouble. Alternately, the line may be pulled
toward a distressed swimmer.
Regardless of whether safety personnel are deployed in the water, there should also be a line-and-tender team
onshore. Other safety team members can be positioned with a throw bag near the downstream end of the area. If the
condition of the bank is such that a swimmer moving downstream with the current cannot easily be followed onshore,
then a boat may be kept on standby to retrieve that person.
A flowing river is less than ideal for a unit with a large percentage of nonswimmers and beginners. However, the
technique described above can be used to define a small region of shallow water for a combined nonswimmer/
beginner area. In that case, extend the upstream end of the line back to shore to completely enclose the area.
Having the bathers wear life jackets will provide an extra margin of safety.
If there is a noticeable current beyond the confines of
the established swimmer area, Scouts may well ask per-
mission to jump into the current, float downstream, exit,
and repeat. In the proper circumstances, such a natural
“waterpark ride” provides an opportunity to teach river
boaters swift-water survival skills in a controlled setting.
However, “control” is the key. The downstream area
needs to be free of obstacles for a long distance, and
there needs to be an easy place to exit. Limit such an
activity to swimmers, have them wear life jackets and
helmets, and instruct them to float feetfirst. Allow only
one person to “launch” at a time. Make sure the course
is within easy reach of a throw bag over the entire route.
Also consider putting a “safety line” in the water near
the exit. Supervisors should be skilled in river float trips
and ideally have training in swift water rescue.


Chapter 7: Swimming Locations7-167-16
Oceans and the Great Lakes
Establishing a safe swimming area in the ocean requires consideration of currents, waves, access, and marine life.
Swimming areas need to be separated from surfing or boating activities. Concerns with water clarity, purity, and
temperature are similar to other areas.
The cycle of high and low tides causes tidal currents. In some coastal
areas, the main shoreline is separated from the open ocean by a
series of barrier bars and islands enclosing shallow bays. The current
in tidal channels between the islands can be strong enough to wash
human-powered boats or swimmers out to sea. Avoid swimming
in such areas, and be alert to changes in the strength and direction
of currents as tides wax and wane.
Longshore currents, also known as drift or lateral currents, move
parallel to the shore. They will not carry a swimmer out to sea,
but they can wash an unwary person toward areas of potential
danger such as pilings or rip currents. Buddies and safety person-
nel should check to see if swimmers are drifting along the beach.
If so, the swimmers should swim directly toward shore until they
are able to wade back to the group. Swimming against the current
wastes energy.
In some cases, drift currents run in a “gutter” or trough inside the
surf line between the beach and a shallow sandbar. Such holes can
present a danger to poor swimmers, particularly shorter children
who may go from standing depth to water over their heads in a
single step. Even though the beach near the shoreline may appear
to be gently sloping, coastal beaches can have abrupt changes in
depth due to gutters, sandbars, low-tide shelves, and waves.
Water cast upon the beach by waves must eventually return seaward. In some cases, that return flow occurs in
strong, isolated currents known as rip currents. Rip currents typically form at breaks in sandbars and alos near
structures such as jetties and piers. They are common on all surf beaches, including the Great Lakes. Some are fixed
in location; others change as sandbars shift. Intense temporary rips may appear quickly in response to changing
conditions, such as a surge from a storm moving toward land.
DRIFT CURRENT
TIDAL CURRENT
(GOING OUT)
OCEAN
BAY
Tidal currents flow to & from open ocean
Longshore currents flow parallel to shore
Depth profiles at beaches are not uniform
Rip currents can sweep even the strongest swimmer away from shore. Preferably, swim near a lifeguard.
If caught in a rip current, relax and swim out of the current, not against it, with a restful stroke, and then to
shore. Float, wave and shout for help if needed.


Chapter 8: Swimming Locations7-17
Rip currents can pull unwary swimmers into deep water and sweep them many yards offshore. Poor swimmers may
panic and need help after they exhaust themselves trying to swim to shore against the powerful current. Instead,
they should relax and swim parallel to shore until they are out of the current. Generally the distance will be short,
but may be comparable to the length of the Scouting America swimmer test (50 plus yards). In such a situation, it
helps to know restful swimming strokes. Once out of the current, the swimmer should probe with the legs for the
bottom. There may be standing depth on an adjacent sandbar. Otherwise, the swimmer can continue to shore out-
side of the rip. A discussion of rip currents should be included in the “tailgate” review that precedes a unit swim in
any area where they are likely. Addtitional information on rip currents is provided by the United States Lifesaving
Society.
Backwash, or runback, is caused when the water cast ashore by a wave flows
seaward down the slope of the beach. The flow at the shoreline reverses promptly
as waves push water onto the beach which then recedes. That flow is often appar-
ent to a person standing in shallow water and may be more noticeable on steep
beaches. The rushing water may affect a person’s footing, but it isn’t normally
dangerous, except perhaps for a small child or an inexperienced swimmer. As
always, both such groups should be closely supervised. Breaking waves combined
with backwash may cause them distress.
The backwash people feel on their feet, combined with a missunderstanding of rip
currents, may have led to the concept of people being caught in an “undertow”
and dragged under. Rip currents carry people offshore, they do not suck people
down and hold them underwater.
Surf is formed when waves meet the shore. Wave strength
depends on offshore winds, the steepness of the beach, and
whether the tide is in or out. Waves approaching a beach travel
as swells formed mainly by offshore winds. If the water remains
deep, energy is released as swells hit rocks, jetties, fishing piers,
or other structures. Such surging waves push swimmers violently
against such objects and should be avoided.
If the shoreline consists of a steep beach, swells will become
higher as they approach shore. Plunging waves topple over the
wave front with a large, sudden release of energy. Such waves are
favored by expet surfers but are hazardous for swimmers.
IF IN DOUBT, DON’T GO OUT!
Surging
waves
Plunging
waves


Chapter 7: Swimming Locations7-187-18
Spilling
waves
If the slope of the shore is gentle, then waves will not get as
high and energy is released when the top of the wave tumbles,
or spills, down, the wave front. Small spilling waves can be
enjoyed by good swimmers who understand how they behave.
Poor swimmers should avoid any waves in which they cannot
easily retain their footing and remain upright. Small children,
regardless of swimming ability, should be closely supervised at
all times, limited to near shore activities, and kept within arm’s
reach. Properly fitted, U.S. Coast Guard approved life jackets
add an extra layer of protection.
Swimmers should face the waves and be alert to water move-
ment. Swimmers should be cautious when ducking into waves.
Head first dives into the bottom can result in serious spinal inju-
ries, including paralysis or death.
Access to the water on a sandy beach is straightforward, but not all shorelines have large stretches of sand. In some
areas, the surf impinges on cliffs at high tide, with patches of shingle (coarse pebbles) or sand exposed at low tide.
Care should be taken when swimming at the base of a cliff during low tide to avoid being trapped against the cliff
as the tide comes in.
Avoid diving into the bottomBe alert to water movementClosely supervise young children
Lifejackets and lifeguards provide additional protection
Low tide High tide


Chapter 8: Swimming Locations7-19
In other areas, stands of thick mangroves line the shoreline and prevent access. In still other places, the shoreline is
composed of ancient rough coral. Stout footwear is needed in that case.
Footwear can also protect against some types of marine life. Rays and urchins have spines that may be
embedded in a foot if stepped on. Jellyfish and sea anemones sting by contact with their soft tentacles. Con-
tact with certain types of coral will also result in skin irritation. The result of a sting can range from mild
discomfort to a life-threatening allergic reaction. Because of the latter, the unit supervisor should make marine
life a consideration in an emergency action plan when swimming in the ocean. At some beaches, warnings against
jellyfish and rays will be posted. In a few areas, kelp or other vegetation may be thick enough to pose a hazard by
impeding swimming.
Attacks by other types of marine life, such as sharks or crocodiles, are rare in this country but not unknown. In other
countries, attacks by marine life may be more prevalent, and stings from box jellyfish may be fatal. Seek advice
from locals when swimming in unfamiliar areas.
To establish a safe swimming area at a surf beach, first find an
area of safe, easy access away from strong currents. Abide by any
posted signs limiting use of the area. If the unit has nonswimmers
and beginners, combine them into one group limited to an area
shoreward of safety personnel standing where waves crest no
more than chest high on the participants. The responders should
be aligned with markers on the beach that establish the lateral
limits of the area. If each responder faces the opposite corner of
the area, they should be able to see each other and each scan the
entire area. The participants may feel more secure if life jackets
are worn.


Chapter 7: Swimming Locations7-207-20
A second rescue team, equipped with a line and a flotation device, should be assigned to watch the swimmer
area. Ideally, the outer limits of the swimmer area should be marked with anchored buoys. However, if buoys
are impractical, the swimmers should be instructed to stay within a given distance of the guards, say 50 feet, or
no farther out than the guards are apart. A buddy check can be called if a buddy pair strays too far out. Water
depths where the troughs of the waves are at chest height should be adequate for a swimmer area. However,
the depth at a reasonable distance from the safety team will depend on the slope of the bottom.
If a large troop is involved, it may be advisable in some settings to divide the unit into smaller groups, either by
swim classifications or patrols, each with its own supervisor, lookout, and response personnel.
Not all ocean beaches have noticeable surf, particularly in
bays. Safe Swim Defense specifics at a “non-surf” ocean
waterfront are similar to those at a lake or pond. Areas at
non-surf beaches where the water clarity approaches that of
a pool are well suited for unit swims, particularly if a local
authority provides a designated swimming area. Such areas
occur along the carbonate platforms of the Florida coast
where the National High Adventure Sea Base is located.
The water is more likely to be turbid in small bays near
the mouths of silt-laden rivers that empty into the western Gulf
of Mexico.
Swimming From Boats
There are several situations when a unit, generally small in number, may consider swimming from a boat that
is large enough to carry the entire group. Afternoon cruises on a pontoon boat on a local lake or a live-aboard
cruise on a large sailboat are examples. Some of the best snorkeling sites are easier to reach by boat than from
shore.
Safety procedures for swimming from a boat involve elements of both Safe Swim Defense and Safety Afloat.
Safety Afloat requires both a qualified boat driver who meets state licensing requirments and a designated
observer or lookout no less than 18 years of age. Details on Safety Afloat are provided in Chapter 13. Chapters 26
on Motorboating and 27 on Tow Sports contain additional information that leaders should review when comple-
teing a SAFE Checklist for a boating activity that includes swimming from a vessel. Those chapters also address
emergency action plans for boating activities.
Generally, swimming from a boat should be considered only when all members of the unit are classified as Scout-
ing America swimmers. Otherwise, the group can put ashore and establish a conventional Safe Swim Defense
area where everyone can participate.
Swimming from a boat under way, or whose position is maintained by a motor, is not authorized. Motors must
be turned off, not simply placed in neutral, whenever persons are entering or exiting the boat to avoid hazards
from propellors or water jets and carbon monoxide.
The boat should be in a fixed position, not drifting noticealbly due to wind, waves, or currents. That often means
the boat should be attached to a permanent mooring bouy or anchored. The location should be free of underwater
obstructions, such as submerged trees, and away from boat traffic. Ideally, the boat should be anchored in clear
water less than 12 feet in depth. If clear water is over 12 feet deep, or if the water is turbid and exceeds 8 feet
in depth, then swimming from a boat should only be allowed if properly fitted life jackets are worn in the water.
Having everyone wear a life jacket also precludes swimming underwater, which is not allowed in turbid water.
The swimmer area may be defined as an approximate distance from the boat. Somewhere around 50 feet should
be sufficient. It is not necessary to deploy anchored buoys to define the area for a small group, but the adult


Chapter 8: Swimming Locations7-21
supervisor should intervene if a buddy pair abuses the guidelines by continuously pushing the limits. Buddy checks
can be used to regroup the swimmers closer to the boat if the group begins to disperse over too large an area.
Swimmers must be keep close enough to easily hear instructions, such as the buddy check signal.
Swimmers should be able to enter and exit the water easily. That normally requires a boat equipped with a fixed
or removable ladder or a swim platform. Don’t neglect a plan for rescuers to bring an unconscious person aboard.
Jumping feetfirst from the side of the boat should only be allowed into deep water that has been checked for
obstructions.
Small swells or weak currents will swing a boat anchored from the bow to face into the direction of water move-
ment, and will also tend to carry swimmers in the same direction. When such forces are present, the designated
swimming area should be in front of the boat so that swimmers who become tired or disabled are carried toward
the boat rather than away from it. The lookout would then be stationed at the bow. In addition, a long floating
line should be deployed from the stern to give those swept past the boat something to grab. Swimming from boats
should not be allowed in the presence of large swells and strong currents.
Swimming should be confined to only one direction away from the boat, so that a lookout on the boat can observe
the entire group without turning. Ideally, neither the lookout facing the swimmers, nor swimmers facing the boat,
should be facing into the sun.
Rescue personnel may be stationed on the boat or in a tender craft. They should be equipped with flotation aids and
throwing devices. The distance swimmers are allowed away from the boat may need to be specified in terms of the
length of the line in a throw bag. A practice drill at the start of the swim will check that the safety team and the
swimmers know how to respond in the event of an emergency.
During a buddy check, swimmers need to find their buddy and tread water in position. It is not necessary to have
everyone leave the water to determine if buddies are watching each other and to check the number in the water.
A buddy check should also serve to remind the adult supervisor to review weather conditions. Getting everyone to
a safe location during a thunderstorm will obviously take more time from an anchored boat than from a backyard
pool.
At the conclusion of the swimming activity, a final buddy check is required to make sure no one is left behind
and that propulsion may be safely started. The designated observor required by Safety Afloat must account for
everyone in the party with a definitive head count. After the count is complete, but prior to stating the engine,
or raising sails, both the designated observer and the boat operator should visually check the water around the
entire perimenter of the boat.


Chapter 7: Swimming Locations7-227-22
Rescue equipment, personnel placement, emergency drills, and keeping a weather eye are elements of an emer-
gency action plan for swimming from a boat. Emergency planning also needs to consider who handles the boat if
the skipper becomes incapacitated and how to contact the nearest emergency services, such as a lake patrol,county
sheriff’s office, or the Coast Guard. A cell phone may be carried for emergency communication. In coastal areas,
marine radios are useful.
Distance and Competitive Swimming in Open Water
Swimming long distances promotes physical fitness through exercise and con-
ditioning. The Scouting America’s Mile Swim recognition is one such activity.
Long distances may be achieved in a pool or an established waterfront swim
area by swimming laps in accordance with Safe Swim Defense policies. Scout-
ing America has additional guidelines if the distance is covered over longer
stretches outside an established swimming area:
• The environment for an open-water swim must conform to Safe Swim Defense guidelines regarding hazards such
as submerged trees, currents, or boat traffic, as well as water quality, depth, and clarity.
• Each individual swimmer, or at most a buddy pair, may be accompanied by a rowboat with two people onboard,
one skilled in controlling the boat and the other trained in basic water rescue, equipped with a reaching device
and flotation aid, continuously watching the swimmer(s).
• Alternatively, a closed circuit may be established where all swimmers are constantly in reach of safety per-
sonnel strategically positioned at fixed points on anchored boats, the shore, or piers. Each participant swims
with a buddy, and the number and spacing of the swimmers in the water should not exceed the capacity of the
watchers to easily count the swimmers as they move from one zone to another.
• Some competitive swimming events, such as triathlons, also cover long distances. Long-distance swimming races
are not approved for Cub Scouts or Scouts BSA, but Venturers may participate in triathlon training and competi-
tive events. All swimming activities conducted by Venturing crews must conform to Safe Swim Defense guidelines.
Individual Venturers may participate in outside triathlon events sanctioned by USA Triathlon.
Recap
Safe Swim Defense defines Scouting America policies on swimming activities. Those
policies offer the conscientious unit leader effective risk-management tools based on
known risk factors and effective preventive measures. Limitations on certain activi-
ties should not be viewed as stumbling blocks; rather, policies and guidelines are best
described as stepping-stones toward safe and enjoyable adventures.
However, every possible contingency may not be covered with a hard-and-fast rule,
and rules are poor substitutes for experience. Responsible adult leaders who under-
stand their responsibility and the risk factors addressed by various policies, can exer-
cise discretion regarding certain procedures while maintaining safety. Some units
may have the supervision, skills, experience, and equipment to engage in an activity
that other units should avoid. Ultimately, individual leaders must personally decide
if they are sufficiently experienced and well-informed to make the rational decisions
expected of a qualified supervisor. Leaders are expected to utilize Scouting America’s
SAFE checklist when planning activities.
• SUPERVISON
• ASSESSMENT
• FITNESS & SKILL
• EQUIPMENT &
ENVIRONMENT


Learning to Swim & Water Competency
Chapter 3, Safety First, reviewed risk factors for drowning and the layers of protection in Safe Swim Defense to
manage those risks. In particular, deep water was identified as a significant risk to those who cannot swim well.
That risk is mitigated by informing Scouts, parents, and leaders of the danger posed by deep water, by teaching
Scouts to swim, and by isolating poor swimmers from deep water. Those protective measures support the concept
of water competency for all Scouts. This chapter addresses water competency and how it is achieved via learn-
to-swim programs and activities.
Since its founding, Scouting America has considered swimming proficiency as a life skill that everyone should
achieve. Proficiency was, and still is, measured by a progressive set of metrics embedded in advancement
requirements and Safe Swim Defense. Anyone able to complete the Beginner swim classification is well on their
way towards water competency. Those able to complete the Swimmer classification may be considered “ade-
quate” or “good” swimmers. Those able to meet the requirements for Swimming merit badge may be considered
“proficient” swimmers.
Regardless of the skills used to define a “competent”, “good”, or “proficient” swimmer, those skills must be
learned, and the ability to learn is tied to age. Ideally, Scouting youth will be able to access age-appropriate
courses offered by trained instructors. Scout leaders are not expected to provide that training themselves, but
should understand basic progressions and local resources to aid Scouts in accessing such instruction. This chapter
also reviews what Scouts, parents, and leaders should expect from learn-to-swim programs.
Chapter
8


Chapter 8: Learning to Swim & Water Competency
8-2
A single set of lessons seldom takes a person from nonswimmer to expert. Youth abilities will likely improve if
opportunities to practice in recreational settings are provided. If parents are knowledgeable swimmers, they
may provide useful guidance to help their children progress. Informed leaders may assist Scouts with swimming
requirements for adventures and ranks. This chapter also includes basic steps for a nonswimmer of Cub Scout age
to learn the skills needed to meet the Scouting America Beginner classification.
Public Perception of Swimming Ability
Scouts and leaders who have been in the program awhile are likely conditioned to the swim classification tests
and ability groups required by Safe Swim Defense. However, those new to Scouting aquatics activities may not
appreciate the need. The public at large, including some Scouts and their parents, often under estimate risks
and over estimate swimming abilities.
Around 85 % (17 of every 20) adults in the U.S. self-reported that they knew how to swim in two surveys. However,
the true number of those able to safely swim in deep water is likely below 50 %. In a 2020 survey by the American
Red Cross, 85% of adults initially stated they could swim, but only 48 % reported that they could perform basic
skills such as entering deep water and swimming 75 feet. Only 32 % of adults in a 2023 CDC survey reported they
could swim in water over their heads.
Misconceptions by adults of their own swimming abilities are likely transferred to their children’s abilities. That
is, parents who watch their children have fun playing in a shallow backyard pool, particularly youth who have
completed rudimentary swim lessons, may not appreciate the danger when those same children step over a
shelf into deep water in a lake. Unfortunately, many children who begin learn-to-swim programs drop out prior
to achieving water competency and few public swimming venues impose depth restrictions based on swim tests.
Water Competency: overview
Water Safety USA defines water competency as the ability to anticipate, avoid, and survive common drowning
situations, as well as being able to recognize and provide assistance to those in need. It includes water safety
awareness, basic swimming skills, and helping others. Although the concept is simple, the details are more
involved and somewhat subjective. Two diagrams help explain how risk varies with skill and awareness.
The vertical axis on the first graph shows the relative
drowning risk, from low to high, for a person alone and
unsupervised in calm, deep water. The horizontal axis
represents swimming ability, from none to that of a
U.S. Coast Guard rescue swimmer.
Nonswimmers, that is those who have never maintained
themselves in water too deep to stand, are always at
high risk of drowning when they are unsupported in
deep water for whatever reason. Nonswimmers of all
ages are almost always unable to move even a few
feet to safety and unable to call for help. However,
it takes very little training and experience to signifi-
cantly reduce the risk posed by deep water.
Those able to jump into deep water, level off, turn, and swim for short distances, as in the Scout Beginner clas-
sification, are reasonably safe in small areas with deep water, but perhaps not able to move over longer distances
without becoming exhausted and therefore at risk. The ability to perform a restful stroke over longer times and
distances, as in the Scout Swimmer classification further reduces risk. Once a person gains the ability to perform
a variety of strokes at relaxed rates, as in Swimming merit badge, the risk levels off, but does not go to zero.
Even the most skilled swimmer can still drown under safe conditions if incapacitated by injury or other medical
emergency such as a stroke or sudden cardiac arrest.


Chapter 8: Learning to Swim & Water Competency 8-3
Note that the graph purposely invoked a safe area as defined by Safe Swim Defense. Those with skills represented
by Swimming merit badge will be more likely to handle river currents, rip currents, and some flood situations
better than a Beginner. However, they are very unlikely to handle such conditions, including high seas in cold
water, as well as a rescue swimmer. That is, the skills needed for water competency depend on the environment.
The second diagram relates drowning risk to knowledge
and application, also known as “water smarts”. Non-
swimmers not aware of the danger posed by a drop off
are at higher risk than nonswimmers who understand
their limitations and carefully stay in shallow water.
Decent swimmers who observe beach warning signs to
avoid rip currents are likewise applying knowledge they
have acquired to reduce risk.
However, knowledge by itself may not be sufficient. A
study suggests that up to 25 % of all drownings, both
fatal and non-fatal, involve some degree of deliberate
risk taking. Teenagers reacting to peer pressure may
attempt a swim to a distant island in a large river even
though they have never before swum that far, or in a
current. Hence the upswing in risk to the right on the graph. A good swimmer well aware of the risks may never-
theless decide to dive headfirst from a cliff into a turbulent river. There is an adage among whitewater kayakers
that those most in peril are novice boaters and the highly skilled. Experts who embrace the extreme aspects of the
sport carefully assess and prepare for risks they clearly understand, but still attempt hazardous first descents of 100
foot waterfalls. A goal of water competency is to educate swimmers to common risks, provide them with ways to
mitigate those risks, and inspire them to act safely. Learn-to-swim programs should include age-appropriate safety
education along with skill instruction.
Although a primary goal of water competency is to prevent
drowning, water competency also includes the ability to rec-
ognize and assist others in need, along with understanding
the risks of doing so. The risks associated with water rescue
depend on the situation and the swimming skills of the res-
cuer. Many learn-to-swim programs cover reaching and throw-
ing rescues from shore appropriate for those with developing
swimming skills. However, those skills may not be sufficient
for common drowning situations. Ideally, parents who super-
vise young children at home, apartment, or hotel pools should
have enough water competency skills to quickly and safely
recover their child from the bottom of the pool, remove them
from the water, and perform CPR while waiting for EMS. Water
rescue skills are covered in detail in Chapter 10.


Chapter 8: Learning to Swim & Water Competency
8-4
Water Competency: skill assessment
It should be evident that the skills and knowledge needed to anticipate, avoid,
and survive common drowning situations depend on the type and location of the
swimming activity. However, a specific set of minimum skills is useful for par-
ents and leaders to measure when a youth is likely ready to participate safely
in a given activity. Tragedies have occurred when parents have assumed their
child was safe in the water after completing swimming lessons that were only
meant to impart introductory skills for shallow water.
For over a century, Scouting America has successfully relied on its Swimmer
classification, along with an understanding and application of the other layers
of protection of its Safe Swim Defense plan, as a working measure of water
competency. Additional swimming skills are required for more advanced pro-
grams such as Lifesaving merit badge, snorkeling, and scuba diving. See Chapter
5 for a detailed discussion of how to interpret and administer the Swimmer test.
The American Red Cross advocates a different metric for water competency skills:
Note that the American Red Cross version is similar to Scouting America’s Beginner classification. Both include
the ability to enter deep water, shift from vertical to horizontal, turn, and travel distances compatible with most
residential pools. Data suggest that drownings in the US would be reduced significantly (25% to 50%, or even
more) if everyone in the U.S. reached this level of water competency. It therefore sets a reasonable minimum
expectation for learn-to-swim programs. Parents should encourage children to continue lessons until at least
reaching this level and consider restricting their in-water activities to shallow water until they do.
Using the Red Cross qualifications, or the Beginner test, as a measure
means a “competent” swimmer is not necessarily a “good” swim-
mer. Neither set of requirements specify how the distance is cov-
ered. Presumably, a person could use a dog paddle, an inefficient,
head-up crawl, or other poorly executed stroke. That in turn implies
the person could become so exhausted over the set distance that they
could not continue much further. If so, the person is reasonably safe
in a deep water area smaller than the required distance, and ideally
can use that area to practice and improve skills. Either measure, or
something similar, is appropriate as a swim test for facilities and pro-
grams that implement swimming tests prior to allowing patrons into
confined deep water. However, that does not necessarily mean the
person is ready to swim in waves, either at a large wave pool or the
ocean, or ready to snorkel in open water from a boat.
Swimmers:
• Jump into deep water.
• Swim 75 yards with
strong stroke(s),
• include a sharp turn,
then continue
• with restful back-
stroke for 25 yards.
• Rest by floating.
Montage from Water Safety USA with images from Safe Kids Worldwide B-roll video
Enter deep water
and submerge
Exit the waterMove at least 25 yards
on front or back
Float or tread for one
minute, turn 360 o
Preschool swim instruction with a
focus on the human stroke imparts
safety skills but is only a start.


Chapter 8: Learning to Swim & Water Competency 8-5
Ideally, learn-to-swim programs incorporating water competency concepts will provide sufficient training and
practice for learners reaching that stage to be well on their way to executing one or more reasonably efficient
strokes. If so, little additional instruction and practice may take that person from a Beginner to a Swimmer
level. Parents and leaders should be aware of the difference in skill level and encourage training until the youth
becomes proficient in a least the crawl and one or more restful strokes. Hence the elective requirement to
attempt the Swimmer test for Webelos and the requirement to complete the Swimmer test for First Class Scouts.
Water Competency: levels of protection
Parents and leaders should always remember that swimming skill is only one layer of protection for swimming
activities. Water Competency skills are closely associated with Ability Groups in Safe Swim Defense. Safety
awareness concepts included in Water Competency are reinforced via Qualified Supervision and Discipline. All
swimmers need to be in Safe Areas. Safe areas for poor swimmers include restricted access to deep water. Bud-
dies, Response Personnel, and Lookouts provide additional safeguards. Activities are adjusted as needed to miti-
gate risks implied by individual health conditions.
Safe Swim Defense guidelines advocate use of life jackets for swimmers of all
ability levels as an extra layer of protection in some situations, such as a river
with a mild current or when the water is too deep for rescuers to easily reach the
bottom. Some water safety advocates suggest that poor swimmers should wear
life jackets at all times when in or near the water. While that adds an extra layer
of protection, it does not substitute adequately for either water competency or
supervision. Poor swimmers left momentarily unsupervised can slip out of their
life jackets, enter deep water, and immediately start the drowning process.
If poor swimmers are properly supervised and restricted to shallow water, then
the extra protection provided by a life jacket is often not essential for safety.
That also means the poor swimmer can practice and improve skills which would
be hampered by life jacket wear.
Definitions of “competent” may indicate “adequate” rather than “good” skills.
“Good” swimmers should efficiently execute multiple strokes over long distances.
Poor or untested swimmers should be restricted to shallow water.
Life jackets provide
protection, but are not
essential for safety.


Chapter 8: Learning to Swim & Water Competency
8-6
Learn-to-Swim Programs
Learn-to-swim programs are available from a variety of sources including municipal pools, recreational centers,
YMCAs, schools, and private instructors. Some Scouting America day and resident camps for Cub Scouts offer
lessons as part of their program. Almost all Scout BSA camps for older youth offer lessons tied to swimming
requirements for rank advancement. This section provides parents and leaders with information for selecting and
evaluating learn-to-swim programs. Additional information is available on the Water Safety USA website.
Age considerations I
Anyone can begin their journey to water competency and proficiency at just about any age once they are old
enough to turn and raise their heads out of the water sufficiently to breathe. The extent to which infants,
toddlers, and preschoolers can learn skills that perceptibly reduce drowning risk depends more on individual
development, and somewhat on the instructor, rather than a fixed age. A parent’s decision of when to start swim
lessons for young children should be based on various factors including the child’s development, exposure to
water, and access to age appropriate learn-to-swim programs.
Water orientation programs conducted by trained instructors working closely with parents may safely introduce
infants less than a year old to warm, sanitized pool water. The infant’s first interaction with the water may be
pleasant or stressful, and involve more reflexive rather than learned behavior.
Toddlers age 1 to 3 are undergoing rapid, significant growth in physical and
mental capabilities and can do amazing things in the water with appropriate
supervision, such as turning on their backs to breathe or moving through the
water using a stroke, float, breathe, stroke sequence. However, they are
unlikely to progress to water competency skills of independently entering
deep water, orienting themselves, leveling off, swimming across a pool, and
exiting. They are also unlikely to understand and avoid risks. Therefore,
toddlers should always be within arm’s reach of an adult, known as “touch
supervision”.
The ability of lessons for this age to reduce drowning risk may depend more
on parent water safety education than on toddler skill acquisition. Claims
that lessons for children 1 to 4 years of age reduce drowning risk by 88 %
are suspect since the authors report that limited data indicate a range in
risk reduction from 3 % to 99 %, even if all the other statistical assumptions
are correct.
According to the American Academy of Pediatrics, children at age 4 can usually learn basic skills such as floating,
threading water, and reaching an exit. By age 5 or 6, most children in learn-to-swim programs can master the
front crawl. Therefore, Cub Scout age is a good time to begin learn-to-swim programs, particularly during sum-
mer transitions from Lions to Tigers, and Tigers to Wolf, That is, between kindergarten and first grade, or first
and second grade. Note that Cub Scouts from Lions through Arrow of Light can earn elective swimming adventures
by taking swimming lessons.
If children or their parents do not learn to swim during their early school years, it is never too late to enroll in
lessons at any age. Some age eleven, twelve, or older youth may simply have never had the opportunity for swim
lessons prior to attending a Scout resident camp. Those youth will be well-served by swim lessons at camp tai-
lored to their abilities and promoted as a way to meet Second Class requirements. Some will be able to complete
the Beginner classification test by the end of the week, particularly if they are not apprehensive of the water.
Regardless of when a child begins learning how to swim, it is important for them to stay with it until at least
achieving minium water competency. A survey of 147 swim schools serving over a million students indicated that
65 % who began lessons left the program prior to gaining the ability to swim 25 to 50 yards. A nine-year-old non-
swimmer may reach that skill level with an hour of instruction a day over five days. A three-year-old taking one
multi-lesson session a year may need several years to reach the same skill level.
Parents need not feel regretful if they are unable to enroll their toddlers in lessons due to a lack of opportunities
in their area or lack of funds. They should, however, educate themselves on and apply other layers of protection
to reduce drowning hazards for this at-risk age group, and actively pursue lessons as the children age.


Chapter 8: Learning to Swim & Water Competency 8-7
Program formats and skill levels
This section is a composite of various learn-to-swim programs with representative labels. Lesson providers should
provide parents with detailed skill descriptions for each level. Parents should always be invited to watch the
instruction.
Courses for infants and toddlers are mainly designed to ori-
ent the child to the water, perhaps including a stroke, float,
breathe, stroke sequence to sustain movement through the
water for a short time. However, that ability should not be
considered as water competency. Some providers require an
adult to accompany each child in the water and teach par-
ents support techniques since the child can seldom stand in
water depths used for instruction. Other providers prefer the instruc-
tor to work one-on-one with the child while the parent watches from
a distance. Lessons are typically frequent and short. Infants and tod-
dlers should never be in the water beyond easy reach of an instruc-
tor or parent during lessons and of a qualified water watcher during
recreational activities.
Course progressions for preschoolers vary by the provider
but typically include three levels that stop just short of
minimum water competency. In an ideal situation, one
level would closely follow another. However,
often only one level is completed during a sea-
son. That means several years may be needed
for a nonswimmer to acquire basic water skills
in water no more than shoulder deep.
Learn-to-swim providers typically support
a smooth transition between preschool and
school age programs. Those completing the
three preschool levels, at whatever age, are
likely ready to gain minimum water competency in deep
water at the conclusion of the next appropriate level in
the school age progression. A common difference between
preschool and school age instruction is the amount of
physical support (holding) provided by the instructor.
Course content for the first few levels for primary school
children is similar to that for preschoolers. Instructors
should first determine the appropriate level to begin
or continue with each child. Children
of this age can typically progress more
rapidly than their younger counterparts.
However, it may still take multiple sea-
sons to achieve basic water competency.
Gaining water proficiency will take lon-
ger. Unfortunately, many children dis-
continue lessons prior to reaching those
levels.
The same progressions are used for teens
and adults. Older students can often
progress rapidly. However, anyone who is afraid of the
water will benefit from one-on-one classes by a patient,
experienced instructor.
Infants & Toddlers
6 months to 3 years
School Age
~5 years and older
Preschool
~3 years to 5 years


Chapter 8: Learning to Swim & Water Competency
8-8
Nonswimmer Instruction
Safe Swim Defense is easier to administer if everyone in the unit is a good swimmer, as defined by the Scouting
America swimmer classification test. Also, nonswimmers and beginners lack recreational and advancement oppor-
tunities until their swimming skills improve. Scouting strives to safely provide those opportunities to everyone.
One recognized means to improve swimming ability is to enroll Scouts in classes taught by experienced swimming
instructors. A den is well served if the den leader can arrange swimming lessons for the group. That will automati-
cally allow the Cub Scouts to complete the associated elective Adventure. Scouts attending summer camp are
typically provided swimming instruction at all levels.
However, for various reasons, such options are not always available on a timely basis. Also, studies indicate that
youth can improve swimming skills between seasonal lessons if they are provided opportunities to practice. Unit
leaders and parents who are good swimmers experienced in dealing with youth can advance the learning process
with a little guidance. Also, sometimes the best instructor is someone the child knows and trusts—e.g., a parent,
working one-on-one—as opposed to a strange adult in the midst of equally unfamiliar, and perhaps insensitive,
peers.
The following material outlines a step-by-step process to teach the skills required for a school age child to
advance from nonswimmer to beginner. The progression assumes the youth is mature enough to master the
crawl stroke. It also assumes a teaching area with water depths waist to chest deep with a gradual slope to
deeper water. Ideally, water and air temperature should be around 80 degrees or more.
The same steps are applicable to just about everyone, regardless of age or comfort level in the water. However,
both those factors will influence instructional details and how quickly the person will progress. Attention spans
and motivations for a 6 year old are different from those of a 16 year old just learning to swim. The first benefits
from games the second might find insulting. The first may expect to be held in the water, whereas the second may
shy away from physical contact. However, the same progression of skills is essential to both.
Some learn-to-swim programs for school age children allow six to ten pupils per instructor and conduct activities
using an assembly line approach. Suggested ratios for a parent or leader coaching nonswimmers is one-to-two or
one-to-one. Teaching two Scouts of similar ability together introduces the buddy system as a basic safety rule,
and the companionship should make the learning process more pleasurable. On the other hand, a youth who is
afraid of the water may progress better working alone with the instructor.
Learn-to-Swim Progression: Nonswimmer to Beginner
Enter / Exit Acclimation Breath Control Buoyancy Back Float
Prone Float / Glide Flutter Kick Arm Motion Coordination Deep Water Skills


Chapter 8: Learning to Swim & Water Competency 8-9
The time it takes to progress through the steps probably depends more on comfort level in the water than on age.
Both a 6 year old and the 16 year old should progress rapidly if they are already comfortable in the water. The
first few steps establish that comfort level, and in some cases may quickly be set aside. A few hours may be all it
takes to improve enough to complete the beginner test. However, it may take those who fear the water several
sessions to move away from the side and put their face in the water.
The initial stages should not be rushed. Learners should be encouraged to progress at their own pace according
to their abilities, not those of someone else in a class. Any time a pupil is reluctant to try something new, the
instructor should consider backing up a step. Patience is required to teach children to swim, particularly those
apprehensive of the water.
A conscientious and understanding adult comfortable in the water can use the following steps to teach basic swimming
skills. When introducing a new skill, the instructor should explain the procedure as simply as possible, demonstrate the
skill, and then have the buddies try it, either one at a time or together as appropriate. At the start of any new period
of instruction, participants should be asked to review the skills they learned during the previous session.
The steps are arranged in a logical progression. Breath control is necessary for floating face down. The ability
to swim in shallow water precedes teaching entries into deep water. However, flexibility is allowed. Some steps
can be interchanged, expanded, or contracted to meet the needs of the student. For example, the prone float
may follow the face-down jelly fish float rather than the back float.
1. Acclimation, Orientation, and Adjustment to Water: Entries & Exits
Although many nonswimmers
will be ready to enter the water
immediately to begin playing and
learning, some will be timid or
cautious, particularly on the first
day or if the water is cool, or
unfamiliar. For this reason and to
minimize physical discomfort, the
initial adjustment process should
be gradual and deliberate. (After
the first session, the adjustment
routine may be quicker and more spontaneous.) The instructor should begin the first instructional period by
entering shallow water and facing participants seated on the pool’s edge with their feet dangled in the water. If
the participants can easily reach the water, they should imitate the instructor to dip, splash, and rub water on
their necks, faces, arms, and upper bodies. This exercise should let the instructor quickly identify those who are
uneasy and may need special assistance in overcoming reluctance to enter the water.
Explain - Demonstrate - Practice -Review
Over the decades, Scouting America has promoted various techniques to effectively teach vari-
ous skills. Examples include KISMIF (Keep It Simple, Make It Fun), PPPPPP (the Six P’s: Proper
Prior Planning Prevents Poor Performance), the Coach-Pupil Method, Guided Discovery, and, more
recently, EDGE. EDGE stands for Explain, Demonstrate, Guide, and Enable. A similar progression,
Explain, Demonstrate, Practice, Review has long been used in Scouting to foster learning of aquatic
skills. It is particularly effective when the review is conducted by the Scouts themselves. Each of
the techniques has strengths and potential shortcomings, but all strive to create an environment
for learning to occur. Ideally, parents and leaders teaching swimming skills will have experience in
teaching skills to youth. A few tips on how to teach are included in this manual, but other resources
may be of use. For example, the Aquatics Staff Guide for Scouting America summer camp staff.
Some illustrations in this section are based on two-
tone graphics from a 2002 AUSTSWIM manual.


Chapter 8: Learning to Swim & Water Competency
8-10
Participants should then coached on
entering the water, preferably using
a slide-in entry. However, steps and
ladders may also be used.
If the instructional area is not a
pool, the nature of the bottom
should be carefully explained
before learners are asked to enter
the water. A reassuring comment on
turbid or discolored water is also
important.
Next,have the learners walk along
the edge of the pool to build and
gauge their comfort level. If they
are reluctant to let go of the side, encourage them to gradually move away from the edge by walking forward,
backwards, and sideways, perhaps with little steps, then big steps, then hops.
If pupils appear willing and enthusiastic, this opening exercise may advance quickly
to the next step. If the instructor feels more conditioning is needed, then exits
should be introduced and various games used to encourage movement through the
water without yet putting faces below the surface. For example, bouncing a beach
ball back and forth, or blowing a toy sailboat across the pool.
2. Breath Control
Breath control is a critical swimming skill—when to hold the breath and how to inhale and exhale. Have the learner
stand in waist-deep water with feet somewhat apart, take one breath, duck head under, and hold for a few seconds:
however long is comfortable. Then raise the head back up, exhale, and take another breath. Repeat holding the
breath several times. Eyes may be shut initially, but after a few repetitions, encourage pupils to open their eyes
underwater to look at their feet. (Goggles may be used if eye irritation is a problem, but eventually water compe-
tency skills should be performed without them.)
Next, buddies, or a pupil and instructor, may practice the seesaw in chest-deep water. They join hands and face
each other. One buddy takes a breath, squats below the surface, and remains there for a short count (2 to 3 sec-
onds) while the other buddy remains standing. As the first buddy comes up, the other goes down. This continues
in a rhythmic pattern. Repeat until participants are able to do so 10 to 12 times without stopping.
Pupils may also be asked to retrieve dive rings, coins, or other objects from the bottom. That prompts them to
open their eyes and concentrate on the task rather than holding their breath. Older students may find it more
challenging to thread a nut on a large bolt.


Chapter 8: Learning to Swim & Water Competency 8-11
Depending on their previous experience, learners may automatically blow bubbles through their nose and/or
mouth rather than holding their breath. That is fine at this stage but not necessary. Buoyancy for the various
floats is improved if the breath is held rather than expelled. Exhaling underwater will be emphasized when learn-
ing the arm motion for the front crawl. However, many learn-to-swim provider lesson plans introduce exhaling
under water at this point in the progression.
Those who are afraid of the water may not be comfortable putting their face into the water even briefly. Instruc-
tors should be extremely patient with such learners and not expect reason to overcome fear. One way to proceed
is to have pupils first try to duck their head into a basin of water setting on a table. If that doesn’t work, it may
be appropriate for the parent or leader to seek guidance from an experienced, qualified learn-to-swim provider.
However, finding such an instructor may take some effort. A seventeen year old who has just completed instruc-
tor training prior to conducting group lessons at a city pool may or may not have the necessary empathy and
expertise.
3. Basic Buoyancy
An introduction to buoyancy lends itself to a Guided Discovery exercise. Simply ask students standing in chest
deep water to take a breath, hold it, and try to sit on the bottom. Most will have difficulty doing so. Point out the
reason: people tend to float and that helps them swim. Next, guide the students through variations in a face
down float.
To do a jellyfish float, take a breath and hold it. Bend forward at the waist to put the face in the water. Slide
hands down the legs toward the ankles and flex the knees slightly to raise the feet off the bottom. The back should
rise near or above the surface. The arms and legs hanging down are like tentacles, hence the name. Instruct the
students to relax and float for a count of 10 or so. Stand up to recover by dropping the feet and raising the head.
To do a tuck float, start the same as for the jellyfish float but lift the legs to bring knees close to the chest. Then
grasp the legs. Hold long enough for the body to quit rising. Let go of the legs and stand up to recover. This float
is also known as a turtle or mushroom float.
These skills as presented, along with most of the others in this section, are “independent” rather than “assisted”.
That is, they are performed individually by the nonswimmer rather than with support provided by the instructor.
That is appropriate for the age five and older youth targeted by this section. Preschoolers are more likely to need
support. Lesson plan progressions for that age group may be different.


Chapter 8: Learning to Swim & Water Competency
8-12
4. Back Float, Glide, Finning / Sculling
The instructor demonstrates the back float in waist-deep water by squatting down as if to sit on a chair. When the
shoulders are just below the surface, the instructor extends the arms to the side just below the surface with the
palms up. Next, the instructor takes a deep breath and tilts the head well back with the chin up and the ears in
the water. The legs are slowly extended and relaxed as the body bobs and settles into a natural floating position
with the arms extended to the side or above the head. (Some will float high on the water with hips and legs near
the surface; others will float with only their face and portions of their chests breaking the surface.) The demon-
stration should include an easy recovery to the standing position. Drop the feet and bend at the hip. Sweep the
arms down while lifting the head.
Participants should progress to independently float on their
backs as demonstrated. However, it they have difficulty at
first, the instructor may provide physical support to alleviate
a natural insecurity about falling backward, particularly if
water washes across the face. One or two hands supporting
the back as the pupil lays on the water may be the key to
success. Once the participant has relaxed and is floating, the
support may be gently withdrawn.
After participants have learned the back float, they can proceed to a back glide. Have them squat down and
lean back with arms out, as if beginning the back float, and then push off gently with the feet as the arms are
swept towards the hips with palms in. The glide position is with the hands at the side. Watch the position of the
participant’s head. If it is too far back, water may wash over the face. A raised head will cause the body to sink.
Students at this stage will likely explore using their hands as flippers to provide stability and propulsion. The
instructor can aid that effort by introducing finning and sculling. Both will be used later to assist with treading
water.
During finning, the wrists are flexed and used to push water toward the feet using short, flapping strokes with
the arms along the sides. When combined with the back glide, the student can independently move slowly
through the water for reasonable distances.


Chapter 8: Learning to Swim & Water Competency 8-13
To scull headfirst while floating on the back, the arms are along the sides with the hands initially away from
the hips. The elbows are bent slightly to allow the fingertips to point upwards with the palms facing the feet.
The wrists are rotated about 45 degrees with the thumbs angled toward the head. The hands are then moved
sideways to the hips. At that point, the wrists are rotated 45 degrees in the opposite direction (thumbs angled
toward the feet) and moved outwards from the hips. That is, the hands move repeatedly towards and then
away from the hips in a figure eight pattern. The procedure is easier to demonstrate than to explain verbally.
What Skills to Teach, When
A challenge facing all swimming instructors is to know when to progress to a new skill, when to backtrack
to improve performance, when to cut a session short to begin fresh on another day, and when to deviate
from a lesson plan to adapt to the needs of the student. A review of the back float helps address that
challenge.
Mastery of the back float has several desired outcomes:
• To build confidence in the support provided by the water
• To foster a relaxed breathing pattern
• To build an understanding of how different actions influence movement in the water
• To promote an important survival skill, and
• To provide a stepping stone for stroke development
At this stage of the suggested progression, the first two take precedence. If trying the back float leads to
frustration and apprehension, then revisiting the earlier water acclimation skills is likely in order.
The back glide, abetted by finning and/or sculling, provides a first introduction to moving through the
water without support. However, it is just the beginning of that critical development. There is no need
to demand covering a set distance efficiently before moving on to the next step.
Being able to perform a relaxed float for long periods in warm, calm water is often considered an impor-
tant component of water competency. However, that skill can be developed progressively rather than
once and done. There is no need at this stage to cover in detail how placement of the hands affects the
center of buoyancy, why some people float horizontally while others float vertically, etc. In this progres-
sion, that information is covered as a deep water skill. At this stage, floating with a bit of hand or leg
motion for a few seconds is likely sufficient so long as the person is reasonably comfortable in the water.
Some learn-to-swim providers take the opportunity at this stage to introduce the flutter kick and the arm
motion of the back crawl. That is, they simultaneously start development of the back crawl along with
the front crawl. Both strokes are then refined in subsequent course levels. However, that may arguably
delay acquisition of basic water competency skills to focus on a stroke that involves somewhat awkward
arm motions and is mainly used in competition rather than recreation. (Remember: Keep It Simple.)
A premise of the Nonswimmer-to-Beginner progression presented here is that the next logical stroke
to introduce after the crawl is the restful elementary backstroke. That is, to next concentrate on the
progression from Beginner to Swimmer. The Back Float, Glide, Finning/Sculling content is a reasonable
precursor to the elementary backstroke.
Note that the challenge of what to teach, when, is easier with the 1 : 2 or 1 : 1 instructor to pupil ratios
assumed for this progression. Instructors working with six to ten participants almost invariably have to
teach to the middle. Parents whose children have completed such instruction may find this material use-
ful to supplement their child’s training after the formal classes have concluded.
If a Scout is comfortable playing in shallow water, then Steps 1-4 may be covered in one 45 minute ses-
sion, particularly if the Scout has already completed one or more stages of formal preschool lessons.
Steps 5-9 may be introduced in a second 45 minute session and polished as needed in two more sessions.
By the end of the forth session, the Scout may well be ready to jump into deep water. A fifth session
can be devoted to completing the Beginner’s classification. That would be an ideal result in a summer
camp lesson plan for nonswimmer instruction. Note however that every Scout is different and may well
progress at a different rate.


Chapter 8: Learning to Swim & Water Competency
8-14
5. Prone Float and Glide
The prone float may be learned either holding to the side of a pool
at arm’s length or holding the hands of a buddy standing in waist
to chest deep water. Buddies face each other while holding hands
with extended arms. One buddy takes a deep breath, puts their
face in the water, and then eases the legs back and straight behind
until the body is extended and relaxed. After a few seconds in
this position, the hands are released and the floater recovers their
footing by pulling the knees forward, pressing the hands down, and
lifting the head. The recovery should be slow and easy. Practice
until both buddies are comfortable holding the float for several
seconds.
The next step is to demonstrate and practice plunging and coasting (the prone glide). This skill is nothing more than
a moving prone float. The instructor should first demonstrate the skill, including a proper recovery to the standing
position. In waist-deep water, have the participants squat slightly and lean forward with arms extended and hands
together. They should take a breath, place their faces in the water, and push forward off the bottom. (Be sure to
have participants push toward or across shallow water, not toward deep water.) Practice until each buddy can
glide comfortably for over a body length. One glide can follow another to cross the pool in shallow water.
6. Flutter Kick
Demonstrate the flutter kick in a prone position while hold-
ing onto the side of the pool. A ladder may provide a good
anchor if the pool edge is difficult to grasp. Keep the toes
slightly pointed, the ankles and knees relaxed and kick
from the hips. Kick deliberately, but slowly and fluidly.
Once the participants learn the general motion, a good way
to practice is with the prone glide. Have pupils begin their
glide and then add the flutter kick. Challenge each buddy
to go farther than the time before on a single breath.
Emphasize rhythm and distance, not speed. Also caution
against holding the breath long enough to become uncom-
fortable. Some pupils chop when they kick, bending the leg at the knee.
Others will kick with the feet leaving the water. Stress kicking from the hip
with the legs underwater.
Avoid drills that encourage participants to kick willy-nilly to create a large
splash. Those can lead to excessive knee bending and kicking above the
water. Having participants sitting or laying on the deck with legs extended
over the water is probably not as effective as having the entire body in the
water supported in a prone position.


Chapter 8: Learning to Swim & Water Competency 8-15
Some pupils may scoot a body length or more on one sensible breath. Others may
barely move after the momentum from the glide is expended. At this stage, only
slight forward movement with the kick is acceptable. The flutter kick is not par-
ticularly efficient or powerful. If problems occur, such as moving backwards, a kick
board, ideally with the head down, may be used to help refine the kick. Further kick
adjustments may be made after the arm motion and rhythmic breathing are added.
7. Arm Movement
The arm pull is first demonstrated and practiced while standing, and then added to the
prone glide. Have participants stand in chest-deep water and bend forward at the waist
with both arms extended. Leave one arm forward and rotate the other down the center
line of the body. The elbow is bent slightly so that both the hand and forearm push against
the water. As the hand nears the thigh, the arm is lifted with the shoulder while the elbow
is bent. The elbow clears the water first and stays above the hand. As the hand reaches
forward, it enters the water fingers first a bit before full extension brings the arm back to
the starting position.
The exercise is then repeated individually with the other arm. After the basic motion is
mastered, the extended arm can begin the pull as the other recovers. The speed of the
hand pulling through the water may be increased as the student develops a rhythm with the
arms moving in opposition. The extra power generated by pulling forcefully may make it
difficult to hold position, so the student may wish to walk forward while doing the rotations.
After getting the feel of the stroke while standing and/or walking, the next step is to add the arm stroke to the
prone glide, with or without a kick. At this stage, the arm stroke is practiced in a face down position. Lifting
the head up to breathe will disrupt the desired body position, so the student should stop at the end of a normal
breath-holding period. Students should not be encouraged to hold their breath for long durations.


Chapter 8: Learning to Swim & Water Competency
8-16
8. Rhythmic Breathing
Demonstrate and then have pupils perform the skill
while bending at the waist to place the face in the
water. Exhale through the mouth slowly under water.
Then rotate the head and shoulder to one side just
enough for the mouth to clear the water. Then inhale
through the mouth, rotate the face back into the
water, and repeat. Practice this key skill until the stu-
dent can comfortably perform rhythmic breathing 10
to 15 times without hesitation and without lifting the
head.
Lifting the shoulders and head vertically to bring the mouth above the water is a common error. Point out that
exercise begins looking down into the water with the nose submerged. When the head and shoulder are rotated,
the nose and mouth clear the water to look to the side. At the same time, the lower ear enters the water. Stu-
dents may wish to think to themselves: nose-ear ... nose-ear ... nose-ear.
Learners should pick whichever side feels more comfortable and stick with it. Inhaling should be done quickly
with only the mouth. To be ready for the air intake, the air from the previous breath should be released prior
to turning the head, either continuously as the head turns down, or just before the rotation up, but not so late
that is has to be released explosively. The exhale may be done with the mouth, nose, or both - whichever comes
naturally and feels most comfortable.
Next, add the arm motion while standing or walking with waist bent. Those just learning should breathe ever
time the arm on the breathing side pulls past the head.
8. Coordination
Demonstrate the complete stroke, and then let the buddies work on coordination, which is best gained with prac-
tice. Start with a prone glide with a kick and then add the arm motion. It may be necessary to back up to refine
individual elements until the components work well together.


Chapter 8: Learning to Swim & Water Competency 8-17
Don’t rush this step but provide enthusiastic encouragement tempered by patience. The instructor should stress
the ease of the stroke, not speed. The combined motion should be easy, relaxed, and streamlined. Concentrate
first on form, and then practice for longer distances. The next two steps can be introduced at this stage, but
continue to work on coordination and distance in shallow water until the buddies can easily swim at least 25 feet,
or across the pool in shallow water, without stopping.
9. Turning Over
Once participants have learned the crawl stroke and are able to do a back float and back glide, they should learn
how to turn over from front to back, and from back to front. This is a useful safety skill, enabling a swimmer to
rest on their back when they begin to tire, and then to resume the crawl stroke when rested.
To turn over while swimming on the back, the swimmer lowers one shoulder and turns the head in the same direction.
To turn from the prone position onto the back, the swimmer lowers one shoulder and turns the head in the opposite
direction. Although explanation and demonstration of these turnover maneuvers will be helpful, participants will learn
well by practicing and experimenting with the concepts of “roll over and float” and “roll over and swim.” Despite the
apparent simplicity of this skill, the instructor should not omit it, and participants should practice these maneuvers in
shallow water before attempting to swim in water over the head in depth.
10. Stops, Treading Water, Reverses, Deep Water Starts
Some skills are not particularly significant when swimming in shallow water where footing is always available.
But the ability to stop and restart swimming, and to change direction, is of critical importance when swimming
in deep water. (Recall that the beginner classification test requires a stop and sharp turn.) To stop while swim-
ming the crawl stroke, the swimmer simply stops kicking and raises their head while pushing down and slightly
forward with the arms.
Treading is used to remain upright in deep water with the head above the surface.
It typically uses a sculling motion with the hands and a kick. The kick may be a slow,
wide flutter. Beginners may also experiment with other leg motions that resemble
the scissors or whip kicks learned later in a stroke development course.
Learners should first practice and refine the skill in shoulder depth water where
they can stand simply by straightening the legs. They should then practice in deep
water under close supervision until confident with all the skills.


Chapter 8: Learning to Swim & Water Competency
8-18
The rotary, or eggbeater, kick is also
a good option for threading water. The
knees are bent and lifted so that the
thighs and lower legs are somewhat par-
allel to the bottom. Each leg is rotated
so that the feet make a large circular
motion. One leg turns clockwise, the
other counter clockwise.
Turning while treading in a vertical position can be used to change or reverse direction. Learners should experiment
with modifications to arm and leg motions until they are able to rotate a full 360 degrees in both directions. Sweeping
one arm opposite to the desired turning direction is an easy motion to use for the skill.
Starting a stroke in deep water is accomplished
by pressing the arms down from the surface of the
water and back alongside the body while leaning
forward, putting the face in the water, and begin-
ning the flutter kick. This planes the body into the
prone glide position for the crawl stroke to begin.
To turn while swimming the crawl, the swimmer sweeps wide with the arm stroke on the side opposite the turn and
reaches out in the direction of the turn with the other arm.
Practice skills in steps 8 and 10 in shallow water until the pupils are proficient. They may then be gradually intro-
duced to water over the head. For example, in a small uncrowded pool, they can enter the water from a ladder
in the deep end and swim along the side to the shallow end where they can stand.
They can then start in the shallow end, swim along the edge to the deep end, stop by holding the side, and then
return to standing depth. Later, they can turn rather than stop. (A reach pole is a good safety device to have on
hand once the buddies are ready to venture into deep water. It should be positioned where easily accessible, but
unobtrusive.)
Adapted from Wiki commons


Chapter 8: Learning to Swim & Water Competency 8-19
11. Jump Entry Into Deep Water
An important part of learning to swim is mastering the skills involved in deepwater entries. First, the instructor
should establish that pupils have gained sufficient confidence from previous exercises. Have them use a ladder to
enter deep water, push away, tread water, and then grasp the ladder again. Next, have them hold on the ladder,
climb down as deep as they can, and then back up. They should then push down to see if they can reach the
bottom without holding on. If they are not comfortable doing these exercises, they may not yet be ready for a
jump from the side. Additional practice swimming, stopping, reversing direction, and treading in shoulder depth
water may be needed.
If a ladder is not available, the instructor or an assistant may hold a reach pole vertically along the side of the
pool. Learners may use the pole for physical support and mental reassurance as they become accustomed to
going up and down in deep water.
To teach a simple stride entry, the instructor should first demonstrate the skill. Then have the participant stand
at the pool edge where the water is shoulder deep. Arms should be extended to the side over the water with the
body leaning slightly forward from the waist. The pupil should then step out over and into the water. Participants
should step away from the side, rather than try to land close enough to grab hold.
After the learner gains confidence in shoulder deep water, the exercise should be repeated in deep water.
Although it is possible to keep the head out of the water when performing a stride entry well, that is not the goal
at this stage. Rather, the stride entry is used to keep the learner near the surface rather than plunging to the
bottom. On the other hand, the entry into the water should be more or less vertical. A flat flop into the water to
land in a prone position is not appropriate.
Deep water entries under close supervision should be repeated until the learner can jump in, turn, and return to
the side, as well as jump in, level off and swim across the pool.
To help reassure learners during the first few jumps into deep water, an instructor or assistant may be in the
water with a flotation aid at the ready. However, they should not try to catch the pupil, or be close enough for
the pupil to jump and grab them.
Next Steps: Stroke Refinement and Additions
While an excellent milestone, the ability to complete the Scouting America Beginner classification test is just
the first step to becoming safe, comfortable, and proficient in the water. Anyone working toward or beyond the
beginner level will benefit from frequent opportunities to practice their skills. For all ages, learning though recre-
ation is more enjoyable than mechanical repetition. Nonswimmers and beginners will progress somewhat by simply
by being allowed to play in the water (under safe supervision, of course). However, advancement to the Swimmer
level and beyond is most easily accomplished through additional instruction by an experienced instructor. Cub Scout
parents and leaders should pursue lessons offered by the American Red Cross, the YMCA, and various parks and
recreation departments. A Scouting America local council aquatics committee may be able to assist unit leaders


Chapter 8: Learning to Swim & Water Competency
8-20
with contacting providers in those organizations. Scouts BSA can increase their skills by working on First Class rank
and Swimming merit badge requirements at summer camp, during special district winter aquatics programs, or by
contacting a counselor through their Scoutmaster.
Scouting America swimming programs emphasize early mastery of restful strokes. A person with a restful elementary
backstroke should be able to swim for long distances in warm water, even in less-than-perfect form. However, a person
whose only option is a poorly executed crawl will need to be a well-conditioned athlete to cover anywhere near the
same distance. A restful backstroke or breaststroke with a glide doesn’t take much energy, and uses the legs for much
of the power. A hasty crawl, particularly with the head slung from side to side, takes a lot of energy, and much of the
effort comes from the arms. The difference is similar to that between walking and running. Most people can walk for
long distances on flat ground without breathing heavily and having to stop to rest. Those same people will not be able
to run full-out for long. Running, and swimming the crawl, simply take more energy, and most folks aren’t trained
marathon runners or competitive swimmers. Instruction should continue until basic strokes such as the elementary
backstroke, the breaststroke, and the sidestroke are learned sufficiently that distances are easily measured in hun-
dreds of yards, rather than a few tens of feet.
Chapter 9 provides information for refining the crawl stroke covered in the Nonswimmer to Beginner progression as
well as covering the basics of other strokes that are required or allowed for Swimmer classification. Proficiency in
those strokes is also needed to successfully execute some of the water rescue skills covered in Chapter 10.
“Water Smart” Components for Nonswimmer Instruction
If a parent or leader undertakes nonswimmer instruction using the skill progression provided in this chapter, they
should also include age appropriate knowledge for Scouts to anticipate and avoid common drowning risks. Swim-
ming skills are only one aspect of water competency.
Scouting America swimming programs emphasize the eight layers of protection in Safe Swim Defense. Age appropri-
ate activities to teach Safe Swim Defense elements are contained in the Cub Scout elective swimming adventures.
Requirements for Lion: Time to Swim, Tiger: Tigers in the Water, and Wolf: Paws for Water all include “Learn
about the swimming safety rules that you need to follow.” Safe Swim Defense is covered in each lesson plan, but
in different activities.
Bear: Salmon Run requirements focus on the attributes of qualified adult supervision, the buddy system, and ability
groups. They also include reaching and throwing rescues.
Webelos: Aquanaut, Arrow of Light: Swimming and Scouts BSA: Second Class requirements also address Safe
Swim Defense and simple rescues. Aquanaut also covers hypothermia.
Other safety topics should arise and be covered during skill sessions, such as dehydration, heat
conditions, and hyperventilation. Use of life jackets is covered in boating program activities.


Swimming Strokes & Water Proficiency
Informed leaders for Scouting America aquatics activities have several reasons to review basic swimming skills,
such as administering swim classification tests and helping with advancement. Proficiency in several of the skills
is also essential for leaders undertaking Aquatics Supervision: Swimming and Water Rescue Training.
While rescues of distraught swimmers can often be accomplished without entering the water, the ability to
respond effectively to some drowning situations requires reasonable proficiency in basic swimming stokes such
as the crawl, breaststroke, elementary backstroke, and sidestroke. The first two are used to approach a victim
in the water; the second two to pull an unconscious victim to safety. Effective emergency response also requires
knowing how to reach the bottom from the surface. The basic components of those skills are reviewed here.
Additional information on swimming skills may be found in the Swimming merit badge pamphlet.
Chapter
9


Chapter 8: Swimming Strokes & Water Proficiency
9-2
Elementary Backstroke
The elementary backstroke begins with the arms at the side and the legs together. The whip kick is started by
slowly lowering the heels beneath the knees. The ankles are then rotated outward of the knees and returned to
the start position in a rapid, continuous circular motion. The knees separate naturally.
At the same time the heels are lowered, the arms are brought slowly along the chest and extended outward at
shoulder level. The hands and forearms push water toward the feet at the same time that the legs are making
the circular “whipping” action.
The arms and the legs provide power at the same time and the body glides in the start position. A prolonged glide,
held until forward motion slows, is an essential element of the stroke when used to swim long distances. It also
minimizes the drag caused by lowering the feet beneath the knees.
The kick by itself is used in various water-rescue situations.
Raising the head and bending at the waist are common mistakes that distort the body position and make the
stroke less efficient. Bending at the waist sometimes results from lifting the knees.
The elementary backstroke is the model of a restful backstroke for the Scouting America Swimmer classification
test.


Chapter 8: Swimming Strokes & Water Proficiency 9-3
Elementary Backstroke Sequence
Begin in streamlined, relaxed
glide position, arms at the
side, legs together
Breathe normally
As glide ends, bring hands up
close to body
Begin to drop feet by bending
at the knees
Extend arms at shoulder level
Feet drop below knees
Knees separate as wide as, or
slightly wider, than hips
Use arms and legs for power at
the same time
Arms push toward the feet
Feet rotate outside of knees
and whip backwards
Arms bend at elbows to allow
forearms to push water direct-
ly backwards
Whipping action of kick con-
tinues
Arm motion finishes with hands
flexed to push against the
water
Feet come together near
surface
Glide until forward motion
drops, then repeat cycle


Chapter 8: Swimming Strokes & Water Proficiency
9-4
Elementary Backstroke Tips
Rather than sweeping the arms like oars from the shoulder, the elbows and wrists can be flexed during the pull so
that palms and forearms push more effectively against the water. (Variations of a “bent arm press” are useful to
generate additional power in several swimming strokes.) A standing dry land drill can be used to demonstrate and
get the feel of the motion before trying it in the water. The motion can be described as three continuous phases:
up, out, together. The “up” and “out” are slow; the “together” fast and forceful.
A good in-water demonstration allows participants to understand
the leg motion. The feet are first dropped slowly beneath the
knees, which remain at the surface. The heels are then moved
outboard of the knees as the feet are rotated and lifted back
to the guide position. The circular motion of the feet and lower
legs push against the water to generate power. A drill sitting at
the edge of the pool with the feet in the water can be used to
prep for trying the kick in the water. The motion can again be
described as three continuous phases: down, out, and around.
The kick can be practiced in a back glide position without the
arms.
Common Elementary Backstroke Flaws
The body should be reasonably flat on the water from the head
to the knees throughout the stroke. Lifting either the head or
the knees disrupts the body position, causing the waist to bend
and a bobbing motion through the water. Here, laying the head
back will probably correct multiple problems.
If more than one flaw is present, instructors should
concentrate on correcting the most critical first.
Here the arms are extended well above the shoulders. Sweeping
the arms down from above the head pushes to the right with one
hand and to the left with the other, which wastes energy. Ide-
ally, any pull or push against the water should be opposite the
direction of desired motion. For the elementary backstroke, the
arms are most effective when they are straight out. However,the
bent arm press helps as the arms move toward the sides.
Here, one leg is down while the other is up. The swimmer is
using a modified scissor kick rather than the whip kick. That’s
a fairly common error, particularly for those learning both the
elementary backstroke and the sidestroke at the same time.
A scissor kick variation may see fairly effective: this swimmer
was moving well through the water. However the scissor intro-
duces a turning moment, so it is more difficult to go straight.
Plus one leg is working harder than the other.
DOWN OUT AROUND


Chapter 8: Swimming Strokes & Water Proficiency 9-5
The frog kick is also fairly common. Rather than keeping the thighs
level, the feet are pulled back near the surface by raising and spreading
the knees. The legs are extended out, which if done fast, pushes the
swimmer backwards. The legs are then snapped together along the sur-
face. Lifting the legs may cause the body to bob. The frog kick was com-
monly used, and taught, until the late 1950’s. It is also a fairly intuitive
motion that swimmers may naturally develop on their own. Swimmers
should be able to move more effectively using the whip kick.
To Glide or Not to Glide - a STEM Digression.
Gliding, particularly for the restful strokes, but even for the crawl, allows the body to rest while moving
forward from momentum. The slower pace also means less energy is wasted overcoming friction, which
increases rapidly with speed. Some swimming manuals claim that the glide should not be held too long
since Newton’s second law (of inertia) implies it takes more work to start a body moving from a stop than
to increase speed while it is already moving. In the absence of friction, that is false. Newton’s F=ma equa-
tion relates a force, F, to a change in speed over time (the acceleration, a). It does not take more force
over a given time to cause a mass, m, to go from 0 to 2 miles an hour (mph), than from 2 to 4 mph, or
from 100 to 102 mph.
An analogy of pushing a car is often invoked to explain inertia. However, it is harder to start a car rolling
than to keep it rolling due to the difference in static friction versus rolling friction of the tires, not inertia.
Fluid dynamics, particularly when unsteady motion and drag are included, are extremely complicated.
Reasonable sounding statements concerning movement through the water are often too simplistic when
examined closely, but sometimes are amenable to simple demonstrations.
Scouts may be asked to cover a given distance using the elementary backstroke. The first time, they
should stroke hard, but glide to almost or all the way to a stop, and count their strokes. The goal is to
see how few strokes they need. The second time, they should stroke just as hard, but follow one stroke
immediately with another. They will cover the distance much faster, but with more strokes. In this case,
more strokes means more energy.
So, to cover a distance with the minimum amount of effort, glide for a long time. However, to go faster,
stroke more often. Additional analysis including drag shows that the greatest efficiency to maintain a
given average speed is achieved when changes in speed are minimized. Ideally a constant force should
be applied continuously to just balance the drag. The action of the crawl approximates that, which is
one reason the crawl, particularly the arm motion, is said to be more efficient than other strokes. For all
strokes, the stroke rate, and the stroke power, should be adjusted to travel at a reasonable speed over a
given distance without getting too tired to continue the rest of the way.
The same physics applies to moving a boat through the water with paddles or oars. Also note that the
faster a swimmer or boat is travelling through the water, the harder it is to push against the water to
further increase speed. A person can’t move a paddle fast enough to generate additional force for a motor
boat traveling at 30 mph.


Chapter 8: Swimming Strokes & Water Proficiency
9-6
Breaststroke
The breaststroke is an easy, energy-conserving way to swim in a prone position and is probably the best all around
stroke. Both the arms and legs provide significant power. The speed and power of the stroke can be adapted to
the situation: slow and easy to go a long distance without tiring, or fast for a rescue. It is good for swimming in
swells. It is easy to track where you are going with rhythmic breathing, but the head may also remain out of the
water to provide a better view during recreation or water rescue. Two swimmers can swim along side and speak
to one another.
Coordination is a key to learning the stroke since the arms and legs do not provide power at the same time. The
stroke begins with the arms and legs extended and the head in the water. The arms bend at the elbows and sweep
down and back to shoulder level while pulling the body forward. At the same time, the body is tilted,raising the
head for a breath, and the feet are drawn to the hips. The arms are then extended forward as the feet lead the
knees in a circular motion that generates power and returns the legs to an extended position. To conserve energy,
the body is allowed to glide in the prone position before beginning another stroke.
The breaststroke is a good alternative to the front crawl for the Scouting America Swimmer classification test.


Chapter 8: Swimming Strokes & Water Proficiency 9-7
Breaststroke Sequence
Begin in a streamlined prone glide
position, arms and legs together,
face in water
Exhale before and during arm pull
Rotate arms out and back, push-
ing against the water with hands
and forearms
Lift head while continuing to
exhale
Inhale after mouth clears water
End power phase of arms when
they align with shoulders
Begin dropping knees and pull-
ing ankles toward hips
Lower face into water
Bring hands together
Rotate ankles outside of
knees to begin whipping ac-
tion of kick
Lower face to glide position
Arms extend forward
Whipping action of kick
continues
Extend arms into glide
position
Complete power phase
of kick after arms fully
extended
Glide until forward mo-
tion drops
Repeat cycle


Chapter 8: Swimming Strokes & Water Proficiency
9-8
Breaststroke Variations
Competitive Styles
The breaststroke described on the previous pages is a conventional
flat style suited to efficiency at low speed. Competitive swimmers
seeking to maximize speed typically use wave or undulating styles
to reduce drag that increases dramatically at higher speed. The
trade off is additional energy expenditure. The extra energy
needed to thrust the shoulders high above the water leads to
inefficiency at lower speeds as well as affecting streamlining.
Head Up Versions
Keeping the head up for extended periods also takes additional
energy, but often has advantages that outweigh the extra
effort. Having the head up makes it easier to interact with the
environment, such as tracking waves and other swimmers. A
short glide is still possible.
A head up version is also useful to push items through the water.
Breaststroke Tips
The version of the whip kick used for the breaststroke is similar to
that of the elementary backstroke, but also different. It should first
be practiced without the arms, either holding to the side in a prone
position with the head down, or added to a prone glide.
The arm motion may be demonstrated and practiced as a standing
dry land drill. The arms begin extended above the head with the
hands together or resting one on top of the other. The palms are
then rotated out as the forearms push back and slightly down as
the elbows bend. Once the elbows are just below shoulder level,
the hands and elbows are brought together and the arms extended
forward.
Coordination of the arm motion with the kick takes a bit of practice
since they do not generate power at the same time. From a prone
position with the arms extended forward, the arms pull against
the water to move the body forward. At the same time the head
and shoulders rotate upwards just enough for the chin to clear the
water. The neck may bend slightly backwards but should not be
hyperextended. It more are less stays in line with the spine. The
face is then lowered into the water as the arms are thrust forward.
A single breath is taken through the mouth as the head lifts. The air is exhaled while the face is in the water. The
breathing motions may be added to the dry land drill after the arm pull and recovery is practiced.
Ideally, the kick is timed so that it finishes just after the arms reach the glide position.


Chapter 8: Swimming Strokes & Water Proficiency 9-9
Common Breaststroke Flaws
These two photo sequences, arranged
top to bottom, show similar problems
with breaststroke execution,including
problems with timing caused by
sweeping the arms all the way back.
The swimmer on the left begins with
the head up as the arms finish extending
forward. However, the legs are already
pulled up. The body is not positioned for
a glide.
The legs are whipped somewhat as the
arms are swept back all the way to the
hips. The cycle begins again as the arms
are extended and the legs raised. In the
bottom photo, both the head and the
feet are above the water.
The swimmer on the right has similar
timing issues with power from the kick
occurring at the same time as the arms
are swept too far back. In this case,
there is no whipping action of the legs.
Instead, the feet are raised and then
lowered somewhat together, somewhat
similar to a dolphin kick.
Both swimmers would benefit from
perfecting the kick first, along with a
glide, in a prone position with the arms
extended.
That exercise could then be followed by a dry land drill of the arm motion, which should not be tried again in the
water until the arm pull stops at shoulder level.
In the third photo sequence, the swimmer is pushing up with the arms more than pushing back. The kick varies
from symmetrical to one leg up with the other down. There is no glide. It would again be appropriate to return
to a prone glide to establish a better body position, followed by in water drills for the kick, and then adding the
arms.


Chapter 8: Swimming Strokes & Water Proficiency
9-10
Sidestroke
The sidestroke begins with the body on its side, with legs together, the lower arm extended, and the upper arm resting
along the chest.
The sidestroke uses a scissors kick in which the heels are first tucked behind the body. The top leg is then extended
forward and the bottom leg back. Power is generated when the legs are snapped back to a trailing position.
As the legs are tucked, the lower arm bends at the elbow and the hand and forearm pull the body through the
water. The lower arm is extended forward as the legs complete the kick. Meanwhile, the upper hand is brought
toward the chin and thrusts backward at the same time the legs are brought together.
The stroke uses a glide to conserve energy. Breathing is natural since the head remains out of the water. Progress is
easily measured with a view to the side, but the forward view is restricted.
The sidestroke is a good alternative to the front crawl for the Scouting America Swimmer classification test.


Chapter 8: Swimming Strokes & Water Proficiency 9-11
Begin in streamlined glide
position on either side
Lower ear in water
Bottom arm extended forward
Top arm extended back
As glide ends, begin pulling your
body forward with your lower
hand and forearm
Begin to move your upper arm
gently up your chest
As lower arm continues to pull,
Bring upper arm into catch
position
Draw ankles toward hips
Begin pull with upper arm
Start to extend lower arm
Rotate top leg forward,bottom
leg backwards
Continue pulling with upper arm
Finish leg separation, then
“Scissor” legs together to drive
yourself forward
Continue to push with upper arm
Time kick to end as arms return
to glide position
Glide until forward motion drops,
then repeat cycle
Sidestroke Sequence
If your top leg tends to go backwards, try switching sides. With practice, you should be able to swim on
either side.


Chapter 8: Swimming Strokes & Water Proficiency
9-12
Sidestroke Variations
Inverted Scissors Kick
In the traditional scissors kick, the top leg extends
forward as the bottom leg goes back. The leg move-
ment is opposite in the inverted scissors kick. The
bottom leg goes back while the top leg goes for-
ward. With practice, swimmers can swim on either
side using either kick. However, some swimmers
will find the inverted scissors is more natural on
one side than the other. Both kicks generate power
effectively, so it does not really matter which kick
is used.
Towing
The sidestroke is useful for pulling items through
the water. For that purpose, the lower arm still
strokes, but the upper arm does not. The body
position for the traditional sidestroke is on the
side. Depending on the object being towed, a slight
rotation toward the stomach or back may be more
natural. If rolled toward the stomach, a regular
scissors kick is preferred. If rolled toward the back,
an inverted scissors kick is indicated.
Sidestroke Tips
A standing dry land drill is often used to introduce the arm motion. A com-
mon description is “reach up to pick an apple, put it in your other hand,
then throw it away”. Typically the motion will be easier with one arm lifted
rather than the other.
The lower arm leads while the upper arm trails. The first pulls while the
second recovers. Then the lower arm pushes while the leading arm reaches
forward. The elbows are bent to allow both the palms and the upper arms
propel the body forward. Generally, the leading arm provides noticeably
more power.
The kick is sometimes introduced lying on one hip with the legs extended
over the water. Alternately, the kick may be demonstrated and practiced
holding to the side of the pool with one hand above the other. However,
both drills may be somewhat awkward.
Ideally, the head is held with the lower
ear in the water, with the mouth just high
enough to breathe easily. That provides
some buoyancy support for the head. The
neck should be in a neutral position rela-
tive to the spine. The view is across the
water. Swimmers may vary the head posi-
tion to adjust the view. Holding the head
more upright tends angle the body away
from horizontal. That in turn increases
drag.


Chapter 8: Swimming Strokes & Water Proficiency 9-13
Common Sidestroke Flaws
Several shortcomings are apparent in this sequence, including:
• Body position. Throughout the sidestroke the body should be on its side nearly horizontal, not with the head
above the waterline with the hips submerged. The head should have one ear in the water. The “glide” posi-
tion is not streamlined.
• Arms. The lower, leading arm is properly extended forward and begins to sweep towards the feet with the
elbow bent. However, it is recovered well away from the body with the elbow rather than the hand leading.
The upper arm correctly moves toward the feet after reaching the level of the shoulders. However, that arm
is moved straight out from the chest and swept back like an oar rather than pushing down along the torso
with a bent elbow.
• Kick. The upper leg moves back, as in an inverted scissors, but that is more an option than a flaw. However,
the legs appear to have significant vertical as well as horizontal separation. The kick combines elements of
the scissors, whip, and flutter.
• Coordination. Ideally, the kick should end at the same time both arms reach the glide position. The timing is
difficult to make out, but does not appear to be in synch.
Each of the elements should be addressed individually, beginning with body position and ending with coordina-
tion. This swimmer appears confident in the water but needs additional coaching and practice to mimic the swim-
mer shown at the bottom of page 9-11.
The second example again shows vertical separation of
the legs. It is fairly common for elements of a scissor kick
to appear in the elementary backstroke, and elements of
the whip kick to appear in the sidestroke.
Note that the head also submerges.


Chapter 8: Swimming Strokes & Water Proficiency
9-14
Crawl Stroke
The front crawl combines a relaxed flutter kick with a rotary arm motion and rhythmic breathing. It is the fastest
stroke but can consume considerable energy. A relaxed version is appropriate for recreation, exercise, and the
Scouting America swimmer test. The stroke is most efficient if the head remains supported by the water. The body
is rotated and the head turned to the side to inhale, and rotated down to exhale. A slight glide is possible if the
forward arm action is delayed slightly while the rear arm recovers in the air.
Most of the power comes from the arms. The kick helps stabilize the body but ideally should also generate for-
ward motion.
The crawl provides a fast approach during water rescue, and is often modified with the head up for that applica-
tion. However, a head-up crawl with the head slung from side to side without rhythmic breathing is a sign of a poor
swimmer. Most people swimming in that manner lack the stamina to go far. A head-down version is preferred for the
Scouting America Swimmer test but is not required.
Additional information on the crawl is provided in the Nonswimmer to Beginner progression in Chapter 8.


Chapter 8: Swimming Strokes & Water Proficiency 9-15
Crawl Sequence
Entire body rolls to side
Forward hand extends to catch posi-
tion
Mouth opens in wave trough for
breathing
Hand on upper arm completes push
Upper arm leaves water elbow
first
Head rotates down, eyes looking
down or slightly forward
Lower arm begins pulling body
forward (opposition timing) or is
delayed while upper arm catches
up
Lower arm bends at elbow to
include forearm in pull
Upper arm recovers with elbow
high, arm relaxed
Body rotates to other side as top
hand slides into water and extends
forward
Holding the new bottom arm forward
while the other arm recovers (catch
up timing) allows a slight, energy
saving glide
An up-down flutter kick provides bal-
ance and some power
Flex knees and ankles to improve
power
Use two to six beats per arm cycle
Keep heels below surface
Body rolls again to breathing side
Exhale underwater prior to next breath
Breathe every arm cycle until you per-
fect a rhythm, later you may wish to
breathe every 1.5 cycles, first to right,
then to left


Chapter 8: Swimming Strokes & Water Proficiency
9-16
Crawl Stroke Variations
Alternate Breathing
Breathing every arm cycle is recommended until the
rhythm becomes automatic. After that, it is matter of
preference. Competitive sprinters may go a pool length
between breaths. Long distance swimmers often breathe
every one and a half cycles. That is, they alternate
breathing to the right and to the left. Normally one side
is easier than the other so practice is needed to perfect
alternate breathing.
Arm Movement: Catch Up versus Opposition
The timing of the stroke varies by swimmer
and activity. Beginners often keep the arms
in opposition, that is, one is pulling while
the other recovers. That allows power to be
applied almost continuously. When swimming
fast, both arms may be in front of the head for
a short time. Alternatively, some swimmers
leave the leading arm extended until the
other arm is ready to enter the water. That provides a short glide in an extended, streamline position, which
reduces drag as the body continues to move forward from momentum. It is possible for recreational swimmers to
employ such a glide for a relaxed, energy efficient version of the crawl.
Crawl Stroke Tips
Fins
Swimmers with large feet and flexible ankles have advantages
with generating power from the flutter kick, but technique
is also important. If practicing without the arms, either face
down or on the back, does not lead to improvement, using
fins may help. However, try short training fins rather than
larger fins used for snorkeling. Large, flexible fins generate
significant power but also promote wide, slow kicks.
Regardless, many crawl swimmers use the legs primarily for
balance rather than power.
Goggles
Some swimmers have difficulty applying power symmetrically
with the arms and legs. That makes it hard to swim in a
straight line particularly since forward vision above the
water is limited. Lane lines and bottom markers in pools
make going straight much easier. Goggles in turn make it
easier to see bottom lines. Tinted lenses with UV protection
are good for outdoor use.
Learn to Swim Progression
Other tips for swimming the crawl effectively are provided in the learn to swim portion of Chapter 8.


Chapter 8: Swimming Strokes & Water Proficiency 9-17
Common Flaws for Crawl
Perhaps the most serious and pervasive problem with the crawl is that
many swimmers never learn proper breathing technique. It is common
to see swimmers thrashing through the water slinging their heads from
side to side. That takes significant energy. Such swimmers often have
difficulty moving the length of a pool without becoming exhausted.
While a head-up version of the crawl is useful in some circumstances, it
should be a deliberate choice rather than the only option.
Other swimmers do put their faces into the water every arm
stroke, but they bend their necks to lift the head to breathe
rather than rotating to the side.
Still other swimmers have problems with proper timing of
the arms and breathing. Here the breathing is late. The face
should be rotated into the water before the arm on the
breathing side recovers.
Excessive bending of the knees while kicking can raise the
feet out the water. Slapping the water with feet flat to the
surface wastes energy. Slapping the water with the feet
angled down can actually move the swimmer backwards.
Ideally, arms leave the water elbow first during recovery. In
this and the next photo, the arms are recovered straight.
In both cases there are also problems with body position.
In the first, the head and shoulder are rotated more than
the hips.
In this and the bottom photo, the bodies are not straight.
Snaking the body through the water means the propulsion is
not all in the right direction and also results in more drag.
Whole body roll is an important component of the crawl.
Here the shoulders are tilted in one direction with the hips
flat or rolled in the other direction. That may contribute to
the body undulation with the head and legs in one direction
and the hips in the other.


Chapter 8: Swimming Strokes & Water Proficiency
9-18
Trudgen
The trudgen stroke is a variation combining the overarm motion of the crawl with the scissors kick of the side
stroke. Symmetric use of the arms provides more power than the unbalanced arm motion of the sidestroke. The
out-of-water arm recovery cuts drag. The scissors kick is often more powerful than the flutter.
As the body rolls to one side for a breath, the knees are bent and brought forward to set up the scissors kick.
Depending on the stroke rate, the legs may not separate as much as they do in a slow sidestroke. The legs snap
together as the head turns back down. That means the legs provide a surge of power just as the arm is fully
extended. That in turn sets up a short glide. The other arm strokes and the sequence repeats. Since the legs are
trailing while the second arm pulls, a few flutter kicks may be added. That variation is a trudgen crawl.
The stroke is efficient if done at a relaxed
pace and is a good option for long distance
swimming for recreation and exercise. Those
who lack a strong flutter kick may prefer it
to the crawl. However, it is not as fast as a
crawl and is not a recognized competitive
stroke. Therefore it has declined in popularity
similarly to the elementary backstroke and
sidestroke. It was a popular stroke over fifty
years ago but is seldom taught today. However,
over the last twenty five years, the U.S. Navy
SEALs have developed their own version of
a sidestroke that combines elements of the
sidestroke, the crawl, and the breaststroke.
The trudgen is an alternative for the crawl
in Swimming merit badge requirements.
Additional information is provided in that
pamphlet.
Other Strokes
Some readers may notice the absence of two popular competitive
strokes: the back crawl and the butterfly. Those are excellent
choices for exercise but otherwise are seldom used for recreation,
self rescue, or water rescue of others. Therefore they are not
included here. The back crawl is covered in the Swimming merit
badge pamphlet. A brief mention of the dolphin kick is made in the
next chapter that includes snorkeling skills.


Chapter 8: Swimming Strokes & Water Proficiency 9-19
Feetfirst Surface Dive
The feetfirst surface dive allows a person treading water to descend vertically. A scissors kick is used to lift the
chest clear of the water, at the same time the arms are pushed downward from an extended position. The legs
are straightened below the water as the weight of the torso out of the water drives the body down. During the
descent, the arms are lifted from the sides to provide additional downward force. The arms should not be lifted
too quickly; they should push against the water rather than break the surface.
The feetfirst surface dive is used to check the depth when setting up a swimmers area and is the preferred
method for retrieving a submerged victim in poor visibility.


Chapter 8: Swimming Strokes & Water Proficiency
9-20
Headfirst Surface Dive
From a prone position, move forward with the arm pull of a breaststroke, and then scoop downward with the
arms while bending at the waist and lifting the legs in the air. The weight of the legs above the water provides
the force to descend. The headfirst surface dive is known as a pike if the legs are kept straight the entire time
and as a tuck if the legs are first bent and then extended vertically. During the descent, the body should be in a
streamlined position with the legs together and the arms extended in front of the head. An arm pull can be used
to reach greater depths.
The headfirst surface dive is used for snorkeling and to retrieve a submerged victim in clear water.


Chapter 8: Swimming Strokes & Water Proficiency 9-21
Towards Water Proficiency
Scouting America swimming programs emphasize early mastery of restful strokes. A person with a restful elementary
backstroke should be able to swim for long distances in warm water, even in less than perfect form. However, a person
whose only option is a poorly executed crawl will need to be a well-conditioned athlete to cover anywhere near the
same distance. A restful backstroke or breaststroke with a glide doesn’t take much energy, and uses the legs for much
of the power. A hasty crawl, particularly with the head slung from side to side, takes a lot of energy, and much of the
effort comes from the arms. The difference is similar to that between walking and running. Most people can walk for
long distances on flat ground without breathing heavily and having to stop to rest. Those same people will not be able
to run full out for long. Running, and swimming the crawl poorly, simply take more energy, and most people aren’t trained
marathon runners or competitive swimmers.
The stroke development programs of some learn to swim providers place an early emphasis on competitive strokes
and teach those before restful strokes. Anyone completing their full course progressions will emerge an excellent
swimmer proficient in multiple skills. Unfortunately, while many parents enroll their children yearly in the first few
levels, fewer and fewer continue to the higher levels where the restful strokes are mastered. Instruction should
continue until basic strokes such as the elementary backstroke, the breaststroke, and the sidestroke are learned
sufficiently that distances are easily measured in hundreds of yards, rather than a few tens of feet. Surveys reported
by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control suggest that a large percentage of Americans fall far short of that goal.
Scouting America programs are aimed at first achieving water competency, that is reasonable skills to self rescue in
calm water close to safety, e.g. the Beginner swim classification. The Swimmer classification adds a resting back-
stroke and back float and is the entry level for many aquatic activities. Both are targeted in the elective aquatic
adventures for Cub Scouts which also promote swim lessons. Both are required to advance in rank in Scouts BSA.
Swimming merit badge furthers the progression to water proficiency, with Lifesaving
merit badge covering water rescue skills for lay persons. Swimming merit badge is
age appropriate for those in the sixth grade or older. It is also one of the most
popular of all merit badges, consistency ranking within the top three. Requirements
include executing the crawl or trudgen, the back crawl, the sidestroke, the
breaststroke, and the elementary backstroke. Other skills include surface dives,
basic rescues, survival floating, and HELP and huddle positions while wearing a life
jacket.
Evaluating Swimming Merit Badge Instruction at Scouts BSA Camps
Many Scouts earn Swimming merit badge at council camps. There is no set time mandated to train for the
requirements. Scouts who are competitive swimmers will likely progress much more quickly than others.
Group instruction of eight Scouts with two instructors will take less time that a class with twenty Scouts
and one instructor. However, experience indicates reasonable times needed for youth to learn the skills.
Roughly seven hours serves the Scouts well, for example five 90 minute sessions. A survey of camp schedules
revealed that 60% of camps offer instruction for less than five hours. On the other hand, 75 % of those same
camps allocated more than five hours for Lifesaving merit badge, with 50% at seven or more hours. The
skills for Swimming merit badge are more extensive than those for Lifesaving merit badge. Troop leaders
may wish to confirm that Scouts granted the Swimming merit badge at camp can actually perform to
requirement standards, and work with camp management if the Scouts are not being served well.


Chapter 8: Swimming Strokes & Water Proficiency
9-22
Baden-Powell’s Outlook on
Swimming and the First Class Scout
“A boy does not really get the value of the Scout training until he is a First
Class Scout. The Second Class rank is only a step to that standing. But it is
a lamentable fact that a good many are content to remain as Second Class
Scouts once they have gained a few badges of proficiency. It is primarily for
that reason mainly, that the All Round Cords are now obtainable only by
First Class Scouts. This move has been welcomed by Scoutmasters as giving
an incentive to the lads to keep progressing in their training.
“Of course, the main objection to it is that it necessitates the boys learning
to swim, and facilities for this do not exist in all centers. It has, therefore, been
suggested in one or two cases that this rule should be relaxed. I am afraid that I have been very ‘sticky’
about it, and although I generally make things as elastic as possible, I may have appeared unnaturally
obstinate in this one particular: but I had reasons, and experience has now shown those reasons were
right.
“When a boy has become a First Class Scout—but not before then—he has got a founding in the qualities—
mental, moral and physical—that go with making a good, useful man. And I look on swimming as a very
important step, combining as it does attributes of all three of those classes. Mentally, it gives the boy a
new sense of self-confidence and pluck; morally, it gives him the power of helping others in distress and
puts a responsibility upon him of actually risking his life at any moment for others; and physically, it is
a grand exercise for developing wind and limb.
“Every man ought to be able to swim; and in Norway and Sweden, the home of practical education, every
boy and girl is taught swimming at school.
“The fact that swimming has got to be learned by the Boy Scout before he can gain his First Class badge
has had the effect of putting the character of the lads in very many cases to a hard and strengthening
test.
“At first they complained that there was no place near where they could learn to swim. But when they
found this was not accepted as an excuse, they set to work to make places or to get to where such places
existed. I have heard of boys riding five miles on their bicycles day after day to swimming baths; streams
in many country places have been dammed up, and bathing places made by the Scouts; the summer
camp has been established at some seaside or riverside spot for the special purpose of getting everyone
trained in swimming.
“It can be done if everybody sets his mind to it. If the boys are put to extra trouble in bringing it about,
so much the better for their character training. In any case, I look upon swimming as an essential
qualification for First Class Scout, and for every man. Also, I don’t consider a boy a real Scout till he has
passed his First Class tests.”
—Lord Baden-Powell, February 1914
Historical Perspective
Robert Baden-Powell founded the international Scouting movement in Great Britain in 1907. His outlook on the
importance of swimming ability follows. Note that Scandinavian countries still provide universal swim instruction
through their public school systems.


Water Rescue for Unit Swims
One goal of Safe Swim Defense is to eliminate the need for water rescue. Even so, the adult supervisor must
ensure that appropriate emergency response will be implemented should the need arise. Effective and safe water
rescue requires properly equipped and trained personnel.
If the adult supervisor lacks a water safety background, one way to achieve protection is to conduct unit swimming
only where trained lifeguards are provided by a facility or tour operator. Although that is certainly a reasonable and
prudent approach, it limits the opportunities available to the unit. The alternative is for unit leaders to acquire the
necessary knowledge for the unit to function safely using its own resources. Required online training in Safe Swim
Defense only allows unit leaders to gauge their level of preparation: it does not provide physical training in the
necessary skills. Scouting America’s Aquatics Supervision: Swimming and Water Rescue covers the skills presented
in this section and is recommended for leaders conducting swimming activities where trained lifeguards are not on
duty.
Unit members who have completed lifeguard training from organizations such as the American Red Cross, the
United States Lifesaving Association, and the YMCA are valuable resources, but they should still receive Safe Swim
Defense training. Such organizations assume that the lifeguards they train will be employed at an established
facility. They may not include instruction in how to set up a temporary safe swim area, how to perform rescues
with a range of equipment, or how to limit risk using swim tests, ability groups and the buddy system. Safe Swim
Defense addresses those additional items.
10Chapter


Chapter 10: Water Rescue10-2
Lifeguard training programs offered by other organizations are designed to meet regulatory demands for paid,
professional lifeguards. Scouting America employees who supervise swimming activities at Scout camps are sub-
ject to such standards. Although the material in this section is consistent with the training received by profes-
sional lifeguards, it is NOT a lifeguard training program. Training for Swimming and Water Rescue is designed
to prepare the volunteer unit leader to conduct safe unit swims in situations where all elements of Safe Swim
Defense are in place, not to serve as a professional lifeguard. Note that the rescue procedures covered in this
chapter may not apply to substantial surf or whitewater. Neither are considered safe areas for unit swims.
The Rescue Process
The Royal Lifesaving Association of Australia uses four As of rescue:
• AWARENESS Recognise an emergency and accept responsibility
• ASSESSMENT Make an informed judgement and develop a plan of action
• ACTION Effect a rescue
• AFTERCARE Provide aid as needed
This chapter covers how to recognize that a person in the water needs help, and skills to provide that aid. The
next chapter on Safety Team Preparation covers how to predetermine and activate a plan of action for unit swims.
Victim Recognition: Situations & Characteristics
The first step in a rescue is recognizing that someone needs help. The need may be obvious. You may observe
someone dive into shallow water and then float facedown motionless at the surface. But not all drowning
situations are that dramatic or easy to spot. A child who appears to be playing may actually be in serious trouble.
It is important to note that not everyone in difficulty will call for help or seem to be struggling.
People in danger of drowning can be divided into different classes or categories based on their condition and
circumstances. In turn, basic rescue techniques are influenced by those situations. Different classification
schemes are possible, including endangered versus injured, tired versus panicked, distressed versus
drowning, conscious versus unconscious, active versus passive. The labels are less important than identifying
specific behaviors and how they influence rescues. Several such categories are discussed. Note that these
are guidelines, not absolutes. An actual victim might not exactly fit the descriptions and may slide from one
type into another over the course of a rescue. It may be difficult to tell one type from another. Basically,
you need to identify anyone unable to control their movements in the water and decide how to provide support
and move them to safety. The time you have to respond will also depend on victim characteristics.
ENDANGERED INJURED ACTIVE PASSIVE (Submerged)
Videos provide a better appreciation of victim characteristics than
still photos or written descriptions. Various enactments are provided
in Safe Swim Defense training. Videos of actual drowning situations
can be found online. Among other resources, the Lifeguards Love
YouTube website has compiled various examples. Those may be
accessed at: https://www.lifeguardsloveyoutube.com/


Chapter 10: Water Rescue10-3
Endangered Swimmer
Anyone needing water rescue is assumed to be in danger of drowning.
That risk often arises from the person’s lack or loss of swimming abil-
ity. However, a separate category is useful to address situations when
a competent swimmer faces serious environmental difficulties. Those
problems may arise intentionally from someone exceeding their skill
limits while undertaking extreme activities, or unintentionally as the
result of an accident or emergency. A capsized canoeist caught in a
cold, fast current is one such situation. A kayaker pinned against a rock
is another. Ocean currents can sweep a swimmer out to sea. Fast-rising
tides against a cliff face can catch a hiker off guard. Fishermen can
be swept off jetties by abnormally high waves. Flash floods can trap
motorists in their cars. The situations can vary greatly and so will rescue
responses.
In some cases, the victim can make it to shore without aid and the
rescuer’s job becomes one of follow-up support, first aid, and transpor-
tation. In others, assistance can be provided from shore. In still others,
the only safe option is to immediately seek aid from a trained rescue
squad with special gear. Such situations should not arise at a planned
unit swimming activity. Both Safe Swim Defense and Swimming & Water
Rescue training should provide leaders with knowledge to recognize and
avoid unsafe conditions. This category is of greater concern for unit
float trips on flowing water. Techniques for assisting capsized boaters
will be discussed in the chapters for various craft in the next section.
Injured Victim
A water rescue can become even more complex if the victim is
injured. Diving into shallow water or being struck by surfboards can
cause head and spinal injuries. Cuts and broken bones can result
from boat collisions, waterskiers hitting objects, cars entering the
water, boats capsizing in rapids, or a swimmer being cast against
pilings by the surf. Burns can occur from gasoline explosions on
motorboats. Fishermen might be entangled in hooks. Painful stings
may result from encounters with marine life. In all such situations,
general first aid rules apply: Treat the most serious condition first,
do no further harm, and quickly summon advanced help if needed.
In water rescues, the most serious condition is likely to be lack of
breathing caused either by drowning or a medical condition.
A safe swimming area, combined with supervision and discipline,
should preclude injuries during unit swims. Nevertheless, a head-
first dive into shallow water takes only a brief lapse in judgment.
The unit leader should be aware of ways to stabilize a victim of
neck or spinal injury who is breathing until EMS arrives.
• Unique situations
• Rescuer safety a primary
concern
• Rescues similar to those for
active or passive victims
• Some situations require
special response


Chapter 10: Water Rescue10-4
Tired Swimmer
A tired swimmer may ask for help. Such persons might be swim-
ming ineffectually in short bursts, proceeding slowly with a weak
stroke, clinging to a boundary line, or trying to float on their
back. They lack, or think they lack, the energy to make it to shore
and may only need encouragement and a helping hand. Such a
situation may arise during a swim classification test when a weak swim-
mer becomes fatigued. Some drowning situations arise when poor
swimmers attempt to swim distances that overreach their skill and
stamina. Distances in safe swim areas used for unit swims should not
exceed those that match the required swim classifications. Never-the-
less, some youth may become tired when racing or doing other strenu-
ous activities.
By definition, a tired swimmer is calm, should reply to questions, and
should cooperate with the assist. Because the tired swimmer is not
at immediate risk of submersion, the rescuer may deliberate momen-
tarily to choose between direct assistance and simple encouragement
to level off and continue to safety. The person’s buddy, who may be
close by in the water, may be directed by response personnel to provide
encouragement.
Distressed Swimmer
Swimmers in distress are normally vertical in the water and exhibit
various degrees of anxiety or panic. They may be poor swimmers
who have exceeded their capabilities. A poor swimmer caught in a
rip current may first become exhausted swimming against the cur-
rent, and then become frightened. Acute medical problems such as
a cramp or a stroke may also incapacitate a conscious swimmer and
necessitate a rescue.
By definition, the distressed swimmer is no longer making any prog-
ress but is still able to struggle enough to keep their head out of the
water. The swimmer may call or wave for help. If they were able to
level off and apply the same energy to their swimming effort, they
might be able to reach safety on their own. The swimmer may act
on clear instructions from a rescuer and reach for equipment as it
is presented. However, such a victim may not be rational and could
grab a rescuer. Contact should be avoided. The longer a distressed
swimmer remains in trouble, the more likely it is that they will sub-
merge. Prompt support is needed.
• Calm
• Responsive
• Able to aid in assist
• May call or wave for help
• May reach for aid
• May grab rescuer for support


Chapter 10: Water Rescue10-5
Active Drowning Victim
An actively drowning person is also distressed or distraught. An inten-
tional attempt to remain at the surface — not mental state — is the distin-
guishing characteristic between a “distressed swimmer” and an “active
drowning victim.” The second term is used to indicate a conscious per-
son without deliberate control of motion. Such a victim lacks the ability
to remain at the surface and will generally submerge in less than a min-
ute. They are unable to call or wave for help and must be recognized by
their facial expression and inadequate movement. The victim usually is
vertical in the water and may have their head thrown back with face
upward. Arms are extended pressing down, flapping, or rotating in an
ineffectual attempt to keep the face above the water to breathe. There
is no effective leg movement. The head may repeatedly bob below the
surface. This is known as the classic or instinctive drowning response,
and may resemble someone playing in the water. Although conscious
and very aware of their situation, such victims cannot move just a short
distance to safety and cannot respond to commands or reach for nearby
equipment. However, such victims will likely grasp an object, such as
a flotation aid, or an unwary rescuer, that makes sufficient contact.
Unaided, a poor swimmer in distress may progress to the actively drown-
ing stage. Other victims may immediately show such behavior. This is par-
ticularly true of nonswimmers who have never supported themselves in
deep water. A nonswimmer stepping off a submerged ledge will be unable
to move a few feet to shallow water. A young nonswimmer knocked off
an air mattress will be unable to reach for it and may submerge in only
20 seconds. Speed in rescue is essential. (Such possibilities reinforce the
need for identifying nonswimmers, providing close supervision to limit
their activities to shallow water, and teaching them swimming skills.)
Passive Drowning Victim
Various situations lead to victims who are unable to struggle. Unaided,
an active drowning victim will soon suffocate, lose consciousness, and
become passive. A person holding their breath too long may suffer
hypoxic blackout. Immersion in cold water can result in progressive
loss of ability. That will slowly lead to unconsciousness even if the per-
son is wearing a flotation device. Other swimmers may become passive
with little or no warning as a result of a diving injury, heart attack,
stroke, seizure, drunkenness, or drug reaction.
A passive victim not wearing a flotation aid may float facedown at the
surface momentarily, or, more often, sink part way, or all the way, to
the bottom. The person may continue to twitch for awhile underwa-
ter but will not be able to surface on their own. Speed in rescue is
critical, both in making contact and also while moving the person to
safety. Breathing will stop, followed shortly by cardiac arrest. Prompt
resuscitation efforts by rescuers will likely be needed for victim
survival. EMS should be summoned as soon as possible, ideally as the
rescue is underway, since advanced medical care may be needed.
Anyone who has lost consciousness in the water should receive medi-
cal evaluation.
• Cannot call or wave for help
• Cannot reach for aid
• May grab rescuer for support
• Likely not breathing
• Will need medical assistance
• Contact needed for rescue
• Submersion likely


Chapter 10: Water Rescue10-6
Because a passive victim cannot grasp a rescue aid, some type of physical contact will be required during a
rescue. Ideally, the response will be quick enough to occur at or near the surface. However, since submersion is
likely, rescuers must be able to reach the bottom in the deepest part of the swimming area. Rescue efforts may be
hampered in murky water by difficulty in finding the person underwater. Safe Swim Defense limits water depths
in murky water and advocates life jacket use when prompt rescue of submerged victims becomes problematic.
Active drowning victims may become passive in only 20 to 60 seconds.
Passive drowning victims are likely to submerge.
This chart summaries behaviors that response personnel required by Safe Swim Defense should monitor,
along with appropriate actions to take. Additional information on surveillance and scanning is provided in
the chapter on Safety Team Preparation.


Chapter 10: Water Rescue10-7
Rescue Techniques: Order of Methods
Safe, effective rescue of a person from the water is easier with prior training and appropriate equipment. At
a unit swim, the adult supervisor is responsible for ensuring that suitable rescue equipment is available,
and that assigned rescue personnel know how to use it. Preparation needs to include three types of
victims: active, conscious victims who will grasp a rescue device; passive, unconscious or nonresponsive
victims who cannot; and victims of spinal injury whose movements may need to be minimized.
For active victims, effective rescue response means finding the easiest, quickest way to provide them with support.
Victims can be handed a rescue aid from the side, thrown a rescue aid, or have a rescue aid taken to them by boat
or swimmer. Reach, throw, row, go is the mnemonic for those options. Reaching assists from pool side, dock, or
boat are normally the easiest. Throwing assists extend the range of shore-based assists. If neither of those tech-
niques is viable, then a swimmer can push a float or carry a line to the victim. Contact with a conscious, active
victim is seldom necessary. However, those displaying the classic drowning response will not be able to reach for an
object that is placed nearby; the equipment aid, but not the rescuer, must be placed in contact with the victim.
An unconscious victim, or someone suffering a seizure or other incapacitating medical condition, will not be able
to grasp a rescue device. Contact rescues, which may be nothing more than grasping the victim from the side of
a pool, cannot be eliminated. Several techniques, with and without equipment, are available to move a passive
victim to safety and will be discussed in the following material. Rescuer-to-victim contact is also necessary to aid
someone with a suspected spinal injury.
All rescues end with removing the victim from the water and providing appropriate aftercare. Details again depend on
whether the victim is conscious and responsive, nonresponsive or unconscious, or has a suspected spinal injury.
The safety of the rescuer is a major factor in all emergency situations, including a potential drowning. Water rescues
in certain “lifesaving” situations are inherently dangerous, such as those encountered by swift-water rescue teams
or Coast Guard rescue swimmers. In a lifesaving situation, a rescuer may face an unsafe area with only makeshift
equipment and no assistance from others trained in water safety. The appropriate response in such situations may
be to go for help. In a “lifeguarding” situation, the area is safe and well-known, appropriate equipment is at hand,
and trained backup is available.
Some people do drown in futile attempts to save others in “safe” locations such as pools, but the would-be rescuers
are usually frantic friends or relatives with no training whose swimming skills are little better than those of the
person in distress. Such double drownings demonstrate that the potential risk of approaching a struggling victim
is not to be taken lightly. However, in the controlled environment that should exist at a unit swim, there is little
risk to a rescuer who is a good swimmer and follows the procedures described here. Contact with an active victim
is avoided by using flotation aids or other devices. Although contact may be needed with a victim who is unable to
grasp a rescue device, such a victim is also unlikely to grasp and imperil a rescuer.


Chapter 10: Water Rescue10-8
Reaching Rescues
Reaching rescues are typically safe, simple, and effective. They can be used for most types of victims. Many
drownings occur close to safety. That’s because poor swimmers often get into trouble as soon as they enter water
deeper than head height. That is likely to be near the edge of a pool or dock. A rescuer at such a location simply
needs to recognize the need, lie down, extend a hand to contact the victim, and pull the victim to the side.
If the victim is farther out, a noodle, paddle, reach pole, or other extension may be used. A tired or distressed
swimmer will probably reach for the device, but an active drowning victim will not. For both types of victims, make
sure the aid comes into direct contact with their hands and arms.
Sweep a pole under the subject’s arm from the side rather than poking at them straight on. Keep your weight low
with one leg behind the other and brace yourself by putting your weight on the back leg as you pull the person to
safety.
When active victims grab an extended hand or pole, they often will stop their own efforts to remain afloat. That sudden
extra weight can topple the unprepared rescuer into the water. That is the reason for lying down or otherwise
bracing yourself. Don’t stand with your feet on the edge and bend over to extend a hand, pole or other aid.
During reaching assists, and ALL rescues for an active victim, tell the victim clearly what you are doing and
what you wish them to do. Speak loudly and use simple words and short phrases, such as: Grab the pole!, Hold
on!, I’ll pull you in!, You’re OK!.


Chapter 10: Water Rescue10-9
Passive victims will not be able to grasp a pole or other extension. You can still use a reaching rescue if you can
reach far enough with your own hand to grab them. You can also use a special device, called a shepherd’s crook,
which is a pole with a large loop at one end, often available at hotel or other semiprivate pools. The loop may be
placed within reach of an active victim, but can also be used to snag passive victims and draw them to the side. As
with a simple pole, sweep the hook into position from the side. Do not use a shepherd’s crook if you suspect that
the person is passive due to a neck or spinal injury.
Intuitively, the hook may be positioned around the victim’s torso. That may work for smaller victims who are nearly
vertical in the water. For larger victims floating in a prone position, it may be more practical to place the hook
under one armpit and pull the victim in at a slight angle. A second rescuer may need to assist as the victim is brought
to the side, particularly if the pool deck or pier is above the water line.
The use of a shepherd’s crook to retrieve a passive victim who has sunk part way or all the way to the bottom may
be more difficult, particularly if the water is murky. Rather than fumble about to perform the rescue from shore,
it may be more expedient for trained swimmers to perform an in-water rescue. Since passive victims may not be
breathing, prompt removal to a location where CPR can be performed is indicated. One of the challenges of water
rescue is to match the response to the situation, including the knowledge and skill of the rescuers.
Throwing Rescues
If a victim is beyond reach of a hand or pole, a throwing assist may be used for some active victims. Throwing devices
appropriate for unit swim protection include ring buoys, boat cushions, and life jackets. Other items, such as boat
fenders and plastic jugs, may be used if they provide enough buoyancy to support a person, are relatively easy to toss,
and are easy to grab. (For example, a soccer ball is not as easy to grasp in the water as other devices.)
Ideally, thrown flotation aids should land close to victims without hitting them. Tired and distressed swimmers may
be able to move a few feet to compensate for an inaccurate toss. However, active drowning victims will not. If the
device does not make contact, they will be unable to reach for it. Such accuracy may be difficult to achieve. Also,
throwing assists are not appropriate for passive subjects. Therefore, unit swim protection cannot rely solely on
throwing devices.
Throwing rescues may not be essential for shore-based assists at small residential and hotel pools since reach poles
may provide sufficient coverage for active victims in deep water areas.


Chapter 10: Water Rescue10-10
A ring buoy with a line attached allows more flexibility than the buoy alone. Such a device may be handy at a lake
swimming area with rescue personnel stationed on a pier or floating platform. However, practice is needed for accu-
rate use.
To throw a ring buoy:
• Grasp the buoy itself in your throwing hand and hold the coil loosely
in your other hand.
• Stand facing the victim and step back with the leg on your throwing
side.
• Swing your throwing arm back, then forward.
• Release the buoy when your throwing arm is about level.
• Allow the rest of the line to play off the open palm of your other
hand.
• Aim for the buoy to hit the water beyond the victim with the line
falling on the victim’s shoulder
• Pull the buoy to the victim and shout for the victim to grab hold. You
may need to move along the shore to angle the line to pull the buoy
within the victim’s reach.
• Reach out with one hand to grip the line with your thumb inward, then alternate arms to pull the victim to safety.
If the line plays out clearly, but your aim is off, you do not have to re-coil the line for a second throw. Instead, drop
the line at your feet as you pull the buoy in and then try again. Keep your eye on the victim rather than watching the
line. It may be prudent to switch to a different means of rescue, depending on the condition of the victim and the
skills of the response team.
It is fairly common for the line to snarl during a throw if the line is not properly prepared and maintained. That in turn
prevents the buoy from reaching the victim. Some ring buoys come with the line stored in a fabric bag or in a plastic
handle. However, the line for many buoys at various locations is gathered in a loose clump. Anyone relying on such a
device for unit swim protection should re-coil the line before it is needed.


Chapter 10: Water Rescue10-11
To coil the line for a right-handed throw, place your left hand on your left knee and slide your right hand along the line
to the full reach of your arm. Grasp the line and then return the line from your right hand to your left hand to form
a loop. Repeat until you reach the buoy. If you leave your left hand fixed to your knee and reach as far as possible
each time with your right hand, all of the coils will be the same size and less likely to tangle when thrown. Reverse
the directions for a left-handed toss. This technique is normally better than wrapping short coils on your forearm or
moving both hands apart and then together.
It is important that the end of the line does not get thrown into the water. To
prevent that, tie a loop with a bowline knot in the end of the line and slip it
over the wrist of the hand that holds the line. Make sure that the loop is loose
enough that it will easily slip free if pulled.
You may find a ring buoy with a large plastic bead, called a “lemon”, on
the free end of the line rather than a wrist loop. If that’s the case, you
are meant to stand on the line with the lemon behind your foot. The wrist
loop is easier to use, particularly if you’re moving with the ring buoy to
get to a better position for throwing or need to move along the shore to
pull the buoy toward the victim after a toss. One reason for placing a
lemon on the line is to lessen the possibility that a nonswimmer using the
buoy could be jerked into deep water. Response personnel at unit swims
must be good swimmers and should be able to avoid being pulled in with
either means used to keep the end of the line out of the water.
The throw bag, or rescue bag, is a common throwing device often carried on
canoes and kayaks. It may be available at unit swims during float trips and makes a
good addition to a unit safe swim kit since it is an easy way to store and transport
a line. The bag does not have sufficient buoyancy to support a person and is com-
monly deployed for endangered swimmers in whitewater. Its use is described in the
boating section of this manual.
For a unit swimming activity, a throw bag may be better utilized to hold the line
for a line-and-tender rescue rather than primarily as a throwing device. The line-
and-tender procedure is covered later in this chapter.


Chapter 10: Water Rescue10-12
Rowing Rescues
The term “rowing rescue” refers to the emergency use of any type of small, human-powered craft, such as
rowboats, canoes, or kayaks. Boats may be appropriate tools for swimming site protection in natural water
bodies when the entire area cannot be viewed or accessed easily from shore or a pier. Snorkeling in open water
is one such situation. Blind spots behind aquatic attractions are another. Basically, the boat serves as a movable
platform from which reaching and throwing assists can be implemented. Challenges include how passive victims
are recovered and moved to safety. Specific skills needed to maneuver various craft are discussed in the boating
section of this text.
Purpose-built rescue boards, similar to surf boards, are sometimes used by lifeguards at lake and ocean beaches.
Rescue board techniques using surfboards, stand-up paddleboards without a paddle, or windsurfers without a
sail, can be considered for unit swim protection at non-surf beaches.
To use a board for active victims:
• Approach the victim from the side while paddling with
your hands from either a prone or kneeling position
• Slide off the board on the opposite side and push the
side of the board to the victim
• If necessary, reach across the board, grasp the victim’s
wrist and pull the victim to the board
• Make sure the victim has a secure hold on the
board, provide assurance, and evaluate the victim’s
condition.
• If shallow water is nearby, use your legs to move the
board and victim to safety.
• If needed, help the victim lay prone, centered toward
the front of the board, facing forward
• The rescuer then lays on the back of the board and
uses arms, legs, or both to move to safety.
For passive victims, flip the board as you slide off. Pull
the victim’s hands across the board until their armpits
are against the rail. Roll the board toward you to pull the
victim across the board. Then carefully move the victim
to rest lengthwise on the board.


Chapter 10: Water Rescue10-13
GO Rescues: In-Water Assists
In-water assists may be divided into two classes, depending on the need to touch, or contact, the victim. In non-
contact swimming assists, the victim grasps a flotation aid you provide. In contact rescues, you grasp the victim
and the aid. Non-contact rescues are the first choice for active victims. Contact rescues are required for passive
subjects, at or below the surface, and those with a suspected spinal injury, but may also be needed for victims with
seizures or other debilitating conditions. Either type of in-water rescue should be performed only by skilled swim-
mers with proper planning, equipment, training, and support. Both non-contact and contact rescues should follow
this progression:
Details vary depending on the situation, and may evolve as the rescue proceeds, so each item in the progression
will be discussed separately. However, it is first useful to illustrate the steps with specific examples.
In-Water Rescue for Active Victim (contact avoided)
1. Recognition and initial assessment 2. Activation of an Emergency Action Plan (EAP)
3. Water entry with rescue aid 4. Approach to victim
5. Updated assessment 6. Provide support
7. Move victim to safe exit 8. Move victim from the water
9. Final assessment 10.After care as needed
A. While scanning her
assigned swimming area
with a flotation aid at
the ready, a responder
notices an active victim
and activates the EAP.
B. Responder quickly
enters the water with the
flotation aid. A running
beach entry is good for
this location.
C. When the water becomes too deep for a rapid
running approach, responder swims flotation aid
toward the victim. In this case, the aid is pushed
forward with a breaststroke kick. The head is
kept above water to allow a continuous view of
the victim.
A CB
D. Responder pauses momentarily just out of
reach of victim to reassess victim’s condition and
the best way to continue the rescue. This “ready
position” also allows the rescuer to provide
simple verbal instructions to the victim.
D


Chapter 10: Water Rescue10-14
FE
E. Responder pushes flotation aid into victim’s
grasp. If a distressed swimmer moves toward the
aid, the rescuer can shove the aid toward the
victim and release it so that it moves forward due
to momentum. For active drowning victims who are
unable to reach for the aid, the rescuer should push
it directly into the victim’s chest.
F. As soon as the victim grabs the flotation aid, the
rescuer should release it and back off. The goal is to
keep the aid between the responder and the victim
so that the victim grasps the aid rather than the
rescuer.
G. Once the victim has a firm grip on the flotation
aid, the urgency of the situation is reduced. The
responder should speak to the victim to judge their
condition and ability to assist with completing the
rescue.
H. If the victim is reasonably calm and has sufficient
energy and skill, have them kick themselves to
safety while you lead the way from a distance.
Continue to provide verbal assurance and
encouragement. This is known as an “accompanied
rescue” by various Royal Life Saving Societies
(RLSS).
J. Once you reach shallow water, ask if the victim
can stand and walk the rest of the way. If so, allow
them to do so. If they have any physical problems
that led to their distress, or lack the energy to walk
on their own, assist the person from the water and
provide aftercare. Other safety team members may
help.
I. If the victim needs help moving to safety while
clutching the flotation aid, tell them to continue
to hold on and that you will be touching the aid
so that you can pull them to safety. Continue to
provide verbal assurance as you tow, ideally with a
side stroke with your arm extended. RLSS agencies
call this a “non-contact tow”. (The rescuer is in
contact with the aid but not the victim.)
G
JI
H


Chapter 10: Water Rescue10-15
In-Water Rescue for Passive Victim (contact needed)
This sequence assumes the victim is spotted by the rescuer after suddenly going limp due to a medical emergency.
Active victim rescues should be implemented for active drowning victims prior to them becoming passive. Family
or bystanders may first notice a passive drowning victim in the water after a brief, unobserved struggle. That
is a fairly common drowning situation encountered by lay rescuers, but should not occur at a supervised swim.
A. Responder notices a passive
victim and activates the EAP.
Other safety team members assess
situation and call EMS while rescue
is in progress.
B. Responder enters water.
In this case using a stride
jump with a pool noodle as a
rescue flotation aid.
C. Responder rapidly approaches
victim using a modified breast
stroke while keeping victim under
observation.
D. Responder assumes ready
position when near victim. Shouts
“Are you OK” and splashes victim
to check responsiveness.
E. Responder grasps wrist of victim
to use wrist tow procedure to
place victim on flotation aid.
F. Responder switches to
double armpit tow to move
victim to closest exit point.
G. Other safety team members help remove the victim from
the water. Here the three responders are preparing for a
vertical lift.
H. Once on deck, the victim is checked
for signs of life and appropriate care is
provided until EMS arrives.
A B C
D E F
G H


Chapter 10: Water Rescue10-16
Rescue Flotation Devices
The Lifesaving merit badge pamphlet trains lay rescuers to quickly look for appropriate rescue aids after they
identify an emergency and decide to act. Swimming and Water Rescue training instructs the adult supervisor and
response personnel to identify and deploy appropriate aids prior to allowing anyone in the water during a unit
swim. Each independent responder should have a separate device.
Rescue tubes and rescue buoys (or cans)
are commonly used at venues that employ
lifeguards. Both have shoulder straps and
lanyards. Most rescue tubes have a snap on the
end that allows the tube to be fastened around
a victim. The rescue tube is more suitable for
the passive victim rescues that are described
in this manual. Both are appropriate devices
for unit swim protection. However, they are
not typically found at unguarded residential or
hotel pools or designated swimming areas in
natural waters.
Various other buoyant items can be used as effective alternative rescue flotation devices, such as pool noodles,
ring buoys, and throwable boat cushions. Pool noodles can be used similar to rescue tubes. Thicker versions are
generally better than thin ones. They are inexpensive and commonly available. Ring buoys and boat cushions
also serve as throwing devices. Ring buoys are often required at hotel and other semi-private pools. Recreational
motor boats are required to carry a either a throwable cushion or ring buoy.
Various styles of life jackets may also serve as rescue flotation devices and are often available for aquatic
activities. Adult sizes provide more buoyancy than smaller sizes. Zippers should be fastened and straps clinched
tight for use as rescue aids.
Other types of buoyant devices may be used as well, such as boat fenders, kick boards, tubes, floats and aquacise
equipment. Some sleeping pads may be rolled and strapped for use on camping trips when other aids are not
available.
Key considerations for alternate rescue flotation devices include overall buoyancy, size, weight, ease of use, and
how well a victim can grasp and hold the object. Some devices provide better support for passive victims than
others, as will be seen in the section on rescue procedures for such victims.


Chapter 10: Water Rescue10-17
Recognition / Assessment / EAP Activation
At a swimming activity where the unit is responsible for
emergency response, the qualified supervisor is charged with
developing a plan of action and explaining it to designated
response personnel prior to need. After response personnel
identify a person in need, the plan should describe how they
communicate that need to others before entering the water
to perform a rescue. Additional details are covered in the next
chapter on safety team preparation.
Entries
A safe unit swim area should have safe locations
to enter and exit. Response personnel should
to be stationed near those locations, which in
natural bodies of water may not surround the
entire swimming area.
This section assumes that the area is free of
hazards, that water depths are known, that
responders do not need to enter the water from
heights greater than 3 feet, and that rescue
flotation devices are available. The goal of all
entries is to quickly and safely move toward the
victim while keeping the victim in view.
Which entry is most appropriate will depend on
several factors, such as water depth and bottom
conditions.
Run-and-Swim Entry
If the swimming area is bordered by a shallow, gentle slope with a firm bottom, such as a sand beach or zero-
depth entry pool, enter at a run. Lift your legs high and hold your rescue aid out of the water. As the water
deepens and running becomes difficult, lie on the surface and kick off the bottom. You can lie on a body board
or air mattress, hold a rescue tube or noodle across your chest, or push a ring buoy or seat cushion ahead of you.
Keep the victim in view.


Chapter 10: Water Rescue10-18
Ease-In Entry
An ease-in entry is generally applicable from pool side, pier, or shoreline with an abrupt drop into either shallow or
deep water. It is particularly appropriate when the victim is just beyond reach from shore. Crouch down while holding
your flotation aid in one hand and placing it on the side or in the water. Brace yourself with one or both hands and
either spring in from a squat, or sit and then slide in. Variations in the technique are known as slide-in, touch-and-go,
or waveless entries. Double check that the entry area is clear, then focus on the victim.
Compact Jump
The compact jump may be used from low heights into moderate water depths or from higher decks or piers into
deep water. Bend at the knees with feet together. Keep your legs flexible and feet flat to absorb shock in case of
bottom contact. Hold a soft rescue device across the chest. Make sure lines and straps are not tangled or caught
on obstructions. In deep water, your head will submerge. Re-locate the victim as soon as you surface.
Stride Jump
The stride jump, or leaping entry, allows you to keep the
victim in sight as you enter deep water. It can be used
from low heights, less than 3 feet, into unobstructed
water at least 5 feet deep. Begin as if you were trying
to reach the victim in one giant step. You want to move
out, not up. Practice first without a flotation aid to mas-
ter the technique, as shown in the chapter on swimming
skills. Hold rigid aids in one hand to the side. Hold soft
aids under your arms or against your chest.
Squat & Hop or Sit & Slide


Chapter 10: Water Rescue10-19
Spring outward while leaning forward with your legs spread front and back in a scissors position. Snap your legs together
as they enter the water. If the entry is done well, your head will remain above the water. However, it may take several
practice tries until you learn the proper timing.
Approaches
The approach will generally be in a straight line from the entry point to the victim. Frequent visual observation
should be maintained in case the victim submerges before being reached. Always give verbal instructions and
encouragement when approaching a conscious victim.
The victim and rescuer will often be facing each other, and many rescues can be initiated from a front approach.
Other rescue techniques require rescuers to position themselves behind the victim in a rear approach.
Adapt your swimming stroke to the con-
dition of the victim, the condition of the
water, the type of aid being carried, and
the distance. For long distances, rescue
tubes and buoys may be trailed behind the
swimmer. For distances common at unit
swims, flotation adds may be pushed for-
ward or positioned across the chest.
Use a modified crawl or breaststroke with
the head up. Generally, the breaststroke
is more flexible and the whip kick is more
powerful than a flutter kick. A single-arm
stroke may be used if the aid is pushed for-
ward with one hand.
As you finish the approach, just before you
assist the victim, stop out of reach, speak
to the victim, and reevaluate the situation.
Splash apparently passive victims.
At times the details of the approach stroke
will be unimportant: for example, many
backyard, apartment, and hotel pools are
so small that the entry and approach are
simultaneous.


Chapter 10: Water Rescue10-20
Rescues for Active Victims
There are several variations in how a rescue flotation device can be used to assist an active victim in deep water. One
possibility is to use a contact tow in which the rescuer grasps the victim from the rear and holds them against the rescue
aid while moving to shore. That technique is perhaps applicable to the widest range of victims, and is discussed here, but
it is not the simplest or safest procedure and requires more stamina than others. Reviews of actual rescues reveal that
many active victims will grasp flotation aids extended to them. That, in turn, leads to the following options:
Accompanied Rescue
In an accompanied rescue, the victim is allowed control of a flotation device provided by the rescuer. There is
minimal risk of the victim grasping the rescuer, and the victim has the maximum support of the aid. The victim must
be conscious and able to assist after becoming stable on the device. The aid must be buoyant enough to support the
victim. This technique is suitable for a tired swimmer and may be attempted for all active victims. You should maintain
a distance between yourself and the victim and be ready at all times to release the aid, duck beneath the water, and
move away.
From a ready position, provide simple instructions and
encouragement to the victim, for example: “GRAB THE
FLOAT”.
If the victim reaches for the aid or begins to move toward
you, shove the float toward them while you back up.
After the victim becomes stable on the float, reassure
them that they are safe and ask if they are able to
kick their way toward shore. If the victim can do this,
provide encouragement and patiently escort them to
the closest point of safety. That may not be the same
place where you entered the water.
Don’t assume that all victims will be able to reach for
the aid. If they do not respond to your approach, con-
tinue to push your flotation device towards them with
your arms fully extended.
Wait until their head is above the water and push the aid
into their chest. You may need to drive them backwards
momentarily until they are able to grasp the aid. Let go
of the aid and back up as soon as the victim has a firm
grip on the aid or the victim attempts to grab you.
After the victim is supported by the aid. Check if they are
able to move to safety on their own. If so, swim near the
victim and encourage then as they move toward safety.


Chapter 10: Water Rescue10-21
Noncontact Tow
If the victim is unable to make progress toward safety
but can communicate and support themselves with the
aid, wait for them to grow calm. Then decide how best
to tow them to safety. Always tell the victim in advance
what you intend to do. Grasp the flotation device with
one hand, extend your towing arm, and begin stroking
away from the victim while holding onto the aid. Use a
sidestroke for the tow. Continue to reassure the victim
and encourage them to kick if appropriate. Watch for
signs of exhaustion or panic. If the victim panics and
tries to reach you, release the aid, quickly move away,
and reassess the situation. Resume the tow only when
it seems safe to do so. At a unit swim, a second rescuer
with another aid should be ready to assist if the first
responder encounters any difficulty. This procedure is
known as a noncontact tow since the rescuer is in con-
tact with the flotation aid, not with the victim.
Contact Tow for Active Victims
Some victims who are injured or suffering a medical
emergency, such as a stroke or seizure, may not be able
to grasp a flotation aid even though they are conscious
and may momentary keep their heads out of the water
enough to breathe. In that case, responders should
switch from a front approach to a rear approach with
a flotation aid across their chest. The technique works
best with soft aids such as rescue tubes, noodles, or
boat cushions - less so with rigid devices such as rescue
buoys or ring buoys.
The rescuer scoops both arms simultaneously under the
victim’s armpits and firmly grasps the victim’s shoul-
ders. The rescuer then leans back to pull the victim
onto the flotation aid which is clamped between the
victim’s back and the rescuer’s chest. Rescuers may
need to keep their own head low and to the side to
avoid being hit by the victim’s head.
Rescuers should keep the victim’s mouth and nose clear
of the water during the tow to safety and offer encour-
agement throughout the rescue.
The rescuer’s grasp on the victim is known as a double armpit tow and will also be an option for passive victims. Note
that the rescuer needs a strong kick. A whip kick or rotary kick is generally more effective than a flutter kick.


Chapter 10: Water Rescue10-22
Exiting the Water - Walking Assist for Conscious Victim
A conscious victim may be able to exit the water without
help once they get sure footing on the bottom or a firm
hold on a ladder. If the victim is exhausted, has trouble
with their footing, or a medical impairment, you can help
them ashore using a walking assist. While standing at their
side, help them to stand and to place one arm across your
shoulder. Grasp the wrist of that arm with your outside
hand, and wrap your free arm around their back. Then
walk slowly together to shore. If the victim is much larger
than you, a second person can help from the other side.
If the victim is unable to stand, then removal techniques
for passive victims may be needed.
Aftercare for a Conscious Victim
A victim who has been conscious throughout the rescue still needs to be evaluated.
If a serious medical condition, such as a stroke, led to the incident, summon EMS
immediately or arrange for evacuation from a remote site. If the victim shows
signs of hypothermia, provide warmth. Be sympathetic to their mental state. Offer
reassurances rather than criticize actions that lead to the situation. If the victim
appears traumatized, be attentive, move them to a comfortable environment,
and notify family members.
Rescues for Passive Victims
If the victim is passive, apparently unconscious, in the water either at or beneath the surface, then the rescuer will
need to make physical contact with the victim. Different techniques are appropriate depending on the situation.
Speed is essential. Any victim who is likely not breathing has a small time window to allow a full recovery.
A victim suffering hypoxic blackout or
other debilitating medical emergency
may be in shallow water. In that case,
a wading rescue is suitable. Walk to
the victim, lift them from the bottom,
and hold their head clear of the water
while moving to safety.
In deep water, a rescuer approaching a victim from the front may elect a different rescue procedure than a rescuer
approaching a victim from the rear. Each procedure can be adapted for use with select flotation aids, but may also
be used without an aid, for example, to bring victim submerged in deep water to the surface. During training, each
technique should be practiced both with and without an aid, and for victims both at and below the surface.
A front or rear approach can always be turned into the other simply by swimming around the victim. However,
that might also necessitate reversing direction to reach safety after the victim is in tow. The different tech-
niques presented here provide the rescuer with options. Those assigned to emergency response at a unit swim site
need not be equally skilled in all the techniques, so long as they know at least one method to handle any likely
situation. Just before a unit swim, assigned rescue personnel may need a practice drill to refresh their memory and
reconfirm their ability. For large groups, limiting the drill to the safety team is probably appropriate prior to everyone
else arriving. For a small group, the drill can be a teaching moment for everyone.


Chapter 10: Water Rescue10-23
Wrist Tow without a Flotation Aid (Front Approach)
The wrist tow may be used when you approach a passive victim from the front and the victim’s arm is within reach.
It can be applied for victims at the surface, floating beneath the surface, or resting on the bottom.
First confirm that the victim is passive,
then come within an arm’s length.
Reach across to the victim’s opposite
wrist as if you were shaking hands. You
may need to reach down if the victim’s
wrist is not at the surface. Grasp the
underside of the victim’s forearm just
above the wrist with your palm up.
Hold firmly and roll your wrist by turn-
ing your thumb and elbow up and over
as you begin your tow. That twist should
turn the victim onto their back.
Maintain the same grip as you tow the
victim to safety with a sidestroke. A
slight tension in your arm is needed
to keep the victim face up. Both your
towing arm and the victim’s arm should
remain straight.
Wrist Tow with a Flotation Aid (Front Approach)
The wrist tow can also be used to place an appropriate flotation aid under the shoulders of a victim at or near the
surface, followed by an over- the-shoulder or double armpit tow.
During the final approach from a ready position, hold the aid with one hand while you reach across it with the other.
Grasp the underside of the victim’s forearm just above the wrist with your palm up. Lift up slightly and pull the victim
toward you as you twist them onto their back. Shove the float beneath them as they turn.


Chapter 10: Water Rescue10-24
Rotate the victim face up with the flotation aid positioned to hold the victim’s face out of the water. If you
are close to the edge of a pool or a low pier, use your legs to move the victim to the side and allow a second
responder out of the water to grasp the victim’s extended arm.
If you need to tow the victim some distance to safety, then reach one arm over the victim’s shoulder and grasp
the flotation aid. Use a modified side stroke to move the victim to safety.
A single over-the-shoulder tow should be appropriate for most passive victims when using rescue tubes or swim
noodles in calm water. However, if you have difficulty balancing the victim on a flotation device, such as a
boat cushion, then a double armpit tow may also be used. Response personnel assigned to unit swim protec-
tion should practice until confident they can perform a passive victim rescue, either from the front or the rear,
using devices available.
Armpit Tow (Rear Approach to Passive Victim)
A passive victim face down at or very near the surface can also be approached from behind, with or without an
appropriate flotation device. Confirm that the victim is unresponsive, then reach out with both arms to scoop under
the victim’s armpits to grasp the victim’s shoulders. If the victim is horizontal rather than vertical, the rescuer may
need to be positioned high on the victim’s back. A rescue tube or noodle is initially held across the rescuer’s chest
and then squeezed between the rescuer and the victim.
If the victim is small, and the direction to safety is behind the rescuer, the rescuer may lean backwards to lift the
victim’s face out of the water, similar to the technique used for a contact tow for an active victim. However, it is
generally easier for the rescuer to roll a passive victim face up.


Chapter 10: Water Rescue10-25
If the distance to safety is small, as is likely the case
in small residential and hotel pools, the rescuer can
tow the victim to safety using the double armpit tow
without changing direction. For greater distances,
or if a change in direction is needed, the rescuer
can switch to a single over-the-shoulder tow. That
allows the rescuer to use one arm for swimming
while grasping the victim and float with the other.
Victims Wearing Life Jackets
Life jackets may be worn to add an extra margin
of safety for unit swimming activities. If so, both
participants and responders should be so equipped.
Properly fitted life jackets should forestall the need
to assist active victims who otherwise could not
maintain themselves at the surface. Life jackets
should also prevent the need for a responder to go
underwater to recover a submerged victim.
However, a victim incapacitated by a medical emergency may still need assistance. In that case, responders
should roll the victim face up if needed and then grasp the victim’s life jacket between the shoulders. A side
stroke may then be used to tow the victim to safety. If the victim needs CPR, their life jacket will likely need to
be removed.
While firmly grasping the victim under both arm-
pits, the rescuer takes a breath and then dips one
shoulder to rotate beneath the victim to roll the
victim face up. The rescuer’s head will be to one
side after the roll and the rescuer should avoid
being hit by the victim’s head during the roll.
If a flotation device has been used, it should be positioned
to hold the victim’s face clear of the water while provid-
ing support for both the victim and rescuer. If a flotation
device is not used, the rescuer will need a strong kick to
support the victim while moving to safety.


Chapter 10: Water Rescue10-26
Submerged Victims
Passive victims not wearing a life jacket will likely sub-
merge if rescue is delayed only slightly. Unconscious
victims can come to rest anywhere between the surface
and the bottom. If the victim is floating just below the
surface, you can reach down and use the wrist tow to
bring them up and forward. If the victim is deeper, you
will need to use a surface dive to get closer. A headfirst
surface dive may be used in deep, clear water. A feet-
first surface dive may be more appropriate in murky
water. Review the chapter on swimming skills for sur-
face dive techniques. If you have a flotation aid, leave
it at the surface.
Grasp a submerged victim in any logical manner, either by the wrist, under one arm, under both arms, or across the
chest. If the victim is on a firm bottom, you can shove against it with your legs to help you up.
Victims recovered from underwater may be towed
directly to safety without taking the time to retrieve a
flotation aid and place the victim on it. Rescue breathing
is likely needed as soon as possible.
The rescuer should adjust whatever grip was used to
bring the victim to the surface to effect a tow that keeps
the victim’s face clear of the water. A wrist tow is one
possibility.
Single and double armpit tows may also be used. Rescu-
ers may hook their elbows under the victim’s arms to
grasp the top of the shoulders, or simply grasp the vic-
tim’s armpit with their hands.
A cross chest carry is another option. The rescuer reaches
across one of the victim’s shoulders to grasp the victim’s
opposite armpit. Alternately, the rescuer may reach
under both of the victim’s arms. A rescuer may need
to support the victim’s buttocks on the rescuer’s hip to
keep the victim reasonably level for towing with their
head clear of the water. Both of these options require
strong swimming skills and stamina.
Only a few strokes are typically needed to reach safety in a small pool. However, if there is an extended distance to
safety, or the victim is too large for a particular rescuer to tow easily, then the rescuer may elect to use a flotation aid.
At a unit swim, the aid may be provided by a second rescuer.
NOTE: The contact tows just discussed are for passive victims. They are appropriate for submerged victims, but
may also be considered when unresponsive victims cannot easily be supported by available flotation aids. The
techniques are NOT advocated for use with active victims. Some of the skills have been used historically by life-
savers lacking suitable equipment to assist active victims. That situation should not arise at unit swims.
If individual rescuers are unable to locate a submerged victim in murky water after one or two surface dives, they
should signal for help. The initial rescuer should continue searching near the spot the victim was last observed on
the surface. That marks the spot around which other responders can expand the search. A search for a missing
swimmer in an unknown location is more difficult than the response for an observed submersion.


Chapter 10: Water Rescue10-27
Missing Submerged Victims
The rescue techniques discussed above assume prompt emergency recognition and response. However, what hap-
pens if a buddy check reveals a missing person or a missing buddy pair? If that happens, several Safe Swim Defense
safeguards have failed. Despite preventive measures, a crisis developed that neither buddies nor the safety team
(lookout and responders) were able to recognize. That should seldom, if ever, happen. However, the count taken
during a buddy check provides a final alert mechanism. For Safe Swim Defense to work properly, that final safeguard
must be unambiguous. If the unit leader first assumes that the missing person or persons simply wandered off on
land, and searches there first, then that leader has not properly implemented Safe Swim Defense standards for an
accurate, current count of everyone in the water. If Safe Swim Defense guidelines are in place, then a missing per-
son during a buddy check means a person is submerged in the water, and that is a major life-threatening emergency
with the clock ticking ominously.
If the water is clear enough to see the bottom, then a search from the surface is relatively quick and easy, either
from the side or from swimmers in the water. The first region to search is the ability area where the missing person
was assigned. The search should then widen to cover the other ability areas and also just outside the boundaries,
under docks or in other restricted zones. If there is a current, first check the downstream perimeter.
If the bottom cannot be seen from the surface, then
the situation is much more difficult and may be
further hampered by waves or a current. In shallow
water, use a line search with swimmers linking arms
and traversing the area while shuffling their feet.
Once anyone in the line gets to chest-deep water,
the line should be directed back into shallow water.
Crisscross the area until the subject is found or each
part of the area has been searched at least twice.
In deep water, only reliable, competent swim-
mers should be used in an underwater search for a
missing submerged victim. An underwater search
in turbid water is difficult and not without risk to
the rescue team. Time is critical. A prompt search
with a few prepared individuals is better than a
search delayed trying to organize and instruct a
large team.
The divers form a line, surface dive together to
the bottom, scour the bottom with their hands for
a set number of strokes (typically three), and then
surface. Buddies are checked every time the line
surfaces. The line then reforms, backs up a bit, and
dives again.
The adult supervisor should not allow the search to continue beyond the point that rescuers become exhausted. In
anticipation of such difficulty, a unit swimming area in turbid water should be small enough in area, and shallow
enough in depth, that the number of available search personnel can cover the bottom rapidly. If the unit leader is
not confident in preventing the need for, and of performing a safe, rapid, and effective underwater search in murky
water, participants may be required to wear life jackets to minimize the possibility that anyone will submerge.
Another option is to limit water depths to around 4 feet and less so that the entire area can be searched by a line
of waders. Additional detail on how to conduct a search for a missing swimmer is covered in lifeguard training
programs that include waterfront modules.


Chapter 10: Water Rescue10-28
Landing a Passive Victim
A passive victim needs to be moved as quickly as possible to a location where breathing and pulse can be moni-
tored and CPR performed if necessary. It is sometimes possible to start rescue breathing in shallow water or at
the side of a boat. If that is not practical, or CPR compressions are needed, remove the subject from the water
and position on a rigid surface. Removing a passive victim from the water often requires more than one rescuer
and may be easier if the victim is first towed to where the rescuer can stand.
Shallow Water Lifts
Many adults can cradle a small child in
their arms to carry them from the water
or lift them a short vertical distance unto
a pool side or low pier. That should work
well for a 40 pound Lion Cub Scout, less
so for a 6 foot 2 inch, 240 pound line-
backer. In the later case, two or more
responders may be needed to safely lift
and move victims onshore.
Beach Drag
A drag is a relatively easy and safe way to remove a passive victim where there is a zero depth exit with a smooth
sloping bottom. During the tow, the victim will be on their back. Once your feet touch bottom, grasp the victim
under their armpits and pull them onto the beach by slowly walking backward. If the victim is small enough,
you can hold them against your chest with your back straight. That will lift them progressively out of the water
as you move shoreward while dragging their feet. You can lock your hands across the victim’s chest, grasp the
victim’s wrists with their arms crossed, or reach under the victim’s armpits and grasp the top of their shoulders.
Gently lower the victim to the ground once clear of the water.
If the victim is too large to easily lift clear of the water, squat as you move shallower to allow the water to help
support the victim’s weight. Cradle the victim’s head with your forearms to keep it clear of the water as you
“duck walk” backwards until the victim’s body bottoms out. Continue to drag victims until at least their heads
and shoulders are out of the water. A second responder can help pull large victims onshore.


Chapter 10: Water Rescue10-29
Vertical Lift
This technique is used for passive victims at the vertical edge of a pool or low pier, or at a steep lake edge or
riverbank. It needs from one to four people depending on the relative size of the people involved, the condition
of the bank, and the depth of water at the edge. Ideally, two responders will be onshore above the victim with
one or two in the water helping to support the victim.
The initial rescuer tows the victim to the side and holds them facing the edge while the others get into position. The
rescuers onshore crouch and each grasp one of the victim’s arms, as near the armpit as is comfortable. If the water
is shallow enough for them to stand, the rescuers in the water prepare to lift on each side of the victim’s hips. On
a signal, the rescuers lift the subject until their hips or thighs are level with the side. The victim is then lowered
facedown to the ground with care taken to protect the head.
Next, roll the person onto their back. However, first make sure the hips are firmly supported. That may require
sliding the victim forward or rotating them parallel to the edge.
Backboard Lift
Pool lifeguards are trained to extract passive victims using a
backboard with the assistance of a least one other rescuer.
Unit members with lifeguard training should know the
techniques and may utilize those at unit swims if a backboard
is available. The skills are not mandatory in Swimming and
Water Rescue training since backboards are seldom available
at backyard, apartment, or hotel pools. However, state codes
typically require backboards at guarded facilities so they may
be present if a unit utilizes such a venue.
The board is sliced vertically down the edge of the pool by
an assisting responder near where the primary responder
is bringing the victim face up. The primary responder lifts
one of the victim’s arm which is grasped by the assisting
responder along with the board. Ideally, a third responder
grasps the victim’s other arm. The board is then angled
upwards centered below the victim. The rescuer in the water
stabilizes the board while the responders on deck pull the
board and victim out of the water.


Chapter 10: Water Rescue10-30
Aftercare for Passive Victims
Anyone who becomes unresponsive prior to or during a rescue is likely afflicted with
a life-threatening condition that may require advanced care and evaluation. To
minimize delay, members of the safety team should consider summoning EMS while
the rescue is underway. After passive victims are brought to safety, they should
be assessed by the safety team and provided basic care until advanced care is
available.
If a victim becomes responsive, keep them inactive until EMS arrives. Anyone who
has lost consciousness or required rescue breathing should be provided advanced
medical evaluation. In remote locations, evacuation should be arranged. Anyone
who has aspirated water (that is, inhaled a small amount of water into their lungs)
may suffer acute respiratory distress and/or later develop pneumonia. If their need
for rescue arose from stroke, heart attack, epilepsy, asthma, or other medical prob-
lem, they may require treatment for conditions other than drowning.
Scouting America Swimming and Water Rescue training does not include first aid and CPR since units should
already have those resources. Scouting America strongly recommends that all adult leaders and youth capable of
performing CPR properly be trained through a nationally accredited organization. That training should cover res-
cue breathing and AED use as part of the curriculum, and include hands-on demonstration of skills to a qualified
instructor. Units are encouraged to have leaders and older youth trained in Wilderness First Aid when activities
take them to remote areas where access to advanced care and/or rapid transport is an hour or more away. If a
unit planning a swimming activity lacks persons with appropriate first aid and CPR/AED training, unit leadership
should utilize venues with professionally trained lifeguards on duty.
Line and Tender
Several of the previously discussed rescue procedures rely on rescuers having sufficient skill and stamina to move
both themselves and the victim to safety. The line-and-tender procedure uses a buddy team equipped with a
rope to effect a rescue wherein both the rescuer and victim are pulled to shore. The procedure is simple, requires
little equipment or training, and provides extra safety for the rescuer. The critical skills are that one person is a
good swimmer and that the other have sufficient strength to pull two people through the water.
For an active victim, the line carrier makes an appropriate entry and carries a flotation aid to push into the vic-
tim’s grasp while providing simple instructions. After the victim has a secure hold on the aid, the line carrier calls
for the line tender to pull them in.
If a flotation aid is not available, the line carrier swims past an active victim, turns, and pulls the line into the
victim’s grasp. The line tender pulls both the victim and rescuer to safety while taking care not to jerk the line


Chapter 10: Water Rescue10-31
out of the victim’s grip. The line tender will need to pull fast enough to keep the victim at the surface. The use
of a line by itself is most appropriate for tired or distressed swimmers. If a victim cannot maintain a grip on the
line with their head above water, then it may be necessary for the line carrier to grasp the victim. Ideally, line-
and-tender teams at a unit swim should be equipped with a flotation aid.
For passive victims at or below the surface, the line carrier must grasp the victim and sup-
port them with their face clear of the water while the line tender pulls them both to safety.
The rescue line should be around 1/4 to 3/8 inch in diameter and long enough to cover the
swimming area. Braided, rather than twisted, line that floats is preferred. The line used
in most throw bags is ideal. To prepare the line, a bowline loop is tied in the free end and
placed over one shoulder and under the opposite arm of the line carrier. The loop should be
snug enough to ensure that it will not come off while the line carrier is swimming or being
pulled in.
The rescuer tending the line is responsible for feeding out the line to prevent tangling as the line carrier delivers the line
to the victim. The line should be kept ready in a neat, loose coil or in a throw bag. The line tender pulls in their partner
and the victim hand-over-hand, grasping the rope with thumbs inwards to kink the rope to prevent it from slipping. The
line tender should be well braced.
The procedure should be practiced until both team members are capable and confident in their roles. Unit
members should understand the procedure and know to “clear the way” when the team is responding.
Note that the line-and-tender rescue is a First Class rank requirement.
The line-and-tender procedure is appropriate wherever there is a clear expanse of
deep water beyond easy reach from pool side, shore, or dock, particularly if team
members have limited rescue training. The procedure is not recommended when
there are obstructions, such as submerged trees. However, such conditions would
violate the criteria for a safe area.
More than one line-and-tender team may be stationed as needed along the shore,
on a pier, or on a detached floating dock. However, other response personnel may
depend on reach poles, a boat, or a flotation aid rather than a line. A line-and-tender
team need not be deployed in all situations. Reaching and wading rescues may pro-
vide adequate coverage at many small, residential in-ground or above-ground pools.
In locations with currents, murky water, or water depths beyond those specified
in Safe Swim Defense, it is prudent to have line-and-tender teams, as well as
swimmers, wear approved life jackets.
Stabilization of Spinal Injury Victims
Diving into shallow or unclear water is dangerous and foolish. The diver risks concussion,
spinal injury, permanent paralysis, and death. In pools, diving injuries occur most often
when a swimmer dives from the side into shallow water, but can also take place if the
diver hits another swimmer or a diving board. When the bottom slopes gently into deep
water, a swimmer attempting a shallow dive may hit the bottom, particularly at a surf


Chapter 10: Water Rescue10-32
beach where the water depth varies between swells. All participants at a unit swim should be warned about the
dangers of diving, and only allowed to enter the water headfirst if the height, water depth, and water clarity
conform to Safe Swim Defense guidelines.
A person suffering a high-impact head injury may not be immediately incapaci-
tated and may move to the side or out of the water. Evaluate anyone observed
forcibly striking their head. If they show signs of trauma, complain of head,
neck, or back pain, appear confused, or have tingling or loss of sensation in their
extremities, have them stand upright, or preferably sit, remain still, and avoid
moving. Summon EMS or otherwise arrange for prompt evaluation by a medical
professional. If they begin become too impaired to remain sitting, gently lower
them to the ground.
If the victim becomes immobile in the water after impact, trained response personnel should provide in-line stabiliza-
tion as described below and immediately summon EMS. If an in-water evaluation indicates the person is not breathing,
then rescue breathing must be started, regardless of the need to move the victim to do so. If the person is breathing,
then response personnel should maintain in-line stabilization until EMS arrives with a backboard.
Note: Professional lifeguard training, includes back boarding procedures for suspected spinal injury. Such training is not
included in the Scouting America Swimming and Water Rescue course since backboards are often not available at unit
swim locations.
At the first indication of a spinal injury victim in the water, instruct everyone else to freeze in place or move
carefully to the side. An immediate buddy check may not be appropriate in a crowded area because swimmers
quickly converging on their buddies may jostle the victim. After the rescuer has made contact, account for every-
one else and have them carefully exit the water.
Face-Up Victim: Overarm Head Splint
If a person with a suspected spinal injury is face up, approach from the side, taking care not to jostle the victim.
Provide verbal encouragement and tell the victim what you are doing. Grasp the victim’s upper arms between
the shoulders and elbow. Grip the victim’s right arm with your left hand and their left arm with your right hand.
Slowly and carefully move the victim’s arms along side their head. After their arms are in position, gently but
firmly squeeze the victim’s head between their arms. Continue to apply pressure to hold their head securely with
a minium of motion.
Ask the victim about signs and symptoms, such as pain and whether they can wiggle their fingers or toes. If the
victim is unresponsive, check for breathing. If the victim is not breathing, immediately provide rescue breathing,
either in the water or on land. Rescue breathing, and compressions if needed, take precedent over whatever
movement of the victim is needed to provide that care.
If the victim is breathing and has signs of spinal injury or concussion, maintain in-line stabilization until EMS
arrives. Other responders can help hold the person in position.


Chapter 10: Water Rescue10-33
Face-Down Victim: Underarm Head Splint
If the victim is facedown, approach them carefully from the side, but don’t delay. Speed matters when the vic-
tim’s face is in the water. Don’t jump into the water next to the victim, but it is often not necessary to enter the
water slowly, particularly if the victim is some distance away or the water is already being disturbed by other
swimmers.
Stand near the victim’s head facing slightly forward. Since the victim’s arms may be dangling at their side, the
first step is to move them forward alongside their head. Reach across with your near arm and grasp the victim’s
outside arm (right-to-right or left-to-left) between the elbow and the shoulder with your thumb toward their
hand. Grasp their other arm similarly with your free hand. Carefully swing their arms forward along the victim’s
ears.
Once the arms are in position, squeeze them both at the same time against the victim’s head to trap it in place.
Next, pull the victim slowly forward at the same time you roll them face up. You turn the victim by pushing down
on their near arm and pulling their far arm across. As you roll the victim, your own body should twist slightly to
face their feet. Lower yourself in the water as needed to prevent lifting the victim. Ideally, you should be at
shoulder depth, but that may be difficult in very shallow water.
After you roll the victim face up, continue to hold their head in place with pressure on their arms. You can brace one
hand against your shoulder to make it easier. Check to see if the victim is breathing; if not, provide care as needed.
If the victim is in deep water, both head splint procedures can be applied while the person is simultaneously moved to
shallow water. The rescuer needs strong swimming skills, particularly a rotary kick. A long, narrow flotation aid, such as
a rescue tube or noodle may be used to help support the rescuer if held by the rescuer’s forearms across the chest. Do
not place the aid under the victim’s shoulders.
Defenses
Responders using the rescue techniques discussed in this section should be at little risk from the victim. If an active victim
reaches for a rescuer rather than an aid, the rescuer should back off. However, if the victim grasps a rescuer, a buddy, or
anyone else nearby, good swimmers should be able to escape.
Active, distraught victims seek support to keep their heads
out of the water so they can breathe. They may grip the
shoulders of anyone close enough and push up with their arms
to raise their head high. That will shove the other person
down. In that case, the first defense is to go deeper. The
victim will likely let go on their own since they are trying to
stay up rather than submerge. They certainly will not swim
down after someone.
At a unit swim, if anyone grabbed by an active drowning
victim cannot quickly get free, they should promptly be
assisted by a designated responder, ideally with a flotation
aid.


Chapter 10: Water Rescue10-34
Front and Rear Head-Hold Escapes
If a victim grabs you around the neck or shoulders either from the front or the rear, take a quick breath (suck),
tuck your chin so that it doesn’t catch on the victim’s arm (tuck), and submerge both yourself and the victim
(duck). You can submerge using the arm motion of a feetfirst surface dive or simply stop kicking to stay up. If the
victim does not let go, grasp their upper arms near the elbows to shove the victim upward and yourself down-
ward. Swim clear of the victim before surfacing.


Safety Team Preparation
The century old goal of every Scout a swimmer, every swimmer a lifesaver is still applicable. However, simply
having trained rescuers at hand does not constitute adequate preparation to prevent and safely respond to
drowning emergencies at a unit swim. The unit leader, the qualified supervisor, the lookout, and emergency
response personnel are all important components of a safety team. Each needs to understand their function and
how it relates to the others, particularly since a single individual may serve in more than one role. Safe Swim
Defense defines those functions, but this section expands on the duties and interactions of team members,
particularly for incident prevention and response. Team members need to be provided with the necessary
equipment, coached in an emergency action plan, and deployed to cover the area effectively.
Chapter
11


Chapter 11: Safety Team Preparation11-2
Roles and Responsibilities
• The unit leader makes sure there is a trained adult present to serve as the qualified supervisor for the
swim. If the unit leader does not fill that position, then the leader provides unit resources and support to that
person. If unit leaders serve as the qualified supervisor, then they should recruit at least one other adult as
an assistant to help with discipline, particularly during an emergency, and to satisfy Youth Protection policies.
• The qualified supervisor reviews health information and ability group classifications, guides the setup
of the areas, makes lookout and emergency response assignments, deploys those people to provide effec-
tive surveillance, ensures that appropriate rescue aids and communication devices are available, develops
and explains the emergency action plan for the event, coordinates execution of the plan during a crisis, and
assigns someone to check participants in and out of the area if needed.
• The lookout maintains a constant watch to ensure that all elements of Safe Swim Defense are working.
The lookout normally calls buddy checks and clears the pool if needed during emergencies. Although not
required to assist in water rescues, the lookout may do so if qualified, but only after the safety of everyone
else in the group is established. If the qualified supervisor serves as the lookout, that person must assume no
other duties, such as providing skill instruction.
• Response personnel are designated by the qualified supervisor to closely monitor the activity and respond
during emergencies. The emergency action plan should clarify the roles of each individual responder—for
example, who reacts to an emergency in one part of the swimming area, and what the others do to maintain
the safety of everyone else during such a situation. The responder’s monitoring role is just as important as
emergency response. Each person needs to continuously scan their assigned area. The ratio of responders to
swimmers is 1 to 10; however, different unit members may rotate in the role during the course of the activity.
The qualified supervisor may also serve simultaneously as a responder.
• Buddies Everyone at a unit swim has a safety role and should be aware of emergency signals and what do
to if those are activated. Also, everyone in the water should be watched by at least three individuals: the
lookout, a responder, and a buddy. Buddies may be the first to notice a problem and should immediately alert
members of the safety team.
• Emergency Medical Services While not on site or typically involved in unit planning, EMS personnel
are important adjuncts to the unit safety team. Access to, and expected response time, should be included
in emergency planning.
• Venue Lifeguards If unit leaders are not confident in their ability to conduct a safe unit swim using unit
personnel, they are encouraged to arrange unit swims where professionally trained lifeguards are on duty.
The venue lifeguards fill the role of unit response personnel and will react according to the venue’s emer-
gency action plan. The qualifiedly supervisor is still responsible for implementing other aspects of Safe Swim
Defense.
THE QUALIFIED SUPERVISOR MANAGES THE SWIM:
• Reviews health histories
• Confirms skill classifications and buddy selections
• Guides area selection and setup
• Ensures appropriate rescue devices are available
• Selects lookout and response personnel
• Stations safety personnel for effective scanning
• Develops and explains the emergency action plan
• Confirms safety team can execute the EAP
• Arranges tailgate review of rules and procedures -
including signals for and actions during buddy checks


Chapter 11: Safety Team Preparation11-3
Surveillance
According to Safe Swim Defense: Every swimming activity must be closely and continuously monitored by
a trained rescue team on the alert for and ready to respond during emergencies.
The first part of that directive involves effective surveillance, that is, keeping a close watch on everyone. What to
look for was covered in Chapter 9. How to look is covered in this section. Unit leadership is responsible for providing
guidance to the safety team to minimize the risk of an unobserved submersion. That includes assigning safety team mem-
bers areas to watch and determining where they should watch from. (Note: this section assumes professionally trained
lifeguards are not provided by a regulated facility or tour operator.)
Personnel Placement and Numbers
Appropriate locations for effective surveillance depend on the area layout, the number of swimmers in each ability group,
and the number of safety team members. Goals include clear views, maximizing observation of each individual in the activ-
ity, and minimizing response time.
For small areas and groups, a responder may be able to watch
everyone over the entire area. That option is known as total
coverage. The responder must also be able to quickly reach
anyone needing help anywhere in the area, ideally within 30
seconds or so. If it takes significantly longer than that to spot
and reach a victim, then either the size of the area needs to
be reduced or additional responders added to be closer to all
participants.
Safe Swim Defense requires one responder per ten par-
ticipants. However, even if only six swimmers are pres-
ent, the layout to the right does not satisfy Safe Swim
Defense surveillance criteria - it lacks a lookout.
THE LOOKOUT SURVEYS THE ENTIRE AREA AND:
• Looks for deviations from Safe Swim Defense
• Monitors the environment
• Provides backup surveillance during a rescue
ADDITIONAL DUTIES MAY INCLUDE:
• Conducting buddy checks
• Clearing the area during an emergency
• Serving as an additional responder
RESPONSE PERSONNEL MONITOR ACTIVITY AND:
• Are buddies with another responder
• Intervene to enforce rules
• Activate the EAP as needed
• Provide assistance to swimmers as needed
• Act as secondary rescuer for their buddy
• Help manage rest of group if not directly involved
in a rescue effort
Total Coverage


Chapter 11: Safety Team Preparation11-4
The lookout always provides total coverage. The look-
out should be close at hand with a clear view, but need
not be able to immediately enter the water. That is,
the lookout may be on an elevated platform for better
viewing.
The layout to the right, with one responder and a look-
out, is appropriate for a crew of six youth and two adults
using a hotel pool on the way to either the Northern Tier
or Sea Base high adventure bases.
The layout is also appropriate for two responders watch-
ing from 11 to 20 swimmers. In that case, a separate
lookout is still needed.
For larger areas or more swimmers, a responder may be
assigned to watch only part of the area or specific ability
groups (zone coverage). Other responders are assigned
zones that combine to cover the entire area.
Zone boundaries should be well defined by physical
markers, such as floating lines, ladders or pier seg-
ments. Vague instructions, such as “halfway across” or
arcs drawn on a diagram may lead to confusion. Zones
should also overlap.
Zones should be adjusted to balance the number of swim-
mers in each. That is, zones with fewer swimmers may
cover more area. That is to optimize the time respond-
ers have to scan each person in their zone.
Although responders may be assigned zones, the lookout
stills provides total coverage. Both together results in
combined coverage.
Total overlapping coverage by multiple safety team
members adds an extra layer of protection since every-
one in the water is monitored by at least three observ-
ers: a responder, a lookout, and a buddy.
Dual coverage also provides automatic backup surveillance during an emergency as well as allowing a safety team
member to momentarily interrupt scanning to deal with minor issues. For example, a responder may need to
direct a swimmer with a nosebleed, along with the swimmer’s buddy, to the adult supervisor without activating
the EAP. Or, a lookout may need to call a swimmer to the side to caution against sunburn.
Dual coverage likewise supports the buddy system which applies to safety team members as well as swimmers.
Every safety team member is within the scan of at least one other. During an emergency, a responder’s buddy
provides rescue assistance as needed while other safety team members manage the rest of the group.
The basic concepts of total, zone, and
combined coverage apply to all locations,
but the best positions to station safety
team members will depend on the area
layout as well as factors such as the sun
direction. Review Chapter 7: Swimming
Locations for items to consider. Response
personnel may shift positions as needed
to adjust to changing conditions.
Total Coverage - 100% overlap
Zone Coverage - single zone
Combined Coverage


Chapter 11: Safety Team Preparation11-5
Scanning
Response personnel should perform a systematic scan so that each swimmer in their zone comes under close
observation at frequent intervals. A complete scan every ten seconds is a reasonable expectation. If that is not
achievable due to a crowded area, then more observers should be deployed. Safe Swim Defense requires a ratio
of one responder to ten participants. That should limit the number of participants assigned to each responder.
The 1:10 ratio is met if one responder’s zone has eight participants while another has twelve. However, it is not
appropriate to assign one responder to watch two people while another watches eighteen.
Observers should be able to see all of their assigned area with little head movement. Visual sweeps may be from
side-to-side, in-and-out, or varied, and should include both the surface and, in clear water, the bottom. The area
immediately below the station should not be neglected.
It is more important to focus on the swimmers than on a particular scanning pattern. Effective scanning requires
deliberate attention to swimmer behavior. For small groups at unit swims, head counting is very effective.
Update the count as swimmers enter or leave the zone. Between counts, scan the entire zone and track individu-
als (someone swimming underwater, for example); note group interactions, such as those playing a game; and
look for signs that someone is in trouble or is breaking the rules. If a swimmer appears to be alone, the observer
should scan for the buddy. If it is apparent that the buddies are not watching each other, the observer should
either catch their attention or call for a buddy check to remind buddies to stay together.
Observers should not be facing into the sun or glare. It is important to check that observers can actually see what
they should and to re-position them if they cannot. Water motion can also obscure underwater objects.
Sunglasses with polarized lenses and UV protection
aid visibility and protect the eyes. Caps with visors
and sunshades are also useful.
Each responder should be assigned a buddy who provides
backup for the rescue. (For example, the backup may be
a line tender for a line rescue.) In turbid water condi-
tions, the responder’s buddy should act as a spotter in
case the victim submerges before being reached.
Other response teams should automatically increase their surveillance zones to help the lookout cover the area
normally scanned by the team performing the rescue.
A safety team member assigned surveillance duty is expected to intervene promptly to prevent accidents as well
as to recognize and respond to emergencies. Those are the only tasks that should be undertaken. Observers should
focus on the task at hand and not engage in casual conversation. If it is necessary to speak with a swimmer, the
observer should do so quickly and continue to scan the area if possible. Effective scanning involves hearing as well
as vision. Observers should not listen to music using earphones while on duty.
Unit members acting as observers at a unit swim should be changed frequently to allow as many as are qualified
to serve, and to allow everyone the opportunity to have fun. The best time to change safety personnel is during
a buddy check. A typical swimming activity should last only an hour or so. Adult observers with critical skills may
serve for the entire time.
Layout for glare example View from A View from B
Glare reduction with polarized glasses


Chapter 11: Safety Team Preparation11-6
The lookout should be in a position to observe the entire swimming area as well as the deck or shore. The look-
out makes sure everything is as it should be, for example: responders are in position and alert; distant clouds
are not threatening; no one is entering or leaving without checking in or out. The lookout typically signals
buddy checks and confirms the count. In an emergency, the lookout decides whether to sound an emergency
signal and provides backup surveillance of the zone where the rescue is taking place. When one team responds,
the lookout and other responders are responsible for emergency communication and the supervision of the rest
of the swimmers.
Communication
A rescue at a unit swim site may involve nothing more than a simple reaching assist to a person with a momentary
cramp. However, any rescue, from simple to complex, should be considered a team effort. Such coordination requires
communication. It is not necessary to equip all supervisory personnel with whistles and an elaborate code, but it is
necessary to establish a few fundamental signals. Communication should be outlined in an emergency action plan and
include how the safety team shares information among themselves, participants, emergency services, those being
rescued, and parents.
A single short blast of a whistle is often used at public facilities as a warning given to a particular individual to stop
some action. If the whistle is overused for that purpose, swimmers can become accustomed to the sound and tend
to ignore it. Although such a signal is sometimes useful, it should be used sparingly, if at all, at a unit swim. Direct
verbal communication is recommended to correct inappropriate activity by a specific individual. A buddy check can
be called to quell group infractions.
The signal for a buddy check should be simple and eas-
ily recognized, such as a single long blast of a whistle or
an air horn. The signal for a buddy check does not nor-
mally indicate an emergency but can be used to clear
the swimming area rapidly, particularly if unit members
are required to sit on the side of a small pool as opposed
to standing stationary in a lake. A buddy check is an
appropriate part of an emergency action plan if a swim-
mer indicates that they can’t find their buddy. A buddy
check can also be called to close down the activity for
weather, or simply when the allotted time has passed. A
separate “checkout” signal is not needed, and may actu-
ally slow down the final buddy check. The same signal
used to call the buddy check can be sounded to resume
swimming, or replaced with a simple verbal directive to
“resume swimming.” Since all swimmers should remain
silent during the buddy check, voice communication is
appropriate.
A specified emergency signal is needed to gain the attention of the entire group without the corresponding scrabble for
buddies. The call should alert everyone to stop what they are doing, freeze in place, and listen for instructions. The
signal can be used to clear the way for a line-and-tender rescue or to prevent swimmers from colliding with someone
in distress. It is also useful to minimize the possibility that another crisis will arise while the first situation is being
resolved. Repeated short blasts of a whistle, or any other simple sequence distinct from the buddy check call, may
be used. Both the “emergency” and “buddy check” signals should be sounded and explained to the group at the final
procedural review before swimming begins.
During a crisis, response personnel react immediately to perform the necessary assist. The qualified supervisor or
lookout, as previously specified in an emergency action plan, decides whether it is appropriate to sound the call
for a buddy check or an emergency. Normally, the area and numbers involved in a unit swim are small enough that
responders, lookout, and unit leaders can communicate verbally without the need for special signals among them-
selves. That verbal communication can include a “call 9-1-1” directive to the person previously assigned to make
the call.
SUGGESTED SIGNALS
BUDDY CHECK: One long blast means everyone
moves to their buddy and remains silent.
EMERGENCY: Repeated short blasts means
everyone freezes silently in place and waits for
instruction.


Chapter 11: Safety Team Preparation11-7
Before the activity, means for contacting emergency medical services must be
established. At urban locations, a phone call placed to 9-1-1 is common, and
may summon a reasonably prompt response at some rural settings. If a mobile
phone is used, make sure there is cell coverage, the phone is charged, and
the person placing the call knows how to direct rescuers to the site. In remote
areas, it may be necessary to dial some other number (e.g., a ranger station)
or to first travel some distance to where a signal is available. Communication
with emergency services is an important part of the emergency action plan.
Emergency Action Plans
Devising an emergency action plan may be simple or complex, but it should be a deliberate undertaking for all
swimming activities. Swimming might be a side activity during an excursion such as a backpacking trek or a float
trip. In that case, some components, such as arrangements for medical services and evacuation, will be part of
the emergency action plan for the main activity. At a minimum, the following items should be considered. Note
that many of these items should already be addressed by a facility emergency action plan if the unit is swimming
where trained lifeguards are employed.
• Incident director. Safety team members should respond automatically to emergency situations
without first seeking approval. However, there needs to be a single individual designated to step in and take
charge if unexpected situations arise. That person is the qualified supervisor defined by Safe Swim Defense.
If a unit leader aged 21 or older is assisted by someone of lesser age who has more extensive training , then
that person may assume this role. There should also be a second person designated to take charge if the
emergency involves the primary individual. Recall that adult cardiac arrest is the most likely life-threatening
emergency to arise during unit outings.
• Safety team members (who and how many). For a small crew of two adults and six youth, the two
adults, if properly trained, may serve as the lookout and responders. For larger groups, there must be a lookout
and sufficient responders to maintain a ratio of one responder for every 10 swimmers or fraction thereof. For
example, a group of 35 swimmers requires one lookout and four responders.
• Safety team deployment. The lookout must be able to observe the entire activity. If the group is too
large for that to be practical, then the group may be subdivided into separate swimming areas, each with its
own complete safety team. Alternatively, the swimming activity may be offered at different times to subsets
of the unit, such as patrols. Responders are best deployed as buddy pairs watching the same areas. If a line-
and-tender procedure is used, then the buddy pair will be stationed at the same location. If other assists are
appropriate, the pair may be separated for better surveillance and response time. The qualified supervisor is
responsible for positioning responders to provide adequate coverage of all areas with due consideration of
the training and maturity of the individual responders. The supervisor is also responsible for providing each
responder with rescue devices suitable to the responder’s level of training.
• Safety team duties. As a whole, the safety team has five primary duties: careful tracking of the
number of people in the activity, continuous surveillance of assigned areas, intervening to stop rule infrac-
tions, intervening to provide emergency assistance, and providing backup surveillance and supervision of
swimmers not involved in a rescue situation. Backup surveillance is automatically provided by designating a
lookout separate from the responders. The supervisor is responsible for handling disciplinary problems.
• Likely emergencies. The supervisor should prepare the safety team to respond appropriately to active
victims, unconscious victims (at or below the surface), and potential spinal injuries. The supervisor may elect
to have specific safety team members respond to special situations—a spinal injury, for example—but in general
each responder should be coached in how to provide assistance in likely scenarios.
• Signals. The emergency action plan should include audible signals for buddy checks and emergencies and
assign a specific individual, such as the lookout, to decide when such signals are needed.
• EMS. Emergency medical services should be summoned promptly for any incident that involves a
serious medical condition or victim submersion. The person making the call should be able to clearer commu-
nicate the situation and provide necessary directions. Phone services may provide dispatchers with a general
address, but EMS will need to know where on site the emergency actually is. Either the caller or another desig-
9-1-1
Know local emergency numbers
and arrange access to them.


Chapter 11: Safety Team Preparation11-8
nated member of the unit may need to meet an ambulance at an obvious entry point. The Annual Health and
Medical Records for persons needing help should be available to facilitate treatment. Someone should also be
assigned to contact parents as soon as possible. Those details should be covered in the emergency action plan.
• Weather. All swimming activities should be curtailed whenever thunder and lightning threaten. A sudden cold
snap, high wind, or visibility impaired by fog, mist, or rain may also interrupt the activity and require back-up
planning to move unit members to a safe, comfortable location.
• Tailgate review. Finally, the supervisor should determine what aspects of the emergency action plan to
review with participants just before the event.
Incident Reporting
Scouting America policy requires prompt reporting of any incident requiring treatment beyond Scout-rendered
first aid, such as intervention by EMS or a visit to a licensed health care provider. After the injured is taken care
of and other participants are in a safe place, unit leaders should preserve and document evidence, including
photos if appropriate, complete an incident report, and notify the local council. Forms and procedures are
available on the Scouting Safely tab of the website at https://www.scouting.org/health-and-safety/incident-
report/. Questions about insurance coverage should also be directed to the local council.
Safe Swim Defense Kits
Various items are needed to set up and aid the safety team in pro-
tecting a unit swim. Depending on the location, some necessary
equipment may already be on-site. For example, many hotel pools
have a ring buoy, shepherd’s crook, and house phone within the area.
In other situations, the unit will need to carry support material with
them. Some units maintain a simple “swim kit” in a bag that travels
with the unit. Other units assemble a kit just before an outing with
the items they know will be needed. Items may include:
• Medical histories. The qualified supervisor should review
Annual Health and Medical Records for each participant before the outing to determine any special precautions
that may be necessary. Copies of the forms should also be carried on any remote trip and shared as appropriate
with emergency medical personnel. Information on allergies and preexisting conditions may influence treatment
options. Also, the forms allow parents to authorize emergency treatment if they cannot be reached. The
qualified supervisor should also determine if participants have had any recent illness or injury not noted on the
forms.
• Cell phone. Portable phones are useful for emergency communications and notifying parents of changes in
plans. Be sure to check coverage and battery charge.
• Whistle. Handy for signaling buddy checks or emergencies.
• Rescue line. Line in 50- to 75- foot lengths can be used for throwing or line-and-tender rescues. Floating
line, often polypropylene, is better than line that doesn’t, such as nylon. Braided line is better than twisted.
Braided line with a core is better than loosely woven line without a core. A throw bag is an easy way to
transport and use the line.
• Rescue flotation devices. Rescue tubes, foam swimming noddles, ring buoys, throwable boat cushions,
and various life jackets are useful rescue aids. Review Chapter 9 for details.
• Buddy tags and portable boards. A simple list of names on a piece of paper is adequate for tracking
those in the water and their ability classification. Some units save their buddy tags from summer camp and
use them with small, portable buddy boards. Other options include tongue depressors stuck in the sand, or
wooden clothespins strung on a line. Waterproof markers are used to print names and color tags by ability
groups.


Chapter 11: Safety Team Preparation11-9
Additional items are needed to set up a temporary area in a natural body of water when swim areas are not pro-
vided at recreational facilities. Review Chapter 8 for details.
• Boundary lines. Light cord connected to floats can be used to define nonswimmer and beginner areas.
Slightly thicker floating line is even better.
• Balloons. Balloons inflated on-site are easy to transport and make highly visible floats to define swim areas.
• Anchors. Rocks are often difficult to tie to; for anchors, nylon or plastic sacks carried in the kit may be
stuffed with rocks or sand. Large fishing sinkers may also be used.
Tailgate Review
Area setup and emergency plans set the stage for a safe swim. A review of rules and procedures just before the
swim clears the stage for the activity. Youth leaders should be encouraged to provide the review after coaching
by the qualified supervisor. A tailgate review should be short and simple, but include the following:
• Entering and leaving the area
• Ability areas
• Any hazards to avoid
• Buddy assignments
• Buddy check purpose, signal,
and action
• Emergency signal and response
At a public facility with professional lifeguards,
review the following:
• Buddy assignments
• Appropriate water depths and
areas for different abilities
• Location of unit leaders
• Time and place to meet
Buddy Tags: Special tags are often placed on hooks on a buddy board at Scout summer camps to track
Scouts from multiple units entering and leaving the swimming area. Similar systems are appropriate for unit
swims and help reinforce the buddy system. However, Safe Swim Defense does not require the use of buddy
tags, even for council camps. The requirement is that the safety team have a precise method to identify ev-
eryone in the swimming area at all times, along with their ability group and buddy. At unit swims with small
numbers of participants who know each other and enter and leave together, a simple list will suffice.


Chapter 11: Safety Team Preparation11-10
Unit Swim Planning Guide
This worksheet is an aid to unit leaders consistent with Scouting America’s Commitment to Safety. It supports
planning, but qualified and trustworthy adults must still exercise due diligence when delivering the program.
Items should be completed by unit leaders who are currently trained in Safe Swim Defense.
• Who
[ ] List names and training of adults supervising the swim. Training to include Safe Swim Defense, Swimming
and Water Rescue, and lifeguard.
[ ] Identify who in the above list will serve as the Qualified Supervisor
[ ] List everyone participating in the swim, including adults
[ ] Review recent health histories of all participants and note any special precautions for swimming activities
[ ] Review swimming ability of all participants and note numbers of nonswimmers, beginners, and swimmers.
• Where
[ ] Specify location and type of venue: [ ] pool with professionally trained lifeguards on duty
[ ] pool where unit provides response personnel
[ ] designated swim area in natural waters with lifeguards
[ ] designated swim area where unit provides response personnel
[ ] natural waters where unit must establish a safe swim area
[ ] Identify any special risks at the swimming venue, such as excessive water depth, murky water, current, surf,
cold water and/or play structures, and factor those into activity planning.
[ ] Determine if life jackets should be worn as an additional layer of protection.
• For established swim areas with professionally trained lifeguards provided by the venue:
[ ] Establish means to track participants – no one should enter or leave without notice.
[ ] Determine zones within the venue where water depths are consistent with swimming classifications and inform
participants.
[ ] Make sure everyone has a buddy and understands their commitment to the other.
• For established swim areas where the unit provides response personnel, training in Swimming and Water
Rescue is recommended. Preparation includes the previous items along with:
[ ] Review Chapter 9: Water Rescue and Chapter 10: Safety Team Preparation in Aquatics Supervision.
[ ] List adults and responsible youth available to serve as response personnel.
[ ] Ensure rescue aids are available to response personnel.
[ ] Review use of available rescue aids with response personnel.
[ ] Determine where response personnel should be stationed for effective surveillance.
[ ] Appoint and deploy a lookout
[ ] Work with the lookout and response personnel to formulate an emergency action plan that covers drowning
and other medical emergencies, including how to remove a passive victim from the water, who is trained to
provide CPR, and who calls Emergency Medical Services.
[ ] Plan for regular buddy checks during the activity
• For locations in natural bodies of water where the unit must first establish a safe swimming area, training
in Swimming and Water Rescue is strongly recommended. Preparation includes the previous items along
with:
[ ] Review Chapter 7: Swimming Locations in Aquatics Supervision
[ ] View the Remote Area Setup video
[ ] Determine in advance if all three classification areas are needed
[ ] Gather equipment needed to define areas
[ ] Assign qualified swimmers to check the bottom for hazards
and depth, and deploy markers
[ ] Assign response personnel to monitor those checking the area
Remote Area
Setup
Aquatics
Supervision


The Underwater World
Water covers most of the earth’s surface. An extraordinary world of fantastic plants and animals awaits those who
venture beneath the surface, whether the trip is at a nearby lake, along a tropical reef, or beneath the ice in the
Arctic. The undersea world is too diverse to discuss in detail here, and seeing it in person is better than reading
about it. Scouting America has two special awards, Snorkeling and Scuba, that provide introductory skills for
Scout-aged youth and their leaders to contemplate an undersea journey. The Scuba Diving merit badge, and the
Open Water Diver Certification it includes, prepares Scouts to experience recreational submarine excursions in
accordance with Scouting’s scuba policy. The National High Adventure Sea Base provides the training and environ-
ment to make dreams of underwater adventures a reality for older youth.
Compared with surface land, much of the submarine world remains a
wilderness. But those areas most accessible by people have suffered
environmental damage similar to the open-air back country. Scouts
know that caring for the environment is a key aspect of enjoying the
outdoors, whether above or below the sea. Leave No Trace concepts
apply to both worlds. Coral might look like a rock but is actually com-
posed of living organisms. The general rule when snorkeling and diving
is “Look but don’t touch.” Not only does that protect the envi-
ronment, it also protects the diver. Some sea creatures have defenses
best not provoked. The skills discussed below are to be learned in clear,
confined water. Before venturing into open water, learn more about the
undersea ecosystem, both to protect it and to protect yourself.
12Chapter


Mask Selection and Fit
The mask should have a single or double tempered-glass faceplate held to the skirt with a rigid band. The skirt,
often of clear silicone, should have a double seal where it fits against the face. There should be a pocket so that
the nose can be gripped with one hand for equalizing pressure in the ears. The strap should be easily adjustable
and either split or wide where it fits across the back of the head.
To fit a mask, place it against your face without using the strap, then inhale gently through your nose. A mask properly
sized and shaped for your face will remain in place. If the mask doesn’t seal easily, try another style. Don’t force the
mask to remain in place by pushing down on the skirt and inhaling strongly. If the mask leaks underwater, or requires
excessive strap pressure, the fit is poor.
To fit the strap, inhale to hold the mask in place, then pull the strap over the back of your head. If the strap is
too tight, stop and loosen each side a notch or two. If the strap is too loose, tighten each side. Strap adjust-
ments vary in style. Some have a hinged clip; on others, ridges are moved past a movable pin and held in place
by friction and a slide. Figure out how to lock and unlock the device rather than forcing it. The strap should be
only tight enough to hold the mask comfortably to your face. If the mask leaks, try a different style rather than
pulling the strap too tight.
You can also don the mask back to front. Lift the mask over your head to position the strap on the back of your
head, then pull the mask gently into place. The mask strap rides above the ears.
Warm air from your nose contains water vapor that will
condense on the cool faceplate and block your vision. A
few drops of a commercial anti-mist solution spread on
the faceplate will prevent fogging. In a pinch, a bit of
saliva will work, but not as well. New masks may have a
residue on the faceplate that will contribute to fogging.
Carefully wash a new mask to remove any such coatings.
1.1. 2.2.Chapter 12: The Underwater World
12-2


The Snorkel
A snorkel is simply a short breathing tube from your
mouth to the back of your head that allows you to
breathe while looking down with your face in the
water. The simplest designs are shaped like a J with
a mouthpiece on the bent end. Other designs have
contoured bends to better fit around the head. Still
others have a flexible section near the mouthpiece.
Although flexible sections may be corrugated on the
outside, they should be smooth on the inside so that
water is not caught in the ridges. Some snorkels have
one-way purge values near the mouthpiece. Others
have “dry top” vents designed to keep out surface
splashes. Regardless of design, the tube should have
a diameter of about an inch (about the size of your
thumb) and not be over 14 inches or so in length.
A snorkel only works over short lengths. Never try
to breathe through a hose to greater depths. The
physics of the situation makes air exchange with the
surface impossible, and the chemistry of re-breathing
your own air causes problems. A few snorkel designs have flapper values at the top to
keep water out during submersion. Conventional purging techniques should be learned
before using such systems.
Attach the snorkel to the mask strap using a “keeper,” which comes in various designs.
Tucking the snorkel under the strap is not reliable and distorts the fit of the mask. The
snorkel may be attached to either side. Scuba divers attach the snorkel on the left to
avoid the regulator hose that comes over the right shoulder.
Fins
Fins are flexible, wedge-shaped flippers worn on the feet to improve the power of your kick. Blades come in a
variety of designs, some long and narrow, some split, some with louvers, all claiming various improvements in
efficiency. In general, the larger and more rigid the blade, the more power in the kick, but that also means tiring
more quickly. The most important considerations are a comfortable fit and ease of use.
Full-Face Snorkel Masks Prohibited
The Guide to Safe Scouting states full-face snorkel
masks (combinations of a built-in snorkel with a
mask that covers the mouth and nose) are prohibited
for Scouting America activities. Limited studies
concerned with breathing pressure, re-breathing of
CO₂, and difficulty of removal in urgent situations,
have found that some products may not pose hazards,
but suggest potential problems with other devices.Chapter 12: The Underwater World
12-3


There are two basic types of fins: closed-heel and open-heel. Closed-heel fins fit over
the entire foot and are often used for snorkeling in warm water. If one size is too tight,
and the next larger size is too loose, then a pair of socks worn with the larger size may
be useful. Some full-foot fins float, which can be handy if a fin is accidentally dropped
in deep water. (Not so good for scuba diving.)
Open-heel fins are designed to be worn with dive boots and are held in place by an
adjustable strap. They are a good choice if a wet suit is needed in cool temperatures,
but are also useful in warm water where booties provide foot protection on rocky
beaches.
Fins should be put on wet, and ideally only when ready to use. Occasionally, walking in
fins may be necessary—when wading through surf into deep water, for example. If so,
walk backward, slowly and carefully.
A slow, wide flutter kick is generally used both at the surface and under the water. A dolphin kick is a fun option
under the water. The arms may be used for surface dives but are not often needed for cruising. They may be held
at the side or in front. It is a recommended practice to hold at least one arm overhead when surfacing.
Vest
An inflatable vest is a useful tool that adds to the enjoyment and the safety of open-
water snorkeling. A few puffs of air in the oral inflation tube provide buoyancy while
swimming out to a site or viewing it from the surface. The air is released through the
same tube before a surface dive. Frequent use provides comfort and prevents exhaus-
tion. A vest is not simply a backup device reserved for emergency use only, although it
does provide an extra safeguard during a crisis.
Use of individual flotation devices (inflatable snorkeling vests or life jackets) is required
for Scouting America snorkeling activities whenever there is notable current or swells,
when the bottom is not visible from the surface due to vegetation or limited visibility
beyond eight feet, or when the activity is greater than 50 yards from shore or craft.Chapter 12: The Underwater World
12-4


Dive Flag
A dive flag should be used at open-water sites open to
other activities and may be required by local regula-
tions. Swimmers are hard to see in the water. A dive
flag alerts boat operators to avoid the area. It may be
displayed from a dive boat or attached to a float and
towed with the snorkeling party. Local codes often
require boats to stay a minimum distance from the
flag (typically 100 feet) and may also mandate the
size of the flag and how close snorkelers must stay to
it (typically 50 feet).
Accessories
Useful accessories include a whistle attached to the vest as a signaling
device, gloves to protect the hands, and protective clothing, either light
everyday wear or special dive “skins,” to limit sun exposure on the back
and legs. A mesh gear bag is handy for transporting gear to and from the
site and allows the gear to dry after cleaning. In cooler waters, a wet
suit provides comfort. However, a wet suit also provides buoyancy that
may make surface dives more difficult. Experienced skin divers may wear
weight belts with wet suits to achieve neutral buoyancy. Weights are not
recommended for anyone who has not been trained in their use by a
qualified instructor.
Snorkeling Skills Training Outline
The following sequence of exercises covers skills required for the Scouting
America Snorkeling award, but is not a complete lesson plan. Counselors
for the Snorkeling award need to review the requirements and decide how
to best cover the skills and the cognitive material. Some items such as dive
signals, the effect of water on sight and sound, and the need to equalize
pressure are listed as distinct requirements but may be introduced and
discussed as needed. Also note that some of the requirements cover items
discussed elsewhere in this text; e.g., hyperventilation and hypothermia.
Portions of this guide, particularly Chapter 12, may be reproduced and
distributed in print or digitally as a brochure for those working on the
award.
1. One buddy dons a mask and sits on the bottom in shallow water to
check for leaks. If needed, the other buddy may assist by standing
behind the first and applying slight pressure on the shoulders to prevent
floating. If the fit is acceptable, the pupil looks toward the underwater
instructor, gives the underwater OK sign, and then surfaces when the
instructor gives the UP sign (or before if needed). If the mask leaks
significantly, the person just stands up.Chapter 12: The Underwater World
12-5


2. The same buddy again sits on the bottom with the mask watching the instructor, who gives the Watch Me sign.
The instructor deliberately floods his/her mask by pulling it slightly away from the face. When the mask is
full, the instructor gives the OK sign, then the UP sign. After everyone is standing facing the instructor whose
mask is full of water, the mask is drained by pulling it slightly away from the face. The pupils then do the
exercise. This drill teaches the pupils not to become alarmed if the mask floods, but simply to surface and
drain the water there. It also shows the difference in vision when the mask is filled with water rather than
air. Once everyone is comfortable with the exercise, repeat 1 and 2 with the other buddy. (Note: Purging the
mask while submerged is a scuba skill that may be shown as a bonus, but is intentionally not required for the
Snorkeling award.)
3. Without the mask, one buddy bends over and breathes through the snorkel. When tapped on the shoulder by
the other buddy on signal from the instructor, the pupil squats to fill the snorkel with water, returns to the
facedown position, purges the snorkel with a blast of air, and then carefully resumes breathing. The exercise
is repeated several times before the other buddy is given a turn.
4. Without the mask or snorkel, one member of each buddy team puts on fins, slips into the water, grasps
the side in a prone position, and makes slow, wide kicks in place. Once adjusted to the flutter kick
with fins, the group walks backward away from the pool side or dock, turns, and swims on the surface using
only the legs until reaching the other end of the swimming area. The head is turned to the side for air if
needed. On the way back, have the group swim part of the distance slightly underwater. Repeat with the
other set of buddies.
5. Repeat 4, this time with mask and snorkel.
6. Move to the deep end of the swimming area. Demonstrate and practice a slide-in entry, a stride entry, and
exits at either the side or a ladder. For the slide-in entry, the person puts on fins from a sitting position on
the pool side, dock, dive-boat swim platform, or side of an inflatable and then slips into the water using the
arms for support.
For the stride entry into deep water, one leg is extended over the water from a standing position with one
hand holding the mask in place. The legs are brought together as they submerge. Have each person give the
surface OK sign after the stride entry. To exit at the side or a ladder, the fins are first removed and handed
up.
7. With everyone sitting on the side at the deep end, show how to pinch the nostrils through the mask. Have
everyone pinch their nose and blow gently until their ears feel full. Have them repeat several times. Then
have one set of buddies slide into the water, push down with one hand, and do the equalization procedure
underwater. Repeat with the other set of buddies.
8. Demonstrate and practice headfirst and feetfirst surface dives one set of buddies at a time, or individually
as needed. The arms lead the head during a headfirst descent and during headfirst ascents.
9. Set out a dive flag and have buddies work together to retrieve objects from the bottom, using DOWN signs as
appropriate.
10. Demonstrate and practice the displacement method of clearing a snorkel. (Mastery of this method is not
required for the Snorkeling award.)
11. Demonstrate the DISTRESS sign, followed by demonstration and practice of floating and double armpit tow.Chapter 12: The Underwater World
12-6


OK? OK on surface
Me or watch me
Go down, going down
Danger
Go up, going up
Stop.
OK? OK below surface
Slow down.
Something is wrong.
Come here.
Help (with whistle)
Diver SignalsChapter 12: The Underwater World
12-7


Dive Physics
Light. Light rays entering the eye are focused on the retina by the lens. However, with water rather than air
against the lens, light rays enter the eye at a slightly different angle, and the lens has a hard time compensating.
You can see underwater, but objects are out of focus. A mask provides an air space in front of the eye so that
light bends as normal at the air-to-eye interface and the eye can focus on underwater objects. However, now the
light rays bend entering the mask. The amount of bending is such that objects appear slightly larger and closer
than they would in air. Your mind normally is able to adjust quickly to the differences.
Water molecules and suspended particles in the water scatter and absorb light. The deeper you go, the darker
it gets, and colors become washed out. A dive light or camera flash will reveal the true colors if the water is
clear. The effect is not pronounced enough to hide the myriad colors of a tropical reef at depths easily reached
by snorkelers.
Sound. Sound travels about four times faster through water than through air. You can hear well underwater and
for long distances. However, your ears use time differences to determine direction, and that ability is distorted
underwater. Your ears will warn you of an approaching motorboat, but you may not know where it is coming
from. Also, sound bounces off layers with different velocity and density. Because the speed of sound in air and
air density are both so much less than those of water, sounds made above the surface probably won’t be heard
underwater. Therefore, you may not hear the whistle for a buddy check until you surface. (That’s just one reason
why buddies should take turns underwater.)
Pressure. Your body is used to a pressure of one atmosphere (the weight of the column of air from sea level
to outer space) of around 14 pounds per square inch. Because water weighs much more than air, pressure under-
water increases rapidly with depth. Every 33 feet or so, you add another atmosphere, but you may feel the dif-
ference at depths around 8 feet. As you descend, the water pressure outside your chest squeezes your lungs and
raises the air pressure in them. If air is free to travel from your lungs to your middle ear, the pressure of the air
on the inside of your eardrum will match the pressure of the water on the outside. Your ears won’t feel any pres-
sure difference because there is none. However, if the Eustachian tubes that connect your lungs to your middle
ear are blocked, the air pressure inside your ear remains the same as that at the surface, and pain will warn you
of the mismatched pressure.
Some people can equalize the pressure in their ears simply by swallowing or mov-
ing their jaw. Most people will need to hold their nose and blow gently to move air
through the Eustachian tube into the middle ear. That is why masks allow you to hold
your nose from the outside. You can check your ability to equalize before a dive by
holding your nose and blowing just enough for your ears to feel momentarily stuffy.
Such an exercise may make it easier to later adjust underwater. However, people
congested with a cold or allergy may not be able to equalize the pressure and should
not try hard to force it. You will still be able to enjoy snorkeling near the surface;
you just won’t be able to dive deeply. Return to the surface whenever the pressure
in your ears warns you to do so.
Like your ears, your mask is another enclosed volume of air that needs to adjust to pressure changes. Mask
“squeeze” is rare because the mask covers your nose, and breathing through your nose will equalize the pres-
sure. By now you should understand why swim goggles are not substitutes for a dive mask: there is no means
for pressure equalization. Some surface swimmers also use earplugs to keep water out of their ears. Snor-
kelers should not use earplugs since the pressure during a surface dive may force them deeper into the
ear canal.
Many people correctly associate the bends, caused by the release of gases dissolved in the blood, and
other hazards of scuba diving with changes in pressure. However, breath-hold divers don’t have the same
concerns. If you dive to the bottom of a pool while breathing from a scuba tank, you will need to clear your ears,Chapter 12: The Underwater World
12-8


but the situation is different. The pressure in your lungs goes up, not because they are squeezed, but because
your air supply is under pressure. You breathe through a special valve, or regulator, that changes the high air pres-
sure in your tank to match what you need at a given depth. You need to release the pressure in your lungs as you
ascend to prevent damage. Scuba divers should never hold their breath! Because skin divers don’t overpressure
their system from an external source, the same problems don’t arise. That is one reason swimmers are safe trying
shallow surface dives on their own, but should never use scuba gear without qualified instruction.
Freedivers who breath-hold dive to extreme depths may encounter another pressure related problem. Exercise
over time in the absence of breathing reduces the oxygen concentration in the blood through metabolism. Near
the end of a deep dive oxygen is running low. However, the increased pressure at 30 to 60 feet or more increases
the partial pressure of oxygen in the blood and may allow the diver to better utilize whatever oxygen remains.
On ascent, the partial pressure drops and may result in the lose of consciousness. That is, blackout may be pre-
cipitated on ascent from depth by depressurization. Given that possibility, freedivers remove snorkels from their
mouths for a descent as a safety precaution since the tube may offer a conduit to water entry if the person blacks
out. Skin divers who stay within a few feet of the surface don’t have that concern and often retain the snorkel
in their mouths over multiple cycles of breathing through the snorkel at the surface, doing a quick shallow dive,
and clearing the snorkel upon surfacing.
Blackouts from depressurization on ascent from depth often occur near the end of a deep free dive, that is, in
relatively shallow water, of 10 feet or so, after going below 30 feet. That lead to labeling the problem as shallow
water blackout. Unfortunately, that same term was also commonly applied to hypoxia (lack of oxygen available
to tissues) caused by hypocapnia (reduced carbon dioxide blood levels). Hypocapnia delays the urge to breathe,
is often associated with hyperventilation, and can lead to loss of consciousness at any depth, including the
relatively “deep” end of a pool at 10 feet. Water Safety USA and its associated members discourage using the
term shallow water blackout to avoid confusion, preferring instead hypoxic blackout which can include several
mechanisms. Note that the danger of hypoxic blackout is why Scouting America prohibits breath holding contests,
including training for or participation in competitive freediving.
Skin Diving - Freediving - Scuba Diving
Snorkels allow swimmers to breath freely while remaining face down at
the surface to observe underwater features. Skin diving is snorkeling while
making short, shallow dives for a closer look or to retrieve objects. In
Scouting, snorkeling and skin diving activities fall under Safe Swim Defense
policies with additional requirements for open water excursions. Scuba
diving utilities a self-contained air supply to stay under longer and to go
deeper. In Scouting, Scuba activities are governed by the Scouting America
Scuba policy.
Freediving uses advanced breathing techniques and diving skills to increase
time under water and to reach greater depths. Freediving activities include
various sports such as underwater football or hockey, mermaiding, and
various competitions with or without weights and fins. The Guide to Safe
Scouting does not specifically mention freediving as a Scouting activity.
However, it does fall under Safe Swim Defense. Since Scouting policies limit
depths to 12 feet in clear water and prohibit competitive breath holding
events, most if not all activities considered as freediving would not satisfy a
Scouting America SAFE review.
Anyone considering freediving activities outside of the Scouting program is
encouraged to seek training from an established agency, such as PADI.Chapter 12: The Underwater World
12-9


Snorkeling in Open Water
Bold print in this section is official Scouting America guidance from the Guide to Safe Scouting. Additional
comments are provided in regular font to expand on other aspects of Safe Swim Defense.
All ability groups may use snorkeling equipment within confined areas when following all Safe
Swim Defense policies, including visibility for underwater swimming.
Snorkeling is a swimming activity in which one must abide by Safe Swim Defense policies, but the
following additions to Safe Swim Defense apply when snorkeling is conducted in open water. “Open
water” denotes a temporary swimming area of flexible extent in a natural body of water that may
or may not be close to shore.
Qualified Supervision: In addition to Safe Swim Defense training and the 21-year-old minimum
age, the supervisor must be an experienced snorkeler. At a minimum, the supervisor must possess
skills and knowledge matching the Snorkeling Scouting America Award and have experience with
environments similar to those of the planned activity.
Participant Ability: All participants in open-water snorkeling must either complete Scouting
America’s Snorkeling award requirements or be a certified scuba diver. Open-water is limited to
Scouts BSA, Venturing and Sea Scouts.
Equipment: All snorkeling equipment must be properly fitted and in good repair. Full-face
snorkel masks (combinations of a built-in snorkel with a mask that covers the mouth and nose)
are prohibited. Use of individual flotation devices (inflatable snorkeling vests or life jackets) is
required whenever there is a noticeable current or swells, when the bottom is not visible from the
surface due to vegetation or limited visibility beyond 8 feet, or when the activity is greater than
50 yards from shore or craft.
A dive flag is required in areas shared by boats. Local regulations specifying the size of the flag
and how far snorkelers may be from it must be followed. Weight belts may not be worn unless the
participant has scuba certification. Dive boats should be equipped with radios and first-aid kits and
should deploy safety lines.
Supervision. Unit leaders may rely on the expertise of
other adults to supplement their knowledge and training.
For example, they may delegate activity guidance
and emergency response to a tour operator offering a
snorkeling program, provided they are satisfied that
the operator’s training and experience will provide
appropriate safeguards. However, registered leaders are
still required to have Safe Swim Defense training, review
health histories, confirm swimming abilities, and help
with discipline.
Safe Area. Training in the use of snorkeling equipment to qualify participants for open water activities should
be performed in clear water in a confined area that conforms to Safe Swim Defense guidelines. “Clear water”
implies pool-like visibility. “Confined area” denotes either a pool or an established summer camp swimming area
with direct access from the shore or a dock.
Safe conditions for open-water swimming and snorkeling
depend on water clarity, area definition, depth, access,
and other environmental factors. Snorkeling is limited to
clear water. “Open water” denotes a temporary swimming
area of flexible extent in a natural body of water that may
not be close to shore.Chapter 12: The Underwater World
12-10


An open-water snorkeling area need not have physical
boundary markers, but the activity should be restricted
within a specified distance of a point onshore, an anchored
vessel, a moving rescue craft, or a float with a dive flag
attached. Generally, a 50-foot radius is recommended, and
may be dictated by local regulations concerning the use
of a dive flag. The area covered by the snorkeling group
should be small enough to allow rapid assistance from res-
cue personnel.
Emergency response places limitations on safe water depth as well as water clarity and area. Response
personnel should be able to quickly and easily reach the bottom, locate, recover, and transport a sub-
merged victim to shore or vessel. At the start of the activity, and periodically if the group moves along a
reef or other feature, the response personnel should check their ability to see and to reach the bottom.
The group should be directed toward shallower water whenever the responders experience any difficulty.
(In Safe Swim Defense, 12 feet is designated as a reasonable maximum depth. In practice, slightly shal-
lower or deeper depths may be appropriate. Different personnel will be able to easily recover objects from
different depths, particularly if wearing fins. The practical way to confirm a safe depth is to test that the bottom
is within comfortable reach of all designated rescue personnel.)
Limited or distant access to the snorkeling area may require additional considerations. Underwater features
close to a sloping beach or near an anchored vessel are ideal. If the snorkeling site is a considerable distance
from a beach or permitted anchoring location, the ability to rest becomes important and may restrict the activity
close to shallow water or dictate the use of inflatable vests and/or small response craft. Tide tables should be
consulted in areas with large tidal changes, especially when beach access is at the base of a cliff. Snorkeling in a
river may require an exit point downstream of the entry.
Snorkeling should not be done if water depth, clarity, or temperature; boat traffic; waves; or current, weather,
marine life, or bottom conditions, including vegetation, are deemed unsafe by the qualified supervisor. Time in
the water should be adjusted based on water temperature and sun exposure. Snorkeling at night is limited to
lighted pools unless the activity is conducted at a Scouting America nationally accredited high-adventure base.
Equipment. Protective clothing may be needed in some environments. Gloves are appropriate in areas with sharp
rocks or encrusted structures. A shirt or a diver’s bodysuit will provide limited protection from sun, abrasion,
or coral burns and minor insulation in warm water. In temperate water, a partial or full wet suit may be worn.
Weight belts may not be used unless the participants are certified scuba divers.
Lifesaving equipment in good repair should be ready for immediate use by response personnel. A flotation device
is recommended, such as a rescue tube, bodyboard, or life jacket, supplemented, as appropriate, by reaching
and throwing devices and small craft. Dive boats should be equipped with radios and first aid kits, and should
deploy a safety line.
Response Personnel. The qualified supervisor is responsible
for designating personnel for emergency response when-
ever lifeguards are not provided by a facility or tour oper-
ator. The snorkeling party should be divided into groups
of two to eight swimmers with two responders, paired as
buddies, assigned to each group. (Units may be divided
by patrols or crews.) The responders should be competent
swimmers with basic water-rescue skills. Emergency pro-
cedures, including entries, exits, and the role of everyone
in the group, should be reviewed and practiced before the activity using rescue aids at the site. The respond-
ers should be stationed either afloat or ashore where they can see and hear all those in their group. Neither the
responders nor the swimmers should face into the sun to see the other. Snorkelers in a group should remain off the
same side of a vessel. Human powered inflatable or rigid dinghies, sit-on-top kayaks, or stand up paddleboards are
appropriate response craft. The responders and snorkelers should remain close enough for rapid rescue, generally
within 50 feet of one another. In some situations, the qualified supervisor may deem it appropriate for the respond-
ers to tow rescue aids while accompanying their group in the water.Chapter 12: The Underwater World
12-11


Responders are responsible for surveillance as well as rescue. If there is more than one group, then a separate lookout, who
may be the qualified supervisor, should coordinate the entire activity and monitor changing conditions. The lookout should
have audible or visible means, such as an air horn or flag, to recall all groups. If a boat is used to transport snorkelers to the
site, then at least one person should remain aboard who knows how to drive the boat and use the radio. A least one person
in the party must be trained in CPR.
It is the combined responsibility of the adult supervisor, the lookout, and the responders to know the number of people
in the water at all times and to make frequent visible confirmations of that number. Buddy boards and tags, or their
equivalent, must be used to account for everyone in the water.
Buddy System. All participants in snorkeling activities are paired
as buddies. Buddies should check each other’s equipment prior
to the activity and review hand signals. During the activity, they
remain close enough that they are constantly aware of their
buddy’s location and condition. Generally, buddies should take
turns making breath-holding dives. That is, one buddy remains
at the surface, floating with his mask in the water while breath-
ing through the snorkel, and keeps an eye on the buddy who is
down. When the diver surfaces, both buddies check their posi-
tion relative to the group before moving on or letting the other
buddy dive.
The adult supervisor, lookout, or responders may call buddy checks as needed to keep the buddies together. Buddy checks
may also be called to aid communication. Buddy pairs should be instructed to routinely watch for predetermined audible
and visual signals of a buddy check.
Sea Base Adventures
Sea Base is a national high adventure program operating out of five locations, 3 in the Florida Keys and 1
each in Abacos Bahamas and the U.S. Virgin Islands. Scouting units may join approximately 16,000 yearly
participants in 20 different programs such as sailing, remote island camping, coral reef restoration, scuba
certification and live aboard dive boats. Almost all the programs involve either snorkeling or scuba diving.
See https://seabaseha.org/ for details.Chapter 12: The Underwater World
12-12


Scuba
Swimming underwater using a compressed air source involves the use of sophisticated equipment. Simple actions, such
as holding the breath, can be deadly. Despite such complications, scuba activities as a whole have an excellent safety
record. That record can be attributed in part to quality training programs adopted by the industry. Scouting relies on such
training to provide safe scuba opportunities for its members.
Scuba training has several levels. Basic introductory experiences are conducted in pools with
a small number of participants supervised by a certified instructor. Those completing such
courses are given a taste of the sport under controlled conditions but are not prepared to dive
on their own. The Scouting America Scuba award for qualified Scouts BSA, Scouters, Sea Scouts
and Venturers is such a program. Requirements are found on the application in Appendix 3
of this manual. Additional information, including a brochure, is available online at https://
www.scouting.org/outdoor-programs/aquatics/scuba-bsa/.
Slightly more advanced introductory courses offered by training agencies conclude with an open-water dive under close
supervision. Open-water dives are not an option for the Scuba award.
Open-water certification courses provide the training needed for independent diving with a
buddy and are normally required before a person is allowed to fill or rent tanks. Numerous tour
operators and dive shops arrange group dive trips for people so certified. Standard open-water
certification is offered only to those over a certain age. Junior diver certification is available
for those below that age. Scouts BSA may obtain open-water certification as part of the Scuba
Diving merit badge. Sea Scouts and Venturing crews may participate in scuba certification
programs, appropriate to their age and current level of certification, that are conducted by
recognized agencies.
Many recreational specialty courses are available to those with open-water certification. These include underwater pho-
tography, wreck diving, cave diving, cold-water diving, and diver rescue. Divers with a sufficient number of logged dives
and additional training may qualify for a divemaster rating. Divemaster is the minimum qualification needed by the dive
supervisor when certified divers engage in unit dives during Scouting activities.
All scuba instruction must be conducted by certified scuba instructors. A few Scout camps offer training programs, either
the Scuba award, the merit badge, or both. The National High Adventure Sea Base offers both scuba certification and
dive programs. Training may also be arranged through local PADI, NAUI, SSI, IDEA, PDIC, or SDI dive shops. The use of
other dive training agencies is authorized under conditions found in the complete scuba policy statement that follows.
Scuba certification requires a level of preparation
for underwater diving that Scouting America seeks
for surface swimming via Safe Swim Defense and
skill instruction. Every certified scuba diver has
the knowledge, skills, and experience to recog-
nize and minimize environmental risks, to move
safely through the water, and to aid a buddy in
distress. Drownings during recreational swimming
would all but disappear if every member of the
swimming public knew and observed basic safety
rules, could swim well, and knew simple rescue
techniques for themselves and others.Chapter 12: The Underwater World
12-13


Youth members registered in Cub Scout programs are not authorized to use scuba in any activity.
Registered members of Scouts BSA and older Scouting America youth programs (age 11 and above) may partici-
pate in the introductory Scouting America award program and scuba certification programs conducted by recog-
nized agencies appropriate to their age and current level of certification.
Members of Scouting America programs, based on age, may participate in recreational group dives as unit, dis-
trict, or council activities, provided such dives are consistent with their certifications and under direct super-
vision of a responsible adult currently certified as a divemaster, assistant instructor, or higher rating from a
recognized agency.
Standards of the recognized scuba agencies require students for open-water certification programs to be at least
15 years of age but allow special certification programs for younger students. Since all instruction for Scouting
Scouting America Scuba Policy
Scouting America’s scuba diving policy is applicable to scuba training/certification courses, and recreational diving
activities by Scouting America members. In addition, council programs are subject to Scouting America National
Camp Accreditation Program (NCAP). Scouting America recognizes scuba industry standards and implements them
by using outside agencies for training and certification. Introductory scuba experience programs that are conducted
in a swimming pool only must at a minimum meet the requirements set forth by the instructor’s recognized scuba
training agency.
Training and Supervision
Any diver possessing, displaying, or using scuba (self-contained underwater breathing apparatus) in connection
with any Scouting-related activity must be either under the direct supervision of a recognized diving instructor or
currently certified by a recognized agency. Any introductory scuba experience program or training/certification
course must be conducted by a recognized diving instructor.
A recognized professional divemaster or instructor is any currently certified (renewed) divemaster or instructor
in good standing with an agency recognized by the RSTC (Recreational Scuba Training Council), with professional
liability insurance and is approved by the local Scouting America council.
Scuba Diving merit badge counselors are not required to be diving instructors. However, the merit badge require-
ment for earning an open water diver certification must be done under the supervision of a recognized diving
instructor.
Recreational diving activities by Scouting America groups whose members are currently certified must be directly
supervised by a responsible adult currently certified (renewed) as a divemaster, assistant instructor, or higher
rating from a recognized agency. Dive environments, equipment, depths, procedures, supervision, and buddy
assignments must be consistent with each individual’s certification.
Because dives by recreational divers may be infrequent, the divemaster or instructor supervising a Scouting
America scuba activity should screen participants prior to open-water activities and provide remedial instruction
and practice as appropriate. Such remedial instruction and practice should be in accordance with the policies
and standards of the divemaster’s or instructor’s agency for Scuba Review, Scuba Refresher, or similar program.
Diving using surface-supplied air systems is not authorized in connection with any Scouting America activity or
facility except when done under contract by commercial divers.
Age-Appropriate RestrictionsChapter 12: The Underwater World
12-14


America scuba programs must be conducted by professionals certified by a recognized agency, additional agency-
specific, age-related restrictions and protocols apply to students under 15 years of age.
The divemaster or instructor supervising a recreational dive by a Scouting America group must implement the
following policies. Additional restrictions and protocols from the certifying agency may apply:
Depths are limited to 40 feet for divers under 12 years of age and to 60 feet for divers 12 to 14 years of age.
Additional divemasters or instructors are present to maintain a ratio of one trained supervisor to four buddy pairs
(eight divers) containing one to four divers under 15 years of age.
In addition to the divemaster or trained supervisor, each diver under the age of 15 must have an assigned adult
diver who is certified as an open water diver or higher rating as part of the dive group. It is recommended that
no more than 3 youth under the age of 15 years of age may dive with the assigned adult diver.
Note: The 8:1 youth to trained supervisor ratio is a maximum ratio and should be reduced based upon weather,
water conditions including current, surface conditions and visibility, participants comfort and skill level and the
ability of the divemaster or instructor to control the group.
Medical Contraindications
Each scuba training agency recognized by Scouting America requires a specific health history form be completed
prior to enrollment in a certification program (e.g., RSTC Diver Medical Participant Questionnaire). Scouting
America requires review and approval of the completed form by a physician. Various risk factors identified on the
forms may exclude a person from scuba training, either temporarily or permanently. Risk factors include, but are
not limited to, ear and sinus problems, recent surgery, spontaneous pneumothorax, asthma or reactive airway
disease (RAD), seizure disorders, diabetes, cardiac disorders, leukemia, sickle-cell disorder, pregnancy, panic
disorders, and active psychosis.
The divemaster or instructor supervising a Scouting America recreational scuba activity/introductory scuba expe-
rience program must review the annual health information (i.e., Scouting America AHMR and RSTC Diver Medical
Participant Questionnaire) and evaluate risk conditions using medical standards consistent with those used by
their certifying agency and Scouting America. Additional tests or physician consultations may be required to con-
firm fitness for diving. Consultation with medical specialists knowledgeable about diving medicine (Divers Alert
Network’s 24-hour hotline) may be needed. If the scuba activity is conducted as part of a council program, then
approval to dive is also subject to review and confirmation by the camp health officer and/or medical director/
Council Health Supervisor.
The following medical contraindications are based on Scouting America operational considerations and may be
more conservative than those listed in the “Diving Medical Guidance to the Physician.”
1. Diabetes Mellitus. Diabetes must be well-controlled. Hypoglycemia can lead to unconsciousness and drowning
• Diving as part of an official Scouting activity is prohibited for the following:
a. For persons under age 18 with the diagnosis of diabetes.
b. Persons using insulin to control diabetes.
c. Persons with diabetes, who are non-insulin dependent and who have had recurrent problems and/
or hospitalizations for diabetic problems.
d. Persons with any HbA1c test greater than 7.0 in the previous 12 months.
e. Persons having a documented or suspected hypoglycemic event requiring treatment or assessment
in the previous 12 months.
• Diabetes is considered well-controlled when the following are met:Chapter 12: The Underwater World
12-15


a. The acceptable oral medications for diabetic control are as single agents only: metformin and met-
formin analogs; DPP-4 inhibitors (sitagliptin, vildagliptin, alogliptin, saxagliptin and linagliptin); or
SGLT2 inhibitors and analogies.
b. Persons who control their diabetes with exercise and diet (without the aid of medication, except
metformin) and document HbA1c test value less than 7.0 in the last 6 months may be approved to
scuba dive.
2. Seizures or Epilepsy. Seizures while snorkeling or scuba diving are extremely dangerous and often fatal.
• Diving as part of an official Scouting activity is prohibited for participants with a history of seizures.
• Prospective participants with a history of infant febrile seizures may be considered for diving after for-
mal consultation with a neurologist.
3. Asthma or Reactive Airway Disease.
• Diving as part of an official Scouting activity is prohibited for persons being treated for asthma or reac-
tive airway disease.
• Persons with a history of asthma who have been asymptomatic and have not used medications to control
asthma for five years or more may be allowed to scuba dive if resolution of asthma is specifically con-
firmed by their physician and includes provocative pulmonary function testing. Provocative testing can
include exercise, hypertonic saline, a hyperpnea test, etc.
4. Psychological and Emotional Difficulties (ADD, ADHD, anxiety, and depression). Any condition should be
well-controlled. Many medications are not compatible with scuba diving.
• Diving as part of an official Scouting activity is prohibited for the following:
a. Participants taking more than one medication for any of these conditions.
b. Participants with anxiety disorder requiring any medication.
5. Severe Risk Factors. Diving as part of an official Scouting activity is prohibited for persons with conditions
listed as “severe” by the Undersea & Hyperbaric Medical Society (UHMS). See: UHMS Diving Medical Guidance
to the Physician (2020).
Youth, parents, dive supervisors, and physicians with questions or concerns about diving with specific medical
conditions should consult the UHMS Diving Medical Guidance to the Physician, Recreational Scuba Training Council
(RSTC) and the Divers Alert Network (DAN). DAN medical professionals are available for non-emergency consulta-
tion by telephone at 919-684-2948 during business hours or via email.
Recognized Agencies
Recognized agencies are:
• PADI: Professional Association of Diving Instructors
• NAUI: National Association of Underwater Instructors
• SSI: Scuba Schools International
• IDEA: International Diving Educators Association
• PDIC: Professional Diving Instructors Corporation
• SDI/TDI: Scuba Diving International
• YMCA Scuba Program (discontinued in 2008, but certification cards are still recognized)
• NASDS: National Association of Scuba Diving Schools (merged with SSI, but certification cards are still
recognized)
• IANTD: International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers
• RAID: Rebreather Association of International Divers
• SNSI: Scuba and Nitrox Safety International
• NASE: National Academy of Scuba EducatorsChapter 12: The Underwater World
12-16


In addition to the agencies listed by name, any current member of the World Recreational Scuba Training Council
(WRSTC), which includes all RSTC members, is also recognized.
Camp Scuba Programs
Detailed standards for conducting scuba programs at national or council camps are contained in the latest version of
the National Camp Accreditation Program (NCAP) standards. Highlights include:
• Scuba programs offered at Scouting America camps must be conducted in a safe manner in accordance with
the Guide to Safe Scouting, the Scouting America Scuba Policy and applicable industry requirements.
• Unless the camp is a nationally accredited scuba adventure program, camp scuba programs must be supervised
by a recognized scuba contractor meeting the requirements of the NCAP standards.
• Local council programs may not compress or sell air for scuba use, or sell, rent, or loan scuba equipment
(scuba cylinders, regulators, gauges, dive computers, weights, or BCDs). All air and equipment for local
council program use must be obtained from professional sources (dive stores, resorts, dive boats, etc.)
affiliated with a scuba agency recognized by Scouting America. Use of personal air or equipment is not
authorized.
• If dive boats are used in the program, NCAP standards specify license and certification requirements for
both vessels and crew.Chapter 12: The Underwater World
12-17


1.0 List the eight points of Safe Swim Defense.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
2.1 Maximum recommended depth for the
swimmer area in clear water is
A. 8 feet
B. 10 feet
C. 12 feet
D. 14 feet
2.2 Beginners should be restricted to water
depths
A. Waist deep
B. Chest deep
C. Chin deep
D. Just over the head
2.3 Nonswimmers should be restricted to water
depths no more than
A. Knee deep
B. Waist to chest deep
C. Chin deep
D. Just over the head
3.1 Water depth for headfirst entry from pool
side into clear water must be at least
A. 5 feet
B. 7 feet
C. 9 feet
D. 11 feet
3.2 Water depth for headfirst entry from a low
height (around 3 feet) must be
A. At least 12 feet in murky water
B. At least 8 feet in clear water
C. Consistent with state regulations for
diving boards
D. At least 12 feet in clear water
3.3 Feetfirst entry should be limited to heights
no greater than
A. Knee high
B. Waist high
C. Chest high
D. Head high
4.1 Underwater swimming is prohibited
A. In water less than 3 feet deep
B. At night
C. In murky or turbid water
D. When water temperature is less than 70°
4.2 Swimming activity must be curtailed when
A. The sky is overcast
B. There is intermittent drizzle
C. There is thunder or lightning
D. All of these
4.3 Having swimmers wear life jackets should
be considered
A. In clear water over 12 feet deep
B. In murky water over head height
C. In weak current
D. All of these
5.1 A buddy check is conducted
A. Approximately every 10 minutes
B. When Scouts are disruptive
C. During an emergency
D. For all of these
Review Questions for Section II
R-1
Review Questions for Section II


5.2 The primary purpose of a buddy check is to
A. Check the number of people in the water
B. Reinforce the buddy concept
C. Signal the end of the period
D. Clear the area in an emergency
5.3 During a unit swim, a record of buddies and
their ability groups may be kept by
A. Using buddy tags and a portable buddy board
B. Using sticks with printed names
C. Using a written list
D. Any of these
6.1 Surveillance (that is, monitoring swimmers
for signs of trouble) is the responsibility of
A. The lifeguards
B. The lookout
C. Each buddy
D. All of these
6.2 A lookout should be
A. A strong swimmer
B. Provided with rescue equipment
C. Coached in effective surveillance techniques
D. All of these
6.3 Rescue personnel (lifeguards) should be
A. Strong swimmers
B. Provided with rescue equipment
C. Coached in appropriate rescue techniques
D. All of these
7.1 Generally, headfirst diving is appropriate at
A. Above ground pools
B. Small backyard pools
C. An ocean beach
D. None of these
7.2 Which of these is a possible concern at an
above ground pool?
A. Depth is too shallow for beginner and
swimmer areas
B. Water clarity
C. Current
D. The water is too deep for some nonswimmers
7.3 Emergency action plans for backyard pools
should include
A. A quick, reliable means to summon EMS
B. Use of rescue equipment
C. Means for removing an incapacitated per-
son from the water
D. All of these
8.1 Everyone in the unit should be involved in
setting up a safe swim area.
T F
8.2 A lookout is needed even when a small
group is setting up a swim area.
T F
8.3 In turbid water, a single swimmer with a
lifeline checks deepwater areas by doing a
headfirst surface dive and swimming along
the bottom with arms extended.
T F
9.1 A unit with only beginners and swimmers
needs three ability group areas at a
temporary lakefront setting.
T F
9.2 If bottom slopes and depths are less than
ideal, ability groups may swim together in
an area appropriate for those of the lesser
classification.
T F
9.3 Access to the swimmers area should be
through the nonswimmer and beginner
areas.
T F
10.1 At a bend in a river, the deepest water
and strongest current is
A. On the inside of the curve
B. Midstream
C. On the outside of the curve
D. Totally unpredictable
R-2 Review Questions for Section II


10.2 The preferred location for a swimming
area on a river is often
A. On the upstream end of a sandbar on the
inside of a bend
B. On the protected downstream end of a
sandbar on the inside of a bend
C. In the deeper water on the outside of a
xxx bend
D. In an area where the water covers grass
rather than sand
10.3 Which of the following is a sign that a river
is higher than normal?
A. Exposed sandbars
B. Strainers along the cut bank
C. Water flowing over grass
D. Debris resting high in trees
11.1 Which of the following is a major safety
concern at an ocean beach, responsible
for more rescues than any other?
A. Undertow
B. Drift current
C. Rip current
D. Surf
11.2 Which of the following are potential haz-
ards, particularly for nonswimmers?
A. Backwash
B. Troughs caused by drift currents
C. Tidal shelf
D. All of the above
11.3 Of the following, which is most suitable
for swimming?
A. Rip currents
B. Spilling waves
C. Plunging waves
D. Surging waves
12.1 Which of the following is a reasonable
precaution when swimming from a boat in
deep water with a slight current?
A. Swimmers only
B. Wearing a life jacket
C. Swimming up-current of a safety line
D. All of the above
12.2 When swimming from a large boat, rescue
personnel may be stationed
A. On the vessel
B. In a dinghy
C. On a paddleboard
D. Any of the above as appropriate
12.3 Which of the following is not allowed?
A. Distance swimming along a protected,
closed circuit
B. Venturing triathlon training
C. Distance swimming in open water
accompanied by a lone person in a rowboat
D. A and C
13.1 For a unit swim at a public pool with pro-
fessional lifeguards on duty:
A. Safe Swim Defense principles don’t apply
B. Unit rescue personnel need not be
deployed
C. The buddy system is not used
D. All of these
13.2 At a location with professional lifeguards,
the unit leader is responsible for
A. Taking any precautions indicated by
medical concerns
B. Implementing a buddy system
C. Restricting nonswimmers to shallow water
D. All of the above
13.3 At a location with professional lifeguards,
which of the following is not a common
expectation of the lifeguards?
A. Surveillance for drowning situations
B. Implementing emergency action plans,
including water rescue
C. Administering and enforcing swimmer
classifications
D. Enforcing rules against diving in
shallow water
14.1 Ideally, youth should learn basic swimming
skills before Scouts BSA age, that is, early
during Cub Scouting.
T F
R-3
Review Questions for Section II


14.2 Attention spans and motivations are the
same for 6- and 16- year old learners.
T F
14.3 Basic swimming skills are always best
taught in a large group by a highly trained
professional rather than individually by a
knowledgeable parent.
T F
15.1 All conscious drowning victims will call out
for help.
T F
15.2 A child apparently playing in deep water
could actually be drowning.
T F
15.3 Nonswimmers falling off an air mattress
into deep water can generally save them-
selves by lunging for the float.
T F
16.1 A person may lose consciousness and sub-
merge due to
A. Drowning
B. A heart attack
C. A diving injury
D. All of the above
16.2 While speedy rescue is very important in
any situation, which of the following is the
most urgent?
A. A tired swimmer barely able to stay afloat
B. A distressed swimmer calling for help
C. A submerged passive victim
D. A swimmer caught in a current
16.3 For which type of victim will rescue
always involve physical contact?
A. A tired swimmer
B. A distressed swimmer
C. An actively drowning nonswimmer
D. A passive, submerged victim
17.1 A throwing rescue is normally not useful
for which types of victims?
A. Distressed swimmers
B. Endangered swimmers
C. Submerged or spinal injury victims
D. Tired swimmers
17.2 The preferred order of rescue methods is
A. Wade, row, go
B. Reach, wade, row, go
C. Reach, throw, row, go
D. Extension, tow, carry
17.3 A reach pole is swept to a victim from the
side to
A. Prevent the victim from lunging into the
end of the pole
B. Bring the pole into physical contact with
an active drowning victim
C. A and B
D. None of the above; the pole should be
extended directly toward the victim’s
chest
18.1 Which throwing device is generally easier
to use effectively?
A. A ring buoy without a line
B. A ring buoy with line attached
C. A throw bag
D. A heaving line
18.2 The preferred way to coil a line is
A. Wrapping between the hand and elbow
B. Moving both hands apart and together
C. Fixing one hand and moving in and out
with the other
D. Laying coils at your feet
18.3 When retrieving a ring buoy for a second
attempt, the line should be
A. Coiled as before
B. Dropped loosely at the feet
C. Left floating in the water
D. Wrapped around the buoy
R-4 Review Questions for Section II


19.1 Rowing rescues are more effectivewith
two people in separate boats rather than
two people in a single boat.
T F
19.2 Conscious victims should be lifted into a
rescue boat as soon as possible.
T F
19.3 An effective rowing assist should incorpo-
rate reaching and throwing devices.
T F
20.1 In-water rescues can be divided into non-
contact and contact rescues..
T F
20.2 Noncontact rescues are used for uncon-
scious subjects.
T F
20.3 Untrained, poor swimmers should avoid
in-water rescue attempts.
T F
21.1 A flotation aid is recommended in case an
in-water assist is needed.
T F
21.2 The rescuer always grasps the victim during an
in-water rescue.
T F
21.3 Suggested entries include long shallow
dives for an in-water rescue.
T F
22.1 During an accompanied rescue, the res-
cuer releases the flotation aid after shov-
ing it into the victim’s grasp because
A. The victim may have better support
B. The victim will tend to grasp the device
rather than the rescuer
C. A tow can still be initiated if needed
D. All of the above
22.2 After approaching a victim in an accompa-
nied rescue them
A. Help is at hand
B. You will push them a float
C. They should grasp the float firmly
D. All of the above
22.3 A contact assist is needed when the victim
cannot grasp a flotation aid due to
A. Unconsciousness
B. A stroke or other debilitating condition
C. Numbness due to cold
D. Any of the above, plus others
23.1 The wrist tow can be used if
A. The victim is at the surface
B. The victim is floating beneath the surface
C. The victim is resting facedown on the
bottom
D. All of the above
23.2 The wrist tow may be used
A. When the victim is wearing a life jacket
B. When the victim is conscious, but passive
C. As a tow in rough water
D. All of the above
23.3 The wrist tow may be used
A. From a front approach
B. To place the victim across a flotation device
C. For unconscious victims without spinal injury
D. All of the above
24.1 Prompt medical attention is needed for all
submerged victims recovered unresponsive
from the bottom.
T F
24.2 If a swimmer is missing in deep, turbid
water, all members of the unit should
quickly begin a random search of the
bottom.
T F
R-5
Review Questions for Section II


24.3 Required life jacket use is a reasonable
precaution in deep, turbid water if the unit
is poorly prepared to conduct an organized
underwater search.
T F
25.1 A spinal injury should be suspected when
A. A person’s head strikes anything but
the water
B. A person is struck with a foam noodle
C. The rescuer does a head-hold escape
D. Any of the above
25.2 If a spinal injury is indicated for a passive,
face-down person, first
A. Check for breathing and circulation
B. Ask the person to gently roll his head
C. Ask if the person feels numbness
D. Use in-line stabilization to turn the person
face up and summon EMS
25.3 In-line stabilization using head splint support
may not be appropriate when the victim
A. Has arms to the side
B. Has only one arm
C. Is faceup in deep water
D. Is facedown in shallow water
26.1 The line-and-tender procedure requires two
swimmers, a line, and a life jacket.
T F
26.2 The line-and-tender procedure requires
minimal equipment and training.
T F
26.3 The line-and-tender procedure should be
familiar to many Scouts BSA since it is
included in rank advancement.
T F
27.1 The preventive elements of Safe Swim
Defense minimize the need for res-
cues.
T F
27.2 Preventive elements of Safe Swim Defense
eliminate the need for rescues.
T F
27.3 In urban settings, quick EMS response is
sufficient preparation for
emergencies.
T F
28.1 Essential elements in unit swim protection
include
A. Continuous, effective monitoring of
xxxxeveryone
B. Persons trained in rescue procedures
C. An emergency action plan, including
communication with EMS
D. All of the above
28.2 Swimmers are continuously surveyed by
A. The buddy
B. The lookout
C. Response personnel (lifeguards)
D. All of the above
28.3 For large groups, surveillance areas assigned
the safety team should be
A. Redundant total coverage by all personnel
B. Individual zones with slight overlap
C. Individual zones with total overlap
D. Total coverage combined with
overlapping zones
29.1 Response personnel are generally best
deployed as
A. Individuals watching separate zones
B. Individuals whose scans include responders
in adjacent zones
C. Buddy pairs watching overlapping areas and
each other
D. Buddy pairs watching separate zones
29.2 During a rescue, the rescuer’s buddy
A. Stands by to assist
B. Provides backup surveillance of the res-
cuer’s assigned zone
C. Helps the lookout clear the area
D. Reacts according to the emergency action
plan
R-6 Review Questions for Section II


29.3 Which of the following are inappropriate
functions of safety team members on duty?
A. Continuous surveillance of assigned areas
B. Intervening to stop rule infractions or to
provide emergency aid
C. Refereeing a game or assisting a person with
a skill
D. Providing backup surveillance and supervision
of swimmers not involved in a rescue
situation
30.1 Basic signals should include those for:
A. Initiating a buddy check
B. Ending the swim activity
C. Emergency response needed
D. A and C
30.2 Whistles should be used frequently at unit
swim events
T F
30.3 Dialing 9-1-1 is always the appropriate way to
contact off-site emergency medical services
T F
31.1 The aquatic activity Emergency Action Plan
should include:
A. Designation of safety team members
B. Likely emergencies that could happen
C. Communication signals
D. All of the above
31.2 Safety team members should wait for direc-
tion from the activity supervisor before
responding to an emergency.
T F
31.3 The Safety Team has how many primary
duties?
A. 3
B. 4
C. 5
D. 6
32.1 A safety team needs no other equipment to
protect a unit swim
T F
32.2 Suggested items for a Safe Swim Defense kit
include:
A. Cell phone
B. Boundary area markers
C. Rescue line
D. All of the above
32.3 Round buddy tags are required for tracking
buddies during a unit swim
T F
33.1 Snorkeling safety guidelines extend Safe
Swim Defense by adding which of the
following?
A. Consideration of equipment
B. Limitations on water clarity for training
C. Training requirements for open-water snorkeling
D. All of the above
33.2 The instructor for the Scuba award must have
council approval and have current certifica-
tion by a recognized agency as
A. Open-water diver
B. Divemaster
C. Scuba instructor
D. Any of the above
33.3 Scouting America has a Scuba Policy that
defines aspects for scuba diving done as a
Scouting activity.
T F
R-7
Review Questions for Section II


Boating Skills
and Safety
Section
III





Safety Afloat
All boating activities in Scouting are required to follow the nine basic principles known collectively as Safety Afloat.
During the 1970s, public interest in river canoeing experienced a huge surge in popularity with a corresponding increase
in the number of fatalities. Scouting’s response was to devise a set of safety guidelines for float trips based on the
successful Safe Swim Defense plan. The emphasis is on accident prevention through proper preparation and skill.
A unit that follows Safety Afloat may expect a safe, enjoyable experience.
A summary of Safety Afloat appears in Chapter 3. The complete text is given here in bold type with additional
explanatory material in regular print. The most up-to-date version is maintained online at this link: Safety Afloat,
or via the QR code. Training is provided online at my.scouting.org.
13Chapter


Chapter 13: Safety Afloat13-2
Scouting America groups shall use Safety Afloat for all boating activities. Adult leaders supervising activities afloat
must have completed Safety Afloat training within the previous two years. Cub Scout activities afloat are limited
to council, district, pack, or den events that do not include moving water or float trips (expeditions). Safety
Afloat standards apply to the use of canoes, kayaks, rowboats, rafts, floating tubes, sailboats, motorboats
(including waterskiing), and other small craft, but do not apply to transportation on large commercial vessels
such as ferries and cruise ships. Parasailing (being towed airborne behind a boat using a parachute), kite-
surfing (using a wakeboard towed by a kite), and unit-level recreational use of personal watercraft (small sit-
on-top motorboats propelled by water jets) are not authorized Scouting America activities.
Safety Afloat training may be obtained from my.scouting.org, at council summer camps, and at other council and
district training events. Additional guidance on appropriate skill levels and training resources is provided in
Aquatics Supervision.
1. Qualified Supervision
All activity afloat must be supervised by a mature and conscientious adult age 21 or older who understands
and knowingly accepts responsibility for the well-being and safety of those in his or her care and who is
trained in and committed to compliance with the nine points of Scouting America’s Safety Afloat. That
supervisor must be skilled in the safe operation of the craft for the specific activity, knowledgeable in
accident prevention, and prepared for emergency situations. If the adult with Safety Afloat training lacks
the necessary boat operating and safety skills, then they may serve as the supervisor only if assisted by
other adults, camp staff personnel, or professional tour guides who have the appropriate skills. Additional
leadership is provided in ratios of one trained adult, staff member, or guide per 10 participants. For Cub
Scouts, the leadership ratio is one trained adult, staff member, or guide per five participants. At least one
leader must be trained in first aid including CPR. Any swimming done in conjunction with the activity afloat
must be supervised in accordance with Scouting America’s Safe Swim Defense standards. In when swimming
is conducted in conjunction with towed activities or from a motorized watercraft, a designated observer or
lookout must be no less than 18 years of age and be present on the watercraft. It is strongly recommended
that all units have at least one adult or older youth member currently trained in Scouting America’s Aquatics
Supervision: Paddle Craft Safety to assist in the planning and conduct of all activities afloat.
The purpose of this publication is to provide unit leaders with sufficient information to confidently know
when they meet expectations set forth in the first point. This book also serves as the text for training in
Scouting America’s Paddle Craft Safety.
2. Personal Health Review
A complete health history is required of all participants as evidence of fitness for boating activities.
Forms for minors must be signed by a parent or legal guardian. Participants should be asked to relate
any recent incidents of illness or injury just prior to the activity. Supervision and protection should
be adjusted to anticipate any potential risks associated with individual health conditions. For
significant health conditions, the adult supervisor should require an examination by a physician
and consult with parent, guardian, or caregiver for appropriate precautions.
This important item is shared with Safe Swim Defense and was covered in Chapter 4.


Chapter 13: Safety Afloat13-3
3. Swimming Ability
Operation of any boat on a float trip is limited to youth and adults who have completed the Scouting America
swimmer classification test. Swimmers must complete the following test, which should be administered
annually.
Jump feetfirst into water over the head in depth. Level off and swim 75 yards in a strong manner using one
or more of the following strokes: sidestroke, breaststroke, trudgen, or crawl; then swim 25 yards using an
easy, resting backstroke. The 100 yards must be completed in one swim without stops and must include at
least one sharp turn. After completing the swim, rest by floating.
For activity afloat, those not classified as a swimmer are limited to multiperson craft during outings or float
trips on calm water with little likelihood of capsizing or falling overboard. They may operate a fixed-seat
rowboat or pedal boat accompanied by a buddy who is a swimmer. They may paddle or ride in a canoe or
other paddle craft with an adult swimmer skilled in that craft as a buddy. They may ride as part of a group
on a motorboat or sailboat operated by a skilled adult.
Note that this directive allows flexibility for those with poor swimming skills to participate, primarily as
passengers, in various situations. However, only swimmers may participate in whitewater activities.
4. Life Jackets
Properly fitted life jackets with U.S. Coast Guard approval for the activity must be worn by all persons while
boating. Check the life-jacket label for performance, turning ability, and warnings. Some life jackets are
NOT approved for water skiing, wakeboarding, tubing, personal watercraft, or whitewater paddling.
For vessels over 20 feet in length, life jackets need not be worn when participants are below deck or on deck
when the qualified supervisor aboard the vessel determines that it is prudent to abide by less-restrictive state
and federal regulations concerning the use and storage of life jackets, for example, when a cruising vessel
with safety rails is at anchor. All participants not classified as swimmers must wear a life jacket when on deck
under way.
Life jackets need not be worn when an activity falls under Safe Swim Defense guidelines—for example, when
an inflated raft is used in a pool or when snorkeling from an anchored craft.
Life jackets with tears and inoperable buckles do not meet Coast Guard standards. Proper fit, including
correct sizing and fastening, is just as important as Coast Guard approval. The Chapter 14 provides
additional information on life jacket selection, fit, and use.
5. Buddy System
All participants in an activity afloat are paired as buddies who are always aware of each other’s situation and
prepared to sound an alarm and lend assistance immediately when needed. When several craft are used on
a float trip, each boat on the water should have a “buddy boat.” All buddy pairs must be accounted for at
regular intervals during the activity and checked off the water by the qualified supervisor at the conclusion
of the activity. Buddies either ride in the same boat or stay near one another in single-person craft.
Buddy tags and boards are often used at Scout summer camps where boating is done in a limited area with the
same launch and landing site. That specific tracking system is not required for a unit float trip, but the unit
leader must have an unambiguous means to ensure that everyone who ventures on the water also gets off the
water when expected.


Chapter 13: Safety Afloat13-4
6. Skill Proficiency
Everyone in an activity afloat must have sufficient knowledge and skill to participate safely. Passengers should
know how their movement affects boat stability and have a basic understanding of self-rescue. Boat operators
must meet government requirements, be able to maintain control of their craft, know how changes in the
environment influence that control, and undertake activities only that are within their personal and group
capabilities.
Content of training exercises should be appropriate for the age, size, and experience of the participants,
and should cover basic skills on calm water of limited extent before proceeding to advanced skills involving
current, waves, high winds, or extended distance. At a minimum, instructors for canoes and kayaks should be
able to demonstrate the handling and rescue skills required for Aquatics Supervision: Paddle Craft Safety. All
instructors must have at least one assistant who can recognize and respond appropriately if the instructor’s
safety is compromised.
Anyone engaged in recreational boating using human-powered craft on flatwater ponds or controlled lake areas
free of conflicting activities should be instructed in basic safety procedures prior to launch, and allowed to
proceed after they have demonstrated the ability to control the boat adequately to return to shore at will.
For recreational sailing, at least one person aboard should be able to demonstrate basic sailing proficiency
(tacking, reaching, and running) sufficient to return the boat to the launch point. Extended cruising on a large
sailboat requires either a professional captain or an adult with sufficient experience to qualify as a bareboat
skipper.
Motorboats may be operated by youth, subject to state requirements, only when accompanied in the boat by an
experienced leader or camp staff member who meets state requirements for motorboat operation. Extended
cruising on a large powerboat requires either a professional captain or an adult with similar qualifications.
Before a unit using human-powered craft controlled by youth embarks on a float trip or excursion that covers
an extended distance or lasts longer than four hours, each participant should either receive a minimum of three
hours training and supervised practice or demonstrate proficiency in maneuvering the craft effectively over a 100-
yard course and recovering from a capsize.
Self-guided unit trips on Class III (including III- and III+) whitewater may only be done after all participants
have received American Canoe Association or equivalent training for the class of water and type of craft
involved. Unit trips on whitewater sections of rivers rated Class IV (including III- and III+) are only allowed in
rafts with a professionally trained guide in each raft. Trips above Class IV are not allowed.
Skill is an important component for an enjoyable, safe activity afloat. Because skills must be learned,
Safety Afloat provides for novice participation in a controlled, safe teaching environment with progressively
more skill expected as the participant moves to independent control of the craft in a remote setting. The
specific skills required for different craft in various situations are too diverse to detail in a general policy
statement. Instead, Safety Afloat depends on unit leadership’s prior awareness of skill levels appropriate for
an activity. Leaders without that awareness should recruit experienced assistants with such knowledge to
supervise an event afloat. Chapters that follow address various skills needed for different craft, as well as
river classification systems.


Chapter 13: Safety Afloat13-5
7. Planning
Proper planning is necessary to ensure a safe, enjoyable exercise afloat. All plans should include a scheduled
itinerary, notification of appropriate parties, communication arrangements, contingencies in case of foul weather
or equipment failure, and emergency response options.
Preparation. Any boating activity requires access to the proper equipment and transportation of gear and
participants to the site. Determine what state and local regulations are applicable. Get permission to use
or cross private property. Determine whether personal resources will be used or whether outfitters will
supply equipment, food, and shuttle services. Lists of group and personal equipment and supplies must be
compiled and checked. Even short trips require selecting a route, checking water levels, and determin-
ing alternative pull-out locations. Changes in water level, especially on moving water, may pose significant,
variable safety concerns. Obtain current charts and information about the waterway and consult those who have
traveled the route recently.
Float Plan. Complete the preparation by writing a detailed itinerary, or float plan, noting put-in and pull-
out locations and waypoints, along with the approximate time the group should arrive at each. Travel time
should be estimated generously.
Notification. File the float plan with parents, the local council office if traveling on running water, and local
authorities if appropriate. Assign a member of the unit committee to alert authorities if prearranged check-
ins are overdue. Make sure everyone is promptly notified when the trip is concluded.
Weather. Check the weather forecast just before setting out, and keep an alert weather eye. Anticipate
changes and bring all craft ashore when rough weather threatens. Wait at least 30 minutes before resuming
activities after the last incidence of thunder or lightning.
Contingencies. Planning must identify possible emergencies and other circumstances that could force a
change of plans. Develop alternative plans for each situation. Identify local emergency resources such as
EMS systems, sheriff’s departments, or ranger stations. Check your primary communication system, and
identify backups, such as the nearest residence to a campsite. Cell phones and radios may lose coverage,
run out of power, or suffer water damage.
This item reinforces the Scout motto: Be Prepared.


Chapter 13: Safety Afloat13-6
8. Equipment
All craft must be suitable for the activity, be seaworthy, and float if capsized. All craft and equipment
must meet regulatory standards, be properly sized, and be in good repair. Spares, repair materials, and
emergency gear must be carried as appropriate. Life jackets and paddles must be sized to the participants.
Properly designed and fitted helmets must be worn when running rapids rated Class II (including II- and II+)
and above. Emergency equipment such as throw bags, signal devices, flashlights, heat sources, first aid kits,
radios, and maps must be ready for use. Spare equipment, repair materials, extra food and water, and dry
clothes should be appropriate for the activity. All gear should be stowed to prevent loss and water damage.
For float trips with multiple craft, the number of craft should be sufficient to carry the party if a boat is
disabled, and critical supplies should be divided among the craft.
Proper equipment depends on the kind of craft as well as the type and duration of the activity. Someone
who has conducted a similar activity should be a valuable resource—experience is hard to beat.
9. Discipline
Rules are effective only when followed. All participants should know, understand, and respect the rules
and procedures for safe boating activities provided by Safety Afloat guidelines. Applicable rules should
be discussed prior to the outing and reviewed for all participants near the boarding area just before the
activity afloat begins. People are more likely to follow directions when they know the reasons for rules and
procedures. Consistent, impartially applied rules supported by skill and good judgment provide stepping
stones to a safe, enjoyable outing.
Like the bread that holds together a sandwich, discipline and qualified supervision are the foundation and
cover that make safe Scouting a reality. Scouts are accustomed to following rules in other situations and
will likely also be well-behaved during boating events. That is particularly true if the Scouts are reminded
of their dual responsibility for their own safety and that of others in the unit. Youth leaders should share
in decisions and guidance. However, youthful exuberance may at times cause momentary lapses in atten-
tion. That is, fun and a sense of adventure can overwhelm common sense. Dealing with such situations is
a learning experience for youth and leaders, but leaders should realize that youngsters cannot always be
expected to act rationally in the interest of their own safety. Adult leaders should therefore accept that
they, not the Scouts, are ultimately responsible for implementing Scouting America rules and procedures.


Life Jackets
State regulations mandate that children under a specific age, ranging from six to seventeen, must wear a life
jacket on recreational boats. Most set the limit for those twelve and under to match regulations for waters under
federal jurisdiction. Exceptions to mandatory wear exist if the child is below deck, in an enclosed cabin, or if the
boat is not under way. An appropriate, easily accessible life jacket must be carried for all adults, including those
towed behind the craft. Scouting America policy is more stringent: Properly fitted life jackets with U.S.
Coast Guard approval for the activity must be worn by all persons while boating.
This chapter covers how to determine if a life jacket is the proper size, is adjusted for a good fit, and is approved
for a specific activity, such as water skiing, personal watercraft,or whitewater paddling. The first step in life
jacket selection is to read the label. Any life jacket used according to the label is appropriate for Scouting
America boating activities. However, Level 70 devices without exclusion icons are generally recommended.
Note: For vessels over 20 feet in length, Scouting America policy states that life jackets need not be worn when
participants are below deck or on deck when the qualified supervisor aboard the vessel determines that it is
prudent to abide by less-restrictive state and federal regulations concerning the use and storage of life jackets,
for example, when a cruising vessel with safety rails is at anch
Chapter
14
According to the U.S. Coast Guard, 87 % of those who drown while boating in 2023 were not wearing a life jacket.
That’s 7 out of 8. Statistics for previous years are very similar. Many of those who drown while boating reportedly
knew how to swim.
WEAR YOUR LIFE JACKET! It’s policy and the smart thing to do.


Chapter 14: Life Jackets
14-2
Labels
Standards dictate the content of labels printed on
life jackets. A generic version is provided below and
explained under headings that follow. Many labels
have duplicate information in Spanish and/or French.
A different label was used prior to 2020. Life jackets
with older labels are still approved so long as they are
in good condition.
Placard
A removable, one-page, two-sided placard is required
to be attached to each life jacket prior to purchase to
help users understand the icons and select the right
device.


Chapter 14: Life Jackets
14-3
Terminology
Various terms are used for wearable safety devices that provide
buoyancy to keep a person afloat. Those include lifejacket, life
jacket, life preserver, life vest, flotation aid, buoyancy aid, and
personal flotation device (PFD). Several terms have been assigned
specific definitions in various current and past standards and appear
on labels. Such distinctions can be confusing to the casual user. This
manual uses life jacket in the generic sense to indicate all such
devices that have US Coast Guard approval. That is in line with Coast
Guard Office of Boating Safety and National Safe Boating Council
usage. What a device is called is less important than wearing it con-
sistent with label instructions.
Coast Guard Approval
The U.S. Coast Guard authorizes agencies such as UL
LLC to certify that life jackets meet standards and
issues USCG approval numbers to include on the label.
Flotation devices without an approved number do not meet regulations for recreational boating and should
not be used for Scouting America boating activities. Unapproved devices include snorkeling vests, aviation life
preservers, swim vests, various flotation aids used for exercise or therapy, floaties, water wings and water toys.
These devices are not USCG approved as life jackets. Always check the label.
Condition
U.S. Coast Guard regulations require life jackets to be in
serviceable condition. The label must be legible. Even if
the label has a clear approval number, the life jacket must
not exhibit deterioration that could diminish performance.
Sun and water exposure can weaken life jacket materials
with extended use. Leaders should check life jackets used
by Scouts for rips, tears, open seams, and broken fasteners.
There should be no signs of waterlogging, mildew odor,
shrinkage, or clumping of the buoyant material. Life
jackets that are not in good shape should be destroyed
to prevent use.
Destroy life
jackets that are
not in serviceable
condition.


Chapter 14: Life Jackets
14-4
Performance Classification
In 2008, the U.S. Coast Guard (USCG) and Transport Canada, in cooperation with life jacket manufacturers, began
harmonizing their standards with international standards. The USCG approved Level 70 buoyancy aids in 2018 and
Level 100 devices in 2021. As of late 2024, many of the life jackets available for purchase both in retail outlets
and online have labels and placards based on the new standards. However, the harmonization is still a work in
progress. Some newly made life jackets still use the old classification. Therefore, a review of both classification
systems is useful. Appropriate activities for the different ratings are discussed further in following sections.
Legacy Classifications: Type System
Type I Type II Type III Type V
Offshore Life Jacket
• Turns most persons
face-up.
• Inherent buoyancy:
22 lb. (~ 100 N)
• Inflated buoyancy:
34 lb. (~ 150 N)
• Reflectors
Near Shore Buoyant Vest
• Turns most persons
face-up
• Inherent buoyancy:
15.5 lb. (~ 70 N)
• Inflated buoyancy:
24 lb. (~110 N)
Flotation Aid
• May hold but not turn
person face-up
• Inherent buoyancy:
15.5 lb. (~ 70 N)
• Inflated buoyancy:
22.5 lb (~ 100 N)
Special Use
• Turning ability varies
• Buoyancy varies:
15.5 to 34 lb.
lb. = pounds, N = Newtons. Inflatables were Type V devices equivalent to Type I, II, or III with the listed buoyancy,
but only when worn and for persons 16 and older. Type IV throwable devices omitted since they do not qualify as
required wearable devices. Some Type I, Type II, and Type V devices are still sold under the legacy system.
Classifications: Level System
Level 150 Level 100 Level 70 Level 50
• Turns most persons
face-up.
• Buoyancy:150 Newtons
• Turns most persons
face-up
• Buoyancy:100 Newtons
• Turning ability varies
• Buoyancy: 70 Newtons
Recently approved -
check label
Legacy Type II & III devices in retail outlets have the new Level 70 labels and placards. As of early 2025, other Levels available
for purchase are difficult to find since some were only recently approved. Always check the labels.
Australian Example Australian Example


Chapter 14: Life Jackets
14-5
Buoyancy
Buoyancy is the upward force exerted by the water on a submerged object and depends on the volume of the
displaced water. If the weight of the object in air is less than an equivalent volume of water, the object will
float. A primary purpose of a life jacket is to provide enough buoyancy to hold a person’s mouth out of the water
without the person needing to tread water, particularly if the person is injured.
Most people can float somewhat without a life jacket, but will
tend to sink if they lift their head free of the water. The head
of an adult on average weighs around 10 pounds, so that sets an
initial target for a life jacket’s buoyancy. Adding a safety factor to
allow for differences in human density and the submerged weight
of clothes, and then testing the results in the water, will yield
buoyancy values consistent with those in USCG regulations.
A Level 70 life jacket submerged in the water will provide an
upward force of 70 Newtons, which is a metric unit for force equal
to 15.7 pounds. Life jackets with higher ratings will float a person
higher in the water, but all are designed to safely support a person
in calm water whose weight in air is within the range indicated on
the label. Level 150 is appropriate for offshore applications where
rescue may be delayed and large waves may be present. (Note the
waves indicated on the Level 150 icon.) However, those devices
tend to be bulky and may restrict motion. The lower level ratings
are appropriate when rescue is nearby. (Hence the reaching hand
in the icons.) They are generally more comfortable and less
restrictive, particularly for vigorous activities such as paddling.
Note that the performance level ratings indicate the buoyancy for
adult-sized life jackets. Level 70 devices sized for youth, children,
or infants have lower buoyancy standards. That’s one reason why
life jackets sized for youth are not approved for adults.
Turning Ability
Life jackets are also characterized by their ability to turn an
incapacitated person from face-down to face-up. Life jackets
designed to position the wearer for breathing are appropriate for
those with developing or impaired swimming and motor skills,
such as young children. Life jackets designed with a turning force
typically have a flotation cushion behind the neck, but check the
label to make sure. The standard icons are shown to the right
below examples of approved Level 70 life jackets for children.
Use Limitations
Standard icons indicate activities for
which specific life jackets are not
appropriate. Such activities include towed
sports (water skiing, wakeboarding,
tubing, etc.), personal watercraft (PWC),
and whitewater paddling. Typically, life
jackets for those pursuits are required to
have at least three closures: at least two
straps encircling the body and either a
third strap or zipper. Inherent buoyancy
is also required.
Flotation material must be in the
water to provide buoyancy. A poorly
fitted life jacket that lifts into the air
above the shoulders does not provide
the rated upward force.
No Turn Turns Most


Chapter 14: Life Jackets
14-6
Life jackets without exclusion icons are
suitable for most recreational boating
activities, including those where
impact with the water is likely, such as
waterskiing. The materials are strength
tested. However, that does not mean
that the jacket will protect the wearer
from injury.
Some life jackets are designed for
specific boating activities. Note that
this paddling jacket does not have a
whitewater exclusion icon.
Other life jacket designs are limited to
less strenuous boating activities. Users,
and youth group leaders, should always
check the label to determine if a life
jacket is suitable for the intended use.
Design Types
Life jacket standards cover four basic design types: Inherent, Inflatable, Hybrid, and Special Purpose. The first
two are covered below. Hybrid, or multi-chamber designs, combine buoyant material with an inflatable chamber.
They are not as widely available in the U.S. as other designs. Special Purpose designs often require training or
action by the wearer and are intended for special activities under specific conditions. Life jackets designed for
swift water rescue are an example. Among other features, they include a quick release harness to which a line
can be attached. However, attaching a safety line to a rescuer can be extremely hazardous, particularly without
proper training. Anyone considering a Special Purpose life jacket should be knowledgable about that purpose.
Also note that the designs covered in this chapter are for recreational boating activities. Other standards apply
to commercial activities and boats that carry passengers for hire.
Inherently Buoyant
These designs have built-in flotation
that provides the rated level of
buoyancy. They are meant to float a
user immediately without any action
required of the wearer. They come in
a variety of styles and vary in price
from relatively inexpensive to pricey.
Only a few of many styles are shown.
(The labels are descriptive: a variety of
names are used for different designs.)
Many inherently buoyant designs have
special features, such as pockets for
use while paddling, fishing, or hunting.
Straps may fasten in front, or at the
sides. Jackets sized for infants and
children may have crotch straps and lift
handles. Float coats provide additional
protection from the environment and
are sometimes used by sailors and
waterfowl hunters in cold weather.
vest
turns most
high-back
paddle jacket
white water
rafting jacket flotation coat
yoke type
horse collar paddle jacketvest
no turn


Chapter 14: Life Jackets
14-7
Yoke type life jackets, also known as key-holes or horse
collars, are available in child to adult sizes, and are
designed to turn most users face-up. They are not approved
for tow sports or personal watercraft. They are typically
slightly less expensive than economical Level 70 designs
that do not have those use restrictions. They may be less
secure, less comfortable, and more motion restrictive
than other designs. Their use is acceptable for Scouting
activities afloat, but other inherently buoyant designs are
often preferred, or required. Some uninformed users may
place the single strap around their waist with the jacket
inside out, which is inappropriate.
Inflatables
Inflatable designs do not provide buoyancy until
chambers are filled from an attached CO2 cartridge.
Options are rated at various buoyancy levels and turning
abilities. Auto inflatables are activated automatically
upon submersion. Manual inflatables require the wearer
to pull a cord. Both types typically have an oral inflation
tube to add air.
Inflatable designs are compact and seldom impede
boating activities. However, they require regular maintenance, repacking after inflation, and often cost more
than similarly rated designs with inherent buoyancy. They must be worn to meet Coast Guard approval. They are
not recommended for youth under 16 years of age and are not recommended for poor swimmers. They are not
approved for tow sports, whitewater paddling, or personal watercraft. Those restrictions limit their use for many
Scouting activities afloat.
This design is worn over the shoulders and is correctly positioned upon activation. In auto-inflate mode, it takes
two seconds to activate and another two seconds to fill completely. It uses a 24 gram CO2 cartridge.
This belt design is worn around the waist with the pack in front. The wearer must jerk the tab to activate. After
inflation, the user places the neck strap over the head, and then adjusts it. Both the neck strap and the body
strap may be adjusted to float the user vertically, with the head out of the water, or horizontally on the back.
The 16 gram CO2 cylinder provides 15.5 pounds of buoyancy. The oral inflation tube may be used to increase
buoyancy to 22.5 pounds.


Chapter 14: Life Jackets
14-8
Size
Life jackets are sized for Infants, Children, Youth, and
Adults. Check the label for the appropriate ranges in weight
and chest size. Sizes that are too large may rise around the
head to hinder breathing, vision, and movement, or even
slip off. Sizes that are too small may not provide adequate
buoyancy.
Cub Scouts will typically need Child and Youth sizes. Scouts
BSA likely require Youth and Adult sizes. Many teens will
need Adult sizes. Leaders should ensure that proper sizes
are available for everyone prior to boating activities.
Adult Universal sized jackets are adjustable over a wide range of chest sizes. However, they will not fit everyone.
Different manufacturers offer products for various body types and heights and offer special sizes such as L/
XL, Tall, and Supersized. Higher end jackets designed for special purposes, such as paddling, may be offered in
narrow chest size ranges. Users should try them on over clothing suitable for the activity before purchase.
Even though an Infant life jacket may be rated for any user weight under 30 lbs, the USCG and various state
boating agencies caution against taking newborns under 18 lbs on board recreational boats. Available life jackets
may not provide a proper fit to perform as expected.
Ideally, a life jacket that is either too small or too large should be obvious.
If the jacket is difficult to get over the arms, the sides of the jacket do
not meet in front, and the straps are at their furthest extent, the jacket
is too small. Try a different design or the next size up.
If the jacket extends below the waist, such that it rises off the shoulders
when the user is sitting, it is too long in the torso. Do not try to force fit
a large jacket to a small person by overlapping the side panels.
Other poor fits are illustrated in the photos. Unfortunately, such sights
are fairly common around boating areas. Scouting America leaders should
ensure that youth under their care have properly fitted life jackets.
INFANT
ADULT 3 XL
YOUTHCHILD
ADULT
UNIVERSAL
< 30 lbs
>90 lbs
>55 - 90 lbs30 - 55 lbs
>90 lbs
Adult Chest Ranges
XS: 28-32 in
SM: 32-36 in
MD: 36-40 in
LG: 40-44 in
XL: 44-48 in
2XL: 48-52 in
3XL: 52-56 in
4XL: 56-60 in
Adult Universal


Chapter 14: Life Jackets
14-9
Fit
Life jackets that are correctly sized for individuals must
still be adjusted for proper fit. After checking the size and
condition of the life jacket, put it on, close any zippers, then
snap and tighten the straps. The jacket should feel snug, but
not tight enough to restrict breathing. If the straps are fully
extended and it is difficult to close the zipper, try a larger
size.
Check the fit of vest type jackets by lifting the shoulder
straps. If the straps rise to ear level or the front of the jacket
catches on the chin, adjust the straps and recheck. If the fit
is still loose, exchange the jacket for a smaller size.
Although individuals can check the fit for themselves, having buddies do so for each other helps promote the
buddy system. A more definitive test of life jacket fit may be done under controlled conditions in the water.
Continue to monitor the fit throughout the activity, particularly if water entry is part of the exercise. Strenuous
movements may cause straps to slip. Pause as needed to adjust the fit.
Check fit by lifting at shoulders. If loose, adjust and recheck.
Good fits. Continue to monitor.
Poor fits. If observed, intervene to correct.
Fasten, Tighten, and Check


Chapter 14: Life Jackets
14-10
Some designs are better suited for robust activities than others. Straps held in place by a single loop on the back
tend to slip off the flotation material. Such a jacket may fit well when checked initially, but may become loose
after exercise. Designs with two back loops, or with the straps held in place by stitching, are less prone to straps
slipping.
Participants of all ages may loosen one or more straps as an activity progresses, perhaps because the jacket feels
tight or hot. Leaders should monitor life jacket fit throughout the venture and encourage buddies to do so as
well.
Various water safety advocates advise parents to have children raise their arms when checking the fit of a life
jacket. An oversize life jacket without a crotch strap will lift off over the child's head, which is a clear indication
that the jacket is too large. However, a life jacket that does not lift completely off, with or without the arms
raised, may still not be the proper size. A key physical indicator is that the shoulder straps should not lift to ear
level. Parents should not assume their child is protected adequately if the jacket rises above the shoulders but
does not lift completely off.
The adult buddies for Lion and Tiger Cub Scouts may well elect to have their child buddies lift their arms. However,
buddies who are of similar height need not do so. Instructions for fitting a life jacket should always emphasize
reading the label. Using the incorrect size does not meet USCG or state regulations and impairs protection.
The first step in sizing a life jacket is to check the label for the appropriate weight range.
Photo illustrations adapted from California Dept. of Boating & Waterways video


Chapter 14: Life Jackets
14-11
Swimming Activities
U.S. Coast Guard regulations for life jackets are specific to
boating activities. Life jackets are designed to support boaters
who inadvertently enter the water until they re-board a vessel
or reach safety. USCG approval numbers indicate that particular
designs are tested to fulfill that function. Coast Guard approval
does not indicate that life jackets are particularly suited as
learn-to-swim aids or that they are an appropriate substitute
for swimming ability and supervision in pools or designated
swimming areas. See Section II: Swimming Skills and Safety for
appropriate layers of protection for swimming activities.
However, Scouting America, along with various other water safety
organizations, considers USCG approved life jackets as important
additional safeguards for specific swimming situations. Recall
that Safe Swim Defense restricts poor swimmers to confined
shallow water, limits maximum water depths for swimmers
based on water clarity, and cautions against large waves and
strong currents. Safe Swim Defense allows the adult leader
supervising the activity to determine if life jackets provide
an adequate additional safeguard in otherwise questionable
situations. For example, swimming from an anchored boat in
water depths where designated response personnel would have
difficulty recovering a submerged drowning person. Likewise,
Scouting America's Aquatics Play Structure Policy and guidance
requires life jacket use by swimmers using Blobs, Icebergs, and other such inflated devices. Life jackets approved for
PWC, waterskiing, or similar boating activities are recommended when used for vigorous swimming events.
Training
The first experience anyone has using a life jacket for support should not be in an emergency. Ideally, youth will be
introduced to selecting, fitting, and wearing a life jacket in the water during learn-to-swim programs. Cub Scouts are
introduced to life jackets in various elective adventures. Lions and Tigers (K and 1st grade with adult partners) are
taught how to put on and fit a life jacket. Bears (3rd grade) who are swimmers are taught how to fit a life jacket,
check their buddy's jacket, and wear one on a boat. Webelos (4th grade) and Arrow of Light (5th grade) who are
swimmers, select, fit, and wear a life jacket while boating and also swim in a life jacket.
Eight of the ten aquatics merit badges (all but Lifesaving and Motorboating) require wearing a life jacket in the water,
as do the four boating special awards. Whitewater merit badge and the Whitewater Rafting Award require swimming
with a life jacket in moving water.





Cold-Water Survival
Be Prepared
COLD WATER CAN KILL. Water conducts heat 30 times better than air. Temperatures that are only mildly
uncomfortable in air can be hazardous if your body is in the water. If your core body temperature drops just 3.5
degrees you will experience clinical hypothermia, which can be fatal. Water that is even slightly below your core
body temperature, around 97 to 99 degrees Fahrenheit, can be dangerous. Your survival time depends greatly on
the temperature of the water, your physical condition, and your personal preparation. In water near freezing, an
unprotected swimmer may be physically impaired almost immediately and may die within a few minutes unless
removed from the water and properly treated.
Chapter
15


Chapter 15: Cold-Water Survival15-2
Cold Shock i s a dangerous, sometimes fatal, condition that can result when a person is suddenly immersed in
cold water, such as would occur in a capsize. The sudden exposure of the head and chest to cold water typically
causes an involuntary gasp for air, sudden increases in heart rate and blood pressure, and disorientation, and can
possibly cause cardiac arrest.
Hypothermia results when the body can no longer maintain its normal temperature. In an attempt to protect
the core (heart, lungs, and brain), the body systematically begins to shut down. Judgment and coordination are
adversely affected. Eventually, death can result. One of the best indicators that someone is becoming hypothermic
is if they begin to shiver uncontrollably while at rest. Being at rest is an important factor because the body heat pro-
duced by the exercise of paddling tends to temporarily mask the onset of hypothermia. Take frequent breaks where
everyone stops exercising and use this time to check whether anyone is shivering.
Prevent
Plan your trip:
• Know the water temperature before you set out.
• Always wear your life jacket.
• Paddle near to shore and/or near others who can help you in the event of capsize.
• Paddle with others and ensure that all participants know the signs and symptoms of hypothermia.
Fuel your body:
• Keep your body well fueled with high-carbohydrate foods and lots of water.
• Remember, your body expends calories to maintain your core temperature as well as to provide energy to
your muscles.
Insulate your body:
• Avoid cotton clothing when paddling in cool temperatures.
• Dress in layers using synthetic fabrics such as polyester fleece
to prevent getting overheated or chilled from perspiration.
• Carry a waterproof jacket designed for splash and/or rain
protection.
• Treat any water temperature less than 70 degrees Fahrenheit
with caution. The lower the temperature, the more important
it is to wear specialized insulat i ng clothing while in the water.
• Wear a warm hat that will stay on your head in the water.
A fleece-lined skullcap is ideal.
• Have spare, dry clothing and store in a sealed dry bag while
on the water.
• Test your protective clothing in a controlled cold-water
environment to understand the level of protection provided.
Watch your group:
• Know your emotional and physical limitations. Group members need to constantly assess the behavior of
others in their group. Look for changes in behavior: withdrawal, sluggishness, talking less, or a member
not eating enough. These are all symptoms of fatigue and may suggest a problem that the group needs to
address.
Paddle jacket with Dry suit
flotation device
The warmth and comfort range of a dry
suit can be flexible based on the clothing
worn underneath it. Do not wear clothes
underneath wet suits.


Chapter 15: Cold-Water Survival15-3
Assess
The most typical symptoms of hypothermia in general order of onset are:
1. Shivering
2. Impaired judgment
3. Clumsiness
4. Loss of dexterity
5. Slurred speech
6. Inward behavior (withdrawal, apathy, lethargy)
7. Shivering stops
8. Muscle rigidity
9. Unconsciousness
10. Death
Treat
Mild hypothermia
(victim shivering but coherent):
Move victim to place of warmth. Remove wet clothes; give warm, sweet drinks, no alcohol or caffeine. Keep
victim warm for several hours. The “window of opportunity” is closing fast. By this time you are already well on
your way to experiencing hypothermia.
(If possible, take action before this stage. You may still have time to either stop the trip or take out early.
Planning for an early takeout and/or shuttle halfway pays dividends.)
Moderate hypothermia
(shivering may decrease or stop):
Victim may seem irrational with deteriorating coordination. Treat the same as above but no drinks. Victim should
be kept lying down with torso, thighs, head, and neck covered with dry clothes, coats, or blankets to stop further
heat loss. Seek medical attention immediately.
Severe hypothermia
(shivering may have stopped):
Victim may resist help or be semiconscious or unconscious. Removed from water, victim should be kept lying flat, on
back, and immobile. Victim should be handled gently. Cover torso, thighs, head, and neck with dry covers to
stop further heat loss. Monitor vital signs. Seek medical attention immediately.
Victim appears dead
(little or no breathing, no pulse, body rigid):
Assume victim can still be revived. Look for faint pulse or breathing for two minutes. If any trace is found, do
not give CPR. It can cause cardiac arrest. Medical help is imperative. If pulse and breathing are totally absent,
trained personnel should start CPR.


Chapter 15: Cold-Water Survival15-4
Self-Help
A person dumped into cold water should get out as quickly as possible. If immersion occurs very close to safety,
such as a shoreline, then the person should swim the short distance to get out of the water, even if that means
abandoning a capsized boat and gear. However, if the distance is more than a few yards, the person should either
get out of the water as much as possible on a capsized boat or assume the H.E.L.P. or huddle positions until help
arrives. Help should never be far away on a properly planned float trip.
Swimming will generate heat through exercise, but the increased water flow caused by swimming will rapidly
conduct that heat away. Even a good swimmer will not be able to swim very far in cold water. Also, heat
loss is concentrated at the head. Therefore, floating techniques with the head in the water should not be used
in cold water; e.g., facedown survival floating or floating on the back. A person’s ability to sustain themselves in
cold water improves greatly if he or she is wearing a life jacket before immersion.
(The above material was adapted from the cold-water survival brochure that is part of the American Canoe
Association’s Paddle Safe, Paddle Smart series. Consult www.americancanoe.org for additional information on
paddle craft safety, technique, and instruction. Modifications were made in 2025 to reflect current knowledge
based on information from the National Center for Cold Water Safety)
Heat Escape Lessening Posture
(H.E.L.P.) Huddle position
Misleading Numbers ?
Numbers used to support recommendations can be very informative, but may be
misleading when the a single value is chosen to represent a range. For example,
various organizations at different times have used 50, 60, or 70 degrees to indicate
an unsafe water temperature. There is no magic universal cutoff that always
applies. A 1-10-1 rule for cold water has been discussed that implies a person has
one minute to control breathing, ten minutes of action prior to incapacitation, and
one hour before losing consciousness. However, those times may vary significantly.
Another previously popular rule was that a value of 120 degrees based on adding
the air and water temperature indicated when protective clothing is needed. The
air temperature isn’t really a significant factor in heat loss when a body is in the
water.


Boating Basics
Boating Terminology
Like other specialties, boating has a special language. Familiarity with basic terms
is needed for good communication. Fore is toward the front or the bow; aft is
toward the back or the stern. Starboard is the boat’s right; port is the boat’s left.
The beam is the maximum width of the boat, and to move abeam is to go sideways.
16
Directions
Chapter


Chapter 16: Boating Basics16-2
The gunwale, pronounced gunnel, is the top of the side in an open boat, or where the deck connects the side in a
closed boat. A cockpit is an opening in a decked boat. A transom is the piece across a flat stern. A keel is a strength
member running fore and aft along the center of the bottom that is often missing in molded boats. A chine is a seam
or distinct change between the side and the bottom. The bilge is the curvature between side and bottom when the
two are not distinct. Bilge can also indicate the deepest depth on the inside of the hull, which is the part of the
boat that forms the sides and bottom. Chines, freeboard, rocker, sheer, length overall (LOA), load waterline length
(LWL), and beam are all design elements that influence how the boat performs its function.
Hull Forms
At low speeds, all boats displace water, or push it aside as they move through it. As speed increases, some
boats are designed to remain displacement hulls. Other boats are designed to plane, or skim along the
surface of the water once the speed reaches a certain point.
Displacement hulls become faster as beam decreases and length increases. A touring canoe is a good example of
a well-designed displacement hull. However, length affects turning ability, so whitewater canoe designs sacrifice
speed and tracking in favor of maneuverability by shortening the hull and adding rocker.
Watercraft capable of generating sufficient speed can use a hydrofoil to lift the hull out of the water. The lighter
the boat, the easier it is. Some human power versions are possible, but the design is mainly seen for powerboats
and sailboats. Any use of a hydrofoil as a Scouting activity needs to undergo a comprehensive SAFE review.
Basic Parts
Dimensions
Displacement hull Planing hull Hydrofoil


Chapter 16: Boating Basics16-3
Planing hulls tend to be flat, although many will have a shallow V shape to improve directional stability.
Flat-bottomed boats tend to pound in rough water and skid around turns. Simple planing hulls often have a hard
chine between the sides and bottom that is above the waterline at the bow and curves down to the corners of a
flat transom. Stepped-chine boats have multiple planing surfaces to allow rapid acceleration, but don’t handle
rough water as well as a single-chine form. Rough water characteristics are improved by using inverted V forms
at the bow grading to a flatter hull at the stern. Small planing sailboats and surfing kayaks tend to have simple
hull forms, whereas a multitude of hull designs are used for small powerboats.
Boat Stability
The shape of the hull also affects stability, which is an
important safety consideration for small boats. Stability
reflects how well a boat resists a tipping force. A boat is
not very stable if a small load shift or a swell causes the
boat to capsize. Stability is measured by the restoring
force as a function of tilt angle, that is, how hard the
boat pushes back if you push down on the side. A round
log has no force to counter rotation. A racing shell has
very little. A properly loaded canoe has a surprisingly
large amount, and a wide, flat-bottomed johnboat has
even more.
Although the width, freeboard, and cross-section shape
of a hull all influence the stability of an empty boat,
load distribution is the primary factor in how likely a
boat is to capsize in various conditions. Two large adults,
plus gear, in a 70-pound canoe can easily shift the boat’s
balance from stable to unstable.
A canoe is most stable when the paddlers are kneel-
ing. Occasionally, it is useful to stand in a canoe in calm
water to scout ahead, but standing needs to be done
carefully. Two people standing is a recipe for trouble. Overloading contributes to boating
fatalities. Don’t exceed the manufacturer’s
recommended load as found on the boat’s
capacity plate.


Chapter 16: Boating Basics16-4
Technical Aside: Primary and Secondary Stability
Many canoeing and kaya-
king books contend that
certain hull shapes have
poor “primary” stability
but good “secondary” sta-
bility. Similar observations
are applied to sailboats
and other craft. To under-
stand the concept, a basic
review of forces is needed.
Gravity, acting through the
center of mass of the boat,
gear, and crew, pulls the
boat down. Displacement,
acting through the boat’s
center of buoyancy, pushes
the boat up. The boat is in
equilibrium when the forces
of gravity and buoyancy
are balanced and directly
opposed to one another. If the boat is tilted from its equilibrium position, the boat is stable if the center
of buoyancy shifts outboard of the center of mass, and unstable if the center of gravity shifts outboard of
the center of buoyancy, as shown in the figures.
The size of the force acting to right a heeling boat depends on the separation of the center of
mass and center of buoyancy as a function of angle. The graph shows hypothetical curves for
two flat-bottomed boats, one wide with low freeboard, the other narrow with high freeboard.
The first boat has a large righting moment at low angles of heel. Such a boat has good initial or pri-
mary stability and is stiff, that is, difficult to heel initially. However, due to the low freeboard,
it can only be leaned half as far as the other boat before capsizing. The second boat has less
righting moment at low angles. Such boats are tender and will tend to roll in waves or as cargo is shifted.
However, the righting moment grows large at larger angles of heel. Such a boat is said to have good
secondary stability. It takes a larger outside force to capsize this boat than the other, even though the
first boat feels less “tippy.” Note that good secondary stability does not necessarily mean that a boat
is designed to be operated with a heel. If the forces on a boat are realigned to establish equilibrium at
a heel, like edging a canoe or heeling a sailboat, then
the righting curves in the graph would need to be
recalculated.
A boat’s seaworthiness depends not only on resistance
to heeling forces but also on pitch and yaw charac-
teristics; that is, how the boat reacts to longitudinal
and turning forces. General hull traits, such as width,
freeboard, and cross-section shape, indicate seawor-
thiness but aren’t completely reliable. Also, ultimate
stability for small boats often depends as much on
load distribution, or trim, as on hull shape.


Chapter 16: Boating Basics16-5
Rules of the Road
Everyone operating a boat has the responsibility to avoid collisions with other craft. Therefore, the craft should
always be under control, at a prudent speed, with a constant lookout.
Rules establish which boat has the “right of way” in various situations. However, not all recreational boaters
understand or follow the rules, so each skipper is responsible for taking evasive actions if the other boat
doesn’t respond according to the rules. The following illustrations cover common situations in recreational
boating. More-maneuverable boats should give way to less-maneuverable boats. Because the ability of
sailboats to maneuver depends on the wind direction, rules for sailboat-to-sailboat interactions are more
complicated. Specific requirements may vary from state to state but generally follow the rules for federal
waterways. The complete rules, which differ somewhat between inland and international waters, may be
obtained from the U.S. Coast Guard Office of Boating Safety: www.uscgboating.org.
Small recreational boats should yield right-of-
way and stay clear of large commercial vessels,
particularly fishing boats with nets deployed or
strings of barges.
All boats must proceed at low speed in the vicinity
of military vessels and must not approach closer
than 100 yards without permission.
Boats under power
should yield right-
of-way to wind- or
human-powered
craft; e.g., sailboats,
canoes, and kayaks.
Powerboats meeting head-on each veer to the
right (starboard) so that they pass left side–to–left
side (port-to-port)—the same as cars meeting on
an unmarked gravel road.
When powerboats
are crossing, the
boat to starboard
has the right-of-way.
That is, yield to a
boat on your right,
but proceed on
course if the other
boat is on your left. Any boat overtaking another from behind
should avoid the slower boat ahead.


Chapter 16: Boating Basics16-6
Signs, Markers, and Navigation Aids
Rivers, lakes, and coastlines often have marker buoys deployed in the water to warn of danger, to mark channels
through shallow water, and as general aids to navigation. These are useful to sea kayakers as well as power
boaters and sailors, and warn canoeists away from dam structures and other dangers. The markers should appear
on area charts. Local authorities, canoe liveries, and landowners may also post information signs on the shore.
White can buoys or signs with orange, crossed
diamonds indicate areas prohibited to
boaters.
White can buoys or signs with orange
diamonds indicate dangers.
White can buoys or signs with orange circles
indicate controlled areas.
Stay well clear of boats
or floats with dive flags
indicating scuba divers or
snorkelers in the water.
Be alert for informal signs on shore that
provide location checks or instructions.
The general rule for channel markers is RED RIGHT
RETURNING. When returning to shore, going upriver,
or traveling south on the Intracoastal Waterway,
keep red, even-numbered cones or triangular signs
on your right, and green, odd-numbered cans or
square signs to your left. Slow, shallow-draft boats
should stay at the edges of the channel to allow
passage of larger craft. Even shallow-draft boats
such as kayaks may need to stay within the channel
markers to avoid damage to and from coral reefs,
to avoid sandbars at low tide, and to stay clear of
weeds and breakwaters.


Chapter 16: Boating Basics16-7
Boats and the Law
Legal requirements for boats and boaters arise from various jurisdictions, including federal, state, and local.
Enforcement agencies include the U.S. Coast Guard, the Army Corps of Engineers, and park services. Safety
Afloat requires you to know and follow all regulatory requirements. Check with local authorities to verify and
complete the material given here. The website of the National Association of State Boating Law Administra-
tors, www.nasbla.org, has links to state agencies responsible for boating laws.
Registrations
Motorized craft must be registered in the state of principal
use. Requirements include display of numbers and
validation stickers and onboard possession of a certificate
of number whenever the boat is in use. Some states require
registration and fees for all boats, including canoes,
kayaks, and inflatable rafts. In a few states, registration
fees may be waived for boats registered to not-for-profit
groups such as Scouting America councils and chartered
units. Your certificate of registration will include your boat
number and how it must be displayed. Normally, plain block
letters and numbers not less than 3 inches in height must be
affixed to the forward part of the vessel as shown.
Accident Reporting
Boat operators are required to promptly report to local authorities any serious boating accident involving loss of life,
medical treatment beyond basic first aid, or property damage exceeding $2,000. Incidents occurring during a Scouting
function must also be reported to the local council.
Operator License
Some states require boat operators to be older than a minimum age and to possess a valid operator’s license. Generally
these requirements apply only to motorized vessels, but check with your state department of transportation or
other appropriate agency. In many cases, an operator permit may be obtained by completing an online course.
Use Permits
Some lakes and rivers require boaters to obtain permits
prior to use. Permit acquisition may be as simple as paying
a fee on the spot to use a launching area, or as complicated
as submitting an application to a national lottery a year or
more in advance of a trip. Permits may specify numbers in
the party, allowed campsites, and restrictions on fires and
waste disposal.
Signaling Equipment
Following sections will expand on the type of equipment
needed for a safe, enjoyable trip in various types of craft.
However, all craft under federal jurisdiction are required
to carry an audible device, such as a whistle, that can be
used to signal other boats. For canoes, kayaks, and other
small boats, it’s a good idea for everyone to have a whistle
attached to their life jacket during a float trip, even if it is
not a local requirement.


Chapter 16: Boating Basics16-8


Kayaking Skills
Comparisons between canoes and kayaks are inevitable. Traditionally, a canoe was an open boat designed for
transporting goods and people, whereas the kayak was an enclosed single-person craft used for hunting. Canoe-
ists typically used a single-bladed paddle but occasionally adopted the double-bladed paddle usually used by
the kayaker. Those classic differences persist today; the casual observer may easily confuse an enclosed com-
petitive whitewater canoe with a kayak, except that one paddler will use a single blade and the other a double.
The skills in this chapter are appropriate whenever double paddles are used. For example, on the canoe treks
at the Evangeline Area Council Atchafalaya Swamp Base in Louisiana.
Chapter
17


Chapter 17: Kayaking Skills17-2
Over the years, kayaking first rivaled and then surpassed canoeing in popularity. There are several reasons. An
inexpensive kayak often costs much less than an inexpensive canoe, though high-end models of either are pricey. A
short, decked kayak in expert hands can safely negotiate white water that would be impossible for the most experienced
team in a long, open canoe. That’s one reason whitewater-canoe designs have adopted kayak characteristics. On the
other end of the design spectrum, a double touring kayak may not have the capacity or ease of portage of a touring
canoe, but can carry sufficient supplies for a long trek. However, ease of use may be the kayak’s greatest appeal to
the novice boater.
The difficulty of gaining reasonable proficiency as a solo canoeist may be likened to that of learning to ride a bicycle.
The first attempts are likely wobbly and may be frustrating. Practice and patience are needed before confidence is
achieved. A novice in a kayak, however, may quickly find that the boat responds agreeably, somewhat akin to starting
out on a bicycle with training wheels. Imperfect analogies aside, both the canoe and the kayak have their champions
and both will satisfy recreational needs into the future, whether those needs are to connect with nature on a remote
backwater, to find thrills on a swiftly moving river, to compete with others in endurance and skill, or simply to delight
in the graceful coordination of craft, body, and thought.
Kayak Designs
Kayaks come in a wide assortment of designs intended for different paddling activities. For example, a flat-water
sprint racing kayak is designed for light weight and easy tracking, whereas a whitewater slalom racer is short with
pronounced rocker for easy turning.
Originally, kayaks were made of sealskins stretched over a wood and bone frame. The Inuit used them for hunting
and fishing. Early recreational kayaks were made of cloth over wooden frames, and some modern folding (2)
kayak designs still use fabric on a frame.
Typical recreational (5) kayaks are designed for versatility. They are of moderate length and have large cockpit
openings. They are great for learning and short trips on protected waters. Most inexpensive models are made of
molded polyethylene plastic, which is durable but weighs more than other construction materials. Some designs
have double cockpits for tandem paddlers.
Sit-on-top (4) kayaks lack a cockpit and have seats and foot braces molded into the deck. They often are made
of polyethylene and come in single and double versions. They are great for short excursions in warm waters and
are good support craft for snorkeling. Expect a wet ride. Specially designed sit-on-tops are used for surfing ocean
waves, which is not an activity for a novice.
Touring (1) kayaks are larger and have dry storage capacity for camping gear. They are long, often up to 17
feet for single versions and close to 20 feet for tandem models. Even though long lengths with little rocker help
tracking, many models are also equipped with a folding rudder. Fiberglass or Kevlar composites may be used in
construction to reduce weight. Spray skirts help keep out water. These boats are also known as sea kayaks due
to their use around ocean shorelines.
Inflatable (3) kayaks have flat-water and whitewater uses. They can be deflated for easy transport and provide
a fun experience in many settings. Quality designs are both stiff and durable.
1 2 3 4 5


Chapter 17: Kayaking Skills17-3
Whitewater kayaks typically have short hulls with pronounced rocker. Creek boats, playboats, and
squirt boats have various design features such as blunt ends, multiple chines, and planing hulls depending on
whether the goal is the first descent of a wild river or performing cartwheels and spins in a rodeo competition.
Some designs have different tips to adapt a basic hull to different specialties.
Note: Some kayak designs come in different sizes. You should fit snugly but
comfortably in a kayak with a cockpit.
Parts of the Kayak
Paddles
The blades of kayak paddles come in various designs. Large blades provide more power per stroke; smaller blades
take less energy per stroke. Many blades are lightly cupped or spooned for increased water resistance over a
flat blade of the same projected area. The curve is oriented to scoop water toward the stern. Some blades are
asymmetrical. That is, the shape of the blade above the centerline of the shaft is different from that below. The
shape is designed to balance the area, and hence the force, on the top and bottom of the blade when the paddle
shaft is inserted into the water at an angle.
Many paddles have the blades set at an angle to one another from 30 to 60 degrees. The offset angle
automatically feathers the blade out of the water when the blade in the water is perpendicular to the boat’s
centerline. Feathering reduces wind and splash resistance. Touring paddles often come in two sections that,
when assembled, allow the feathering angle to be varied.


Chapter 17: Kayaking Skills17-4
A paddle with spooned, asymmetrical blades set at an angle has top and bottom sides and right and left ends.
Depending on how the blade angles are set, paddles are either right-hand or left-hand controlled. Most
are set in the right-hand control position. That is, the grip of the right hand will not change during use. The wrist
of the right hand is rotated to set the proper blade angle on each side of the boat. The shaft rotates freely in the
left hand. Quality paddles have an oval shaft, which provides better control and comfort and helps you set the
correct angle. Most paddles have straight shafts, but a few designs are bent at the grip positions to ease strain
on the wrists.
Correct paddle length depends on the length of the blades, on your dimensions, those of your boat, your style of
paddling, and your personal preference. Generally, whitewater paddlers use a slightly shorter paddle than touring
kayakers. Paddles are normally sized in centimeters with typical lengths between 190 and 220 centimeters, or
around 6½ to 7 feet. Don’t have a metric ruler handy? Stand with the paddle upright with one blade touching the
ground. If the end of the top blade is less than head high, the paddle is probably too short. If you can’t reach the
top of the blade with the fingertips of your extended arm, the paddle is probably too long. Pick a size or two in
between, see how they feel in the water, and check with your instructor. Many paddles come apart for transport
and are adjustable in length.
Learning to Paddle
The Scouting America Kayaking award introduces Scouts BSA,
Venturers, Sea Scouts and leaders to basic flat-water kayaking skills.
Check with your local council service center for approved instructors
or ask the council aquatics committee to initiate a local program.
The Kayaking merit badge teaches Scouts BSA kayaking skills and
safety for calm water. Material in the merit badge pamphlet provides
additional information to that given here. Aquatics Supervision Paddle
Craft Safety training has kayaking modules for flat water and rivers.
If your council does not have a kayaking program, check with local paddling clubs for assistance. They may
offer basic and advanced kayak classes using instructors affiliated with the American Canoe Association.
Boarding
After checking on land that the kayak is a good fit, place the kayak in ankle-deep water or at the edge of a low
bank or dock. Use your paddle for balance by placing one end on the bank or bottom and the other end just
behind the cockpit coaming (rim). Sit on the deck, not the paddle, and place one foot in the cockpit. Bring the
other foot into the cockpit, then slide your legs into the boat. Reverse the process to exit. On sandy beaches,
some people board in a similar manner but with the bow of the kayak in the water and the back resting on the
ground.


Chapter 17: Kayaking Skills17-5
Capsize Drill
Kayaks are sufficiently stable that an unintentional capsize in calm water should be a rare event rather than a
foregone conclusion. Even so, a capsize drill early in the learning process is a useful safety exercise to remove
any apprehension about an accidental capsize during stroke practice.
A A
A capsize drill for a sit-on-top or inflatable kayak is simple: lean over, slide off, right the boat if necessary, and
climb back on board. A capsize drill for a decked kayak is only a bit more complicated. After you roll over, if you
don’t automatically fall clear of the boat, do the following: Lean forward and grasp the coaming behind your
back. Straighten your legs and push the kayak forward with your hands as you slide your feet out. You should fall
out of the cockpit in a somersault. Try to maintain contact with the kayak as you bring your head above water
to one side. Master this technique in a pool or calm water before you need it. Make sure the water is free of
obstacles and deep enough that you don’t hit the bottom when you roll over. Both your buddy and your instructor
should be watching.
Balance
Kayakers “wear” their boats in the sense that power is transferred from the paddle to the boat through the torso,
hips, and legs. Turns, braces, and rolls involve the hips as well as the paddle. You can experiment with hip action
as part of the capsize drill. Try to tilt the kayak to the side using your hips, not your paddle. Keep your upper body
upright so that your center of mass stays over the center of the boat. With practice you should be able to lean
the boat almost 45 degrees to each side by cocking your hips. Flick the boat level again simply by moving your
hips back to normal. When you are ready to practice capsizing, lean the boat not with your hips but by rolling
your whole body to the side.
1
3 4
2


Chapter 17: Kayaking Skills17-6
Hold the shaft firmly with your control hand and
rotate the paddle by bending your wrist down
and rolling your knuckles back. Let the shaft
rotate freely in your other hand.
Practice rotating the blades a quarter turn by
flexing your wrist up and down. This exercise
prepares you to angle the blade correctly on
both sides of the kayak.
Next, with the paddle still level, push one blade
forward and pull the other back by twisting your
torso. Keep your elbows loose but don’t change
their angles.
A few swings back and forth should loosen
your muscles sufficiently that you are able to
comfortably point first one and then the other
blade forward. This exercise prepares you to
derive power from torso rotation rather than
your arms.
Opening Exercises
Do the following, either on land or on the water, or both, to prepare
for paddling the first time. Space your hands by holding the paddle
above your head horizontally with your elbows at 90-degree angles.
Then hold the paddle level in front of you. The knuckles of your
control hand should be aligned with the edge of the blade nearest
that hand. If you are using a right-hand control paddle and you are
grasping the shaft with your wrists flat, then the blade on the right
will be tilted slightly forward.


Chapter 17: Kayaking Skills17-7
The Forward Stroke
Forward motion is achieved by stroking first on one side and then on the other. Extend your lower arm toward
the bow and push down to plant the blade in the water. The blade should be perpendicular to the centerline of
the kayak. Draw the blade back parallel to the centerline, ending the stroke when your lower hand reaches your
hip. Your upper hand should be near eye level. Don’t lean forward to extend your reach. Rather, keep your back
straight and rotate your torso. After the blade has left the water at the end of the stroke on one side, rotate the
shaft with your control hand to set the angle for the blade on the other side as you extend that blade forward.
Repeat from side to side, making slight adjustments as needed to keep the kayak headed in the desired direction.
Go slowly at first to get a feel for the interaction of the boat and paddle. Also make sure the region ahead of you
is clear. The kayak will respond quickly.
The boat is maintained on a relatively straight heading by stroking evenly on each side. A long kayak with a V
shaped hull will tend to stay straight. The bow of shorter boats will tend to wobble from side to side.
5 64
31 2


Chapter 17: Kayaking Skills17-8
Ideally, the paddle blade for the forward stroke should be kept as near the boat as possible. The further the blade
is from the center line, the more the energy in the stroke tends to make the boat turn rather than go forward.
Having the shaft almost vertical (when looking from the front or back) keeps the blade close and would require
keeping the top hand high and across the boat. However, that is often not as comfortable or as natural as a
cruising stroke with the shaft at an angle and the top hand lower.
Forward Sweep
Forward strokes are done with the blade close to the boat pushing the water to the rear; turning strokes are most
efficient with the blade moved away from the boat in a half-circle. The circle for the sweep begins at the bow
and turns the boat away from the paddling side. Your elbow, hand, and paddle blade will be lower on the opposite
side than they are for the forward stroke. Power still comes from torso rotation. Recovery is done by feathering
the power blade just above the surface. Several sweeps from one side from a stop will spin, or pivot, the boat. A
sweep while under way will change the boat’s direction, and can be adjusted to control the amount of the turn.
A sweep on the other side will turn the boat in the opposite direction.
Reverse Sweep
You can also reverse the direction of the sweep to pivot the boat in the opposite direction without changing
sides. A reverse sweep begins at the stern with the paddle shaft at a low angle to the water. Moving the blade in
a forward arc turns the bow toward the paddling side.


Chapter 17: Kayaking Skills17-9
Rudder
If you hold the blade vertical in the water at the rear of
the kayak, you can use the paddle as a rudder to make
minor course adjustments at the end of a forward stroke.
You guide the kayak by pushing the blade toward or away
from the rear of the boat. Angling the blade away from
the kayak turns the bow toward the paddling side. In that
case, your forward hand is slightly inboard of your back
hand. Angling the blade toward the rear of the boat, with
your forward hand slightly outboard of your back hand,
turns the bow away from the paddling side. A rudder is
only effective when the boat is moving. Deflecting water
to the side creates resistance, which is translated into a
course correction. The faster the boat is moving relative
to the water, the quicker the response. However, a rudder
also creates drag, which slows the boat. A forward sweep is
generally more efficient for making turns under way.
Draw Stroke
The draw stroke moves the kayak sideways toward the paddle. Rotate your torso to face the side and reach out
with your lower arm. Plant the blade in the water and pull the kayak toward it. Keep the blade almost vertical
and parallel to the side of the boat. Recover with the blade in the water by twisting the blade perpendicular to
the boat and slipping it back to the draw position.


Chapter 17: Kayaking Skills17-10
Back Stroke
To stop the kayak, do a back stroke: the forward stroke in reverse. Continue to stroke backward on opposite sides
to bring the kayak to a complete stop or to move it backward, also called backwatering. Don’t forget to look
behind you when using the back stroke.
Stroke Combinations
The few strokes described above give you enough choices for moving a kayak at will in calm water. Practice the
strokes separately when first learning. Master each component sufficiently to make the kayak respond as intended.
With a bit of practice, the actions caused by the strokes should begin to feel natural. After a while, you will not
deliberately consider what stroke to use or worry about how to execute the stroke correctly. Instead, you will
decide where you want the kayak to go and automatically direct the paddle to achieve that result.
Aiding a Capsized Paddler
As with the wet-exit capsize drill, the difficulty of helping a capsized paddler depends on the water conditions
and the type of craft. A sit-on-top kayak in warm water should present few challenges.
Your first concern if your buddy boat capsizes should be for the safety of the paddler, not their equipment. If the
situation is urgent, due to injury or cold water, immediately tow the person to shore rather than chase after their
gear. If your rear deck is large enough, the capsize victim may be able to balance on it. If your kayak is small, have
the person hold onto the rear grab loop or toggle and float near the surface to reduce drag. If your buddy has hold
of thier boat and needs help getting it to shore, you can tow both the person and their kayak for short distances in
calm water.


Chapter 17: Kayaking Skills17-11
Once on shore, you can empty the
water from the swamped boat by
each holding an end and rocking
the upside-down boat fore and
aft to allow water to drain from
the cockpit. Some kayaks have
plugs near the ends so the water
can be drained by simply holding
up one end.
Kayak-Over-Kayak Assist
In calm water, a capsized paddler can sometimes resume
paddling without returning to shore. Self-rescue in a decked
boat often requires a paddle float to provide stability.
However, that technique is not reviewed here because
Safety Afloat requires buddy boats for any excursion. If
the buddy boats are also in jeopardy, because the group
was remiss in not getting off the water in sufficient time to
avoid worsening conditions, the simple towing techniques
discussed previously should be considered. Boat-to-boat
rescues are difficult in high winds and waves.
If the capsized kayak has good flotation, and is either self-
bailing or has a pump, you can hold the boat upright next to
yours to allow the person to climb aboard.
It may also be feasible to empty a swamped kayak before
the person climbs aboard. Form a “T” with the boats and
have the swimmer steady your kayak from the rear. Pull
the swamped boat upside down across your foredeck, and
gently rock it back and forth to drain it of water. Steady the
boat next to your own, with your paddle braced across both
craft, as your buddy climbs back aboard.


Chapter 17: Kayaking Skills17-12
Additional Skills
According to Safety Afloat, all persons participating in activities afloat other than during closely supervised instruction
must be trained and practiced in craft-handling skills, safety, and emergency procedures. The skills reviewed above
support Kayaking award requirements and prepare Scouts for kayaking on flat water of limited extent, such as that at
a camp waterfront, and for float trips on flat water provided all facets of Safety Afloat are in place. However, ocean
and river trips require additional kayaking skills, such as the classic roll, for dealing with waves and moving water.
Such skills are best learned under the guidance of an experienced instructor. You will also need to develop the ability
to “read” the environment. An introduction to moving water is provided in Chapter 20.
stern draw low brace
roll sequence


Canoeing Skills
Canoeing Introduction
Canoeing is popular with youth served by Scouting America. Scout groups delight in canoe trips, whether for a
day or a week, far away in the Canadian wilderness or on a local lake, down a distant river or on a local stream.
The material in this section is tailored to the cruising canoeist, but modern canoeing takes many forms, from
dragon boats with large crews, to solo whitewater slalom racers, to freestyle “ballets” set to music. Specialized
canoeing has led to a variety of canoe types and paddling techniques. There is no single best boat or universal
perfect stroke.
With experience, canoeists develop boat sense and automatically adjust strokes to move the boat as desired.
However, it does take thought and practice to learn to paddle with ease. Many people first learn to paddle
tandem, that is, two to a boat. That has both advantages and disadvantages. If buddies paddle together, it is
easier to go straight and perform other maneuvers. On the other hand, if buddies independently try to adjust how
the boat is moving, the learning process can be frustrating. Communication and slow deliberate strokes done in
unison are keys to success.
Chapter
18


Chapter 18: Canoeing Skills18-2
General-purpose canoes are good for flat-water cruising, gently flowing rivers, or just messing around. Longer boats
float higher, slide easily through the water, and track well. High-volume boats are good for carrying lots of gear on
an extended trip. Lightweight boats are good when you need to carry the canoe across portages. Boats with little
sheer and low sides offer less wind resistance; boats with raised ends take waves better.
Wood is the classic canoe building material and may be covered with canvas or fiberglass. Aluminum is lighter
and more durable. Other canoes are made of synthetic fiber bonded with resin, such as fiberglass and polyester
or Kevlar and epoxy. Depending on the construction, such canoes may be heaver or lighter than aluminum, while
remaining rigid and durable. Other canoes are made of layered plastics. They can deform around a rock and then
bounce back into shape. They are typically heavier than Kevlar and less rigid. The bottoms of some may flex, or
“oil can” as they move through the water.
Down river canoes designed for cruising in flowing water are shorter than their flat-water counterparts and have
more rocker. They are a bit more sluggish and don’t track quite as well, but they are more responsive and turn
easier. They often are made of composite plastics capable of regaining their shape after impact. Open boats
without air bags, properly handled, are suitable for carrying gear through minor white water.
“Playboats” with flotation bags, pedestal seats, and thigh straps are used in heavy white water. Whitewater
competitors may use decked boats resembling kayaks. See Chapter 21 for additional information on paddling in
whitewater. Whitewater designs are not recommended for cruising flatwater or calm streams since their tracking
ability is poor.
Learning to Paddle
First, learn to swim. Scouting America policies restrict canoe instruction to those who complete the standardized
100-yard swimmer test. Second, seek out an experienced instructor. Canoeing is a physical skill, somewhere in
difficulty between kayaking and ice skating. It is possible to learn through individual study and practice, but
it’s much easier with someone to guide the way. The basics can be learned in a few hours, but mastery takes
concentration and practice. Don’t get discouraged if the canoe doesn’t always react as you expect. Go slow and
easy until “canoe sense” becomes ingrained.
With an accomplished paddler coaching from the stern, it is possible to learn while doing—during a flat-water
trip, for example. However, it is generally better to pick up the basics in a class setting before hitting the water.
Trying to learn on a trip when the wind picks up and your buddy isn’t as skilled, or patient, as they should be, can
be a disheartening experience. Keep canoeing fun by learning and teaching it in a proper setting.
Safety Afloat requires Scouts to have three hours of training or to demonstrate proficiency before paddling
on a float trip. The ability to perform the basic skills covered in this chapter constitutes appropriate training.
Adults and older youth may learn the skills by completing Scouting America’s Paddle Craft Safety training. Scouts
BSA who earn the Canoeing merit badge cover these skills and more. The American Canoe Association also
provides good introductory training programs.
Your instructor should choose an appropriate setting and tailor the lessons to conditions. Ideally, there should be
no current until you are ready to master river skills. If a sheltered cove without wind or waves cannot be found,
then the lesson may need to be postponed until weather conditions improve.


Chapter 18: Canoeing Skills18-3
Your instructor should also provide or help you choose equipment appropriate for a novice. A long, stable boat that
tracks well is preferable to a slender, tippy racer or a short whitewater boat with lots of rocker. Even those who can
make a 17-foot cruising canoe respond to their every whim may find their first experience in a short, whitewater
playboat to be like paddling an inner tube.
Choosing a Paddle
Canoes, paddlers, and paddles come in different sizes, and much is written about how to
match one with the others. When you are positioned for paddling in the canoe, holding
the paddle vertically at your side, the upper end of the blade, or throat, should be just
underwater; the end of the grip, depending on who you ask, should be even with your
shoulder, chin, nose, or eyes. Those few inches of leeway are a matter of preference or
paddling style and shouldn’t affect your ability to learn. That is fortunate since the paddles
at many Scout camps come in 6-inch increments. Although scoffed at by some, a useful rule
is that the grip of a paddle placed on the ground should come up around your chin, nose,
or eyes. If the paddle is only midway up your chest, or over your head, it probably is either
too short or too long. If you find two paddles, one at eye level and one just below your chin,
take them both to the canoe and test them in the water. It’s probably best not to buy an
expensive paddle at a custom length until you have perfected your own paddling style in
your own canoe.
Paddles angled at the throat may appear broken, but are deliberately built with angles
of roughly 12 to 15 degrees and are used with the blade angled forward. Many marathon
racers contend that bent-shaft paddles provide better stroke efficiency and will argue
that results prove their advantage. On the other hand, Olympic sprint racers are allowed
to use bent-shaft paddles but don’t. Since some flat-water strokes are better done with
a straight shaft, and straight shafts are generally preferred for white water, it is probably
best for a novice to begin with a straight shaft. Some paddles have multiple bends in the
shaft for a more comfortable grip, but those aren’t widely available for instruction.
Paddles are made of different materials and have different-style grips, shafts, and
blades. When you’re just starting out, any of the common grips will be appropriate. Avoid
excessively narrow or wide blades. Ideally, the shape of the shaft at the throat should be
an oval, wider front-to-back to fit your hand. A circular cross section is fine, but avoid
paddles that have a shaft excessively wide from side to side. Also avoid the inexpensive,
heavy, all-plastic paddles that flex during a stroke. Those are not recommended for Scout
use.
Grip
Shaft
Throat
Blade
Tip


Chapter 18: Canoeing Skills18-4
1. Use a perpendicular launch, either bow first or stern first, when the water is shallow, access is limited,
or in waves. Carry the boat to the shoreline, place the paddles aboard, then lift from the center. Slide
the canoe hand-over-hand into the water until it is floating free.
2. The paddler who will be at the end facing the shore steadies the canoe while squatting. The other
paddler steps in the center of the canoe and moves into position by walking along the center line while
bending to grasp the gunwales.
3. The first person in the boat kneels in position and steadies the canoe with the paddle braced in
the water. The second person then enters along the center line. If the water is shallow, the second
person may need to go past their paddling position to the middle of the canoe to allow the shoreward end to
float free. They assume their paddling position after the other paddler moves the boat slightly offshore.
Use a parallel launch from a dock, at a wide beach with deep water, or into a current. Place the boat in the water
broadside to the shore and load your gear. One person steadies the boat while the other gets into position by
stepping carefully onto the center line of the boat. The first person in the boat then steadies the boat while the
second person gets into position. In a current, carefully consider which direction to point the boat, and who enters
first. Land a canoe by reversing the steps. Stop the canoe before it hits.
To avoid damage to the hull, don’t enter a canoe that is bridged, that is, has one end in the water, one end on
shore, and an air gap between. You may need to wade into the water to ensure that the canoe floats freely before
and after you enter.
Safety Tip:
When moving around in a canoe, always
maintain three points of contact: two feet
and one hand, for example; or two hands
and one foot, as shown in these illustrations.
Launching the Canoe


Chapter 18: Canoeing Skills18-5
Paddling Positions
Tandem paddlers paddle on opposite sides from positions
near the bow and stern. The boat should be trimmed
roughly level fore and aft. Adjust the trim by moving gear
and paddlers.
Kneeling in the center of the canoe, with knees apart
and braced against thigh straps, provides the best
stability and allows a quick shift of the paddle to the
other side.
Kneeling vertically, but slightly toward the paddling
side, helps with stroke execution. Weight should be
against a thwart or seat edge, not on the knees. Pads
help make kneeling comfortable even for long trips.
The knee opposite the paddle may be raised with the
leg extended forward as an alternate relief position
to kneeling with both legs.
A well-designed canoe will have seats positioned to
provide comfort along with reasonable stability. In
some designs, your feet may be tucked under the
seat. In other designs, that might be awkward or risk
entanglement.
One or both legs may also be extended forward from a
seated position. Marathon racers sometime brace their
feet against blocks.
Avoid sitting with lifted knees that interfere with
your paddling.


Chapter 18: Canoeing Skills18-6
Positioning the Paddle
The main points of this segment are to kneel or sit upright, keep your lower arm straight, keep the paddle shaft
vertical, and use your muscles effectively.
The paddling position you take influences your stroke. A kneeing position places
your shoulders higher above the water than sitting on a low seat. That in turn allows
you to use a slightly longer paddle to gain more leverage. However, the position
you choose may depend on how the seats are placed in the canoe. Knelling upright
without support places all your weight on your knees, which is uncomfortable and
does not anchor your body well for transferring the power of your stroke to the
canoe. Ideally, you have the option of resting your buttocks comfortably on the edge
of the seat with your knees down and your legs tucked under the seat. However, the
seats in some canoes are too low for that. In that case, you are meant to sit on the
seat with your legs extended forward. Ideally your feet are firmly anchored. Sitting
low influences your paddle stroke and may require you to bend your lower arm.
Each style has its advocates. The forward stroke described here assumes the classic
kneeling position.
(If you are really low in the boat while sitting on the seat, you might consider whether
a double bladed paddle will be more effective.)
Your lower hand should hold the paddle shaft a little above the throat. Shifting your lower hand a little toward
the grip may make it easier on your wrist. However, you should ideally apply force close to the blade, like holding
a shovel close to the load. Your hands should be far enough apart that you can keep your lower arm reasonable
straight throughout the stroke.
As the blade slices into the water for the forward
stroke, your upper hand should cross over the canoe
more or less in line with your opposite shoulder.
That is, the shaft should be nearly vertical when
viewed from the front. If your grip hand stays too
much on its side of your body, you are likely adding a
sweeping motion to your stroke, which means more
turning and less forward power.
You also want to keep the shaft as vertical as
practical when viewed from the side. You rotate
your shoulder forward with your lower arm straight
to begin a forward stroke. When you slice the blade
into the water to “plant” it to push against the
water, your grip hand should also be forward, not
kept near your chin.
vertical:
hands
stacked
angled:
paddle
too long


Chapter 18: Canoeing Skills18-7
Forward Stroke Overview
The forward stroke provides basic propulsion in all types of canoeing. It is simple in concept, although details
vary from one canoeist to another. The stroke can be divided into three phases: the catch phase (putting the blade
into the water), the power phase (accelerating the canoe forward), and the recovery phase (removing the paddle
from the water and returning to the catch position). The drawings illustrate the catch and power phases for a seated
marathon racer on the left (with a bent shaft paddle), a kneeling cruiser in the middle, and a sprint racer in a high
kneeling position on the right.
The recovery phase is sometimes divided into release and recovery components. Emphasis is seldom placed on how
the blade is removed from the water prior to moving it forward. Some paddlers have a natural tendency to move
their arms in line like a piston. At the end of the stroke, they jerk both arms up and forward. That causes at least
some drag as the paddle blade is moving against the water as it is lifted. The same is true if the paddle is rotated out
of the water by dropping the grip hand and lifting the shaft hand. There is an alternate, perhaps seldom mentioned
since it is not conducive to winning races. That is, quit pulling hard to generate power once the blade starts to angle
significantly, but continue to let it move back at boat speed until it is almost flat at the surface, then, with your lower
arm still straight, begin a reverse sweep in the air. The blade is already in a feathered position and both hands in the
right place. If you have a wood paddle, its buoyancy even helps a bit. (You only really lift water by keeping the blade
in the water past your hip if you continue to accelerate the paddle.)
If you keep your back straight and your shoulders square, it is possible to do a forward stroke by bend ing
your arms. However, it is more practical to use your back and shoulder muscles. Kayakers rely almost
completely on torso rotation to generate power. They rotate their shoulders first forward, then back. At the
other extreme, rowers in whitewater rafts “put their backs into it” by leaning both shoulders forward and
then back. Some authors suggest that canoeists should mimic kayakers. However, videos of flat-water and
whitewater racing canoeists reveal various combinations of both rotation and lean. A cruising canoeist need
not exaggerate either.


Chapter 18: Canoeing Skills18-8
Catch
Power
Recover
You start the forward stroke by knifing the blade into the
water by driving both hands down. Don’t slap the water
using only your lower arm.
During the catch, firmly grasp the paddle, but no tighter
than needed. Pull back with your lower arm comfortably
straight. Looking from the front, the shaft should remain
vertical throughout the power phase. Pull straight back
parallel with the boat’s centerline rather than follow-
ing the gunwale. Your grip hand will move just a bit for-
ward and then back during the power phase. Ideally, the
paddle should also be close to vertical when viewed from
the side, at least as it approaches your hip. To transfer
power from the paddle to the canoe, it is necessary to
move the paddle backward more rapidly than the canoe is
moving forward. However, think of the stroke as planting
the blade in the water and pulling the canoe toward it.
To maintain your cruising speed, you only need to apply
enough power to restore the momentum lost to friction
and wind since your last stroke. That is easily, and most
effectively, done in the short distance from the catch to
or just past your hip. The power phase, either cruising
or racing, is rela tively short and ends once the paddle has
stopped accelerating. The recovery begins in the water
as you seek some way to remove the paddle without
creating drag or other adverse affects.
Some folks let the paddle blade continue to arc upward
past their hip. So long as the paddle is moving at constant
speed, not jerked upward, that approach is reasonable
and provides a relaxed stroke rate with time for course
correction. Those in more of a hurry may slice the blade
sideways out of the water or bend their lower arm to lift
the paddle vertically. Still others rotate the grip to make
the blade parallel with the canoe and slice upward. If you
don’t overanalyze the situation, your natural tendencies
will probably serve you well. When cruising, return the
blade to the catch position by turning, or feathering, it
sideways to avoid catching wind or waves.
Forward Stroke Components
When describing strokes, it is useful to use the term onside to refer to the side of the boat the paddle is on.
Offside is the opposite (for a single paddler).
Just before the catch, the paddle blade is in the air over the water toward the bow. The hand on the shaft loosely
grasps the paddle just above the throat with your hands a bit more than shoulder width apart. Your grip hand
is just above eye level, slightly aft of the shaft hand and ideally over the onside gunwale. You may lean slightly
forward, but there is no need to stretch or rotate uncomfortably.


Chapter 18: Canoeing Skills18-9
Paddling in a Straight Line
Paddling in a straight line is one of the more difficult tasks
in flat-water canoeing, but it is really not that difficult if
you are paddling with a savvy partner. Paddle on opposite
sides, at the same time, and you are most of the way there.
However, even though each paddler pulls parallel to the
centerline, the offset from the centerline to the gunwale
generates a slight sideways force, or torque. In most canoes,
the stern paddler is farther from the boat’s pivot point than
the bow paddler, and the mismatch of forces eventually
causes the boat to turn away from the stern paddler’s side.
To compensate, the bow paddler can pull harder or the
stern paddler less forcefully. The stern paddler might even
skip a stroke or use the paddle as a rudder. If the wind is
blowing from the side, the stern paddler can paddle on the
side opposite the wind. Any of those methods will work if
you have patience and aren’t battling a gusty headwind
or a current. If you’re in a hurry or a jam, you can always
switch sides every few strokes. Marathon racers routinely
switch sides to relieve muscle fatigue, and their boats track
well. However, novices trying the hit-and-switch technique
tend to zigzag or snake through the water. It’s worth the
effort to learn other techniques for maintaining a straight
course. Tandem and solo sprint racers make a beeline over
a kilometer or more, and anyone taking the time to switch
sides during those races would lose.
Stern Correction Stroke
The stern paddler can always pull the bow toward their paddling side by adding a hook, pry, or reverse sweep at the
end of a forward stroke. Whitewater paddlers make those combinations to forcibly turn the bow in the direction they
desire. However, those techniques are more powerful than needed by a flat-water cruiser, tend to make the boat
zigzag, and kill forward momentum. Only a slight modification to a cruising forward stroke is normally needed to make
the necessary course correction.
The stern paddler wishing to compensate for the tendency to veer off course simply rotates the paddle during the
completion of a forward power stroke by turning the thumb of the grip hand downward. The rotation begins as the
blade nears the hip. Once the blade is parallel to the centerline, it is pulled past the hip and then lifted from the
water. The amount of correction can be adjusted by when the rotation is started, by varying the angle the paddle
is rotated, and by moving the grip hand slightly outboard of the shaft hand. The proper name for this stroke is the
pitch stroke. If a turn is needed rather than a simple correction, the blade can be pushed outward at the end of
the stroke. That makes the pitch stroke more akin to the classic J stroke.
Each paddler generates a rotational force,
or torque, like a person sitting on a swivel
chair pushing with a ski pole on one side.
Torque depends on the distance from the center of
rotation. The stern paddler typically generates more,
like the person at the end of the seesaw, and the canoe
veers off course.


Chapter 18: Canoeing Skills18-10
Draw and Pry
The draw stroke pulls the canoe toward your paddling
side. Rotate your shoulders to face the onside gunwale,
reach out with both arms, and plant the paddle in the
water with the shaft vertical, one hand above the other,
and the blade facing you. Then draw the canoe to the
paddle.
If you need to make another draw, recover in the water
by turning the blade perpendicular to the canoe and slid-
ing it back out as you rotate to face the side. The thumb
on your grip hand will point out.
Although both arms will be extended over the water, keep your body over the canoe to maintain stability.
The pry pushes the canoe away from your paddling side. Rotate as you would for a
draw stroke, but place the paddle against the side of the canoe with the shaft verti-
cal when viewed from the side. Your shaft hand should be just above the gunwale.
Your grip hand should be slightly outboard. Use the boat as a fulcrum to lever the
canoe sideways as you pull back with your grip hand. The stroke should be short and
powerful—don’t pull in past the center. If you need another pry, feather the blade in
the water and slice it back into position.
If the canoe has straight or flared sides, the paddle will pivot on the gunwale. The
contact may be further down on a boat with tumblehome (inward curve of the side
above the waterline).
There are numerous variations to the stroke just described. Any technique that lets you track straight without
killing forward momentum accomplishes the task.
When you are first perfecting your stern steering stroke, concentrate on the motion of the blade rather than the
direction the canoe is heading. Proceed slowly and stop just before the recovery to make sure your grip thumb
is pointing down, the shaft is parallel to the canoe, and the blade is aligned fore and aft.
Once you think you have the idea, then work to keep the canoe on course. To check your mastery, try the stroke
solo. Have the bow paddler turn to face aft while you demonstrate and explain the stroke.
If you try the stroke solo from a stop, you may need to take a few strokes starting with a short diagonal draw
until you gain momentum. It also helps to learn in a boat that tracks well.


Chapter 18: Canoeing Skills18-11
Communication Tip: Tandem paddlers operate as a team. For long straight passages on flat water, the
bow paddler provides power while the stern paddler makes minor course corrections, but both paddlers
must work together when major course changes are needed. Clear instructions are essential, particularly
if the course change must be done quickly. “Port” and “starboard,” as well as “onside” and “offside,” have
their uses, but it’s hard to beat “right” and “left” to indicate direction. Canoeists almost always face for-
ward. At other times, it may be useful to call out the name of a stroke. Either paddler may initiate action
as required and should be able to rely on the other to respond appropriately.
Moving Sideways
Draws and pries are used in opposition to move the canoe sideways (abeam). Various combinations are shown
below. Moving sideways may be useful from a stationary position, such as pulling away from a dock or assisting
a person in distress; or while moving, for instance to avoid a submerged stump.
Sweeps
During a sweep, the paddle moves in an arc, or part of a circle. Forward sweeps with the paddle moving aft turn
the canoe away from the paddling side. Reverse sweeps with the paddle moving forward turn the canoe toward
the paddling side. In tandem canoeing, sweeps are quarter circles between the ends of the canoe and the side of
the paddler.
A person in the bow begins a forward quarter sweep by
rotating the onside shoulder toward the bow. The grip hand
is kept low, and the shaft hand slides away from the throat as
the blade is laid along the bow perpendicular to the water.
The blade is pulled away from the canoe as the torso is
rotated to face forward. The blade is kept submerged
near the surface. The power phase ends when the shaft
becomes perpendicular to the centerline.
To recover, the blade is feathered flat over the water and
arced back to the bow.
Desired travel direction Desired travel direction


Chapter 18: Canoeing Skills18-12
A forward quarter sweep in the stern position begins
perpendicular to the canoe and arcs to the rear.
A reverse quarter sweep in the stern position begins at
the stern and arcs forward until the shaft is perpendicular
to the canoe.
A reverse quarter sweep in the bow position begins with the
shaft perpendicular to the canoe and arcs toward the bow.
Turns and Pivots
Forward sweeps are used for gradual turns while under way. To turn away from the bow paddler’s side, the
bow paddler sweeps. To make the turn sharper, the stern paddler can add a pry at the end of a forward
stroke.
To turn the other direction, the stern paddler sweeps. The bow paddler can assist in making a sharper turn by
adding a draw at the beginning of a forward stroke.


Chapter 18: Canoeing Skills18-13
Pivots are handy when you’ve been exploring a narrow cove and need to turn around. Pivots are circular turns within
the boat’s own length made around the boat’s center. They may be done in one direction with both paddlers doing a
draw, or in the other direction with both paddlers doing a pry.
Stopping and Moving Backward
To stop a canoe, “hold water” with the blade vertical in the water
at the end of a stroke.
To hasten the stop, or to move backward, stroke in reverse. Rotate
your shoulders aft, place the blade in the water near your hips,
and push the blade forward. When you can no longer keep the
paddle reasonably vertical, feather it back to the starting point
and repeat the stroke.
Quickly stopping a canoe that is traveling fast takes a large force
to hold the paddle in place. It helps to hold the shaft against the
side of the boat, but be careful about using your thumb to hold
the paddle in place.
Rescue of a Distressed Swimmer
A canoe may be used as a rescue craft at a unit swim. Units on float trips may also be in a position to rescue
swimmers or boaters without a life jacket who have been separated from their craft. Approach a distressed swim-
mer from stable paddling positions—kneeling, if possible. If you have an extra flotation device aboard, throw it
to the swimmer as you approach bow first. After the subject has grasped the aid, or if there is no aid available,
the bow paddler reaches out with a paddle. Once the subject grabs hold, the bow paddler swings the subject and
bow together to allow the subject to grasp the end of the canoe. The bow paddler should give clear instructions
throughout.
Counterclockwise pivot


Chapter 18: Canoeing Skills18-14
Swamped Boat Drill
Most canoeists inadvertently swamp a boat now and then. An intentional capsize helps prepare the boater for
such an accident. To safely capsize a canoe, both paddlers should sit on the bottom of the boat facing the same
side with their legs over the gunwale. One hand is placed on each gunwale. The partners then move their weight
over the bilge and, if necessary, gently rock from side to side until water comes in over the gunwale and fills the
boat. The boat should settle in the water rather than flip.
Canoes will float even when filled with water. Capsized canoeists should remain with the boat, which is more eas-
ily spotted by rescuers than are swimmers. If near the shore, the swamped canoeists may swim the boat ashore
or paddle it with their hands while sitting upright on the bottom. Their buddy boat should be nearby at all times.
Canoe-Over-Canoe Recovery
If the water is calm, the shore fairly distant, and the canoes not very loaded, then the buddy boat may elect to per-
form a canoe-over-canoe rescue, provided the swamped canoeists are not injured or in danger of hypothermia. If the
swamped canoeists are in distress, then they should either be brought aboard the rescue craft or be towed immedi-
ately to shore unless the rescuers are proficient enough to retrieve their boat quickly. If the swamped boat is fully
loaded with gear, it may be more practical for the rescue boat to tow it ashore.
Come alongside the capsized canoe while instructing the people in the water to move first to the ends of their
boat and then to the ends of your boat on the far side. Either transfer their gear to your boat or let it float free
for later retrieval.
The bow paddler turns to face the stern and may need to move toward the center. Swing the capsized canoe at a
right angle to yours. As you raise the end, turn the canoe bottom up and rest the end on your gunwale.


Chapter 18: Canoeing Skills18-15
Ease the swamped canoe across the gunwales of your canoe, scooting it along until it is balanced. Roll the cap-
sized canoe upright across your canoe and then slide it back onto the water on the same side you brought it from.
Hold the emptied canoe alongside yours and stabilize it as its crew climbs back aboard one at a time. Allowing
the gunwale near your boat to lift slightly will make it easier for them to board.
See the Canoeing merit badge pamphlet for the Parallel Canoe Rescue.
Deepwater Entry
If you fall overboard without swamping your canoe, or need to reenter a canoe after a canoe-over-canoe recov-
ery, then the following technique will be useful. Your partner or buddy boat can help by steadying the canoe with
the gunwale down on the side you are entering.
Enter from the middle where the gunwale is lowest; push down on the gunwale with both hands to bring your hips
above the water. A strong kick may help. Your partner needs to provide counterbalance.
As your hips come up, lean forward to grasp the opposite gunwale or along a thwart.
Rotate your hips to sit inside the canoe with your legs over the gunwale. Then bring your feet aboard. Move
to a paddling position to steady the boat if your buddy still needs to enter.
Other procedures for deep water entry are shown in the Canoeing merit badge pamphlet, for example, the
heel hook method.
1 2
3


Chapter 18: Canoeing Skills18-16
Technical Aside: Power to the Paddle
Books on canoeing often note that the canoe is pulled to the paddle rather than the paddle moved through
the water. When the canoe is moving at a reasonable pace, the paddle is almost stationary in the water, but
not quite. You move the canoe forward by accelerating water backward. Canoes, kayaks, swimmers, and
powerboats all respond according to Newton’s third law of motion: For every action, there is an equal and
opposite reaction. If the paddle, hand, or propeller didn’t slip at all, water would not be moved backward
(the action), and there would be no momentum imparted to the canoe through the paddle (the reaction).
Consider moving a large, heavily loaded canoe from a stop using a paddle. On your first stroke, you will
accelerate a mass of water backward, and the boat will respond by accelerating forward. The force on the
water (mass × acceleration according to Newton’s second law) imparts an opposite force of the same mag-
nitude on the boat. However, because the boat is massive (heavy), it will accelerate only a little compared
to the water moved by the paddle. During the stroke, the paddle may move backward more than the canoe
moves forward.
Although a single stroke won’t make the canoe move very fast, it is efficient. Some of the energy is lost to
friction—that is, pushing water aside—but most of it imparts momentum to the canoe. Were it not for fric-
tion, the boat would continue gliding slowly all the way across the lake (Newton’s first law). You can mini-
mize energy loss to friction by letting the boat glide to a stop between every stroke, but your pace will be
slow. Instead, take a few powerful strokes to reach the cruising speed you would like, and then cut back on
the power to balance propulsion against friction. Be aware that friction increases rapidly with speed. Short,
easy strokes at a uniform, relaxed pace will let you eat up the miles without overexertion.
Now consider the following diagram of paddle motion of an Olympic sprinter moving past a fixed point.
As the blade is punched into the still water, the shaft of
the paddle continues to move forward at boat speed. If the
paddler resisted that motion by holding the shaft fixed to
the boat, tremendous drag would result—that’s how you
stop.
If the paddler allows the shaft to move backward relative
to their body at the speed of the boat, little is accom-
plished. There is a bit of drag, but no energy added to the
boat. To add energy, the paddler must pull back on the
paddle to make it move backward faster than the canoe is
moving forward. That is, the still water must be acceler-
ated backward. To do that, the paddle must push backward
relative to a point fixed in the water. The end of the blade
rotates aft in the diagram, though not by much.
Once the water begins moving in response to the paddle, it must then be moved even faster to impart more
energy. That is, the water must be accelerated by an accelerating paddle. Moving the paddle backward at
constant speed doesn’t have much effect, either positive or negative. If you aren’t in a big hurry, it doesn’t
really hurt to allow the paddle to continue past your hip to the surface. You probably won’t win a race, but
neither will you noticeably pull the boat down into the water unless you jerk the blade upward. A slower
recovery allows your muscles to rest between strokes and allows time for a steering stroke.
The racer is only able to accelerate the paddle over a short distance. At this point, various physical and
physiological limits have been reached. All the paddler can do is add just enough energy to make up for the
energy lost due to the friction of the boat moving through the water. The boat continues toward the finish
line at fairly constant speed. The athlete is unable to move the paddle fast enough to make the boat go
faster.
Note that the paddle blade changes angle, or rotates about a moving point, during the power phase. Ideally,
the blade should be held vertically at all times, but that is not the case. Fixing the blade at an angle to the
shaft, as in a bent-shaft paddle, would allow a more vertical angle at the end of the power phase, but it is not
clear what impact that has on the entire stroke or how the timing of the stroke should be modified to take
advantage of the bend. The hydrodynamics are extremely complicated. Rather than rely on an oversimplified
analysis, be open to trying different paddle designs with various grips, shaft lengths, blade shapes, and blade
angles. Then enjoy paddling with whatever paddle strikes your fancy.


Chapter 18: Canoeing Skills18-17
Portaging
Two people can efficiently carry a canoe from a rack or a trailer a short distance to the water by grasping
each end. Other techniques are useful when longer distances are involved, particularly when gear needs
to be carried at the same time. The following techniques can be used to portage a canoe around a rapid or
between lakes.





Stand Up Paddleboarding
Stand up paddleboarding, stand up paddling, or simply SUP is a popular paddle sport. While various cultures
through the ages have made limited use of long paddles while standing in canoes, modern techniques and equip-
ment grew out of surfing. SUP then rapidly moved beyond the surf zone into flat water and rivers. Although some
of the basic mechanics of using a single-bladed paddle while standing on a board are similar to those used in
canoeing, stand up paddling has its own unique characteristics and devotees.
The Scouting America Stand Up Paddleboarding award introduces Scouts and Scouters to the basics of stand up
paddleboarding (SUP) on calm water, including skills, equipment, self rescue, and safety precautions. Require-
ments for that award are found in the appendices. This chapter may be reproduced and distributed to partici-
pants to serve as a guide for that award.
Chapter
19


Chapter 19: Stand Up Paddleboarding
19-2
SUP Equipment
Paddleboard Designs Stand up paddleboards vary based on their use, such as touring, whitewater,
racing, or surfing. Some boards are highly specialized for a specific activity or water environment. Other all-
around boards are suited for different activities across a range of water venues. Most boards are relatively wide
compared to their thickness, have a slightly up-turned nose, and are designed to skim on top of the water. Some
racing boards with narrow pointed hulls are designed to slice through the water. Some boards are rigid. Those
are occasionally made of wood, but more commonly of resin-saturated fiber over a form core. There are also
inflatable versions that are stiff enough for most uses and easier to transport.
Most boards are designed for a single paddler. Some longer boards are designed for two or more paddlers. A few
giant SUPs can accommodate several paddlers and/or passengers.
Stability is a basic need for beginners and depends primarily on the width of the board. However, the length,
thickness, and shape of the board, as well as the size of the paddler, also affect stability and ease of use. Begin-
ners should start with a basic all-around solo design approximately 10 to 12 feet long and at least 30 inches wide.
Parts of the Board and Paddle The front of the board is called the nose, the back is the tail, the
entire top is the deck, and the sides are rails. Many boards have a non-slip deck pad to help hold your feet to the
board. Some boards have bungee cords to help secure gear on the deck. There should be a leash cup near the
tail of the board to attach one end of the leash. Boards have one to three fins on the bottom near the tail to aid
tracking (going straight). The fins may be removable. There should be handles near the center of the board or on
the sides of the deck.
Touring SUP Whitewater SUP Racing SUP
Inflatable SUP Tandem SUP Giant SUP


Chapter 19: Stand Up Paddleboarding 19-3
Paddles SUP paddles are made of various materials. Many paddles have aluminum shafts with plastic, fiber-
glass, or nylon blades and grips. Others have shafts made of fiberglass or carbon fiber. Lighter, more expensive
models may be made entirely of carbon fiber. Blades may be rectangular or tear shaped and come in various
widths. Wider blades are more efficient, that is they transfer more of your energy into moving the boat rather
than the water. However, wide blades may be more tiring if you are pushing to maintain a fast pace. Most blades
are angled slightly forward relative to the shaft.
Many paddles have adjustable lengths. Those are useful to accommodate users of different heights. They may
also break down into shorter segments for transport. The preferred length varies somewhat by user and appli-
cation. Generally, when the blade is immersed in the water and the shaft is vertical, the grip hand should be
around shoulder height. Generally that means a paddle resting on the ground will be 8 to 12 inches taller than
the paddler.
Some less expensive adjustable paddles with aluminum shafts may sink if the paddle is left floating in the water
long enough for the shaft tube to fill with water. Quality paddles are naturally buoyant or have foam in the shaft.
Life jackets The U.S. Coast Guard considers paddleboards as vessels when they are used outside of designated
swim areas or surfing zones. Therefore, federal regulations concerning life jackets, sound devices, and lights apply.
Safety Afloat policies require life jackets to be worn by all participants during Scouting paddleboard activities.
Comfortable jackets with positive flotation surrounding the chest and back are recommended for all participants.
Inflatable life jackets may be appropriate in calm water for those 16 years of age or older. Check Chapter 13 in
Aquatics Supervision for additional guidance.
Whistles Federal rules require all vessels to carry a sound-producing device. A whistle attached to a life
jacket is appropriate for paddleboards.
Leashes A leash can be a crucial piece of equipment in numerous situations. Surfers use straight leashes to
prevent losing boards when falling in waves. A leash is also useful on calm water because even a slight wind can
blow your board away faster than you can swim, particularly while holding a long paddle.
For flat water, a coiled leash is appropriate since a straight leash may drag
in the water and snag paddle blades or other objects. One end is attached to
a fitting on the tail of the board and the other to a Velcro ankle or calf cuff.


Chapter 19: Stand Up Paddleboarding
19-4
In flowing rivers, with or without whitewater, leash use is not as straightforward since there is a possibility the leash
could lead to entanglement. For river use, the leash should be attached to your life jacket with a quick-release
mechanism, never to your ankle or calf. Seek specialized training before attempting SUP in moving water rivers or
whitewater, and follow the advice of your instructor. When in doubt, do not wear a leash in moving or whitewater.
Leashes may also not be appropriate for multiple paddlers on a giant SUP. In any situation where the extra layer of
protection provided by a leash is not utilized, then other aspects of the Safety Afloat policy such as the use of buddies,
buddy boats, and supervisors skilled in emergency response will help provide a safe outing.
Clothing Shoes are needed in most environments to protect your feet when getting on and off the board. Only
paddle barefoot at well-maintained, sandy beaches. Neoprene booties and wet suits are useful in cooler waters. A hat
and sunglasses provide sun protection.
Additional Items For touring activities, or any SUP activity outside of a controlled instructional environment,
additional equipment may need to be carried on the water. Examples include water bottles, water proof communication
devices, first aid supplies, and navigation aids.
SUP Safety
Various safety items, such as leashes and life jackets, were covered in the Equipment section. Both “Life Jackets”
and “Equipment” are points of the Safety Afloat policy which applies to all Scouting boating activities, including
SUP. Those nine points are:
1. Qualified Supervision 2. Personal Health Review 3. Swimming Ability
4. Life Jackets 5. Buddy System 6. Skill Proficiency
7. Planning 8. Equipment 9. Discipline
Here are a few highlights:
SUPERVISION
Skilled, knowledgable leaders
or instructors must directly
supervise SUP Scouting activities.
Those Qualified Supervisors are
responsible for all nine points of
Safety Afloat. Safety Afloat details
are found in the Guide to Safe
Scouting and Chapter 12 in Aquatics
Supervision.
BUDDIES
Each person on the water must
qualify as a swimmer and must
have a buddy. Buddies stay aware
of the other at all times and
provide assistance or call for help if
needed.
WATER, WEATHER, WIND,WAVES
Adjust plans to current and
changing environmental conditions.
Be cautious of winds blowing
offshore into open water, of
currents, or wave action that
increases with increasing distance
from the shore. Avoid areas
crowded with other water craft
and be aware of other users while
launching and paddling. Adjust
activities as needed for hot or cold
air and water temperatures.


Chapter 19: Stand Up Paddleboarding 19-5
Learning to Paddle
The skills needed to stay upright and move about on a stable
paddleboard in calm water are not difficult to learn. The
basics are covered below. However, like kayaking, canoeing,
or other boating activities, you may learn faster and better
with coaching from a knowledgeable instructor.
Scout counselors for the Stand Up Paddleboarding Award are
one resource. The American Canoe Association also offers
SUP skill and instructor courses.
Launching
To carry the paddleboard to the water by yourself, place one arm over the rail and grab the handle or hand well
in the center of the board. Bend with your knees to lift the board - do not bend with your back. Some boards have
attachment points for a shoulder carry strap. If the board is too heavy, too long to balance well, or is caught by
the wind, use a two person carry. One person places an arm over the nose, the other places an arm around the
tail. Be careful to avoid the fin(s).
When launching from a shallow beach, wade far enough into the water so that the fins clear the bottom. The
board may be placed parallel or perpendicular to shore. A parallel launch may also be used from a pier. Be sure
to attach your leash before moving away, either just before or after placing the board in the water.


Chapter 19: Stand Up Paddleboarding
19-6
Getting in Position
Experienced paddlers, particularly with a wide board, can step onto the center of the board from shallow water
while bracing themselves with their hands, and then rise to a standing position. (Not recommended)
Most paddlers should first assume a kneeling position even if they are comfortable balancing on the board.
Kneeling Position
Kneeling is a good way for beginners to get a feel for the
board before standing up. It is also a good safety position
when stability is an issue, such as crossing waves generated
by the wakes of passing motorboats, or moving away from
a crowded pier. Beginners should practice moving from
kneeling to standing and back.
Since the paddle is sized for standing, it is often necessary
to adjust your grip. Options are an over/under grip, a double
overhand grip, or a standard grip, as shown in the photos.
Don’t submerge the paddle blade deeper than the throat.


Chapter 19: Stand Up Paddleboarding 19-7
From Kneeling to Standing
One way to move from kneeling to standing is to place your paddle on the board in front of you with the blade on
one side and the grip on the other. Keeping your hands on the shaft, and staying balanced on the board, slowly
drag one foot up underneath your body. Next bring your other foot forward while slowly standing up.
The tripod method is another option to rise from the kneeling position. Place the blade of the paddle in the
center of the board in front of you with the grip pointing toward the sky. Then, maintaining your balance in the
center of the board, hold the shaft in an over/under grip and begin to slowly bring one foot forward underneath
your body. You can then walk your hands up the shaft while bringing the other foot forward. After you are
standing, steady yourself by placing the paddle blade in the water. Shift your weight about to learn how to use
the paddle to brace yourself.
Standing & Paddle Positions for the Forward Stroke
Stand near the middle of the board with your feet
about shoulder width apart. Move slightly forward
and backwards and note whether the nose or tail
move up or down. Find the spot where the board is
in trim, that is, resting flat on the water. One foot
can be slightly forward of the other. Stand straight,
with your knees relaxed.
Position the paddle upright near one side of the
board with the blade submerged to the throat. The
paddle length should be such that the grip is around
shoulder to chin height. Grasp the grip with the
hand from the side opposite the blade. Slide your
other hand (on the blade side) down the shaft until
your arm is reasonably straight. Then move both
hands until one is above the other when looking
from both the front and the side.


Chapter 19: Stand Up Paddleboarding
19-8
The reason for stacking one hand above the other is to
keep the paddle blade close to the boat. If you don’t
reach across with your grip hand, the paddle shifts from
vertical to an angle, when viewed from the front. That
places the blade away from the rail and will cause the
board to turn.
A slight bend in the elbow of your shaft hand may be
more comfortable than keeping your lower arm always
straight. However, you gain mechanical advantage the
further your hands are separated on the shaft, so don’t
keep your hands too close together.
Paddle Power Face
A SUP is propelled forward when the paddle blade
pushes backwards against the water. That motion is most
efficient when the blade is vertical, that is, perpendicular
to the direction of motion. However, the blade rotates
during a forward stroke so the angle changes.
Most SUP paddle blades are set at an angle to the shaft,
from 7 to 15 degrees or so, when viewed from the
side. The blade may also be curved vertically and/or
horizontally. Conventionally, the blade is angled toward
the nose of the board. The premise is that the blade
should be more vertical at the end of the stroke.
Novice paddlers often intuitively turn the blade in the
other direction so that the blade enters the water more
vertically when the paddle is extended forward. For
a flat blade, the best angle actually depends on how
power is applied to the paddle.
Basic Strokes
Forward Reverse Sweep Draw
Gaining skill in four basic strokes should provide the SUP paddler the ability to move the board where needed on
calm water. That is, variations in, and combinations of, the forward, reverse, sweep, and draw strokes will move
the board frontwards, backwards, and sideways, as well as turning and spinning the board.
Motion of paddle toward tail of board.
Side view of blade Cross section of blade
Flat
Dihedral


Chapter 19: Stand Up Paddleboarding 19-9
Forward Stroke
Three key components of the forward stroke are
the catch phase, the power phase, and the recovery
phase. At the start of the catch phase, reach forward
by rotating your shoulders and hips and extending your
shaft hand. The tip of the blade should be just above
the water and near the rail.
Smoothly plant the blade into the water by pushing
down with your grip hand and begin pulling back at the
same time. Submerge the blade to the throat.
During the power phase, the goal is to pull the board
towards the paddle. Unwind your body and pull back
with your shaft hand to apply a backwards force on the
paddle blade.
Keep the paddle blade close to the rail and continue to
apply force until the blade passes your feet.
Watch where you are headed rather than watching the
paddle blade.
The recovery phase begins as the blade passes your feet. To avoid drag, don’t lift the blade forward through the
water. Instead, continue to pull the blade along the rail just fast enough to avoid slowing the board. At the same
time, slice the blade sideways out of the water by lowering your grip hand across the board and lifting your shaft
hand away from the rail (a). The goal is to smoothly transition the blade from the water to the air. You should
not be lifting water at the end of the stroke by forcibly jerking the blade upwards while the board moves past it.
Once the blade clears the water, swing the paddle forward into the catch position as you rewind your body. (b)
Note: The three phases of the stroke are sometimes described as five phases: reach, catch, power,
release, recovery. The reach positions the blade for the catch. Recovery (a) above is the release.
Catch
Power
Recovery
(b)
Recovery
(a)


Chapter 19: Stand Up Paddleboarding
19-10
Going Straight
After just a few forward strokes on the same side, the board will turn away from your paddling side. One way
for beginners to go reasonably straight is to switch sides every few strokes. Lift the paddle across the board and
interchange your grip and shaft hands. Downsides of switching sides include taking more effort, interrupting your
paddling rhythm,and the nose of the board wobbling first one way and then the other.
As you gain experience, you can add a gentle course correction at either the beginning (a) or end (b) of your
forward stroke to avoid changing sides. Both will take a bit of practice and can be adjusted for different boards
and conditions.
The first technique (a) begins with the catch. Plant the blade in the water with the power face angled toward
the board and pull straight back. Force applied to angled blade for the first foot or so of the stroke will gently
pull the nose toward the paddling side. The effect diminishes as the center of the board approaches the paddle,
so finish the stroke with the blade perpendicular to the board.
The second technique (b) applies the correction as you start the recovery phase. Rather than immediately slicing
the blade out of the water after it passes your feet, point the thumb of your grip hand down to rotate the power
face of the blade away from the board. In essence, the blade serves as an extra fin and moving rudder.
Once you build speed and momentum through the water, the fins should help the board move in a straight line. If
you are starting from a stop, the first procedure (a) can begin with an angled draw toward the board. The second
procedure (b) may need a slight push away from the board at the end. Standing slightly toward your paddling side
will lower the rail and may also help you track straight.
(a) (b)


Chapter 19: Stand Up Paddleboarding 19-11
Reverse Stroke and Stopping
To stop the board or move backward, use the reverse stroke. The reverse stroke is a near opposite of the forward
stroke and has the same three phases: catch, power, and recovery. Rotate your torso and hips toward your pad-
dling side and place the paddle blade behind you in the water next to the rail, with the back face of the blade
facing down. (That is, you don’t need to flip the paddle.) Keeping the shaft as vertical as possible, push the
blade forward with your shaft arm while unwinding your torso and hips. Keep your shaft arm reasonably straight
to transfer power from your shoulder rather than bending your elbow. Once the blade is no longer vertical in the
water (usually after it passes your feet), begin the recovery phase by dropping your grip hand down toward the
center line of the board to slice the blade out of the water. Then swing the paddle back to the catch position.
If you are using the reverse stroke to stop a fast moving board, it will likely take more than one stroke. You may
find it useful to take the second stroke on the opposite side of the board to avoid turning.
Sweep Strokes and Turning
Both the forward stroke and reverse stroke can be used to change direction. To do a wide turn away from your
paddling side, move the blade farther away from the rail during the power phase of the forward stroke. To turn
in the other direction, simply switch sides. For a sharper turn, follow a forward stroke on one side with a reverse
stroke on the opposite side. However, adding a sweep stroke to your tool kit provides more options for efficient
turns and pivots.
The forward sweep turns the nose of the board away from the paddling side. If you are starting from a stop, the
sweep tends to rotate the board about your standing position along with a bit of forward motion. With your knees
slightly bent, rotate your torso and hips so that you place the paddle blade close to the nose of the board. Your
grip hand will be lower and closer to the far rail than in the forward stroke. The thumb on your grip hand should
be in a thumbs-up position to assure that the blade is in the correct orientation before beginning the power
phase. Dip the blade into the water and unwind your hips and torso so that the blade makes a wide sweeping arc
away from the rail. For the maximum turning effect, continue to rotate your body so that the blade exits the
water close to the tail of the board. However, you can start and end the power phase of the stroke in different
positions along the arc depending on how much you want the board to turn. Recover by lifting the blade from the
water and doing a reverse arc in the air.
Catch Power Recovery


Chapter 19: Stand Up Paddleboarding
19-12
You can switch paddling sides to turn the board in the
opposite direction. Alternately, you can do a reverse sweep
to turn the board toward your paddling side. Other than
switching direction, the technique is similar to that of the
forward sweep.
Draw Stroke to Move Sideways
The draw stroke is used to move sideways. Begin the stroke by rotating your torso and hips until your shoulders
are parallel to the center line of the board. Reach out to the side and place the blade into the water parallel to
the rail. Using your torso and arms, draw the board toward the blade for the power phase.
One way to recover (not shown) is to drop your grip hand forward toward the nose, thereby slicing the blade out
of the water behind you. Another way, particularly suited for another draw stroke, is to rotate your grip hand
thumb out to turn the blade perpendicular to the board. Slide the blade out through the water, then turn the
thumb of your grip hand to face the tail.
You can adjust how the board moves by changing the angle of the draw relative to the board’s center line. The
fins will also influence the lateral movement of the board.
Falls and Recovery
Try to anticipate and avoid situations that may lead to a fall. For example, if a motorboat with a large wake
approaches from a distance, you may want to kneel until the waves arrive and die down. However, sooner or later
you are going to fall. If you feel yourself losing balance and cannot easily recover by bracing with your paddle, try
Power Recover


Chapter 19: Stand Up Paddleboarding 19-13
to fall away from the board with your paddle held to the side. You do not want your elbow or chin to hit the board
when falling, nor do you want your board to shoot out away from you and potentially injure someone else nearby.
When you are first learning to use a stand up paddleboard, you should practice controlled falls under safe
conditions so you are prepared when it happens for real. Make sure the water is clear of hazards and deep enough
that you do not strike the bottom. Your buddy boat should be close enough to provide assistance if needed, but
not so close that you hit it when you fall.
To get back on the board after a fall, approach the center of the board from the side. Using a handle or hand
well, pull/lift your upper torso over the rail and onto the deck. Next, slide around into the prone position. Unless
there is a strong current, you can place your paddle next to the board and retrieve it after you remount since it
will float. If you try to remount from the tail of the board, be very careful that you do not get cut by the fin(s)
or that the board does not shoot out in front of you and injure someone.
Prone Position
If the conditions that led to your fall have not improved, or you lose your paddle, the prone portion is a back-up
safety position to kneeling. You lay flat on the board and stroke with your arms. The arms can alternate, like with
the crawl swimming stroke, or pull at the same time as in the breast stroke. Be wary of other boaters since it is
harder for you to both see and be seen. Others in your group may be able to guide you to safety. However, if you
are having difficulty, they may also have problems.
Beyond the Basics
There are additional strokes and maneuvers
to learn after the basics. Stepping back
when performing a sweep reduces nose drag
by raising it out of the water and also shifts
the pivot point above the fins. Cross strokes
are sometimes useful. Racers extend their
reach by leaning forward.


Chapter 19: Stand Up Paddleboarding
19-14
Other SUP Activities and Environments
As mentioned at the beginning of this chapter, there is more to SUP than the basic calm water skills covered here.
Options include touring, racing, whitewater, and surfing. Seek out others with similar interests to expand your
enjoyment of the sport and to improve your knowledge and skills. However, but don’t push beyond the confidence
zones of yourself and your colleagues. Learn critical new skills under the guidance of experienced instructors.
All SUP activities conducted during Scouting events must follow Safety Afloat policies.
Acknowledgment
Thanks to the American Canoe Association
for reviewing this material, helping with the
Stand Up Paddleboarding award, and provid-
ing several photos.


Paddling on Flowing Water
River paddling has several allures. Drifting down a river with the current is much easier than fighting a strong
headwind on a lake. Running an obstacle course over small drops and ripples adds thrills and challenges. However,
safely meeting the challenges of moving water requires knowledge, skill and experience. Basic flat-water skills
provide a good foundation but are not sufficient for river paddling.
This chapter provides a basic introduction to river features and the skills needed to maneuver in a current
without rapids. Whitewater features are covered in the next chapter. A joint American Canoe Association and
Scouting America video provides additional information on both. That video may be accessed via the digital link
or the QR code.
Chapter 7 on Swimming Locations also reviews basic river features.
Rivers and Rapids Video
20Chapter


Chapter 20: Paddling on Flowing Water20-2
River Basics
All free-flowing rivers have currents, but not all rivers have the drops and obstacles that create whitewater rapids.
There are many more miles of rivers navigable by small boats without rapids than there are with white water.
Therefore, we’ll begin with currents. The strength of a current depends on the amount of water and the
speed. The amount of water changes with seasonal runoff and can increase rapidly due to upstream rainfall or
convergence of tributaries. The speed of the current for a fixed amount of water varies with the width and depth
of the channel and the gradient, that is, how much the river bottom slopes downhill. The flow of a broad river
constricted into a narrow canyon speeds up. The speed of the current slows down exiting the canyon onto a flat,
broad plain.
The shape a river takes depends on the total flow and local geology. Forces within the earth raise mountains, but
rivers shape the land and eventually move material from the mountains into the sea. Competent river paddlers
know how to read a river, and reading a river is easier if you understand some simple geologic concepts of fluvial
(river) systems.
In mountain country, water cascading downhill erodes weaker rocks to form channels. The channels tend to be
steep and narrow with abrupt drops, and that leads to white water. Eventually, the rivers form wide valleys and
wear the land into broad plateaus or plains. Rivers in valleys or on the plains continuously rework the soils and
sediments they have deposited in previous ages. The channels are not straight conduits to the sea, but rather
twist and turn or meander. In steep valleys, the meanders are gentle curves. On flat plains, meanders can form
large, complicated loops. Each meander has a cutting edge that erodes sediments. The curve cuts through the
land and becomes tighter. Eventually, high water during floods will break through the neck and temporarily
straighten the river. The process then starts over. In flood stage, water extends from bank to bank, or beyond. In
low water, the flow may break up into several different channels, each meandering within the overall width of
the riverbed. Rivers nearing the sea may also divide into numerous smaller channels, with the current switching
direction depending on the tide.
The meander process has important implications
for the boater. As the river switches from one
curve to the other, there will be short stretches of
relatively straight channel. In a straight channel,
the fastest current is in the middle. Because faster
currents erode quicker than slower currents, the
deepest water will also be near the center of a
straight channel. The faster center current will
also pull water in from the sides. That is, floating
objects may drift to the middle.
In a curved riverbed, the fastest current and
deepest water will be on the outside of the bend;
the current on the inside of the bend will be less.
The faster water on the outside of the curve
erodes the bank, which means access on that side
is often difficult. Larger sediment particles fall out
of suspension as the current slows, so the inside
curves of a river often have shallow sandy stretches
that make good launching and landing sites. fast,deep slow,
shallow


Chapter 20: Paddling on Flowing Water20-3
At low to medium water levels, you will want
to travel in the channel to avoid grounding
or hitting the bottom with your paddle. That
means you will travel from one side of the
river to the other to stay on the outside of
the meanders. You mainly stay parallel to the
current. Cutting across a bend near the inside
bank might be shorter, but you normally will
make better time if you stay in the channel.
If the river splits into several channels, follow
the one that seems to have the greatest flow.
If you find yourself on a river with the water rising, you may wish to avoid the main current while looking for a
safe place to take out early. In that case, stay toward the inside of a curve, and toward the bank rather than in
the center of straight stretches. That means you need to move from one side to the other across the current flow.
That can be tricky in swift water unless you do a ferry maneuver. Ferries are an important skill in a river runner’s
toolbox and will be covered a bit latter.
Strainers
Trees often grow along rivers, even on the plains. As the meander cuts away the bank along the outside bend of
a river, trees fall and become lodged across the strongest current. Strainers effectively block the channel for
boaters with little effect on the current. Sweepers are trees leaning over with branches in the water. Both can pose
significant hazards to the paddler. Look well ahead for strainers, and be particularly careful coming around tight
bends where visibility is limited. If there is a strainer ahead in the main current, then hug the inside of the bend to
avoid it. Stop and scout if there is any doubt of getting around the obstruction. Strainers are particularly dangerous
for novice river paddlers in strong currents - paddling harder without control of direction is not enough. Moving
across the current is a skill acquired through experience. Although many strainers are located near the cut bank,
floods can dislodge trees and move them just about anywhere. Some can be hiding just under the surface. Avoid any
branches sticking out of the water.
current >
current >
>>>
>>>


Chapter 20: Paddling on Flowing Water20-4
Undercut Cliffs
I f the cut bank is formed from rock rather than soil, erosion will be slower, and meanders tend to have less
curvature. However, erosion still occurs. Scouring over the years will cut into the rock below the waterline
while leaving the cliff face above the waterline intact. Different rocks erode at different rates, so the profile
of the bank may vary above and below the water. In some rivers, bottom erosion will match or exceed erosion
to the side, and you may be able to drift along in the shadow of an overhanging cliff. However, in other rivers,
particularly at normal or high water flows, underwater currents may sweep in an undercut channel just below the
surface. Such features may be invisible from above and can be dangerous if a capsized boat or swimmer is swept
underwater. Because such hazards may not be apparent from the surface, be leery of strong currents against rock
cliffs and check river guidebooks and others who have traveled the river before. If the river is not wide and slow
enough to avoid the undercut bank, the area should be portaged.
Road Crossings
Large bridges may have supports in rivers but those are generally easy to avoid. Back country roads may have
concrete pads at river level. Those are typically called low water crossings since cars can only pass when river
flow is minimal. Paddlers often need to get out of their boats to walk across the road bed which might be
slippery due to algae. Some rivers have very low bridges with the water flowing beneath rather than over the
roadway. Those can be hazardous and should be portaged.


Chapter 20: Paddling on Flowing Water20-5
Low-Head Dams and Horizon Lines
Some small rivers have low-head dams or weirs stretching in a level line from one bank to the other. The river
falls evenly over the structure and often creates an extremely dangerous recirculating flow, or hydraulic, at the
foot of the dam. These are aptly called “drowning machines” and should never be run. Identify any dams during
trip planning and make sure each can be safely portaged. When on the river, look well ahead for a horizon line
indicating you are approaching a low-head dam (or waterfall). The abrupt drop in river level below a low-head
dam makes the river appear to disappear momentarily beyond the level horizon line across the river.
Current Measures
The total amount of water passing a point in a set time is measured
in cubic feet per sec (cfs). River flows are often reported daily in
newspapers and on newscasts, particularly for rivers where the flow
depends on dam releases. Other rivers have gauges that measure the
height of the water relative to some datum. Neither a flow report nor
a gauge reading by itself will tell you if there is sufficient water for an
enjoyable float trip, or too much water for a safe trip. A large river at
low levels may flow several thousand cfs; the same level in a smaller
river would indicate a major flood. Check river guidebooks for sources
of flow information for specific rivers and suggested safe levels, and
note the level during any trip you take for future reference.
If you suspect the water is rising during a float trip, take a short break onshore and note
the level by placing a rock or stick at the river’s edge. If the water covers your gauge
after a few minutes, it’s time to consider your alternate takeouts. If you are spending
the night on the river, set up a makeshift gauge and check it in the morning. Changes
in level due to rain or dam releases upstream of your location may not be immediately
obvious.
The most important thing to remember in river paddling is that moving water has tremendous, unrelenting power.
Suppose a canoe in a current strikes a rock and comes to a sudden stop. Since energy increases with the square of
the speed, the energy required to stop the canoe from 5 miles per hour will be four times that at 2.5 mph, even
though the speed only doubled. However, the energy also depends on the mass. The impact on a rock of an empty
canoe drifting at 5 mph is about the same as dropping the canoe on the rock from a height of 10 inches—not
something you want to do, particularly on a sharp rock, but the canoe will likely survive. Now swamp the canoe
so it is drifting along full of water. The impact on the rock will now be similar to dropping an empty canoe on the
rock from 28 feet. You don’t want to be between a swamped canoe and a rock any more than you want to try to
catch an empty canoe dropped from a two-story building.
You can also get a feel for the power in moving water by comparing it to the power in moving air. Water weighs
770 times more than air, so water flowing at only 3 mph has roughly the same energy per cubic foot as a hurri-
cane-force 80 mph wind. Put another way, standing on top of a car traveling at 80 mph would be very difficult
(and extremely foolish). Standing neck-deep in a 3 mph current would be about as hard.


Chapter 20: Paddling on Flowing Water20-6
Also note that how you position yourself influences your interaction with the wind or the current. Point a closed
umbrella into a wind, and the force on the umbrella is small. Open the umbrella pointed into the wind and
the force increases significantly, but not as much as it would if you opened the umbrella to catch the wind.
The same applies to a boat in a current. Point the boat with the current, and the force will be less than
with the boat turned sideways to the current. If a swamped canoe is snagged by a strainer with gunwales
facing downstream, the force will be less than with the gunwales facing upstream.
Sideslips
Most of the time, you should keep the canoe parallel to the current and make course adjustments by moving the
canoe sideways. In a solo canoe or kayak, use either a draw stroke or a pry. In a tandem canoe, one person does
a pry while the other does a draw. Sideslips are used to align the boat to pass between bridge pilings, to follow
the channel in shallow rivers, and to avoid obstacles such as a submerged tree lurking just below the surface.
Suppose there is a rock or other obstacle dead ahead in a strong current. You
might think about using a sweep to turn the front of the boat to the side, like
you would steer a car. In the river, that is like putting a car into a skid. You turn
sideways to the rock while continuing to move forward. If you wait too long
for the strength of the current, the result will be to broach on the obstacle. It
doesn’t take much current to bend a canoe in half.
If a broach appears unavoidable, try to lean the boat toward the obstacle so
that the current will flow around the bottom of the hull rather than into the
boat. Your first concern, however, is to avoid being trapped between the boat
and the obstacle. If the boat does not quickly slide past the object, get clear
of the boat, fast.
The better way to avoid an isolated obstacle is to slideslip the canoe using
draw and pry strokes. That is, to keep the canoe parallel to the current.
Tandem canoeing in a river requires teamwork. The stern paddler is
sometimes in a better position to make general course corrections, but
the bow paddler is more likely to first notice an obstacle just below the
surface. Clear verbal communication is a must, but a team used to paddling
together will automatically take cues from each other. For example, if the
bow paddler begins a draw or a pry to avoid an object, an experienced
stern paddler should automatically perform a matching stroke to move the
boat sideways.


Chapter 20: Paddling on Flowing Water20-7
Ferries
River paddlers strive to use the power of the current to advantage, rather than trying to work against it. One such
strategy is used to cross from one side of a river to the other. You can move across a current with draws and pries
while drifting downstream. That keeps your craft parallel to the current, which is good, but you’ll travel a long way
down river before you make it all the way across. You might be tempted to strike straight across, but that will turn
your boat broadside to the current and you will still sweep downstream at the speed of the current. Alternately,
you can stop near one bank, turn around, and paddle upstream at an angle with your bow pointed ahead of where
you expect to land. The last maneuver is one version of a ferry, named for an analogous technique used by a barge
connected to each bank with a rope or cable. To understand how a ferry makes use of the current, it’s useful to
look at the barge analogy.
A barge connected by pulleys to a line stretched across the
river can be pulled across by grasping the rope. However, if the
barge is set at a slight angle to the current, the water itself
will move the ferry from one side to the other. Current striking
the upstream side of the barge pushes it sideways as well as
downstream. Tension in the rope cancels out the downstream
portion, and the remaining force will move the barge across
the current without the ferry operators pulling on the rope.
(There is a counter force at the narrow end of the barge, but
it is smaller than the force on the long side.) To move back to
the other side, the operators reverse the angle to the current.
The upstream end is always angled toward the opposite bank
in the direction of desired travel.
If a canoe or kayak is paddled upstream with the bow angled slightly toward the opposite shore, the current will
provide the sideways force while the paddlers substitute for the rope. If the paddlers are able to match the cur-
rent in strength, the boat will slide across like the barge. More likely, there will be downstream drift, but not as
much as if paddling straight across. A larger angle speeds the crossing but also results in more slippage. In tandem
boats, the person in the stern holds the angle with pries and draws while the person in the bow attempts to hold
position with forward strokes. A solo paddler has to maintain the angle while also moving against the current.
A downstream ferry is done with the boat facing downstream, but
with back strokes used to counter the current. The stern is angled
toward the opposite bank.
Note that it is the angle of the boat to the current, not to the shore,
that determines the ferry angle. Also note that ferries are more
difficult if the upstream end is trimmed lower than the downstream
end. An unbalanced boat will work like a weather vane with the deep
end swinging downstream.
Paddling cross current Downstream ferry
<<< current <<<
<<< downstream <<<


Chapter 20: Paddling on Flowing Water20-8
Eddies
Any fixed obstacle blocks the current and creates a “shadow” zone immediately downstream. Water flows side-
ways from the deflected current to fill in the shielded region. If the obstacle is wide enough, water will actually
flow upstream for a short distance. The area of reverse flow is known as an eddy, and the boundary between
downstream and upstream flow is called an eddy line. Boaters crossing an eddy line unawares risk capsize as the
opposing currents carry the bow and stern in different directions and the boat pivots.
Whitewater paddlers make use of small eddies behind midstream rocks as rest stops and scouting locations. To do
so, they need to develop precise eddy turns to quickly move into a tight location. Paddlers on larger rivers with-
out obstacles are more likely to encounter eddies on the inside of tight bends, behind weirs extended partway
into the current, or behind bridge pilings or other artificial structures. In most such situations, the eddies are
avoided altogether by staying in the main channel clear of any obstacles. However, sometimes a takeout point
may be at an eddy site.
Fast or Slow?
During upstream and downstream ferries, the boat is slowed relative to the current. Some strokes depend on the
boat moving either faster or slower than the current. If you are moving along at a good pace on flat water and
set the blade as a rudder at the end of a stroke, the boat will quickly veer to one side or the other. If you hold
water to stop the boat, it slows rapidly. If you are drifting with a current going at that same speed, a set rudder
angle won’t work and holding the paddle vertically fixed to the boat won’t slow you down. Changes in motion
require acceleration, that is, movement of the paddle relative to the water. In the flat-water case, you deflect
water by holding the forward-moving blade against the resistance of the stationary water. When drifting with a
current, the same actions don’t work since the boat, paddle, and water are all moving together. If you paddle
faster than the current, then the rudder and holding water will again work as expected. If you are moving slower
than the current, then holding the blade fixed relative to the boat works as it would if you were backing water.
Moving faster than the current is naturally accomplished using forward strokes and helps maintain control of
the boat. However, moving slower than the current, as in the ferries, is also a valuable option and can provide
additional time to react in tricky situations.
<<< downstream flow<<<
eddy line
>>> reverse flow >>>


Chapter 20: Paddling on Flowing Water20-9
To enter an eddy, the boat should be pointed toward the upstream start of the eddy line at roughly a 45-degree angle.
As the bow crosses the eddy line, it will automatically turn upstream as the stern continues downstream. Paddlers
should drive the boat into the eddy as it pivots. A paddle blade planted on the upstream side of the bow will make the
boat pivot faster. The bow person in a tandem canoe can use either a draw or a cross draw stroke, depending on the
paddling side. This is a stationary draw. The object is to catch the upstream current with the blade—it is not necessary
to pull against it. The paddler should be ready to hang on. The boat is leaned upstream into the turn.
You can slip out of a broad eddy near its tail to continue downstream. However, a broad eddy in a river free of
obstacles is a good place to practice some skills needed for white water. Try a peel-out with the boat facing
upstream. Drop downstream a bit against the eddy and align the boat facing upstream with the eddy line. Drive
the boat forward to cross the eddy line at an angle. A bow pad d ler uses a stationary draw to pull the bow into the
current as the boat pivots to head downstream. The boat is leaned downstream into the turn.
1
43
2
3
1 2
4


Chapter 20: Paddling on Flowing Water20-10
Stop Help (wave side to side) Are you OK? (pat 3 times)
Run down center or all clearRun this way I’m OK (pat 3 times)
River Signals
The lead boat on a river trip should contain
experienced paddlers who, ideally, have
traveled that particular river several times
before under different water conditions. The
boat next in line should follow the path of
the lead boat and make sure the boat behind
does the same, unless the lead boat signals
otherwise. Standard river signals using paddles
have been developed so that information from
the lead boat can be clearly communicated to
boats behind. Review these signals at the start
of the trip. Caution those in the group to avoid
pointing at hazards. That is too easily mistaken
as indicating a direction to proceed.


Chapter 20: Paddling on Flowing Water20-11
Do not attempt to stand in shallow water above your
knees. If your foot becomes wedged between rocks on the
bottom, you may be unable to keep your head above water
against the force of the current.
If thrown a line, float on your back, feet downstream, with
the line over your shoulder and held to your chest. Do not
attempt to pull yourself along the line. Instead, swing with
the current toward shore.
If you are being swept toward a strainer, change from the
feetfirst position on your back to a headfirst position on
your stomach with your head out of the water and your
legs at the surface. Try to climb onto or over the strainer
instead of getting sucked underneath.
Self-Rescue
Everyone on a river trip needs to know how to
react to a capsize in moving water. If feasible,
stay with the swamped boat. It provides
support and will be easy for rescuers to spot.
Stay at the upstream end to avoid being
caught between the boat and an obstacle.
Slowly swim the boat to the side while waiting
for another boat to provide a tow.
Do not jeopardize personal safety in an
attempt to retrieve gear. Swim for shore if:
• You have been thrown clear of your boat.
• The water is very cold.
• You are approaching dangerous rapids or
other hazards.
In deep water, swimming a fast forward stroke is feasible if time is short. If you have time to “go with the flow”
to reach calm water ahead, swim on your back with your feet and legs pointed downstream near the surface.
Swim backward to ferry toward shore or to avoid obstacles.


Chapter 20: Paddling on Flowing Water20-12
Throwing Assists
Boats that are significantly ahead of a capsized craft may have time to land and get ready for a throwing assist
using a throw bag. A person setting up for a throwing assist should have secure footing, ideally above a good
landing spot for the swimmer. If the bag is cinched shut with a plastic slide, make sure the top is open enough
for the line to play out freely. Hold the bag in one hand and the end of the line in the other hand. Try to get the
swimmer’s attention by yelling “Rope!”
Throw the line while the swimmer is still slightly upstream. A good throw should lay the rope across the victim’s
chest, but you will need to allow for a moving target. Normally the bag is thrown underhand, but an overhand
toss may be used to clear weeds near the shore.
If the river is free of obstructions and the shoreline is clear, the rescuer can walk downstream and inland to pull
the swimmer toward shore without having to hold the swimmer against the force of the current.
If there is not an easy path along the bank, be prepared for considerable force if the line becomes taut. Addi-
tional rescuers can help hold the line. If necessary, belay the line around a stout tree or large rock. Let the cur-
rent swing the swimmer toward shore. Alternatively, run the line around the back of your hips, and brace your
feet in a wide stance. You should be able to release the line at any time, from yourself if you are about to be
pulled in, and from the belay if the victim gets tangled in the line and needs it slack.
Boat Assists
If your buddy boat capsizes ahead of you in a
current, first look for an obvious cause. You may
need to maneuver around a submerged obstruction
to avoid swamping yourself. If so, pick up swimmers
after they float clear. Quickly check to see that
paddlers are conscious with their heads above water.
A kayaker needs to either exit the craft or perform a
roll. Next, look ahead for other possible hazards and
decide whether to approach swimmers from the left
or the right. In unobstructed water, have swimmers
hold onto the ends of the rescue boat as you ferry
toward a safe landing site onshore. You may need to
drift downstream until a safe exit comes into view.
Downstream craft should back water and position
themselves to assist swimmers or retrieve loose gear.
Everyone’s first concern should be for the swimmers.
Boats and other gear are secondary concerns.
If you have maneuvering room and the capsized boaters are drifting with their boat, you can slowly tow the
swamped boat and the swimmers if they are able to hold onto your boat’s grab loop or painter.


Chapter 20: Paddling on Flowing Water20-13


Chapter 20: Paddling on Flowing Water20-14
Tubing
Drifting down a shallow, lazily flowing stream on a warm, sunny day on tubes, air mattresses, or small rafts
is a pleasant way to pass the time. Even though the activity is akin to swimming, once you leave the con-
fines of a swimming area to venture down moving water, Scouting America Safety Afloat standards apply.
All participants must pass the Scout Swimmer classification test, wear a life jacket, and have a buddy close
by. Make sure you know the water ahead and allow plenty of time to meet your float plan.
Ideally, the tubes should be designed for river floating, with concealed valves, a mesh or net cover, and
grab lines. Be wary of exposed valve stems on inflated tire inner tubes. Auxiliary gear should include shoes,
sun protection, and plenty of safe drinking water.
Tubes are generally controlled with the hands, although small fins or hand paddles may be useful. Canoe
and kayak paddles are generally not worth the trouble—tubes tend to spin.
Since tubes are difficult to control, avoid all but the gentlest of currents (Class I as defined in the next chapter).
If you want the adventure of white water, stick with a canoe, kayak, or whitewater raft.


Whitewater
Chapter
21
Increase the gradient of a river with a decent flow; then throw in drops, exposed rocks, and constrictions, and
whitewater results. Safety on flowing water requires additional knowledge and skill beyond those needed for calm
water. Safe whitewater excursions require even more expertise, which is best learned in stages from a skilled,
experienced instructor. Scout units without the appropriate experience should consider whitewater activities
offered by Scouting America national and council camps.


Chapter 21: Whitewater21-2
Whitewater Features
Describing whitewater requires an additional vocabulary to account for various features caused by changes to the
river channel. Note that many of these features will be easier to identify looking down on the river from a high
bank. They may be hard to spot from river level.
Upstream and Downstream Vs
Each isolated rock or other obstacle will deflect water to the sides and produce a V shape pattern in the current
that points upstream. Slideslip upstream of such features to avoid the obstacle and a possible broach.
Two rocks in line across a river will each produce an upstream V. Those two Vs with their points upstream will
produce another V pattern between the rocks with a point facing downstream. That is, for a downstream V, the
wide end of the V is upstream and the point is downstream. Downstream Vs also form when water passes through
a break in a ledge. Downstream Vs often indicate the best route. Aim for the point, or just to one side.
Standing Waves
The faster water flowing in an open V will often produce standing waves as it hits slower water downstream.
Waves in a river are often caused by changes in flow rate, rather than by obstacles below the surface. Water
speeds up in a narrow channel and slows in a wider channel, for example, below a break in a ledge that produces
a downstream V. The flow also slows down going from shallow water to deep. A line of small waves just below a
downstream V often indicates deeper water and a good route. However, if the waves are too large, particularly
if they are breaking back upstream, you may need to avoid them, particularly in an open canoe. Large standing
waves are also called haystacks.


Chapter 21: Whitewater21-3
Eddies
Any stationary object that protrudes above the surface will deflect current to the side and produce a counter
flow as the water fills in behind the object. If the object is wide enough, the counter flow, or eddy, will be big
enough to shield a boat from the downstream current. A popular strategy for running long rapids is to hop from
eddy to eddy to rest and scout the next stretch. An eddy line separates downstream from upstream flow and must
be crossed correctly to take advantage of the shadow zone behind the object.
Pillows
A deep rock in a strong current will produce a boil on the surface downstream
of the rock. A pillow will form as water pours over a rock near the
surface. Pillows, particularly over large flat rocks, can cause calm-looking
areas in rapids and should be avoided. If the rock breaks the surface, the
water piling against the upstream side will produce a pillow that will help
push you away from the rock if you strike it at a glancing angle rather
than broadside.
Holes
Given the right combination of rock shape and current strength, water flowing around and over a large rock
just beneath the surface will create a depression, or hole, that is filled by a large standing wave that curls back
toward the rock. Unlike eddies, holes should be avoided. If a break in a ledge or between rocks is accompanied by
a steep drop, the water cascading down will also form a hole that is backfilled from downstream. Water pouring
over an unbroken ledge can produce a dangerous hydraulic similar to a low-head dam.


Chapter 21: Whitewater21-4
Drops
Abrupt drops can range from a few inches to
major waterfalls. They can stretch across the
river or form at breaks in ledges. Small drops can
be fun. Amazingly high sheer drops are run by
experts in decked boats willing to take extreme
risks. Scout units should portage such features.
Several rock ledges may create a series of
smaller drops. These should be studied carefully
from shore. Portage any situation where there
is not sufficient space to line up the next drop
after the first, or where an error anywhere in
the series exposes boaters to an unacceptable
hazard farther downstream.
Shoals
Rivers at low flows or with stretches where
the channel is wide and shallow may have
sections of “dancing” water or shoals caused
by numerous small rocks near the surface. Stay
close to the outside of river bends where the
channel is deepest, and aim for any obvious
downstream Vs. Be ready to step out of the
boat if it drags bottom in very shallow water.
Boats may be lined through short sections
of shallow shoals, but be wary of tripping
hazards and foot entrapment.
International Scale of River Difficulty
American Whitewater maintains the U.S. version of a river rating system used to compare the difficulty and
risks of various rivers at different flow levels. Check out americanwhitewater.org for details. It contains ratings and
describes for numerous rapids on a large number of rivers. Chances are you will find ones you are interested in. Even
so, the scale is at best a rough estimate. Particular rapids may not fit easily into the categories, and individuals from
different parts of the country may interpret the scale differently. However, a river purported to have numerous
Class III to Class IV rapids should be more challenging than a river with mainly Class II rapids but a single Class IV
rapid that is easily portaged. Therefore, the scale can be used to help decide whether to embark on a section of
a river. You should still supplement the rating system with individual knowledge and detailed descriptions found
in river guidebooks. Even then, keep in mind that a river may change from one run to the next, even if the flow is
similar. Note that rapids at the lower or upper end of the range may have – or + designations. See the above website
for the complete text of the classification scheme for Class V and VI.
Even though the Class I description seems benign compared with the others, don’t forget that any moving water
can be hazardous, particularly to those unprepared for currents and cold water. Floating a river at flood stage is
not recommended regardless of wave size or obstacles.
Also be leery of the term “novice” used to describe Class II. Class II runs are likely not appropriate for a Scout
unit doing its first river trip.
Safety Afloat requires helmets to be worn when running rapids rated Class
II and above and special training for unit led trips on Class III. Scouting
activities on Class IV are limited to rafts with professionally trained guides
in each raft. Trips are not allowed on rapids rated Class V and above.


Chapter 21: Whitewater21-5
Class I: Easy
Fast-moving water with riffles and small waves. Few obstructions, all obvious and easily missed with little training.
Risk to swimmers is slight; self-rescue is easy.
Class II: Novice
Straightforward rapids with wide, clear channels that are evident without scouting. Occasional maneuvering
may be required, but rocks and medium-sized waves are easily missed by trained paddlers. Swimmers are
seldom injured; group assistance, while helpful, is seldom needed.
Class III: Intermediate
Rapids with moderate, irregular waves that may be difficult to avoid and that can swamp an open canoe. Complex
maneuvers in fast current and good boat control in tight passages or around ledges are often required; large waves
or strainers may be present but are easily avoided. Strong eddies and powerful current effects can be found,
particularly on large-volume rivers. Scouting is advisable for inexperienced parties. Injuries while swimming are
rare; self-rescue is usually easy but group assistance may be required to avoid long swims.


Chapter 21: Whitewater21-6
Class IV: Advanced
Intense, powerful, but predictable rapids requiring precise boat handling in turbulent water. Depending on the
character of the river, it may feature large, unavoidable waves and holes or constricted passages demanding fast
maneuvers under pressure. A fast, reliable eddy turn may be needed to initiate maneuvers, scout rapids, or rest.
Rapids may require “must” moves above dangerous hazards. Scouting may be necessary the first time down. Risk
of injury to swimmers is moderate to high, and water conditions may make self-rescue difficult. Group assistance
for rescue is often essential but requires practiced skills. A strong roll is highly recommended.
Class V: Expert
Extremely long, obstructed rapids requiring precise boat handling in turbulent water.


Chapter 21: Whitewater21-7
Whitewater Gear
In North Woods lake country, long treks favor touring canoes even though the trip may include short stretches on
rivers between lakes. Many seasoned canoeists easily take on Class I rapids in such boats without special equipment
or unloading camping gear. Helmets are needed for Class II and it might be prudent to portage critical, heavy loads
prior to practicing skills in an isolated rapid. Some experts can handle Class III rapids in a long, general purpose
open canoe full of gear. However, at some point, the open cruising canoe should be replaced with boats and gear
better suited to the task. Whitewater canoes and kayaks have short, rockered hulls for easy maneuvering. Kayaks
have small cockpits with spray skirts. Canoes have saddles and thigh straps rather than seats, and are filled with
flotation. Hull materials are impact-resistant.
A strong, properly fitted helmet should be worn whenever upsets are likely in white water. Helmets are essential
in any craft in Class II rapids or above, and should be used in kayaks and decked canoes for most river travel. The
head of a paddler in an open canoe generally stays above water during a capsize, but needs a helmet for protec-
tion when swimming through rapids. A paddler in a kayak or decked canoe rolls head down, even if doing a wet
exit rather than a roll, and therefore always needs head protection in rivers with rocks, shallow water, or other
obstructions. Use helmets designed for white water; don’t rely on a bicycle helmet to meet the need. Material
should protect the forehead, temples, ears, and the base of the skull. Most helmets feature holes that allow
water to drain. The helmet should feel snug but comfortable.
Paddling Skills
Some basic skills needed for river travel were covered in the last section. Paddlers in any craft should be able to
travel forward and backward parallel to the current and move sideways while staying aligned with the current.
However, a boat in white water seldom moves in a straight line or even where it is pointed. Frequent turns occur
at all angles to the current. Paddlers in white water need to perfect ferries, eddy turns, and eddy peel-outs.
Various braces and stationary draws, both onside and offside, help with those maneuvers. Kayakers must learn
wet exits with a skirt and need to perfect a roll in moving water if they expect to tackle rapids with higher
ratings. Some of those skills are discussed in the Whitewater merit badge pamphlet and the Scouting America
Fieldbook. Those will not be repeated here: Whitewater skills must be acquired through demonstration and
practice rather than picked up by reading.
A sweeper viewed ahead may appear to have plenty of room to pass to one side. However, the first experience a
paddler has with back paddling and side slipping in a strong current should not be frantically trying to avoid being
swept into a dangerous feature. Skill is essential for safety.
It is feasible for individuals or groups to move systemically from flat-water to whitewater skills. A day or two of
instruction and practice on flat water with a competent instructor can safely be followed by a day trip on a Class
I river guided by an instructor familiar with that run. Subsequent trips can be on more difficult sections of river.
Some rivers are of the pool-and-drop variety with long stretches of Class I water interrupted by short, isolated
rapids. The drops can be run multiple times to perfect skills without the danger of a mishap carrying a capsized
boat into another hazard. Once the group learns the skills in a safe, relaxed setting, more ambitious trips can be
considered. That is a viable approach for a Scout troop or a Venturing crew with capable leadership to gain the


Chapter 21: Whitewater21-8
skills needed for paddling at the Class II level along with an occasional Class III (-) challenge. Numerous rivers
will fit those categories; there should be plenty of variety to keep the group engaged without the need for higher
and higher skill levels. As new members cycle through the unit, they can be brought up to speed with more
experienced youth without having to bar new members from unit trips because of skill level. However, other
training options are available if unit leadership lacks basic instructional capability, or a Venturing crew really
wants to tackle the nearby Class III river.
Learning by doing is fine in concept, but can leave large
gaps if the procedure is not systematically arranged by
a knowledgeable leader. Scout units lacking internal
resources may get useful assistance from local paddling
clubs. Ideally, the local club will have volunteer
instructors certified by the American Canoe Association
or a similar organization. ACA instructors offer canoeing
and kayaking courses from basic to advanced, from flat
water to different levels of white water. The ACA also
has courses for float-trip leaders. Check out the ACA
website at www.americancanoe.org for course outlines
and contacts with affiliated clubs.
Scout units may also obtain whitewater instruction and experience at various local council summer camp
programs as well as the National High Adventure Base at the Summit.
Failing a local volunteer or camp connection, there are many commercial paddling schools where a unit can
obtain professional instruction to jump-start a whitewater specialty. Course location, duration, and price are all
practical considerations in the choice of a paddling school. Also evaluate schools based on years of operation,
type and condition of equipment, instructor training programs, and recommendations from other Scout leaders.
Whitewater Strategy
Even a properly trained and equipped group faces important decisions when deciding whether and how to run a
particular rapid.
• Know the river and the group. Knowledge of the river and the skills and limitations of the group are impor-
tant aspects of trip planning. Once on the river, that knowledge is used to gather the group at a safe landing
above any feature that needs scouting from the bank. The only portage around a waterfall may be on one
side above a turn in the river. Hugging the opposite cliff side until the horizon line becomes visible around
the bend may not allow sufficient time to avoid the hazard. Proceed into a rapid only if it is known to be
easily within the capability of everyone in the group at current water levels. Otherwise, stop and scout from
the shore. Rivers where scouting can only be done on the fly from one eddy to the next are for experts only.
• Scout intelligently. Walk downstream along the bank until the
end of the rapid is in clear view, that is, until a point is reached
where everyone boating or swimming the rapid will be able to
regroup and land if necessary to scout the next feature. Then
look back upstream to determine if there are one or more points
to safely exit the rapid. Visually work upstream of likely exits to
connect clear paths around intermediate obstacles until you arrive
at likely entry points to the rapid. Then consider the plausible
routes individually and discuss the pros and cons of each path
as a group. In some cases there will be only a single viable path
that does not require complex maneuvering beyond the group’s
capability. In other cases, there may be one easy route, and additional paths of increasing difficulty. Note
that features clearly visible from a high bank may be difficult to see from water level. Safely running the
rapid may depend critically on either lining up an intermediate chute or avoiding a dangerous hole. Look for
landmarks, if any, that should be obvious on the water and factor those into the evaluation.


Chapter 21: Whitewater21-9
• Decide. Everyone in the group needs to individually decide whether they wish to run the rapid and, if so,
which path to take. Different members of the group may have different preferences. No one should ever be
pressured to run a rapid they view with concern. However, individuals may also overestimate their ability or
discount the consequences of an error. For youth groups, adult leaders assume responsibility for the safety
of those under their care and may elect to have individuals or the entire party portage a rapid that some
group members would attempt on their own. The following questions will help individuals and leaders reach
a reasonable conclusion.
1. Is there a safe path? If there is an unavoidable steep drop into a hole, if there is not enough room
between ledges to align one narrow chute with another, or if the only chute with sufficient water depth runs
straight into a boulder, the decision is easy. Everyone portages.
2. What maneuvers are required? Perhaps the paddlers need
to sideslip past a rock near the point of a downstream V while
negotiating moderate-sized standing waves. Maybe a short ferry is
needed to align one chute with another, or perhaps an eddy needs
to be caught to move from one side of the river to the other.
Any course that moves across the current in short distances may
require precise execution.
3. Does each person have the skills necessary to make those maneuvers? If a solo kayaker or
a tandem canoe team missed an easy ferry or eddy earlier, they probably are not ready if tighter moves are
required for the rapid under consideration. The goal is to keep the boat always under control. Paddlers who
rely on luck rather than skill to maintain control during specific maneuvers should opt out.
4. What are the consequences if maneuvers are not successful?
A common result of a botched maneuver is that a paddler becomes
a swimmer. No one should enter a rapid in a boat if they are
unwilling to swim that same rapid in case of an upset. The risk to
a swimmer often depends on where in a rapid a capsize occurs.
If the only critical maneuver occurs near the end of the rapid,
the swimmer may simply be swept into a safe pool. If difficult
maneuvers are required near the start of the rapid, the results of
an error are more dire if the swimmer faces steep drops, holes,
or undercut rocks. When calculating the margin for error, also
consider the temperature of the water. Longer swims increase the
likelihood of hypothermia. The other risk of a botched maneuver is the loss of a craft. Consider the chances
of a boat wrapping around a rock for upsets in different parts of the rapid. Finally, consider the chances that
a boater will be pinned in a craft.
5. Are the consequences acceptable? This is the kicker. Risk to life and limb should always be mini-
mized. But a swimmer swept into a deep pool after a short swim in warm water may only slow the trip down
a bit. In between the obvious are situations where the potential loss of gear and time are more inconvenient
than hazardous. Remember that a float trip is meant to be an enjoyable experience. Just because you have
planned ahead and can get everyone off the water safely doesn’t mean that a lost boat is an acceptable risk.
When in doubt, err on the side of caution. There will be other rapids where the group will have fun and gain
experience.


Chapter 21: Whitewater21-10
Whitewater Rafting
Units without the training or gear to undertake a whitewater trip on their own have other options for catching
the thrills and challenges of white water. Commercial rafting trips cater to people with limited experience. Short
trips may take only a few hours. Other trips take a week or more. In oared rafts, participants are along for the
ride. A professional rower maneuvers the raft through the rapids. In paddle rafts, riders participate by paddling
under the direction of a trained guide at the stern. The rafts are large and stable and can handle heavy white
water. However, realize that a raft ride on a wild river is not the same as an amusement park ride. Statistics
compiled by American Whitewater show that commercial whitewater-rafting trips are not without risks, including
fatalities. Even the largest rafts can flip and send passengers for a swim. Flush drownings may occur even when
swimmers are wearing life jackets and avoid striking objects. The key to a safe, enjoyable experience is a
competent rafting service.
Use the following criteria to compare rafting services:
• Years of operation. New outfitters may operate to the highest standards, but those who have been
around awhile and still stay booked have a proven success record. However, experienced companies may hire
inexperienced guides.
• Safety record. Operators are unlikely to share poor safety records but may use clear records in their advertis-
ing. Check various websites for additional information, including contacts with government regulators.
• Condition of equipment. Helmets, life jackets, rafts, paddles, food storage containers, and other
equipment need not be brand new, but should be clean, functional, and up-to-date.
• Safety policies. Rafting services cater to the general public and therefore may not have guidelines as
strict as those of Scouting America concerning ages and swimming ability. However, there should be reason-
able restrictions based on age and physical condition. Pretrip orientations should include proper fitting of
helmets and life jackets, and what to do if knocked overboard or the raft flips. Overnight trips should include
additional safety instruction relative to camping, communication, and first aid.
• Guide training. Some states closely regulate the rafting industry and require specific guide training pro-
grams that result in licenses. Other states simply require rafting services to post a fee. Therefore, phrases
such as “state approved” or “trained guides” will have different meanings in different locations. Reliable
operators should gladly share details of their guide training programs with prospective clients. Many do so on
their websites. Check first-aid training and emergency action plans as well as rafting credentials.
• Instructional programs. Some operators include natural history and ecology programs in sections of
river between rapids. Many operate under permits that require ecological responsibility.
• Alcohol policy. Most serious whitewater enthusiasts agree that alcohol and other drugs are not conducive
to whitewater performance or safety. However, a few groups see float trips as opportunities for binging, and
some whitewater guides are known to indulge heavily when off the river. Even though Scouting trips should
be alcohol-free, check a rafting company’s policy on alcohol use by participants and guides, particularly for
overnight trips. Some limit alcohol to an evening meal; others restrict alcohol consumption to a post-trip
party. Look for a company that enforces a policy of restraint.
Rafting tip: Rafting guides EXPECT TIP$!


Chapter 21: Whitewater21-11
Commercial rafting services are not solely of interest to those without whitewater skills. Access to some rivers
is by permit only, which may take years to obtain. Commercial rafting operators may have access to permits
through other avenues, which means a trip down some popular rivers is best arranged through an outfitter. Some
will escort kayaks with support rafts.
Scouting America High Adventure Bases
Several council camps offer an additional avenue for a Scout unit to
undertake a whitewater excursion under proper supervision.
The national high adventure base at the Summit Bechtel Reserve is
located in West Virginia near the New River Gorge National Park. The
New River is one of the premier whitewater rivers east of the Mississippi.
River programs at the Summit range from a short rafting trip on Class IV
rapids to a 50 mile trek using kayaks and rafts.
Additional insights on river and whitewater features may be gained from the Reading the Rhythms of Rivers and
Rapids video, a joint production of the American Canoe Association and Scouting America, funded by a U.S. Coast
Guard–administered grant. The video may be viewed only through the following link or by scanning the QR code.
RIVER VIDEO


Chapter 21: Whitewater21-12
Whitewater Rafting Award Brochure
A twelve page brochure in support of the Scouting America Whitewater Rafting award is available for free
download on the scouting.org website at Rafting Brochure. It provides a good summary of content from various
chapters in this manual specific to that award and should be shared with participants and raft guides.


Float Trip Preparation
“Where to go?” seems a logical first concern when considering a float trip, but several interrelated questions
must be addressed together before the “where” can be finalized. Those questions include:
• Who will go?
• How long?
• What gear is needed?
• How is the gear obtained?
• How much will it cost?
• How to get there?
Chapter
22


Chapter 22: Float Trip Preparation22-2
Because a trip is often triggered by a suggested location, we’ll start there, and see how the other questions arise.
Researching a Location
Inexperienced parties should only consider trips accompanied by a leader who knows the route from firsthand
knowledge. Ideally, a group will gain competence on short day trips before tackling an extended wilderness
adventure. However, a skilled leader can guide inexperienced parties with adequate preparation. A group of
older Scouts strong on camping but weak in canoeing can nevertheless enjoy the experience of a lifetime under
the wing of an interpreter at the Northern Tier High Adventure Bases. “Where?” therefore depends on the
experience of the leaders and the skills of the participants, that is, the “Who?”
More-experienced groups can use river guidebooks to review potential destinations. Many guidebooks are rather
obscure publications; the internet can be used to track down a written or online guide to a particular river. Do
a search on a location by name or check the websites of the major paddle sports organizations, of paddle clubs
near the location, and of government agencies that regulate certain lakes and rivers. Sporting goods stores may
carry printed guides for local destinations.
Guidebooks should provide maps and detailed informa-
tion on required permits, put-in and takeout points,
campsites, boat liveries, location and classification of
rapids, and recommended water levels based on local
gauges. Sometimes a phone number will be given for
learning the current gauge level. Restrictions on group
size, the type of food containers, fire options, and human
waste disposal should be noted in the guide.
While guidebooks can offer a wealth of useful informa-
tion, don’t forget that rivers change and that one per-
son’s Class II is another person’s Class III. Check the
guide’s publication date and use other sources, such as
phone numbers provided in the guide, to make sure the
information is still accurate. The location that once was
a freely used campsite may have changed hands, and
the new owner may expect a fee or prosecute campers
for trespassing. For lakes and rivers on public property,
check with park or ranger personnel. For lakes and rivers
bordered by private land, don’t assume you can camp
anywhere without prior permission. Campsites may be
limited to canoe liveries and state parks that will charge
a fee and may require reservations.


Chapter 22: Float Trip Preparation22-3
Who to Take Where
Recall that Safety Afloat guidelines do not permit Cub Scout dens to conduct float trips.
Any youth operating a canoe or kayak must have passed the Scout Swimmer classification test. Although there are
special allowances for nonswimmers and beginners to ride as passengers under limited conditions, a unit with many
members lacking swimming skills should concentrate on learn-to-swim opportunities rather than float trips.
Safety Afloat requires participants for trips on flat water and moving water below Class III to demonstrate basic
skill proficiency. Ideally, skill instruction is provided before a float trip, but time may be set aside at the begin-
ning of a trip for basic skill review. Travel distances the first day should be adjusted accordingly. If a group arrives
at the put-in point at midday, then an overnight stay at the launch area allows for skill review in the afternoon,
followed by an early start the next day. The unit leader needs to use sound judgment when considering such
options. It may be reasonable to allow time at the beginning of a short trip to check out a new member who
claims to have experience. In a pinch, such a person can ride in a boat with a skilled leader. It is not appropri-
ate to attempt basic instruction at the start of a long, remote trip when every member of the crew is a novice.
On rivers with rapids above Class II, there are three options: (1) a group with basic skills may portage an occasional
Class III rapid; (2) those with advanced whitewater training may run rapids rated at Class III or above, provided they
are confident in their ability to do so after scouting each rapid; and (3) a novice group may ride in rafts (or dories)
under the direction of a professional guide in each craft. That last option means that trip planning involves selecting
a rafting company as discussed in Chapter 21.
All things considered, Safety Afloat guidelines require unit leaders to only consider float trips consistent with the
skill levels of unit members, both youth and adults. That might limit a large troop to conducting special high-
adventure trips only for older, more skilled members. A Venturing crew whose activity interest survey focuses on
whitewater canoeing may set a goal of a trip down a local whitewater river. However, the crew may need to plan
training sessions and intermediate trips to accomplish that goal.
How Far in How Long?
River guidebooks are likely to give mileages between takeout points but may not provide typical times needed
to make a run. That’s because “typical” depends on many factors, such as the water level; how often and how
long the party stops to rest, eat, play, explore, or scout; and the physical conditioning of the party. A Venturing
crew practicing for a marathon race might cover 20 miles in a day, but five to 10 miles is more “typical” for a
day trip, depending on how much time is needed to get to the launch point and make any necessary shuttles to
get home before dark.
The best way to judge the time needed to cover a given stretch of lake or river is to make a conservative estimate
based on previous experience with a similar group under similar conditions. Given a choice of a takeout point that
is a little short compared with the next one that is twice the distance, choose the shorter distance. That way,
the group can take time to enjoy the trip rather than racing against dusk while fighting a strong headwind. Livery
companies on popular rivers will be able to provide reasonable estimates of travel time for a given flow level.
For an overnight trip on a weekend, you may need to choose among several popular river segments even though
the group would like to do more. Make sure to factor in driving time. If you rent boats from a livery company, the
livery’s location may dictate your put-in and takeout points. They may prefer you start or end at their location to
reduce the number of shuttles. Alternately, you may be able to launch upstream one day, camp overnight at the
company’s campground, and continue the next day to a takeout point.
For an extended trip on the water, it is prudent to schedule a short leg or a layover midway through the trip,
ideally at a spot where there is something else to do rather than paddle.


Chapter 22: Float Trip Preparation22-4
Gear: What, From Where, at What Price
At a minimum, any float trip will require boats, life jackets, and paddles. Overnight trips will also require stan-
dard camping gear and provisions. Detailed lists are needed later in the planning stage, but the source of boats
is a major consideration when first deciding on a location.
A unit with its own boats and boat transport has the greatest flexibility in choosing a location. Some boat livery
companies rent boats only for their local stretch of lake or river, but others will rent boats and trailers you can
take to various locations within their region. Using a local livery company is advantageous when they transport
the boats for you. Otherwise, arranging your own shuttle can take time away from the water. Many boat liveries
supply only the necessary marine equipment. Others are total outfitters equipped to provide food, tents, and
cooking stoves in addition to boats. Although contracting with a complete outfitter simplifies the planning, it also
ups the cost. A typical unit may find a better fit to their budget if they rent canoes from their council camp, buy
their own provisions, and use their own camping gear.
Note: Even though you have made reservations for boats for a certain time, rental companies, including local
councils, may void the agreement at the last minute if a river is up due to heavy rains the day before. That’s a
prudent business decision on their part and it also speaks to your safety. The best-laid schemes “gang aft a-gley” and
need contingencies.
How to Get There: People, Boats, and Shuttles
Buses are handy for large groups with gear traveling over long distances without boats, and commercial carriers are
recommended. Many groups arrive that way at the Northern Tier bases. If a unit uses its own or a rental bus, the
drivers must have the appropriate driving licenses. Smaller groups may travel in rented vans or private automobiles.
The best way to transport canoes or kayaks is on a trailer designed for that use. Make sure the boats are securely
fastened with straps, bungee cords, or lines. Such trailers often have lockers for life jackets and paddles. If not,
those are packed in the tow vehicle. Make sure that the tow vehicle and hitch are rated for the trailer and that
the trailer meets all legal requirements such as lights, license, and safety chains. You should carry a spare tire
for the trailer and an appropriate jack.
It is also feasible to car-top canoes or kayaks for a small group. Pipe racks on pickups can often be used as is,
but standard luggage racks on vans and SUVs are seldom designed for hauling boats, particularly two canoes
side by side. You may be able to order special attachments from a dealer. Alternately, removable racks can be
purchased. Some less-expensive models are generic and can be adjusted to fit many vehicles. Higher-end racks
are tailored to fit specific automobiles. It is important to obtain a good-quality rack that is held securely to
the vehicle. At highway speeds, the wind resistance on the boats creates large forces. Foam blocks and other
temporary arrangements may be sufficient for transporting a new boat slowly from the store to a garage, but are
not recommended for long distances at highway speeds.


Chapter 22: Float Trip Preparation22-5
The boats should be balanced on two racks that extend across the top of the automobile. If necessary, adjust the
racks so that the end of the boat toward the front of the car is level or slightly down. The wind needs to part
along the sides of the boat, not catch it from beneath. Canoes are loaded upside down; kayaks may be loaded
either way, based on design. Some kayak racks have J attachments that rest kayaks on their sides. Secure the
boat or boats to the racks using cam straps, bungee cords, or lines using a trucker’s hitch. The lines should be
tight and secure, but be careful: it is possible to tighten hard enough to damage the hull.
The lines across the racks keep the boats from sliding sideways and also help hold the boats down against aero-
dynamic lift. However, all but the shortest boats also need lines front and back for adequate security. Use rope
or straps for these, not bungee cords. Ideally, the fore and aft lines should slant in opposite directions to hold
the boats in place not only against the wind while moving forward, but also against sliding forward when braking.
Tie either the middle of a single line or two separate lines to a secure attachment near the forward end of the
boat, normally where you would tie a painter to a canoe or to the grab loop on a kayak. Angle the lines down to
the front of the vehicle to form a V. Old-fashioned metal bumpers offered several attachment options that are
not available on newer plastic bumpers. Attach the ends of the lines to tow hooks or other secure spots on the
frame beneath the bumper. Avoid sharp edges or moving parts. Alternately, you may be able to attach tie loops
under the hood and still be able to shut the hood securely. Pull the lines snug, but not too tight, with trucker’s
hitches. Cut or secure loose ends to keep them from flapping against the car finish or getting caught in moving
parts. Make another V in back.
On lakes, it is common to plan a circular trip that ends where it began. On rivers, it is common for the starting
point to be upstream of the takeout. That difference requires a shuttle to get land transport from one location to
the other. There are two easy ways to do it: (1) pay a reliable outside party to run the shuttle, e.g., a livery that
includes a shuttle service as part of the package; or (2) have extra adults along willing to follow the party by road.
Other options need careful planning and may involve several trips along the same road to reconnect gear, people,
and vehicles. Do not leave the shuttle to chance. Hitchhiking is dangerous and unreliable, and transportation at
the takeout is useful in case of an emergency.
A shuttle requires at least two vehicles. Dropping a vehicle at the takeout on the way to the put-in is a good option if
the entire party and all the gear fit in the remaining vehicles. At the end of the trip, the majority of the party waits at
the takeout while the drivers are taken to the start and then return. Make sure there are enough leaders to maintain
adequate supervision and to satisfy Youth Protection policies for both groups whenever the party is split.
Trucker’s
Hitch


Chapter 22: Float Trip Preparation22-6
If all the vehicles are needed to transport people and gear,
then the entire party goes to the put-in and unloads. Then
two vehicles are driven to the takeout. One vehicle is left
and both drivers return. When the party leaves the river, a
double trip is required again.
For extended river trips, a round-trip shuttle may take
several hours, particularly if there is no direct road
between the put-in and takeout. It the party does not
reach the put-in or takeout early in the day, an overnight
camp may be necessary. In remote areas, make sure to
maintain sufficiently full gas tanks to complete the legs.
On many rivers, common access sites are on public rights-
of-way at bridge crossings, so shuttle vehicles are often left
near bridges or low-water crossings. Although that practice
is fairly common among river runners, it risks the vehicle
to theft and vandalism. A safer bet is to launch and land
at established campgrounds. If a vehicle is left near a bridge, make sure it is above the high-water mark. Some
folks are fearful of losing car keys on the river and will hide the keys near the vehicle, but you never know who
is watching. It makes better sense to carry two sets of keys down river in separate boats.
Float Plan
Once the waterway segment is decided on and other details considered, such as how to run the shuttle, it’s time
to plan a detailed itinerary. Folks who have run the river before are valuable resources. If you don’t have such
a person in your party, see if there is someone else around willing to offer advice based on personal knowledge.
Good maps make planning the itinerary easier. River maps in guidebooks or off the internet may be only sketches. High-
way maps are typically at too large a scale to show useful back roads and don’t reliably track all the bends in the river.
County road maps are good for the back roads, and topographic maps help spot campsites and emergency exit routes. In
lake country, try to find a map that shows portage trails. For sea kayaking along the coasts, get charts for the water and
maps for the land. Maps and charts in GPS navigation systems may or may not have the needed detail depending on the
location and the data loaded.
The itinerary is part of the float plan, along with emergency contact information and contingencies. Refer to the
sample form at the end of this chapter.


Chapter 22: Float Trip Preparation22-7
What to Take
What to take depends on the location, the duration, and the time of year. The following lists provide reasonable
guidelines, but temper them with local knowledge and common sense. Camping from a boat is not that differ-
ent from camping on a backpacking trip. For some trips you will need a heavy-duty sleeping bag; for others, a
lightweight bag will suffice. In some areas, you may be concerned with bears; in other areas it may be alligators.
Although gear capacity is limited in some kayaks, canoes and touring kayaks generally make it easier to carry
more gear than on a backpacking trip. Even so, take enough to be comfortable, but don’t pack gear you will
never touch. Always follow Leave No Trace principles. Check the Scouting America Fieldbook for information on
camping and the Leave No Trace program.
Paperwork: Group and Individual
• Copies of the float plan
• Route maps
• Permits
• Identification (passports for foreign travel)
Boats
• Life jacket sized for each occupant
• Paddle sized for each occupant
• Sponge, bailer, or pump
• Throw bag
Group Equipment and Provisions
• Extra paddles
• First aid kits
• Emergency communication devices (cell phones,
radios) with extra batteries
• Weather radio (hand-cranked versions available)
• GPS system
• Emergency beacon
• Repair kit (duct tape at least)
• Packs or gear bags with waterproof liners
• Miscellaneous straps and cord
• Tents, with ground cloth
• Medical histories with treatment consent
• Fishing licenses
Personal Gear
• Medications
• Whistle (attached to life jacket while on the
water)
• Pocketknife
• Medical records with treatment consent
• Fishing licenses
• Cash and credit cards
• Painters
• Portage yoke if much carrying is anticipated
• For white water, add float bags and a helmet
• For cold water, add gloves and a wet suit
• Dining fly
• Drinking water/water purification system
• Food
• Ice chest for short-term storage of perishable
items
• Cook kit
• Butane lighters or waterproof matches
• Stoves and fuel*
• Cleanup kit (biodegradable soap, sanitizing rinse
agent, trash bags)*
• Toilet paper with pack-out kits as appropriate*
• Small trowel* *Leave No Trace
• Water bottle
• Compass
• Sun protection (hat and sunscreen)


Chapter 22: Float Trip Preparation22-8
Personal Gear (continued)
• Sunglasses (prescription, if needed) with
strap
• Insect protection (repellent; head net in some
cases)
• Rain gear (hooded jacket and pants—no
ponchos!)
• Stout, no-slip footwear that can get wet and
will dry quickly
• Shoes for camp wear
• Swimsuit or quick-dry shorts
How to Pack
The challenge when packing for a float trip is to keep things dry. Water easily finds its way into any opening.
For a short day trip, a 5-gallon plastic paint bucket with a sealing lid, available empty at discount outlets,
makes a reasonable container. It has enough space for lunch and essentials, and is light, waterproof, and inex-
pensive. If you like, take off the handle and thread a light line through the hinge for tying to a thwart. If the
canoe capsizes, the bucket can be cast free—it will float with a reasonable load.
A bucket, or any other secure container, is
difficult to open and close quickly while under
way. Waterproof items you need often, such as
sunscreen, are better kept in a simple hip pack
that can be tied to a thwart. An underwater
camera housing is useful if you want to take
snapshots without jeopardizing an expensive
mechanism. Some digital cameras have enough
water resistance to shake off an occasional
splash with no ill effect.
For overnight excursions you can use conventional packs, either with or without a frame. Cook pots need no
additional protection, but food, clothes, and sleeping bags do. Individually bag items in zip-lock or heavy-duty
plastic garage bags, and then place those within a larger bag. Leave enough room to make a twisted, fold-over
gooseneck that can be secured with rubber bands. Make sure to carry plenty of folded spare bags and rubber
bands since rips are common. Pack food in clear bags so contents are visible after the outer bag is opened.
You can also purchase special gear bags with various waterproof, or near-waterproof, closing mechanisms, but
double layering is still useful for critical items. Special containers fit the spaces beneath kayak hatches easier
than generic backpacks will fit.
Once the gear is secured in waterproof containers, place the items in the boat. In a canoe, place the gear on
the bottom in the center. Balance the load so that the canoe, paddlers included, stays in trim both sideways
and fore and aft. Tie the gear in, particularly any item that doesn’t float well, so it is not lost during a capsize.
Gear secured well will displace water in a swamped canoe and help float the boat higher. On the other hand,
a complicated tie-in system can make it more difficult to empty a swamped canoe.
A cruising canoe can hold an amazing amount of gear, as shown in the photo on a previous page. Like to cook in
a Dutch oven? There’s plenty of room to carry one. However, if your trip involves reaching your destination by
float plane, portaging from lake to lake, or moving gear on steep, rough trails around rapids, keep the number
and weight of the items small enough that everything can be carried in one trip.
• Change of clothes appropriate for season
• Light jacket or layers in cold weather
• Toiletries
• Eating utensils (bowl, cup, spoon)
• Sleeping bag
• Sleeping pad
• Flashlight
• Camera


Chapter 22: Float Trip Preparation22-9
On a backpacking trip, hikers typically carry individual packs. On a canoe trip, it often makes sense to share a
pack. That allows one person to portage gear while the other carries the canoe. Split critical group supplies, such
as food, between boats. If a boat is lost, including its share of the gear, the group should still be able to continue,
although on a shorter schedule, perhaps.
On the Water
Planning needs to include procedures used on the water. Buddies in tandem boats should be matched according
to size and skill as well as compatibility. Size is a consideration for proper trim. Pairing those with lesser skill with
more experienced paddlers will keep the group moving efficiently while providing valuable training. Buddy boat
assignments for solo craft should also pair experienced paddlers with novices. However, make sure the lead and
sweep boats have experienced crews. It is particularly important to have someone familiar with the route in the
lead boat. A missed portage trail or scouting location could lead the following boats into hazards.
If possible, plan a route that follows the shoreline rather
than striking long distances across open water. If a long-
distance, open-water segment is desired, for example to
reach an island campground, review local and approaching
weather patterns before leaving shore. Either wait or take
a contingency route if facing strong winds, high waves, or
strong currents. Be leery of leaving a shoreline with the
wind at your back. While such a wind will help push you in
the desired direction, it may also cause increased offshore
wave action that makes the path ahead hazardous and
the return path to safety increasingly difficult.
WindPortage
Preferred, scenic route
Questionable, shorter route
Area with
large waves
When planning a long trip with several portages, try to
arrange the route so that longer portages come after
the group becomes conditioned on shorter runs. Plus,
the weight of food decreases as the trip progresses.
Make sure to allow extra time in the itinerary for long or
difficult portages.
When stopping at a campsite, make sure to secure all
boats against changes in wind or water levels during
the night. Normally, that means bringing them com-
pletely ashore. Minimalist campers may use the canoe
itself as a shelter. An overturned canoe balanced on
rocks serves as a makeshift table for food preparation.


Check if currently trained in:
Safe Swim
Defense
Safety
Afloat CPR First Aid
[ ] [ ] [ ] [ ]
[ ] [ ] [ ] [ ]
[ ] [ ] [ ] [ ]
[ ] [ ] [ ] [ ]
Sample Float Plan (Different formats may be used, but should include all relevent information.)
MEMBERS AGE
Trip leader:
1. ______________________________________ _____
Assistant leaders:
2. ______________________________________ _____
3. ______________________________________ _____
4. ______________________________________ _____
Youth members:
5. ______________________________________ 6. ________________________________________
7. ______________________________________ 8. ________________________________________
9. ______________________________________ 10. _______________________________________
11. _____________________________________ 12. _______________________________________
13. _____________________________________ 14. _______________________________________
ITINERARY
Date: Start at: Via: Overnight:
_______ _____________________________ ______________________ _________________________
_______ _____________________________ ______________________ _________________________
_______ _____________________________ ______________________ _________________________
_______ _____________________________ ______________________ _________________________
_______ _____________________________ ______________________ _________________________
_______ _____________________________ ______________________ _________________________
CONTACT INFO—Names and numbers or radio info for:
Party ___________________________________________________________________________________
Emergency services _______________________________________________________________________
Emergency contacts ______________________________________________________________________
TRANSPORTATION Automobiles: Boats:
Number __________________________________ Number _____________________________
Type __________________________________ Type _____________________________
License __________________________________ Registration _____________________________
Parked at __________________________________ Rented from __________________
NOTES
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
Carry float plan with health histories, consent forms, and required permits. Leave copies with contacts.


Rowing
Traditionally, oars were the primary motive power for small craft for a wide range of commercial and recre-
ational activities such as fishing, ferrying, bird hunting, and tending larger vessels. The advent of small out-
board motors has almost made rowing a lost art today. Basic rowing skills are still advantageous, however, in
several situations. Many youth are attracted to rowing as a fun activity because they are interested in boats
of all kinds.
23Chapter


Chapter 23: Rowing23-2
Boat Designs and Use
Although many excellent rowboat designs are still manufactured, those tend to be of limited production and
expensive. Most small craft outfitted with oars are actually designed for small outboard motors. The back seat
will be positioned forward of the transom to allow space for a fuel can and to allow better trim and tiller control.
Oarlock sockets may not be positioned correctly for easy rowing. Compared to a dory or other classic design, the
typical small powerboat under oars may seem sluggish but will generally perform well if the oars are correctly sized.
Conventional Rowing. Rowing is a useful skill when using small boats
as tenders to cruising sailboats, as guard craft during unit swims,
or to move quietly from one fishing spot to another. Rowboats are
suited for such purposes due to their carrying capacity and stability,
particularly in waves. In some countries, properly designed and
equipped rowboats are offered for hire in public parks.
Sliding-Seat (Competitive) Rowing. Competitive rowing is typically
sponsored by schools and clubs. A local rowing club may provide
resources for Scouts to try the activity. Sliding-seat rowing provides
excellent whole-body aerobic exercise, and there is joy in how
easily a long, slender craft glides through the water. However, most
such craft are not well suited for much beyond rowing in a straight
line on calm water. Only a few sliding-seat designs are available for
transporting people and gear on trips.
Dories. Dories are used on for running whitewater and drift fishing,
particularly on western rivers. Running rapids in any craft requires
specialized skills. Youth groups should normally ride as passengers
in such craft with the rowing done by an experienced guide.
River Rafting. River rafting is discussed in Chapter 21 as a means
by which youth groups without specialized skills can experience
white water. Oared rafts are also used as support craft for kayaking
groups.
Additional information on all aspects of rowing is provided in the
Rowing merit badge pamphlet.


Chapter 23: Rowing23-3
Oars
Probably the greatest impediment to easy rowing is the tendency to use oars that are too short. Oars must be
sized to the boat, not the rower. That is, a Cub Scout will find it harder to row a wide-beamed boat with short
oars than with long oars. Typically, oars need to be 7 to 8 feet or longer, but unfortunately the sporting-goods
departments of large chain stores will often only stock 6-foot oars. Therefore, you may need to special-order the
correct size oars for your boat. Be aware that price increases with length.
Correctly sized oars resting in the oarlocks should float with the blades in the water and the handles meeting
amidships at belly-button height of a person centered on the seat. The correct oar length will increase with
beam width and freeboard height. If the oars are too short, they will dig too deep in the water, pop out of the
lock, and force the rower to position the hands either too high or too far apart for efficient rowing.
Buttons on oars are not essential but do help keep the oars positioned, while the rower is reaching for a flotation
device to throw to a swimmer in distress, for example. Oars with buttons typically also have sleeves or leathers
to protect the oar from wear on the oarlock. Traditionally, buttons and sleeves were made from leather held in
place by stitching or tacks, but rubber and plastic versions are available. The button should rest slightly inboard
of the lock when the oar is in use.
LEATHERBUTTONHANDLE LOOM THROAT BLADE TIP
HANDLE BUTTON SLEEVE SHAFT BLADE
Fixed-
seat oar
Sliding-seat
oar


Chapter 23: Rowing23-4
Note that other styles of locks are used with sliding-seat and raft rigs.
Davis (rowing position) Davis (safety position)
Open Ring
Gate lock
Oarlocks
The next key to effective rowing is a proper oarlock. Folks attempting to row with oars that are too short tend to
favor locks, such as clamps and pins, that hold the oar to the boat. An oar that is too short will tend to pop out of
an open-top oarlock. Open-top or ring locks are preferred since they allow the oar to feather. Again, these may
be special-order or internet shopping items. The typical sporting-goods department may stock only the inferior
styles, if any.
The socket for the lock should be located approximately forearm or thigh length aft of a rower sitting upright on
the seat. The lock should be secured to the socket with a chain or lanyard so that the lock can be lowered when
people are getting in and out of the boat. Alternately, a ring lock may be left on the oar beneath the button, or
a self-contained Davis lock may be used.


Chapter 23: Rowing23-5
Feather. Rotate the blades almost flat to the water
by rolling the wrists down. Feathering prevents wind
and wave resistance during the recovery.
Recover. Return to the catch position by leaning
forward with the blades feathered just above the
water (or skipping across the surface if there aren’t
any waves).
Moving Forward
Catch
Catch. Facing aft with blades clear of the water,
lean toward the stern with arms stretched forward.
Drop the blades into the water edgewise.
Feather
Pull
Pull. Brace your legs and sweep the blades aft
by first leaning back with arms straight, and then
finish with elbows next to your sides.
Recover
1 2
3 4


Chapter 23: Rowing23-6
Moving Backward
Catch. Angle the oars slightly aft by pulling your
hands to your belly with your elbows at your sides.
Drop the blades into the water edgewise.
Feather. Rotate the blades almost flat to the water
by rolling the wrists up. (Your hands twist in the oppo-
site direction to the forward stroke.)
Push. Lean aft and straighten your arms to sweep
the blades toward the bow. Finish with arms extended
aft.
Recover. Pull back on the oars to return to the
catch position with the blades feathered just above
the water (or skipping across the surface if there
aren’t any waves).
1 2
3 4


Chapter 23: Rowing23-7
Stops, Turns, and Pivots
To stop, hold water with the blades submerged, or reverse the stroke slightly.
To turn under way, pull harder on one oar than the other.
Pivot–catch Pivot–push-pull
Pivot–feathering
To pivot, or spin in place, row forward
with one oar while backing water with
the other.
Rowing Tips
Common errors can be avoided by imagining that you slide your hands within a narrow, flat track or “groove.”
Keep the grips close together with your elbows down. Having your hands too far apart reduces your leverage
against the oarlock. Minimize vertical movement to prevent “windmilling.” If you push your hands down while
feathering, you waste energy lifting the blades too far out of the water. If you raise your hands during the catch
and pull, the blades go too deep into the water and you are likely to pop the oar out of the lock. Be careful during
the recovery to keep the leading edge of a feathered blade tilted slightly up. Otherwise, the blade will dive into
the water if you try to skim the oars or catch a bit of wave chop. The reaction of a diving blade, called “catching
a crab,” may be strong enough to knock you from your seat.
Additional tips on oar length, boat trim, maintaining course, sculling, sliding-seat rowing, and other subjects can
be found in the Rowing merit badge pamphlet.


Chapter 23: Rowing23-8
Swimmer Assists
Rowboats used as guard craft at a unit swim should be positioned at the perimeter of the swimmer area and
crewed by a buddy team equipped with rescue aids. Distressed swimmers can be thrown a flotation aid as the
rower backs water to allow the person to grasp the transom. A reach pole or an extra oar may be used as a reach-
ing device. Incapacitated swimmers are held at the back of the boat by the coxswain as the rower moves the
boat quickly to shore. If the boat is a long distance from safety—for example, guarding a snorkeling party near a
reef—the victim can be lifted over the stern of some boats if rescue breathing/CPR is needed.
If rowboats are used to protect long-distance swimmers in open water, such as for the Mile Swim, then Scouting
America policies state that the swimmer is followed by a rowboat with both a rower and a spotter.


Sailing
Sailing is a popular recreational activity that is fun, healthy, and challenging. Many of today’s youth are keenly
interested in sailing but may have little access to boats and little opportunity to learn sailing skills. Scouting pro-
grams address that gap and provide sailing opportunities in more than one format in boats of various sizes. Some
focus on the individual, others on the unit. This chapter addresses program opportunities rather than specific
sailing skills. Basic sailing skills are covered more thoroughly in the Small-Boat Sailing merit badge pamphlet.
24Chapter


Chapter 24- Sailing24-2
Small-Boat Programs
The Small-Boat Sailing merit badge is designed primarily for the individual Scout and their
buddy using small craft with limited crew capability. Scouts can earn the merit badge from
local counselors and at many council summer camps.
Some Venturing crews and Sea Scout ships specialize in sailing as one of their primary activities.
The following elements should be considered for such programs:
• Sailing for pleasure with competition as an option
• Learning by doing
• Using youth members as counselors aided by volunteer consultants
• Maximum time on the water with a minimum of lectures
• Visual aids and simple instructional materials to support learning
• A series of sailing exercises and drills to add fun to skills practice
• Competition with those of like ability with emphasis on fun rather than winning
Professionally Crewed Day Trips
Several large sailing vessels offer scheduled day trips for the general public from various ports on the coasts and
the Great Lakes. These offer a fun introduction to large-boat sailing to Scouting America members of all ages and
abilities and can accommodate large groups if prearrangements are made for a block of tickets. However, the
group will be passengers with limited opportunities for learning skills. Make sure the captain and the vessel have
current U.S. Coast Guard credentials.


Chapter 24: Sailing24-3
Captained Charters
An active industry of large and small companies provides crewed boats for hire for typical terms of one to two
weeks. The crew may consist of only a captain or include a mate/cook. Patrons can leave everything to the crew
or operate the vessel under supervision. Fees and availability may vary by season. Summer is the prime season
in northern waters around Maine and Vancouver. In southern waters, particularly the Caribbean, summer is the
off season due to heat and potential hurricanes. Typically, group size is limited, around four to eight, but some
larger vessels are available. Catamarans may accommodate larger numbers than a monohull of the same length.
While there are many well-maintained boats with reputable captains willing to work with Scouting groups, there
is also the potential for a bad experience, particularly when booking sight unseen months in advance. An easy
way for a unit leader to vet a boat and crew is to book the trip through the Scouting America National High
Adventure Sea Base or through council high-adventure bases that offer similar opportunities. A few vessels are
available for groups of 20 or so.
Bareboat Charters
Boats may also be hired without a crew. That frees space aboard for other unit members but also places greater
responsibility on the unit leader. Before renting boats, charter companies generally require proof of sailing
competency. If you don’t qualify, some will provide a captain for an additional fee. You will need
experience on larger boats to qualify. One way to gain that experience is through a keelboat training
program. There are numerous sailing schools affiliated with organizations such as US Sailing or the
American Sailing Association whose training programs are recognized, or required, by charter companies.
Information on sailing schools and charter companies may be found in SAIL magazine and on the internet.
Many charter companies restrict sailing to daylight hours within sight of land. Those are good guidelines for any
amateur skipper and crew.


Chapter 24- Sailing24-4
Cruising Checklist
Not all charter companies require the same experi-
ence, and a unit may also have the opportunity to use a
private vessel on a local lake skippered by a member’s
parent. The following checklist of gear and skills may
be used for a self-assessment. Details will vary depend-
ing on the type of vessel and the cruising area, but a
lack of comfort in any pertinent area is a flag that needs
additional review. A similar list should be reviewed with
a charter company before accepting a vessel.
Rigging:
• Standing rigging (stays, shrouds, spreaders,
lifelines, etc.) in good condition and properly
adjusted.
• Running rigging in good condition and understood.
Operation of every line, cleat, and winch is clear
and it is obvious how to:
– Raise, lower, and reef the main, including any
roller reefing or topping lift
– Raise, lower, or roller furl the jib, including
whether the furling system can be used to
reduce sail
• Ground tackle should include at least two anchors
and rodes.
Mechanical Systems:
• Rudder operation checked. Wheel has centerline
indicator.
• Swing keel operation reviewed.
• Operation and basic maintenance of the auxiliary
engine is clear (start, throttle, neutral, engaged).
• Engine compartment clean (to allow easy determi-
nation of new fuel, oil, or water leaks).
• Cooking system operation and safety precautions
reviewed.
• Fire extinguishers easily accessible for either
engine or cooking fires.
• Bilge pump operational; manual backup system
available.
• Freshwater system reviewed (capacity, pump
operation, level indicator, cutoff valves, filling
procedure).
• Fuel system reviewed (fuel type, capacity, level
indicator, cutoff valves, filling procedure).
• Head and shower operation reviewed, including
holding-tank capacity and emptying.
• Dinghy checked (towing or storage system, out-
board operation and maintenance, repair kit for
inflatable).
Electrical/Electronic Systems:
• Is generator attached to auxiliary engine or
separate?
• Battery system reviewed (charging procedure,
bank usage, and switching).
• Shore power connections reviewed.
• Navigation and interior lighting system
reviewed.
• Marine radio operation and procedures checked.
• Is there a system for weather forecasts?
• Depth-finder operation and alarm setting.
Lead-line backup.


Chapter 24: Sailing24-5
Mal de mer
The constant motion aboard a boat can unset-
tle the stomach and produce nausea or worse.
Those who have problems with motion sickness
in cars should seek medical advice before a
sailboat cruise. Prescription medications are
available. Over-the-counter pills may work for
some sufferers. Just about anyone will show
signs of seasickness if below deck in a hot, con-
fined space when the boat is pushing through
swells while heeling. Anyone green behind the
gills should stay on deck in the fresh air with
a view of the horizon. A turn at the wheel or
another task may help. Hopefully, the feeling
will soon pass. However, anyone stricken with
severe motion sickness should be monitored
for dehydration.
Navigation Aids:
• Chart plotters up-to-date with clearly under-
stood operation?
• Backup paper charts and magnetic compasses
available?
• Binoculars supplied?
• Is there a local cruising guide with information
on channels, anchorages, etc.?
Accommodations and Provisioning:
• Adequate sleeping space for all aboard, consis-
tent with Youth Protection policies?
• List of personal gear provided to each unit
member?
• Is food provided by the charter company, by the
unit, or a combination?
• Are any perishable food items properly stored
(icebox or refrigeration)?
Maneuvers
Is the skipper confident that supervised crew members
can:
• Set and trim sails for all points of sail (tack,
reach, and run).
• Come about.
• Plot a course to the next waypoint.
• Read channel markers.
• Follow rules-of-the-road when encountering
other vessels.
• Quickly recover a person who falls overboard
while under way.
• Quickly de-power, lower, and/or furl sails.
• Anchor, moor, or dock under power in potentially
crowded anchorages.
• Anchor, moor, or dock under sail if auxiliary
power fails.
• Manage adequately if skipper becomes
incapacitated.


Chapter 24- Sailing24-6
Float Plan:
The charter company should provide advice on:
• Local sights and activities, such as a good
snorkeling location.
• Local regulations (e.g., fishing licenses)
and customs.
• Good and bad anchorages.
• Tricky channels.
• Good restaurants for a treat and places to avoid
crowds.
• Provisioning locations.
• Who to contact, where, and how, for minor and
major emergencies.
Emergencies:
Discuss with the charter company:
• Major medical emergencies.
• Minor medical concerns (should have a first-aid
kit adequate for removing fishhooks, etc.).
• Major vessel damage.
• Theft or other criminal activities.
• Running aground.
• Location and use of flares and other emergency
gear.
Although basic sailing procedures are universal, different boats have different systems and will handle differently.
The above checklist is for guidance only and does not substitute for experience. Nothing beats a short shakedown
on the actual vessel or a sister ship. Someone confident in tight maneuvering of a 25-footer may still be intimidated
the first time at the wheel of a 40-footer. Don’t hesitate to inform the charter company of such concerns. They
may offer to have, or insist on having, a representative aboard for a short time while you get the feel of the boat.
NOTE: Because most cruising sailboats have auxiliary power, skippers must also comply with
all rules applicable to motorboats. Chapter 26 on motorboating provides additional guidance.


Boardsailing
Forerunners of sailboards were experimented with around the 1950’s. The equipment was patented and
commercialized around 1970. The sport took off in that decade and the next and became an Olympic sport for
men in 1984 and for women in 1992. It gradually declined in popularity but is perhaps now making a modest
comeback. Hydrofoils were introduced at the 2024 Olympics.
Windsurfing is the popular expression used to describe the use of a sailboard, but that term was initially
trademarked. Boardsailing was the generic alternative used when the activity became an Olympic sport.
Boardsailing is fun, relatively inexpensive compared with some sports, and great exercise. It is also relatively
easy to learn with the right equipment and conditions.
Sailboards can reach high speeds, ride huge waves, and even go airborne. When learning, it is very important to
select the right equipment to learn the basics. An experienced instructor will make the effort much easier. US
Windsurfing (www.uswindsurfing.org) provides information on courses and online tutorials. Some Scout summer
camps offer boardsailing programs, and your local council may have a list of counselors for the Scouting America
Boardsailing award. The Boardsailing award application is provided in Appendix 3.
25Chapter


Chapter 25: Boardsailing25-2
The Board
Learning is easier with a board that has good stability and buoyancy. Therefore, start with a long, wide, thick
board with a large volume. Avoid short advanced shapes with a narrow nose and tail until you have mastered the
basics.
Less expensive boards made of molded polyethylene are tough but are heavier than more expensive boards made
of various composites such as fiberglass, Kevlar, and carbon fiber. Some boards are inflatables.
The nose or bow at the front of the board is shaped to ride over small waves without diving.
The tail or stern always remains in the water (except for hydrofoils). A wide tail provides increased stability that
allows you to move back on the board.
A small fin or skeg is attached on the underside of the tail to help tracking. Without it, the board would spin in
circles.
A mast track or foot on the top of the board near the center holds the sailing rig to the board.
Aft of the mast track, most boards have a second, larger fin that helps the board point closer to the wind, similar
to a daggerboard or centerboard on other sailing craft. There may be a lever handle on top of the board that
pivots the blade up and down.
The tops of all boards should have a nonslip coating to allow you to stand on the board without slipping.
Many boards will have foot straps positioned aft on each side of the board. Foot straps are not needed for basic
maneuvers. Beginners may want to forego using the straps initially.
Mast track
Nose
(bow) Tail
(stern)
Board
Fin/Skeg
lever
Daggerboard
Nonslip surface
Foot
straps


Chapter 25: Boardsailing25-3
The Rig
The rig consists of the sail and the spars that hold it
in place.
The front edge of the sail is the luff, the back edge
is the leach, and the bottom is the foot.
The mast is a rigid tube of metal or composite
material that slides into a sleeve along the luff of
the sail.
The mast foot at the bottom of the mast has a
universal joint that attaches to the board’s mast
track. The attachment allows the rig to pivot in any
direction.
A safety leash provides a backup connection to the
board in case the mast foot fails. A rig attached to
the board makes it less likely to blow away from a
sailor dumped in the water.
The back of the sail is held away from the mast
with a divided wishbone boom usually made of
aluminum. The boom attaches to the mast with an
adjustable clamp in a cutout in the luff sleeve. The
boom is used to control the sail and has a textured
grip on both sides of the sail. For best results, the
boom should be positioned on the mast between
shoulder and chin height.
The back corner of the sail, or clew, attaches to the
back of the boom with a line called the outhaul.
The bottom of the sail at the luff is the tack and is
attached to the mast with another line called the
downhaul.
The sail functions best when the downhaul and outhaul are properly tensioned to produce a smooth airfoil. Flex-
ible battens running across the width of the sail help maintain the shape. Pulleys are used to gain sufficient ten-
sion in the downhaul to flatten the sail along the luff. The clew is tensioned sufficiently to keep the sail off the
boom. Once pulled taut, the lines are held in place with various types of cleats.
The uphaul is a line attached to the boom that is used to pull the rig from the water into a sailing position.
If you buy a rig, it should come with rigging instructions, but the novice using a camp or rental board should rely
on an instructor to provide guidance. For best results, the fullness of the sail can be adjusted, or tuned, based
on wind conditions.
Sail designs vary with use. Racing sails are large, with a tall luff, a long boom, and a low foot. Wave sails used in
the surf have a shorter luff and boom and a higher foot. Generally, beginners should start out with smaller sails.
A sail that is too big for the wind conditions is difficult to control and tiring to use.
Head
Mast
Luff
Clamp
Battens
Leach
Clew and
outhaul
Foot
Mast foot
Universal
joint
Boom
Tack and Downhaul


Chapter 25: Boardsailing25-4
Moving to the Water
Initially you can rely on your instructor, but even-
tually you will need to learn how to rig the sail and
move it and the board to the water, and attach the
rig to the board. The illustrations provide pointers.
Before you start to sail, for the first time or the
umpteenth, make sure your gear is ready: Double-
check your life jacket and the rig, particularly the
mast foot attachment.
Also check the weather and surroundings. Begin-
ners should start in light winds (3 to 7 knots) and
calm, uncrowded water. Do not launch into winds
that are blowing offshore into large expanses of
water.
Carry the rig either at your side
or above your head with the
mast toward the wind.
Carry the board at your side, with one hand on the
centerboard and the other on the mast track. Avoid
turning broadside to the wind.


Chapter 25: Boardsailing25-5
Uphauling
Start with the board sideways to the wind with the rig on the downwind side. Face the board with your back to
the wind and one hand on each side of the mast.
Boost yourself into a kneeling position over the center of the board. When stable, crouch with your feet on either
side of the mast along the centerline of the board, grasp the uphaul, and carefully stand up.
Keep your back and arms straight, with your head up. Push up with your legs and lean back to slowly slide the
rig from the water.
Finish pulling the rig from the water until you can grasp the mast with both hands just below the boom. Don’t pull
the mast completely vertical. Your body and the mast should form a V. Your back should still be to the wind with
the sail flapping, or luffing, loosely downwind. Your front foot should be against the mast foot, and your back foot
should be on the centerline behind the mast about shoulder width from your front foot. This is the basic position.
From the basic position, you can pause by lowering the rig, turn the board, or move to a sailing position. If the
board starts to turn, the rig is leaning either too far forward or aft. Tilting the rig in one direction will cause the
board to rotate in the other direction.
1
3
2
4


Chapter 25: Boardsailing25-6
Getting Under Way
Experienced sailors move seamlessly into a sailing
position during the uphaul by grasping the boom near
the mast with their forward hand while adjusting their
stance. The boom is then grasped with the back hand
and pulled in to catch the wind. The actions are firm,
but the body is relaxed.
The beginner may wish to start with a more deliber-
ate progression. From the basic position, release the
mast with your back hand. Step aft with your back
foot across the centerline and your front foot angled
forward just behind the mast. That rotates your body
toward the front of the board and allows you to look
forward.
Shift the rig to maintain balance. The sail should still
be luffing with the rig tilted downwind.
Next, place both hands on the boom about shoulder-
width apart with your hands on top. Your forward hand
will be slightly aft of the mast. Pull the boom in with
your back hand by rotating your rear shoulder away
from the rig. The sail will catch the wind and the board
will move forward.
With the wind from the side, pulling in on the boom
will increase the force on the sail. Letting out will
decrease the force. Let go with your back hand to luff
the sail if you start to lose control.
Stay relaxed and lean back gently against the pull
of the sail. Keep your body and arms straight in the
shape of the number 7. Look ahead.
As the board accelerates, you may need to make
slight adjustments to your stance or where you grasp
the boom to maintain comfortable control and trim.
Experiment with different positions in a light breeze.
Some boards will be more forgiving than others.
Signs of poor positioning include: shoulders in with
hips out, feet across the board, bent arms, arms too
far apart, and head facing the sail near the rig.
1
2
3
4


Chapter 25: Boardsailing25-7
Steering
Since a sailboard has no rudder, steering is done by
shifting the rig. When the wind strikes the sail at an
angle, part of the force moves the board forward while
part of the force tries to move the board sideways.
Both force components act as if they were applied at
a single point on the sail called the center of effort
(CE). The sideways, or lateral, force is countered by
the resistance of the water on the fins. The water
resistance acts at a point called the center of lateral
resistance (CLR). When the CE and CLR are directly
above one another, there is a tendency for the board
to heel that is countered by the sailor leaning to wind-
ward. However, the lateral forces are balanced and
the board moves forward in a fixed direction. Tilting
the rig forward shifts the CE ahead of the CLR, and
the resulting moment of unbalanced forces causes the
front of the board to turn with the wind. Tilting the rig
aft shifts the CE behind the CLR, and the front of the
board turns into the wind.


Chapter 25: Boardsailing25-8
Turning Around
There are three different procedures for making major
course changes or reversing direction. The board may
be tacked by turning into the wind while under way.
The sailor moves from one side of the board to the
other by stepping around the front of the mast. Tack-
ing is used to beat upwind and may also be used for
reversing direction. Tacking is described in the next
section.
Jibing is turning downwind while under way. The sail is
flipped from one side to the other around the front of
the board. Jibing is more difficult than tacking and will
not be illustrated here because it is not required for the
Boardsailing award.
The third procedure is done from the basic position
with the sail luffed. The rig is tilted forward and the
board rotated beneath it. This procedure should be
learned during your first sessions on the board—it is
vital that you know how to return to your starting
point. The technique is also useful for aligning the
board in the direction of desired travel when you
launch. You will not always desire or be able to pro-
ceed perpendicular to the wind as the getting under
way sequence assumed.
To start the turn, luff the sail to cut power. After the
board slows, grasp the mast or the uphaul with both
hands. Then shift the rig so that it points toward the
bow (actually, the board rotates under the rig).
As the board turns, keep one foot on each side of the
mast and take small steps to turn the board as you
continue to face the mast.
Once the board is pointing in the desired direction,
return to the sailing position and adjust the boom for
power.


Chapter 25: Boardsailing25-9
Tacking
To turn without stopping, turn the board toward the wind. Grasp the mast with your front hand, lean the sail aft,
and step forward across the board with your front foot.
1
3 4
2
As the board turns through the wind, grasp the mast with both hands and step forward with the back foot to face
the rig. Twist around the rig on the balls of your feet, bring the mast upright, step back, grasp the boom, and
resume a sailing position on the new side.


Chapter 25: Boardsailing25-10
Points of Sail
The angle of the sail to the wind and the board
depends on the heading relative to the wind. The
board cannot travel directly into the wind. With the
boom pulled parallel to the board, sheeted in, turn
into the wind until the board starts to slow down or
stall, then back off slightly. That’s as tight to the wind
as the board will go, which is often near 45 degrees.
Traveling into the wind, called beating, will require a
series of zigzag tacks.
To sail off the wind, or reach, let the sail out to maxi-
mize speed and minimize tilt. A beam reach is faster
than the wind. The board is perpendicular to the wind
with the sail out near 45 degrees.
To go directly downwind, or run, the sail is at 90
degrees to the board and you should be centered
on the board, facing forward, with your back to the
wind. Adjust your stance to balance the board, which
may feel wobbly or unstable in this direction. The
board can go no faster than the wind in this direction.
WIND
run
broad
reach
beam
reach
(blasting)
close
reach
beat
STAR-
BOARD
TACK
PORT
TACK
NO-GO ZONE


Chapter 25: Boardsailing25-11
Stopping
As you near the shore, sheet out to slow down, and
then let the rig luff as you coast the final distance.
Carefully lower the rig into the water, which will stop
any remaining forward motion. Crouch down as you
lower the sail, and then step off the board.
Emergencies
Even when you are careful, situations can arise that will
require assistance. For example, a part of the rig could
break. Since you should always sail with a buddy close
at hand, such assistance should be easy to summon.
One way to attract attention is to use a whistle. Always
sail with a whistle attached to your life jacket. Another
option is to flap your arms vertically in the international
distress signal.
Falling off the board is an inevitable part of learning.
Try not to fall headfirst, and try not to land on the
board or the rig. Avoid foot entrapment between the
mast and the board near the mast track. Raise your
arms to protect your head from a falling rig. Always
stay with the board. If the rig separates from the
board, grasp the board first.
If you can’t sail back to shore—for example, the rig or fin
is broken, the wind has stopped completely, or the wind
has strengthened beyond your comfort level—the pru-
dent action is to signal for a rescue boat. For short dis-
tances, you can paddle to shore by lying prone along the
board. Your buddy should follow close by. In light winds,
balance the wishbone boom on the aft portion of the
board to lift the sail clear of the water. Then lie prone on
the forward portion of the board and paddle to shore. In
heavier winds, dismantle the rig and roll the sail to make
it easier to paddle or to take gear aboard a rescue boat.
If you are paddling to shore, point upwind or upcurrent
of your projected landing site.
Be alert for other watercraft. With the rig down, the
board may be difficult for others to see. (Yet another
reason for a buddy board close by.)


Chapter 25: Boardsailing25-12
Know the Environment
Sailing conditions vary with wind speed, the body of water, and other boat traffic. A small lake or a calm, enclosed
bay free of other boats is an ideal area for learning. In such a setting, you should be able to reach shore along
some direction even if you can’t return to your launch site.
On large lakes or an ocean shoreline, beginners should not launch into an offshore wind. Stay close to shore in
case the wind shifts direction or dies. In some areas, the wind will shift from offshore in the morning to onshore
in the afternoon and die in the late afternoon. In other areas, afternoon thunderstorms are common during
certain seasons. Get off the water in advance of thunder and lightning.
Be alert for shallow water and areas with underwater obstructions. In some parts of the country, trees are left
upright in lakes formed by dams and may present underwater hazards.
Tidal currents are strong in some coastal areas, particularly in bays and in the channels between barrier islands.
Currents may also be a factor in rivers large enough for boardsailing. Do not sail in situations where currents can
carry you offshore or into areas of danger.
Beginners should avoid all but the smallest waves and surf. Wave sailing and other extreme aspects of the sport
are only for the experts.
The environment also affects your physical comfort and well-being. Drink plenty of water to avoid dehydration
in hot, humid conditions. Protect yourself against sunburn. Be wary of hypothermia. Return to shore if you begin
to shiver. Wear shoes or booties to protect your feet.


Chapter 25: Boardsailing25-13
Safety Guidelines
Whenever youth participate in boardsailing activities as Scouting activities, they must follow the complete Safety
Afloat guidelines reviewed in Chapter 13. The following list highlights several Safety Afloat items adapted for
boardsailing and is consistent with various boardsailing safety codes. Individuals should follow similar procedures.
• Qualified Supervision. This item requires the supervisor to either be an experienced boardsailor knowledgeable
in accident prevention and prepared for emergency situations, or be assisted by those with such experience.
• Swimming Ability. Only persons who have completed the standard Scout Swimmer classification test may ride
on or control a sailboard. See Chapter 5 for a review of the test.
• Buddy System. Each person on the water must have a buddy, either on another board or other type of craft,
sailing close enough to monitor one another but far enough apart to avoid collision.
• Skill proficiency. Beginners should receive instruction in sailing skills and safety from an experienced
boardsailor. Only participants who have demonstrated the ability to control the craft under existing wind and
water conditions should be allowed to sail in open water. If needed, a triangular course may be used to test
ability before allowing participants to set their own direction. Those who have trouble completing the course
should receive additional instruction.
• Planning and Safety
◊ Review local weather forecasts prior to the activity and monitor conditions while on the water.
◊ Do not sail where winds or currents are directed offshore into open water.
◊ Stay off the water during high winds, high waves, or lightning.
◊ Check all equipment before going out—yours and your buddy’s.
◊ In case of equipment failure or distress, stay with the board.
◊ Determine how to summon help before going out.
◊ Use a float plan to advise others where you plan to sail and when you expect to return.
◊ Plan to be off the water well before dusk. Do not sail at night.
• Equipment. All equipment should be safety checked and repaired as needed before each use. Personal gear
should include a life jacket, a whistle, footwear, and adequate protection from heat or cold. A rescue craft
is recommended for beginner groups. Beginners should avoid high-performance boards
What Next?
The material in this chapter reviews skills and safety items to support
the Scouting America Boardsailing award. That training should be
provided by a qualified instructor. Although the Boardsailing award
provides a basic introduction, there are additional skills used by
advanced boardsailors. Again, the best way to learn is from someone
with experience, whether just for fun or for competition. Jibing is an
alternative way to turn. Foot straps and a harness allow better control
of the board. For additional opportunities, check out the website of
U.S. Windsurfing mentioned at the start of this chapter.





Motorboating
A few Sea Scout units do training and extended cruising in large powered vessels, and the National Sea Base uses large
dive boats. In those cases, U.S. Coast Guard regulations may require special licenses and certifications for captains,
crews, and vessels. For the most part, motorboating by Scouts and the public at large involves a variety of smaller
recreational boats including johnboats with small outboard motors, bass boats with large outboards, pontoon boats,
multipurpose runabouts with stern drives, and inboards designed for waterskiing. This chapter addresses operation
of those craft, including variations in state regulations. Additional information is provided in the Motorboating merit
badge pamphlet.
26Chapter


Chapter 26: Motorboating26-2
According to Scouting America policies, a motorboat may
be operated by a youth, subject to state regulations,
when accompanied in the boat by an experienced
leader or camp staff member who meets state
requirements for motorboat operation. Most states
set a minimum age for motorboat operation—12 is most
common but the range is from 10 to 16 for states with
age restrictions. Many of the states with age restrictions
also require an adult to be onboard when a minor is
operating a motor vessel. More and more states are
adding mandatory education and licensing requirements,
which often require online or in person classroom
sessions but may also include actual skill reviews. In
some cases, requirements also depend on the type of
craft and horsepower. Some states recognize certificates
from other states, some do not.
Because regulations differ from state to state, each
leader supervising motorboat operation at a Scouting
America function must check and comply with local state
requirements. The website of the National Association
of State Boating Law Administrators (NASBLA), www.
nasbla.org, contains links to the appropriate agency in
each state.
Some states offer courtesy rather than compulsory
powerboat education courses specific to local
regulations. In states without such offerings, there are
various options for generic courses that follow NASBLA
recommendations. Check the national websites for
local chapters of the U.S. Coast Guard Auxiliary, www.
cgaux.org, or America’s Boating Club, www.usps.org,
for additional course opportunities. Such courses are
recommended for Scouting America members who own
and operate motorboats.


Chapter 26: Motorboating26-3
Required Boating Equipment
Life jackets
Fire extinguishers
Backfire flame arrestors
Ventilation systems (e.g., blowers for
enclosed gasoline engines)
Navigation lights for operation at night
Sound signaling devices
Visual distress signals
Trip Planning and Preparation
Checking intended route (access,
hazards, permits, alternate emergency
destinations)
Checking local weather and water conditions
(low or high water; wave state)
Filing a float plan
Preventive maintenance and systems check
Trailering
Fueling procedures
Predeparture checklist and tailgate review
for participants
Environmental Laws and Regulations for
Safe Boat Operation
Operator responsibilities
Capacity, trim, and passenger locations
Adverse effects of alcohol and other drugs
Rules of the road
Aids to navigation
Docking, mooring, and anchoring (don’t
anchor from stern)
Carbon monoxide hazards (on swim platforms
as well as in enclosed spaces)
Emergencies
Capsize
Man overboard
Hypothermia and cold-water immersion
Fire
Grounding
Rendering assistance
Accident reports
Other Considerations
Personal watercraft
Tow sports (waterskiing, wakeboarding, tub-
ing, etc.)
Diving and snorkeling
Hunting and fishing
A typical course outline, adapted from NASBLA standards, provides a handy checklist for items that the powerboat
operator should understand:


Chapter 26: Motorboating26-4
Basic Powerboat Operation
Many powerboat courses focus on cognitive material (that is, rules and procedures in a classroom) rather than physical
demonstration and practice. The boat operator should have actual boating experience before transporting others.
Motorboat operation has similarities to driving a car, particularly if the boat has a steering wheel rather than a tiller.
Even though a boat steering wheel is often on the right or starboard side, boats meeting head-on each veer to pass
left-to-left, the same as cars on an unmarked country road. When boats are crossing, the boat to starboard has the
right-of-way but needs to check that the other boat is acting accordingly. The same principles apply to cars at an
unmarked intersection or in an open parking lot. (Review Chapter 15 for a more complete description of the rules of
the road.) A car driver can lose control striking an obstacle in the road, swerving to avoid an object, or hitting a bump
at high speed. The same is true for a boater encountering a floating log or crossing the wake of another vessel.
A powerboat operator also needs to understand that driving
a boat is different from driving a car. For example, a boat
has no brakes. It either glides to a stop or is slowed more
quickly by shifting to reverse, if available. A boat steers
from the back rather than the front. A car will follow the
front wheels away from a curb when pulling forward,
whereas the front wheels will likely hit the curb if pulling
away in reverse. In a similar situation, the back of a boat
pulling forward away from a pier will swing into the pier.
Trailering
Many boats are stored out of the water and transported on trailers to and from waterways. The size of the trailer
will depend on the size and weight of the boat, including the engine and all gear transported in the boat. Trailers
are rated by gross vehicle weight (GVW) and divided into classes. Class I is for trailers carrying less than 2,000
pounds. Larger trailers will have dual axles and may require separate trailer brakes. It is essential that the tow-
ing vehicle and hitch are rated for the trailer. Car manufacturers and insurance companies often restrict typical
sedans and minivans to minimal towing loads. Larger vehicles can be purchased with special towing packages that
include items such as additional cooling capacities, heavy-duty brakes, and larger side mirrors. Four-wheel drive
is useful on steep, slippery ramps.
Make sure the towing vehicle is rated for the load.
Do not risk a fall and being run over by standing
on the trailer tongue while the rig is moving. Also,
additional weight on the tongue may engage some
automatic trailer brakes.
Unhook trailer lights temporarily
if not waterproof.
Insert plugs and removeInsert plugs and remove
motor or drive supportsmotor or drive supports
before launch.before launch.
Use the parking brake and chocks if needed.
Avoid running back tires into water. Do not submerge tailpipe.
Carry a spare trailer tire and
appropriate jack. Maintain
wheel lubrication.
Avoid backing off a ledge
at end of paved ramp.


Chapter 26: Motorboating26-5
The hitch should be attached to the vehicle frame. Hitches are rated not only on total towing capacity but also
on tongue weight. A properly designed and loaded trailer should be balanced with minimal force either pushing
down or pulling up on the hitch. Trailer balls come in different sizes and typically can be interchanged on the
hitch. Make sure the ball matches the trailer coupling. The trailer should be attached to the hitch with criss-
crossed safety chains as well as a ball.
Backing a trailer is an essential skill but can be tricky. Practice on open, level ground before attempting a steep,
narrow ramp with a line of other boats waiting to launch.
Getting Under Way
Boats with an inboard engine are required to have a backfire flame arrestor and a ventilation blower. Before
starting a gasoline engine in an enclosed compartment, run the blower to clear any fumes that may have
accumulated. Failure to do so can result in a serious explosion and fire.
State and federal regulations often require boats to have
an engine cut off safety switch (ECOS) and associated
ECOS link (ECOSL). The link is typically a lanyard
attached to the driver but may be a wireless fob that
activates on immersion. Make sure the ECOSL is active
prior to starting the engine.
Ideally, the boat should float free of the trailer, but in
some cases it may be necessary to power the boat off.
Make sure the prop is lowered to an operating position
but is clear of the bottom. In most cases, the motor is
started in neutral, but some small outboards may not
have a gear shifting mechanism.
Passengers should wait to board until the driver brings the boat alongside the floating piers that generally are
provided for that purpose. (Don’t forget the person parking the trailer.) Passengers should don life jackets, board
one at a time, and sit in positions indicated by the driver. Everyone should have a seat. If there are more pas-
sengers than seats, except perhaps for a toddler sitting on a parent’s lap, the boat’s design capacity has been
exceeded and it will be necessary to take turns. Don’t overload the boat or allow passengers to ride on the sides.
Everyone should remain seated while the boat is under way.
Review basic safety precautions before leaving the dock. Check 360 degrees for a clear departure route. Miniver
carefully in congested areas and extend courtesy to other users.
Attach safety lanyard and run blower before starting engine.


Chapter 26: Motorboating26-6
Planing
Most small powerboats are designed to plane. At low speeds, the boat operates in displacement mode: the bow
pushes water to the sides while causing significant friction. At higher speeds, the back of the boat glides on top
of the water. Motor away from the dock at low speeds—the boat will generate a significant wake while reaching
a plane. Once in open water out of no-wake zones, slowly but continuously open the throttle to generate more
power. The boat may initially ride high on a bow wave but should quickly level off after reaching planing speed.
Slowly back off the throttle to your desired cruising speed. It takes more power to reach a plane than to maintain
it. Power-to-speed ratios can be adjusted with power trim tabs in boats so equipped. In most situations, the stern
unit should be lowered such that the prop shaft is nearly parallel to the water when at rest. If the unit is lowered
too far with the prop shaft angled up, the bow of the boat will plow and may not achieve a plane. If the unit is
not lowered enough, the boat squats, and steering while on a plane may be compromised.
Displacement mode Plane mode
When motor is at too much of an angle, the boat “squats.” When motor is not placed at enough angle, the boat “plows.”
When motor is angled correctly, the best performance will
be obtained.
Turning
Although many powerboats will remain upright during
sharp turns at speed on flat water, it is generally better
to make gentle turns while planing and limit tight turns
to slow speeds. Turn the wheel or tiller slowly, rather
than putting it hard over. While turning, the back of the
boat will swing wide. Flat-bottomed boats may skid at
higher speeds, particularly if towing a skier. Remember
to always keep the boat under control. Avoid situations
where sudden turns are needed by not outrunning your
ability to see ahead.


Chapter 26: Motorboating26-7
Waves and Wakes
One potential consequence of a high-speed turn is that a sharp turn into the trough of a wave could cause
the boat to flip. Small swells from the side will rock the
boat slightly but shouldn’t cause a problem at normal
operating speeds. If possible, alter course to take large,
isolated waves from the wakes of passing boats at an angle,
and then resume your previous heading. Large continuous
waves should be taken at a slight angle off perpendicular.
Decelerate off a plane if control is lost due to pounding.
Deep V hulls with an enclosed foredeck and high freeboard
will manage waves better than a small open outboard, but
the best way to handle large waves in any boat is to get off
the water before they develop. Remember to always check
the weather forecast before going out and to keep an eye
on the sky. Head back to the marina if adverse weather is
moving your way. In a pinch, if the waves are large enough to jeopardize control or to bring in water over the
sides, temporarily forgo heading to the marina and try to maintain sufficient power to keep the boat headed into
the waves at a slight angle.
Stopping
If you suddenly put the engine in neutral while planing, the boat will not immediately stop but will slow down
quickly enough to throw your passengers forward. In addition, your wake will continue forward and may spill in
over the stern. Plan ahead sufficiently so that you can slowly reduce speed. An easy, controlled stop will take
several hundred feet if you are traveling fast. As you reduce throttle, the boat will come off the plane. Continue
to reduce throttle to avoid running at intermediate speeds just below planing. At those speeds, the bow lifts,
which interferes with visibility, and a large wake is generated. As you approach a dock or trailer, it’s a good ideal
to kill all forward momentum a boat length or two away by short bumps into reverse at low power. You can then
proceed at the boat’s slowest forward speed with a final short bump into reverse if needed. Note that the rudder
on an inboard allows some steering capability if the boat is gliding forward in neutral. However, outboards and
stern drives rely on the prop for steerage. Turning the wheel in neutral will not have much effect.
You should be skilled enough to bring your boat to a stop at the side of a pier or in a slip. In unfavorable winds or
currents, you may need to rely on a fender to absorb the final momentum or a boat hook to close the final gap.
Throwing a line to someone already onshore may also be handy. However, you should not expect or allow pas-
sengers to jump off a moving boat or to grab a post to stop the boat from crashing into the pier.


Chapter 26: Motorboating26-8
Two- and Four-Cycle Outboards
The technology and regulation of outboard motors continues
to evolve. Years ago, two-cycle designs were preferred for
small engines with a single piston. They burned a gas/oil
mixture and were lighter, more powerful, lower maintenance,
and less expensive than four-cycle models. However, they
were noisy and released more pollutants. Most were unable to
meet newer environmental regulations and the market shifted
to four-cycle designs. Since then, carburetors have been
replaced with direct fuel injection and two-cycle engines are
again produced. However, four-cycle engines are more fuel
efficient and durable.
Personal Watercraft
The initially poor safety record and nuisance complaints associated
with personal watercraft have been moderated with education,
supervision, regulation, and design changes. Scouting America
councils may apply to the National Council for approval to conduct a
personal watercraft (PWC) camp program. Consult National Camp
Accreditation Program (NCAP) standards for details. However, unit
use of personal watercraft by youth is not an authorized Scouting
America activity. Individuals who operate private personal watercraft
should note that the Personal Watercraft Industry Association
recommends operator training and a minimum operator age of 16
even though regulations in several states are less restrictive. Safety
guidelines are available at www.pwia.org and www.uscgboating.org.


Tow Sports
Tow sports in aquatics include any activity in which a person is pulled in or above the water by a line attached
to a power source. The typical power source is a motorboat but could be a sailboat, a kite, or a cable. Tow
sports include riding on flotation devices, waterskiing, kneeboarding, wakeboarding, hydrofoiling, parasailing,
and kitesurfing. This chapter does not provide details on the skills needed to perform the activities. Instead, it
focuses on safety policies and procedures that unit leaders should consider as part of a SAFE Checklist review and
assessment during activity planning and execution. The chapter also discusses several tow sport activities, such
as parasailing, that are not authorized as Scouting America youth programs.
Basic information on waterskiing and wakeboarding skills is provided in the Water
Sports merit badge pamphlet. Additional information may be found on the USA Water-
ski and Wake Sports website.
Chapter
27


The Guide to Safe Scouting states the following for Tow Sports:
All participants in towed activity afloat (waterskiing, wakeboarding, kneeboarding, tubing, etc.) must have
successfully completed the Scouting America Swimmer classification test and must wear a life jacket that
has U.S. Coast Guard approval for the activity. Supervision must include both a skilled boat driver who meets
state requirements and is currently trained in Safety Afloat and a separate designated observer. Participants
should observe the Water-Skiers Safety Code and the Boat Drivers Safety Code found in Aquatics Supervision.
Use only floats specifically designed for towing that provide secure handholds for each rider.
Both the boat operator and the designated observer must visually inspect the water around the boat and
confirm by a headcount during a buddy check that everyone in the party is either securely on board or well
clear of the propulsion system before the engine is started. This mandate applies to both towed activities
and swimming activities in conjunction with the towed activities.
The designated observer must be no less than 18 years of age and present on the watercraft.
The list of prohibited activities in the Guide to Safe Scouting includes aerobatics while skiing or wakeboarding
and any activity in which a person is carried aloft by a parachute, parasail, kite, flying tube, or other device.
States likewise have various regulations governing tow sports, such as boat operator licensees, spotter require-
ments, and restrictions on operating from dusk til dawn.
The skills needed by individuals participating in towed activities vary from simple to difficult. In many cases, the
activity itself will have components ranging from basic to extreme. The activity leader should not allow participants
to attempt maneuvers without appropriate training, or maneuvers of questionable safety.
Tow sports and devices are continually evolving. Some products are introduced and then recalled due to poor safety
records. In the absence of a specific Scouting America policy, the unit leader is responsible for making reasonable
judgments about an activity’s safety, age appropriateness, and training requirements based on the leader’s own
experience. Questionable activities should be curtailed or postponed until appropriate trained supervision becomes
available.Chapter 27 Tow Sports
27-2


Water-Skier’s Safety Code
The following items support safe, enjoyable waterskiing and also apply to wakeboarding and kneeboarding:
• Always learn to water-ski by taking instructions from a good water-ski instructor or an advanced skier.
• Always wear a personal flotation device when skiing. Before entering the water, make sure your life jacket
is adjusted correctly for safety, comfort, and freedom of movement. Always make sure your life jacket is in
good serviceable condition.
• Always look ahead and know where you are going at all times.
• Always stay away from solid objects such as docks, boats, and stumps.
• Always be courteous and stay a reasonable distance from other skiers, boats, and swimmers.
• Always run parallel to shore and come in slowly when landing.
• Always learn new maneuvers progressively.
• Always have an extra person in the boat to watch the skier.
• Always signal that you are all right after a fall by clasping your hands overhead to notify the driver and
observer.
• Always hold up a ski while waiting in the water in a well-traveled boating area.
• Always check your equipment for dangerous, sharp, or protruding objects (wing nuts, loose runner, slivers).
• Never ski in shallow water or in an area where you do not know the depth. Minimum safe depth is 6 feet.
• Never put any part of your body through the bridle or wrap the rope around any part of your body.
• Never yell “Hit it!” or “Go boat!” until the rope is tight and the tips of your skis are up.
• Never ski to the point of exhaustion.
• Never ski at night. (Almost all states prohibit skiing from dusk to dawn.)
• Never ski directly ahead of another boat.
• Never ski double with different lengths of rope.
• Never attempt fast landings directly toward shore.
• Never jump from the boat while it is moving.
• Never move toward the boat until directed to do so by the observer.
• Never approach or climb into the boat while the motor is running, even if it is in idle.
• Always use a stern platform or ladder when climbing into the boat.
Skier safe Skier in waterChapter 27: Tow Sports
27-3


The observer is in charge of the towrope. The observer coils the line into the boat when the skier is ready to
board, pays it out when necessary for deepwater starts, and makes sure the line is clear prior to starts.
A critical function of the observer is to determine the location of everyone in the group, as well as anyone else
nearby in the water, before giving the driver clearance to start the engine. The buddy system required by Safety
Afloat is an aid in that process, and confirmation by buddies should be a first step. However, the observer should
still make an individual count and scan the water around the boat prior to giving an all-clear to the driver.
Boat Driver’s Safety Code
Boat drivers should never forget that they are not driving for personal pleasure. The boat is operated solely for
the benefit and safety of those being towed. All boat drivers should observe the following:
• Always have an observer onboard to watch the participant(s).
• Always return quickly to protect a fallen person, who is helpless in the water against oncoming boat traffic.
Anyone being towed is your primary responsibility.
• Always drive according to the participant’s ability, and avoid sharp turns.
• Always use common sense and courtesy when driving.
• Never ride the gunwale or the back of the seat while driving and do not allow passengers to ride that way.
• Never tow anyone in congested areas, particularly swimming areas.
• Always put the motor in neutral when passing a person in the water.
• Always turn the motor off when picking up a person.
• Always take a swimmer into the boat using a ladder or low rear deck, avoiding any contact with the motor,
rudder, or drive.
• Always independently confirm the location of everyone in the group and visually scan all around the boat and
verbally check that the observer has done the same prior to starting the motor.
Faster Slower HomeCut motor or stop
Role of the Observer
The designated observer watches how the skier, boarder, or float rider is doing; relays signals both ways between
the participant and driver; tells the boat driver if the participant falls; watches for potential hazards; and helps
the driver stay aware of traffic approaching from the rear.
The observer and skier should review signals before the skier enters the water. Although signals are fairly stan-
dard, they vary slightly in some regions. For example, some people indicate a turn by circling a hand overhead
and then pointing in the desired direction, others simply point, and some employ the straight- and bent-arm
signals used for bicycles. Agree on signals under way for OK, stop, faster, slower, right turn, left turn, and return,
and make sure the skier knows to quickly use the skier safe signal after a fall.Chapter 27 Tow Sports
27-4


The driver looks ahead while the observer
watches the skier. The ski buddy sits low and
out of the way.
Safe Boat Maneuvers
Keep passengers in the towboat to a minimum. Passen-
gers other than the observer and the skier’s buddy may
distract the driver. In a low-powered boat in particular,
unnecessary passengers make good starts more difficult.
Although a skier or boarder may request a takeoff by
shouting “Hit it!” the boat driver should not respond with-
out clear water ahead for a considerable distance. The
acceleration should not be so abrupt as to jerk the line
from the skier, but the boat will need to proceed quickly
to a plane, from which the driver should throttle back to
a speed that matches the skier’s ability and desire. The
driver should also avoid a turn during the takeoff by check-
ing that the towrope, the centerline of the boat, and the
prop axis are all approximately aligned. That check is nor-
mally done when taking the slack out of the line.
The towboat should proceed in a straight line at uniform
speed except when turning to reverse direction or pick
up a fallen participant. Fishtailing or rapid speed changes
intended to upset a skier or to dislodge a rider are irre-
sponsible and inappropriate.
Ideally, the towpath should be clear of obstructions or
other vessels for roughly 100 feet to each side and at least
a quarter-mile long. Other boats should stay clear of a boat
and riders being towed. However, the tow driver should be
prepared to take appropriate evasive action (either a wide
swerve or a controlled stop) if other boats continue on a
crossing path.
Turns at the ends of a run should be a wide oval to avoid
pulling the participant through the boat wake. After the
turn, the towboat should proceed back along its previous
wake. At times, skiers may intentionally cross the wake
either during a straight run or during a turn. However, the
actions of the boat driver should not force the participant
to cross the wake. Water is typically smoother inside the
wake if there is chop on the open lake due to wind and
other boat traffic, and crossing the wake can be intimidat-
ing for a beginner.
When a skier falls, the driver, through the observer, should
make certain the skier is all right and return as quickly as
safety permits if the skier fails to give the “safe” signal.
If the skier is all right, the driver should turn and idle back
toward the skier, approaching to pass on the driver’s side
for best visibility. As the boat approaches the skier, the
observer asks if the skier wishes to go again.Chapter 27: Tow Sports
27-5


If not, the driver kills the engine and coasts abreast the person, staying far enough
away that the boat does not glide or blow into the person. If boarding is from the
stern, caution the skier to avoid sharp edges on any exposed drive mechanism.
Turning an outdrive away from the boarding ladder may help.
To continue the run, the driver pulls abreast of the skier, but still at least 10 to
12 feet away, and then starts a sharp turn around the skier at idle speed. If the
driver continues to turn in a half circle completely around the skier, the boat will
be positioned to continue in the same direction it was going when the skier fell.
Alternatively, if the driver starts a tight turn around the skier followed by a sharp turn
in the opposite direction, the S-shape course will bring the towline close to the skier.
The new course will be reversed relative to the previous run.
“Skier Down” Flags
Some states require the towboat to display a 12-by-12-inch orange flag when the
boat is moving to pick up a fallen skier, boarder, or float rider. Because regulations
differ from state to state, each leader supervising a towing activity during a
Scouting function must check and comply with local requirements. The website
of the National Association of State Boating Law Administrators, www.nasbla.org,
contains links to the appropriate regulatory agency in each state.
Towed Flotation Devices (Tubing)
The roles and responsibilities of the boat driver and observer while towing riders on a float are similar to those while
towing people on water skis or wakeboards.
Persons on flotation devices should be towed at slow speed well
away from any obstacles. A prudent speed depends somewhat on
the design of the float, that is, how secure the passengers are, and
the age and comfort level of the participants. The driver should
immediately honor any requests to slow down, even if given con-
tradictory instructions by other riders. The driver should also ignore
requests for greater speeds at which the float becomes unstable.
Only use floats specifically designed for towing. Each rider should
have a secure grasp on the device, not on another rider. Don’t rig
makeshift floats using car or truck tire inner tubes.
The number of riders on a float plus the number of people in the towboat, which must include at least the driver
and an observer, must not exceed the towboat’s rated occupant capacity. Given that requirement, the easy way
to start the tow and retrieve riders is in deep water away from congested beaches or launch areas. That avoids
potential problems with trying to tow the device into shallow water or to a pier for riders to board and disembark.
If more than one person is on the float, and one falls off, the others should remain with the float while the boat
turns to retrieve the fallen passenger. The procedure is similar to picking up a fallen skier. Make sure riders know
to use the hands-overhead “safe” signal.Chapter 27 Tow Sports
27-6


Unauthorized Activities
Parasailing is a popular concession at many resort areas. A patron is lifted
high above the water wearing a parachute while being towed by a boat.
In some cases, the participant is winched down to a platform on the back
of the moving craft and never enters the water. Parasailing and other
aerial activities such as static parachute jumps, skydiving, paragliding,
and hang gliding are not authorized youth activities for Scouting America
groups.
Kitesurfing is somewhat similar to wakeboarding except the towline is
pulled by a kite held by the rider rather than a motorboat. Even though
modern rig designs have led to increased control, control is still uncertain
and there is a reasonable expectation that the participant will become
airborne, either accidentally or intentionally. It is not unusual for a par-
ticipant to be pulled off the board. Therefore, some users attach them-
selves to the board with a lanyard. However, head injuries, even when a
helmet is worn, sometimes result from the lanyard pulling the board into
the participant. In some areas, there have been problems with overhead
obstructions, such as power lines. This sport is not an authorized Scouting
America activity.
Some towed floats are designed to “fly”. Some models have been recalled
due to safety concerns, but others may be available. They are not appro-
priate for Scout use.
Basic waterskiing and wakeboarding activities are approved. However,
extreme aspects of the sports involving aerobatics are not.
Boat operators are expected to apply SAFE principles to their actions.
Some drivers and swimmers consider it fun for a speed boat to cut tight
circles around a person in the water. That is not a valid Scout program.Chapter 27: Tow Sports
27-7


1.0 List the nine points of Safety Afloat.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
2.1 All adult supervisory personnel for a
boating activity must be over 21.
T F
2.2 According to both Safety Afloat and Youth
Protection guidelines, there must be at
least two adults for any activity afloat, with
one over 21.
T F
2.3 The ratio of supervisors to participants is
1-to-10 for Scouts BSA and Cub Scouts.
T F
3.1 Life jackets must be worn by everyone
during all small-boat activities.
T F
3.2 Adults on Scout float trips may safely store
life jackets close at hand on calm water.
T F
3.3 Exceptions to life jacket use are allowed
for vessels over 20 feet in length.
T F
4.1 No youth may control any boat without first
completing three hours of skill instruction.
T F
4.2 Participants on an extended float trip must
demonstrate basic proficiency or complete
three hours of skill instruction.
T F
4.3 Buddy tags must be used to account for
everyone participating in a boating activity.
T F
5.1 All participants on whitewater treks with
rapids rated higher than Class II must have
specialized training.
T F
5.2 Youth may only operate a sailboat with an
adult or camp staff member onboard.
T F
5.3 Youth may only operate a motorboat with
an adult or camp staff member onboard.
T F
6.1 Which type of life jacket is recommended
for most recreational boating activities?
A. Level 100
B. Level 70 - horse collar design
C. Level 70 - vest with 3 fasteners
D. Level 50
6.2 Certified inflatable life jackets are Coast
Guard–approved:
A. When worn
B. With age restrictions
C. In non-impact situations
D. All of the above
6.3 For proper life jacket fit:
A. Check the size label
B. Lift the straps at the shoulders
C. Fasten all buckles, straps, or zippers
D. All of the above
Review Questions for Section IIIChapter 27: Tow Sports
R-1Review Questions for Section III


7.1 Which statement is incorrect?
A. Hypothermia is a dangerous drop in body
core temperature.
B. Hypothermia impairs mental and
physical capabilities.
C. Hypothermia is only a concern in northern
climates or in rivers fed by snow melt.
D. An unprotected boater falling into water
near freezing is impaired almost immediately
and may die within minutes.
7.2 Progressive symptoms of hypothermia are
A. Unconsciousness, shivering, death
B. Shivering, impaired judgment, loss of
dexterity
C. Slurred speech, clumsiness, shivering
D. Muscle rigidity, inward behavior, loss of
dexterity
7.3 The best prevention for immersion hypother-
mia is
A. Wear a wet suit
B. Assume the H.E.L.P. position
C. Get out of cold water immediately
D. Avoid immersion in cold water
8.1 For a person facing forward in a boat headed
downstream, the direction to the right is
A. River left
B. Starboard
C. Port
D. Onside
8.2 Which terms in order denote the front and
back of a boat?
A. Transom, bow
B. Bow, stern
C. Port, gunwale
D. Starboard, aft
8.3 If the ________ reduces significantly when a
boat is loaded, the load may be too heavy.
A. Gunwale
B. Freeboard
C. Draft
D. Sheer
9.1 A canoe is more stable when a passenger is
sitting on the bottom rather than standing.
T F
9.2 A boat that is stiff is always harder to tip
over than a boat that is tender.
T F
9.3 A load may safely exceed a boat’s rated
capacity if the boat is operated only at slow
speeds.
T F
10.1 The most general navigation rule for
boats on a collision course is
A. Red, right, returning
B. Commercial boats yield to private boats
C. More maneuverable yields to less
maneuverable
D. Boat on the right is always right
10.2 Which of the following is not true?
A. Powerboats meeting head-on each veer to
the right.
B. When powerboats are crossing, the boat
to starboard has the right-of-way.
C. A sailboat has the right-of-way when
overtaking a powerboat.
D. Private craft must stay clear of military
vessels.
10.3 Boaters should stay clear of areas
marked with
A. A white buoy with a crossed diamond
B. A white buoy with a diamond
C. A red flag with a diagonal white stripe
D. All of the above
11.1 All states require all boats to be
registered.
T F
11.2 Any boating accident during a Scout
activity involving significant injury must be
reported to both law enforcement and the
local council.
T F
11.3 Access to public waterways is unrestricted.
T FChapter 27 Tow Sports
R-2 Review Questions for Section III


15.3 While kayaking, power is applied
through the paddle by rotating the torso.
T F
16.1 Kayaks automatically flip up after
capsizing if the paddler maintains position.
T F
16.2 A capsize drill is a useful safety precau-
tion prior to instruction in a decked kayak.
T F
16.3 A wet exit is more difficult with a narrow
cockpit and a spray skirt.
T F
17.1 Which of the following is not a safety
concern on a river?
A. A strong current
B. A rip current
C. A strainer
D. A low-head dam
17.2 When rounding a river bend, the current
strength and water depth will be greatest
A. On the inside of the bend
B. In the middle of the channel
C. On the outside of the bend
D. Unpredictable
17.3 Strainers are most likely to lie
A. Near the cut bank on the outside of a
bend
B. In the shoals on the inside of a bend
C. In the middle of the channel
D. Just below the surface moving with
the current
18.1 Any river flow above 1,000 cfs is
dangerous.
T F
18.2 A low-head dam can be safely run if pad-
dlers lean back in their craft to keep the
bow up as it crosses the lip.
T F
18.3 The best way to control a craft in a cur-
rent is to match the speed of the current.
T F
12.1 Canoeists should maintain three points
of contact when moving in the boat.
T F
12.2 Paddling while kneeling is inefficient,
uncomfortable, and generally poor form.
T F
12.3 Canoeists should both paddle on the
same side and switch sides in unison to
maintain a straight course.
T F
13.1. A draw and a pry in unison from opposite
sides move the canoe sideways.
T F
13.2 A draw and a pry in unison from opposite
sides pivot the canoe.
T F
13.3 Forward sweeps in unison from opposite
sides pivot the canoe away from the onside.
T F
14.1 After a canoe capsizes, boaters generally
should abandon the boat and swim quickly
to shore to prevent hypothermia.
T F
14.2 The first concern after capsizing is the
safety of
the boaters.
T F
14.3 To rescue a swimmer, approach in a
canoe so that the swimmer makes contact
amidships at the widest, most stable point.
T F
15.1 Use a “J” at the end of each kayak
stroke to maintain a straight course.
T F
15.2 Feathering while kayaking requires a no-
slip grip with both hands.
T FChapter 27: Tow Sports
R-3Review Questions for Section III


19.1 If boaters lose contact with a boat dur-
ing a capsize in warm water, they should
A. Try to stand up in the current
B. Float feetfirst downstream while moving
toward shore
C. Swim headfirst downstream while moving
toward shore
D. Swim directly for the nearest strainer
19.2 If a boater capsizes in a narrow, very
cold river, the swimmer should
A. Try to stand up in the current
B. Hold to the back of the boat
C. Float feetfirst downstream
D. Get out of the water as soon as safely
possible
19.3 If a capsized boater is unavoidably swept
into a strainer, the swimmer should
A. Dive underwater to pass beneath
B. Fend off the object while floating feetfirst
C. Assume a headfirst position and try to
climb up onto the object
D. Swim upstream to ferry around the object
20.1 Riding tubes or floats down a lazy river
is allowed for all ages and ability groups.
T F
20.2 Only swimmers may ride floats on a
river.
T F
20.3 Life jackets are not needed because
tubing on a river is a swimming event
rather than a boating event.
T F
21.0 Participants in whitewater treks in rap-
ids rated at Class III must
A. Have special training in whitewater if
controlling the boat
B. Ride as a passenger in a boat controlled by
a trained guide if not trained
C. Always wear a helmet
D. All three apply
22.1 A whitewater canoe or kayak generally
differs from a touring model by being
A. Shorter, with a flatter bottom
B. Shorter, with more rocker
C. Longer, with a flatter bottom
D. Longer, with more rocker
22.2 Which of the following whitewater fea-
tures should be avoided?
A. An open V (pointed downstream)
B. A closed V (pointed upstream)
C. Standing waves
D. Eddies
22.3 Which of the following whitewater fea-
tures is generally the least hazardous?
A. A hole
B. A drop
C. Shoals
D. An undercut
23.1 Major or unfamiliar rapids should be
scouted from shore.
T F
23.2 In general, plan a route by scouting from
the top of the rapid to the end.
T F
23.3 Features seen from a high bank may be
difficult to spot at river level.
T F
24.1 When scouting a rapid, the party must
choose between everyone running the rapid
and everyone portaging the rapid.
T F
24.2 If the trek leader is not confident that
the skill of the participants allows an
adequate margin of error, then those par-
ticipants should portage the rapid.
T FChapter 27 Tow Sports
R-4 Review Questions for Section III


28.1 Which of the following is likely the least
useful on a float trip?
A. Stout, no-slip footwear that can get wet
B. Hooded rain jacket rather than a poncho
C. Cell phone
D Computer tablet
28.2 What is the preferred way to distribute
gear?
A. Each person packs to be totally
self-sufficient
B. Group gear and provisions (tents, stoves,
food) are packed with all like items together
with each category carried in a different boat
C. Critical gear and provisions are divided
into two or three packs and carried in differ-
ent boats
D. Each item is packaged and loaded sepa-
rately in waterproof containers that float
28.3 Which is an important consideration
when loading a boat?
A. Easy access to important gear
(water, cameras, first aid supplies)
B. Manageable portage loads
C. Boat trim
D. All of the above
29.1 When traveling on the water, experi-
enced crews lead and inexperienced crews
follow at the end.
T F
29.2 Only the lead boat needs to carry a
route map.
T F
29.3 Avoid traveling across open water with
the wind at your back.
T F
24.3 If the trek leader determines that the
likely consequences of a mishap are accept-
able, then each individual still decides
whether or not to run that rapid.
T F
25.1 Cub Scout dens may not conduct over-
night float trips.
T F
25.2 Swimming ability is not an important
consideration during float-trip preparation
since all participants will wear life jackets.
T F
25.3 A unit with only Class II skills may not
consider a float trip on a river with even a
single Class III rapid.
T F
26.1 River guidebooks are often unreliable
and should not be consulted when planning
a float trip.
T F
26.2 River guidebooks should be reviewed,
but firsthand experience is better.
T F
26.3 Boat livery companies are often good
sources for equipment, shuttles, and gen-
eral information.
T F
27.1 Because of shuttle concerns, large
groups are better transported in multiple
private cars rather than a single bus.
T F
27.2 Large numbers of boats are best trans-
ported on a trailer rather than car-topped.
T F
27.3 An easy way to handle a shuttle is to
have drivers who do not travel downriver.
T FChapter 27: Tow Sports
R-5Review Questions for Section III


30. Which best describes a float plan?
A. A simple alert mechanism if a party is
overdue
B. A complete itinerary shared with the
immediate party and those at home
C. Emergency contact procedures to and
from the crew in case of trouble
D. All of the above
31. A common problem with rowing technique
is the use of oars that are too long for the
boat.
T F
32. During the rowing stroke, the hands should
trace out vertical circles.
T F
33. Oarlocks, other than on outriggers, should
be lowered when not in use.
T F
34. Some Scout high-adventure bases offer
captained sailboat cruises.
T F
35. Small-boat sailing experience qualifies a
leader to skipper a cruising sailboat.
T F
36. Modern navigation aids eliminate past
concerns with sailing at night and out of
sight of land.
T F
37. All sailboards are well-suited to both learn-
ers and experts.
T F
38. Offshore winds allow beam reaches
parallel to the shore and are favorable for
boardsailing.
T F
39. Scouts earning the Motorboating merit
badge at camp are generally exempt from
state licensing requirements.
T F
40. Motorboats on converging paths yield right-
of-way similar to cars.
T F
41. Motorboats steer the same as cars.
T F
42. A rearview mirror is an adequate substitute
for an observer when a motorboat is towing
a person.
T F
43. The towpath should be clear of obstructions
and other boats for 100 feet to each side.
T F
44. Some states require “skier down” flags.
T F
45. Which of the following is an authorized
Scouting activity at the unit level?
A. Personal watercraft operation
B. Towed flotation devices
C. Parasailing
D. KitesurfingChapter 27 Tow Sports
R-6 Review Questions for Section III





Program Delivery Section
IV





Council Aquatics Committees
Local Scouting America aquatics programming is enhanced when a council aquatics committee promotes
activities, helps procure equipment and instructors, and provides guidance to unit leaders and council
professionals. Interested volunteers should check with their local council service center. Some committees
have been active for years but need an influx of new members to remain viable. In other councils, the aquatics
committee may not exist or may be inactive. In that case, an interested volunteer is needed to work with
council professionals to generate sufficient interest to form an active committee. The following material is a
guide to aquatics committee organization, responsibilities and activities.
Appendix
1


Ap 1: Council Aquatics CommitteesAp1-2
Organization
The aquatics committee has overall responsibility for the local council’s aquatics activities in Cub Scouting,
Scouts BSA, Venturing, and Sea Scouts. Within the local council organization, the aquatics committee reports to
the vice president of program or to the vice president of health and safety. The aquatics committee may be a
separate committee or a subcommittee within the camping or health and safety committees.
Members of the aquatics committee should be experienced Scouters with a background in aquatics, or aquatics
specialists interested in becoming involved in Scouting. The committee should include at least one individual
with a current National Camping School Aquatics Instructor training card.
Besides swimming and water-rescue specialists, the committee should include specialists for the type of aquatics
activities prevalent in the local council (e.g., snorkeling/scuba, canoe tripping, sailing, whitewater, crew rowing,
waterskiing, Sea Scouting, etc.). Select committee members should be members of or liaisons to other council
committees that touch the aquatics committee’s areas of responsibility including training, advancement, health
and safety, camping, etc.
Camp aquatics directors hired by the council for the summer should be ex officio members of the committee
during their term of employment and afterward encouraged to become full-time, year-round volunteer members.
Responsibilities
The aquatics committee’s main responsibilities include the following year-round activities tailored to the local
council’s aquatics activities and opportunities:
• Training. Work with the council training committee to provide aquatics training for adults and youth.
• Program. Provide and promote a broad array of basic and high-adventure swimming and boating activities to
support all parts of the Scouting program.
• Advancement. Provide advancement opportunities for youth.
• Safety. Actively assess safe operation of council- and district-led aquatics activities including summer camp
and promote aquatics safety at the unit level.
• Attraction, Development, and Retention of Aquatics Leadership. A primary role of the committee is
attracting, developing, and retaining qualified aquatics leaders for the training, program, advancement, and
safety activities above. This includes summer camp and year-round council and district led aquatics activities
and should include succession planning for key roles.
Key Activities
Local council aquatics committee activities should include but are not limited to the following items, grouped by
the responsibilities listed above.
Training
• Safe Swim Defense and Safety Afloat
• Swimming and Water Rescue skills training for unit leaders
• Paddle Craft Safety skills training for unit leaders
• Development of unit aquatics activities for unit leaders
• Camp aquatics staff training in:
—Aquatics skills
—Effective teaching of aquatics skills
—Aquatics safety, including lifeguard assessments
• Basic canoeing
• Basic rowing, fixed seat or crew rowing with sliding seats
• Basic whitewater
• Nonswimmer instruction


Ap 1: Council Aquatics CommitteesAp1-3
Program
• Promote learn-to-swim programs for all members,
especially Cub Scouts, by providing opportunities
and incentives.
• Provide or promote whitewater canoe, kayak, rafting
trips.
• Provide instruction for special awards: Snorkeling,
Kayaking, Boardsailing, Mile Swim.
• Promote aquatics high-adventure opportunities—
Northern Tier, Sea Base, Summit, other.
• Provide or promote scuba activities.
• Provide enhanced aquatics activities during day camp
and resident camp sessions for Cub Scouts and for
Scouts BSA.
• Help select, procure, and maintain camp aquatics
equipment.
• Provide special aquatics camp sessions for Scouts BSA
and Venturers with emphasis on activities not available
during regular summer-camp sessions.
• Provide winter swim programs with learn-to-swim and
advancement opportunities for Cub Scouts, Scouts
BSA, Sea Scouts and Venturers.
• Coordinate with other councils to promote programs
and resources.
• Implement and promote the aquatics portions of the
national American Red Cross and Scouting America
agreements and interface with the assigned Red Cross
aquatics liaison.
• Coordinate with other agencies (e.g., YMCA, NAUI,
PADI, American Canoe Association, etc.) for joint
programs or use of facilities.
Advancement
• Cub Scout elective Adventures
• Second Class and First Class rank requirements
• Swimming and Lifesaving merit badge clinics outside
of summer camp
• Canoeing and other merit badges outside of summer
camp
• Safety
• Promotion of Safe Swim Defense and Safety Afloat at
the district and unit level
• Precamp swim classification testing
• Review of council and district safety training and
procedures for aquatics activities including day and
resident camps
• Inspection of summer camp and other council and
district aquatics activities facilities and equipment


Ap 1: Council Aquatics CommitteesAp1-4
Attraction, Development, and Retention of Aquatics Leadership
• Assist with sourcing qualified candidates.
• Assist with interviewing candidates to ensure necessary aquatics experience, training certificates, and aquatics
leadership.
• Establish a succession planning process identifying the next aquatics leaders for key roles.
• Establish a program to train, develop, and retain younger aquatics staff members to become aquatics leaders
in the future. This includes staff for summer camp and year-round council- and district-led aquatics activities.
The staff training process for summer camp staff ideally would begin in the January-to-April period each year to
ensure that a well-trained aquatics staff exists before arriving at summer camp.
• Develop and maintain enough qualified instructors, distributed throughout the council, to timely meet all local
aquatics training needs.
Resoure Kit
A 39 page Local Council Aquatics Committee Resource Kit
is available online. Several examples of year-round council
aquatics activities are included. The kit was last updated in
2022 so does not reflect the retirement of the BSA Lifeguard
program at the end of 2024 or the organization name change
from Boy Scouts of America to Scouting America but those
are minor items compared with the information within.


Merit Badge Counselors
The following material reviews the Scouting America merit badge program for aquatics specialists from other
organizations interested in volunteering as counselors. Subject-specific information is found in the merit badge
pamphlets. Counselors should review that information before conducting merit badge sessions. For additional
information see the Merit Badge Counselor page on the Scouting America website.
Appendix
2


Ap 2: Merit Badge CounselorsAp2-2
The Aims of Scouting
The Scouting program is an educational program aimed at teaching youth character development, citizenship,
and mental and physical fitness. These aims of Scouting are accomplished through the use of eight fundamental
methods:
• The ideals of Scouting (Scout Oath, Scout Law, Scout motto, Scout slogan)
• The patrol method
• The outdoors
• Advancement
• Association with adults
• Personal growth
• Leadership development
• The uniform
What Is Advancement?
Advancement is the process by which a Scout progresses from rank to rank in the Scouting program. It is simply
a means to an end and not an end in itself. Everything done to advance and earn higher ranks is designed to help
the Scout have an exciting and meaningful experience.
The advancement method is designed to encourage a young man to accomplish a progressive series of fun and
educational tasks. Earning merit badges allows Scouts to explore many fields, helps them round out their skills,
and perhaps introduces them to subjects that will become lifelong interests or rewarding careers.
What Is a Merit Badge?
A special part of a Scout’s learning adventure, merit badges are awards presented to when a Scout has completed
the requirements for one of the merit badge subjects. There are more than 135 merit badges a Scout may earn.
The subject matters range from vocational and careers introduction to personal development, hobbies, sports,
high adventure, citizenship, and life-skills development.
Every merit badge is designed to teach the Scouts new skills while actively encouraging them to challenge them-
selves and have fun in the process. Merit badges offer a range of difficulty over a breadth of subject matters, and
each Scout is free to pursue any merit badge they wish. The merit badge itself is a simple embroidered patch,
but the intangible end result of earning it is that the Scout gains self-confidence from overcoming obstacles to
achieve a goal.
Why Does Scouting America Use Merit Badge Counselors?
One of the methods of Scouting is association with quality adults. Besides a Scout’s parents and relatives, school-
teachers, religious leaders, and possibly sports coaches, most Scout-age youth do not have much contact with
many other adults or professionals. Merit badge counselors provide an excellent means for each Scout to grow
through exposure to outstanding adults who serve as examples and mentors to them. The opportunity to deal
with business leaders, trained specialists, and experienced hobbyists while pursuing a merit badge offers the
Scout a chance for personal growth and possibly a life-altering experience.
Scouting America recognizes that the merit badge counselor is the cornerstone to the merit badge program. By
offering their time, experience, and knowledge to guide Scouts in one or more merit badge subjects, counselors
help shape the future of our country. By assisting as the Scout plans projects and activities necessary to meet the
merit badge requirements, and by coaching the Scout through interviews and demonstrations, the quality adult
contact fostered by this working relationship can only enhance the Scout’s self-confidence and growth.


Ap 2: Merit Badge CounselorsAp2-3
What Is a Merit Badge Counselor?
A merit badge counselor serves as both a teacher and a mentor as the Scout works on the merit badge. Merit
badge counselors should be satisfied that each Scout under their guidance meets all the requirements set forth
for the merit badge. In this sense, a merit badge counselor is an examiner. In a larger sense, the real opportunity
for a counselor lies in coaching—helping Scouts over the different hurdles of the requirements and helping make
them aware of the deeper aspects of the subject from their knowledge and experience.
The merit badge counselor may help a Scout by providing instruction and guidance on the subject matter. How-
ever, the counselor must not complete the Scout’s work on the requirements. The counselor needs to test the
Scout to ensure that all the required work has been completed but may not modify the merit badge requirements
in the process. This standard ensures that the advancement requirements are fair and uniform for all Scouts.
A merit badge counselor must always ensure that a Scout has a “buddy” present at all instruction sessions. Working
on merit badges is especially enjoyable when Scouts work together, and the Scouting America encour-
ages this by making the buddy system a part of the merit badge program. Together the two meet with
merit badge counselors, plan projects, and keep their enthusiasm high. The Scout’s buddy could be another
Scout, a parent or guardian, brother or sister, relative, or friend. The Scout should bring a buddy to all
appointments with the counselor.
Merit Badge Counselor Requirements and Registration
To qualify as a merit badge counselor, a volunteer must:
• Take Youth Protection.
• Register annually with Scouting America as a merit badge counselor.
• Be at least 18 years old.
• Be of good character.
• Be proficient in the merit badge subject by vocation, avocation, or special training.
• Be able to work with Scout-age youth.
• Be approved by the district/council advancement committee.
To register with Scouting America, a potential merit badge counselor must complete the Adult Application form
and submit it along with the Merit Badge Counselor Information form to the local Scouting America council office.
Renewal of this registration annually is necessary to continue as a merit badge counselor.
Scouting America requires every merit badge counselor to take the organization’s Youth Protection training before
working with youth. This program addresses strategies for personal safety awareness for youth as well as adults.
Scouting America Youth Protection policies include:
• Two-deep leadership
• No one-on-one contact
• Respecting privacy
• Reporting problems
The Scouting America Youth Protection guidelines have been adopted primarily for the protection of youth members;
however, they also serve to protect our adult volunteers and leaders from false accusations of abuse. Youth Protection
training is available online at https://my.Scouting.org


Ap 2: Merit Badge CounselorsAp2-4
The Merit Badge Process
The requirements for each merit badge appear in the current Scouting America merit badge pamphlet for that
award and in the current edition of the Scouts BSA Requirements book, available at Scout shops and online. When
a Scout has decided on a merit badge they would like to earn, they obtain from their Scoutmaster the name and
phone number of the district/council-approved merit badge counselor. At this time, the Scoutmaster also can
issue the Scout a signed Application for Merit Badge (blue card).
The Scout telephones the merit badge counselor to make an appointment, and together they schedule a date and
time for the Scout and buddy to meet. The counselor suggests that the Scout bring the merit badge pamphlet,
the Application for Merit Badge, and any work he has started or accomplished, and that he prepare by reading
over the requirements.
At their first meeting, the merit badge counselor and the Scout decide upon a tentative schedule for completing
the requirements. They should keep the Scout’s other obligations (Scouting, school, worship, etc.) in mind, and
set the dates, times, and locations for future meetings. The counselor will explain the requirements for the
badge and help the Scout plan ways of fulfilling the requirements while getting the most out of the experience.
Merit badge counselors help Scouts meet the requirements for the merit badge. They may expand on the informa-
tion in the merit badge pamphlet based on their knowledge, experience, and expertise in the subject. They are
encouraged to tell about their own experiences that positively reinforce the subject matter, but new require-
ments or additional work may not be added. The Scout is expected to meet the requirements for the merit badge
as stated—no more and no less.
The number of counseling sessions will depend on the difficulty of the merit badge requirements and the Scout’s
preparation and ability. The Scout and counselor are expected to meet as many times as is necessary for the
Scout to complete the requirements for the badge. The advancement program allows the Scout to move ahead
in their own way and at their own pace. Rather than competing against others, each Scout commits to a personal
challenge of going as far as their ambition will carry them. The rate of advancement depends upon their interest,
effort, and ability.
As the Scout completes each requirement, they are always tested (but with a buddy present), and as each
requirement is completed, the merit badge counselor marks it on the application. When all the requirements for
the merit badge are fulfilled, the merit badge counselor certifies that the Scout has completed the requirements.
The Scout may return their completed Application for Merit Badge (blue card, if one is used) to their Scoutmaster.
Counseling Techniques
The most productive environment for the Scout when meeting with the merit badge counselor will be one in
which the Scout feels welcome and relaxed. Start the conversation by finding out what the Scout already knows
about the subject, then stimulate their interest by showing them something related to it. Be careful not to over-
whelm the Scout. (Remember: The Scout is probably a beginner.) Establish an atmosphere that encourages the
Scout to ask questions and to ask for help when they need it.
Spend some time helping the Scout learn the requirements, making sure they know they should do exactly what
the requirements call for, whether “show” or “demonstrate,” “make,” “list,” “discuss,” “explain,” or “collect,
identify, and label.” Take a genuine interest in their projects, and encourage the Scout to complete them.
Remember that the requirements must be completed exactly as presented—do not expand any requirement.
However, the Scout may undertake more activities on their own initiative. The merit badge counselor can encour-
age this without pushing the Scout off course.
Encourage the Scout to practice for their review session and to reflect on their accomplishments. The Scout might
approach the review process with some apprehension. The Scout is familiar with final exams in school and may
see this meeting with the counselor as another such experience. The counselor can help by talking to the Scout


Ap 2: Merit Badge CounselorsAp2-5
rather than grilling or examining them—there’s a big difference, yet it still will be evident what the Scout knows.
Expressing honest enthusiasm for the things the Scout has done will give them confidence.
During testing, the merit badge counselor may find that the Scout needs help learning a particular area. The
counselor teaches the needed skill, and then retests to ensure the area has been learned.
Summer Camp Merit Badge Counselors
The same qualifications and rules apply to counselors for council summer camp merit badge programs. All coun-
selors must be 18 years or older, but qualified camp staff members under age 18 may assist the merit badge
counselor with instruction. (These assistants are not qualified to sign off on a Scout’s blue card, nor may they
certify the Scout’s completion of a merit badge.) As always, each counselor must maintain the exact standards
as outlined in the merit badge requirements—nothing deleted, nothing added.
Partial completion of merit badges at summer camp should be credited to a Scout on the Application for Merit
Badge (blue card) and given to their Scoutmaster at the end of the week.
Resources for Merit Badge Counselors
Scouting America’s website is a primary source for all aspects of Scouting. Here’s the link to merit badge counselor
information: Everything You Need To Know About Being A Merit Badge Counselor.
The adult application form is used for all Scouting America volunteers, including merit badge counselors. Comple-
tion of the form is required of all merit badge counselors regardless of whether they have already registered in
a different position. The Scouting Position code for merit badge counselors is 42.
The Merit Badge Counselor Information Form should be submitted along with the Adult Application. It specifies
the subjects a counselor wishes to coach.
Fast Facts for Merit Badge Counselors
• A merit badge counselor can counsel any Scout, including their own child—although this is discouraged in
order to offer a Scout the chance to meet a diverse group of outstanding adults.
• A counselor may be certified in unlimited merit badge subjects, but must be approved for each one.
• There is no limit on the number of merit badges that a counselor may counsel with one Scout. How-
ever, the Scout will benefit the most from working with a variety of outstanding adults.
• Merit badge counselors may limit their services to one unit but still must be approved by the council
advancement committee.
• Scoutmasters and assistant Scoutmasters are not automatically approved as merit badge counselors.
• Group instruction is acceptable, but each Scout must be tested and passed individually.
• There is no time limit for completion of merit badges, but all work on merit badges must be com-
pleted before the Scout’s 18th birthday.


Ap 2: Merit Badge CounselorsAp2-6
The Guide to Advancement and the Guide for Merit
Badge Counseling are both available online. The first is
the handbook for Scouters responsible for advancement
at the council, district, and unit levels. It contains
the current Scouting America advancement policies,
procedures, rules, and regulations as well as other
information. The second gives potential merit badge
counselors an introduction to the program and the
counselor’s role.
Merit Badge Pamphlet Series The merit badge pamphlets are
written for Scout-age youth. They are available for purchase
in either print or digital formats. The information presented
in the pamphlet will help the counselor understand what the
Scout is studying and the level of learning expected by the
Scouting America. At times, requirements may be updated
before a new pamphlet is released. Counselors should always
check the current requirements posted online prior to coaching
a Scout. Once a Scout has started working on a merit badge,
they may stay with the requirements that were in effect when
they started.
Scouts BSA Requirements Updated yearly, this book contains the complete, official
requirements for all the merit badges, ranks, and special awards. Requirements in this
publication may be more current than the merit badge pamphlet. However, the latest
versions are first available online.
Application for Merit Badge (“blue card”)This three-
panel, blue wallet-sized card shows that the Scout has
permission to start working on a particular merit badge;
records the Scout’s progress; and, when completed, pro-
vides a separate record for the Scout, the counselor,
and the unit. The council Advancement Committee may
approve other means to record the same information.
Scouts BSA Handbook This is
the critical document for a Scout,
providing the basic information for
all facets of Scouting, including a
chapter on the merit badge program.
Troop Leader Guidebook, Volumes 1 and 2 As the troop
leader’s primary guide, the two-volume Troop Leader
Guidebook contains sections on advancement that include
advice on recruiting merit badge counselors and other
resources.


Requirements and Application Forms
This text serves as the manual for the Scouting America Aquatics Supervision: Swimming and Water Rescue and
Paddle Craft Safety programs. It also serves as a primary resource for the Mile Swim, Snorkeling, Kayaking,
Boardsailing, and Whitewater Rafting awards. The requirements for each of those recognitions follow. Anyone
interested in earning those should check with the local council for qualified instructors. Anyone interested in
serving as an instructor needs to check with the council for the qualification procedure and additional support
material.
Requirements for the Scouting America Scuba award are also given here, but both the participant and the instruc-
tor need to review additional guidance found on the back of the application. Counselors for the award must be
certified scuba instructors and must follow the protocols of their certifying agency.
Requirements for the aquatics merit badges are found in the individual merit badge pamphlets and are summa-
rized online at scouting.org.
Appendix
3


Ap 3 : Requirements and Application FormsAp3-2
1. Before fulfilling the following requirements, successfully
complete the Scouting America swimmer test.
2. Do the following:
a. Describe various types of kayaks and how they
differ in design, materials, and purpose.
b. Name the parts of the kayak you are using for
this exercise.
c. Demonstrate how to choose an appropriately sized
kayak paddle and how to position your hands.
3. Do the following:
a. Tell what precautions must be taken for a safe
trip afloat.
b. Demonstrate how to select and properly fit a life jacket.
c. Explain the importance of safety equipment such as
life jackets, air bags, grab loops, and helmets.
4. Demonstrate your ability to aid yourself and others in the
event of a capsize:
a. Capsize your kayak in water at least seven feet deep,
perform a wet exit if necessary, and swim the boat
to shore.
b. With assistance, if needed, ready the capsized craft
for use.
c. Show how to approach a capsized paddler in your kayak
and tow him to shore.
d. While upright in your kayak, right a capsized kayak,
empty it of water, and assist the paddler aboard with-
out returning to shore.
5. As a solo paddler, demonstrate the following:
a. Entering and launching a kayak from shore or dock
b. Landing or docking and exiting a kayak
c. Forward stroke
d. Sweep stroke
e. Reverse sweep
f. Draw stroke
g. Rudder stroke
h. Back stroke
6. As a solo paddler, do the following:
a. Paddle forward in a reasonably straight line.
b. Move the kayak sideways to the right and to the left.
c. Pivot 360 degrees to the right and left.
d. Stop the kayak.
Kayaking Application
Any youth or adult who is registered with a troop, crew, or ship and completes the requirements is eligible for a patch and
recognition card, available from the local council service center. The completed award application should be handled as directed
by the council Training, Aquatics, or other committee. Instruction for the Kayaking award is to be conducted under safe conditions
on calm water. Two to four hours in one or more sessions should suffice for instruction and practice. Paddle lengths and life
jacket sizes should be adequate to fit all participants. Feathered blades are preferred, but blades at the same angle are allowed.
Information and skills are discussed in Aquatics Supervision: A Leader’s Guide to Youth Swimming and Boating Activities, No. 34346,
and the Kayaking merit badge pamphlet. All counselors must be trained in Safety Afloat. Any person with current training as a
Scouting America Aquatics Instructor, an Aquatics Supervision: Paddle Craft Safety kayak instructor or as a kayak instructor by the
American Canoe Association may serve as a counselor for this award with the approval of the local council. A person with similar
experience in kayaking skills, safety, and instruction may also serve as a counselor with council approval. The Kayaking award is
intended to provide Scouts and their leaders with an introductory experience to kayaking on lakes, ponds, slow-moving water, or
calm ocean areas. Additional preparation is needed before a unit does extended kayak touring or takes trips on class I or above
white water.
Requirements
Notes to Counselor:
Name of applicant ___________________________________________________________________________
Address _____________________________________________________________________________________
City __________________________________________________ State _______________ Zip ______________
Unit type _____________ Unit number ____________ Council____________________________________
Name of council-approved counselor _________________________________________________________
Address _____________________________________________________________________________________
City __________________________________________________ State _______________ Zip ______________
Counselor qualification _____________________________________________________________________
Signature of counselor signifies
applicant has completed all requirements: __________________________________ Date_______________
430-602


Ap 3: Requirements and Application FormsAp3-3
Snorkeling Application
1. Before doing other requirements, successfully complete the
Scouting America swimmer test: Jump feetfirst into water
over the head in depth, level off, and begin swimming. Swim
75 yards in a strong manner using one or more of the following
strokes: sidestroke, breaststroke, trudgen, or crawl; then swim
25 yards using an easy, resting backstroke. The 100 yards
must be completed in one swim without stops and must
include at least one sharp turn. After completing the swim,
rest by floating.
2. Discuss the importance of using the buddy system at all
times while snorkeling and list duties of a buddy, beginning
with equipment checks.
3. Explain the function, fit, and selection of mask, fins, and
snorkel. Discuss the use of inflatable flotation vests and
life jackets when snorkeling in open water.
4. In confined, shallow water (about waist deep),
demonstrate use of mask and snorkel:
a. Show how to prevent the mask from fogging and how
to equalize pressure in mask, ears, and sinus cavities.
With your head underwater, flood the mask, observe
the effect on your vision, surface, and drain the water
from the mask.
b. With your face in the water, breathe through the
snorkel. Then submerge, surface, clear water from
the snorkel, and resume free breathing without
removing the snorkel from your mouth.
5. In confined, shallow water, demonstrate the use of swim
fins: Do first using only fins, and then repeat with a mask and
snorkel.
a. Fit and adjust fins to feet.
b. Walk with fins as if entering from a beach.
c. Swim at the surface (10 yards) and underwater (three
yards) using the flutter kick.
d. Control direction without using hands while swimming
with fins at the surface and underwater.
6. In confined, deep water (six to 12 feet), demonstrate:
a. Proper techniques for entering and exiting the water
with snorkeling equipment from a dock or boat.
b. Headfirst and feetfirst surface dives, including proper
body position for safe ascent and descent.
7. Show knowledge of snorkeling signals:
a. Demonstrate divers’ signs and signals, both audible
and visual, for use at the surface and underwater.
b. Set out a diver down flag and explain its function.
8. In clear, confined water eight to 12 feet deep that has
a firm bottom, while swimming with a buddy, use mask,
fins, and snorkel to locate and recover an object from the
bottom.
9. Demonstrate basic survival skills:
a. Float facedown for five minutes while breathing
through a snorkel with a minimum of movement.
b. Demonstrate survival floating for five minutes without
use of a snorkel.
c. Using fins, show how to tow an exhausted or
unconscious buddy to safety.
10. Review and explain the eight points of Safe Swim Defense
applied to snorkeling. Explain training, preparations, and
precautions required for snorkeling in open water. Explain
environmental factors that affect snorkeling and discuss
special precautions needed for oceans, streams, and lakes.
11. Explain pressure, buoyancy, and submerged optics and
acoustics related to snorkel swimming and diving.
12. Discuss the effects of submersion on the body and how to
handle potentially dangerous situations:
a. What is hyperventilation and how is it avoided?
b. What are the symptoms and consequences of
hypothermia?
c. Why is CPR training recommended for those participat-
ing in swimming and snorkeling activities?
(See Notes to Counselor on next page.)
Requirements
Name of applicant ___________________________________________________________________________
Address _____________________________________________________________________________________
City __________________________________________________ State _______________ Zip ______________
Unit type _____________ Unit number ____________ Council____________________________________
Name of council-approved counselor _________________________________________________________
Address _____________________________________________________________________________________
City __________________________________________________ State _______________ Zip ______________
Counselor qualification _____________________________________________________________________
Signature of counselor signifies
applicant has completed all requirements: __________________________________ Date_______________


Ap 3 : Requirements and Application FormsAp3-4
The Scouting America Snorkeling award requirements introduce the special skills, equipment, and safety precautions
associated with snorkeling; encourage the development of aquatics skills that promote fitness and recreation; and
provide a foundation for those who later will participate in more advanced underwater activity.
Any youth or adult who is registered with a troop, crew, or ship and completes the requirements is eligible for
a patch and recognition card. The completed award application should be handled as directed by the council
Training, Aquatics, or other committee.
All counselors must have current Safe Swim Defense training and council approval. Anyone currently trained as a
Scouting America Aquatics Instructor or certified as a snorkeling instructor by a Scouting America recognized scuba
training agency may serve as a counselor for the Snorkeling award. Councils may also approve counselors who have
been trained and are supervised by those with the previously listed credentials.
Instruction must be conducted in clear, confined water with a maximum depth of 12 feet. A swimming pool is
recommended. The Snorkeling award is ideally suited to winter programs using indoor pools. Three 45-minute sessions
are recommended for instruction, practice, and completion of requirements.
All aspects of Safe Swim Defense apply during instruction, practice, and all other snorkeling activities. Snorkeling in
open water requires each participant to first demonstrate knowledge and skills equivalent to the Snorkeling award
requirements.
Aquatics Supervision: A Leader’s Guide to Youth Swimming and Boating Activities, No. 34346, provides reference
material for Snorkeling instruction. Scuba training agencies, equipment manufacturers, and others occasionally
publish references available online and through bookstores and dive shops. Although few dedicated snorkeling
texts are available, instruction manuals for scuba diving contain pertinent information.
All requirements must be completed as stated on the application form. The counselor may not omit, vary, or add
requirements. The skill requirements are listed in an order appropriate for instruction.
The second requirement considers the time-honored and time-proven principle of the buddy system. Snorkelers
must use the buddy system at all times. Before beginning the activity, each person helps their buddy fit and check
equipment. The principle of the buddy system is that two people can enjoy an aquatics activity together while
each provides a critical margin of safety for the other. Each buddy must constantly be aware of the condition and
circumstances of their buddy, and must always be prepared to call for aid or give immediate assistance if needed.
Snorkeling: Notes to Counselor
430-603


Ap 3: Requirements and Application FormsAp3-5
Scuba Application
Requirements
1. Before doing other requirements, successfully complete the
Scouting America swimmer test. To begin the test, jump
feetfirst into water over the head in depth, level off, and
begin swimming. Swim 75 yards in a strong manner using one
or more of the following strokes: sidestroke, breaststroke,
trudgen, or crawl; then swim 25 yards using an easy, resting
backstroke. The 100 yards must be completed in one swim
without stops and must include at least one sharp turn.
After completing the swim, rest by floating.
2. Discuss the importance of using the buddy system at all
times while scuba diving. Explain that a dive buddy is there
to assist with the donning and doffing of equipment, to
lend assistance in case of emergency, and to share in the
underwater experience. Remember, always dive with a
buddy—Never dive alone!
3. Review hazards associated with scuba diving, including
causes of decompression incidents, and safety procedures
to avoid them. Explain the importance of never using scuba
equipment unless you are enrolled in a training exercise or
have completed a diver certification program taught by a
certified instructor.
4. State the purpose of the following pieces of basic diving
equipment: mask, fins, BCD, BCD inflator, regulator, air
gauge, and alternate air source.
5. Describe how to locate the air gauge, and explain how to
recognize the “caution zone” on it.
6. Don and adjust mask, fins, snorkel, BCD, scuba, and
weights with the assistance of a buddy, an instructor, or a
certified assistant.
7. While underwater, demonstrate and recognize the
following hand signals: OK?/OK!; Stop; Up; Down; Out
of air; Come here; Ears not clearing; Slow down/Take
it easy; Something is wrong; Watch me; Check your air
supply.
8. Inflate/deflate a BCD at the surface using the low-
pressure inflator.
9. In shallow water, demonstrate proper compressed air
breathing habits; remember to breathe naturally and not
hold the breath.
10. Clear the regulator while underwater using both exhalation
and purge-button methods, and resume normal breathing
from it.
11. In shallow water, recover a regulator hose from behind the
shoulder while underwater.
12. In shallow water, clear a partially flooded mask
while underwater.
13. Swim underwater with scuba equipment while
maintaining control of both direction and depth,
properly equalizing the ears and mask to accommodate
depth changes.
14. While underwater, locate and read submersible pressure
gauge and signal whether the air supply is adequate or
low based on the gauge’s caution zone.
15. Describe how to avoid hazardous aquatic life (if appli-
cable to your confined water location).
(See Notes to Counselor on next page.)
Name of applicant ___________________________________________________________________________
Address _____________________________________________________________________________________
City __________________________________________________ State _______________ Zip ______________
Unit type _____________ Unit number ____________ Council____________________________________
Name of council-approved counselor* _________________________________________________________
Address _____________________________________________________________________________________
City __________________________________________________ State _______________ Zip ______________
Agency qualification and scuba instructor number* _____________________________________________
Signature of counselor signifies
applicant has completed all requirements: __________________________________ Date_______________
*The counselor must hold an instructor rating with current teaching status with an approved RSTC member organization in accordance with
Scouting America scuba policies in the Guide to Safe Scouting. Counselors must have council approval.


Ap 3 : Requirements and Application FormsAp3-6
The Scuba award program was created and imple-
mented with assistance from International PADI Inc.,
www.padi.com.
All aspects of the Scuba award program must conform with the Scouting America scuba policy found in the Guide
to Safe Scouting. Instructors not familiar with the Scouting program should consult the Scouting America manual,
Aquatics Supervision: A Leader’s Guide to Youth Swimming and Boating Activities, No. 34346, which also contains
the Scouting scuba policy.
Counselors for Scuba award must hold current scuba instructor certification from a RSTC member organization
listed in the Scouting America scuba policy. Instruction must comply with RSTC standards for introductory scuba
experiences. Minimum standards include instructor-to-participant ratios. In a pool, the maximum ratio is eight
participants per instructor. In a confined waterfront setting, the maximum ratio is four participants per instructor.
Ratios may be increased by two participants if the instructor is assisted by someone certified as a divemaster or
assistant instructor.
A second adult who understands the procedures should be present in case the instructor becomes incapacitated.
Two-deep adult leadership is also required by Scouting America Youth Protection guidelines.
Before participants are allowed in the water, they must complete an Annual Health and Medical Record
designed for scuba activities. Instructors should use standard forms advocated by their certifying agency.
Instructors may use agency materials, such as participant guidebooks, slide shows, and videos to help convey
cognitive material. Skill instruction must be conducted in clear, confined water. A swimming pool is recommended.
The Scuba award is ideally suited to winter programs using indoor pools. Two 45-minute sessions are appropriate
for instruction, practice, and completion of requirements.
Although the Scouting America Scuba award is similar to introductory scuba experiences offered by various RSTC
member organizations and other dive agencies, those programs are not substitutes for Scouting’s Scuba award.
All requirements must be completed as stated on the application form. The counselor may not omit, vary, or
add requirements. In particular, the Scuba award has a prerequisite swimming requirement, is only available to
youth and adults registered in the Scouts BSA, Venturing, or Sea Scout programs (minimum age around 10½),
and does not include the option of an open-water dive.
Local council programs may not compress or sell air for scuba use, or sell, rent, or loan scuba equipment.
All air and equipment for local council scuba programs must be obtained from properly licensed sources, not
affiliated with Scouting America and under the supervision of RSTC-approved and certified scuba instructors.
Individuals completing the Scuba award requirements qualify for a recognition card and patch. The completed
award application should be handled as directed by the council Training, Aquatics, or other committee.
Scuba: Notes to Counselor
430-604


Ap 3: Requirements and Application FormsAp3-7
Mile Swim Application
Participant Notes
Swimming a mile without stopping is a significant accomplishment on your way to being proficient in the water. Are you
ready? If you have done it before, you probably know the answer. If you haven’t, then consider whether you can walk or bike
on level ground for an hour or so without stopping. If you can, then you likely have enough stamina to swim a mile. The next
question is whether you have the skill.
If you can meet the requirements for Swimming merit badge, then you likely have the skills needed to swim a mile, that is,
the ability to swim a restful breaststroke, sidestroke, and elementary backstroke. If you have trouble completing the 100-
yard swimmer classification test, then you are probably not ready for the mile.
How long will it take to swim a mile using one or more of those restful strokes? If you save energy by gliding after each
stroke, expect to take an hour or more. If you were walking at a relaxed pace, you could probably cover around three miles
in the same time. However, it generally takes more energy to pull and push yourself through the water than to walk. A
secret to successfully swimming a mile is to use your energy wisely. If you typically swim a brisk front crawl with your head
out of the water, then you may need to build endurance by swimming increasing distances over a long period. Using a fast,
poorly executed swimming stroke to swim the mile is similar to trying to run full-out for a mile. Conditioned athletes can
do so, but not the average person. That is why restful strokes at a relaxed pace are recommended over trying to stay ahead
of another person swimming a fast crawl. Swim team members will be able to do a mile in less than 30 minutes without
exhaustion. (The record is around 15 minutes.) However, they will have trained extensively to build their stamina and to
swim as effectively as possible.
Name of applicant ___________________________________________________________________________
Address _____________________________________________________________________________________
City __________________________________________________ State _______________ Zip ______________
Unit type _____________ Unit number ____________ Council____________________________________
Name of council-approved counselor _________________________________________________________
Address _____________________________________________________________________________________
City __________________________________________________ State _______________ Zip ______________
Counselor qualification _____________________________________________________________________
Signature of counselor signifies
applicant has completed all requirements: __________________________________ Date_______________
Requirements
1. Successfully complete the swimmer test: Jump feetfirst
into water over the head in depth, level off, and begin
swimming. Swim 75 yards in a strong manner using one
or more of the following strokes: sidestroke, breast-
stroke, trudgen, or crawl; then swim 25 yards using an
easy, resting backstroke. The 100 yards must be com-
pleted in one swim without stops and must include at
least one sharp turn.
2. Learn through discussion and application how skill,
stamina, stroke selection, and pace influence distance
swimming.
3. Pre-qualify for the mile by either swimming continu-
ously for 1/4 mile or otherwise demonstrating ability
to the satisfaction of a counselor approved by the local
council.
4. Swim one mile under safe conditions over a course ap-
proved by the counselor supervising the swim.


Ap 3 : Requirements and Application FormsAp3-8
Mile Swim : Notes to Counselor
The Mile Swim recognition provides a sense of accomplishment and supports confidence, safety, skill, and physical fitness. The
ability to swim long distances in warm water in time of need provides a margin of safety for all aquatics activities. Swimming
skills and physical stamina are also needed to assist others. In addition to safety, Mile Swim should encourage the development of
physical fitness by introducing youth to swimming as regular exercise. However, it is not a competitive training program limited to
specific strokes that emphasize speed over efficiency. Swimming skills, including mastery of restful strokes, are as important to the
program as endurance. Anyone who can walk a mile without stopping should have sufficient stamina to swim a mile with restful
strokes. Just as walking is a viable exercise alternative to jogging or sprinting, restful swimming strokes used over long distances
in place of a fast crawl can also play a positive role in physical conditioning.
Counselors for Mile Swim must be approved by the council. Adults trained as a Scouting America Aquatics Instructor, a Red
Cross Water Safety Instructor, or a YMCA Swim Instructor are good candidates. Swim coaches with a Scouting background are
also appropriate. All counselors must have current Safe Swim Defense training. participants. A second responsibility is to foster
success. Requirements 2 and 3 are included to aid the counselor in that mission.
Many Scouts who have not been exposed to swimming merit badge skills will lack the ability needed to do a mile without training
and practice. However, they may not realize their limitations.
The Participant Notes provide some background for requirement 2. A counselor may enhance the “application” part of that
requirement with simple exercises if those are needed to prepare the Scout. The intent is to provide the Scout with simple
drills that physically convey concepts. For example, showing how gliding reduces effort but increases time by seeing how few
strokes are needed to cover a given distance. Also, how tired Scouts become swimming a given distance as fast as they can with
a head-up crawl compared with swimming the same distance with a relaxed crawl using rhythmic breathing.
The intent of requirement 3 is to both prescreen applicants who are not ready, and to get those who are close over the hump.
However, the counselor (or camp) is allowed flexibility. Competitive swimmers who regularly swim as part of a swim team need
not be forced to do an extra quarter mile. The 400-yard swim for Lifesaving merit badge is close enough to a ¼ mile (440 yards)
to serve, likewise the distance swim for lifeguard training should suffice if a Scout has that certification. Camps may allow those
enrolled in Swimming merit badge instruction to substitute class attendance for the ¼ mile.
Ideally, anyone wanting to sign-up for the Mile Swim should be allowed to do so. However, camps are also allowed flexibility to
limit participation based on resources, similar to how they meet requests for popular merit badges.
The continuous mile may be done using any combination of strokes and has no time limit. The swimmer may pause in deep
water either by floating or treading water but may not rest by standing or holding to the side. Goggles may be worn, along with
wet suits in cold water, but flotation devices are not allowed.
The continuous mile may be done using any combination of strokes and has no time limit. The swimmer may pause in deep
water either by floating or treading water but may not rest by standing or holding to the side. Both open and flip turns are
allowed in pools.
The mile may be covered by laps in a pool or at an enclosed waterfront swimming area. Both open and flip turns are allowed. There
is no need to adjust the distance to compensate for pushing off the side.
Courses over extended distances in open water must conform to Safe Swim Defense guidelines regarding hazards such as
submerged trees, currents, or boat traffic, as well as water quality, depth, and clarity.
Each individual swimmer, or at most a buddy pair, may be accompanied by a rowboat with two people onboard, one skilled
in controlling the boat and the other trained in basic water rescue, equipped with a reaching device and a flotation aid,
continuously watching the swimmer(s). The swimmer, not the boat, must set the pace.
Alternatively, a closed circuit may be established where all swimmers are constantly in reach of safety personnel strategically
positioned at fixed points on boats, the shore, or piers. Each participant swims with a buddy, and the number and spacing of
those in the water should not exceed the capacity of the watchers to easily count the swimmers as they move from one zone
to another.
512-020
There is no time limit for swimming the mile, so take your time, particularly at the beginning so you don’t wear yourself out
too soon. As you near the end, you can speed up if you like if you aren’t particularly tired. If you aren’t struggling to keep
going, then one of the challenges of swimming long distances is boredom. Feel free to sing silently to yourself, day dream,
or otherwise keep your mind occupied. If you are swimming numerous laps in a pool, then it helps to have a buddy out of
the water counting laps so you don’t lose count.
Still not sure if you should attempt a mile? No problem. Try a quarter mile or so first, as indicated in requirement 3. If
that tires you out, seek coaching tips to improve your skill, then practice regularly until you meet your goal. Swimming is
excellence exercise and a great way to develop and maintain physical fitness throughout your life.


Ap 3: Requirements and Application FormsAp3-9
Stand Up Paddleboarding Application
1. Review Safety Afloat policy. Explain to your instructor how
this applies to stand up paddleboarding.
2. Before fulfilling other requirements, successfully complete
the Scouting America swimmer test: Jump feetfirst into
water over the head in depth, level off, and begin
swimming. Swim 75 yards in a strong manner using one or
more of the following strokes: sidestroke, breaststroke,
trudgen, or crawl; then swim 25 yards using an easy,
resting backstroke. The 100 yards must be completed in
one swim without stops and must include one sharp turn.
After completing the swim, rest by floating.
3. Explain safety considerations for stand up paddleboarding
in the following environments: lake, moving water, white
water, open ocean, ocean surf.
4. Review the characteristics of life jackets most appropriate
for stand up paddleboarding and understand why one must
always be worn while paddling. Then demonstrate how to
select and fit a lifejacket for stand up paddleboarding.
5. Describe the correct type of leash to wear in the
appropriate water venues.
6. Name and point out:
a. The major parts of a stand up paddleboard
b. The parts of a paddle for stand up paddleboarding
7. Discuss:
a. The different types of stand up paddleboards
b. How to correctly size and hold a paddle for stand
up paddleboarding
8. Using a properly outfitted stand up paddleboard,
demonstrate the following:
a. How to safely carry a stand up paddleboard
b. How to safely paddle away from a dock or shoreline (on
knees)
c. How to stand and balance on a board in the
neutral position
d. How to appropriately fall off a board
e. How to remount the board
f. Forward stroke
g. Back stroke
h. Forward sweep
i. Reverse sweep
j. Draw stroke
k. One self-rescue technique—lay on your stomach and
paddle with your hands
9. With supervision from your instructor, paddle a course that
involves:
a. A straight line for 25 yards and stop within one board
length
b. A figure 8
c. Moving abeam to the right 10 feet and to the left
10 feet
Requirements
Name of applicant ___________________________________________________________________________
Address _____________________________________________________________________________________
City __________________________________________________ State _______________ Zip ______________
Unit type _____________ Unit number ____________ Council____________________________________
Name of council-approved counselor _________________________________________________________
Address _____________________________________________________________________________________
City __________________________________________________ State _______________ Zip ______________
Counselor qualification _____________________________________________________________________
Signature of counselor signifies
applicant has completed all requirements: __________________________________ Date_______________


Ap 3 : Requirements and Application FormsAp3-10
Notes to Counselor
Any youth or adult who is registered with a troop, crew, or ship and completes the requirements is eligible for a patch and
recognition card. The completed award application should be handled as directed by the council Training, Aquatics, or other
committee. Instruction for the SUP award is to be conducted under safe conditions on calm water. One to three hours in one
or more sessions should suffice for instruction and practice.
430-189
Information and skills are discussed in Aquatics Supervision: A Leader’s Guide to Youth Swimming and Boating Activities,
No. 34346. All counselors must be trained in Safety Afloat and have council approval. Any person with current training as a
Scouting America Aquatics Instructor or as a SUP instructor by the American Canoe Association, or a person with similar
experience in SUP skills, safety, and instruction may serve as a counselor.


Ap 3: Requirements and Application FormsAp3-11
Boardsailing Application
Requirements
1. Before fulfilling the following requirements, you must
successfully complete the Scouting America swimmer
classification test.
2. Review how each point of Safety Afloat applies to
boardsailing.
3. Explain precautions for the following environmental factors:
dying wind, high wind, offshore winds, currents, waves, and
lightning.
4. Discuss the prevention, recognition, and treatment of
the following health concerns that could arise while
boardsailing: hypothermia, sunburn, dehydration, and heat
exhaustion.
5. Properly rig and prepare the sailboard you are using.
Identify each of the following: uphaul, outhaul, downhaul,
cleat, leach, tack, clew, foot, luff, skeg, centerboard,
wishbone boom, and universal. Explain luffing. Explain how
to steer the sailboard by adjusting the center of effort.
6. Demonstrate your ability to uphaul the sail, find the neutral
position to the wind (sail luffing), and control the board’s
position with foot movement.
7. With supervision from your instructor, sail a course that
involves beating, reaching, and running. Change direction
by tacking into the wind.
Name of applicant ___________________________________________________________________________
Address _____________________________________________________________________________________
City __________________________________________________ State _______________ Zip ______________
Unit type _____________ Unit number ____________ Council____________________________________
Name of council-approved counselor* _________________________________________________________
Address _____________________________________________________________________________________
City __________________________________________________ State _______________ Zip ______________
Counselor qualification _____________________________________________________________________
Signature of counselor signifies
applicant has completed all requirements: __________________________________ Date_______________
512-017
Notes to Counselor
The Boardsailing award has been developed to introduce basic boardsailing skills, equipment, and safety precautions; to encourage
the development of skills that promote fitness and safe aquatic recreation; and to lay a foundation for more advanced and
demanding boardsailing activities. Any youth or adult who is registered with a troop, crew, or ship and completes the requirements
is eligible for a patch and recognition card. The completed award application should be handled as directed by the council
Training, Aquatics, or other committee.
All counselors must be trained in Safety Afloat and have council approval. Any person recognized as a boardsailing instructor by
US Windsurfing or US Sailing, or someone with similar experience in boardsailing skills, safety, and instruction, may serve as a
counselor for this award.
Instruction must be conducted on a protected body of water in an area free from other traffic or large waves. Initial water entry
and practice should be on a gradual beach clear of hazards. A steady three-to-seven knot breeze is ideal for beginner practice. All
participants should be close enough to supervisory personnel for efficient instruction and ready assistance.
All requirements must be completed as stated. Basic skills and safety precautions are presented in the Scouting America
publication: Aquatics Supervision: A Youth Leader’s Guide for Swimming and Boating Activities, No. 34346. Additional resources
may be found online at www.uswindsurfing.org.


Ap 3 : Requirements and Application FormsAp3-12


Ap 3: Requirements and Application FormsAp3-13
Whitewater Rafting Application
Name of applicant ___________________________________________________________________________
Address _____________________________________________________________________________________
City __________________________________________________ State _______________ Zip ______________
Unit type _____________ Unit number ____________ Council____________________________________
Name of council-approved counselor _________________________________________________________
Address _____________________________________________________________________________________
City __________________________________________________ State _______________ Zip ______________
Counselor qualification _____________________________________________________________________
Signature of counselor signifies
applicant has completed all requirements: __________________________________ Date_______________
Requirements
1. Before doing the following requirements, successfully
complete the Scouting America swimmers test.
2. Do the following:
a. Name the parts of a whitewater raft.
b. Describe differences between a paddle raft and an
oar-powered raft.
c. Explain the importance of perimeter lines used on
whitewater rafts.
d. Demonstrate how to choose an appropriate
size paddle.
e. Demonstrate how to select and properly fit a
life jacket.
f. Demonstrate how to select and properly fit a helmet.
g. Discuss the use of throw ropes in rescuing
overboard paddlers.
h. Discuss common river hazards including rocks,
strainers, broaching, standing waves, hydraulics,
and foot entrapment.
3. Explain the importance of safety equipment used in
whitewater rafting including throw ropes, helmets,
and life jackets. Also discuss appropriate clothing and
footwear for a whitewater rafting trip.
4. Under proper supervision and appropriate conditions
safely do the following:
a. Lift, carry, launch, and land an inflatable raft, with
help, on calm or slow-moving water.
b. Sit in a raft as a paddler with proper foot position.
c. Swim a Class I rapid while wearing a life jacket,
helmet and attire appropriate for the water
temperature. Demonstrate defensive and aggressive
swimming positions as possible.
d. Re-enter a raft from the water, with assistance
if needed.
5. While on calm or slow-moving water, demonstrate the
following strokes in an inflatable raft with at least one
other paddler and on command of a
qualified paddle captain:
a. Forward
b. Back
6. While on moving water up to Class I, demonstrate the
following maneuvers with at least three other paddlers
in an inflatable raft and on the command of a qualified
paddle raft captain:
a. Turn left.
b. Turn right.
c. Paddle forward in a straight line for 50 feet.
d. Back paddle reasonably straight for 15 feet.
7. While on moving water up to Class I, demonstrate the
following maneuvers with at least three other paddlers
in an inflatable raft and on the command
of a qualified paddle raft captain:
a. A front or a back ferry.
b. A shallow or a wide eddy turn.
c. A shallow or a wide peel out.
8. Participate in a whitewater rafting trip in up to Class
III white water with a qualified paddle raft captain in
each raft using a minimum of two rafts and for at least
one hour’s duration.
(See Notes to Counselor on next page.)


Ap 3 : Requirements and Application FormsAp3-14
Notes to Counselor
This award is available to Scouting America youth and adults who are members of Scouts BSA, Venturing, or
Sea Scout units. Any adult leader, approved by the council, who is trained in Safety Afloat and can personally
verify that all instruction and skill completions were directly supervised by a professionally trained or licensed
rafting guide may serve as a counselor for this award. Such guides may be employed by council high-adventure
programs or commercial outfitters. A review of representative skills and guidance for selecting a reputable
rafting service is provided in the Scouting America publication Aquatics Supervision, No. 34346.


Ap 3: Requirements and Application FormsAp3-15
Prerequisites
1. Age, physical fitness, and training:
A. Be 15 years old or older prior to training.
B. Submit written evidence of physical fitness.
C. Complete Safe Swim Defense training.
2. Swimming ability:
A. Complete the 100 yard Scouting America xxxxx
xxxxswimmer test.
B. Recover a 10-pound weight from 8 feet of water.
Requirements
3. Administer both the Scouting America beginner and
swimmer classification tests.
4. Demonstrate reaching assists from deck, side, and shal-
low water using items such as arms, legs, towels, rescue
tubes, and poles.
5. Twice demonstrate throwing assists using items such
as lines, ring buoys, throw bags, and free-floating sup-
ports. Successfully place at least one such aid within
reach of a subject 25 feet from shore.
6. Demonstrate stride jump and compact jump entries into
deep water.
7. Demonstrate an accompanied rescue for a conscious
subject in deep water 20 feet from shore. Enter the
water with a buoyant aid, present the aid to the sub-
ject, release it, and accompany the subject to shore.
Speak to the subject throughout the assist to provide
clear instruction and encouragement.
8. Demonstrate a contact rescue for an unconscious subject
at or near the surface in deep water 20 feet from shore:
A. Approaching the subject from the front, use a
wrist tow to move the subject to shore. During the
approach, confirm that the subject is passive.
B. Approaching the subject from the rear, use an
armpit tow to move the subject to shore. During
the approach, confirm that the subject is passive.
C. With the assistance of one other person, and
without the aid of a backboard, remove an uncon-
scious subject from the water at the edge of the
pool or pier and check for breathing
and circulation.
9. Practice in-water rescues of both conscious and uncon-
scious subjects using a variety of flotation aids.
10. Demonstrate the following defensive actions:
A. Front head-hold escape
B. Rear head-hold escape
11. Demonstrate a line-and-tender rescue as both the swim-
mer and the line tender.
12. Demonstrate in-line stabilization for a suspected spinal
injury in shallow water:
A. For a faceup subject
B. For a facedown subject
13. Correctly answer 80 percent of the questions on the
Swimming and Water Rescue written exam covering
Safe Swim Defense, emergency action plans, surveil-
lance, victim recognition, and water rescue. Review any
incomplete or incorrect answers.
530-505
Scouting America Aquatics Supervision:
Swimming and Water Rescue
Purpose
Training for Aquatics Supervision: Swimming and Water Rescue provides Scout leaders with information and skills to prevent,
recognize, and respond to swimming emergencies during unit swimming activities. It expands the awareness instruction provided
by Safe Swim Defense training. Persons completing the training should be better able to assess their preparation to supervise unit
swimming events. Scouting America recommends that at least one person with this training is present to assist with supervision
whenever a unit swims at a location that does not provide lifeguards. This training is open to any registered adult leader, Scouts BSA,
Venturer, or Sea Scout who is age 15 or older. A council-approved instructor must directly supervise all training. The course takes
approximately eight hours and is valid for three years. Course presentation must follow the online instructor guide.
Although the training is consistent with training provided professional lifeguards, the Swimming and Water Rescue course is not
a lifeguard training course and is not a substitute for professional lifeguard training for summer camp aquatics staff. On the
other hand, this course addresses important information that may not be covered in generic lifeguard training programs such
as: preventative measures, including the buddy system and swim classification tests; how to set up a safe swim area in diverse
situations; the use of non-standard rescue equipment; and emergency action plans in remote settings. Therefore, Scout leaders
with lifeguard training from other agencies are encouraged to complete this course prior to supervising unit swim activities in
remote settings. A “challenge” option is provided to foster cross-training of individuals with training from other agencies.
Adult and youth first aid training, including CPR, is an important safety consideration for all Scouting activities, not just swimming.
First aid training is not included in the Swimming and Water Rescue course with the expectation the leader has addressed this
need separately, as noted in the course material and on the training card.


Ap 3 : Requirements and Application FormsAp3-16
Prerequisites
1. Age, physical fitness, and training:
a. Be 15 years old or older prior to training.
b. Submit written evidence of physical fitness.
c. Complete Safety Afloat training.
2. Swimming ability:
Complete the 100 yard Scouting America
swimmer test.
Requirements
3. Personal safety skills:
a. Select a life jacket of appropriate size and
demonstrate proper fit.
b. Demonstrate the feet-up floating position
used if caught in a current.
c. Demonstrate H.E.L.P. and Huddle positions.
d. Capsize and swim a boat to shore.
4. Basic boating skills: Demonstrate the follow-
ing maneuvers on calm water using standard
stroke techniques:*
a. Transport boat from rack or trailer to water’s
edge.
b. Safely board and launch the craft.
c. Travel in a straight line for 50 yards.
d. Stop the craft.
e. From the stop, move the boat sideways,
first to the right, then to the left.
f. From the stop, pivot the boat to the right,
then to the left.
g. Return to shore along a curved course
demonstrating both left and right turns while
under way.
h. Land, safely exit, and store the craft.
5. Group safety skills:
a. Throwarescuebag,layingthelinewithin3feet
of an object 30 feet away.
b. Demonstrate a boat rescue of a swimmer.
c. Demonstrate an on-water boat-over-boat
assist.
6. Correctly answer 80 percent of the questions
on the Paddle Craft Safety written exam cover-
ing Safety Afloat, trip preparation, emergency
action plans, and basic boating knowledge.
Review any incomplete or incorrect answers.
*Skills may be demonstrated either tandem in a canoe
or solo in a kayak. If a tandem canoe is used, each par-
ticipant must demonstrate the maneuvers from both
bow and stern positions.
Scouting America Aquatics Supervision:
Paddle Craft Safety—Basic
Purpose
Float trips are popular Scouting activities for older youth. Safety Afloat aware-
ness training provides guidelines for safe float trips and is required of unit
leaders, but does not provide the skill training mandated by those guidelines.
Aquatics Supervision: Paddle Craft Safety—Basic expands Safety Afloat train-
ing to include the skills, as well as the knowledge, needed for a unit leader to
confidently supervise canoeing or kayaking excursions on flat water. Persons
completing the training should be better able to access their preparation to supervise paddle craft activities.
The training is open to any registered adult leader, Scouts BSA, Sea Scout, or Venturer, who is age 15 or older.
The training must be conducted by a council-approved instructor, takes roughly eight hours, and is valid for three
years. Course presentation must follow the online instructor guide.
Adult and youth first aid training, including CPR, is an important safety consideration for all Scouting activities,
not just boating. First aid training is not included in the Paddle Craft Safety course with the expectation that the
leader has addressed that need separately, as noted in the course material and on the training card.
Float trips that last overnight also require camping skills. Because Scouting emphasizes outdoor skills in many
programs, only items specific to canoeing or kayaking are reviewed in the course material.


Ap 3: Requirements and Application FormsAp3-17
Requirements
1. Prerequisites:
a. Submit written evidence of physical
fitness.
b. Have current Safety Afloat training.
c. Have current training in Aquatics Super-
vision: Paddle Craft Safety—Basic for the
appropriate craft.
d. Demonstrate or provide evidence of current
ability to complete the 100-yard Scout
Swimmer classification.
2. View and discuss the video “Reading the
Rhythms of Rivers and Rapids.”
3. Do the following during an instructor-led canoe
or kayak trip of at least three miles down a
flowing river with Class I or Class II features,
including standing waves, a downstream V, and
a large eddy. A segment that includes isolated
Class II+ or Class III rapids that can be portaged
is appropriate, but not necessary. Features and
water levels must be consistent with the safe
performance of the requirements.
a. Transport boat from trailer or carrier to
river’s edge. Safely board and launch the
boat into a current.
b. Review the effect of basic flat-water
strokes in moving water, demonstrating
the ability to stay parallel with the
current.
c. Demonstrate knowledge of river signals to
communicate with other boats.
d. Perform a controlled swamp in a current,
safely exit the craft, and guide it to shore.
e. Swim feetfirst in a current without a boat
and catch a throw bag deployed from
shore.
f. Successfully deploy a throw bag to a person
fulfilling requirement 3E.
g. If canoeing, demonstrate a cross draw
stroke. If kayaking, demonstrate a low
brace.
h. Demonstrate ability to cross the current
using a front ferry.
i. Demonstrate an eddy turn.
j. Demonstrate peel out of an eddy.
k. Stop above a rapid indicated on a river
map. Scout the rapid to determine how
best to run the rapid and then run it.
l. Stop above a hole, low-head dam, or other
feature indicated on a river map. Scout and
portage the feature, even if it can be safely
run.
m. Land, safely exit, and load the boat for
transport.
4. Write a float plan for a troop, crew, or ship
covering the stretch of river used for training.
Scouting America Aquatics Supervision:
Paddle Craft Safety—River
Purpose
The Basic Paddle Craft Safety training provides an introduction to flat water canoeing and/or kayaking. The
River modules extend that introduction to moving water. Any unit planning river trips in canoes or kayaks
should be well served by leaders who complete those modules. Details are provided in the same Instructor
Guide used for the basic modules.
530-501


