BACKPACKING


BACKPACKING
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


35863
ISBN 978-0-8395-3232-3
©2025 Scouting America
2025 Printing


BACKPACKING 3
Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Backpacking or check Scoutbook for the latest
requirements.


4 BACKPACKING


BACKPACKING 5





BACKPACKING 7
Contents
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Planning and Preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Minimizing Risk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
Backpacking Clothing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
Backpacking Gear . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
Leave No Trace Backpacking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
Finding Your Way . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
Backcountry Dining . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
Expect the Unexpected . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
Backpacking Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93





BACKPACKING 9
.Introduction
Introduction
Imagine yourself and a few Scout friends hiking a rugged trail
through mountains, along rivers, and deep into forests. Your
packs hold all the gear and food you will need for your stay in
the backcountry. With map and compass you study the terrain
ahead and choose a good place to spend the night. You know
from the look of the clouds that an evening storm might be
coming, so you waste no time making camp.
After cooking a tasty supper over your backpacking stove,
you hang your food from a tree to protect it from animals and
then crawl into your tent. The sound of distant thunder lets
you know a storm is rolling in. The first drops of rain lull you
to sleep. Later, you look out and see the midnight sky blazing
with stars.
In the morning you move on, leaving behind no sign of
your camp. Your legs become strong and your eyes sharp. You
draw on your skills as a hiker, camper, cook, pathfinder, and
leader, and you follow no-trace principles.
Earning the Backpacking merit badge will be demanding
but rewarding. You will learn what equipment to carry on your
back and what knowledge to have in your head. You will dis-
cover how to protect the environment by traveling and camping
without leaving a trace. Master backpacking’s basics and you
will develop an even deeper respect for the outdoors, for those
who travel with you, and for yourself.





BACKPACKING 11
.Planning and Preparation
Planning and Preparation
A backpacking trip requires planning. Anticipating trail condi-
tions, travel distances, weather conditions, the availability of
water, and campsite locations will help you and your group put
together a plan that is right for the conditions. Your goal is to
estimate what to expect in the backcountry and then to prepare
so that you are ready for whatever comes your way.
The most useful planning tools for backpackers are a note-
book and a sharp pencil. Putting ideas on paper encourages
you to think them through. Checklists will help you make sure
you don’t forget anything. After a trek you can review your
notes to see what worked well and what you can improve the
next time around.
Choosing Your Destination
Almost every part of our nation has parks, forests, and other
open spaces that Scouts can explore. In choosing a place to go,
you first need to collect good information.
Planning a trek
is a matter of
looking ahead,
anticipating the
conditions you
will find, and then
preparing to
meet them.
Plan your adventure with your group members in mind.
Take into account their experience, knowledge, interests,
and physical abilities.
Check out backpacking guidebooks at your local
library. Contact an office of the Forest Service, National
Park Service, Bureau of Land Management, or state or local
conservation and recreation agencies. The Scouting America
local council office serving the area where you will be
backpacking might also have valuable information.
Another very helpful resource is Backpacker magazine.
Visit backpacker.com with your parent or guardian’s
permission, of course.


12 BACKPACKING
Planning and Preparation.
Once you have decided on a general area to visit, obtain
topographic maps of the region and identify some possible
routes. Find out where you can camp and consider the elevation
gains on the trails. Check if you will need permission to cross
any private land or if you will need to obtain permits from
public agencies. For some popular locations—especially national
parks—you may need to reserve a spot as early as six months in
advance. So, start planning early for a big summer hike.
Identifying key campsite locations is critical to planning
your route and miles traveled each day. Many parks and
planned routes already have designated camping areas, and
some sites need to be reserved in advance. If an established
camping area isn’t available, keep the following in mind.
• Find a site that has some elevation, and avoid depressions
in the ground so your tent won’t end up in a puddle in case
of rain.
• Choose a site out of the view of others and away from trails.
• Use the sun to your advantage—morning sun dries tents, and
afternoon shade can keep you cool.
• Avoid mosquitoes and other bugs by camping away from
low, marshy areas, still water, and tall grasses or ferns.
• Avoid snake-infested areas commonly found in rocky terrain.
• To avoid avalanches and rock slides, don’t set up camp at the
bottom of cliffs.
• Camp above the high-water mark in dry stream beds or
river canyons.
Whenever
possible, choose
a site out of the
view of others and
away from trails.


BACKPACKING 13
.Planning and Preparation
• Be aware of poisonous plants.
• Don’t camp under “widow makers”—trees that have fallen
onto other trees—or threatening limbs.
• Find protection from high winds among large boulders, rock
outcroppings, or dense stands of trees.
• When winter camping, don’t build a fire or set up your tent
under snow-laden branches.
• Use a topographic map to help you find a good campsite.
• Set up camp during the day so you can identify the
best location.
Pacing Yourselves
Plan the distances of your first backpacking treks conservatively.
It is better to have too much time to reach a destination than
too little. When planning, consider weather, terrain, physical
conditioning, and weight of gear. As a group, do you walk with
a quick stride or at a leisurely pace with frequent pauses to
appreciate the scenery, watch wildlife, and take photographs?
Allow enough time to enjoy yourself, stay safe, and have time
for activities other than traveling and setting up camp.
Even the best-prepared patrol or crew should plan for
unexpected events. Give yourselves extra time for traveling each
day in case the weather turns bad, the terrain is more rugged
than anticipated, or there is much to see and do. A layover day
during a longer trek will allow everyone to rest, set off on side
trips, or take the time to prepare a special meal.
Getting There
Public transportation is sometimes a good way to reach the
trailhead to begin a backpacking trip, although traveling by
private motor vehicle is often more convenient and practical.
If you decide to drive to the trailhead, arrange carpools so that
you don’t take more vehicles than necessary.
Make your trek plan flexible. Cover the basics so that
you have the right gear, enough food, and a workable
itinerary, but remember that it is important to be able
to adapt to changing conditions in the field. Plan an
alternative route in case your original plans fall through.
If you must leave
your vehicles at
the trailhead,
check with
land management
agencies and
local guidebooks
first. Find out
where you should
leave your
vehicles and
whether you
will need
parking permits.


14 BACKPACKING
Planning and Preparation.
Parking is often limited at trailheads to help protect the envi-
ronment, and many wilderness areas do not allow motorized
vehicles. You may need to plan on extra time spent backpacking
from the parking lot. Another option might be to arrange to have
your group dropped off at one trailhead and picked up at another
so that you can complete a route without backtracking.
The Trip Plan
When your patrol or crew has agreed on an itinerary for a trek,
write down your plans. Include who will be going, a detailed
description of the intended route, a daily schedule, a list of
food and equipment needs, an emergency response plan, and
a budget. Leave copies with several responsible adults.
As you prepare
your schedule,
follow this rule
of thumb for a
relaxed pace.
Plan on a rate
no greater than
2 mph. Add an
hour for every
1,000 feet of
elevation gain.
That should give
everyone enough
time to stop and
smell the roses.


BACKPACKING 15
.Planning and Preparation
Emergency Response Plan
An important part of planning any backpacking journey is
anticipating what could go wrong. For example, someone
in your crew might sustain a serious injury. Developing an
emergency response plan in advance gives you and your crew
important information to use if you encounter backcountry
difficulties. Along with copies of your trip plan, provide copies
of your emergency response plan to people in the frontcountry
who can assist your group should you need help.
Crew Organization
The patrol method is an effective way to organize a trek.
It allows everyone to take responsibility for making each trip
successful, so everyone gets the most out of the experience.
Sample Emergency
Response Plan
Dates of trip:
Trip location and description: [See the trip plan.]
Group leader:
Group members:
Medical training level of leaders and members:
Resources:
Location of nearest public telephones:
Group first-aid kit:
Mobile phone number(s):
Emergency contacts: [Include telephone numbers of
land management agencies, Scouting America council
officials, emergency response system, and search-and-
rescue alert numbers.]
Conditions for activating an emergency response:
[For instance, if you are a day late.]
Driving instructions to clinics, hospitals, and other
health-care facilities:
If you are
delayed, notify
your contacts
so that they
don’t initiate
an emergency
response. Upon
your return, let
them know you
are back so they
won’t report
you missing.


16 BACKPACKING
Planning and Preparation.
First, figure out how many people should be in your patrol
or crew. Find out from land management officials what restric-
tions and limitations apply, and plan accordingly. In the back-
country, you will find that a smaller group can share equipment
efficiently and will not require much space for camping or
much time for cooking. A small crew or patrol moves along a
trail quickly and will be less likely to cause damage to the land.
As you plan the size of your group, keep in mind its
impact on the land, on your safety, and on the quality of the
wilderness experience for yourself and for others. Philmont
Scout Ranch recommends having seven to 12 individuals
(including adults) on a trek—the best number for sharing gear,
food, and chores.
Once you have established the group size, the patrol or
crew leader will consult with adult leaders and discuss ideas
and alternatives with the group. On the trail, the leader must
stay aware of how each member is doing and how the entire
group is getting along. He or she encourages everyone to be
involved in finding the route, choosing campsites, and taking
part in completing all the tasks to make a backpacking trip the
best it can be.
The leader also finds opportunities for others to solve prob-
lems, to practice and improve their backcountry skills, and to
become effective leaders themselves. Many backpacking groups
use a chore chart so that everyone has an equal chance to cook,
clean up after meals, manage animal-safe food storage, and
take care of other camp tasks.
as the head cook. The head cook’s role is to do some of the cooking while
supervising the tasks of the other cooks. Serving as head cook is a great way to
practice leadership skills. Here are some tips:
■ Begin by developing a vision of future
success—dinner on the table at 6 p.m.,
for example.
■ Figure out the steps that will help you
achieve that vision: When should you
start the charcoal? What dishes need to
be started first?
■ Think about potential challenges:
Does your assistant know how to chop
vegetables? Do you have enough pots
and pans? What will you do at crunch
time when you have two cooks and four
tasks to complete?
■ During the cooking process, assign yourself some tasks but make sure you
can still keep an eye on the other cooks and on your watch. Ensure that
all principles of personal hygiene and kitchen sanitation are followed and
that all food-handlers wash their hands often.
■ If someone has a free moment—while the Dutch oven is heating up, for
example—have them set the table or start cleaning up. Even putting all the
dirty dishes and utensils in one place can be helpful to the cleanup crew.
SAMPLE DUTY ROSTER
Only the head cook should season
the food. That keeps food from
getting a double dose of seasoning.
MEAL COOKS FIRE AND WATER CLEANUP
Friday
Dinner
Taylor
Sydney
Pat
Jordan
Casey
Leslie
Saturday
Breakfast
Casey
Leslie
Taylor
Sydney
Pat
Jordan
Saturday
Lunch
Pat
Jordan
Casey
Leslie
Taylor
Sydney
Saturday
Dinner
Taylor
Sydney
Pat
Jordan
Casey
Leslie
Sunday
Breakfast
Casey
Leslie
Taylor
Sydney
Pat
Jordan 305
Sample duty roster


BACKPACKING 17
.Planning and Preparation
When you are on a backpacking trip with other Scouts,
you will need to rely on one another to help minimize risk
and face group challenges. Patrol members might find that a
backpacking trip tests them physically and emotionally. Having
their group’s and patrol leader’s support and encouragement
will go a long way toward the success of each person and of
the group as a whole.
Tasks on the Trail
Your patrol should stay together as you move along
the trail. One crew member can be designated as the
pacesetter. This person takes the lead and hikes at a
speed that is comfortable for everyone in the group.
Second in line is the crew’s navigator, who makes
regular checks of the map to be sure the group is stay-
ing on course. If the navigator has any doubt about the
crew’s direction, he or she should ask the pacesetter to
bring the group to a halt so that everyone can discuss
the location and route and decide which way to go.
In larger groups, you may designate a sweep.
The sweep brings up the rear, carries the first-aid kit,
and is responsible for making sure that all hikers are
accounted for and are staying on course. The sweep
calls a halt if someone needs to stop. (Anyone, how-
ever, has the right to call a halt to check a hot spot,
adjust a pack, add or remove layers of clothing, or take
a break.)





.Minimizing Risk
Minimizing Risk
Minimizing risk is so much a part of outdoor adventures that
often we hardly notice we are doing it. When you fill bottles with
water from streams and lakes, you deal with the risk of parasites
by treating the water to rid it of microorganisms. When you share
the outdoors with wildlife, you protect them and yourself by
hanging your food out of their reach, eliminating odors from
sleeping areas, and keeping campsites spotless.
A truly effective approach to reducing risk comes from the
willingness of every group member to take an active role in
maximizing personal safety and the safety of others. The more
responsibility each person takes for his or her own health and
safety, the more everyone can contribute to a successful trek.
To help minimize risk, follow these suggestions.
• Stay in good shape so you are ready for the physical
demands of a trek.
• Know where you are going and what to expect.
• Adjust clothing layers to match
changing conditions.
• Drink plenty of water.
• Take care of gear.
A critical aspect of managing risk is letting
others know when you are having difficulties or
are aware of a concern that might affect you or
the group. Even if you feel hesitant to speak up,
voicing concern about questionable route decisions
or changing weather conditions, for example, can
bring important matters to the group’s attention.
BACKPACKING 19


20 BACKPACKING
Minimizing Risk.
Dealing With Health Issues and Injuries
Getting injured while out on the trail is one of the biggest risks
for which you need to be prepared. Fortunately, many trail
injuries—scrapes, bruises, blisters, and sunburn—usually are
not very troublesome. Soap, water, bandages, and other items
in your first-aid kit will take care of the majority of medical
problems you may encounter.
However, the danger of a more serious injury is magnified
by your distance from emergency response. Miles up a trail,
you must rely on your own resources and those of your com-
panions. Know how to prevent, recognize, and treat the health
hazards that may arise during a backpacking trip. The brief
discussions that follow are intended only to alert you to the
dangers. Consult a first-aid manual for complete information.
Scouting America Recommends …
Scouting America has some general first-aid guidelines for the treatment
of minor injuries. Do not use bare hands to stop bleeding. Treat all blood
as if it were contaminated with bloodborne viruses. This means always
using a protective barrier, preferably nonlatex gloves, and always washing
exposed skin areas with hot
water and soap immediately
after treating the victim. Include
the following equipment in all
first-aid kits, ready for use when
rendering first aid:
• Nonlatex gloves, to be used
when stopping bleeding
or dressing wounds
• A mouth-barrier device, for
rendering rescue breathing
or CPR
• Plastic goggles or other eye
protection, to prevent a victim’s
blood from getting into the
rescuer’s eyes in the event of
serious arterial bleeding


BACKPACKING 21
.Minimizing Risk
Blisters. Blisters occur when skin is irritated, usually by heat
or by friction. A “hot spot” on your foot signals the beginning
of a blister. Stop immediately and protect the tender area by
covering the hot spot with a piece of moleskin or molefoam
slightly larger than the hot spot. Use several layers if necessary.
Some helpful products include 2nd Skin® or Blist-O-Ban®.
To prevent blisters, wear boots that fit properly and are
broken in well. Keep your feet clean and dry, and change your
socks frequently. Toughen your feet with short hikes before
embarking on an extended trek.
Hypothermia. When a person’s body is losing more heat than
it can generate, hypothermia sets in. It is a danger for anyone
who is not dressed warmly enough, although simple exposure
to cold is seldom the only cause. Wind, rain, hunger, and
exhaustion increase the danger. Dehydration is a common
contributing factor as well. A person experiencing hypothermia
might feel cold and numb, fatigued, irritable, and increasingly
clumsy. Slurred speech, uncontrollable shivering, poor judg-
ment, and loss of consciousness might also occur.
Blisters are best
left unbroken.
If a blister does
break, treat the
broken blister as
you would a minor
cut or abrasion.
Diabetics who
develop blisters
should see a
doctor as soon
as possible after
the trip.


22 BACKPACKING
Minimizing Risk.
Treat a victim of hypothermia by preventing the person
from getting colder. If necessary, use any or all of the following
methods to help warm the body to its normal temperature.
• Move the person into a tent or other shelter and get him or
her into dry, warm clothes.
• Warm the person by zipping him or her into a dry sleeping
bag or wrapping in blankets. Cover the head with a warm
hat or sleeping bag hood.
• Offer small amounts of warm liquids (cocoa, soup, fruit juices,
water; no caffeine or alcohol) if the person is able to drink.
• Provide water bottles filled with warm fluid (it should be
comfortable to the touch) to hold in the neck, armpit, and
groin areas. These areas are rich with blood vessels close to
the skin, and warming them can help raise body temperature.
To help prevent hypothermia, carry spare clothing in case
you get wet or if temperatures drop. Be alert for early symptoms
of hypothermia in yourself and others. Take action to keep
full-blown hypothermia from developing.
Monitor the
person closely
for any change
in condition. Do
not rewarm a
person too quickly
(for instance,
by immersing the
person in warm
water); doing
so can cause
irregular and
dangerous
heartbeat.
The Hypothermia Challenge
If you suspect someone is suffering from hypothermia,
challenge the person to walk, heel to toe, a 30-foot line
scratched on the ground. If the person shows unsteadi-
ness, loss of balance, or other signs of disorientation,
take immediate action to get the victim warm and dry.


BACKPACKING 23
.Minimizing Risk
Frostbite. A frostbite victim may complain
that his or her ears, nose, fingers, or feet
feel painful and then numb, but some-
times the person won’t notice any such
sensation. You may see grayish-white
patches on the skin—called frostnip—the
first stage of frostbite.
Only frostnip can be treated out on
the trail. If you suspect that frostbite is
deep (extending below skin level), remove
any wet clothing and wrap the injured area
in a dry blanket. Do not rub the injury. Get
the victim under the care of a doctor.
To treat frostnip, move the victim into a shelter, then warm
the injured area. If an ear or cheek is affected, warm the injury
with the palm of your bare hand. Slip a frostnipped hand under
your clothing and tuck it beneath an armpit. Treat frostnipped
toes by putting the victim’s bare feet against the warm skin of
your belly.
Help prevent frostbite by wearing layers of clothing, keep-
ing dry, and staying hydrated.
Dehydration. Water is essential for nearly every bodily func-
tion, including digestion, respiration, brain activity, producing
heat, and staying cool. Losing more water than one takes in
puts a person at risk of becoming dehydrated. The first sign
of dehydration usually is dark urine. Other signs can include
weariness, headache, body aches, confusion, and dark amber–
colored urine. Heat exhaustion, heatstroke, and hypothermia
may all be caused in part by dehydration.
Prevent dehydration and heat reactions by drinking plenty
of fluids. That is easy to do on hot summer days when you are
thirsty. It is just as important in cold weather when you may
not feel thirsty. Drink enough so that your urine stays clear.
A sugary drink is not the best way to quench your thirst
and prevent dehydration because each molecule of sugar in the
drink requires a molecule of water to break it down. The best
cure for dehydration is water. Sports drinks and other fluids
designed for rehydrating the body also are a good option
because they rehydrate and replace electrolytes.
Rewarm any
frostbitten area
so long as there
is no chance
of refreezing,
which would
cause much
more harmful
damage to the
affected area.


24 BACKPACKING
Minimizing Risk.
Staying Safe During a Thunderstorm
• If you are caught outdoors in a thunderstorm, do not stand in open
areas or near lightning targets such as trees, power poles, or wire
fences. Metal conducts electricity, so avoid metal poles. Remove any
metallic frame packs and do not stay near them.
• When hiking near mountaintops, which are struck by lightning often
during summer, try to get downhill before the lightning begins. If a
storm catches you, find a cave or a low spot among the rocks. Avoid
prominent outcroppings, overhangs, and flood zones.
• If you cannot find shelter, become the smallest target you can. Do not
lie flat on the ground, because lying flat makes you a bigger target than
crouching down. The less of you that is touching the ground, the better. If
you feel your hair stand on end or your skin get tingly, immediately squat
down on the balls of your feet, cover your ears with your hands, and
get your head close to your knees. If you have a sleeping pad, use it for
insulation by folding it and crouching on it.
• Take shelter in a steel-framed building or hard-topped motor vehicle
(not a convertible) if you can. Such places are safe because the charge
stays within the frame of the building or vehicle and is conducted safely
to ground without endangering the occupants. When you are taking
shelter in a car during a thunderstorm, avoid touching the metal parts.
• When taking shelter in a building during a thunderstorm, do not use
the telephone or hold objects connected to electrical power (such as
hair dryers). Staying near stoves, fireplaces, and plumbing is also
dangerous, because metal can conduct electricity. Also, do not take
a bath or shower or run water.
• Water also conducts electricity, so if you are boating or swimming,
get to land immediately when a storm is approaching.


BACKPACKING 25
.Minimizing Risk
Heat Exhaustion. Heat and dehydration can lead to heat
exhaustion. Symptoms can include pale, clammy skin; nausea
and headache; dizziness and fainting; muscle cramps; and
weakness and lack of energy.
If a member of your group is suffering from heat exhaus-
tion, get the person in the shade and encourage him or her to
drink small amounts of fluids. Cool water is best. Apply cool,
wet cloths to the skin and then fan to hasten the cooling pro-
cess. Activities can resume when the person feels better,
although it can take a day or more for full recovery.
Heatstroke. When a person’s core temperature rises to life-
threatening levels (above 105 degrees), heatstroke occurs.
Dehydration and overexertion in hot environments can be
factors. Symptoms may include hot, sweaty, red skin;
confusion; disorientation; and a rapid pulse.
This is a life-threatening condition; summon medical
attention as fast as possible. To treat a heatstroke victim,
lower the person’s temperature quickly by moving him or her
to a shady location and loosening tight clothing. Fan the person
and apply wet towels. If you have ice packs, wrap them in a
thin barrier (such as a thin towel) and place them under the
armpits and against the neck and groin. Cooling the skin in
these areas can help lower body temperature. If the person is
able to drink, offer small amounts of cool water. Monitor the
victim closely to guard against a relapse.
Victims of heat exhaustion should be cooled down as quickly
as possible.


26 BACKPACKING
Minimizing Risk.
Sunburn. Sunburn is a common but potentially serious result
of overexposure to the sun. Long-term exposure can result in
an increased risk of skin cancer. Treat sunburn by getting the
person in the shade. If no shade is available, have the person
put on a brimmed hat, pants, and a long-sleeved shirt for pro-
tection from the sun. Treat painful sunburn by applying cool,
wet cloths.
To prevent sunburn:
• Limit sun exposure between 10 a.m. and 4 p.m. Potential for
skin damage is greatest around noon.
• Shade your head, neck, ears, and eyes. The thinner atmo-
sphere at high elevations increases the intensity of UV rays.
Sand and snow also can intensify the damaging effects of
the sun.
• Sunscreen should provide UVA and UVB protection and have
a sun protection factor (SPF) of at least 30. Skin care experts
recommend applying sunscreen every two hours—even on
cloudy days—and more often during water activities.
• Sunglass lenses should provide UVA and UVB protection.
• Check with your doctor to ensure that any medications
you take won’t make you more susceptible to increased
sun damage.
Insect Stings. To treat bee stings, scrape away the stinger with
a flat object like the edge of a credit card, but don’t squeeze the
sac attached to the stinger—that might force more venom into
the skin. For all stings, apply an ice pack to the affected area to
help reduce blood flow, pain, and swelling.
Bumblebee


BACKPACKING 27
.Minimizing Risk
Tick Bites. Ticks are small, blood-sucking creatures that bury
their heads in the skin. Protect yourself whenever you are in
tick-infested woodlands and fields by wearing long pants and
a long-sleeved shirt. Button your collar and tuck your pants
into your boots or socks. Inspect yourself daily, especially
the hairy parts of your body, and immediately remove any
ticks you find.
If a tick has attached itself, remove it immediately. Grasp
it with tweezers close to the skin and gently pull until it comes
loose. Don’t squeeze, twist, or jerk the tick, as that may leave
its mouth parts buried in the skin. Wash the wound with
soap and water, and apply an antiseptic. After handling a tick,
thoroughly wash your hands.
If a tick has
been embedded
for more than
a day or poses
difficulties in
removal, see a
physician.
Lyme disease is an illness carried by some ticks. A red
ringlike rash might appear around the bite. A victim
might feel tired and have flulike symptoms. Anyone
experiencing these symptoms in the days and weeks
following a trek should see a physician.
Feeding tick Engorged tick
Do all you can to prepare for a mishap before it occurs.
Study the First Aid merit badge pamphlet and the chap-
ters on first aid in the Scouts BSA handbook and
Fieldbook. Practice rescue techniques with your patrol
and troop. Enroll in emergency medical courses offered
by the American Red Cross and other local groups.
(Check with your Scouting America local council office
for training opportunities in your area.)
Almost invisible,
chiggers burrow
into skin pores
where they cause
small welts and
itching. Try not to
scratch chigger
bites. You might
find some relief by
covering chigger
bites with hydro-
cortisone cream.


Minimizing Risk.
Snakebites. There are two types of venomous snakes in the
United States. Pit vipers (rattlesnakes, copperheads, and cotton-
mouths) have triangular heads with pit marks on both sides of
the head. Coral snakes have black snouts and bands of red and
yellow separated by bands of black. Coral snakes inject
powerful venom that works on the victim’s nervous
system; pit-viper venom affects the circulatory system.
The bite of a nonvenomous snake causes only
minor puncture wounds. If a crew member has been
bitten by a snake that you are certain is nonvenomous,
clean the wound with soap and water, then treat with
an antiseptic.
The bite of a venomous snake may cause sharp, burning
pain. If you are not certain whether a snake is venomous,
assume that it is venomous. Get the victim under medical
care as soon as possible so that physicians can neutralize the
venom. The venom might not affect the victim for an hour or
more. Within that time, the closer to medical attention you
can get the victim, the better.
A hiking stick does double duty when you
walk through places where snakes might lurk.
Walk slowly and use the stick to poke among
stones and brush ahead of you. Watch where
you put your hands as you collect firewood
or climb over rocks and logs.
Coral snake
RED AND YELLOW—
DEADLY FELLOW
RED AND BLACK—
FRIENDLY JACK
28 BACKPACKING
Milk snake


BACKPACKING 29
.Minimizing Risk
Snakebite Don’ts
• Don’t make any cuts on the bite, apply suction,
apply a tourniquet, or use electric shock (such as
from a car battery). All of these so-called remedies
can cause more harm to the victim and are not
proven to be effective.
• Don’t apply ice to a snakebite. Ice will not help the
injury but may damage the skin and tissue.
• Don’t give the victim alcohol, sedatives, or
aspirin. Doing so could hasten the absorption
of venom, aggravate nausea, or fuel fear and
panic in the victim.
Don’t Take a Tumble
Keeping safe from falling
will make your backpacking
adventures much more
enjoyable from beginning
to end. Trails often are
bumpy and have loose
rocks, gravel, and other
debris, so watch where you
step, every step of the way.
This is especially important
if you are backpacking along
a steep incline. Stay within
the boundaries of the trail,
behind any protective rail-
ing, and obey all signage.
Don’t get distracted when
you take photographs, talk with companions, or drop
something. Paying attention will help you avoid the
pitfalls of injuries such as a sprained ankle or scrapes
and bruises from a tumble.





BACKPACKING 31
.Backpacking Clothing
Backpacking Clothing
Clothing keeps you warm in the winter, cool in the summer,
dry in storms, and protected from insects, sun, and wind.
Fabric Choices
Wool was the fabric of choice for generations of backcountry
travelers. Wool is still a good choice for many cold-weather
adventures. It is durable and can help you keep warm even
when wet. Wool is also an excellent choice for shirts, jackets,
long pants, hiking socks, hats, and mittens.
Cotton clothing is cool and comfortable, making it very
good for hot-weather shirts and shorts worn in dry climates.
If cotton becomes wet, however, it loses its ability to insulate,
and it may be slow to dry. Wet clothing can be a danger on
cool days, especially when mist, rain, and wind increase the
threat of hypothermia, so avoid wearing cotton.
Outdoor clothing made of synthetics—fleece,
polypropylene, and other manufactured fabrics—can be sturdy
and comfortable. Synthetics will maintain warmth even
when wet. Look for synthetic underwear, shirts,
sweaters, jackets, pants, mittens, and hats.
Lightweight garments for warmer weather and
heavy ones for cooler climates have the added
benefit of drying quickly when wet. Many parkas,
rain jackets, and the shells of mittens and gloves
are made of waterproof, breathable, synthetic
fabrics. Synthetics offer the best combination of
comfort and protection from the elements, and
they are lightweight. Though synthetics can be
more expensive than cotton, they can be superior
for most conditions.
To help decide
what you need
for your trek,
familiarize your-
self with the
fabrics from
which clothing
is made.


32 BACKPACKING
Backpacking Clothing.
Clothing for Warm-Weather Backpacking
Summer is a popular time with backpackers. Alpine meadows
are ablaze with wildflowers, nights are comfortably chilly, and
lakes and streams are warm enough for a refreshing afternoon
swim. The list below offers some clothing suggestions that will
help you stay comfortable in summer and in climates where it
is warm year-round.
Basic Warm-Weather Clothing List
o T-shirt
o Hiking shorts
o Underwear
o Socks (synthetic blend)
o Hiking shoes or boots
o Long-sleeved shirt (lightweight)
o Long pants (lightweight)
o Sweater or warm jacket
o Brimmed hat
o Bandannas
o Rain gear


BACKPACKING 33
.Backpacking Clothing
Clothing for Cold-Weather Backpacking
As the temperature drops and snow covers the backcountry,
there is no reason to stay at home. In fact, winter can be a great
time to be in the wild. Trails usually are not crowded, and
mountains and forests have a beauty very different from their
summer appearance. Camping on a frosty January evening with
moonlight glistening on the snow can be one of your most
memorable backpacking experiences.
A winter trek in cold climates, however, demands special
preparation. Your primary concerns are staying warm and dry.
The list below provides some clothing suggestions that will help
keep you warm and comfortable during a cold-weather adventure.
Be sure to pack clothes made of fabrics that breathe and don’t
trap perspiration, which can increase your risk of hypothermia.
Basic Cold-Weather Clothing List
o Long-sleeved shirt (not cotton)
o Long pants (fleece or wool)
o Sweater (fleece or wool)
o Underwear
o Long underwear (synthetic blend)
o Socks (wool or synthetic blend)
o Hiking shoes or boots
o Warm hooded parka or jacket (fleece, synthetic, or down)
o Stocking hat (fleece or wool)
o Mittens or gloves (fleece or wool) with water-resistant shells


34 BACKPACKING
Backpacking Clothing.
Layering System
For the most outdoor comfort with the least weight in
your pack, use layers of clothing that, when combined,
will meet the worst weather you expect to encounter.
On a chilly day, for example, you might start out on the
trail wearing long pants, a wool shirt, a fleece pullover,
mittens, and a stocking hat. As your body generates
heat, you can take off the pullover. If you are still too
warm, loosen a few buttons on your shirt or take off
your mittens and hat.
When you reach your campsite and begin to cool
down, wear enough clothing layers to stay comfortable.
After the sun sets you might want to add an insulated
parka and fleece pants or long underwear.
Use the layering system to keep cool in hot
weather by stripping down to hiking shorts, a T-shirt,
and a brimmed hat. Lightweight long pants and a
long-sleeved shirt will shield you from insects, brush,
and the sun.
Start off feeling
slightly chilled.
That way, you
won’t soak your
clothes as you
warm up.


BACKPACKING 35
.Backpacking Clothing
Rain Gear
Prepare for wet weather by carrying rain pants and a hooded
rain jacket. Choose rain gear that lets you move freely and
allows perspiration to vent through the neck, cuffs, armpits,
and waist. Your best bet is to select rain wear made of a breath-
able fabric that allows perspiration to escape but prevents wet-
ness from seeping in.
Boots
Footwear manufacturers make
a wide variety of hiking shoes
and boots, ranging from ultra-
light trail shoes to rugged
mountaineering boots. For
short to moderate backpacking
trips, lightweight nylon-and-
leather hiking boots or leather
hiking boots should provide
the support you need without
being too heavy.


36 BACKPACKING
Backpacking Clothing.
Lightweight hiking boots combine nylon-and-leather
uppers with rugged soles. These boots offer varying degrees
of stability, durability, and protection from water and
snow. Most require little time to break in.
Leather hiking
boots often have a steel
shank between the upper and the sole for increased stiffness
and stability. Leather boots shed water and snow and can help
keep your feet warm in cold weather. Flexible leather boots
may be your best choice for cross-country travel and for hiking
on open trails.
Boots for backpacking must fit very well. Ill-fitting boots
are an invitation to blisters. When you try on hiking boots,
wear the socks you will use when backpacking. Find a sales
associate who is knowledgeable about both backpack-
ing and how to properly fit boots. Lace up a pair
of boots and walk around the store. Kick your
toes forward—they should not jam against
the front of the boot. Kick your heel back
into the heel pocket—your foot should
feel secure. The widest part of your foot
should not slip or feel squeezed. Try
several pairs of boots for comparison,
giving each the same careful tests.
Wear new boots around at home
and then on short hikes to break them
in before setting out on a backpacking
trip. Gradually extend the length of your
walks or hikes and your boots will soon feel
quite comfortable.


BACKPACKING 37
.Backpacking Clothing
Clean your boots after every outing. Use a stiff brush to
remove mud, or wash the boots off with water and mild soap.
Allow them to dry at room temperature. (Placing boots too
close to a campfire or other source of heat can dry out leather
and damage nylon.) Follow the manufacturer’s advice for boot
care. You may need to treat your boots with a waterproofing
agent to keep them in top condition.
Know when to replace your boots. You can tell it’s time for
new boots if:
• Your boots no longer fit. The material may have stretched and
no longer provides support, or your feet may have grown.
• There are cracks between the treads on the bottoms. Quality
boots can be resoled by a cobbler.
• The lining of the sole is wearing out, causing blisters.
Replacing the insoles may be an option.
• Seams are showing signs of failure or padding is exposed.
Always try on boots in the afternoon or evening, when your feet
will be slightly swollen, like they will be on the trail.





BACKPACKING 39
.Backpacking Gear
Backpacking Gear
Manufacturers of outdoor travel gear are always looking for
ways to make equipment lighter, tougher, and more versatile.
That is good news for backpackers, but all of those choices
can make gearing up a little overwhelming, not to mention
expensive. However, backpacking equipment doesn’t need to be
expensive, new, or stylish. Secondhand gear is often just fine.
Your troop might have a pack, a tent, and other items you can
borrow until you are able to get equipment of your own.
The Outdoor Essentials
The following items should go on
every backpacking trek, just as
they do on any Scouting adventure.
Pocketknife. Your pocketknife is
an all-purpose tool. Use it to cut a
cord, slice some cheese, whittle a
tent stake, or tighten a screw.
Choose a quality knife that
includes a cutting blade or two,
a can opener, and a screwdriver.
Keep it sharp and clean.
First-Aid Kit. Carrying a few first-aid items in a resealable plas-
tic bag will allow you to treat a variety of minor injuries and to
provide initial care should a more serious emergency arise. A
first-aid kit should include blister treatments, various sizes of
bandages, several gauze pads, adhesive tape, disinfecting oint-
ment, over-the-counter pain medication, nonlatex gloves, and
pen and paper. It’s also a good idea to carry a compact guide to
dealing with medical emergencies, such as the First Aid merit
badge pamphlet. The length of the trip and the number of peo-
ple in your group will affect the number of items in your kit.


40 BACKPACKING
Backpacking Gear.
Extra Clothing. Temperatures can soar during the day and
plummet at night. Have the clothing you need to deal with
temperature extremes. Select extra clothing appropriate for the
weather that is expected. A good question to ask when choos-
ing extra clothing is “What do I need to survive the worst con-
ditions that could be realistically encountered on this trip?”
Rain Gear. Weather conditions can sometimes change with
surprising quickness. Rain gear will keep you dry during a
sudden downpour or a steady drizzle.
Water. The amount of water you need to carry
depends on the activities of the day and the
sources of water you will encounter. Drink
plenty of fluids—at least three to four liters per
day—even in cold weather. Use a lightweight,
unbreakable container with a secure lid. A
widemouthed water bottle is easiest to refill
and clean. In cold weather, it’s easier to break
a layer of ice to get to the water. A one-gallon
collapsible water jug will come in handy if
you must carry water a long distance in camp.
On average you will need half a liter of water
for dehydrated meals. Before setting out, review
with local resources (park rangers, council
office, etc.) water sources along your route.
Flashlight. A lightweight flashlight will serve all of your
backcountry needs. A headlamp leaves your hands
free and works great for emergencies in the dark.
Many headlamps have a strobe setting, which
is useful in emergency situations; headlamps
have the best battery conservation in strobe
mode. You can even turn your headlamp
into a lantern by placing an empty
clear plastic water bottle, top down,
on top of the light. High-output
LEDs provide great light and have
no filament to break, so they are
ideal for rugged activities like back-
packing. Even though LED lights use
significantly less power than their
incandescent predecessors, be sure
to carry spare batteries.


BACKPACKING 41
.Backpacking Gear
Trail Food. Backpacking burns a lot of calories. An
emergency supply of trail food will keep you going
and can be especially important if a backpacking trip
lasts longer than expected. Make your own trail mix
with nuts, raisins, and other dried fruits. Bring along a
small bag of granola. Pack a couple of energy bars.
Matches and Fire Starters. Store matches and butane light-
ers in resealable plastic bags or an empty plastic aspirin bottle
with a secure lid. Plan your trip so that you won’t need an
open fire, but be prepared to build one in an emergency.
Sun Protection. Sunburn is a common injury among people
who enjoy being outdoors. Use plenty of sunscreen with a sun
protection factor (SPF) of at least 30. Protect your lips from sun
and wind with a tube of SPF 30 (or higher) lip balm. Reapply
sunscreen and lip balm often when swimming. A broad-
brimmed hat, long-sleeved shirt, and long pants provide even
more protection. Sunglasses will help keep you comfortable
and safe, too.
Map and Compass. A baseplate compass and topographic
map (waterproofed or protected in a sheath) of the area where
you intend to travel will help you identify landmarks and find
your way. Don’t forget—hone your route-finding skills before
you go on your trip. Using a GPS unit is a great way to follow
established waypoints and determine the distance you have
traveled. However, a compass—which doesn’t require batter-
ies—is always ready, so brush up before your trek.
Protect matches
from moisture.
Dip them one
by one in
melted paraffin.


42 BACKPACKING
Backpacking Gear.
Backpacks
Out on the trail, a backpack will be your storeroom, attic,
garage, and basement. Good packs fit well and are roomy and
comfortable to carry. Most have outside storage pockets and
padded shoulder straps. A hipbelt lets you
support most of a pack’s weight on the hips
rather than the shoulders. Packs have
either an internal or external frame.
Internal-Frame Packs. Stiff metal or
plastic stays positioned inside a pack act
as its frame, providing structural rigidity
for transferring the weight of the pack
load to the hipbelt. With their compact
shapes and snug fit, internal-frame
packs are ideal for travel through heavy
brush, in steep terrain, and while
snowshoeing or cross-country skiing.
They also are comfortable on open
trails. Some are outfitted with remov-
able top flaps or rear compartments
that can be converted into day packs
for hikes from a base camp.
Personal Toiletry Kit
When it comes to toiletries, a
small amount will go a very long
way. For instance, share a small
tube of toothpaste with others
in your crew, or save a nearly
empty tube to carry in your pack.
o Toothbrush
o Toothpaste
o Dental floss
o Biodegradable soap
o Waterless hand cleanser
o Small towel
o Toilet paper and trowel or
resealable plastic bags for
packing out waste
Whenever you use biodegradable camping
soap, keep it at least 200 feet from rivers,
lakes, streams, and springs. Use it sparingly.


BACKPACKING 43
.Backpacking Gear
External-Frame Packs. The weight distribution principles of
an external-frame pack are essentially the same as for a pack
with an internal frame. Because the frame is on the outside
of the bag, it can be larger and more rigid than an internal-
frame pack and can efficiently transfer the weight from the
shoulder straps to the hipbelt. Most external frames also pro-
vide room for lashing on a sleeping bag or tent.
Before you invest in a pack of your own, get an idea of
which ones best fit your body and suit your needs. Some
stores will allow you to rent a pack. Your troop might have
packs you can borrow so that you can compare styles.
When you try on packs at a store, have the salesperson
measure your torso length to get an appropriate fit. Put some
weight in the packs you try, so that you can judge them based
on how they will feel as you carry them on a trail.
Fitting Your Backpack
Your goal is to have 80 to 90 percent of the weight of the pack
resting on your hips. Keep in mind that
as you grow, your backpack should
as well. Buy your backpack from a
knowledgeable sales representa-
tive, and follow these steps to
find a good fit.
• Make sure all the
straps are loosened,
and put 10 to 15
pounds of weight
into the pack.
• Hipbelt. Put the pack
on, and adjust it so the
hipbelt rests on your
hip bones. Check to be
sure the hipbelt is padded
and rests comfortably.
• Shoulder Straps. Tighten
the shoulder straps so they
wrap around your shoulder—
they should not be carrying the
weight. The shoulder straps should
connect to the pack 1 to 2 inches
below your shoulders.
BELT ON
HIP REST
LOW PRESSURE
ON SHOULDER
PAD EXTENDS
JUST BELOW
CHEST
ADJUSTABLE
STRAP


44 BACKPACKING
Backpacking Gear.
• Load Lifters. Gently pull tight the load lifter straps (located
near your collarbone). These straps help lift the weight off your
shoulders and snug the pack to your back, minimizing sway.
• Chest Strap. Tighten the chest straps so the shoulder straps
are pulled comfortably from your shoulders, allowing your
arms to swing freely.
• Stabilizer Straps. Tighten the straps toward the back of the
hipbelt—again minimizing sway.
• As you are backpacking, continue to adjust your straps
throughout the day for optimal comfort.
A waterproof nylon pack cover weighs only a
few ounces. Secure it around your pack when bad
weather threatens. A large plastic garbage bag can
serve as a temporary pack cover. Cut a T-shaped
slit in one side of the bag, place it over the pack,
and tuck the edges under the straps and frame. Tie
a nylon cord around the pack and the garbage bag
to help hold the bag in place.
Inspect your pack before every trek and fix
any damage before you leave home. Check for
cracks in the frame, stitching that needs reinforce-
ment, frayed straps, and loose grommets. Empty
the pack after a trip, shake out any debris, and
store it in a clean, dry place. Take care of your
pack and it will give you years of reliable service.
Backpack Capacity
The capacity of backpacks is often noted in cubic inches.
• 2,500 to 3,000 cubic inches. Good as a large day pack or for overnight
trips in warm weather when you need only a lightweight sleeping bag
and a minimum of other gear.
• 3,000 to 4,500 cubic inches. With space for camp essentials, extra food,
and extra clothing, a pack of this size works well for two- or three-day
trips in the spring, summer, and fall.
• 4,500 to 6,000 cubic inches. The majority of standard backpacks are of
this size. Intended for trips of several days or more, they have the room
to haul all the food and equipment you need, as well as a few extras.


BACKPACKING 45
.Backpacking Gear
Sleeping Systems
Put together a sleeping system based on the temperatures and
weather conditions you expect in the backcountry.
Sleeping Bags
The shells of most sleeping bags are made of
nylon. Fill material inside the shell may consist
of down or synthetic fibers.
Down fill is composed of the fluffy feath-
ers geese grow next to their skins. Goose down
provides a lot of warmth without a lot of weight.
However, down is expensive. In addition, if it gets
wet, it loses its “loft,” which means it loses the ability to
keep you warm. If you choose a down sleeping bag, be sure to
shield it from the elements with a good tent or other shelter.
Synthetic fill is made of polyester fibers that create
warmth-trapping loft even when wet. Synthetic-filled bags are
often less expensive than down bags, but they are heavier
and bulkier.
During your trip, protect your sleeping bag from moisture
by stowing it in a stuff sack lined with a plastic trash bag. Air
out your sleeping bag at the end of a trip, and store it in a large
cotton laundry sack or pillow cover and hang it in a dry, out-of-
the-way spot until your next adventure.
Don’t store a
sleeping bag in its
stuff sack. Fill that
is compressed for a
long time may lose
some of its loft.
Instead, use a large
cotton pillow cover
or laundry sack
before hanging it in
a dry storage area.


46 BACKPACKING
Backpacking Gear.
Sleeping Pads
What you have beneath you at night is as important
in keeping you warm as what is on top. A sleeping
pad will prevent the cold ground from drawing away
body heat and can give you a comfortable surface on
which to sleep. Your best choices are foam pads and
self-inflating pads.
Foam pads vary in the degree of insulation
and comfort they provide. Closed-cell pads insulate
well but at the expense of comfort. Open-cell pads
are softer but may not be as warm or as durable.
Though lightweight, bulky foam pads can be
challenging to pack.
The choice of many backpackers, a self-inflating
pad is an airtight nylon shell covering open-cell foam.
It provides maximum insulation and warmth. Self-
inflating pads are often more expensive and heavier
than other kinds of pads. Store your pad unrolled,
with the valve open, to let the foam retain its shape
and help prevent mildew.
Make a pillow by
arranging some
extra clothing in a
stuff sack or
inside a sweater
with the sleeves
tied together.
Remember to pack a small repair kit for patching punctures in
your sleeping pad.


.Backpacking Gear
Before going into rugged snow
country, familiarize yourself with
the causes of avalanches, how
to avoid them, and what to do
if your party is caught in one.
Be alert for the warning signs
of hypothermia, frostbite, and dehydration in
yourself and your companions. See also the chapters
“Minimizing Risk” and “Expect the Unexpected.”
Shelter
Having the right kind of shelter means you can always camp
comfortably and in such a way that the land will not be
harmed by your presence.
Tarps
The simplest backpacking shelter is a tarp
that weighs just a few pounds and can be
set up in dozens of ways. You can use a
tarp as your primary shelter or as a dining
fly to protect your group’s gear and cooking
area from the weather. Rig it with lengths
of parachute cord at the corners and as a
ridgeline. A tarp has no floor, which can
pose challenges in soggy terrain, nor does it
have netting to keep insects away. Still, for
a flexible, lightweight shelter in mild or hot
climates, a tarp is hard to beat.
Snow Shelters
If you are on a winter backpacking trek,
you might dig a snow cave or build an
igloo. A good snow structure can be the
warmest and most secure of winter shel-
ters, but it also can take half a day to con-
struct. It is a good idea to have a tent with
you as a backup shelter. When leaving
camp, always dismantle any snow struc-
tures you built.
BACKPACKING 47


48 BACKPACKING
Backpacking Gear.
Bivy Sacks and Shelters
The bivouac or “bivy” sack is a very small, lightweight shelter
for one person. It is extremely popular with mountain climbers,
ultralight backpackers, and the military. Bivy sacks are designed
to slip over a sleeping bag and provide additional insulation
and protection from wind and rain. Choose a high-quality bivy
sack that fits your sleeping bag. Low-quality bivy sacks can
trap moisture that permeates the sleeping bag.
Bivy shelters provide the same low-profile
design as bivy sacks, but they use metal hoops—
the kind used in tents—over the head and feet.
These hoops keep the shelter from constant contact
with the sleeping bag so moisture doesn’t form.
Tents
Most backpackers use tents for shelter. Among the factors to
consider when comparing tents are season, size, and shape.
Three-season tents are intended for general year-round use.
Many have mosquito-netting panels to allow for bug-free
ventilation in warm weather. Four-season tents are built to
withstand the strong winds and snow loads of winter. Most
are heavier than three-season tents. Backcountry tents come
in sizes suitable for one, two, three, or four sleepers.
A-Frame. An A-frame tent is roomy and usually has a water-
proof floor and mosquito netting vents and doors. Breathable
fabric allows moisture to escape from inside the shelter, while
a waterproof rain fly protects the tent from exterior moisture.
Weighing 5 to 9 pounds, a two-person A-frame tent will keep
a couple of hikers and their gear dry.
Bivy sack
A-frame tent


BACKPACKING 49
.Backpacking Gear
Dome. Flexible aluminum poles have allowed
tent makers to develop dome-shaped tents.
Domes stand up well in rain, wind, and
snow, and the spaciousness of their
interiors makes them great for two
to four campers. A dome tent can
be flipped upside down in the
morning to shake out debris and
dry the bottom of the tent floor.
Hybrids. Tent designers are constantly trying to improve their
products by altering or combining basic tent shapes, adding
features, and even removing basic features. Sometimes the
results are an odd shape, but occasionally there are advances
that make tents lighter, roomier, stronger, and more useful.
With so many tents on the market, you will want to
shop around until you find the shelter that is just right for you.
Ask a salesperson to help you pitch tents in the showroom,
then crawl inside and check them for size, comfort, and quality
of construction. Also consider how easy a tent will be to set up
and take down in windy, cold, or stormy weather or after dark.
Your tent may need a ground cloth—a sheet of plastic
under your tent—to protect the floor and keep moisture
from seeping through. Place the cloth so that it does
not extend beyond the area covered by the tent. Most
quality tents today have tough, waterproof floors that
make a ground cloth unnecessary.
Dome tent
Hybrid tent
The first thing
to fail on a tent
usually is the
zipper, as a result
of grit getting in
the teeth. To help
improve your
tent’s longevity,
after every few
trips, vacuum
the zipper to get
rid of sand and
other debris.


50 BACKPACKING
Backpacking Gear.
Cooking Gear
What you need for cooking, eating, and drinking depends upon
what you intend to cook, eat, and drink. Usually, you will need a
stove or two, pots and pans, and an eating kit for each individual.
One or two lightweight cooking pots will form the founda-
tion of your kitchen. Add another pot or frying pan for more
complicated meal preparations. Don’t forget the lids. Match
your meals to your cooking gear and carry only what you need.
Be sure to have a handkerchief or pot grabber to retrieve hot
pots safely.
Lids hold in heat,
shorten cooking
times, and prevent
dust and insects
from blowing into
your food.


BACKPACKING 51
.Backpacking Gear
Backpacking Stoves
Of the many backpacking stoves on the market, those burning
the following fuels are most useful in the backcountry. Always
read and follow the manufacturer’s instructions for carrying, fuel-
ing, using, and storing stoves. Be sure to check Scouting America
local council and local regulations on permissible stove fuels.
White-Gas Stoves. White gas is a highly distilled fuel used
in many North American backpacking stoves. White gas is
extremely volatile and must be carried, stored, and
used with the utmost caution. White-gas stoves
raise the temperature of the liquid fuel that runs
through the supply line so that it exits the line
as a gas, allowing for high-burning tempera-
tures. White gas is pressurized by the user,
which differs from canister fuels and is a real
advantage in cold weather. All fuel tanks must
be packed out for proper disposal or recycling.
Canister Stoves. Simplicity, safety, and convenience
are features of canister stoves. A canister is a metal
container of pressurized butane or propane gas.
To use a canister stove, attach a canister, turn the
control knob, and light the burner. Canister stoves
operate well in warm weather and at high altitudes
but can lose efficiency as the temperature drops.
Empty canisters must be packed out for disposal
or recycling.
Alcohol Stoves. Their transportability and ease of
use make alcohol stoves a practical choice for a
short-term trek in fair weather. These lightweight
stoves are very safe and reliable. Because they do
not produce the heat typical of other types of camp
stoves, alcohol stoves are best for small meals.
Be sure to use a windscreen with this stove.
Because legal restrictions often prohibit transporting
camp stoves and any type of fuel on aircraft, ferries,
and other means of public transportation, you may
want to ship your stove ahead to be safe. Better yet,
plan to buy one when you reach your destination,
before setting off on your adventure.
Canister stove


52 BACKPACKING
Using Chemical-Fuel Stoves Safely
Follow these guidelines for the safe use of chemical-fuel stoves.
1. Use compressed- or liquid-gas stoves only with knowledgeable adult
supervision and only where and when permitted. At home, store fuel
containers in a shed, garage, or other uninhabited structure.
2. Read and understand the manufacturer’s instructions before lighting
any stove. Follow the instructions exactly.
3. Keep liquid fuels in well-marked, approved containers only and never
in a glass container. Store fuel in a ventilated, locked box a minimum
of 20 feet from buildings and tents. Keep all chemical-fuel containers
away from stoves and campfires and store them below 100 degrees.
4. Let a stove cool completely before changing cylinders of compressed
gases, refilling from containers of liquid gas, and storing the stove.
For long-term storage (a month or more), empty the fuel tank.
5. Refill liquid-gas stoves a safe distance from any flames, including other
stoves, campfires, and personal smoking substances. For safety and
performance, use a commercial camp stove fuel. Pour through a filter
funnel, and recap both the device and the fuel container before igniting.
6. Never fuel or use a stove inside or near a tent or cabin; always do this
in the outdoors. Do not operate a stove in an unventilated structure.
7. Place the stove on a level, secure surface before operating. On snow,
place insulated support under the stove to prevent melting and tipping.
8. Before lighting a compressed-gas or pressurized liquid-gas stove, check
the fittings for leakage by coating them with a soap solution. If gas is
leaking, the leaking gas will cause the soap solution to form bubbles,
signaling a leak and its general location.
9. To avoid possible fires, locate gas tanks, stoves, etc., downhill from
tents since heavy leakage of gases will flow downhill.
10. Keep your head and body to one side of the stove when lighting it.
Open the stove valve quickly for two full turns and light carefully
with head, fingers, and hands to the side of the burner, then adjust
the valve down.
11. Never leave a burning stove unattended.
12. Do not overload a stove with heavy pots or large frying pans. Instead,
set up a grill with legs to hold the pot, and place the stove under the grill.
13. Pack out empty fuel containers for proper disposal back home. Keep
empty fuel bottles and canisters away from sources of heat, which can
cause the empty containers to explode.


.Backpacking Gear
Eating Kit
A large plastic cereal bowl or kitchen storage bowl
is good for most meals, and you can dig your
way through most backcountry meals with
nothing more than a spoon. An insulated plas-
tic mug that won’t burn your lips is just the
thing for soup and any drink.
Other Gear
Depending on what you will be doing during a
backpacking trip, you may want to carry a few
of the following items:
o Nylon cord
o Insect repellent (Those containing the
chemical DEET can be very effective.)
o Notebook and a pen
o Repair kit (duct tape,
needle, thread)
o Hiking stick or
trekking poles
o Whistle
o Camera
o Binoculars
o Fishing gear
o Field guides
BACKPACKING 53
Each time you go on a trek you will learn more
about what you really need and what you can leave
at home next time. By eliminating ounces wherever
you can, you will shave pounds off the weight on
your back.


54 BACKPACKING
Backpacking Gear.
Pack Weight
How much your pack weighs depends on the length of the adventure
you have planned, the amount of food and equipment you must carry,
and your personal preferences. For comfort on the trail, a pack contain-
ing everything you need for a safe trek should tip the scale at no more
than 25 percent of your body’s weight. If your pack weighs less, so much
the better. If your pack weighs more, here are some tips for lightening
your pack without compromising your health or safety.
1. Do a shakedown before every trip to “shake out” everything you
won’t need.
2. Divide group gear so that each person carries a fair share.
3. Gradually replace your heavy equipment and clothing with lighter
items. For example, a standard flashlight with C batteries can weigh a
pound or more, while a modern LED headlight weighs only ounces.
4. Choose lightweight hiking boots over stiff, heavy footwear.
5. Prepare one-pot meals featuring pasta, powdered sauce mixes, and
other ingredients that are dry, easy to pack, and not very heavy.
6. Match cookware with menus. A couple of lightweight pots with lids
may be all you need.
7. Get used to your hiking clothes. Wearing the same outfit three or four
days in a row can save a lot of space and weight, and nobody in the
backcountry is going to mind.
8. Share personal items. One small tube of toothpaste is probably
enough for everybody.
9. Carefully consider anything that is not
essential. Books, binoculars, camera
tripods, and other items can enrich a
trek, but remember that you will have
their weight on your back every step
of the way.
10. Review a list of all your gear and provi-
sions when you get home. See if there
is anything you can do without the
next time.


.Backpacking Gear
Prehike Inspection
A day or two before you depart on a backpacking trip, spread
out all the equipment, clothing, and provisions you and your
group intend to take. It’s the moment of truth. Consider each
item carefully. Are there some items laid
out that are not absolutely necessary?
If so, put them in a pile you will leave
at home. Figure out how you will
divide up the food and group
equipment you will be taking.
Everyone should share the
responsibility of carrying the
group’s equipment. Check off
each item on your list of food
and gear, and be sure you have
all the essentials. Take a last
look through the pile of
nonessentials. Some items
may make your trip more
pleasant, but decide
whether they are worth
the extra weight.
Keep your
pocketknife,
map and compass,
bandanna, and
other small items
you will use often
in the pockets
of your pants and
shirt, where you
can reach
them easily.


56 BACKPACKING
Backpacking Gear.
Loading and Hoisting Your Pack
Once you have decided what to take and what to leave
behind, it is time to see if it all fits in your pack. Loading a
backpack is something of an art. Equipment you won’t
need until you make camp can go deep in your pack.
Rain gear, your first-aid kit, a sweater, dry socks, and
your lunch should ride just under the main flap.
Use the outside pockets of your pack to carry your
water bottle, sun and insect protection, and trail
snacks. Put fuel bottles or cylinders in an outside
pocket, isolated from the rest of your supplies.
Place your sleeping bag low in your pack
(some packs have a special pocket for it) and
away from smellable items so you don’t attract
animals while you sleep. Keep heavy items above
your sleeping bag and close to your spine. Heavy
items often include the group’s food and personal
water supply (hydration pack). Arrange the remaining
gear and provisions so that the pack’s center of gravity
is high and close to your back.


BACKPACKING 57
.Backpacking Gear
To hoist your pack, grasp both shoulder straps, lift your
pack waist high, and rest the bottom of the pack on your thigh.
Slip an arm through a shoulder strap and smoothly swing the
pack onto your back, easing your other arm through the
remaining strap. Lean forward at the waist to hoist your pack
into position. Buckle the waist belt and adjust the shoulder
straps so that most of the weight rides on your hips.





BACKPACKING 59
.Leave No Trace Backpacking
Leave No Trace
Backpacking
Caring for the environment is an important responsibility of
every backpacker. The principles of Leave No Trace can help
you live up to that responsibility and enjoy the outdoors fully
by knowing that you are respecting the environment.
Leave No Trace Principles
As you and your group plan your adventure,
ask yourselves how you can follow each of
the Leave No Trace guidelines. In addition to
adhering to no-trace principles, you should
also hike and backpack with sustainability
in mind. The goal should be to leave mini-
mal impact on the surroundings not only
for the next group of backpackers but also
for generations to come.
Plan Ahead and Prepare
Contact the management personnel of the area you
intend to visit or the Leave No Trace Center for Outdoor
Ethics (see the resources section for contact information).
Explain the trek you have in mind and ask how you can best
implement Leave No Trace. Here are some general guidelines.
• Know the regulations and special concerns for the area
you will visit.
• Prepare for extreme weather, hazards, and emergencies.
• Schedule your trip to avoid times of high use.
• Whenever possible, visit the backcountry in small groups.


60 BACKPACKING
Leave No Trace Backpacking.
Travel and Camp on Durable Surfaces
Stay on existing pathways and in designated campsites to help
protect the surrounding landscape from being trampled, eroded,
and compacted.
• In popular areas, seek durable surfaces (established trails
and campsites, rock, gravel, dry grasses, snow).
• Protect shoreline vegetation; camp at least 200 feet (about 70
adult paces) from lakes and streams.
• Walk single file in the
middle of the trail, even
if it is wet or muddy.
• Keep campsites
small and conduct
activities in areas
where vegetation
is absent.
In pristine areas,
disperse use
to prevent the
creation of new
campsites and
trails. Avoid
places where
impacts are
just beginning.


BACKPACKING 61
.Leave No Trace Backpacking
Dispose of Waste Properly
Remember this solid guideline: Pack it in, pack it out.
Make it easier on yourself by limiting the amount of
potential trash you take. Refine your food lists so that
most of your provisions will be consumed. Before you
leave a campsite or rest area, make a thorough inspec-
tion for litter and spilled foods.
It is obvious that packing out litter helps keep the back-
country pristine, but you also need to be conscious of other
sources of waste such as the water you use to wash your face,
your clothes, or the dishes. Select a wash site at least 200 feet
from any streams, lakes, or other sources of water. Using a
strainer or sieve, strain any food particles out of dishwater and
put the particles in a plastic bag along with other bits of left-
over food. Pack the bag out. Dispose of the water by dispersing
it over a wide area.
Especially important is the disposal of human waste.
If toilet facilities are available, use them. Otherwise, urinate
away from trails, camps, and other gathering places. Choose
rocks or bare ground; animals may strip vegetation in their
efforts to consume the salts left by concentrations of urine.
Dispose of solid waste by digging a cathole or packing out the
waste. Check with the land management agency for the area
you will visit to find out the preferred method.
Water used for
personal washing
or for laundry
does not need to
be strained.


62 BACKPACKING
Leave No Trace Backpacking.
To dig a cathole, choose a remote spot at least 200 feet
(about 70 adult paces) from camps, trails, water, and dry
gullies. With a trowel, dig a hole 6 to 8 inches deep in
the topsoil. Take care of business, cover the hole with
soil, and disguise the site with leaves or other ground
cover. Organic material in the topsoil will slowly break
down the waste, making it harmless.
If you are required to pack out solid waste, bring
a supply of pack-it-out bags designed for use in
wilderness areas. These tear- and puncture-resistant
bags contain chemicals designed to neutralize odors.
Check the manufacturer’s instructions for details about
safe disposal of the bags. (See the resources section for
product information.)
Keep Healthy While Backpacking
Always start a trip with clean utensils, pocketknives, and kitchen gear.
To help prevent the spread of germs, all members of a group should
have and use their own water bottles and eating utensils.
To keep cooking and eating gear clean and
sanitary, set up a dishwashing system. Fill a wash pot
with hot water and add a few drops of biodegradable
soap. Wash pots and utensils and rinse them in a pot
of cold water that contains a few drops of bleach or a
sanitizing tablet and then in a pot of clear hot water.
Allow clean dishes and pots to air dry.
Set out a small plastic pump bottle of alcohol-
based, waterless cleanser to use before handling food
or upon returning from a latrine or cathole. A small
dab rubbed on the hands will kill most harmful germs
and then evaporate, leaving hands dry without the
need of a towel.
CATHOLE
MINERAL SOIL
ORGANIC TOPSOIL
WATER SOURCE • TRAIL • CAMPSITE 200+ FEET


BACKPACKING 63
.Leave No Trace Backpacking
Leave What You Find
A cluster of flowers beside an alpine trail. Bricks from a historic
homestead. A bird’s nest on a low bush. Every backpacking trip
will bring with it a new discovery to see and enjoy. Here are
some reasons why you should leave what you find.
• Future backcountry visitors will have the excitement of
discovering for themselves what you have found.
• Plant and wildlife environments will not
be harmed. Leave rocks and other
natural objects as you find them.
Avoid introducing or transport-
ing nonnative species.
• Archaeological, cultural,
and historic structures and
artifacts preserve a record
of America’s past; some
are sacred to Native
Americans. Observe, but
do not touch or take.
Indian paintbrush


Leave No Trace Backpacking.
Minimize Campfire Impacts
Today’s backpackers have many options for cooking without an
open fire and for staying warm. They also have a good under-
standing of when a campfire can be kindled and when a fire
could scar the land. In many areas, fires are discouraged or
prohibited, or are allowed by permit only. If you must make
a campfire, observe these guidelines.
• Use established fire rings, fire pans, or mound fires.
• Keep fires small. Use only sticks from the ground that can be
broken by hand.
• Burn all wood and coals to ash, make sure the ashes are cold
out, then scatter the cool ashes.
Respect Wildlife
Sharing the outdoors with wildlife is one of the great pleasures of
backpacking. Respect wildlife by always traveling quietly (except
in grizzly bear habitat) and observing animals from a distance.
You are too close if an animal changes its activities because of
your actions. Always avoid wildlife when they are mating,
nesting, or raising young, and during other sensitive times.
Never feed animals. Doing
so damages their health, alters
natural behaviors, and exposes
them to predators and other
dangers. Store all your food
and trash securely.
Round-tailed
horned lizard
64 BACKPACKING


BACKPACKING 65
.Leave No Trace Backpacking
Be Considerate of Other Visitors
Extending courtesy to other outdoor visitors is a natural habit
of backpackers. Speak softly and avoid unnecessary noise.
Leave radios and electronic devices at home. If you carry a
mobile telephone for emergency communication, turn it off and
stow it in your pack until you need it. Appreciate the company
of those you meet on the trail and at campsites near yours, but
respect their desire for quiet and solitude.
Observe proper trail etiquette. If you encounter horseback
riders or pack animals, stop and ask the lead rider what you
should do. The lead rider will probably ask you to step a few
paces downhill from the trail and stand quietly while the
animals pass. If you encounter other hikers or backpackers
going uphill when you are going downhill, give them the right-
of-way. Step aside on a rock or a log to minimize your impact.
Service Project
Aside from your commitment to Leave No Trace, find out what
else you can do to help preserve the wilderness. Contact land
managers and conservation organizations. Your crew might help
repair or maintain existing trails, build a new trail, clean water
bars and other drainage structures, or clear fallen logs from
backcountry routes.
When you arrange to work on a service project, find out
from land managers what tools or equipment you will need.
You may be able to trek to a work site where equipment is
already in place. Camping near and
taking part for several days in a
backcountry conservation project
will involve hard work, but it will
be tremendously rewarding.
Including service projects
as a regular part of your outdoor
adventures can lead to a long-term
partnership with land managers. As
they become acquainted with you
and learn of your commitment and
skills, they are likely to put more
effort into matching your group with
interesting projects that will allow
you to make a real difference.
If possible, camp
away from trails
and other visitors.
Minimize the
likelihood that
other people will
see you and
your camp by
choosing earth-
toned clothing,
equipment,
and tents.
Control pets at
all times, or leave
them at home.





BACKPACKING 67
.Finding Your Way
Finding Your Way
Even if you trek along well-marked trails, you should master
the use of navigational tools. In poor weather, storms can
obscure familiar landmarks and destroy trail signs. A section of
the path could be closed, rerouted, or washed out. No problem.
With a map and compass or a map and GPS receiver and the
right knowledge, you can find out where you are and the best
way to reach your destination.
Topographic Maps
Maps are written records of places. Topographic maps show the
shape of the terrain. The most useful maps for backpackers are
those based upon data prepared by the U.S. Geological Survey of
the Department of the Interior. Sporting goods stores often carry
topographic maps. For a fee, maps for many parts of the country
can be downloaded from internet sites (with a parent or
guardian’s permission) or ordered directly from the USGS. (See
the resources section for ordering information.)


68 BACKPACKING
The margins of a USGS map contain a wealth of useful
information. For example, the date printed in a map’s margin
indicates the year the map was created or most recently revised.
The newer a map, the more accurately it will portray the cur-
rent appearance of an area. Other useful information you will
find in the margins include details on the map’s scale, contour
intervals, and the boundaries of the area covered on the map.
Cartographers use different colors to indicate the various
landscape features of a topographic map.
• Blue indicates aquatic features—streams, lakes, oceans,
and wetlands. Contour lines on glaciers and permanent
snowfields also are blue. Aquatic landmarks such as rivers
and lakes are further denoted by having their names printed
in italics.
• Green indicates vegetation, usually forests. The darker the
green, the denser the vegetation.
• White signifies land such as meadows and boulder fields
with little or no tall vegetation.
• Black designates human-made structures—buildings,
railroads, trails, etc. Names of geographical features are
always printed in black.
• Red indicates certain survey lines (township and range,
for instance) and highlights primary highways and other
significant constructed features.
• Purple overlays show revisions to a map that are based on
aerial photos but have not yet been fully verified in the field.
• Brown is reserved for contour lines and elevations.
Mapped, edited, and published by the Geological Survey
Control by USGS and USC&GS
Topography by photogrammetric methods from aerial
photographs taken 1972. Field checked 1973
Projection and 10,000-foot grid ticks: Colorado coordinate
system, south zone (Lambert conformal conic) 1000-meter
Universal Transverse Mercator grid ticks, zone 13, shown
in blue. 1927 North American datum
Where omitted, land lines have not been established
or are not shown because of insufficient data
COLORADO
QUADRANGLE LOCATION
MOUNTAIN VIEW CREST, COL.
SW/4 NEEDLE MOUNTAINS 15’ QUADRANGLE
N3730-W10737.5/7.5
1973
AMS 4459 II SW—SERIES V877


.Finding Your Way
A topographic map is a
two-dimensional model of the
three-dimensional world. The fun-
damental feature of a topographic
map is the contour line. Drawn
with brown ink, each contour line
represents an elevation above sea
level. The vertical difference
between adjacent contour lines is
indicated in the margin of a map
as that map’s contour interval—
anywhere from 10 feet to 200
feet, depending on the scale
of the map and the ruggedness
of the terrain.
Compasses
A baseplate compass is the most useful type of compass for
backcountry navigation. It consists of a magnetized needle
balanced inside a circular, rotating housing mounted atop a
baseplate. The plate is etched with a direction-of-travel arrow.
The floor of the compass housing is engraved with an
orienting arrow and, parallel to it, several north–south
orienting lines.
The circumference of the
housing is divided into direc-
tions—north, south, east, and
west—and further divided into
360 degrees. You will see that
0º coincides with north, 90º
with east, 180º with south,
270º with west, and 360º
is again north (0º and 360º
overlap as they close
the circle).
Contour lines that
are close together
indicate steep
areas. Contour
lines that are
farther apart
denote areas that
are less steep.
Maps with few
contour lines
signify relatively
flat terrain such
as a prairie
or wetland.
BASEPLATE
MAGNETIC
NEEDLE
BEZEL
ORIENTING
LINES
ORIENTING
ARROW
BEARING INDEX
DIRECTION-OF-TRAVEL
ARROW
MAGNIFYING GLASS
INDEX LINE
SCALES
The baseplate compass, a magnetic
needle within a 360-degree bezel that
rotates on a clear plastic base (allowing
maps to be read beneath it), provides a
convenient and accurate platform for
working with bearings.


70 BACKPACKING
Finding Your Way.
Orienting a Map
A map that is oriented is aligned with the topography it repre-
sents. Landscape features in the real world have the same
directional relationships to one another as they do on the map.
To orient your map, hold the compass on the map and
rotate the compass housing until N (360 degrees) touches the
direction-of-travel arrow. Place the edge of the compass along-
side the arrow in the map’s margin that points toward magnetic
north. (The direction-of-travel arrow on the compass will be
pointing toward the top of the map.) Turn the map and com-
pass as a unit until the compass needle lies directly over the
compass-housing arrow. (The red end of the needle should
always point toward the red end of the compass-housing
arrow.) The map is now oriented.
Declination
Most maps are drawn with the North Pole as the controlling reference
point. A compass needle is pulled toward magnetic north, though, not the
true north of the North Pole. The difference between a true north–south
line and the direction that the compass needle points is called declination.
Two arrows in the margin of a map, one pointing toward true north and
the other pointing toward magnetic north, illustrate the declination of a
particular map.


BACKPACKING 71
.Finding Your Way
Identifying Landmarks
Have you ever seen a distant ridge of mountains and wondered
what each summit is called? With a compass and a sharp eye,
you can identify any landmark prominent enough to appear on
your map.
To identify landmarks, hold the compass in the palm
of your hand, and point the direction-of-travel arrow on
the baseplate at a mountaintop, lake, or other landmark
feature you wish to identify. Turn the compass housing until the
magnetic needle is inside the compass housing arrow. This will
give you the bearing from your position to the landmark.
Next, place the compass on your oriented map with the
long edge of the baseplate touching the spot that represents
your present location. Rotate the entire compass around that
point on the map until the magnetic needle is again inside the
compass-housing arrow. Beginning from the map symbol for
your location, draw an actual or imaginary line away from
yourself along the edge of the baseplate. The line should
intersect the point on the map representing the landmark.
Finding Your Location
If you are not sure where you are, but you can see several
landmarks that are indicated on your map, it is easy to
determine your location. First, point the direction-of-travel
arrow on your compass at one of the landmarks—a mountain-
top, a meadow, a building, etc. Holding the baseplate steady,
turn the compass housing until the magnetic needle is inside
the compass-housing arrow.
Taking a bearing is simply
measuring a direction
from one point on the
ground to another.
As you orient the map,
check the terrain around
you to ensure that it
matches what you see on
the map.
With a map and compass,
you can identify a landmark
that you can see from the
ground if you know where
you are on the map.


72 BACKPACKING
Finding Your Way.
Now place the compass on your oriented map with the
edge of the baseplate touching the symbol representing the
landmark. Rotate the entire compass around that point on the
map until the magnetic needle is again inside the compass-
housing arrow. Lightly pencil a line toward yourself from the
landmark symbol along the edge of the compass baseplate.
Find a second landmark and repeat the process of taking
a bearing, placing the compass on the map and drawing
lines toward yourself. The spot on the map at which the lines
intersect indicates where you are. Taking a reading on a third
landmark can increase the accuracy of your efforts.
Global Positioning System
Modern technology has provided backcountry travelers with
a powerful electronic means of navigation—the Global
Positioning System. A GPS receiver accurately calculates the
longitude and latitude of any spot on the globe by taking
bearings on satellites orbiting 12,000 miles above Earth.
Different receivers work differently, so if you use one,
you will have to study the manufacturer’s instructions and
then put in some time practicing. Once you learn to oper-
ate a GPS receiver, you can use it to identify precise loca-
tions, determine elevations above sea level, and plot the
path of a trek. Inputting this information will create a
history in the receiver that can be used if you need to
retrace your steps.
Electronic navigational instruments will surely
continue to improve in accuracy, versatility, and ease of
use. But just as having a calculator
does not eliminate the need to
know how to add and subtract, a
GPS receiver (especially one with
dead batteries) is no substitute for
being able to navigate the back-
country with traditional tools.
Develop confidence in your ability
to use maps and compasses and
then, if you wish, add to them
with a GPS receiver.


BACKPACKING 73
.Finding Your Way
Staying Found
Maps, compasses, and GPS
receivers will be of little help if
you don’t remember to use
them. One of the secrets of safe
backcountry hiking is the use
of thumbnail navigation.
This technique calls for your
constant awareness of your
position. You must carry a
topographic map where you
can easily refer to it, that is,
in your shirt or pants pocket
rather than in your pack.
As you hike, you should
continuously try to match
up features around you with
points on your map. Mark the points you identify on your map.
Not only will this prevent you from getting too far off your
route if you take a wrong turn, it will keep your map-reading
skills sharp. With a basic knowledge of route finding and the
use of thumbnail navigation, there is little chance of becoming
truly lost.
If you find you can’t determine your position, the best
thing to do is stop walking. Don’t panic. Sit down and relax.
Pull out your thumbnail navigation map and think about the
way you came. Discuss with your buddies how long it has been
since you passed a feature you identified on your map. With a
rough idea of your pace, you should be able to figure out how
far from this point you might be. Then you may be able to
determine your general position. Look around. Do you recog-
nize any landmarks? If you are on a trail, can you determine
which direction leads back to the road?
If you think you are lost, stay put. When you are late
returning to your camp or your home, the people with whom
you left a trip plan will initiate a search for you. In the mean-
time, make yourself and your companions comfortable. Erect
your tent or build a small shelter. If your shelter doesn’t provide
enough protection to keep you warm, build a small campfire.
If you have a whistle, a distress signal consisting of three short
blasts at intervals of about a minute can help a search party
find you. Above all, be patient.





BACKPACKING 75
.Backcountry Dining
Backcountry Dining
Food is fuel for the body. The harder your body works, the
more calories it burns and the more you need to eat. Careful
food selection should allow you to eat well with about 1 to 2
pounds of ingredients a day for each person. Decide at home
what to prepare for each camp meal, then bring ingredients for
each dish. For convenience, premeasure meal items and carry
them in plastic bags labeled with the name of the ingredient,
the dish, and the preparation instructions.
Shopping for Backpacking Food
Build your backpacking menus around simple,
nutritious ingredients.
Dry Foods. Nuts, pasta, biscuit mix, beans, rice, seeds,
powdered milk, and other dry foods form a large portion of a
backcountry diet. These ingredients are usually less expensive
when purchased in bulk and then repackaged for the trail.
Fresh Foods. If you don’t mind carrying the weight,
you can take fresh fruits and vegetables. They
won’t keep long without refrigeration, so use
them for meals during the first day or
two of a backpacking trip.
Your body stays
warm by burning
calories, so you
probably will need
more food while
on a winter hike
than a similar hike
during the summer.


76 BACKPACKING
Backcountry Dining.
Canned Foods. When the weight of your pack is a concern, be
very selective about which canned products, if any, you take.
Instead of small cans of tuna or boned chicken, take conve-
nient, lightweight pouches. If you must take cans, wash and
flatten them, and pack them out of the backcountry.
Convenience Foods. Every supermarket has convenience
foods that are ready to eat or quick to prepare. Those you
might want to include are pancake mixes, jerky, energy bars,
macaroni and cheese, or other mixes that require only the
addition of hot water.
Say Cheese!
Eaten by itself or used as a recipe ingredient, cheese is a fresh-food
favorite on the trail. Jack, cheddar, mozzarella, parmesan,
and other hard varieties of cheese will stay edible for
up to a week without refrigeration, especially if the
weather is cool. Cheese sealed in plastic when
purchased might also last longer if the airtight
wrapping is left unopened. If a layer of mold
appears on a piece of cheese, cut it away and
use the unaffected portion underneath.
Convenience foods


BACKPACKING 77
.Backcountry Dining
Dehydrated Foods. Dehydrating removes most of the moisture
from a food item. The result is a product that weighs ounces
rather than pounds and that takes up less space in your pack.
The serving sizes listed on many prepackaged foods are
optimistic—a freeze-dried meal for four may, in fact,
be just enough to feed two hungry backpackers.
Seasoning Kits. Seasonings enhance your meals by bringing
variety and interest to even the most ordinary recipes. Small
plastic bags are good seasoning containers, as are thoroughly
cleaned plastic aspirin bottles with tight lids. Label containers
with the name of the seasoning. A basic kit might contain salt,
black pepper, garlic powder, onion flakes, basil, and chili
powder. Add others if you wish.
Sage Oregano
Chives Salt Black pepper Onion flakes
Thyme


78 BACKPACKING
Backcountry Dining.
Repackaging Food
Grocery store foods often come sealed in a lot of packaging, most of
which is useless in the backcountry. Here is how to eliminate excess
weight and trash as you organize food for a trek.
Start a pile of food supplies for each meal you will prepare during a
trek. Measure the amount of each ingredient that a recipe calls for and put
it into a plastic bag. For example, suppose you want to make tuna-rice
casserole as a main course. To feed yourself and three companions, you
will need 2 cups of white rice, two packets of gravy mix, two cans of tuna,
and 3 ounces of dehydrated vegetables.
Measure the rice into a bag and the vegetables into another, then
stow them in a larger bag along with the gravy packets and cans of tuna.
Write the cooking instructions on a slip of paper and include that in the
bag, too. Close the bag and label it to identify the meal it contains.
Camp supply stores sell refillable squeeze tubes and plastic jars with
screw-on lids for carrying peanut butter, jelly, margarine, honey, and other
messy foods. Guard against leakage by carrying each jar or squeeze tube
in its own plastic bag.


BACKPACKING 79
.Backcountry Dining
Preparing Meals in the Backcountry
Breakfast. A good breakfast gives you the
energy you need to last you through the morning.
Include something to drink, some fruit (fresh or
dried), and a main course. If you are eager to get
out of camp early, a bowl of granola with nuts,
fruit, and some reconstituted dry milk can hit
the spot. On more leisurely mornings you might
prepare hot cereal, pancakes, or scrambled eggs.
Lunch. Plan lunches that require little preparation. Bagels,
pita bread, and tortillas are filling and won’t get too squished
in your pack. Round out a lunch menu with peanut butter
or cheese. For dessert, have some fresh fruit or dip into a
bag of trail mix.
Dinner. After you have set up camp at the end of the day, you
have a chance to do some cooking and catch up on nutrients
your other meals might have lacked. A one-pot special is a
great way to make a simple, nutritious main course.
Before you leave
on your trek,
familiarize
yourself with
cooking times
and preparation
methods for the
foods you are
bringing. Take
simple instructions
to use when you
are ready to
start cooking.
Eggs will stay fresh for a few days without refrigeration.
Pack a few in an empty cardboard potato chip tube;
separate and cushion them with loosely wadded news-
paper. Many camping stores carry powdered eggs.


80 BACKPACKING
Backcountry Dining.
One-Pot Specials
To prepare a one-pot main course, combine one ingredient from
each column in the chart below in proportions appropriate for
the number of people in your cooking group. Feel free to use
more than one item from the Extras column.
Think about the preparation times for each ingredient to
determine the order in which you will add the items. Dried
vegetables, for example, may require presoaking before being
added to the pot, and some sauce mixes dissolve more easily in
cold water than in hot. Don’t limit yourself to the items listed in
the chart. View them as a starting point and feel free to experi-
ment. For more ideas, check out some of the backcountry cook-
ing books listed in the resources section.
Pastas
and Grains
Noodles,
macaroni,
rice (white or
instant works
best), bulgur,
couscous
1
Sauces
Soup mixes,
gravy mixes,
pasta sauce
mixes
2
Proteins
Canned or
pouch chicken
or tuna (one
can or pouch
should feed
two people),
jerky (beef,
turkey), dried
chipped beef,
textured vege-
table protein
(a lightweight
meat substitute
that is easy
to pack)
3
Extras
Cheese, nuts,
coconut, raisins,
sunflower
seeds, bacon
bits, dried veg-
etables, fresh
or dehydrated
fruit, fresh or
dried potatoes,
seasonings
from your
seasonings kit,
margarine
4
Snacks are
important in
backcountry
nutrition. Fruit,
cheese, and trail
mix help maintain
your energy
between meals.
Make your own
mix by combining
nuts, raisins, and
other dried fruit
in a plastic bag.


BACKPACKING 81
.Backcountry Dining
Safe Drinking Water
The safest water to use on a backpacking trip is water you
have carried from home. Always start out with two or more
full (one-liter) water bottles. Replenish your supply from tested
public systems whenever you can. On longer adventures,
streams, lakes, springs, and snowfields are potential sources
of water. Treat—by boiling, chemical treatment, or filtering—
all water you get in the wild before drinking it, no matter
how clean it appears to be. Even a seemingly crystal-clear
mountain stream may contain invisible microorganisms
such as protozoa, bacteria, and viruses that can cause
diarrhea, nausea, and vomiting.
Boiling. The surest means of making your water safer is to heat
it to boiling. If water used for food preparation comes to a
boil at least once, it requires no further treatment. Boiling is
simple to do and completely effective in killing microorganisms.
However, it requires fuel and a campfire or a stove, and it takes
time for the water to boil and then cool enough for use as
drinking water.
To keep from
getting dehydrated
and risking a heat
reaction, drink
plenty of water
throughout the
day, even if you
don’t feel thirsty.


82 BACKPACKING
Backcountry Dining.
Chemical Treatment. Chemical treatment is simple to use,
inexpensive, lightweight, and convenient. Treatment with tab-
lets containing iodine, chlorine, or other chemicals works
against waterborne viruses and bacteria. Be sure to read the
label to find out how effective the tablets are against protozoa
such as Cryptosporidium and Giardia.
If you treat your water with chemical tablets, you will need
to wait for some time before the water is ready to drink.
Tablets also leave a chemical taste in the water, and they
lose their potency over time. If you dip your
bottle into a stream to obtain water for
chemical treatment, be sure to treat the
lid and seams by inverting the bot-
tle and opening it slightly so the
treated water runs over those
areas, minimizing the potential
transfer of harmful bacteria.
Filtering. Most filters are simple
handheld pumps used to force
water through a screen with
pores so small that bacteria and
protozoa cannot get through.
The finer the screen, the more
effective the filter. Information
provided with new filters describes how to use and
maintain them and the degree of filtration they can provide.
Filters are effective against protozoa and bacteria;
some filters also may be equipped to kill viruses. Filters come
in a range of capacities and designs to match the needs of
groups of various sizes and the duration of their journeys.
Filters, while an excellent choice for longer journeys, can be
expensive. In addition, filtering elements must be cleaned or
replaced frequently, and the pump mechanisms of filters
may malfunction.
Allow muddy water to stand in a container until the silt
settles to the bottom. Dip the clear water off the top
and remove any remaining organic debris by straining
the water through a bandanna into a clean container.
Treat the water with a filter or chemical tablets or by
bringing it to a boil.
Water used to
wash dishes does
not need to be
treated. Allow
everything to air
dry before using
it again. Most
of the harmful
microorganisms
that exist in water
cannot survive in
a dry environment.
Water
treatment
device


.Backcountry Dining
Backcountry Food Handling and Storage
Proper handling and care of the food you bring on your trek is
important for your health. To stay healthy during your wilder-
ness adventure, eat perishable foods such as eggs and fresh
fruits and vegetables within the first days of your trip. Plan
most of your meals around ingredients that do not need refrig-
eration. Lastly, accurately estimate portion sizes to minimize
leftovers that could spoil.
Always stow your food beyond the reach of wildlife.
Get all the “smellables” out of your tent and pack whenever
you will be away from camp or are bedding down for the night.
Smellables include all food items, garbage, soap, shampoo,
deodorant, lotions, toothbrushes and toothpaste, sunscreen,
and lip balm.
Insect repellent,
first-aid kits, cloth-
ing soiled with food,
and anything else
that has an odor
can be considered
a smellable.
Don’t Feed the Bears!
To keep your food out of reach of
wildlife, the most reliable method
is a hard-shell storage canister. This
approach demands careful planning to
ensure that provisions will fit inside.
These days, bears in many areas
are wise to the bear bag method. If you
must use this method, find a tree with
a sturdy horizontal branch about 20 feet
above the ground. Put a couple of
handfuls of soil in a bandanna or plas-
tic bag and secure it to the end of a
50-foot length of nylon parachute cord. Toss the weight over the branch.
Stash provisions equally between two waterproof stuff sacks or burlap bear
bags, each lined with a heavy-duty plastic trash bag. Twist both closed.
Secure the first bag to one end of the cord using a clove hitch. Raise
the bag up high. Tie the cord’s free end to the second bag; secure
the loose end so that it does not dangle, and lift the bag
overhead. Use a stick or hiking staff to shove the bags at
least 12 feet off the ground. The bags will counterbalance
one another and keep your provisions safe. To retrieve the
bags, use a stick to push one bag even higher,
causing the other to come down within your reach.





.Expect the Unexpected
Expect the Unexpected
As you make your way up the trail, remain alert to conditions
around you. By thinking about the “what ifs” of your surround-
ings, you can avoid or minimize risky situations. By knowing
what to do in certain situations, you can keep yourself and
others safe by taking the right actions at the right time. It may
be impossible to anticipate every backcountry risk, but a few
of the more common risks are described below.
Beware of Wildlife
Be especially aware of the kinds of predatory animals
you might meet during your adventures. Wolves,
coyotes, and cougars (or panthers and pumas) are
curious. If you happen upon such an animal, do not
approach the animal, run, or play dead. Face the
creature and slowly retreat. Make yourself as “big”
as possible by waving your arms and clothing above
your head. Make a lot of noise, and
throw rocks and sticks. If you
encounter a bear, do not run or
throw anything at the bear. Stay
calm, back away, and avoid eye
contact with the bear. Remember,
no matter what kind of wild animal,
give all wildlife a wide berth—
especially a mother and her offspring.
Your trip plan
and emergency
response plan will
serve as guidelines
for minimizing risk
and for getting out
of difficulties when
they arise.
North American cougar


86 BACKPACKING
Expect the Unexpected.
Storms. Changing weather conditions is a
common risk encountered by backpackers.
To avoid getting caught in a storm, keep
your eye on the sky. Changes in the clouds,
the temperature, and the direction of the
wind can all signal an approaching storm.
By anticipating bad weather, you will
have time to pull on your rain gear or perhaps
even to reach a campsite and put up your tent.
If there is lightning in the area, descend from
high and open places and take cover at lower
elevations and in groves of trees. Watch out
for everyone in your crew. If some members
of your crew are having a hard time coping
with the weather, help them get sheltered,
dry, and comfortable.
See the
“Minimizing Risk”
chapter for more
about staying
safe during
a thunderstorm.


BACKPACKING 87
.Expect the Unexpected
Stream Crossings. Crossing a stream where a bridge has
washed out or where no bridge has ever been built is a
potential danger that you should consider carefully before
attempting. Take a few minutes to study the situation.
Look downstream. Should you fall into the water, could
you be swept into a rapids or over a falls? If so, go no
farther. Be smart and turn back.
If you decide to cross, consider crossing on logs. If a log
is wide, dry, and not far above the water, you might feel com-
fortable walking on top of it. You might also straddle it as you
would a horse and scoot your way across the stream.
Many streams contain scattered rocks that you can use as
stepping stones. However, you must still exercise caution. Plan
your route before you leave shore, deciding which stones you
will use. Try to step on the center of large rocks, which are
more stable than small ones. Beware of loose, mossy rocks that
may be slippery.
Wading also is an option, but it requires extra caution.
Wade only when a stream is shallow or very calm. Protect your
feet by removing your boots and socks and putting on a pair of
sneakers. Dry your feet thoroughly when you reach the other
side, dump water from your sneakers, and put your boots back
on with dry socks.
If a stream is swift or more than knee deep, wading can
become difficult. During the spring thaw when the sun is melt-
ing snow at the headwaters, a stream will be most dangerous in
the afternoon but often quite low at dawn. Be patient enough
to wait for safe conditions and wise enough not to challenge a
stream that is simply too turbulent.
Before attempting any
crossing, unbuckle the
waist belt and loosen
the shoulder straps of
your pack. That way if
you do fall, you can
get away from your
pack before it gets
waterlogged and pulls
you under the water.


88 BACKPACKING
Expect the Unexpected.
Avalanche Dangers. If your group will be traveling in snow
country, protect yourselves by knowing where, how, and
when an avalanche is likely to occur. An avalanche happens
when snow breaks loose on a slope or when a cornice of
snow collapses and tumbles down, taking with it rocks,
tree branches, and other debris. In springtime, wet avalanches
can occur in consolidated snowpacks. If you are out late in
the day, know that warmer temperatures increase the chance
of a wet avalanche.
Hiking Sticks and Trekking Poles
Hiking sticks or trekking poles can help you keep your
balance when crossing streams. In addition, they are
good for poking around in holes or between rocks to
check for snakes, for maintaining a rhythm while you
hike, and for absorbing impact and reducing wear and
tear on your knees as you hike downhill.
Be aware of the
possible impact
the tips of trekking
poles may have
on the trail.
Adjustable
trekking poles


BACKPACKING 89
.Expect the Unexpected
Keep an eye out for these signs of danger.
• Steep terrain—avalanches usually happen on slopes of 40 to
60 degrees.
• Accumulations of new snow, especially during or after a
heavy winter storm.
• Variations in the quality of snow layers, especially if one or
more layers are airy, granular, or in slabs.
• Sounds that suggest cracking or settling of the snowpack.
If you see an avalanche approaching and cannot escape its
path, abandon your backpack. When the snow hits, move your
arms and legs in a swimming motion to keep yourself upright.
Try to keep your head above the surface. As the avalanche
settles, push away any accumulation of snow from your face
to form an air pocket that will allow you to breathe.
Should others in your party be caught in an avalanche,
keep your eye on them as long as you can. Note the exact
place you saw them last. Once the avalanche has settled,
listen for their voices. Search quickly. Use anything you can
as a shovel to free them, then treat for shock, hypothermia,
and any injuries. (See the First Aid merit badge pamphlet for
more information about first-aid techniques.)


Expect the Unexpected.
Trek Journal
While it is important to be alert to potential dangers,
don’t forget to enjoy your time outdoors. Unexpected
pleasures await as well. You might discover a field of
ripe blackberries, a hidden waterfall, or a massive
beaver dam.
A good way to document the highlights of your
backcountry trip is to keep a trek journal or logbook.
Use a loose-leaf notebook, blank journal, or scrapbook.
Include a description of your route and a list of your
companions. Write a paragraph or two each day about
the highlights of that day’s adventure. Note when
things went particularly well, and when things didn’t go
quite as planned. Include your thoughts on how you
might avoid similar mishaps the next time.
A journal is especially valuable on a service project.
Record each day’s tasks and your progress. You can
include before and after photographs that clearly
show the value of the work
your crew completed. Provide
a copy of that portion of your
journal to the land manag-
ers. As your trek journal
fills over the years, you
will have a valuable
record of your back-
packing adventures.


BACKPACKING 91
.Expect the Unexpected
You can transcribe your journal onto a computer,
including digital photos and perhaps even audio and
video clips. With your parent or guardian’s permission,
you might even create a website or use social media to
share your adventure with your backpacking buddies.





BACKPACKING 93
.Backpacking Resources
Backpacking Resources
Scouting Literature
Scouts BSA handbooks; Basic Illustrated
Backpacking; Be Prepared Backpacking
and Hiking; Conservation Handbook;
Fieldbook; Bird Study, Camping,
Canoeing, Climbing, Cooking, Emergency
Preparedness, First Aid, Fish and Wildlife
Management, Fishing, Fly-Fishing,
Geocaching, Hiking, Kayaking, Mammal
Study, Nature, Orienteering, Personal
Fitness, Reptile and Amphibian Study,
Search and Rescue, Sustainability,
Weather, Whitewater, and Wilderness
Survival merit badge pamphlets
Books
Berger, Karen. Backpacking and Hiking.
DK Adult, 2005.
Berger, Karen. Hiking Light Handbook.
The Mountaineers Books, 2004.
Birkby, Robert. Lightly on the Land:
The SCA Trail Building and
Maintenance Manual, 2nd ed.
The Mountaineers Books, 2006.
Bohmrich, Craig. The Adventurer’s
Guide to Enjoyable Backpacking.
Elevation Creations, 2015.
Conners, Christine, and Tim Conners.
Lipsmackin’ Backpackin’:
Lightweight Trail-Tested Recipes
for Backcountry Trips, Falcon, 2018.
Drury, Jack, and Eric Holmlund.
The Camper’s Guide to
Outdoor Pursuits: Finding Safe,
Nature-Friendly, and Comfortable
Passage Through Wild Places.
Sagamore Publishing, 1996.
Forgey, William. Basic Illustrated:
Wilderness First Aid.
Falcon Guides, 2025.
Foster, Steven, and Roger Caras.
A Field Guide to Venomous
Animals and Poisonous Plants.
Houghton Mifflin, 1998.
Grubbs, Bruce. Desert Sense. The
Mountaineers Books, 2005.
Hall, Adrienne. The Essential
Backpacker: A Complete Guide
for the Foot Traveler. Ragged
Mountain Press, 2000.
Hampton, Bruce, and David Cole.
NOLS Soft Paths: Enjoying the
Wilderness Without Harming It,
4th ed. Stackpole Books, 2011.
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


94 BACKPACKING
Backpacking Resources.
Logue, Victoria. Hiking and
Backpacking: Essential Skills,
Equipment, and Safety, 2nd ed.
Menasha Ridge Press, 2004.
Marsh, Laurie Ann. Fork in the Trail:
Mouthwatering Meals and Tempting
Treats for the Backcountry.
Wilderness Press, 2007.
McGivney, Annette. Leave No Trace:
A Guide to the New Wilderness
Etiquette, 2nd ed. The Mountaineers
Books, 2003.
O’Bannon, Allen. Allen and Mike’s
Really Cool Backpackin’ Book:
Traveling and Camping Skills
for a Wilderness Environment!
Falcon, 2001.
Pearson, Claudia, ed. NOLS Cookery,
6th ed. Stackpole Books, 2017.
Petzoldt, Paul. The New Wilderness
Handbook. Norton, 1984.
Robbins, Michael W. The Hiking
Companion. Storey Publishing,
LLC, 2014.
Schimelpfenig, Tody. NOLS Wilderness
Medicine. Stackpole Books, 2021.
Shillington, Ben, and Rebecca
Sandiford. Winter Backpacking: Your
Guide to Safe and Warm Winter
Camping and Day Trips.
Heliconia Press, 2009.
Skurka, Andrew. The Ultimate Hiker’s
Gear Guide: Tools and Techniques to
Hit the Trail. National Geographic
Society, 2017.
Tilton, Buck, and Roberto Sabas.
Outdoor Safety Handbook. Stackpole
Books, 2005.
Townsend, Chris. The Backpacker’s
Handbook, 4th ed. Ragged Mountain
Press, 2011.
Organizations and Websites
American Hiking Society
Toll-free telephone: 800-972-8608
americanhiking.org
Bureau of Land Management
Telephone: 202-208-3801
blm.gov
Leave No Trace Center for
Outdoor Ethics
Toll-free telephone: 800-332-4100
lnt.org
National Park Service
1849 C Street NW
Washington, DC 20240
Telephone: 202-208-6843
nps.gov
Recreation.gov
recreation.gov
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
1849 C St. NW
Washington, DC 20240-0001
Toll-free telephone: 800-344-9453
fws.gov
U.S. Forest Service
1400 Independence Ave. SW
Washington, DC 20250-1111
Toll-free telephone: 800-832-1355
fs.usda.gov
U.S. Geological Survey
Telephone: 703-648-5953
usgs.gov
Map store: store.usgs.gov


BACKPACKING 95
.Backpacking Resources
Periodicals
Backpacker magazine
backpacker.com
Scout Life magazine
scoutlife.org
The use of pack-it-out kits for human waste is becoming
more common at many outdoor recreational areas. In
fact, some areas require packing out human waste. If
the land management agency does not provide kits for
visitors and you must bring your own, you may want to
obtain a ready-made, commercial kit for ease and
sanitation purposes.
One popular brand that is readily available is the
Wag Bag®, manufactured by Cleanwaste. For more
information, visitcleanwaste.com (with your parent or
guardian’s permission). Another widely used line of
personal sanitation products is made by Restop®. Visit
restop.com for more information about
their products.
Restop® 1
®®
Wag Bag®


96 BACKPACKING
Backpacking Resources.
Acknowledgments
Scouting America is grateful to Ben
Lawhon, education director, Leave No
Trace Center for Outdoor Ethics, and
Jonathan Dorn, editor-in-chief,
Backpacker magazine, for their
expertise, time, and careful attention in
reviewing this pamphlet.
Scouting America is grateful to the
men and women serving on the
National Merit Badge Subcommittee for
the improvements made in updating
this pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration Credits
©2003 Texas Parks and Wildlife,
courtesy—page 28 (coral snake)
U.S. Department of Agriculture,
Agricultural Resource Service/
Scott Bauer, courtesy—page 27
(feeding and engorged ticks)
U.S. Geological Survey, courtesy—pages
68 (map) and 69 (contour lines)
All other photos are the property of
or are protected by Scouting America.
Dan Bryant—pages 40 (water bottles,
flashlight), 43 (backpack and
Scout), 50 (cooking gear), 53 (bowl
and spoon), and 62 (trowel)
Darrell Byers—page 90
John Fulton—page 56 (items to pack)
Daniel Giles—page 19
John McDearmon—all illustrations on
pages 62, 71, and 83
Christian Michaels—page 26
(ice pack)
Mary Oakes—page 18
Brian Payne—pages 17, 21, 37, 44, 47
(snow shelter), 55, 56 (Scout), 74,
78, 87, and 89
Brian Payne, Scouting America file, and
Julie Moore—page 33 (photo
illustration)
Randy Piland—pages 10, 12, 30, 57
(hoisting), 61 (straining water), 64
(campfire), 66, 72 (orienteering),
79 (Scouts), and 92
Scott Stenjem—page 80