Uncovering the Past
This module is designed to help you explore the wonders of archaeology.
1. Choose either A
, B, or C and complete all requirements.
A. Watch an episode or episodes (about one hour total) of a show about
anything related to archaeology. Then do the following:
1. Make a list of at least two questions or ideas from what you
watched.
2. Discuss two of the questions or ideas with your counselor.
B. Read (about one hour total) about anything related to archaeology.
Then do the following:
1. Make a list of at least two questions or ideas from what you
read.
2. Discuss two of the questions or ideas with your counselor.
Some examples include—but are not limited to—shows found on PBS (such asNOVA), Discovery Channel, Science Channel, National Geographic Channel, TED Talks
(online videos), and the History Channel. You may choose to watch a live
performance or movie at a planetarium or science museum instead of watching a
media production. You may watch online productions with your counselor’s approval
and under your parent’s or guardian’s supervision.
Books on many topics may be found at your local library. Examples of magazines


include but are not limited to
Odyssey, Kids Discover, National Geographic Kids,
Highlights, and
OWL or owlkids.com.
C. Do a combination of reading and watching (about one hour total)
about anything related to archaeology. Then do the following:
1. Make a list of at least two questions or ideas from what you
have read and watched.
2. Discuss two of the questions or ideas with your counselor.
2. Complete ONE adventure from the following list for your current rank
(Webelos or AOL) or complete option A or option B. (If you choose an
adventure, choose one you have not already earned.) Discuss with your
counselor what kind of science, technology, engineering, and math was used


in the adventure or option.
Webelos Scouts: Project Family
Option A: Some of the objects archaeologists find have been
preserved in various ways. Experiment with preserving a hot dog with
baking soda. Measure each dimension, then completely surround and
cover the hot dog in baking soda. Let sit in a safe place for seven days,
and measure again. Then cover the hot dog again, let it sit another
seven days, and measure it a third time. Make note of any changes in
size, shape, color, and other properties. Compare it to a hot dog that
has not been preserved. Discuss your experiment with your counselor.
Note: Do not eat the hot dog, and make sure to store your
experiment in a safe place and dispose of it properly when you are
done.


Useful Links:
https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/bring-science-home-
mummification/
http://www.sciencebuddies.org/science-fair-
projects/project_ideas/HumBio_p022.shtml
Option B: Use plaster of paris to create a “rock” mold at least half an
inch thick. Once it is set, create a dark surface like a patina on the rock,
possibly by using tempera paint. Use a carving tool, such as a screw or
push pin, to create one or more petroglyphs on your rock.
Search online for “plaster of paris petroglyphs” for instructions.
3. Explore. Do each of the following:
A. Look up the definition of the word
archaeology and discover what an
archaeologist does on a dig site, and what other activities are involved
in their work. Discuss it with your counselor.
Archaeology is the study of the human past by recovering and analyzing materials
that people left behind.
B. Discover the differences between physical remains, artifacts, and
ecofacts. Discuss with your counselor examples of each that
archaeologists can find for a prehistoric people group.
An
artifact is any object made by a human being. Usually, it refers to an object that
has cultural or historical interest.


An
ecofact, or
biofact, is any organic material that has been recovered and has
cultural or historical significance. This might be bones, animal horns, plants, and so
on. If the item has been manipulated or modified by humans, it becomes an artifact.
Physical remains are things left behind that were part of an animal—for example,
body parts or fossils of body parts.
C. Look around your home. Make a list of 10 artifacts from your home
that serve as clues to the way you live. Discuss what you discovered
with your counselor.
Artifacts could include anything found lying around the Scout’s home. A dog crate
could indicate the family has kept domesticated animals. A hammer could indicate
they know how to use tools. Ask the Scouts to pretend they have never seen a
particular item before, and what might they think it is.


4. Be an archaeologist! Choose A or B:
A. Much can be discovered about a group of people based on the items
they throw away. With a parent or guardian’s permission and guidance,
look through the items in a medium-sized trash can that contains at
least a few days’ worth of trash. Draw conclusions about the people in
that location and how they might live, based on what they throw away.
Determine which items are artifacts and which are ecofacts. Discuss
with your counselor how the relative age of the artifacts be estimated
based on their location in the trash can.
You may want to have the Scout wear disposable gloves, especially if the trash can
contains food remains. The Scout could lay out a plastic tarp or sheet on the floor,
then spread the trash out in order from what was at the top of the can to what was
at the bottom. Can the Scout tell when one day ended and the next began? Is it
possible to estimate how many days’ worth of trash there is? You could ask the
Scout to take pictures and bring them to discuss with you.
B. Create your own layers of artifacts and ecofacts. Gather some small
items that would show future archaeologists how you and your family
lived. Use a plastic bottle or glass jar as the vessel and Play-Doh sand,
dirt, etc., to form layers. Place the gathered items in different layers.
Think about which layers would hold the older items compared to
newer ones. Show it to your counselor, and discuss with your counselor
why you chose these items and what they would show archaeologists
about how you lived. Excavate your items when you’re done.
The lower the level, the older the item would be.
5. Visit a place that has items that have been excavated, such as a museum, dig


site, historical society, etc. Talk to someone who works there about the
displays. If you can’t visit in person, use resources in your school or local
library or on the internet (with your parent's or guardian’s permission and
guidance) to take a virtual visit. Discuss with your counselor what you saw,
how the archaeologists helped uncover those items, and what questions you
had.
6. Discuss with your counselor what you have learned about archaeology while
working on this award.
2022 January