SHOTGUN
SHOOTING
STEM-Based


SHOTGUN
SHOOTING
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


4 SHOTGUN SHOOTING
Requirements
1. Do the following:
a. Explain why BB and pellet air guns must always be
treated with the same respect as firearms.
b. Describe how you would react if a friend visiting your
home asked to see your or your family’s firearm(s).
c. Explain the need for and use and types of eye and
hearing protection.
d. Explain the main points of the laws for owning and
using guns in your community and state.
e. Explain how hunting is related to the wise use of
renewable wildlife resources.
f. Successfully complete a state hunter education course,
or obtain a copy of the hunting laws for your state, then
do the following.
(1) Explain the main points of hunting laws in your
state and give any special laws on the use of guns and
ammunition, and
(2) List the kinds of wildlife that can be legally hunted
in your state.
g. Explain to your counselor the proper hygienic
guidelines used in shooting.
h. Identify and explain three shotgun sports. Identify
places in your community where you could shoot
these sports and explain how you can join or be a
part of shooting sports activities.
i. Give your counselor a list of sources that you could
contact for information on firearms and their use.


SHOTGUN SHOOTING 5
2. Do ONE of the following options:
OPTION A—SHOTGUN SHOOTING
(Modern Shotshell Type)
a. Identify the principal parts of a shotgun, action types,
and how they function.
b. Identify and demonstrate the rules for safely handling
a shotgun.
c. Identify the parts of a shotgun shell and their functions.
d. Identify the various gauges of shotguns. Explain which
one you would pick for use and why.
e. Identify and explain the fundamentals of safely
shooting a shotgun. Explain what a misfire, hangfire,
and squib fire are, and explain the procedures to follow
in response to each.
f. Identify and explain each rule for safely shooting
a shotgun.
g. Demonstrate the knowledge, skills, and attitude necessary
to safely shoot moving targets, using the fundamentals of
shotgun shooting.
h. Identify the materials needed to clean a shotgun.
i. Demonstrate how to clean a shotgun properly and safely.
j. Discuss what points you would consider in selecting
a shotgun.
k. Shooting score required—Hit at least 12 out of 25 targets
(48 percent) in two 25-target groups. The two groups
need not be shot in consecutive order. A minimum of
50 shots must be fired.
Shooting skill rules:
• Targets may be thrown by a hand trap, manual mechani-
cal trap, or on any trap or skeet field. Note: If using a
hand trap or manual mechanical trap, the trap operator
should be at least 5 feet to the right and 3 feet to the rear
of the shooter. If throwing left-handed with a hand trap,
the trap operator should be at least 5 feet to the left and
3 feet to the rear of the shooter.


6 SHOTGUN SHOOTING
• All targets should be thrown at a reasonable speed and
in the same direction.
• Targets should be generally thrown so as to climb in
the air after leaving the trap.
• Scores may be fired at any time, either in formal
competition or in practice.
• Any gauge shotgun not exceeding 12 gauge may be used.
• Only commercially manufactured ammunition may
be used. Reloads may not be used in BSA shooting
sports programs.
• Shooters must shoot in rounds of 25. Rounds need not
be shot continuously or on the same day (the term
“round” refers to a single series of 25 shots).
• If using a trap field, shoot station 3 with traps set to
throw straightaway targets.
• If using a skeet field, shoot station 7 low house.
OPTION B—MUZZLELOADING SHOTGUN SHOOTING
a. Discuss a brief history of the development of the
muzzleloading shotgun.
b. Identify principal parts of percussion and flintlock
shotguns and discuss how they function.
c. Demonstrate and explain the rules of safely handling
a muzzleloading shotgun.
d. Identify the various grades of black powder and their
proper and safe use.
e. Discuss proper safety procedures pertaining to black
powder use and storage.
f. Discuss proper components of a load.
g. Identify proper procedures and accessories used for
safely loading a muzzleloading shotgun.


SHOTGUN SHOOTING 7
h. Demonstrate the knowledge, skills, and attitude
necessary to safely shoot a muzzleloading shotgun
on a range, including range procedures. Explain what
a misfire, hangfire, and squibfire are, and explain the
procedures to follow in response to each.
i. Shoot a moving target with a muzzleloading shotgun
using the five fundamentals of firing the shot.
j. Identify the materials needed to clean a muzzleloading
shotgun properly and safely.
k. Demonstrate how to clean to clear a muzzleloading shot-
gun’s failure to fire and explain or demonstrate proper
correction procedures.
l. Identify the causes of a muzzleloading shotgun’s
failure to fire and explain or demonstrate proper
preventive procedures.
m. Discuss what points you would consider in selecting
a muzzleloading shotgun.
n. Shooting score required—Hit at least 5 out of 15 targets
in each of two 15-target groups. The two groups need
not be shot in consecutive order. A minimum of 30 shots
must be fired. Shooting skill rules:
• Targets may be thrown by a hand trap, manual
mechanical trap, or on any trap or skeet field.
Note: If using a hand trap or manual mechanical
trap, the trap operator should be at least 5 feet to
the right and 3 feet to the rear of the shooter. If
throwing left-handed with a hand trap, the trap
operator should be at least 5 feet to the left and
3 feet to the rear of the shooter.
• All targets should be thrown at a reasonable speed
and in the same direction.
• Targets should be generally thrown so as to climb in
the air after leaving the trap.
• Scores may be fired at any time, either in formal
competition or in practice.


8 SHOTGUN SHOOTING
• Any gauge shotgun not exceeding 10 gauge may
be used.
• Standard clay targets customarily used for trap and
skeet are to be used.
• On a standard trap field, the shooter should be
positioned 8 yards behind the trap house. The trap
should be set to throw only straightaway targets.
• On a skeet field, use station 7 low house.


94 SHOTGUN SHOOTING
Shotgun Shooting Resources.
Shotgun Shooting Resources
Scouting Literature
Environmental Science, Fish and Wildlife
Management, and Rifle Shooting merit
badge pamphlets; Guide to Safe Scouting;
National Shooting Sports Manual
(Appendix 1).
Books
Bridges, Toby. Muzzleloading. Creative
Publishing, 1997.
Brister, Bob. Shotgunning: The Art and
the Science. Winchester Press, 1977.
Galan, J. I. Airgun Digest. DBI
Books, 1995.
Henderson, David R. Gunsmithing
Shotguns: A Basic Guide to Care and
Repair. Lyons Press, 2003.
Malloy, John. Complete Guide to Guns
and Shooting. DBI Books, 1995.
McIntosh, Michael. Shotguns and
Shooting: A Celebration of the Gun.
Countrysport Press, 1995.
Meyer, Jerry. The Clay Target
Handbook. Lyons Press, 1995.
Migdalski, Tom. The Complete Book
of Shotgunning Games. McGraw-
Hill, 1998.
Morrow, Tom. The Orvis Field Guide
to Shotgun Care and Maintenance.
Willow Creek Press, 2000.
Re, Lois. Black’s Wing and Clay:
The Complete Shotgunner’s Guide
to Equipment, Instruction, and
Destinations. Masters Press, 1999.
Russell, James. Precision Shooting: The
Trapshooter’s Bible for the Advanced
Trapshooter and Those Who Strive to
Be. James Russell, 1998.
———. Trapshooting Secrets. James
Russell, 1999.
Organizations and Websites
Alco Target Company
Toll-free telephone: 888-258-4814
Website: http://www.alcotarget.com
Amateur Trapshooting Association
Telephone: 618-449-2224
Website: http://www.shootata.com
Visit the Boy Scouts of America’s
official retail website (with your
parent’s permission) at http://www.
scoutstuff.org for a complete listing
of all merit badge pamphlets and
other helpful Scouting materials
and supplies.


SHOTGUN SHOOTING 95
.Shotgun Shooting Resources
American Target Company
Toll-free telephone: 877-733-0433
Website:
http://www.americantargetcompany.com
Discover the Outdoors:
Shooting Sports
Website: http://www.dto.com/shooting
Log Cabin Shop
Website: http://www.logcabinshop.com
Michaels of Oregon
Website:
http://www.michaels-oregon.com
National Rifle Association
of America
Toll-free telephone: 800-672-3888
Website: http://home.nra.org
National Shooting
Sports Foundation
Telephone: 203-426-1320
Website: http://www.nssf.org
National Skeet Shooting Association
National Sporting Clays Association
Toll-free telephone: 800-877-5338
Website: http://www.nssa-nsca.com
National Target Company
Toll-free telephone: 800-827-7060
Website:
http://www.nationaltarget.com
Remington Arms Company
Toll-free telephone: 800-243-9700
Website: http://www.remington.com
Shotgun News Magazine
Website: http://www.shotgunnews.com
Shotgun Sports Magazine
Telephone: 530-889-2220
Website:
http://www.shotgunsportsmagazine.com
Target Barn Inc.
Telephone: 419-829-2242
Website: http://www.targetbarn.com
The Target Shop
Telephone: 856-358-5140
Website:
http://www.thetargetshop.com
Trapshooters.com
Website: http://www.trapshooters.com
U.S. Target Inc.
Toll-free telephone: 800-746-6836
Website:
http://www.ustargetonline.com
USA Shooting
Telephone: 719-866-4670
Website: http://www.usashooting.com
Photo and Illustration Credits
©Comstock Inc., 1999—cover
(clay targets, shotgun shells)
©Jupiterimages.com—page 84
©Photos.com—cover (top right, powder
horn); pages 59–60, 80, and 85
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property
of or are protected by the Boy Scouts
of America.
John McDearmon—all illustrations on
pages 12, 16–18, 20, 36, 40–41, 47, 50,
53, 61, and 88