GAME
DESIGN
STEM-Based


GAME DESIGN
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


35708
ISBN 978-0-8395-0026-1
©2025 Scouting America/Boy Scouts of America
2025 Printing
Note to the Counselor
The project portion of the Game Design merit badge gives Scouts flexibility to work
with a medium of their choosing. The level of effort required to make a game in
different mediums can vary significantly. However, the requirements define what
individual Scouts must include in their design notebooks so that there is a baseline
for all Scouts to meet.
The notebook must demonstrate a thoughtful initial concept, multiple design
iterations based on initial testing, and feedback from blind testing. Encourage
Scouts to use their notebook to record brainstorming sessions, test parameters,
and any game-related ideas throughout the process. Also encourage them to record
thoughts behind key design decisions to help them trace and retrace their steps as
their designs evolve.
Before beginning the prototyping phase, the Scout must have counselor approval
for the design concept. Notebooks can take just about any form the Scout wants — an
actual notebook, a binder, a sketch pad, or a digital document. The counselor must
make sure that the Scout has put enough effort into the concept phase to have a good
foundation for the prototype phase. Watch out for overly ambitious projects that could
lead to unnecessary frustration. It is important to understand that the Scout is making
a prototype. The challenge of the project is to develop and experiment with gameplay,
not to develop extensive programming skills, create beautiful artwork, or spend a lot of
time fabricating components.
When prototyping, Scouts should devote most of their energy to assessing
and improving the play experience. With each iteration, Scouts should identify
game elements that they want to change and how the changes will alter the play
experience. After making changes, they then test the game and evaluate whether
or not the changes had the desired outcome. It is acceptable for the final prototype
to be very different from the initial concept, provided that the notebook shows
the progression.
Because the project is so flexible, it is likely that you will have Scouts working
in mediums with which you are unfamiliar. The game design community has a vast
array of publicly available resources. If you have a specific concern about programming
an electronic game prototype, there are a number of free or inexpensive game design


GAME DESIGN 3
software packages available online that Scouts could use. Some
are very easy to use with little or no computer programming
knowledge, and most have robust information resources to support
them. See the resources section at the end of this pamphlet.
The merit badge includes many opportunities for teamwork
and group play. Group participation is mandatory to complete
requirement 7, but all of the other nonproject requirements also
work well in collaboration. Note, though, that each Scout must
deliver their own game prototype to complete the project. This
ensures that every Scout has the chance to develop and use the
critical thinking skills that are part of testing and design iteration.
If they want to collaborate on their projects after completing the
requirements for the badge they are encouraged to do so, but that
is beyond the scope of this badge.
The Game Design merit badge relies heavily on specific
terminology. Game design is broad and game analysis is
relatively young. There is no official dictionary for game design,
and there may be disagreements on precise meanings. Please
refer to the glossary at the end of this pamphlet for definitions
applicable to the pamphlet and requirements. For additional
questions, refer to the resources listed at the end of the pamphlet.


4 GAME DESIGN
Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Game-Design or check
Scoutbook for the latest requirements.


GAME DESIGN 5


6 GAME DESIGN


GAME DESIGN 7
Contents
What Is Game Design? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Game Mediums . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
Core Game Elements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
Why We Play Games . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
Game Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
Making Your Game . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
Prototyping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
Testing Your Prototype . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
Careers in Game Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
Glossary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 90
Game Design Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 94





GAME DESIGN 9
.What Is Game Design?
What Is Game Design?
For thousands of years, in every culture, across every part of the
globe, people have played games. Games challenge us to overcome
long odds, tell compelling stories, and allow us to work with or
against one another. They give structure to play. Games motivate
us to find creative solutions, practice new skills, and spend time
with others.
Games also come in almost every shape, size, format, and
flavor imaginable. Games can be fast-paced, slow, or anything
in between. Some are competitive. Some are cooperative. They
may be for individuals, small groups, or thousands of players at
a time. They might take seconds to complete or last for years.
However you slice it, everyone has played games, and games
help make us who we are.


10 GAME DESIGN
What Is Game Design?.
Game design is the process of creating the content and rules
of games. Along the way, game designers take on many
different roles.
• Builders make worlds to explore.
• Engineers make systems and mechanics that link together
into a complete picture.
• Scientists test new
ways to improve the
play experience.
• Teachers teach players
what to do and how the
rules of the game work.
• Dreamers create
new, unique,
amazing experiences.
Game Design Goals
1. Fun 6. Manageable in scope and time
2. Interactive 7. Well-paced
3. Social 8. Immersive
4. Easy to learn 9. Replay value
5. Hard to master 10. Affordable
—Pete Fenlon, Eagle Scout and chief executive officer, Catan Studios
BUILDERS
ENGINEERSDREAMERS
TEACHERS SCIENTISTS
GAME DESIGNERS


GAME DESIGN 11
.What Is Game Design?
What Is a Game?
Even though games are everywhere, “game” is a tricky word to define.
Here are a few common traits of most games.
1. Games are a form of play. Most games are played for recreation,
others are played by amateurs and professionals alike, and some
are even used as tools for training and education.
2. Games have objectives or goals that players work to achieve.
3. Games have rules. Rules govern the components of the game and the
ways that players interact with those components and each other.
4. Games have feedback. As players work toward their goals, the game
provides information about how they are doing. Scores are a form
of feedback.
5. Games have challenges. In the vast majority of games, the rules,
other players, or other elements impede player progress toward
the objectives.
6. Games employ a variety of skills. These include physical abilities,
communication, strategic thinking, patience, observation, and
problem solving.
7. Games present
choices. Players make
meaningful decisions
in order to affect
game outcomes.
8. Games are participatory.
Unlike many other
forms of entertainment,
games are not just
about observing. They
are about taking action.


12 GAME DESIGN
What Is Game Design?.
Year Game Medium Comments
5200 B.C. Bocce Physical/
Sport
Egyptian hieroglyphs depict a rock-throwing game
that became the origin of bocce and bowling.
3500 B.C Senet Board An Egyptian tomb housed the pieces of the first
known board game.
3000 B.C. Dice Dice These randomizing tools first appeared in
India and have been found alongside early
backgammon sets. Sheep knuckle bones were
used by other cultures for dice-like games.
2000 B.C. Polo Sport The Persians developed this horse-riding game to
train their cavalry.
1400 B.C. Ulama Sport Throughout Latin America, temple ruins can be
found for a Mayan game played with a rubber ball.
600 Chatrang Board This Indian board game was the origin of checkers
and chess.
1100 Handball/
Racquetball
Sport French monks developed an indoor handball game
that later evolved to include a racket.
1250 Dominoes Tile This game, related to dice games, originated in
China.
1457 Golf Sport The Scottish parliament banned golf to keep troops
from getting distracted during archery practice.
1529 Trump Card This English trick-taking game later evolved into
bridge, euchre, and hearts.
1630 Lacrosse Sport When Europeans reached North America,
they witnessed natives playing this team
stickball game.
1791 Baseball Sport The first known American reference to our future
national pastime was a law prohibiting it near the
town meeting house in Pittsfield, Massachusetts.
1800s Conquian
(Rummy)
Card The ancestor of rummy, this game of card
sequences was played in Latin America.
1848 Charades Party The novel Vanity Fair described this party game of
acting and guessing.
1891 Basketball Sport This sport was developed by Dr. James Naismith to
provide indoor physical activity for his gym class.
1913 Little Wars Miniatures The first set of rules for civilians to play with toy
soldiers was written by H.G. Wells.
1934 Monopoly® Board The modern form of Monopoly®
, first published
in 1934, was based on The Landlord’s Game of
the early 1900s. It struck a chord in impoverished
Depression-era America.
History of Games Timeline


GAME DESIGN 13
.What Is Game Design?
Year Game Medium Comments
1938 Scrabble® Tile The word tile game was created in 1938 but was
not successfully sold to a manufacturer until 1952.
1956 Yahtzee® Dice This dice-throwing game from Milton Bradley was
a commercial iteration of the earlier games Yacht
and Generala.
1966 Twister® Party The colorful party game became a classic.
1972 Pong® Electronic The first electronic game to reach mainstream
popularity, the table tennis simulation was
a training project for a new engineer at Atari.
1974 Dungeons and
Dragons®
Text-based
RPG
The first text-based role-playing game created
a new form of interactive storytelling.
1980 Pac-Man® Electronic Providing the first iconic video game character, Pac-
Man was the highest-earning arcade game in history.
1984 Tetris® Electronic This colorful puzzle game was released on the per-
sonal computer but has spread to many devices.
1985 Super Mario
Bros.®
Electronic This side-scrolling platform game helped launch
the home game console market and Nintendo®
.
1987 Warhammer™ 40,000
Miniatures
Players paint futuristic figurines and face them
against one another in this war game.
1993 Magic: The
Gathering®
Card Its gameplay became the model of many
collectible card games, and new content
continues to be released 20 years later.
1995 Catan® Board One of the first Eurogames to sell well outside of
Europe, Catan® became a gateway for bringing
players to modern tabletop games.
1998 The Legend of
Zelda™: Ocarina
of Time™
Electronic The combination of storytelling, mechanics, art
direction, and technical power made this one of
the best-regarded electronic games in history.
2004 World of
Warcraft®
Electronic Peaking at 12 million subscribers, this game changed
expectations about persistent online worlds.
2009 Angry Birds™ Electronic This mobile puzzle game had more than a billion
downloads in its first three years.
2009 League of
Legends®
Electronic This computer game is at the center of the eSport
industry with championships watched by more
than 100 million viewers.
2016 Pokemon Go® Electronic Pairing cameras and GPS, this game brings
“monsters” to real-world locations.
2017 Fortnite® Electronic More than a game, Fortnite® has experimented
with in-game concerts and partnerships with
Star Wars and Marvel.





GAME DESIGN 15
.Game Mediums
Game Mediums
To think like a game designer, it is useful to analyze games that you
play or know about. Thinking about how games work, grouping
them based on similarities and differences, and learning common
words to describe games will give you tools for making your own
games. One obvious way to categorize a game is by medium, or the
form of the game. Newspapers, magazines, and books are different
printed media. In the same way, games can be described by the
shape they take and the way players interact.
Physical Games and Sports
The oldest recorded game in history was a ball game played in
ancient Egypt. Ball games and sports are physical games. They
typically feature competition between players or teams, like
capture the flag. These games involve athletic activities and are
played with special equipment like balls, nets, or sticks. Generally,
the gameplay revolves around one or more specific physical


16 GAME DESIGN
Game Mediums.
actions, and the objectives reward players who most skillfully
perform those actions. Basketball, for example, is built around
dribbling, passing, and shooting the ball. The shape and details of
the field of play are an important part of the game design. Rules
and objectives may be related to specific portions of the field.
Board Games
Also dating back to ancient Egypt, board games usually involve
placing and moving pieces on a game board. They come in a
variety of gameplay types including:
• Abstract games in which the board is divided into regular
spaces and the players compete to claim pieces or spaces.
Examples include checkers, chess, and go.
• Territorial strategy games like Risk® and Scythe®, where the
board is a map with distributed resources and attributes.
• Candy Land® is an example of a game where players compete
to be the first one to reach the finish space.
• Building games where players earn points by completing
construction objectives. In Ticket to Ride® players try to earn
the most points by building train connections between cities.
Eurogames are a broad category of modern games that originally
flourished in Europe. Covering several mediums, they emphasize strategy
over chance and often have multiple victory conditions or paths to win.
When designing a physical game or sport, it is important to consider
safety. Rules and mechanics should enforce safe play, and protective
equipment should be used to reduce risk.


GAME DESIGN 17
.Game Mediums
Tile Games
Tile games are played with a limited set of tiles (usually rectan-
gular) that may contain pips (dots), letters, or special symbols.
Play consists of players placing one or more tiles from their
hand adjacent to those already placed and then replenishing
their hand with new tiles (if available). Scoring is usually
performed when tiles are played. Dominoes, Carcassonne™,
and mahjong are all examples of tile games.
Dice Games
Dice are often used to introduce chance into other types of games
and can also be the primary focus. Some games, such as Yahtzee
and Bunco®, use standard six-sided dice (abbreviated d6). Others,
such as Boggle® or Cosmic Wimpout™, replace the dots with
letters or special symbols. Dice games can usually be played by
any number of players, with the dice being passed from player
to player. A “turn” calls for the player to roll the dice once or
a number of times, depending on the game and prior rolls.
Games are typically scored, with the various combinations
of dice having a specific scoring.


18 GAME DESIGN
Game Mediums.
Card Games
Card games are played with sets or “decks” of
cards. Generally, the order of the deck is
unknown. Cards are mixed or shuffled by the
players at the beginning of the game. This
creates suspense, uncertainty, and surprising
situations to which players must react. Information
is communicated to the players by symbols or
writing on the cards, which can be on one or both sides
of the card.
Many card games use a standard playing card deck of
hearts, diamonds, spades, and clubs. Hearts, rummy, and solitaire
are well-known examples. Collectible or tradable card games are
another common form of card game. Magic: The Gathering is
the earliest example. In these games, players use their own deck
with only a small portion of the available cards. Each player’s
deck is typically used to achieve the game outcome through
a particular strategy, based on how the decks compare with
one another. There are even card games like Dominion® where
the players are building their decks as they play.
Party Games
Most board and card games are for no more than six players.
Party games are generally for four to 16 or more players and are
often arranged in teams. Because they are meant for larger social


GAME DESIGN 19
.Game Mediums
situations, the gameplay emphasizes interaction between players
and often involves some form of creativity. Drawing, acting,
singing, and giving word clues are all common activities in party
games. Trivia games also typically fall into this medium.
These games may include boards, cards, and dice, but
they are distinguished by the player format and play expe-
rience. The party game designer places special emphasis
on making gameplay that is fun for players and observers,
easy to join, and encourages participation from everyone at
the event. Party games include charades, Twister®, Trivial
Pursuit®, Cranium®, HedBandz®, Morphology™, Telestrations®,
Pictionary®, and Jenga®.
Games With Miniatures
Miniature games are played
with small, detailed models
of pieces and terrain.
Originally, they were used
to teach and experiment
with military tactics and
strategy. Miniature gaming
as a hobby emerged in the
early 20th century, in large
part because the H.G. Wells
book Little Wars, which set
forth rules for playing with
toy soldiers.
Today, miniature game
settings include historical
reenactments, fantasy,
and science fiction. The
gameplay might focus on
just a few or many pieces. Most
miniature games are turn-based. This
style of gameplay has contributed to the
design of many board and electronic strategy
games. Miniatures are also commonly used in tabletop role-
playing games to act out the action.


20 GAME DESIGN
Game Mediums.
Text-Based Role-Playing Games (RPGs)
This game medium can be most easily described as interactive
storytelling. A ruleset or system is used to define the gameplay,
but the game’s objectives may change during play. The end point
of an RPG campaign—a complete story arc—is often flexible.
Players take on the roles of distinct characters within a
fictional setting and then take actions based on the capabilities
of those characters. Typically, these capabilities increase over time,
as the characters practice skills, acquire knowledge, or obtain
equipment. This allows players to take on progressively more
challenging game scenarios. The most well-known RPG
is Dungeons and Dragons, but there are many others.
Gamers call
role-playing
games RPGs.
Computer-generated dungeon


GAME DESIGN 21
.Game Mediums
In most RPGs, one player serves as the gamemaster (GM).
This player is the moderator and primary storyteller of the game.
The GM determines the setting and rule system of the game, takes
on the role of the environment and any non-player character
(NPC), helps the players create their characters, and provides the
initial game objectives. A GM is like the host of a party: A GM
cooks the food, sets the table, and provides different choices for
entertainment. The GM is not in charge of the players but is in the
game to give the players a compelling experience.
Once the campaign is underway, the players choose the
actions they want to take, game mechanics determine whether
their actions succeed or fail, and the GM determines the effect
of those successes and failures. The GM then moves the story
forward. A good GM keeps all the players engaged, uses a strong
imagination to begin the story and react to the players, and main-
tains a moderate level of game balance. In electronic role-playing
games, the GM role is usually played by the game software.
Role-playing games typically have strong themes,
narratives, and character advancement, and unique
gameplay elements. Text-based and miniature-based
role-playing games—collectively called tabletop RPGs—
are two forms of RPGs. These games are particularly
strong in the following ways:
• Control over the story—The players and GM move the
plot along as they see fit and are limited only by their
creativity. Players take ownership of the stories in a
deeply personal way.
• Social interaction—At their heart, tabletop RPGs are
about hanging out with friends.
• Problem solving—Tabletop RPGs reward creativity and
thinking “outside the box” to solve problems. This
applies to both the players and the GM.
• Customization—Many game systems can be adapted
to different game themes. Also, if you do not like a
system, you can make any changes you want.


22 GAME DESIGN
Game Mediums.
Electronic Games
Electronic games are the largest-growing medium of games
today. Almost every other game type could be implemented in
an electronic form. Electronic games present information to
players through video screens and audio signals. Players interact
with the games through electronic sensors. Buttons, touch
screens, control sticks, and computer mice are common input
devices. Newer technologies include GPS, motion sensors, and
cameras that respond to physical motion and detect a player’s
position and movements.
Electronic games are limited by the game hardware and fall
into several categories: personal computer (PC) games, console
games, and games for mobile devices. For example, PC games
like World of Warcraft® or League of Legends® typically use the
mouse and keyboard for input. Console games like the Super
Mario Bros. series use hand-held controllers. Game apps for
mobile platforms use touch controls that are often simplified to
make them effective.
As a game designer, think about the benefits and constraints
of the mediums you want to work in. How do the players get
information? What kind of actions can they take? What are they
unable to do? How does the medium restrict you?
Remember that
whenever you
participate in
online gameplay
with multiple
players, you
should first have
your parent or
guardian’s
permission to
do so.


GAME DESIGN 23
.Game Mediums
Gameplay is affected by medium, but it is not com-
pletely constrained by medium. Most forms of gameplay
can be replicated in several different mediums, and
mediums can overlap. For example, Strat-O-Matic®
Baseball was first published in 1961 to recreate the sport
of baseball as a board game. Many versions of chess
can be played on computers, and the Madden® football
series has been around since the 1988. Electronic and
card versions of the game series Pokemon™ are both
very popular. In each of these cases, some of the rules
are exactly the same between the different mediums,
and some of the rules have been changed to make the
game functional.
Mediums can also be mixed together to utilize the
advantages of each one. Monopoly is clearly a board
game, but it also uses stacks of cards that can be
mixed up and dice that add an element of chance
to player movement.





GAME DESIGN 25
.Core Game Elements
Core Game Elements
Every game is built around four core game elements: player
format, objectives, rules, and resources. A fifth element,
theme, is also central to many games.
Player Format
Player format defines the number, arrangement, and alignment of
players in a game. How many players does the game support?
Must it be an exact number (four players only) or can the number
vary (two to five players)? Can players enter or leave during play?
How does this affect play? Are players on teams? Can teams be
uneven? Do all the players on a team have the same objectives?
These examples of player structures are by no means a complete
list.
Single-player (one player vs. the game system). Examples
range from simple solitaire card games to epic electronic games
like The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild®.
Head-to-head (one player vs. one player). Chess and go are
classic board game examples.
Much of the material in this section is based on Ian
Schreiber’s Game Design Concepts Level 3: Formal
Elements of Games, found at gamedesignconcepts.word-
press.com/2009/07/06/level-3-formal-elements-of-games,
and is used here under the Creative Commons license.
Formats where players compete against one another are
generally known as Player vs. Player (PvP). If the players
are competing against the game or game elements, then
the game is Player vs. Environment (PvE).


26 GAME DESIGN
Core Game Elements.
Cooperative or player vs. environment (PvE) (multiple
players vs. the game system). This is common in online
games like World of Warcraft® and Destiny®. Some purely
cooperative board games exist too, such as Pandemic®.
One-against-many (one player vs. multiple players). In the
Nintendo Land™ game Luigi’s Ghost Mansion® for the Wii U™
game system, one player takes the role of a ghost trying to scare the
other players while they work together to trap the ghost with their
flashlights. This asymmetric structure has one player acting as an
antagonist or as the game world while the other players work as a
team. It is common in text-based role-playing games (RPGs).
Free-for-all (one player vs. one player vs. one player vs. …).
Perhaps the most common player structure for multiplayer
games, this can be found everywhere, from board games like
Monopoly to the basic mode in most competitive first-person
shooter electronic games. This popular model appears every-
where from the battle royale modes of Fortnite® to board games
like Monopoly® and card games like Dominion®.
Team competition (multiple players vs. multiple players
[vs. multiple players …]; includes pair vs. pair). This is also
a common structure, finding its way into most team sports and
card games like bridge and spades.
Predator-Prey. Players form a (real or virtual) circle. Everyone’s
goal is to attack the player on their left and defend themselves
from the player on their right. The live-action game Assassin
uses this structure.
Social Deduction. This is the team model of Among Us® and
The Resistance®, where only one of the teams knows who its
members are, and part of the goal of the other team is to figure
out who is who.
MATT
LESLIEHEATHER
KEITHDAVE
ROB
Predator-prey player format


GAME DESIGN 27
.Core Game Elements
Objectives (Goals)
What are players trying to do? Game objectives determine who
won or whether a player has beaten the game or a portion of the
game. They can also vary in scale. Complete the level or mission
is an objective, but the bigger objective might be complete a series
of levels or complete this storyline. Here are some common
game objectives.
Score: Get more points than your opponent as in soccer or get a
lower score such as in golf. Alternately, be the first player to reach
a particular number of points or, in a single-player game, get more
points than you have before or beat a previous score. In other
cases, the game ends after a certain amount of time, and the best
score wins. There might be more than one source of points, or
individual actions might have different point values. The way that
points are assigned can give game designers flexibility to adjust
the play experience.
Capture/destroy: Eliminate all of your opponent’s pieces from
the game. Chess and Stratego® are well-known examples where
you must eliminate opposing forces to win.
Collection: The card game rummy and its variants involve
collecting sets of cards to win. Many electronic jumping and
exploration games like LittleBigPlanet™ or Super Mario®, com-
monly referred to as “platformers,” require the player to collect
a certain number of objects scattered throughout the levels.
Solve: The board game Clue® is an example of a game where
the objective is to solve a puzzle.


28 GAME DESIGN
Core Game Elements.
Chase/race/escape: Generally, anything where you are running
toward or away from something. The board game Candy Land® is
a race to the finish.
Spatial alignment: A number of games involve the positioning
of elements as an objective, including the nondigital games
tic-tac-toe and Pente® and the electronic game Tetris®.
Build: The opposite of “destroy,” players
use resources to build structures or
assets. Meeting certain building
requirements is a common objective
in Eurogames; the board game Catan®
is an example. RPGs often include the
related objective of character advance-
ment where player characters gradually
gain power and capability.
Avoiding a loss: Some games end
when one player performs an act
that is forbidden by the rules.
Examples are the physical dexterity
games Twister® and Jenga®.


GAME DESIGN 29
.Core Game Elements
Advance the story: Sometimes the objective of a game is just to
continue a storyline and see what happens next to the characters.
This is especially common in role-playing games of all types.
Explore: Game worlds like the Legend of Zelda series encourage
players to travel around the world and discover new characters
and places.
Rules, Mechanics, and Systems
There are three categories of rules, all important to a successful
play experience.
• Setup involves things you do once at the beginning of the game.
• Progression of play entails what happens during the game.
• Resolution indicates the conditions that cause the game to end
and the outcome when the end is reached.


30 GAME DESIGN
Core Game Elements.
Mechanics are collections of rules that combine to form a
discrete chunk of gameplay. In a similar way, systems are
collections of mechanics that make up the biggest chunks of the
game. For example, basketball has a system for determining
which team has possession of the ball. Mechanics for turning
over the ball to the other team are a subset of that system. For
example, a rule says that a team loses possession of the ball if a
member of that team takes three steps without dribbling.
These categories help designers to understand how their
games work and can be powerful all the way from concepts
through final iterations. If tests suggest a problem, the designer
must determine whether the problem involves an individual
rule, a mechanic, or an entire system.
Many games also have unwritten rules implied by player
expectations. For example, many turn-based games do not have
a time limit on the turns. Players may be expected to take turns in
a “reasonable” amount of time and not stall the game indefinitely.
When in doubt, designers should clearly define such rules in
order to encourage smooth play.


GAME DESIGN 31
.Core Game Elements
Resources
Resources are all the things directly under a player’s control that
can be used as the game advances. This includes explicit
resources (pieces in chess; health, mana, and currency in
League of Legends®) and can also include other items under
player control:
• Territory in Risk®
• Number of questions remaining in 20 questions
• Objects that can be picked up in electronic games (weapons,
power-ups)
• Time (either game time or real time or both)
• Turns or opportunities to take action
• Known information (the suspects that you have eliminated
in Clue®)
What kinds of resources do players control? How are these
resources manipulated during play? How are the resources
limited? The game designer must clearly answer these
questions through the game rules.


32 GAME DESIGN
Core Game Elements.
Resources are almost always limited or constrained in some
way, and these limitations create the tension that makes game
decisions interesting. Does the player have enough health to
survive the attack? Can the player miss the jump and still have
enough time to reach the end? Can the player afford to spend
$200 on a property this turn knowing that a subsequent move will
lead through a dangerous part of the board? Should the player use
a turn to improve defenses or attack the opponent?
Games also have resources that are available but not yet
under the control of a player. Gameplay can develop around
both spending resources and acquiring resources. Systems or
mechanics also need to be in place to track resources not yet
under player control. For example, in most card games, the
players know what cards are in a deck, but they do not know
the order, and they often do not know what cards have been
drawn by other players. In other cases, the available resources
are completely unknown.


GAME DESIGN 33
.Core Game Elements
Theme
Thematic elements—stories, settings, characters, etc.—give games
topics. They answer the question “What is the game about?” which
is different from the question “What is the gameplay about?” Not
every game has a theme, and not every game needs a theme. Most
playing card games and sports do not have themes. However, a
well-chosen theme can have a big impact on the play experience.
Thematic elements have three primary purposes:
1. Help players become more engaged. Players personalize
the game experience if they identify with their character
(I am Pedro the wizard). Similarly, an interesting setting
can add emotional weight. A game set in a haunted mansion
will cause a response different from one set in the Wild West,
even with the same mechanics.
2. Make a game easier to learn. The piece movement rules in
chess have a limited relation to the theme and must be mem-
orized by players. By contrast, players in a racing game expect
mechanics for accelerating, braking, and steering because that
is how real vehicles work.
3. Tell a compelling story. Games can be used to share interesting
stories, just like other media.


34 GAME DESIGN
Core Game Elements.
Themes also create player expectations. If your game is set
during the American Civil War, airplanes would be out of place.
Similarly, players would expect a board game version of basket-
ball to include a three-point shot, just like in the sport. Such
expectations can also create unwritten rules for how a player
or a designer thinks a game “should be” played. Designers
must be sure to write down or program all the rules that they
want players to follow so that there is no confusion
on how the game is played.
Instead of creating new thematic elements
themselves, a game designer may license an
existing setting and characters. Examples include
themed editions of standard board games, like
Monopoly NFL as well as games
based on successful movies or
books, like Star Wars®. Follow
appropriate intellectual property
requirements when working
with licensed material. It is also
important to be consistent with
the story, setting, and characters
of the source material.
Even for a simple game like Bubble Talk™, having
rules that are clear and easy to understand helps
make the game more enjoyable.
Scouting has its own special
edition of Monopoly®.


GAME DESIGN 35
.Core Game Elements
The Benefits of a Theme
The best thing that a theme can do is make it easy to learn the rules. If
you have a game about building automobiles, and your goal is to build
factories, make cars, and hire salespeople to sell those cars, the theme
makes it easy for you to remember the goals of the game because the
goals are very similar to what would happen in real life if you ran a
car company. A game can be without a theme, but themes both add a
framework that makes it easier to understand the rules and goals of a
game and give players a way to “escape” into the game—to become the
head of a car company, or an army general, or a starship pilot. Themes
are what catch the imagination of a potential player, for games are in fact
interactive stories. At the same time, games are puzzles, so the theme
should always lead you to how the game works.
—Alex Yeager, submissions editor, Catan Studios





GAME DESIGN 37
.Why We Play Games
Why We Play Games
Game elements are building blocks that designers use to make
games, but they do not tell the full story. It is equally important
for the designer to consider the player’s perspective. Why would
someone want to play your game? If they are playing “for fun,”
what does that mean? Every player will have an opinion about
what kinds of activities are enjoyable or engaging, and these
opinions will reflect the player’s personality.
Play value refers to reasons that a player chooses to play a
particular game. There are many different reasons that people
want to play games, and they changed based on situation and
mood. This is not a complete list, but here are five categories for
describing why people might enjoy a specific game: novelty,
challenge, stimulation, harmony, and threat.
Novelty
Novelty describes how much a game provides the player with
imaginative, new, or unexpected experiences. Novelty can be
introduced through theme (fantasy, art, and storytelling) and
mechanics (chance and sandbox modes).
The following is based on Jason VandenBerghe’s
“Domains of Play” presentation at the 2012 Game
Developers Conference and is used with permission.
Sandbox mode gives players more freedom, options,
and flexibility. For example, it might allow players to
ignore certain game objectives, have unlimited access to
resources, or enjoy safety from enemies and dangerous
obstacles. Minecraft® has a hugely popular sandbox mode.
It allows players to be extremely creative, but it also puts
a burden on the players to decide what they want to do
within the game—to make their own objectives.


38 GAME DESIGN
Why We Play Games.
Have you ever dreamed of being a superhero who can fight
crime with a range of powers and can fly? What about a medi-
eval king defending your kingdom from invaders? Perhaps you
want to search the stars on a spaceship. Games can allow players
to take on roles that would otherwise be impossible in real life.
Role-playing games can tell engaging stories. Novelty is also
related to storytelling. Sometimes the most fun part of a game
comes from creating a unique storyline and play sequence,
meeting characters, and interacting with them as they overcome
tough challenges or go on amazing adventures. Lastly, novelty
may be about the senses: fantastical artwork, intricate visual
details, stirring music and sounds, and even the weight and feel
of physical pieces. All of these can add depth to a game and
make it more engaging to play.
Players who like novelty may gravitate toward games with
randomized content or chance-based mechanics as part of the
game design. These add unpredictability and uncertainty that
can keep a game fresh.
Games with
a high novelty
factor often have
a high replay
value, meaning
they are fun
to play more
than once.


GAME DESIGN 39
.Why We Play Games
Challenge
Some players enjoy games that provide challenging tasks to be
practiced and mastered. Unlike other forms of entertainment,
games have a unique ability to provide meaningful “work”
where we can make clear progress and are happy to try again if
we fail. Difficulty, advancement, and completion are all ways
players experience challenge.
Challenge can be introduced through mechanics, resources,
and objectives. A game based on difficulty is like an obstacle
course. The fun comes from successfully overcoming the hurdles
made by the game designer. To do so, the player must learn
or improve particular skills. The game designer must decide
whether particular content is difficult enough to be interesting
but easy enough to match what the player has learned from the
game.
The quickest way to lose your audience is by creating
obstacles that are far too hard, resulting in a reward inadequate
for the player’s effort, or far too easy. A designer can lose their
audience if their game is far too hard or far too easy. Games can
test a player’s physical skills, reaction speed, problem-solving
ability, and more. Many games, especially those implemented
electronically, have a varying degree of difficulty in order to
better match the game to the player’s personality and skill.


40 GAME DESIGN
Why We Play Games.
Character advancement is when the player becomes more
powerful over time. World of Warcraft® is an example of a game
with a significant advancement component. In most RPGs
in any medium, as the player’s character performs tasks, the
player gradually gains access to new or more powerful abilities
and stronger armor and weapons. Players can then defeat
progressively more powerful monsters. While this is similar to
difficulty-based gameplay, the player is not necessarily becoming
more skillful. Instead, the player’s character becomes more
powerful as the player spends time with the game. Found in
most role-playing games, player advancement is increasingly
common in other types of games. This is useful for design,
because it provides a way for talented players to show off by
beating the game faster, while other players still have a chance
to win if they are patient and keep trying.
An old slogan of Pokemon—Gotta Catch ’Em All™—is a good
description of completion in gameplay. For this kind of challenge,
the player may be trying to collect all the coins, buy all the prop-
erty, conquer the entire map, or accomplish all of the possible
tasks. The gameplay provides a journey to that final collection,
and each step should be satisfying on its own. It is important for
the game to communicate to players when they have made prog-
ress and how far they need to go to reach the end.


GAME DESIGN 41
.Why We Play Games
Besides letting people play new roles, games can bring
players to uncharted territories, magical places, new worlds.
Once there, a natural reaction is to take a look around. The
challenge is to explore the new world and uncover its secrets.
Discovery is a big part of text-based role-playing games and
many electronic games.
Stimulation
Have you ever played a game that was exciting? What
about a game that pushed you to express yourself cre-
atively? These are both forms of stimulation. Stimulation
deals with the emotional element of play. Self-expression,
role, pace, and excitement are all ways in which players
experience stimulation. Stimulation can be introduced
through player format (team play, player roles), objective
(solve, chase, escape), and mechanics (how players take
turns and time limitations).
Many party games involve forms of self-expression
like acting, singing, and drawing because they are enjoy-
able for both the person doing the work and the people
sharing it. Text-based RPGs also place a heavy emphasis
on creativity.
In many team and multiplayer games, a player’s
role can be key to how a player experiences the game.
Think of soccer—playing as the forward is very dif-
ferent from playing as a goalkeeper. In role-playing
games, players often choose different roles (fighter, magic
user, ranger, etc.) based on what the player experiences as fun.


42 GAME DESIGN
Why We Play Games.
Pacing and the play sequence also have an impact on fun.
Players with a high need for stimulation would most likely enjoy
real-time games (most team sports) or games with strict time
limitations, while those with a low need for stimulation might
prefer turn-based games (most board games) or games that are
more open-ended.
A final aspect of stimulation is the thrill of victory and
agony of defeat. Many live-action and electronic sports games
have gameplay that fulfills a player’s need for stimulation.
Harmony
Harmony reflects the rules of player-to-player interaction. Trust,
integrity, helpfulness, competitiveness, and compassion are all
ways in which players experience harmony. Game elements
that can be used to emphasize harmony include player format
(cooperation vs. competition) and objective (build vs. destroy).
Cooperation and competition reflect two ends of a spectrum.
Individual players often have a preference for where they fall
along this spectrum; for them, a game’s fun factor and player


GAME DESIGN 43
.Why We Play Games
interest is higher the closer it comes to their personal preference.
Picture cooperation and competition as opposite ends of a line for
describing multiplayer games. Some players are super competitive
and prefer games at that end of the line. Others prefer to work
together at the cooperative end. And many people are interested
in a bit of both.
Whether playing with friends, family, or even rivals,
multiplayer games help build and strengthen social ties.
Games pull people together for common interests. In some
cases, the game drives a social event, but for some games like
Apples to Apples®, the game is a backdrop to start conversation.
Party games lean heavily toward friendly competition. Going
one step further, cooperative games make players work together
to complete objectives. Massively multiplayer online games
often include lots of cooperative gameplay.
In many games, the objective is to outperform an opponent.
Competition motivates people to practice skills and think of
different ways to succeed. A good competitive game will allow
players to display their skills and ingenuity against players of
a similar skill level. In more casual competitive games, an
element of chance might help ensure that the same player does
not win every time.
Note that in many individual sports and games,
the competition is often with the players against
themselves, where they are seeking to improve their
time, score, ranking, etc., rather than focusing only
on their opponents.


44 GAME DESIGN
Why We Play Games.
Threat
Tension, danger, provocation, and humiliation all are ways
that players experience threat. Player format (team structure),
mechanics (real-time play), objectives (chase, escape, and race),
and resources (better weapons, armor, cars, etc.) are the primary
game elements used to incorporate threat.
These games are fun because of their heart-pounding action
and the enjoyment people get out of crushing their opponents.
Paintball and racing games are examples of games that appeal to a
player’s threat instinct.
Fun is not the only
reason to play.
Other motivations
to play are to get
exercise, master
a skill, and teach
someone else
how to play.
Most games incorporate multiple types of play value.
Basketball, for example, involves novelty (playing
against a different team, having multiple lineups as
players come off the bench), challenge (mastering basic
techniques such as shooting, dribbling, and passing),
stimulation (a fast pace), and both aspects of harmony
(cooperating with your team and competing against the
opposing team).
Games that incorporate a high degree of reflex into their game
mechanics appeal to the player’s desire for threat.


GAME DESIGN 45
.Why We Play Games
A Lesson From Valve
Making a game fun is extremely difficult because we know precious little
about what “fun” actually is. At Valve, the electronic game maker, the
philosophy is that, while game designers can partially predict what is
fun, they cannot do this entirely. As such, “designing” a game (in the
conventional sense) is only one part of the process. The rest involves
a core iteration cycle:
1. Playtest—Recruit people to play the game, then watch them. Take notes
on what seems to work, where people seem engaged, where they seem
frustrated, etc. At Valve, sometimes playtesters are people involved
in the production of the game and sometimes they are people from
outside the company. We try to mix it up because you get different
kinds of information from each group.
2. Evaluate playtest results—Just because one player did not like some-
thing does not mean a game should be scrapped. Look carefully at the
playtest results. Decide what to act on, what to watch in the future, and
what feedback to discard.
3. Apply evaluated playtest feedback—Act on the conclusions from step 2.
We tend to think about this process like a series of experiments. You may
even notice that these steps have a lot in common with the classic scientific
method. Not only does this give us concrete data about where within a
game we are succeeding and failing, it also keeps us focused on fun as the
primary goal. (That can be surprisingly difficult when you work on a single
project for years!)
—Erik Robson, Game Designer, Valve Software





GAME DESIGN 47
.Game Terminology
Game Terminology
In addition to the core game elements, many other terms are
useful for analyzing games. Game designers need a strong
knowledge of game vocabulary.
Thematic Elements
Games have two types of stories: narrative stories and player-
created stories. The narrative story or plot is created by the game
designer. A well-written story can overshadow bad gameplay,
but a poor story can ruin an otherwise well-designed game
experience. In some games, player decisions change the overall
narrative. This requires the designer to use specific techniques
to script how the storyline can split, continue, end, or come
back together over the course of a game.
All games have player-created stories that tell what the
players did during the game. Here is an example from a baseball
game: “Their batter smacked a line drive toward right field, but
Kelly made a leaping catch, whirled, and zipped the ball to first
base for a double play!” Designers can empower player stories
by giving players interesting decisions to make and opportunities
to collaborate and demonstrate their skills.
The setting of a game—the fictional environment in which
it occurs—can have a big impact on the play experience. A game
about exploring a haunted mansion at night has a different
emotional hook than a game about exploring a fantasy kingdom,
even if the rules and mechanics are very similar.
Game characters can have a similar impact. If the player
character has a loosely defined personality (such as Chell from
Portal™ and Master Chief from Halo®, the player can project
their own personality onto that character. If the player character
has a well-defined personality, then the character comes across
as more realistic. The player then relates to that character’s
story. This element is even more pronounced in RPGs, where
the players create the characters they will play, then the designer
can tell a deeper narrative story to keep the player interested.


48 GAME DESIGN
Game Terminology.
Gameplay Terms
Whose turn is it? Do we take turns? Can we play at the same
time? The play sequence of a game answers these questions.
Changing the play sequence can have a big impact on the play
experience. In Magic: The Gathering there are some cards that
allow players to take actions when it is someone else’s turn. As
a result, participants remain actively engaged even when wait-
ing for their turn. By contrast, the card game bridge requires one
player to set his or her cards down during each hand.
Level design (or environment design) is the process of
creating game spaces. It is separate from designing rules and
mechanics. As an example, think about the three-point line in
basketball. If it is too close, players want to take every shot from
behind the line. If it is too far, no one attempts three-point shots.
The design of the play space determines how and where the
action occurs. The play space should also help players identify
objectives and judge their progress toward the objectives.
2 FEET
RADIUS
6 FEET
RADIUS
19 FEET 9 INCHES
50 FEET
15 FEET
84 FEET FOR HIGH SCHOOL
12 FEET
BACKBOARD
MIDCOURT LINE
BASKET (HOOP)
FREE THROW LANE
BASELINE
FREE THROW LINE
THREE-POINT LINE
SIDELINE
CENTER CIRCLE
KEY
How do the size and shape of a basketball court affect the gameplay? What would
happen if the three-point line was closer or the court was narrower?


GAME DESIGN 49
.Game Terminology
Interface design is the process of developing effective
methods for communicating information between players and
games. The interface describes how players get information from
a game and how they physically interact with it. Consider the
design of a deck of playing cards. One side of each card usually
has some sort of design that is the same throughout the deck
so that the cards can be randomly mixed and their values
hidden. The other side sports symbols, colors, and numbers
to communicate information to players. In electronic games,
the user interface includes the screen and button layouts.
Rule sheets, glossaries, FAQs, tutorials, and help sections
are also parts of the interface.
Card interface: A card game designer should carefully consider what information
should be on each card and how the player will read or interpret it.
TITLE
VALUE WHEN
PLAYED
CARD ART
CARD TYPE
COST TO BUY
THE CARD


50 GAME DESIGN
Game Terminology.
Terms for Game Analysis
The following terms—difficulty, balance, depth, complexity,
pace, replay value, and age appropriateness—describe
the nature of the play experience. They are useful tools for
comparing different games.
Difficulty describes how easy or hard it is for a player to
complete a game objective. As a designer, you can adjust game
difficulty in many ways. For example, you could make a puzzle
harder by increasing the number of steps to complete it, increas-
ing restrictions on the player, or reducing the amount of time the
player has to complete it. Electronic games often have settings,
such as novice, standard, and expert, that adjust difficulty by
changing the strength of the player and enemies. Board games
or card games may include a second, simpler set of rules for
new players.
Balance is a description of the relative strength of different
resources, mechanics, objectives, or starting states. At the high-
est level, a balanced game does not give an unequal advantage
or disadvantage to any player. Consider the classic rock–paper–
scissors game. One player might win more often because of skill
or luck but not because the game favored that player. Similarly,
balance applies to decisions within a game. If a player can
choose between two different paths but one of the two is always
better, then the choice is not balanced.
Rock-paper-scissors: rock beats scissors; scissors beats paper;
paper beats rock
SCISSORS
ROCKPAPER
A tutorial is a
part of a game
that introduces
new rules or
mechanics and
gives the player
a chance to
practice them
before using them
in combination
with all of
the other
game systems.


GAME DESIGN 51
.Game Terminology
Depth and complexity are related. Complexity refers to the
number of rules or the number of elements with which a player
interacts in the gameplay. Depth refers to the ability to continue
to find enjoyment in a game as one’s skill improves. Increasing
complexity might increase depth, but that is not guaranteed.
Chess is a board game that gets great depth from relatively mod-
est complexity.
Complexity is the price designers pay to make gameplay, not
a benefit. The greater the complexity, the harder it is to learn how
to play the game. When creating rules, think about the purpose
behind each one and what it will do for the play experience. Each
rule or mechanic should have a purpose.
Pace describes the speed of a game. Specifically, it is how
quickly the player receives information and makes decisions.
Consider the strategy games StarCraft®, League of Legends®, and
Risk®. The games are about controlling territory and resources,
winning battles, and defeating an opponent. In Risk®, play is not
simultaneous—only one player takes a turn at a time—and turns
have no time limits. By contrast, StarCraft play is simultaneous
and real-time. Professional players make more than 300 actions
Depth vs. Complexity
Imagine that every game is a house. Depth represents how much house
there is to explore. Complexity is the cost of the rent.
Depth is directly related to the number of interesting decisions that
players make. Tic-tac-toe has few decisions, but it also has few rules.
Chess has more rules and elements, but tons of interesting decisions.
Monopoly has loads of rules and elements but relatively few meaningful,
interesting decisions.
Tic-tac-toe Chess Monopoly
$ $$$ $$$$$$


52 GAME DESIGN
Game Terminology.
per minute and process information very quickly. The two games
stimulate players at different levels as a result of their very differ-
ent paces.
If play value is the reason someone plays a game, then
replay value is the reason someone plays a game over and over
again. Designers increase replay value by introducing choices of
characters, difficulties, starting positions, maps, levels, storylines,
and more. All of these options add novelty to additional play
sessions. Increasing gameplay depth also increases replay value.
Lastly, multiplayer games generally have much greater replay
value than single-player games.
Like with movies and music, games can have subjects that
are not suitable for everyone. Age appropriateness refers to the
age or maturity level of a game’s intended audience. For example,
a game with minimal cartoon violence might be suitable for
elementary school students, but a game with frequent, graphic
violence would be more appropriate for a much older audience.
Another example is the difference in size between Little League
baseball fields and the fields for professional baseball; the field
for younger players is smaller to fit with their expected athletic
capability. Most retail games have markings on the outside of the
packaging that indicate the suggested audience age range.
The Entertainment
Software Rating
Board (ESRB) is
a nonprofit group
that assigns
age-appropriate-
ness ratings to
electronic games.
These ratings
help players and
their parents or
guardians identify
games with
suitable content.


GAME DESIGN 53
.Game Terminology
Related Terms
The following pairs of terms represent opposite ends of a spectrum.
In each case, games can be designed to fall at either end or
somewhere in between.
If a game is played with only one (human) player, it is said
to be single player. While this term mainly applies to electronic
games, card games such as solitaire are also single-player games.
Games with more than one player are multiplayer. Some electronic
games include both single-player and multiplayer modes.
While many multiplayer games are competitive—with
clearly defined winners and losers—others are not. Designers can
sometimes make games less competitive by eliminating gameplay
elements, such as by not keeping score. Similarly, single-player
games can add a competitive element by including comparisons
between players like high score lists for online games.
Cooperative games require players to work together to
complete objectives. Games on social media websites, for
example, often include cooperative elements to keep more
people engaged. Most team games—like capture the flag—
are both cooperative and competitive.
Most board and card games are turn-based, allowing one
player or team to control the play at any given time and then
switching control to the next player or team. Some turn-based
games also have simultaneous play, which means that more
than one player or team can act at the same time. In a real-time
game, all players act at the same time throughout the game.
Turn-Based vs. Real Time
Chess Baseball or Softball Capture the Flag
Players alternate turns. Teams switch between
offense and defense.
Players are always on both
offense and defense.
While one player plays,
the other waits.
After each pitch, play
finishes before the next
pitch begins.
Flags are reset only when
a point is scored.
During a play, players from
both teams participate.
Action happens
continuously.


54 GAME DESIGN
Game Terminology.
Compare bowling to baseball to capture the flag. In bowling,
one player takes a turn—up to two throws—to try to knock down
pins. The other players wait until it is their turn to play. Baseball
and softball have innings split into halves where the teams switch
between offense and defense. However, players from both teams
are participating at the same time. In capture the flag, both teams
are constantly trying to steal and defend flags.
While many games are thematic (as discussed earlier),
some are abstract, meaning that they don’t incorporate
nongame information into the game. Checkers, most
playing-card games, dominoes, golf, and Tetris® are all
examples of abstract games.


GAME DESIGN 55
.Game Terminology
Strategic (mental) and reflex (physical) gameplay are
different expressions of player skill. In both cases, players have
control over the outcome through their decisions and actions.
By contrast, chance-based mechanics have a randomized
outcome. Chance adds uncertainty to a game, which can create
tension and make it more exciting. Too much randomness can
be frustrating. Players want to make meaningful decisions, but
decisions lose meaning if the outcomes are decided solely by
dice rolls or card shuffles.
Chance-based mechanics also come in different flavors and
with different mathematical characteristics. Should players roll one
six-sided die or two six-sided dice? What about 10- or 12-sided dice,
flipping a coin, or drawing cards from a shuffled deck? If the player
is using a six-sided die, what do the different numbers mean?
Determining the right type and amount of chance-based mechanics
for a game is a big part of being a game designer.





GAME DESIGN 57
.Making Your Game
Making Your Game
How does someone make a game? You know the elements of
games, words that describe games, and the types of experiences
that players enjoy and look for. How do you make the jump
from having that knowledge to making your own game? It all
depends on you and on the game you want to make.
Where to Begin
Almost any kind of idea can launch
your game, and you can start at
many different places.
Your Game Could . . .
• Take the player on a story of adventure or discovery.
• Teach a skill or topic.
• Use a special game mechanic, like a dice roll or
an auction.
• Simulate another activity or event, like running the
Roman empire or flying a plane.
• Follow an established game form, like a racing game
or a role-playing game.
• Explore a certain theme or setting, like space travel
or pizza delivery.
• Use a particular technology, like a motion sensor or
a sound recording.


58 GAME DESIGN
Making Your Game.
Professional game designers use these and many other
ideas as starting points. Think about each one and see what
comes to mind, then write those ideas in your designer’s
notebook so they do not get lost.
Starting Your Designer’s Notebook
Once you have your “launch idea,” you should create your
designer’s notebook. A “notebook” can be made from any tool
you want for gathering and tracking your game ideas as long as
it is easy to add to and easy to review. A bound composition
book or a spiral notebook works just fine, as does a three-ring
binder with filler paper. Also consider using an engineering or
drafting pad that has both horizontal and vertical lines. Your
notebook can be large enough for a book bag or small enough
to fit in your pocket. As long as you can keep your pages
together and feel comfortable writing in it, then you have found
a good tool to use as your designer’s notebook. Keeping notes
digitally, either in a document or note application, is fine, too.
Do not throw anything out—no matter how off-topic—as it
might be important later on in the process.
Introduction
Most good books have an introduction; your notebook is no
exception. Your introduction should describe what you are
aiming for in your game in three brief sections:
1. Vision statement. Describe your game in a sentence or two.
Make sure to leave room for changes, as your vision will
certainly be fine-tuned over time. However, it may also
wander, so it is helpful to keep your vision of the completed
game in a single place.
2. Limitations. The game will have limitations, depending on the
medium and the equipment needed to play the game. A mobile
application will have different memory space requirements
from a graphics-heavy computer game. The components for a
board game represent a significant expense, so the quantity and
composition are important.
3. Timeline. For your game, you may be able to take whatever
time you want (particularly if you don’t care if it ever gets
finished). However, for most projects the designer will set


GAME DESIGN 59
.Making Your Game
some progress goals with specific time milestones so that
the project can be completed in a reasonable time. The
timeline can be changed, but frequent delays may be
a symptom of problems.
Main Text
Brainstorming is the process of coming up with as many ideas
as possible to solve a problem or accomplish a task. Take some
time (from five to 30 minutes), and think about what your game
could be. Write down every idea in your designer’s notebook.
Do not worry about the details behind the ideas. If you get
stuck, review the game elements or types of fun to ask yourself
questions about your game: Where does it take place? What is
the player trying to do? What is the player experience like?
From now on, whenever you get an idea about game
design—any idea at all—write it down or type it into
your notebook. It might be an idea about anything relat-
ing to your game. It might be something you saw as
you rode the bus or an idea that popped into your head
as you talked with a friend. Whatever it is, write it down
along with the date and your initials. You do not want to
lose your ideas!


60 GAME DESIGN
Making Your Game.
Writing down the ideas is the most important part of brain-
storming. By writing them down, you are giving your mind
permission to think about other things, like which idea sounds
the most interesting. Do not try to organize them or think about
whether this idea sounds better than that idea. Do not even
think about that as you write. If an idea comes to mind, but you
think you already wrote it down, write it down anyway. When
you look back at the list, you might discover that you wrote that
same idea three or four times. That is perfectly OK; in fact, it is
great! It shows that you were really thinking about that topic, so
it might be especially interesting or important to you.
Organizing Your Ideas
Now that your notebook contains a bunch of ideas, start reading
through them. Put a star next to all of the ones that catch your
attention. Take time to think about them some more. What
makes those ideas so fascinating? What would a game using
some of those ideas look like? Write your answers in your
designer’s notebook.
Sift through everything in your notebook. Pick out the items
that seem most interesting. This will help you focus your thoughts
and get you closer to your game design. Keep narrowing your
ideas by asking yourself questions. For example, consider a game
about first aid. Would you focus a) on how to perform first-aid
techniques or b) on knowing which techniques to apply when
someone gets injured? By adding details to your ideas, you begin
to see your game more clearly. Use the game elements to guide
this process.
The key to developing our project “Vessel” was to grow it around a
singular idea. “Vessel” started life as . . . an experiment with making
liquid move in games. . . . In “Vessel” you can make creatures out of a
variety of liquids, including water and lava. If you mixed water and lava,
it would make steam, and this same effect occurs in the game if creatures
made of the two liquids collide. We taught the players that their real-world
expectations of materials (water + lava = steam) would carry over to the
liquids in the game. Finding that connection was the core of the puzzle
and was something that we developed through playing the game.
—John Krajewski, Founder, Strange Loop Games


GAME DESIGN 61
.Making Your Game
Players vs. Designers
Game designers and game players look at games very differently.
A game designer needs to understand both viewpoints and
consciously move back and forth between them. Those who can
do this design great games.
As a designer, you are focused on how the game works. You are
concerned with questions such as:
• What are the different segments of the game and how do they
fit together into a complete whole?
• Can a player successfully play the game to the end and win?
• Does each player have an even chance of winning and a fair
shot at everything the game has to offer?
Game players, on the other hand, want the enjoyment and
challenge of playing a game, as well as the camaraderie of
spending time with friends. They are looking for the expe-
riences that playing games provide. Whether they play
a game for fun or to learn, they are spending their
time playing in exchange for whatever the game
offers them.
While developing and testing your game,
you will frequently switch back and forth
between designer and player. With your
designer hat on, you will think of something
to add to your game. With your player hat
on, you will give the idea a try to see what
you think about it.
When making changes to a game
based on player feedback, remember that
players want to have fun with games. They
will often make suggestions that would
have helped them do that. Ask yourself,
“Is this better for the game itself or just for
that player?”
“Game design is an iterative [repetitive] process. Even the best designers
don’t get it right on the first try: They play lots of games, plan their designs,
make their games, get feedback from users, analyze data, and use it to
improve the game … over and over.”
—National STEM Video Game Challenge, stemchallenge.org


62 GAME DESIGN
Making Your Game.
Intellectual Property (IP)
To demonstrate what intellectual property is and how laws are
designed to protect it, basic information about each area of
protection is described by using the example of a hypothetical
Scout named Justin, who is developing a mobile phone game as
part of his effort to earn the Game Design merit badge. Justin
will be programming the game and might want to
commercialize, or be able to sell the game in the future.
Let’s say Justin creates a game, an instruction manual, and
a name for the game. In particular, Justin has created computer
source code as part of the game development process. Source
code is computer instructions that people can write and edit.
Let’s also say that Justin’s game includes an electronic controller
that is novel—brand new in the video game industry—and the
technology is not obvious to other video game developers. What
kinds of IP could he protect?


.Making Your Game
First, Justin can protect his software and instruction manual
under copyright law. Copyright protects computer code and visual
displays made by the program. In general, copyright law protects
creative, literary, and artistic works. He can use copyright to
prevent others from making copies of his code, its displays, or
his manual. He can also stop others from making new games
based on his game. All you—as the creator—need to do to claim
copyright is to put the symbol “©” (or the word “copyright”) along
with the year and your name on any materials that you distribute.
On the other hand, if you want to make a game based on a book or
movie, you would need to license (rent) the rights to those images
and characters in order to legally make that game.
Second, Justin may have a patentable invention—his
controller technology. Patent law protects useful inventions that
are novel and not obvious to people in the field. For instance,
key inventions in history such as the airplane, the telephone,
and the laser have received patent protection. Patent law can
prevent others from performing Justin’s method or making or
selling games that utilize his invention.
Third, if Justin maintains the secrecy of his source code,
he may have trade secret protection. Trade secrets are items
of information or technology that provide the owner with a
competitive advantage in the marketplace and are kept secret
by reasonable measures. Well-known examples of trade secrets
include the formula for Coca-Cola® and the “Original Recipe”
used by Kentucky Fried
Chicken®. If Justin’s software
source code provides him an
advantage in the marketplace,
and he uses reasonable mea-
sures to protect his source code
and methods, he can protect it
under trade secret law.
A copyright is
still enforceable
decades after the
creator has died.
Patents are issued by the U.S. Patent and Trademark
office after a detailed and often costly application sub-
mission and review process that can often take years to
complete. A patent is good for up to 20 years, provided
that you pay the required maintenance fees to the U.S.
Patent and Trademark Office.


64 GAME DESIGN
Making Your Game.
Fourth, the name of Justin’s game can serve as a trade-
mark. Trademarks and service marks protect words, names,
symbols, sounds, or colors that distinguish goods and services
of a business from those of others. McDonald’s®, NIKE®, and
Apple® are examples of famous trademarks. Similarly, the
name of Justin’s game can act as a trademark to show that he
or his business is the source of the game. All a designer needs
to do to claim a trademark is to put the regular trade-
mark symbol (
™) close to any instances of the
design to be trademarked. However, if you
want to use the registered symbol (®), you
must register your creation with and pay a
fee to the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office,
which verifies that your use will not
be confused with any other use of that
same design.
Finally, you may be able to use the intellectual property rights
of others. To do so you need to “license” their rights. A license is
a contract between you and the rights owner that allows you to
use the rights in a particular way in return for a licensing fee and
other terms. For example, you may be able to use the title, art, and
story of a movie but not photographic images of the actors. Many
opportunities are available for licensing, but the value of the rights
determines (through contract negotiation) how much you must pay
for their use. However, if you have done the work outlined above,
you may have rights that someone else may want to pay for.
This From the U.S.
Copyright Office
“Copyright does not protect the idea for a
game, its name or title, or the method or
methods for playing it. Nor does copyright
protect any idea, system, method, device,
or trademark material involved in develop-
ing, merchandising, or playing a game.
Once a game has been made public, noth-
ing in the copyright law prevents others
from developing another game based on
similar principles. Copyright protects only
the particular manner of an author’s expres-
sion in literary, artistic, or musical form.”
SM
®
™


GAME DESIGN 65
.Making Your Game
Morphing From Game Player
to Game Designer
Game designer Kate Ryan Reiling will tell you that, as a child, she “never
really seriously thought about the rules of games” she played. She said
she just “liked games that made sense, and the rules faded into the back-
ground and allowed creativity and competition to thrive.” From that little
girl playing crazy eights with her grandmother and soccer with friends
during recess, Reiling has become a self-made game designer with many
accolades for her game Morphology®.
In 2002, inspired by wanting to play something different, she started
designing her own board game. Reiling said, “I had to make decisions
about what I felt about luck vs. skill, how long the game should last, and
how hard it should be. I had to decide what to spell out as rules of play
and what to leave open to house rules. I wanted to find that sweet spot
I experienced as a child, when I forgot about everything else and found
myself immersed in creative competition. I wanted to find a way to
recreate joy.”
Of the development process, Reiling says it was much more than “just
sitting back and playing a game. It is rare now that I can ‘just’ play a game.
I’m always thinking about who invented it and why they decided to do
certain things. I’ve become a lot more aware—and critical!—of games
and game play.”
In Morphology, she seems to have found the perfect way to recreate
joy for many people. Although it took seven years for Reiling to fully
develop her game and see it to fruition, it has been wildly popular since
she took it to market in 2009.
During its first year, TIME
magazine named Morphology
the No. 2 “Toy of the Year.”
Kate Ryan Reiling has
since quit her day job to found
Morphology Games. She now
works in her studio, creating
new games. Says Reiling, “For
me, game design has become
a game in and of itself.”





GAME DESIGN 67
.Prototyping
Prototyping
Designing games on paper is challenging. Simple games like
Candy Land® and the card game War translate pretty well from
paper to actual play. However, as players are given more decisions
to make, gameplay becomes less and less predictable. Often, what
looks good on paper does not turn out to be fun when put into
practice, and the game designer needs to make adjustments.
To address this challenge, game designers rely heavily on
iteration. This involves designing mechanics and systems, building
a version of the game, predicting how it will work, testing it, and
adjusting it, and then repeating the process many times until
a game is engaging and satisfying. Testing and evaluation take a
lot of time. There is no way to rush creativity, so the best place to
save game development time is in the building phase.
DESIGN
IMPLEMENTREVISE
EVALUATE PLAYTEST
The game design process


68 GAME DESIGN
Prototyping.
A prototype is an early playable version of a game, section of
a game, or game system. It allows a game designer to rapidly
experiment with rules and objectives without having to wade
through full game design and implementation. A prototype must
meet three fundamental goals:
1. A prototype is playable. The rules are complete enough to try
out but do not need to be fully formed. It is perfectly acceptable
to test individual systems and include only enough of the rest of
the game to make those systems function.
2. A prototype is quick to make. Prototypes
do not need pretty artwork, a fancy board,
or perfect equipment. Developing artwork
can be a useful part of the creative process,
but once construction has started, the focus
should be on getting the mechanics and
systems up and running.
3. A prototype is easy to
change. If you can, include
features that can be changed
on the fly. On a board game,
for example, use Post-it® Notes
to designate special spaces; if
you want to change the spaces,
you can just reposition the
notes. Similarly, with a card
game, use blank note cards so
that you can add or cross out
text on the cards easily.
You are encouraged to make your
prototype as quickly as possible.
Do not worry about making your
prototype pretty or including all of
the rules in the first pass. The faster
you can get to testing your game,
the sooner you will be able to decide
what works and what does not.


GAME DESIGN 69
.Prototyping
Developing Your Game
When prototyping, think about the following:
• Component list: What are the game pieces? Boards? Cards?
Displayed resources?
• Setup: What, if anything, must be done before play can begin?
• Sequence of play: Precise description of what players must do, in
what order, to play the game. This can be a game-turn sequence or a
flowchart, depending on the game structure and medium. For an elec-
tronic game, what interface screens will there be?
• Play progression: How does the game move from start to finish?
Are there multiple levels or phases that must be
completed in some sequence? Are there different
rules for different times or circumstances?
• End-game and objectives: When does the
game end? What are the game objectives?
How do players measure their progress
toward game objectives? Can the game
end in a draw?
• Difficulty levels: If the game has
multiple levels of challenge, explain
how they work and how they differ
from one another.


70 GAME DESIGN
Prototyping.
Prototyping With Paper
Regardless of the medium of the final game, making a paper
prototype can be very valuable. Paper prototypes can often be
made in minutes and are easy to modify. Board and card games
translate directly, but paper prototypes are simply a launch point
for sports, electronic games, and others. They work best for
turn-based games, but with some ingenuity, you can even use
the paper method to test mechanics of action-heavy games.
Here are some materials that can be found at
most craft or office supply stores and are great
for making paper prototypes:
• Index cards
• Blank playing cards
• Paper (construction paper, lined paper,
graph paper)
• Post-it Notes (easy to move around a board)
• Stickers (use to mark special pieces,
locations, etc.)
• Tape
• Markers
• Colored pencils
• Dice (six-sided, 10-sided, 20-sided, etc.)
• Coins or discs
• Glass beads
• Game pieces from other games
(chess, checkers, etc.)
• Paperclips
• Other tokens (wooden blocks, pencil
erasers, small household objects, etc.)
• Scissors
Use your imagination to help you figure out
how to represent the parts of your game.


GAME DESIGN 71
.Prototyping
The following game mechanics can be represented using
the paper method.
Game Parameters
In many games, a player’s or
character’s abilities and possessions
are represented as numbers:
character attributes, power gauges,
money indicators, and score totals.
In a paper prototype, abilities and
possessions can be recorded on a
character sheet—using a pencil
and eraser—so that players can
change the values during the
course of the game. Money,
energy, and other values that can
change frequently in the game can
be represented in the prototype as
coins or tokens that the player
can collect or expend so that they
do not have to constantly erase
and update numbers on their character sheet.
A die can be used as a player token, with the
number representing a key character attribute
like health points.
Game parameters that might be represented in the final
game as meters in the interface—health bars, power gauges, and
the like—can also be represented by boxes drawn on a piece of
paper. To model the meter increasing or decreasing, place tokens
in or remove tokens from each box.
Playing Area
To represent sports fields, battle arenas, or other environments
in your game, you can use game boards from existing games or
you can draw your own. Graph paper is excellent for games
where precise location, movement, or distance matter. Post-it
Notes are a great way to mark special locations on the field.
These can be easily moved from place to place and information
can be written on them.


72 GAME DESIGN
Prototyping.
For games in which precise move-
ment in all directions is required,
consider using a grid based on hexagons
rather than squares. The hex map has
been a favorite tool of war game design-
ers for many years because the distance
between the center of each hex cell, or
hex, to each of the six cells around it
is the same. This is an advantage for
games in which it is important to
measure movement or distances.
If location and distance are not important factors in your
game design, consider creating a card game as your prototype
instead of a board game. A card game is easier to create and
change. Also, boards restrict character movement and can make
rounds take longer during playtesting. When a playfield (or any
other game element) is unnecessary for testing game rules, you
need not include it in your prototype. Index cards are an inexpen-
sive and easy way to make card games. Paperclips can be used to
group cards that are played together, such as the Wizard was hit
with a curse that lasts two turns. Stickers are an easy way to mark
specific cards.
Chance
With a paper prototype, randomness can be modeled in a variety
of ways.
One way is to write down all the possible outcomes of a
player’s actions onto a set of index cards and have the player
pick one when taking that action in the game. If some outcomes
are more likely than others, simply include more cards with that
outcome in the deck.
Hex grid
If you cannot find hexagonal graph paper, there are free
online programs that will print hex, square, circles, and
any other type of graph paper on your printer.


GAME DESIGN 73
.Prototyping
Another way to model randomness is to use dice. Six-sided
dice are the most common and can be found in many board
games. However, two 10-sided dice can be very useful for rolling
percentages from 00 to 99; you can purchase these and other
types of dice at hobby stores. To model random outcomes using
dice, create a table with the die roll in one column and the
outcome in another.
Real-Time Gameplay
Real-time gameplay can be tricky to model in a paper prototype,
but other aspects of real-time games—like the layout of the map
or the relative strength of different actions—can be explored
pretty easily. When using the paper method, change the real-
time mechanics into turn-based mechanics so that the other
game rules can be tested.
To convert real-time actions into turn-based actions, give
each player a maximum number of action points to spend during
a turn, and assign a cost to each type of action the player would
want to take. For example, in an action game, you may get 3
action points a turn, with running costing 1 point, leaping costing
2 points, and spinning costing 3 points.
Instead of using
dice, you can also
make a spinner
with numbers
along its edge.
The paper method is a very flexible approach for creating a game prototype
because it allows you to change your mind often, which is important in the
early stages of game design. It is not important to model every aspect of
your design as it would appear in the final game. What is important is to
model the game rules that make your game fun and unique.


74 GAME DESIGN
Prototyping.
Prototyping Electronic Games
When making an electronic game, a software prototype will
eventually be necessary. This prototype will be closer to the
final play experience than a paper prototype. It will allow the
game designer to better test the user interface, controls, and
game timing. However, software prototypes may require much
more time to implement than paper prototypes. The designer
will need to devote a significant amount of time to technical
issues, such as learning how to use the software, rather than
on the game design itself.
If you are making a software prototype, consider using
either a game creation software package or app or a level editing
package. Many are available online, and some are free. (To get
started, see the resources section at the end of this pamphlet.)
Game Creation Software
Game creation software programs allow users to design and
develop their own electronic games without needing to develop
game-making software. Many game creation systems are
designed so that a beginner with no programming knowledge
can create a playable game in a short time. Others come with a
scripting language that gives game designers greater flexibility in
creating the game rules.
Prototyping Outdoor Games and Sports
Prototyping outdoor games, sports, and any other game of physical action
often works well with a combination of design on paper and live testing.
Paper sketches and models are a great way to design play spaces for
live-action games and for visualizing how the game will be played. It is
also very important to think about player safety before you begin testing
your game.
In addition to picking game equipment like balls and boundary markers,
think about the actions that players could take and possible injuries. If you
need help, compare your game to other outdoor games. Does your game
need shin guards like soccer or helmets like baseball or softball? Once you
have a plan for the play space, rules, objectives, equipment, and safety
concerns, then it is time to try your game in the real world.


GAME DESIGN 75
.Prototyping
Many game creation systems are engineered for creating
games of only one particular genre or type, whether it is arcade
games, adventure games, first-person shooters, platformers,
etc. Either select a game system that can work with your game
vision or craft your vision and core game elements around the
capabilities of the creation software.
Level Editor
A level editor is a software tool used to design levels, maps, and
campaigns for an existing electronic game. Some products, such
as the Halo, Portal™, StarCraft®, and Super Mario Maker™ series,
come with a level editor as part of the package, while fan-made
level editors exist online for other games. Even more than
creation software, a level editor may restrict the types of
gameplay that you can produce.
Consider using a level editor if it comes from a game that is
similar to the game you wish to design. It does not matter if the
game engine is for a modern warfare game but you plan to make
a pirate-themed game; what matters is whether the game rules,
camera perspective, interface, etc., are similar to what you need.
Determine if the editor will allow you to make adjustments to the
game rules in order to fit your vision.
Special Considerations
Regardless of the type of software tool you use, a software
prototype usually takes longer to make. It is easy to change
numbers in a software prototype—building a house costs x
gold or the player starts with y lives—but new mechanics take
more time to create. You should use this method only after you
have the basics of your game design and rules figured out.
Test individual rules and mechanics as you program them
before trying to implement larger systems. Also, the simpler
your initial rules, the easier they will be to program and test.
If you plan to create a software prototype of your game, ask your
merit badge counselor for help in finding a suitable software package.





GAME DESIGN 77
.Testing Your Prototype
Testing Your Prototype
Once a game prototype has been developed, testing can begin.
Testing is the process of playing a game and providing feedback
to the designer or development team. Testing will continue
throughout the game development cycle, and the purpose and
design of the tests will change. At the prototype stage, testing is
used to evaluate the game’s elements and determine how the play
value can be increased and the play experience be improved to
make the game more fun and interesting. The game designer is a
crucial participant in the first stage of testing.
Testing as the Designer (Alpha Testing)
During the earliest testing, the game designer’s basic assumptions
about the game will be confirmed or rejected. Recruit as many
people as you need to meet the player format, and then try
playing the game. You either can be a player or can direct the
players, but you should be heavily involved in the test.
After the initial play-through, compare the play experience
to your notes and decisions from the planning stage. Did the play
experience match your expectations? What happened? How did
it match your expectations? How was it different? Use the initial
tests to help you understand how your game works. As your
understanding grows, you will be better able to predict what will
happen when you make changes and which changes you need
to make. Patience is very important during testing. The players
might need to go several rounds before you can determine which
problems are because of player inexperience and which are the
result of the game systems or rules.
Recording test results in your notebook is a good way
to keep track of how your changes affect the play experi-
ence. You can use these notes to continue with an idea
that works well or backtrack if an idea does not work.
You do not always
need to play
through the
entire game
when testing.
Play enough
to get the
information you
need to
make more
design decisions.


78 GAME DESIGN
Testing Your Prototype.
Testing Questions
Here are some questions to consider during testing.
Game Foundation
• Was the game rewarding/fun? In what way?
• What was the best/worst part of the play experience?
• Did the play experience match your vision?
• Should the vision be changed?
Play Experience
• Did the game have a suitable level of difficulty?
• Does the game progress well from beginning to end?
• Does the game have suitable depth?
• Can the game be played multiple times and still remain interesting?
• Does the player feel in control?
• Is the game too frustrating?
• Was the theme used effectively?
• Was the story engaging/interesting/useful?
Implementation
• Were the rules clear? Did they make sense?
• Were there obvious places where rules should be added or removed?
• Were the objectives clear? Did they make sense?
• Was the player format appropriate/rewarding/fun?
• Did the play space work as intended?
• How can the play space be improved?
Outcome
• Who won the game?
• Was there a clear winner?
• What was the winning strategy?
• Were other strategies or tactics successful?
• Was the game’s outcome fair?
Use the answers to generate ideas for improving the game. Also, use your
understanding of the game to make predictions about what the changes
will do.


GAME DESIGN 79
.Testing Your Prototype
Game design may look like a very creative field, but it is
also very scientific. Each test is an experiment to evaluate game
design decisions. With each change to the game elements, you
make a kind of hypothesis or prediction about how the play
experience will change. After the test, draw conclusions about
the change and use them to help you identify more changes
you can make. Always keep in mind that your game should be
rewarding. Make it fun!
Responding to Setbacks
Sometimes you will have an idea that seems perfect, but when you test it,
the idea flops. This might be because of poor implementation, but it might
be that the idea is just not as fun as you had expected. Do not worry;
this happens to every game designer. Unsuccessful ideas are part of
coming up with anything new. Inventors sometimes go through
hundreds of ideas that do not work out before they find
one that does, and the same is true of game designers.
Whenever you hit a setback, it is OK to feel sad or
frustrated. But do not let a setback stop your project.
Keep going. Try something different. Use what you
have learned from your testing. Look at things from
a different angle. Give yourself a fresh start. Your final
result may be completely different from your initial
vision, and that is OK. Setbacks are vital to design
success, regardless of the field or discipline. The ability to
recognize unsuccessful designs is actually a very important skill
for developers to learn.
This is where your design notebook becomes an essential
tool. Look back at prior decisions and see where you lost
your path. Did you lose track of your vision? Did you make
a decision based on incomplete data or a poor concept?
A path that you did not take earlier may be the
next one to try (or not). In any case, be sure to
completely describe the issues you are having,
why you think they are a problem, and what you
expect to try to advance the project. Just the
process of completely documenting your prob-
lem usually helps in finding a new direction.


80 GAME DESIGN
Testing Your Prototype.
Blind Testing (Beta Testing)
As the designer, you are unable to look at your game the way a
new player would. You know what you want the play experience
to be, but a new player has only the game pieces, rules, and
objectives to work from. Once you have a fully working prototype
and a clear understanding of how the game works when played,
it is important for you to arrange a blind test. In a blind test, the
players have little or no experience with the game beforehand and
do not interact with the designer during the test. Instead, they use
the rules and components provided by the designer and play the
game as well as they are able.
Writing Rules for Testing
Your rules will be used by the players in very different ways, depending
on their experience with other games like yours and their prior experience
with your game.
• Players with no experience with games like yours will need very com-
plete rules and explanations. They may not even know how to read
special dice or prepare components for play. To test this kind of ruleset,
have someone who is unfamiliar with your game (maybe a parent or
grandparent) explain your game to you after reading your rules.
• Players who have experience with games like yours need fewer
elementary rules with an emphasis on differences from standard
forms of the game. Players like this respond very well to standard
terminology and methodology.
• Players who have learned the game often have specific questions
about boundary issues. Answer these questions with clear examples.
• Players sometimes use the rules to create “gotchas,” or unfair
advantages in interpretations of the rules. Dealing with these “rules
lawyers” can be frustrating, but failing to do so often undercuts the
impact of the game.
It is difficult to address all of these types of players with a single set of
rules. You might consider a tutorial game with simplified rules for the first
kind, a set of tournament rules for the third and fourth kind, and solid basic
rules for the second kind. Handling this [challenge] is a big part of the art
form of game design.
—Darwin Bromley, game designer, Empire Builder®


GAME DESIGN 81
.Testing Your Prototype
Blind testers should be similar to the people you imagine will
be playing your game when it is finished. Consider asking other
Scouts or Scout leaders to test your game during a troop meet-
ing or campout. Otherwise, a family member and classmates or
friends could be testers. Finding testers can be challenging, but
they will provide a unique and crucial perspective on both the
intended game and the specific ways you have communicated
the rules and objectives.
Begin a playtesting session by handing the testers any rules or
instruction sheets that you have written to go with the prototype
components. Do not give them extra instructions on how the game
is played, but you can provide questions for them to think about
while they play. During the playtest, if the players get confused
by the rules or stuck, they should make up whatever rules they
need for play to continue. This is what would happen if someone
bought a new board or card game and the rules were confusing
or incomplete.
By observing people as they play your game, you can see
how they progress, how they deal with challenges, and where
they appear to become confused or bored. It is important to
take notes throughout this process so that afterward you have a
record of what happened. Write down the problems you find as
well as any important contributing factors (number of failures,
player frustration level, their score or progress, length of play).
In addition to tracking game actions, watch body
language to help you understand the players’
emotional state during the test.


82 GAME DESIGN
Testing Your Prototype.
During some tests it can be useful to ask general questions.
One of the most useful questions you can ask is, “What are
you trying to do right now?” This is helpful because it tells
you what the player is thinking. The player’s answer can give
you unexpected and important information about how players
are experiencing the game. Then you can ask yourself if their
thought process is consistent with the gameplay you are trying
to achieve.
After the test is over, ask the players about the game experi-
ence. Many of the questions you asked during earlier testing also
apply to playtesting. Write down your questions ahead of time.
To simplify the process, consider using a questionnaire. Try to
ask questions only about what you really need to know so that
the questionnaire does not take too long. Good things to find
out are what aspects of the game were confusing, boring, or too
difficult.
Consider using rating scales on questionnaires to help
you get concrete feedback. You can also leave space for
testers to explain their answers or include any extra
information they feel strongly about.
Much of your testing should involve how others, not
you, interpret the rules that you have provided.
—Alex Yeager, submissions editor Catan Studios


GAME DESIGN 83
.Testing Your Prototype
Using Feedback
After you have all the information from playtesting sessions, it is
time to act. What did you learn? What did the testing reveal about
your game? How did the playtesters act that was different from
how you thought they would act? Most important of all: How are
you going to change the game with this new information?
The goal of playtesting is to get feedback you can act
upon, but remember that player feedback is just one piece of
the puzzle. Problems during playtests are symptoms, and as
the game designer you must identify the causes and determine
whether or not they need to be changed. If you are unsure about
what action to take, perform additional testing to give you more
information. Keep at it, and your patience will eventually be
rewarded in the best way possible: a rewarding game experience
that you created and can share.
Game designer Don Cornelson grew up in India
with few options for entertainment. He used imag-
ination, ingenuity, and simple objects to create fun
and games. “Real entertainment originated from
the interaction of the people around you,” he said.
Cornelson says it takes hundreds of hours to
develop just the game mechanics, before testing
the prototype even begins. For his game Word
FRENZY®, he used about 45 testers who played
the game many times in groups of four, six, and
seven players. From conception to production, the
process took two years.
He analyzed information such as time per round, time to complete
a full game, issues that caused confusion, and rule questions. He also
observed “enjoyment levels”—the fun factor—and the social interaction.
Afterward, participants completed questionnaires about their gameplay
experiences and other elements of the game.
His advice? While “anyone can develop a game that they, themselves,
love,” developing one that many people will enjoy is the challenge, he
said. “Believe in your concept . . . but hire professionals to help with any
elements where you are not a professional.” For Cornelson, that meant
leaving the manufacturing, sales, and distribution to others. However, “No
one else will have more passion about your game than yourself,” he said.
Once you think you
have identified the
cause and have
come up with a
solution, run tests
with the new rules
to determine if you
are correct.





GAME DESIGN 85
.Careers in Game Design
Careers in Game Design
“Dream job” is how many professional game designers describe
their career. After all, who would not want to make games for
a living? Game design is one of the most challenging fields
to break into. There are far fewer positions out there than
people who want to make it their career. Many successful
game designers can point to a hefty dose of luck, as well as
their talent, creativity, passion, determination, and hard
work as the keys to their success.
Education and Skill Sets
No matter what kind of game designer you want to become, you
should make sure that you take classes in some key areas in
school. Many high schools and colleges offer creative writing,
which teaches you fundamentals in telling good stories that will
be the backbone of narratives for games. Having an excellent
grasp of mathematics, especially statistics, can help you create
working systems with which to make your game. Understanding
statistics will help you fine-tune and balance your game while
keeping it fun. You will quickly find how statistical analysis
allows you to simulate a typical game even when there is a lot of
randomness involved and can dramatically improve the feedback
you get from the playtesting that you do.
Additionally, you may want to consider learning about
graphic design so that you can make your game look presentable.
Although the saying goes “you can’t judge a book by its cover,”
most people’s first impression of your game will be based
on how it looks, not how it plays. Finally, understanding
computer programming is very helpful if you want to work
on electronic games.


86 GAME DESIGN
Careers in Game Design.
Nonelectronic Game Design
This area is very crowded with aspiring game designers, and
most established companies will not hire anyone who does not
already have a successful game. So the question becomes, “How
can you make a successful game if no one will hire you?”
Consider self-publishing your first games. This can be
expensive and risky, but it is the best way to become known
as the creator of a good game. Minimize the risk by publishing
your most polished and playtested game design. You are putting
everything on the line and you do not want to represent yourself
with a substandard product. Internet distribution also allows
players to share or sell game documents at little cost.
Many designers of nonelectronic games, even those with
successful game titles, consider game design a “hobby career”;
that is, they have a full-time job that pays the bills and quite
possibly finances their game design work.
In addition to formal education, immerse yourself in games of every type.
See what other game designers did and put yourself in their shoes. Ask
yourself, “Why did they make those particular game design decisions?”
Once you are able to understand how other games were made (especially
games you like), you will then have an excellent head start on making your
own games for others to enjoy.


GAME DESIGN 87
.Careers in Game Design
Electronic Game Design
It may be easier to begin your career in electronic game design
because there are more firms hiring for these positions. Because
it sounds exciting, there is fierce competition for those positions.
“Knowing someone” is how many game designers got their start
in the industry, but that may not be an option for you.
Being a quality assurance analyst, or “game tester,” is a
typical entry-level position for aspiring game designers. It gets your
foot in the door and you might get noticed for your hard work,
perceptiveness, and persistence. A QA analyst can be a difficult
position that is not well-paid. While testing does involve playing
games, it can also consist of playing the same game—maybe one
you do not even enjoy— every day, for months or years.
Excellent QA analysts with ambition can see themselves
promoted to game design. Most entry-level game designers
have a narrow focus, maybe on mechanics, level design, or
dialogue. They generally follow a more senior person’s design,
and thus may not have a lot of creative control over the content
they are creating. However, they are ultimately responsible for
that content making it into the game.
Design leaders are in charge of creating and implementing
designs of a specific component of a game. This position offers
great freedom to truly show your creativity and be extremely
proud of the work you do. Eventually this can lead to lead
designer, where you are in charge of realizing the overall
design vision for the game, managing the entire design team,
and providing direction and guidance to the team. The ultimate
game design position would be creative director, where you lay
down an overall vision of the game your company is making.
Designers often work with a technical team to bring their
design to life, which includes programmers, artists, and audio
specialists. Sharing the overall responsibility for the success
of the game is the general manager, who is tasked with the
production and business side of the effort. Finally, as with most
creative projects, games require producers, who coordinate and
manage the overall project, schedule, and budget.


Careers in Game Design.
88 GAME DESIGN
Nondesign Career Paths
The skills you hone while designing games can be used not only
within the game industry but also in other careers. Artists and
animators who can give good input on the graphic design of
the game they are working on are extremely valuable and save
companies time and money while making a superior product.
Computer programmers who have a background in design can
consider boundary conditions that the designer may have not
thought of. Finally, great project managers in any field can look
at their project like a complex puzzle being worked on by a
number of different people. Getting them to all work together
can be done easier with skills you learned from designing and
playing games.
GENERAL MANAGER CREATIVE DIRECTOR
QUALITY
ASSURANCE
QA
LEAD
QA
TESTER
DESIGN
LEAD DESIGNER/
DESIGN DIRECTOR
DESIGN
LEADS
DESIGNER
PROGRAMMINGPROGRAMMERS
PROGRAMMING
LEAD
PRODUCTION
PRODUCERS
EXECUTIVE
PRODUCERS
LEAD
PROGRAMMER/
TECHNICAL
DIRECTOR
ASSOCIATE
PRODUCERS
AUDIO
AUDIO
DIRECTOR
COMPOSER
VOICE
DESIGNER
SOUND
DESIGNERS
ART
ART
DIRECTOR
ARTISTS
Diagram of game design positions*
*Source: PC Gamer magazine, November 2012 issue


GAME DESIGN 89
.Careers in Game Design
If you have a game that you want to pitch to a publisher, remember
these tips.
• Show your best, most
finished, and most of
all fun game. Make
sure that the testers are
having a blast when
they play your game.
• Make sure the game
you are showing fits in
with what the publisher
normally makes. Do
not show a board
game to a card game
company, for instance.
• If you are pitching an electronic game, have a good working prototype
and be prepared to answer ANY question about the game’s design.
Be prepared to hand over all the game design documentation.
• Nondisclosure Agreements (NDAs) protect you and your game idea.
It is good practice to get anyone who is looking at your game to sign
an NDA. Remember, if you are not 18, you will need to get a parent
or guardian to sign on your behalf.
Work within the game industry is not a career everyone
can pursue no matter how hard they try, but that does not mean
game design cannot be incorporated into everyday life. Coming
up with a fun, exciting, and balanced ruleset is a good skill to
have in almost any career. As a manager, you can make your
employees work smarter and harder by gamifying their tasks—
making work activities more like play activities through the use
of rules and objectives. Teachers can employ game elements in
the classroom to make learning a more engaging, participatory
experience. You can also use the psychology of rewarding tasks
to get yourself to do things you would not normally want to do.
Assign point values to boring chores like cleaning the bathroom
or paying the bills, and restrict yourself from fun activities or
a new purchase until you achieve a certain point threshold.


Glossary
abstract. A game that does not have
a theme. Checkers and Uno® are
abstract games.
age appropriateness. The age or
maturity level of the players for which
a game’s content is appropriate,
determined by elements such as
language and violence.
balance. A description of the relative
strength of different game attributes.
A competitive game is balanced if all
starting positions, character classes,
roles, teams, etc., have a roughly equal
chance of being successful. Balance
also applies to choices that players
make. In basketball, two-point shots
and three-point shots are balanced
relative to each other because three-
point shots are more valuable but
more challenging.
blind test. A playtest in which the
participants have no prior knowledge
of the game and are given no outside
assistance beyond the game materials.
The game designer should either silently
observe the test or have the testers
answer questions afterward but should
not tell the participants how to play
the game. If the testers get stuck, they
should make up whatever rules they
think are necessary to continue play.
campaign. A story arc played over
several sessions involving the same
characters and setting in an RPG.
Campaigns allow for the characters
to develop and gain (or lose) power,
abilities, equipment, etc.
characters. An imaginary person or
being who is controlled by one of the
participants, a gamemaster, or the
game itself. A non-player character
is controlled by the game.
competitive. A game where not all
players can meet the objective(s).
complexity. The number of game
elements with which a player must
interact and the number of rules a
player needs to know. The more
complex a game, the more difficult
it is to balance.
90 GAME DESIGN


GAME DESIGN 91
.Glossary
cooperative game. A game where
players can work together to meet
the objective(s).
depth. The capability of a game to
support or appeal to a broad range of
strategies or skill levels. A game with
simple rules can still be complex or
deep and allow for complicated strategy
and skill mastery. Deep games generally
have more replay value than shallow
games.
difficulty. The amount of challenge for
a player to complete a game objective.
exploit. A player action that is unin-
tended by the game designer, allowed
(or not directly forbidden) by the rules,
and gives a player an unfair advantage
or allows the player to ignore or skip
game content or mechanics.
gamemaster (GM). The organizer of
a text-based role-playing or miniature
figure–based game. The GM defines
and controls the setting and non-player
characters. The GM sets the stage for
players to play the campaign and reacts
to the actions of players to advance
the story of the campaign. A good GM
keeps players interested, maintains
game balance, has a good imagination,
and thinks quickly as players act in
unexpected ways. In electronic role-
playing games, the software often acts
as the GM. See text-based RPG.
gameplay. The experience of the playing
of a game; the experience of taking actions
under the rules of a game. For example,
the basic gameplay of a platforming
game is get to the end of a level using
the movement tools available (running,
jumping, ducking, etc.) while avoiding
obstacles and collecting items.
game system. A collection of rules or
game mechanics that fully describe one
section of a game (e.g., combat system,
movement system) or a machine for
playing electronic games (e.g., Game
Boy ®, PlayStation®, Xbox®). For text-
based role-playing games, it refers to
the game’s complete set of rules. GMs
often modify game systems to fit their
needs. The d20 and GURP systems are
examples of game systems.
interface design. The process of
developing effective methods for com-
munication between players and games.
The interface includes how the players
provide input to the game and how the
game communicates the context and
results of the input to the player.
iteration. A version of a game, rule,
or mechanic that is changed from a
previous version. Game designers use
iterations to incrementally improve
their games.
level design. The process of creating
the spaces in which players work to
achieve objectives.
mechanic. A rule or combination of
rules designed to create a specific type
of gameplay. Mechanics represent the
intent behind the rules. For example,
many board games have a mechanic
for moving players around the board.
The specific rule might be to roll two
dice and move forward the total
number shown.


92 GAME DESIGN
Glossary.
medium. The form of a game. Mediums
include but are not limited to electronic
games (PC, web, console, or mobile
device), board games, dice games,
card games, athletic games, physical
games, and text-based role-playing
games. Similar gameplay can exist
between different mediums, and
mediums can mix and overlap.
multiplayer. A game or game mode
with more than one player. The game
can be cooperative, competitive,
or both.
objective. A game goal that defines
how to win or complete the game. Often
referred to as “victory conditions,”
objectives can also mark progress
through a game.
pace. The speed that information is
transmitted to and actions are made
by a player. A chess game played
through the mail has a very slow
pace. Lightning and Blitz chess have a
fast pace.
play sequence. The order in which
players take actions and how those
actions flow together. Some games are
real-time, where a player or players can
take actions constantly. Other games are
turn-based, and the sequence determines
the order of the turns. Other games mix
real-time and turn-based play.
play value. The core reason for or
benefit from playing a game. For
example, the value of a game may
come from discovering and exploring
a game space or from competing and
cooperating with friends.
player format. The number, arrangement,
and alignment of players in a game. This
defines whether the game is single-player
or multiplayer and whether the players
are competing or cooperating with one
another. If there are teams, the format
indicates the size of the teams and how
they relate to one another.
prototype. A functional model used for
testing. The goal of a prototype is to test
game elements; therefore, it should be
made quickly and inexpensively. It must
also be easy to change.
real-time. A game in which players
can take actions as fast as they are
physically or mentally able. Contrast
with turn-based games.
reflex gameplay. Gameplay based on a
physical action; also referred to as twitch
and dexterity games or gameplay. The
player uses hand-eye coordination or an
equivalent to achieve game objectives.
Reflex gameplay ranges from whole-
body motions like swinging a baseball or
softball bat to timed button pressing in a
game like Pong.
replay value. The characteristic of
being able to play a game multiple
times while continuing to have fun.
resource. Anything under the control of a
player or team or available to come under
control. Resources are limited in some
way. Examples include health, currency,
territory, information, and time.


GAME DESIGN 93
.Glossary
role-playing game (RPG). A game in
which players take a character’s role in
a fictional setting and act out that char-
acter’s role within a story. Such games
typically include elements for develop-
ing the character’s capabilities over the
course of the game.
rule. Describes an action, activity, or
decision within a game that is required,
prohibited, or allowable but optional.
Rules are used to set up, play, and end
games. Rules direct and define gameplay.
setting. The setting is the fictional
environment in which a game occurs.
single-player. A game with only one
player. The objective of single-player
games may require the player to compete
against an element of the environment,
against their own skill, against time, or
against chance. This is often referred to
as solitaire play, particularly with
card games.
story. The plot line of the game created
by the game developer. Just as in a
book or movie, games can tell stories
about characters and worlds. Through
their choices and actions, players can
also create their own stories as they
play the games.
strategy gameplay. Gameplay in which
success is the direct result of having and
using a plan to achieve objectives.
testing. Essential to game development,
the process of playing a game to provide
feedback to the designer about the play
experience. There are many types
of testing.
text-based RPG. A game medium in
which players play as characters and
describe their actions through speech or
writing. Players determine the actions of
their characters within the limits of the
game system. A GM creates the setting
and initial story then takes on the role
of the environment and non-player
characters. See gamemaster.
theme. A game’s core topic; not all
games have a theme. The theme does
not directly affect gameplay but provides
an emotional or mental foundation for
the game designer and game player. For
example, the theme of Monopoly is to
build a property empire.
turn-based. A game divided into
separate and distinct opportunities
to take actions. Contrast with
real-time games.
vision statement. A short description
of the central idea or ideas of a game.
For example, Scrabble is a game where
players compete to earn points by spelling
interconnecting words on a board.


94 GAME DESIGN
Game Design Resources
Scouting Literature
Athletics, Chess, Digital Technology,
Inventing, Programming, and Scouting
Heritage merit badge pamphlets
Books
Bell, R.C. Board and Table Games
From Many Civilizations, revised ed.
Dover Publications, 1979.
Botermans, Jack. The Book of Games:
Strategy, Tactics & History. Sterling
Publishing, 2008.
Brathwaite, Brenda, and Ian Schreiber.
Challenges for Game Designers.
Charles River Media, 2009.
Koster, Raph. A Theory of Fun for
Game Design. Paraglyph Press, 2005.
Morehead, Albert H., Geoffrey Mott-
Smith, and Philip D. Morehead.
Hoyle’s Rules of Games, third revised
and updated ed. Signet, 2001.
Sackson, Sid. Card Games Around the
World. Dover Publications, 1994.
Schell, Jesse. The Art of Game Design:
A Book of Lenses. Morgan
Kaufmann, 2008.
Organizations and Websites
Adventure Game Studio
adventuregamestudio.co.uk
Entertainment Software Rating Board
esrb.org
RPG Maker
rpgmakerweb.com
Scratch Project
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
scratch.mit.edu
Stencyl
stencyl.com
Twinery 3D
twinery.org
Unity 3D
unity.com
YoYo Games/GameMaker: Studio
gamemaker.io/en
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


GAME DESIGN 95
.Game Design Resources
Acknowledgments
Scouting America is grateful to the fol-
lowing individuals for their assistance in
proposing and developing the Game
Design merit badge requirements and
pamphlet.
These co-leaders, coordinated, wrote, and
helped develop the pamphlet:
Tom Miller, Persuasive Business Plans
David Radue, Lincoln Laboratory,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Contributing writers:
Darwin Bromley, Bromley and Associates
Pete Fenlon, Catan Studios
Bill Fisher, Quicksilver Software
John Kaufeld, Indiana University/
Purdue University–Fort Wayne
John Krajewski, Strange Loop Games
Matt Miller, Paragon Studios
David Mullich, Jet Morgan Games
Kate Ryan Reiling, Morphology Games
Erik Robson, Valve Software
Ian Schreiber, independent consultant
Matthew Spencer
Al Waller, Out of the Box Publishing
Alex Yeager, Catan Studios
Reviewers, test event supporters,
photographic event supporters:
Aaron Chusid
Katie Fisher, Quicksilver Software
Thomas Foulkes, student,
Rose-Hulman Institute of
Technology, Terre Haute, Indiana
Darren Jones, BrainStorm Studios
Samuel Liberty, Engagement
Game Laboratory
Bradley Marsceill, GSN Digital
Frank Schimmoller, Lincoln
Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute
of Technology
Jay Schnapp, Boston Minuteman Council
Jim Solomon, GSN Digital
Scouting America also thanks
the following for their assistance and
contributions: Becca Kaufeld, stu-
dent, Oakland University, Rochester,
Michigan; Leslie Redd, Valve Software;
and Philip Tan, Massachusetts Institute
of Technology.
Photo and Illustration Credits
Don Cornelson/www.FrenzyCardGames.
com, courtesy—page 83
Entertainment Software Rating Board—
page 52 (ESR label)
Darren Jones, courtesy—pages 3, 75,
and 76
Getty Images—pages 16 and 22
Jon Miller, courtesy—page 38
Tom Miller, courtesy—pages 10 and 20
(computer-generated dungeon,
created using donjon.bin.sh)
David Radue, courtesy—pages 26 and 67
Laura DeCapua, courtesy; Kate Ryan
Reiling—page 65


96 GAME DESIGN
Game Design Resources.