Game
Design

35708_cover.indd 1

3/11/14 1:00 PM

BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES

game design

“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”

G
Game Design
1. Do the following:
(a) Analyze four games you have played, each from a different medium.
Identify the medium, player format, objectives, rules, resources, and theme
(if relevant). Discuss with your counselor the play experience, what you enjoy
in each game, and what you dislike. Make a chart to compare and contrast
the games.
(b) Describe four types of play value and provide an example of a game
built around each concept. Discuss with your counselor other reasons people
play games.
2. Discuss with your counselor five of the following 17 game design terms.
For each term that you pick, describe how it relates to a specific game.
Thematic game elements: story, setting, characters
Gameplay elements: play sequence, level design, interface design
Game analysis: difficulty, balance, depth, pace, replay value,
age appropriateness
Related terms: single-player vs. multiplayer, cooperative vs. competitive, turnbased vs. real-time, strategy vs. reflex vs. chance, abstract vs. thematic
3. Define the term intellectual property. Describe the types of intellectual
property associated with the game design industry. Describe how intellectual
property is protected and why protection is necessary. Define and give an
example of a licensed property.
4. Do the following:
(a) Pick a game where the players can change the rules or objectives (examples: basketball, hearts, chess, kickball). Briefly summarize the standard rules
and objectives and play through the game normally.
(b) Propose changes to several rules or objectives. Predict how each change
will affect gameplay.
(c) Play the game with one rule or objective change, observing how the
players’ actions and emotional experiences are affected by the rule change.
Repeat this process with two other changes.
(d) Explain to your counselor how the changes affected the actions and
experience of the players. Discuss the accuracy of your predictions.
123

5. Design a new game. Any game medium or combination of mediums is
acceptable. Record your work in a game design notebook.
(a) Write a vision statement for your game. Identify the medium, player
format, objectives, and theme of the game. If suitable, describe the setting,
story, and characters.
(b) Describe the play value.
(c) Make a preliminary list of the rules of the game. Define the resources.
(d) Draw the game elements.

You must have your merit badge counselor’s approval of your
concept before you begin creating the prototype.
6. Do the following:
(a) Prototype your game from requirement 5. If applicable, demonstrate to
your counselor that you have addressed player safety through the rules
and equipment. Record your work in your game design notebook.
(b) Test your prototype with as many other people as you need to meet the
player format. Compare the play experience to your descriptions from requirement 5b. Correct unclear rules, holes in the rules, dead ends, and obvious rule
exploits. Change at least one rule, mechanic, or objective from your first
version of the game, and describe why you are making the change. Play the
game again. Record in your game design notebook whether or not your
change had the expected effect.
(c) Repeat 6b at least two more times and record the results in your game
design notebook.
7. Blind test your game. Do the following:
(a) Write an instruction sheet that includes all of the information needed to
play the game. Clearly describe how to set up the game, play the game, and
end the game. List the game objectives.
(b) Share your prototype from requirement 6 with a group of players that has
not played it or witnessed a previous playtest. Provide them with your instruction sheet(s) and any physical components. Watch them play the game, but
do not provide them with instruction. Record their feedback in your game
design notebook.
(c) Share your game design notebook with your counselor. Discuss the
player reactions to your project and what you learned about the game design
process. Based on your testing, determine what you like most about your
game and suggest one or more changes.

124

8. Do ONE of the following:
(a) With your parent’s permission and your counselor’s approval, visit with a
professional in the game development industry and ask him or her about his
or her job and how it fits into the overall development process. Alternately,
meet with a professional in game development education and discuss the
skills he or she emphasizes in the classroom.
(b) List three career opportunities in game development. Pick one and
find out about the education, training, and experience required for the profession. Discuss this with your counselor. Explain why this profession might
interest you.

Gardening
1. Do the following:
(a) Explain to your counselor the most likely hazards associated with gardening
and what you should do to anticipate, help prevent, mitigate, and respond to
these hazards.
(b) Discuss the prevention of and treatment for health concerns that could
occur while gardening, including cuts, scratches, puncture wounds, insect
bites, anaphylactic shock, heat reactions, and reactions from exposure to
pesticides and fertilizers.
2. Do the following:
(a) Grow six vegetables, three from seeds and three from seed­lings,
through harvest.
(b) Grow six flowers, three from seeds and three from seedlings,
through flowering.
3. Give the nutritional value of the following:
(a) Three root or tuber crops
(b) Three vegetables that bear above the ground
(c) Three fruits
4. Test 100 seeds for germination. Determine the percentage of seeds that germinate.
Explain why you think some did not germinate.
5. Visit your county extension agent’s office, local university agricultural college,
nursery, or a botanical garden or arboretum. Report on what you learned.
6. Explain to your counselor how and why honeybees are used in pollinating
food crops and the problems that face the bee population today. Discuss what
the impact to humanity would be if there were no pollinators.
7. Identify five garden pests (insects, diseased plants). Recommend two solutions
for each pest. At least one of the two solutions must be an organic method.

125

Game Design Resources
Scouting Literature
Athletics, Chess, Digital Technology,
Inventing, Programming, and Scouting
Heritage merit badge pamphlets
Visit the Boy Scouts of America’s
official retail website (with your
parent’s permission) at
http://www.scoutstuff.org for a
complete listing of all merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.

Books
Bell, R.C. Board and Table Games
From Many Civilizations, revised ed.
Dover Publications, 1979.

Morehead, Albert H., Geoffrey MottSmith, and Philip D. Morehead.
Hoyle’s Rules of Games, third revised
and updated ed. Signet, 2001.
Sackson, Sid. Card Games Around the
World. Dover Publications, 1994.
Schell, Jesse. The Art of Game Design:
A Book of Lenses. Morgan
Kaufmann, 2008.

Organizations and Websites
Adventure Game Studio
Website:
http://www.adventuregamestudio.co.uk
Entertainment Software Rating Board
Website: http://www.esrb.org
RPG Maker
Website: http://www.rpgmakerweb.com

Botermans, Jack. The Book of Games:
Strategy, Tactics & History. Sterling
Publishing, 2008.

Scratch Project
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Website: http://scratch.mit.edu

Brathwaite, Brenda, and Ian Schreiber.
Challenges for Game Designers.
Charles River Media, 2009.

Unity 3D
Website: http://unity3d.com

Koster, Raph. A Theory of Fun for
Game Design. Paraglyph Press, 2005.

94    game design

YoYo Games/GameMaker: Studio
Website:
http://yoyogames.com/gamemaker/studio

