ROBOTICS
STEM-Based


ROBOTICS
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Note to the Counselor
There are many different robot platforms (or frameworks) avail-
able to Scouts, and there will be many ways to earn this merit
badge. Any Scout who is interested in earning this merit badge
should meet with the merit badge counselor before beginning any
work on the robot. You should both agree on a project to provide
assurance that the robot or robotic subsystem the Scout plans to
create meets the requirements of this merit badge.
As the merit badge counselor, you will need to determine
the following:
1. Based on the difficulty of the project, determine whether the
Scout should complete this merit badge as part of a team (if
the project is sufficiently complex) or if the Scout’s project is
simple enough that it should be completed individually.
2. Whether the robot or robot subsystem the Scout plans to
build will accomplish a task sufficient for the requirements.
3. Whether the Scout understands all the subsystems of robotics.
An individual robot project will not be as complicated as
a team project. A robot that can be assembled by an individual
Scout should not qualify for a team of Scouts. If a summer
camp or district has programmable kits that Scouts can
share and use, each Scout should complete their own task
and develop their own robot design that is documented in the
Scout’s robot engineering notebook.
Before spending a lot of time and effort on the
requirements, the Scout should be sure you will give
credit for that work.
35972
ISBN 978-0-8395-5972-6
©2024 Boy Scouts of America
2024 Printing
FPO


ROBOTICS 3
Competitions are a wonderful opportunity for Scouts to
work on the Robotics merit badge as part of a team. Scouts in
a team competition will likely have learned a great deal about
robotics by the end of the season and enough to earn the merit
badge. These competitions generally require several weeks of
preparation and generally are sufficiently complex to require
Scouts to take on specialized roles on the team.
For instance, a Scout may be responsible for an articulated
arm that has several motors or actuators. The Scout should be
able to explain that part of the robot and the design process of
that part of the robot in detail. The Scout may be unable to fully
describe the rest of the robot but should be able to describe the
robot’s other subsystems, including the programming. A Scout
must show in a notebook that they designed some part of the
robot. Even as part of a team, each Scout should be individually
responsible for a design component of the robot. Simply being on
a team is insufficient for this merit badge.
Please review the examples in this pamphlet regarding sug-
gested tasks (see “Building a Robot”). A task should demonstrate
robot motion, and the use of sensor feedback in the programming
at a minimum. Each example requires some form of structured
programming, such as a loop, while, or if/then statement. A simple
timed task or a task that requires only one program step (e.g., go
forward 2 seconds and return, bump against the wall and return)
would not fulfill requirement 4.
Many reasonably priced robot kits meet the needs for require-
ment 4. A remote control car, plane, or boat will not qualify unless
extensive modifications are made. Some “robot” kits are no more
than puzzles; they create a predetermined robot that completes a
predetermined task. There is no room for original design or pro-
gramming in these robots, and they will not meet the Robotics
merit badge requirements.
Earning the Robotics merit badge requires a Scout to under-
stand how robots move (actuators), sense the environment
(sensors), and understand what to do (programming); the Scout
shall demonstrate robot design in building a robot or robotics
sub-system. You should help ensure that the Scout has sufficiently
explored the field of robotics to understand what it is about, and
to discover whether this may be a career field of interest.
Requirement
4b calls for the
Scout’s robot
design to have at
least 2 degrees of
freedom to ensure
the robot has
some complexity.
For example, a
robot that has two
motors will have
2 degrees of
freedom. A robot
that has three
output ports
is capable of
3 degrees
of freedom.





ROBOTICS 5
Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Robotics or check Scoutbook for the latest requirements.


6 ROBOTICS


ROBOTICS 7





ROBOTICS 9
Contents
What Is Robotics? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Major Fields of Robotics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
Building a Robot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
The Chassis Subsystem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
The Mechanical Subsystem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
The Power Subsystem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
The Controls Subsystem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
Robotics Competitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
Careers in Robotics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
Robotics Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85





ROBOTICS 11
.What Is Robotics?
What Is Robotics?
From space probes to underwater exploration, from medicine to
manufacturing, from law enforcement to search and rescue, robots
are highly useful in people’s lives today and will be an even
bigger part of our lives in the future. Robotics—the technology of
designing, building, and operating computer-controlled robots—
is a large and growing field.
The uses for robots seem almost endless. In agriculture,
robots cultivate and harvest fields. In the mining industry, robots
do the dirty work of digging and hauling mineral deposits.
In microelectronics manufacturing, robots perform precision
assembly work where parts must be placed exactly in making
components. In medicine, robots perform delicate surgery around
nerves, on the eyes, and on other vital organs.
Robotic surgery
requires smaller
incisions, causes
less discomfort,
and lets patients
recover faster.
There is no single, agreed-upon
definition for robot. Some
people believe the only real robot
is one that acts on its own or
autonomously. Others call virtual
computer agents that do things
like gather information over the
internet “robots.” For the purpose
of this merit badge, a robot
is defined as a machine that
performs mechanical tasks using
programming, sensors, actuators,
mechanical structure, and motion.
Remote-control cars, helicopters,
boats, etc., or computer simula-
tions are not robots, for the
purpose of this merit badge.
In the movies, robots are often depicted as
evil androids attempting to replace humans.
Modern robots have little in common with
these science fiction robots. Robotics design-
ers today focus robot development on tasks
that people dislike doing or find difficult.


12 ROBOTICS
What Is Robotics?.
The Four D’s of Robotics
Robotics tasks generally fall into four categories that humans do
not want to do or don’t do well. These are known as the four
D’s of robotics: dangerous, dirty, dull, and difficult.
Dangerous. Robots are used for tasks too dangerous for humans.
Bomb squads often use robots to defuse or detonate explosive
threats. Robots go places like deep space, miles below the ocean
surface, and into collapsed buildings, volcanoes, and combat
situations that would be extremely dangerous for people. Soldiers,
firefighters, police, and rescue workers use robots to do things
that would otherwise put people in danger.
Dirty. Robots are used in dirty places and tasks, such as inspecting
sewers, wastewater pipelines, and storage tanks. Robots scrub
ships of barnacles. They are also useful in disposing of or
containing toxic materials like those at nuclear power plants.
Dull. Robots are good at highly repetitive or dull tasks that humans
may find dreary and boring. Robots are used in automotive plants,
for example, to make repetitive welds, to paint cars, and to bolt
parts together.
Difficult. Robots are used to perform tasks that are difficult for
people to do. Some of these tasks are delicate, like surgery;
others require heavy lifting and strength beyond what people
can do safely, like lifting huge amounts of material in mines.
Five Centuries of Robots
The first robots appeared hundreds of years ago and were not
called “robots.” They were entertaining mechanical toys that
used clockwork or mechanical programming. They could do
complex tasks using gears and latches, like a player piano can
play music without a musician. The Japanese karakuri ningyo
toys of the 1700s or Leonardo da Vinci’s 15th-century design
for a mechanical knight are examples of early robots.


ROBOTICS 13
.What Is Robotics?
The abilities of
early mechanical
devices only hinted
at the eventual
potential of robots.
Robot, the Name
The term “robot” was first used in 1921 in the play R.U.R.
(Rossum’s Universal Robots) by Czech playwright Karel Capek.
Robota is a Czech word that means “forced labor.” The story is
a familiar one: An inventor builds robots that turn on their
human masters. The science fiction writer Isaac Asimov is also
credited with inventing the term “robotics” and developing the
concept of robots as intelligent machines in his book I, Robot.
Artificial Intelligence
In the late 1950s the field of artificial intelligence (AI) was born.
An important field for robotics, AI is the study of ways to program
a computer or machine to re-create the reasoning, deduction, and
problem-solving abilities of humans and animals. So far, this field
has had only limited success in matching the intelligence of
animals, not the higher-thinking abilities of humans.
Leonardo da Vinci is credited with
creating the first robot in human form
(1495). Here, a mechanical knight is
being built using da Vinci’s plans.
While truly intelligent machines have
yet to appear, robots with humanlike
“features”—humanoids—have been created.
This humanoid robot, ASIMO (Advanced
Step in Innovative Motion), can walk on
two feet.


14 ROBOTICS
What Is Robotics?.
Human and Robot Teams
A major focus of AI is understanding the differences between
machine computing and human thinking. Machines can
recall data and compute math equations far quicker and more
accurately than humans. They can also be made more rugged
than humans, so they can go places we cannot.
People, however, are creative and can recognize patterns
more rapidly than computers or robots can. People generally
enjoy being creative and looking for patterns. We do not need
or want robots to do that for us.
In addition, humans can adapt to changing situations much
better than robots. Most robots cannot even adjust their grip to pick
up a hammer or a rake. People learn early how to adapt to changes
in our environment, or how to adapt to grip different tools.
Industrial Robots
The first industrial robot, Unimate, was installed in a General
Motors manufacturing plant in 1961. The Puma series of robots
soon followed the Unimate onto the manufacturing floor. These
robots kicked off the industrial robotics revolution seen in
manufacturing today. They do jobs that are too dangerous or
too dull and repetitive for people. They are also faster and more
accurate than humans. Because of the gains in speed, accuracy,
and efficiency, robots can reduce the overall cost and increase
the quality of manufactured products.
Robots as Explorers
Robots have become our eyes and ears in new worlds. Robots
can be made more rugged than humans. They also do not mind
being sent to distant places, possibly to be destroyed and never
to return.
This understanding has refocused much recent work
in robotics. Instead of attempting to replace human
thinking with robot computing, engineers use robot
computing to complement human thinking. The robot
does what the robot does best, and the human does
what the human does best. The combined strengths
make for powerful teams.
Some of the most
useful robots
today complement
humans by work-
ing side by side
with people.


ROBOTICS 15
.What Is Robotics?
Robots have explored the extreme depths of our oceans and
the farthest reaches of our solar system. Jason Jr. is an underwater
robot that helped to discover and explore the sunken Titanic in
1986. NASA scientists and engineers have used space robots to
explore the sun, comets, asteroids, and planets of our solar system.
In 2004 the rovers Spirit and Opportunity landed on Mars. While
they were designed to last only 90 days in the harsh Martian
environment, Spirit lasted seven years and Opportunity lasted 15.
Personal Robots
For years people have dreamed of owning a robot to do their
dull and dirty jobs. The Roomba®, a robotic vacuum cleaner
introduced in 2002, has become the most successful of a group
of robots known as personal robots. The Roomba is inexpensive
enough that many people can afford one to clean
their floors. There are also robot lawn
mowers, robot pool cleaners, sentry
robots to watch your home when
you are away, and gutter-
cleaning robots.
Robotic explorers
have increased
our knowledge of
our little corner of
the universe.
The Robotics merit badge logo was based loosely on NASA’s
Mars rovers Spirit and Opportunity.
The category of personal
robots, like this Roomba®
560 vacuum cleaner, is
growing slowly but surely.





ROBOTICS 17
.Major Fields of Robotics
Major Fields of Robotics
Sophisticated robot design typically requires the talents and
expertise of teams of engineers. There are five fields of expertise
in robotics.
Operator Interface. A robot must be able to communicate
with its human controller. The interface is the mechanism of
communication between the person and the robot. For example,
a joystick controller for a video game is an interface used to
communicate with the game.
Mobility or Locomotion. Locomotion is how the robot gets from
place to place—how it moves in its environment. Mobility can be
achieved with wheels, legs, fins, propellers, and much more.
Manipulators and Effectors. The parts of the robot that
interact with objects might touch things, pick them up, place
them in containers, spray them with paint, and more are called
manipulators or effectors. Examples include claws, pushers, and
mechanical arms and fingers.
Programming. Programming is how you talk to a machine.
Some forms of advanced programming allow a robot to learn
and adapt to changes in its environment.
Sensing and Perception. A robot needs information from
sensors to know where it is, to go where it needs to go, and to
avoid obstacles.
The operator
is the human
controlling the
robot.
This robotic arm
was designed
using 3D CAD
software by
SolidWorks.


18 ROBOTICS
Major Fields of Robotics.
Operator Interfaces
Autonomous Interfaces
An autonomous robot is controlled by its internal computer.
An autonomous robot system is much like the human
autonomic system (a part of the nervous system that
controls involuntary actions like heartbeat, balance,
and breathing). It operates and regulates itself with-
out our awareness or interference.
A common computer and robot interface is
a keyboard. Autonomous robots are generally
programmed by the operator using a keyboard.
The program directs the robot through the
controller, a small computer on the robot.
Another common programming interface
for autonomous robots is a teach pendant.
Teach pendants are similar to a handheld
video-game controller that has a small video
screen. These controllers have many control
options but not as
many as a keyboard.
With a teach pendant, the
programmer programs the
robot using pictures rather
than words. Programming
with pictures is called
graphical programming.
A teach pendant is an
example of a graphical
user interface (GUI).
Most robots in
manufacturing
are autonomous.
A robot may have many arms that can move in many
directions. Controlling all the different arms at once can
be difficult. To simplify things, a master and slave con-
trol system is used. The master is a smaller version of a
robot that the operator moves around directly. The posi-
tions of the master unit are then sent to the robot, which
is the slave. This makes for an intuitive and easily train-
able interface for a robot.
Robotic arm teach pendant


ROBOTICS 19
.Major Fields of Robotics
Teleoperator Interfaces
A teleoperated robot (telerobot) is controlled by a human using
a control device at a remote location, also known as remote
manipulation. Teleoperation and remote control are similar.
Remote-control cars and airplanes are controlled completely
in real time by a person. Teleoperated robots are much more
complex, however. They receive some commands from the
operator, but they also have sensors that sense the environment
and provide feedback to the operator. Such robots are
programmed to react to the environment if necessary.
The interfaces mentioned so far can be used to teleoperate
a robot as well as to program a robot to do autonomous tasks.
The following are some unique interfaces for teleoperation.
Virtual reality (VR) systems immerse the operator in a real-time
control environment. NASA’s Robonaut system, for example, can
use a teleoperation control system with gloves and a VR helmet to
control a pair of dexterous hands and arms. The VR helmet
receives video from the cameras placed in
the robot’s head where the eyes would
be. The VR gloves control the
movement of the robot’s arms and
fingers: When the operator moves an
arm or finger, the robot moves its arm
or finger. These controls allow operators to
feel as though they are within the body
of the robot and directly controlling it.
NASA’s Robonaut
made a guest
appearance at
the 2010 National
Scout Jamboree
in Virginia.
A telerobot may perform a task a few yards away and as far as
miles away from its human operator.


20 ROBOTICS
Major Fields of Robotics.
Biofeedback or neurofeedback is another way to teleoper-
ate a robot. This technology uses electroencephalogram (EEG)
sensors to directly detect the nerve activity of a human body
and interpret it as commands to a robot. The user thinks “arm
move,” and the robotic arm moves. This method of control is
increasingly common for prosthetic (artificial) limbs that are
used by people who have lost an arm or leg.
An interesting human-machine interface is the exoskeleton.
An exoskeleton robot is a wearable robot that gives the wearer
increased strength and endurance. You may have seen these fea-
tured in such movies as G.I. Joe, Ironman, and Avatar. Exoskeletons
are their own interface. As the human wearing it moves, so does
the robot. This interface also provides nonvisual feedback to the
operator. For example, an operator wearing a properly designed
exoskeleton can lift weights far greater than would be possible
for the person to lift without the exoskeleton. The operator
will feel a weight in the arm, but does not feel its full weight.
Telerobotic interfaces all provide some form of
feedback to their operators: force feedback, for example,
or visual display information from cameras, or at least text
information like speed, temperature, and location. All this
feedback comes from sensors that monitor and report the
environment to the robot or operator.
Prosthetics
are becoming
more and more
robotic—robots
controlled by
the user’s mind
and nerves.
Robotic exoskeleton developed by the U.S. Army
Feedback systems that provide force information
directly to the operator through sensors are of
two different forms: haptic and force reflecting.
Force-reflecting feedback directly transmits
the force the robot feels back to the operator
in the same form. As the robot arm pushes
something, the human controlling it feels
the same push, even if the robot is miles
away. Haptic feedback changes the informa-
tion and provides it in a different way. Instead
of the human’s arm being pushed, the operator
may feel a vibration.


ROBOTICS 21
.Major Fields of Robotics
Energy for robot
movement can
come from many
sources, includ-
ing electricity,
springs, or air or
fluid pressure.
Energy sources
are described
in “The Power
Subsystem,” later
in this pamphlet.
Mobility or Locomotion
To do their jobs, robots need to move. They can move in many
different ways. Some need to move only mechanical arms or
grippers. Others need to be fully mobile, able to travel from
place to place. The parts of the robot that create motion are
called actuators. There are many types of actuators used in
robots including motors, servos, and pneumatic cylinders.
Electric Motors. Most robots use electric motors. These popular
actuators are typically used to rotate a wheel, gear, or propeller.
Direct current (battery-operated) motors are often used in portable
or mobile robots; alternating current motors are used in industrial,
fixed-position robots.
Servos. Servos are similar to motors in that they have a rotary
action and work on electricity. But instead of just rotating
continuously, they can also rotate very accurately to a specific
position and stop. Servos are used to rotate gears, joints, and
fins. They range from small hobby servos for remote-control
airplanes to large industrial servos that are used to move objects
weighing many tons.
Pneumatic or Hydraulic Actuators
Linear Actuators. Linear actuators are used to push or pull
structural elements instead of rotating them. These types of
actuators can exert a tremendous amount of force very quickly
in one linear (straight) direction. These use pressurized air
(pneumatics) or fluid (hydraulics) to cause their motion.
Rotary Actuators. A rotary actuator generates a rotational force
that can be used to move robot joints. Rotary actuators work
in much the same way as linear actuators, except the push is cir-
cular rather than straight.


22 ROBOTICS
Major Fields of Robotics.
Other Actuators. Other types of actuators include:
• Muscle wire—a type of wire that contracts (shortens) when
electricity is run through it. Also known as shape memory alloy
(SMA), Nitinol, or Flexinol®, muscle wire typically contracts
less than 5 percent and is useful in small robot applications.
• Electroactive polymers—a plastic material that can contract
up to 400 percent when electricity is applied. These polymers
are popular for robotic facial muscles and the arms of human-
oid robots.
Locomotion
Robots can move around in many ways
using actuators.
Two-Wheeled Balancing. By using sensors
and feedback, a robot can keep track of its
orientation and maintain its balance on two
wheels. An example is the popular Segway®,
a self-balancing electric vehicle that can keep
its balance even while scooting sideways
along a sloped surface.
One-Wheeled Balancing. Some robots ride
on a single wheel or ball and still keep
their balance.
Six-Wheeled Robots. A Mars rover or other
all-terrain robot is an example of a six- or
eight-wheeled robot.
NASA’s Mars rover, the wheeled Curiosity, can travel easily along
multiple types of terrain.
A Segway® per-
sonal transporter
is an example
of two-wheeled
balancing.


ROBOTICS 23
.Major Fields of Robotics
Walking Robots. A robot that can walk on two legs (like the
Honda ASIMO) is called a biped. Some robots have more than
two legs and can always have multiple legs on the ground to
maintain their position and not risk losing their balance. The
U.S. Army’s BigDog robot, a four-legged cargo carrier, can move
across rough terrain that would stop a wheeled vehicle.
Flying Robots. Unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) are flying
robots. In the military, small UAVs fly in front of patrols so
that soldiers can spot potential
ambushes. UAVs with special sen-
sors can patrol large areas to spot the
enemy setting mines or booby traps.
Flying robots are also useful for sur-
veillance in remote areas. The U.S.
Border Patrol uses unmanned aircraft
along America’s borders.
Underwater Robots. Robots are
used underwater for exploration,
repairs, mapping, recovering items
like the flight data recorder of an airplane that has crashed in the
ocean, or cleaning up oil spills.
Climbing Robots. Some climbing robots can adjust their center
of mass and move each limb in turn to gain leverage, just like
humans. Another form of climber is the gecko-style robot that
uses a special pad to climb even smooth surfaces.
It’s important to
design and equip
a robot for its
intended purpose.
For instance,
robots that mimic
the motion of a
snake may be
able to enter
small crevices
of buildings
destroyed by
earthquakes to
look for survivors.
The BigDog “pack mule,” a four-legged robot, is designed to help
carry supplies for U.S. military troops.
Unmanned aerial vehicle


24 ROBOTICS
Major Fields of Robotics.
Manipulators and Effectors
Besides moving from place to place, robots need to manipulate
objects—pick up, modify, or otherwise move or have an effect
on objects. There are many types of manipulators and effectors.
Mechanical Grippers. The gripper is a common type of effector.
It can be as simple as two fingers that open and close like a claw,
or as complicated as a mechanical hand.
Vacuum Grippers. Vacuum grippers use suction to manipulate
objects. They are used in a wide variety of applications: to place
tiny integrated circuits on electronics boards and to place the
windshields on automobiles in a car factory, for example. The
main requirement for vacuum grippers is that they have a
smooth surface to which they can attach themselves.
Magnetic Grippers. Magnetic grippers use electromagnets to
hold and manipulate objects. These are versatile and can control
heavy loads, but the objects must be made of a kind of material
(iron, usually) that a magnet can pick up.
Ingressive Effector. An ingressive effector uses pins, needles,
or hackles that penetrate the surface of the object. These are
common for handling textiles and glass fibers.
Manipulators also
use actuators
to accomplish
their tasks.
Some people refer to the hand of a robot as an “effector”
or “end-effector,” and refer to the arm as the manipula-
tor. Many robots have interchangeable end-effectors so
the robot can be adapted to different uses. In a car fac-
tory, for example, the same manipulator might be used
to weld a metal seam and to paint the car. The only dif-
ference is that each job uses a different end-effector.


ROBOTICS 25
.Major Fields of Robotics
Programming
A robot generally has an onboard computer that controls it. This
requires writing a program in the language the robot speaks.
You are probably familiar with many computer programs:
word processors, spreadsheets, and presentation software, for
example. Programming is the process of creating these programs:
writing software in the computer’s language. For robots, program-
mers can use various computer languages. An interesting one
often used in artificial intelligence applications is LISP; it can
learn from its surroundings.
Sensors
A robot must constantly ask, “Where am I? Where do I need to
go? What is in my way?” To answer these questions, the robot
uses sensors, which do many of the same things that human
senses do. Robots use cameras for eyes and microphones for
ears. They use bump sensors to touch. They have temperature
sensors to “feel” heat or cold. Other special sensors go beyond
human senses.
• The Global Positioning System (GPS) can provide a robot or
its operator with the robot’s coordinates on a map.
• Radar transmitters can detect objects in the robot’s way.
Radar bounces radio waves off objects to determine their
distance and speed from the radar device.
• Light detecting and ranging (LIDAR) sensors can be more
precise than radar at identifying objects. LIDAR uses light
instead of radio waves. LIDAR can identify several objects and
their distances at once.
• Infrared sensors can detect heat and are used to see at night
or in the dark.
Sensors and programming work together to tell the robot where to go
and what to do: They make up the controls subsystem. Sensors detect the
physical world and convert that information into electrical signals. These
signals are transmitted to the computer program that controls the robot in
the physical world. In autonomous applications, the program determines
the next move. In telerobotic applications, the sensor data is sent back as
a signal to the human operator. As the robot moves in the physical world,
the sensor values change, and the process repeats until the program ends.
You are strongly
encouraged to try
programming.
It will open
up worlds of
possibilities when
you can
command the
robot to do
anything you
want. For details
and examples,
see “The Controls
Subsystem”
section later in
this pamphlet.





ROBOTICS 27
.Building a Robot
Building a Robot
For this merit badge you will design and build a robot or a func-
tional part of a robot. Building a robot of your own is an exciting
project, but getting started can be challenging. Fortunately, you
do not have to build your robot from scratch or alone.
Before you begin building your robot, be sure to discuss the
project with your counselor. Discuss the type of robot you want
to build, the task you want your robot to complete, and the
safety considerations of building your robot.
Building larger robots requires the use of safety glasses,
gloves, or other safety equipment depending on the complexity
of your project. In addition, your merit badge counselor may
suggest that a parent or adult or another Scout be present during
the building of your robot. This is in the Scouting spirit of two-
deep leadership and the buddy system—always a good practice.
The robot you build for this merit badge may be
complicated. If so, you may be able to work on a
team to complete the requirements. Discuss this
with your counselor before you get started. In
any case, you need to be familiar with the mecha-
nisms and structure, the programming, and the
sensors of your robot, and you will still be required
to demonstrate your individual knowledge.
Safety Precautions
Robotics combines many different fields of engineering
and science like electrical engineering and mechanical
engineering. When working with a robot, you must
be concerned with electrical safety, materials safety,
chemical safety, and power tool safety.


28 ROBOTICS
Building a Robot.
Robotics and First Aid Basics
Discuss with your counselor all the potential hazards stemming
from your project. Know the proper first aid for cuts, burns, and
eye injuries.
Cuts. To avoid minor cuts and scrapes, be sure you dress appro-
priately when working on your robot—for instance, jeans, boots,
gloves, and so on. Treat minor cuts and scrapes by flushing
the area with clean water for at least five minutes, or until
all foreign matter appears to be washed away. Apply triple
antibiotic ointment (if appropriate and if there are no known
allergies) and cover with a dry, sterile bandage.
Burns. Working under close supervision of a responsible adult
and being careful when you work with materials that can cause
burns will help prevent accidents. For chemical burns, it’s
important to quickly brush off as much of the chemical as possi-
ble using a gloved hand. Flush the area with tap water, taking
care not to recontaminate the area. For superficial (first-degree
or minor) burns, hold the burn under cold water or apply cool,
wet compresses until the pain eases. Cover the area loosely with
a sterile gauze pad and bandage. For more serious burns, seek
immediate medical attention.
Eye Injuries. Wearing safety glasses or goggles will help protect
your eyes from fumes, chemicals, debris, and other foreign
matter. If a foreign object gets in the eye, do not rub the eye.
Blink the eyes to help tears flush out the object. If that doesn’t
work, wash your hands with soap and water, then try to flush
out the foreign particles with clean running water or clean water
poured from a glass or bottle. For more serious injuries, seek
immediate medical attention.
For more
information about
first aid, see the
First Aid merit
badge pamphlet.
Safety First
Before beginning to build, fix, or work on moving parts,
be sure the robot’s energy sources are disconnected:
• Turn the power switch off.
• Disconnect the batteries.
• Unplug the power cord.


ROBOTICS 29
.Building a Robot
Robot Design Kits
You can complete the requirements for this merit badge using
robot design kits, many of which can be put together with snaps
or screws. Robot construction kits provide all the parts you
need: structural parts (bricks, beams, fasteners), mechanical
parts (gears, motors, actuators), controllers (small computers),
and sensors. These are design platforms. They allow the builder
to create any number of robots that can accomplish various
tasks. Examples of these design-and-build kits include the VEX®
Robotics Design System, Lynxmotion’s Servo Erector Set, LEGO®
Mindstorms®, Robotis, Parallax Boe-Bot®, and Fischertechnik.
Most of these kits provide parts that are
designed to work together with the controller
and sensors. Some have all the parts you need
to create many different robots. Others include a
standard platform that moves and has a controller.
To add functionality, you must purchase additional
parts separately. Both approaches offer many options
for designing your own robot.
The advantage of using a design-and-
build kit is that you are working with
parts that are made to work together,
so you spend your time imagining
and building your robot rather than
struggling to fit things together. The
disadvantage is that these kits
can be expensive.
Robot created from VEX Robotics kit
Robot constructed from a LEGO Mindstorms kit
Parallax
Boe-Bot robot


30 ROBOTICS
Building a Robot.
Hybrids
If you feel comfortable with electronics, you may try to add a controller to
a toy or machine to make it into a robot. Remote-controlled cars, boats,
and airplanes can be modified to become robots by adding a controller
or central processing unit (CPU). This is not easy. Find someone who has
done this before to help you.
Caution: Some robot kits are like puzzles. They are to be put together in a
specific way and can accomplish only predetermined tasks. These robots
are typically designed to teach robotics programming or operation, but not
mechanical design and construction. Such robots and kits do not fulfill the
requirements for the Robotics merit badge. To earn the badge, you must
design your own robot or part of a robot.
Be sure you discuss your project with your counselor before you get
started. That way, you can both determine an appropriate project that will
meet the needs of the Robotics merit badge requirements.
In industry, modifying existing machines is common practice.
Researchers are automating products to make them robotic,
creating smart vacuum cleaners, automated lawn mowers,
and robot cars like this one.


ROBOTICS 31
.Building a Robot
When you start
from nothing, you
begin to realize
that many things
lying around your
home or neighbor-
hood can easily
become part of
a robot.
Building From Scratch
Building a robot from scratch is not only satisfying, but can also
be less expensive. You can make a good robot from a robotics
controller, servo motors, and fabricated components. Resources
available online and in books can help walk you through the pro-
cess (see “Robotics Resources” in this pamphlet). If you choose
this option, be sure to work with someone who has previously
built a robot from scratch.
Many builders start with a robot kit or building kit and
add their own parts. PVC pipes are great for underwater robots.
Cardboard and discarded polycarbonate make excellent building
materials. (Look for polycarbonate plastics rather than acrylic
plastics for robot use. Acrylic plastics like Plexiglas might look
better than polycarbonate plastics because they are clearer and
resist scratches. However, polycarbonate plastics like Lexan are
better for robots because they resist breakage and do not shatter
when broken.)
Being Part of a Team
In most cases, being on a robotics team will give
you opportunities to complete the merit badge
requirements. You may learn more on a team
than by working alone.
Putting most commercial robots together
takes a team of skilled engineers. A Scout,
however, does not have to wait to become
an engineer to build robots. More than
300,000 students participate each year in
robotics competitions around the country.
Many other youths build robots as a hobby.
Often, each member of a robotics team is
assigned a responsibility. If you have an
assigned responsibility, you need to show how
you designed your part of the robot. You need to
develop an idea and design a solution. You will
also need to understand how the robot subsystems
work together and be able to describe the chassis,
mechanical, power, and controls subsystems. (The
subsystems that make up a robot are discussed
individually, later in this pamphlet.)


32 ROBOTICS
Building a Robot.
Robot Tasks
Robots can do many tasks. Those that qualify for this merit
badge require programming, movement, and sensors to respond
to the environment, and use an attachment to interact with the
environment in some way. Most robotics competitions present
several tasks that satisfy this requirement. (See “Robotics
Competitions,” later in this pamphlet.) Here are other examples
of acceptable tasks.
Sumo Robot. A sumo robot can identify another robot in a circle
and push the other robot out of the ring. To accomplish this, it
needs to use a sensor to sense the circle and the opposing robot.
It must be able to move in the direction of the other robot to push
it out of the ring. Finally, the sumo robot must have an attach-
ment to push the other robot out of the ring. You could modify
this to a single task: Use the same type of circle from the sumo
robot competition. Place 10 cans in the circle and have your robot
remove them as quickly as it can.
Rescue Robot. Send a robot to save a “human” toy that has
fallen off a table. The robot moves to the edge of the table and
stops. It then lowers a string to pick up the human. Finally, the
robot rolls the string back up and returns to the base.
Basketball Robot. Program your robot to shoot baskets with a
toy basketball. The robot should be able to identify the basket,
throw the ball, and then retrieve the ball.
Butler Robot. The robot needs to follow a path (a line on
the ground) to find the spot to deliver a beverage. It needs
to hold the drink, deliver the drink, and return. You can vary
this activity to deliver just about anything—perhaps make a
warehouse robot that stores materials in bins.
Energy-Saver Robot. The robot tracks to a light source and
turns off the light via a switch.
Greeter Robot. Create a robot to hear the doorbell, move to the
door, and extend a hand to welcome guests.
The projects mentioned here are only suggestions. You may want to be
more creative with your task—build a robot to cap a simulated oil well
deep in the “ocean,” for example, or build a robot that “plays” basketball
and “shoots” hoops.


ROBOTICS 33
.Building a Robot
The Design Cycle
The design cycle is the process that engineers use to create new
things or improve existing things. The design cycle is a creative
process, and like robotics itself, its definition is not universally
accepted. For the purpose of this merit badge, the design cycle is
defined in the following way.
Identify and define the problem. Everyone involved needs to
identify the problem and share the same precise definition of the
problem that the robot will address.
Understand the problem and pinpoint the constraints. This
is a step of further refinement of the problem to determine what
is possible at present, the limitations (such as resources), and
what will have to wait for another time.
Analyze the problem. Analysis can take many forms. This is
where you research your problem for what already exists, what
has already been tried, what works, and what does not work
from past experience and data.
Evaluate and brainstorm the problem. During this step, you
generate ideas and consider a number of possible approaches to
the problem. You need to evaluate which one approach your
team will pursue.
Synthesize and select the approach. Identify the best
approach (what), specify the implementation (how), and
build your product.
Communicate the product. You show your product to others
to test it.
Refine the product and repeat the design cycle. This is a
critical step, and this is why the design cycle is circular. Once a
team has created something, the team will begin the design
cycle over again. This is why an engineer’s job is never finished.
It is also why a new version of a television, mobile phone, or car
appears every few months.
It is critical for engineers to document their design steps
in an engineering notebook, because it is the primary evidence
used to grant a patent. The steps the engineers take, and the
tests they do, need to be documented clearly and precisely so
that others can understand what they did.
An innovative
design can pro-
vide engineers or
their companies
with continual
income through
patents. A
patent is an idea
that belongs
exclusively to
an individual or
a company. If
another company
wants to use the
idea, it must pay
the inventor or
patent holder for
the right to use
it. For more
information about
patents, see the
Inventing merit
badge pamphlet.


34 ROBOTICS
Building a Robot.
Robot Engineering Notebook
You will need to keep a robot engineering notebook, just like a
robotics engineer’s. You will use the notebook to document the
completion of each requirement for the Robotics merit badge. The
purpose of the notebook is to document the design process for
your robot. The documentation will be helpful as you improve the
robot design. It is also a valuable way to communicate to others,
like your counselor, what you did.
Many notebook formats are suitable. A composition book
makes a good design notebook. The kind with graph paper allows
you to draw scale pictures of your robot designs. You should draw
several pictures of your designs as you develop them. Use the
squares to represent a measurement scale, like an inch or a
centimeter. Using the squares will give you more information
about the final design size and the placement of parts than
would a free drawing without the squares.
For your robot engineering notebook, collect pictures of robots
(from the internet, for example) so that you can discuss them
with your counselor.


ROBOTICS 35
.Building a Robot
Feel free to add
more to your
notebook—notes
on other robot
designs, cool
attachments,
other robot
languages, or
anything else
you want.
Robot Engineering Notebook—
Required Sections
Put your name in your robot engineering notebook,
and include these sections:
• Robot. Describe the type of robot you want to
build (flying, underwater, boat, land, tank drive,
wheeled, etc.).
• Task. Describe in detail the task the robot
will accomplish.
• Several Possible Design Ideas. Discuss with your
counselor several possible ideas for your robot
design before building it.
• Tests. Describe the tests and the designs that did
not work that lead to the final robot design.
• Pseudo Code. Prepare a detailed flowchart of the
step-by-step commands the robot must complete
to accomplish the task. (See “The Controls
Subsystem” section of this pamphlet.)
• Software Code. Include the code or flowchart
you used.
• Code Modifications. Include any changes you make
to the pseudo code or the actual code so that the
robot completes the task better.
• Final Robot Design. Include a description or picture
of what you decided to build.
• Potential for Improvements. Describe how you can
improve your robot for the next design version.
Show your counselor the notebook at several points as you
design your robot. Before you begin building your robot, discuss
with your counselor the “Several Possible Design Ideas” section
of your notebook. Your counselor can help save you from the
time and trouble of working on a faulty design.





ROBOTICS 37
.The Chassis Subsystem
The Chassis Subsystem
Just as your body needs a skeleton, your robot needs a well-
designed chassis or frame. The chassis gives a robot shape,
structure, and strength; protects the robot’s computer and other
vulnerable components; and provides a place for attaching the
robot’s other parts.
The chassis can be made from various materials, including
wood, metal, plastic, PVC, or composites. The choice of materials
depends heavily on the robot’s environment (land, water,
air, space, etc.). Choose materials that are strong and appropriate
for the task at hand.
Remember that
the design pro-
cess is repetitive.
Experiment with
several different
kinds of chassis
to see what
works best for
your robot.
As you build your robot, keep these things in mind: stability,
robust design, vulnerability, and interaction with other
system components.


38 ROBOTICS
The Chassis Subsystem.
Stability
Center of Gravity. You can think of a robot’s center of gravity
as the average position of all the weight on the robot. Because it
is an average of weight and position, heavy objects count more
than light ones in determining where the center of gravity is,
and pieces that are farther out count more than pieces that are
closer to the center of the robot.
Support Polygon. Squares and rectangles (four-sided figures)
and pentagons (five-sided figures) are examples of polygons.
The support polygon of a robot is the imaginary polygon formed
by connecting the points where the robot touches the supporting
surface (the ground, water, air, etc.).
A triangle is the most stable stationary polygon. The most
stable sitting or standing object will have three feet like a tripod.
Robots, however, do not sit or stand still; they move. Three
points of contact are not stable when a robot is moving. Four
points work better. This is why most land robots have four
points like wheels touching the ground or surface, not three.
It varies by
design, but there
is always one
support polygon
in any stable
configuration.
CENTER OF GRAVITY
POINT OF CONTACT BETWEEN
WHEEL AND GROUND
SUPPORT POLYGON


ROBOTICS 39
.The Chassis Subsystem
A robot will
be most stable
when its center
of gravity is over
the robot’s support
polygon under
all operating
conditions
(diving under-
water, climbing
a ramp on
land, etc.).
CENTER OF GRAVITY
OVER SUPPORT POLYGON
CENTER OF GRAVITY
NOT DIRECTLY OVER
SUPPORT POLYGON
CENTER OF GRAVITY
STILL OVER
SUPPORT POLYGON


40 ROBOTICS
The Chassis Subsystem.
Stability Example No. 1
This robot was built with a heavy weight high above the
robot’s base. While standing still on a flat surface, it is stable
because the center of gravity is above the support polygon. But
when the robot climbs a ramp, as shown on the previous page,
the center of gravity is no longer over the support polygon,
and the robot tips.
1kg
WEIGHT REPRESENTS
BULK OF GRIPPER OR
SIMILAR APPARATUS
CENTER OF GRAVITY IS
HIGHER BECAUSE MORE
WEIGHT IS MOUNTED HIGH UP
CENTER OF GRAVITY IS
LOWER BECAUSE
WEIGHT IS LOWER
CENTER OF GRAVITY IS
DIRECTLY OVER SUPPORT
POLYGON (BUT NOT BY MUCH)
The top-heavy robot can be modified so its weight is lower
and forward of its center. Then, climbing a ramp won’t be such
a problem because the center of gravity is always above the
support polygon.
Stability Example No. 2
This robot is designed to pick up a heavy object using a claw. By
itself, it is a stable design because the center of gravity is over
the support polygon. But when it picks up a heavy object, the
center of gravity moves so it is not over the support polygon,
and the robot falls over.


ROBOTICS 41
.The Chassis Subsystem
The problem may be solved several ways: (1) move the grabber back so
the center of gravity always stays over the support polygon; (2) extend the
support polygon by making the chassis longer; or (3) add a counterweight
to help keep the center of gravity over the support polygon.
CENTER OF GRAVITY
NO LONGER OVER
SUPPORT POLYGON
HEAVY WEIGHT NEAR FRONT OF ROBOT MOVES
CENTER OF GRAVITY FAR FORWARD
CENTER OF GRAVITY OVER NEWLY
EXTENDED SUPPORT POLYGON
CENTER OF GRAVITY REMAINS
OVER SUPPORT POLYGON
WEIGHT STILL PULLS CENTER
OF GRAVITY FORWARD, BUT
NOT AS FAR AS BEFORE ADDITIONAL WEIGHT PULLS
CENTER OF GRAVITY BACK
TOWARD CENTER
CENTER OF GRAVITY REMAINS
OVER SUPPORT POLYGON


42 ROBOTICS
The Chassis Subsystem.
Robust Design
A robust design is one that does not break or fall apart easily.
A simple rule to follow to build a robust chassis is the two-point
rule: Make sure you have two points of connection on
structural pieces.
For a more robust design that is less
likely to rotate out of position, overlap
the metal extension piece with the base
piece and use two screws to secure it on
both sides.
This arm, if not supported, puts stress on the system at the single
mounting point. By adding a support, the stress is shared and the
arm is more likely to hold.
The top piece of the extension is likely
to fall because a single screw allows the
pieces to pivot.
TWO SCREWS
ELIMINATE ROTATION
ARM ROTATES TOO
EASILY AROUND
THIS POINT
SIMPLE
SCREW
LONG LEVER ARM
CAUSES GREAT STRAIN
ON MOUNTING POINT
SINGLE SCREW
MOUNTING POINT
SHORTER LEVER ARM
CAUSES LESS STRAIN
ON MOUNTING SCREW
TWO SUPPORTS
BRACING ARM
PROVIDES SUPPORT,
SHORTENS
LEVER ARM


ROBOTICS 43
.The Chassis Subsystem
Vulnerability
Some parts of every robot are more fragile than others. If possible,
always plan the chassis design to protect these parts from
unwanted physical contact.
WIRES CAN GET CAUGHT
IN ROBOT’S OWN TIRES
TIED WIRES ARE LESS
PRONE TO SNAGGING.
In this example, the onboard computer
hangs out beyond the chassis where it
can be bumped, and the wiring dangles
where it can be snagged and ripped out.
Safety With Power Tools
Power tools can be dangerous and need to be handled
with care. If building the chassis or other parts of your
robot requires the use of power tools, talk with your
counselor and parent about permission to use the tools
and the safety procedures for each.
• Always wear safety glasses when working with
power tools, including handheld and table-mounted
saws, drill presses, and sanders.
• When using handheld power tools, use a securely
mounted vise to hold the material being cut, drilled,
or sanded. Use equal caution when working with
regular hand tools such as saws and sandpaper.
• Some operations, such as drilling into steel, require
oil or a liquid lubricant for a safe and precise cut.
• After a cut is made in a piece of metal or wood, it
may be very hot, and the edges may be sharp. Be
sure to wear gloves when cutting with power tools.
For a more robust design, move the
controller inside the chassis and route
the wiring so it won’t snag.
The Home Repairs
merit badge
pamphlet is
a good resource
for learning about
tools and how to
use them safely.
HOME
REPAIRS
HOMEHOME
SKU 35908
35908 2017 Printing
MICROCONTROLLER HANGING
OUTSIDE ROBOT’S BUMPER
IS VULNERABLE TO COLLISIONS WIRES WILL SNAG
ON OBSTACLES OR
OTHER ROBOTS
MICROCONTROLLER
NOW PROTECT FROM
COLLISIONS


A robot’s power system connects to axles, gears, wheels, or other forms of locomotion
through the chassis. In many robot designs, the motion and chassis subsystems are
tightly integrated.


ROBOTICS 45
.The Mechanical Subsystem
The Mechanical
Subsystem
The mechanical subsystem is the part of the robot that moves
the chassis and the manipulators. Like everything else, the
mechanical subsystem is attached to the chassis. It’s also
connected directly to the robot’s power subsystem.
The mechanical subsystem manipulates the power system to
do many things. This manipulation is called mechanical advantage.
Forces and energy are at the heart of mechanical advantage.
The many forces on a robot include these:
• Torque is the circular force of the motor.
• Friction is a force between parts of the robot that may
prevent motion.
• Gravity is the force that holds the robot on the ground.
• Lift is the force that raises a robot off the ground.
• Buoyancy is the force pushing things to the surface of water.
Energy is anything that can do work. A simple formula
can relate the two concepts: Force × Distance = Work


46 ROBOTICS
The Mechanical Subsystem.
Leverage
Manipulating this formula is what the mechanical subsystem
does. Levers are perhaps the simplest parts of a mechanical
subsystem. A seesaw is a simple lever. If you have played on
a seesaw, you understand that you
can lift a much heavier person by
moving to the end of the seesaw.
You are getting mechanical advan-
tage by putting your weight (the
force of gravity on your body) at
the end (farthest distance) of the
seesaw lever.
Leverage plays a role in many parts of a robot. A wheel that
is a long distance from the chassis (on a long lever), like a hot
rod, makes a robot travel in a straight line. This could make it
hard to steer. Manipulator arms (like a lever arm) should not be
too long or they may break off the chassis.
Torque is force at a distance. You can feel the differ-
ence in force at a distance—torque—of an object with
your arm. Try this: Hold a weight by your side with your
elbow bent. Now stretch out that arm from your body.
The weight should seem heavier and harder to hold up
because it is further from your body.
CENTER OF MASS
FULCRUM


ROBOTICS 47
.The Mechanical Subsystem
Power
A robot’s motors and actuators can produce a maximum
amount of force and speed for locomotion or manipulation.
Force and speed make up the power to the robot. The formula
for power is the same as the work formula divided by time:
The power of a robot generally does not change. The power
delivered by a motor does not change until the energy available
from a battery decreases and is discharged. Batteries will weaken
as they drain, but that does not make a big difference for the
power of the motor. The force and speed can be changed,
however, and manipulated using levers and gears.
If the power stays the same, force and speed are inversely
proportional. Inversely proportional means that as force
increases, speed decreases: They move in opposite directions.
Gears are changing the nature of the energy transmitted and
obey conservation of energy principles. You can prove this to
yourself by simply plugging in numbers:
Notice that “distance over time,” or distance divided by time, is speed. In
phrases such as “miles per hour” or “feet per minute,” you can think of the
word “per” as meaning “divided by.” For example, a distance of 80 miles
divided by a time of 2 hours equals a speed of 40 miles per hour.
FORCE POWER
DISTANCE WORK
TIME TIME
× ==
IF FORCE IS 4 AND SPEED IS 3, THEN POWER IS 12.
FORCE × SPEED = POWER; 4 × 3 = 12.
Now decrease speed to 2. Power stays the same (12) because
it is the same motor. The force must go up to 6 to make the equa-
tion true again: 6 × 2 = 12. Therefore, as the speed decreases
from 3 to 2, the force must increase from 4 to 6. This holds true for
any robot. To increase force, simply reduce the speed with gears.


48 ROBOTICS
The Mechanical Subsystem.
Gears
Gears and levers can create more force
or speed. The motor on a robot is
connected to the gears in the
transmission. The transmission
connects the motors to the wheels
through the axles.
To make the robot move faster
than the motor, connect a large gear
to the motor. Connect this driving gear
to a smaller gear—the driven gear—that is
connected to the robot’s wheel with another axle.
This will make the wheel travel faster than the motor.
How fast the robot will go is determined by the gear ratio.
Calculating the gear ratio is simple. First, identify which gear is
the driving gear and which gear is the driven gear. Then count the
number of teeth on the driving gear, and divide it by the number of
teeth on the driven gear.
For example: If the large gear connected to the motor
(the driving gear) has 40 teeth and the small gear (the driven
gear) that is connected to the wheel has 8 teeth, every time
the driving gear (40 teeth) makes one rotation, the driven gear
(8 teeth) will make five rotations (40 ÷ 8 = 5). The wheel will
travel five times as fast as the motor. This is a 5-to-1 gear ratio.
The cost of this added speed is a loss of force. In this case,
the force is the circular force of the motor (torque). The wheel
will have one-fifth the torque of the motor.
The opposite is true as well: Using gears, your robot
can exert more force or torque than the motor can
exert on its own. In the previous example, reverse the
driving and driven gears. Connect the small (8-tooth)
gear to the motor and the large (40-tooth) gear to the
wheel. The small gear is now the driving gear and the
large gear is now the driven gear. This gives a 1-to-5
gear ratio: 8 ÷ 40 = 1/5. The wheel will go one-fifth the
speed of the motor, but the wheel will have five times
as much torque as the motor.
DRIVING
GEAR
DRIVEN
GEAR


ROBOTICS 49
.The Mechanical Subsystem
The 24-tooth gear in this string is
called an idler gear. Idler gears do
not improve the mechanical advan-
tage. However, idler gears do serve
a purpose in robot designs. You may
have noticed that as one gear turns
clockwise, the gear it is connected to
will turn counterclockwise. An idler
gear will make the first and third gear in a string of gears spin in the same
direction. Some walker robots use this arrangement of gears.
String of Gears
When working with gears, a common mistake
is that more gears improve mechanical
advantage. Stringing several gears
together in a row does not increase a
robot’s mechanical advantage.
This picture, for example, shows
three gears. The 40-tooth gear is con-
nected to the 24-tooth gear, which is
connected to the 8-tooth gear.
In the first pair, the 40-tooth gear is the driving
gear for the 24-tooth driven gear. This gear ratio is multiplied by
the gear ratio of the second pair, in which the 24-tooth gear is
driving the 8-tooth driven gear. The result is:
This is a 5-to-1 gear ratio. (Notice how the 24s cancel each
other.) This is no better than the 40-tooth driving gear
connected directly to the 8-tooth driven gear.
Compound gear
IDLER
GEAR
DRIVING
GEAR
DRIVEN
GEAR
40 ÷ 24 × 24 ÷ 8
WHICH EQUALS 40 ÷ 8 = 5
DRIVING
GEAR IDLER
GEAR
DRIVEN
GEAR


50 ROBOTICS
The Mechanical Subsystem.
In this example, a 40-tooth gear is the driving gear. It is
connected to an 8-tooth driven gear. On the driven gear’s axle is
a 24-tooth gear. That 24-tooth gear is a driving gear for another
8-tooth driven gear that is connected to a wheel.
Each mesh of two gears together is a ratio. The first mesh is
the 40-tooth driving gear to the 8-tooth driven gear. The second
mesh is from the 24-tooth driving gear to its 8-tooth driven gear.
Gear Train
The way to put gears together to multiply mechanical advantage
is in a gear train. Gear trains are formed when you have more
than one gear on an axle.
To get the full gear ratio from the motor to the wheel,
multiply the first ratio (40 ÷ 8 = 5) by the second ratio
(24 ÷ 8 = 3). The result is 5 × 3 = 15.
DRIVEN GEAR
This gear train has a 15-to-1 ratio. In other words, the
wheel is spinning 15 times faster than the motor.
DRIVING GEAR
DRIVEN GEAR DRIVING GEAR


ROBOTICS 51
.The Mechanical Subsystem
Chains and Sprockets
Instead of directly meshing with each other, gears can be
connected by chains. A gear using a chain connection is called
a sprocket. Chains connect the sprockets on bicycles
at the pedals and the rear wheel.
For the most part, sprockets and chains
work the same way as meshed gears. A
40-tooth sprocket connected by a chain
to an 8-tooth sprocket is still a 5-to-1
gear ratio. The main differences are
(a) the chain separates the gears by a
distance, and (b) the sprockets always
rotate in the same direction. Recall
that meshed (interlocked) gears turn
in opposite directions to each other.
While chains are convenient, they
require lubrication and proper tensioning
to work correctly. Too much slack in a
chain, and it will fall off the sprocket. Too
much tension, and the chain will break or
burn out the bearings on the sprockets.
Belts and Pulleys
Belts and pulleys are another way to
transfer motion over a distance. A pulley
is a wheel with a smooth rim that has
a belt wrapped around it. A pulley has
no teeth. So how do you determine the
gear ratio?
One way is to turn one pulley one
rotation and see how many times the other
pulley rotates. If a single rotation of the
first pulley makes the other pulley rotate
five times, the ratio is 5-to-1. If the
rotations do not come out evenly, an
easy way to determine the gear ratio is
to measure the diameters of both pulleys
and take the ratio of the two. The ratio
of the diameters will be the same as the
ratio of the teeth (if the pulley had teeth).
DRIVEN SPROCKET
Robot designers find many good
applications of gears using chains
and sprockets.
Measuring the diameter of a pulley
Chain drive
DRIVING SPROCKET
CHAIN
Robot with belts and pulleys
DRIVEN
PULLEY
BELT
DRIVING
PULLEY


52 ROBOTICS
The Mechanical Subsystem.
Belts have the same issue with tension that chains do—the
tension must be just right. Belts and pulleys can also be limiting,
because belts usually come in standard lengths that may not
be what you want to use. With chains, you can always adjust
the length by removing or adding links. Belts tend to be quieter
than chains, however. What you decide to use depends on what
trade-offs you are willing to make in your design.
Degrees of Freedom
“Degrees of freedom” describes how many directions an actuator
or a manipulator can move. For example, a door hinge has one
degree of freedom—it can rotate in only one direction.
An airplane has three degrees of freedom: roll, pitch,
and yaw. To understand these movements, imagine
three lines running through the airplane and intersect-
ing at right angles at the airplane’s center of gravity.
Rotation around the front-to-back axis is called roll.
Rotation around the side-to-side axis is called pitch;
it’s an up-and-down movement. Rotation around the
vertical axis is called yaw; it’s a side-to-side movement.
A human arm has
seven degrees of
freedom: shoulder
pitch, shoulder
yaw, shoulder roll,
elbow pitch, wrist
pitch, wrist yaw,
and wrist roll.
See whether you
can identify all
the degrees of
freedom in your
hand. Hint: It’s
a bunch!
ROLL
YAW
PITCH


.The Mechanical Subsystem
[[ART 66]]
Safety With Mechanical Energy
Be aware that mechanical energy can make robot parts
move with great force and speed.
• Springs can provide tension and release a large
amount of force quickly. Be sure springs are released
before working on mechanisms.
• A large raised arm can fall unexpectedly. Before working on it, be sure
it is in a locked position.
• A pneumatic (air pressure) system can release large amounts of energy
quickly. Be sure all air lines are purged (emptied) before working on them.
• Loose clothes, long hair, hanging jewelry, neckerchiefs, or probing
hands can easily be caught in mechanisms. Wear appropriate clothing
and appropriate protective equipment (such as safety goggles) when
working on robotic mechanisms.
PINCH POINTS
IDLER
GEAR
DRIVEN
GEAR
DRIVING
GEAR
DRIVING SPROCKET
CHAIN
DRIVEN SPROCKET
PINCH
POINTS
PINCH
POINTS
SIMPLE
SCREW
ARM ROTATES TOO
EASILY AROUND
THIS PINCH POINT
ROBOTICS 53


54 ROBOTICS
The Power Subsystem.
Be careful of any
energy source.
Robots use many
types of energy:
electricity, air
pressure, fluid
pressure, springs,
rubber bands,
heat, and the
potential energy
of heavy parts
hanging in the air.
Any of these can
hurt you. Always
take precautions.
The power subsystem often adds weight to a robot.
The placement of that weight on the chassis affects
the robot’s stability. And the more weight, the more
energy is needed to move the robot. The trade-off
between more power versus more weight is a critical
design decision.
The Power Subsystem
Robots need energy to move, to process information, and
to sense the environment. This energy comes from the
power subsystem.
Electricity
All robots use electrical power, because every robot has a
microcontroller (onboard computer) in the controls subsystem.
Most robots use electrical energy for other power needs as well,
such as moving servos or motors in the motion subsystem.
The power subsystem works with the other robot subsystems. It
powers the motion subsystem and the controls subsystem.


ROBOTICS 55
.The Power Subsystem
Electricity can be either alternating current (AC) or direct
current (DC). AC electricity in your home and in factories
generally comes from wall sockets (and ultimately, from an
electric power plant that spins generators to create the electricity).
Industrial robots that stay in one place while working on
assembly lines use AC current for power. Underwater robots are
generally tethered to a ship with a power line—a long power cord
that is connected to an AC generator aboard the ship. The power
cord adds little weight to the robot and is a good solution to the
weight-versus-power problem.
Batteries
Robots that move around, far from a wall socket,
usually need to carry their own power in the form
of batteries. DC power comes from batteries.
Many different types of batteries are used on
robots. Each type has benefits and drawbacks.
Flashlight batteries like AAA, AA, C, D-type, or
9-volt dry-cell batteries are inexpensive and easy
to find. These batteries are useful for small hobby
robots that do not require much power to move.
However, if the robot is heavy or gets used a lot, the
cost of replacing these nonrechargeable batteries
can add up quickly.
Batteries often add significant
weight to a robot.
VEHICLE THRUSTERS


56 ROBOTICS
The Power Subsystem.
Robots often use rechargeable batteries. These come in all
shapes and sizes and are used in many small electronic devices
like mobile phones, cameras, camcorders, and portable music
players. Types include alkaline, NiCad, lead-acid, and lithium
batteries. These batteries tend to be more expensive than
nonrechargeable batteries, but they last longer.
Lithium batteries
have the most
energy and last
the longest, but
they can get very
hot under normal
use and can
explode if short-
circuited. Handle
these with care.
Dust blanketed the solar panels of the Mars rover Spirit so that
it blended in with its background. Luckily, the winds on Mars
gave the panels an occasional “cleaning,” which increased
their effectiveness.
A common problem with rechargeable batteries is that
the robot owner forgets to recharge them. Some robots
have their own recharging system, gathering energy
from the environment to renew the battery. A NASA
Mars rover, for example, cannot be plugged into a wall
socket to recharge. The rover uses solar panels to gather
energy from the sun to recharge the batteries that keep
it moving and keep its computer working. However, the
solar panels add weight to the robot.


ROBOTICS 57
.The Power Subsystem
By the time you see smoke, the motor is likely to be
destroyed beyond repair. When the insulation between
the wires melts and smokes, the wire that was protected
by the insulation touches the other wires in the motor,
and a short occurs. The only way to fix a “smoked”
motor is by opening the motor case and rewinding the
motor with new insulated wire.
Safety With Electricity
Your robot will probably run on electricity. Take
proper precautions:
• Almost everyone is familiar with dry-cell batteries
in sizes from AAA to D. These dry cells are not
designed to be recharged. Dispose of depleted
batteries safely at a toxic-waste pickup station.
• Equivalent rechargeable batteries such as nickel-
metal hydride (NiMH) will be clearly marked as
rechargeable. To recharge these batteries, use only
an approved and matched charger.
• Sealed gel batteries provide even more energy
to robots. Gel batteries are also designed to
be rechargeable. Again, be sure to use a
matching charger.
Problems With Overheating
Electricity can move motors, but motors are not always the best
actuators to move things. When motors are under a heavy load,
forced to work hard, they will often get hot. They get hot
because the electric energy is not being converted efficiently into
motion energy. When electric energy cannot be converted into
motion energy, it converts to heat instead.
If a motor is stopped completely, the motor is stalled. If a
robot’s motors are stalled, all the electric energy is converted
into heat energy and the motor will heat up fast—a very bad
state for a motor. If it heats up too much, the insulation between
the wire coils in the motor will melt. A motor may smoke when
it is overheated.
Never short-
circuit a battery,
and especially
not a gel battery.
Short-circuiting
occurs when
the two
battery terminals
are connected
directly to each
other with a
wire and
no resistance
between.
Batteries contain
a large amount
of energy, and a
short circuit will
release all the
energy at once.
This can cause
fires and
explosions, and
could release
toxic chemicals
and cause burns.


58 ROBOTICS
The Power Subsystem.
Soldering
To permanently connect wires, you can solder them together or
use wiring terminals. A soldering iron needs to melt solder to
join wires. Solder is a mixture of lead and tin, plus a
material called flux that helps the solder
flow when melted. Burning the flux creates
chemical vapors that can be harmful,
so be careful to solder only in a
well-ventilated area.
Soldering Safety Tips
• Solder only under the constant supervision of a responsible
and knowledgeable adult.
• Always work in a well-ventilated area.
• Do not allow anyone to drink, eat, or smoke in the
soldering area.
• Wear safety goggles.
• Before you start soldering, protect any flammable material
with a fireproof shield or wet rags, and have a fire
extinguisher nearby.
• Be careful not to let hot solder splash; it will burn you
almost instantly.
For information
about soldering,
see the
Electronics merit
badge pamphlet.
A soldering iron can reach temperatures of 600 degrees F or more.
That’s much hotter than boiling water (212 degrees F) and can
easily burn you.


ROBOTICS 59
.The Power Subsystem
• If possible, use a soldering-iron stand or clamps when you are
soldering, leaving one hand free to hold the solder.
• Do not overheat components, circuit boards, or plastic wires
when soldering.
• Oxidation (rust) develops more
rapidly when a soldering iron is hot,
so try to make sure the iron does
not stay hot for long periods.
• Never touch the tip of a hot solder-
ing iron. Keep the iron in a holder
when you aren’t using it. Don’t lay it
down on your bench or work area.
• Never leave a soldering iron
on unattended.
• During cleanup, have an adult clean
oxidation of the soldering iron.
• When you are finished soldering
and cleaning up, thoroughly wash
your hands.
Pneumatics and
Hydraulics
In some robots, pneumatics and
hydraulics can be better alternatives
than electric motors.
• Pneumatic devices get their energy
from compressed air, usually stored
in a tank called a reservoir.
• Hydraulic pressure is created with fluids (water, motor oil,
brake fluid, transmission fluid, etc.). In a hydraulic system,
when pressure is applied at one spot, the pressure is transmitted
through the fluid, which causes something else to move. For
example, car brakes are hydraulic. When the driver pushes on
the brake pedal, the brake fluid is compressed and pushes the
brake pads against the wheel discs.
These energy sources are especially good when a powerful,
fast force is needed by an actuator. This may be the case if the
robot needs to punch through something or shoot something out
a tube. Recall that motors lose force as they gain speed.


60 ROBOTICS
The Power Subsystem.
Also, pneumatics and hydraulics are good for grabbing
things and holding them in one place. Hydraulics are used on
car brakes for this purpose. They can hold brake pads with lots
of force and not be damaged. A motor would quickly burn up
if used as a brake because a brake does not move, and a motor
that is not moving burns up. Gripping an object may cause a
motor to stall and eventually overheat.
The drawback of pneumatics and hydraulics is the added
weight. These systems require electronically controlled valves
that run on batteries, and a storage tank to hold the compressed
air or fluid.
Hydraulics are great for gripping, holding, and maintaining a posi-
tion with force.
Pneumatic and hydraulic pistons operate similarly.
When air or a fluid is forced into one end of the cylinder,
it pushes the disk inside the cylinder to the other end,
which pushes a rod that is connected to the disk.


ROBOTICS 61
.The Power Subsystem
Pistons
A pneumatic cylinder has an air valve that allows air
to flow into the cylinder and push on a piston, forcing
the piston to the other end of the cylinder. Pictured are
some typical, small, robotics pneumatic pistons.
Industrial robots that stay in one place can use pneumatic
lines just as they use electric cords. The lines connect to the
air tanks and compressors that supply pressurized air. The
compressed-air tanks can be in another room; they are not on
the robot, and therefore do not add weight.
For mobile robots, however, that must carry all their energy
with them, adding pneumatics or hydraulics will add significant
weight (which also must be balanced on the robot chassis so
it stays stable). When designing your robot, you must decide
whether the extra energy from these alternative power systems
is worth the added weight.
A double-acting pneumatic piston requires more complicated
valves and controls than a single-acting type—air pushes
from both ends. In the single-acting pneumatic piston, air
enters from one end only, and the device uses a spring for
return force.


DIGITAL SENSOR INPUTS
ANALOG SENSOR INPUTS
AIR PRESSURE PUMP
ETHERNET FROM PC
CONNECTED TO WIRELESS
RECEIVER TO RUN THE ROBOT
(BLACK CABLE)
ROBOT CONTROL
COMPUTER
WEBCAM
ETHERNET
SECOND CAMERA
SERIAL PORT
DIGITAL
SIGNAL
ROUTER
CAMERAS MAIN
BREAKER
MAIN POWER
DISTRIBUTION BATTERY CONNECTOR


ROBOTICS 63
.The Controls Subsystem
The controller
on a robot is
like a computer
except it does not
have a keyboard
or mouse.
The Controls Subsystem
The controls subsystem controls what the robot does, similar to
the way your brain controls your actions. The subsystem consists
of a computer, the microcontroller on the robot, and all of the
controller’s associated inputs and outputs.
The robot controller has a large number of input and output ports.
• An output is something that gets commands from the controller
to do something. Outputs on a robot are the motors, servos,
and actuators that control the robot’s wheels, flaps, fins, arms,
or manipulators.
• The inputs are sensors that receive information from the
environment and send it into the robot controller. Inputs
can also come from an operator—joysticks, lights, etc. These
work together to answer the questions the robot must always
know: “Where am I? Where am I going? What is in my way?”
The operator uses a computer to write the program that will run
the robot. The computer translates the program and sends it to
the robot’s controller. This screen shows a partial CAD rendering
of a robot at a goal.
CAMERAS DIGITAL SENSOR
INPUTS
ANALOG SENSOR
INPUTS ROBOT CONTROL
COMPUTER
AIR
COMPRESSOR
ETHERNET
FROM PC TO
DOWNLOAD


64 ROBOTICS
The Controls Subsystem.
Sensors
Sensors interact with the environment in some way that causes
them to send a signal to the controller. The controller, using its
program software, decides what to do with the signal from the
sensors. Sometimes the controller will send an electrical signal to
an output, like a motor to move the robot.
Light sensors are
also common on
robots. A light-
sensing robot can
be programmed
to follow a lit path,
hide in the dark,
or switch on its
headlights when it
enters a dim area
(down a tunnel or
under a bed,
for example).
MAIN POWER GROUND WEBCAM BEING TESTED
ETHERNET OUTPUT
TO ROBOT COMPUTER
SERIAL OUTPUT
TO ROBOT
COMPUTER
SECOND CAMERA
WITH ONBOARD
VIDEO PROCESSOR
MAIN POWER
+12V DC
A bump sensor, for example, signals that the robot has run
into something. Adding a bump sensor may be as simple as affix-
ing a small switch to the robot. In a simple bumper sensor, an
internal spring holds the switch open until the robot collides with
a wall, table leg, or other barrier. Then the switch is pushed in,
making an electrical connection and sending an electrical pulse—
a signal—to the robot’s onboard controller.


ROBOTICS 65
.The Controls Subsystem
How It Works
Here is an example of how
the control system works:
The robot control-
ler sends an electrical
signal to the outputs to tell
the motors to move for-
ward; the motors begin to
spin. (Where am I going?
Forward.) The robot moves
forward until a bump sen-
sor (What is in my way?
Something solid.) is pushed
by the robot running into a
wall. (Where am I? At a wall.)
The sensor sends
back to the controller an
electric signal that it has
been pushed. The control-
ler receives the signal and
responds according to the
way it was programmed
(Where am I going?) by
immediately sending
another signal to the
motors to reverse
direction, turn, and
move forward again.
The robot repeats
this cycle until it reaches
its destination or is told
to stop by the program.
Bumper switch
BUMPER
SWITCH
Robot with bumper
switch installed


66 ROBOTICS
The Controls Subsystem.
Programming
The operator or programmer writes the program in plain language,
and it is translated or compiled to the robot in machine language.
All programming languages must ultimately talk to the computer
in machine language, which is the lowest common language for
all microprocessors.
Program a Friend
Programs generally follow a specific way of thinking, or logic.
Programmers must use the logic to write their programs.
Programming another person is a quick, easy way to learn
about programming logic. Try to write a simple program using
English words to blindfold a friend, sit at a table, and direct your
friend to pick up and stack some blocks or books. Use only simple
terms like “move left hand forward,” “pick up,” “set down,” etc.
Do not say things like “Walk across the room and go out the door.”
Doing this activity even briefly will help you understand
the first rule of programming.
First general rule of programming: A robot will do
exactly what you tell it to do, but not always what you
want it to do. (To find out more about programming,
earn the Programming merit badge.)
Microprocessors
(computers) are
mainly a
collection of on
or off switches.
In machine
language, on is
represented with
a 1, and off is
represented by
a 0. The only
commands a
computer can
understand are
1’s and 0’s.
You may ask your friend to turn left, meaning “turn 90
degrees to the left.” But the person may turn around in a com-
plete circle to the left. Your friend did as you said, but not what
you meant. Precision is important in programming. You will
quickly learn that the more precise you are with your instruc-
tions, the more likely you will produce the desired result.


ROBOTICS 67
.The Controls Subsystem
Pseudo Code
The thought process of programming a friend is similar
to the initial thought processes all programmers go
through when they begin to program robots for
a task. They break down the larger task into
programmable-size chunks. Programmers
often create flowcharts of commands that
will lead to the final task. Such flowcharts
are called pseudo code. You used pseudo
code to program your friend.
High-Level Languages
Programming directly in machine language, the most basic level
(just 0s and 1s), can be done, but it is tedious and slow. Most
languages that programmers use instead are high-level languages.
The two main categories of high-level robot programming are
text-based programming and graphical programming.
• Text-based programs like Java, C, and C++ use English to
program the robot’s computer. The operator types commands
on a keyboard. The English must be translated into machine
language using another special piece of software called a
compiler. Once the robot receives the commands in machine
language, it can then execute (do) them.
• Using a graphical language instead of typing text, the operator
drags and drops graphics blocks onto the screen and connects
them with lines indicating the flow of the program. These are
then compiled and executed.
Pseudo code generally cannot be
used to program robots. LEGO®
Mindstorms® software and VEX IQ
Blocks comes close, however. They
are a graphical software package that
allows you to combine a series of software
icons or pictures to program. The LEGO®
Mindstorms® is built on LabVIEW software that
is also icon-based. LabVIEW is powerful software
that many engineers use for highly complex robots
like NASA spacecraft. Mindstorms® is a first step to
learning LabVIEW.


68 ROBOTICS
The Controls Subsystem.
Text-Based Programming
Text-based programming takes skill to translate pseudo code into
programming that a robot can understand. To write programming
code in languages such as Java, C, and C++ you need to learn
the syntax (rules or patterns) of the language. Text-based
languages have statements, and statements within statements.
The full syntax of these languages is beyond the scope of this
pamphlet. You will have to learn some of this syntax, however,
to understand your robot program. Review the manufacturer’s
instructions for the kit you plan to use, and consult with your
counselor for guidance.
Sequences of Commands
Programs are either linear or structured. Linear programs go in
a sequence from first to last. The first command to the robot is
executed first, the last command is executed last, and all the
intervening commands are executed in the order they appear.
Structures like loops and “go to,” “if/then,” and “while” statements
cause the commands to move around in the program.
• Loops are used to make a segment of code repeat a specific
number of times.
• Go to statements cause the program to jump to another area
in the program.
• If/then statements are conditional statements. They usually work
with sensors. If the sensor has been activated, then the program
will do something. If the sensor has not been activated, then the
program does something else.
• While statements are also conditional. They will run a part
(or subroutine) of the program while something is happening.
After the “something” ends, this subroutine returns to the rest
(or main part) of the program.
“Robot move
forward, stop, and
return to the start-
ing spot” is an
example of linear
programming.
One command
follows the next.
Note that “Return to starting point” is too large a state-
ment. This statement will have to be broken down into
smaller chunks that the robot can understand. This
statement is not sufficient even for pseudo code.


ROBOTICS 69
.The Controls Subsystem
Warehouse Robot Pseudo Code
Try writing pseudo code for a warehouse robot.
This pseudo code includes if/then and loop statements.
Following the line to the warehouse bin required the structured
statements. To follow a line, the robot must find the edge of the
dark guiding line with its light sensor. Following the line requires
the robot to zigzag along the edge of the line, first moving into the
line and then moving away from the line, toward the dark, then
toward the light.
The end of the line is marked with a long line across the top
of the guide line. This line is wide enough that both of the robot’s
light sensors will see it at the same time. This is the signal to the
robot that it is at its destination. It now jumps out of the loop and
on to the rest of the program. The dropping of the part in the bin
is linear programming.
The process of writing pseudo code helps the programmer decide on the
sequence of events in the program. Once established, programming icons
or proper programming syntax can be used to assemble the programming
code into the robot program.
From point A, left wheel forward;
Right wheel forward;
If light sensor sees dark line,
turn right wheel forward,
left wheel stop;
If light sensor sees white, turn left
wheel forward, right wheel stop;
Loop while only one light sensor
is dark or light;
If both light sensors see dark line,
stop wheels;
Lift manipulator;
Push manipulator forward.
Drop part in bin;
Pull manipulator backward.
Lower manipulator;
Return to point A.


70 ROBOTICS
The Controls Subsystem.
Troubleshooting
Writing a good program with no errors the first time is nearly
impossible. After writing some code, programmers will usually
troubleshoot it for problems and errors. To troubleshoot the
code, the programmer compiles the code to the robot. If the
compiler has trouble translating the programming code, it will
send back an error message to the programmer. At this stage,
errors are common.
Programmers should constantly test their code to see that
it works error-free. The errors that appear when troubleshoot-
ing large amounts of code can be confusing, if not impossible to
understand well enough to fix. Take the advice of experienced
programmers: If you are going to write programs, get into the
habit of checking your code every few lines. That way, when an
error message appears while troubleshooting, you will know the
problem is only a few lines away.
Second general rule of programming: Never write a lot
of code before troubleshooting it.


.The Controls Subsystem
Comments in the Code
Talking to a machine is not like talking to a person. The purpose
of several lines of code in a program may not be obvious to others
who are trying to interpret the code. Every programming language
allows the programmer to embed comments into the code. These
comments are the programmer’s explanation for the code that
follows. Large programs may become quite complicated because
the code may jump around a great deal as it is processed by the
robot controller. The larger the program, the more important it is
to embed comments in the code to explain what is happening.
Experienced programmers always embed many comments
into their programs so that others who would like to use or
modify the code can do so more easily. Comments also
allow programmers to attribute an elegant, clean piece of
code to its creator. Programmers can either take credit for
the code they have written or give the credit to someone
else who did a good job. Giving and receiving credit for
doing something well is always a good thing.
If you do not program the robot yourself, you will be
expected to thoroughly understand how the program
interacts with the sensors and actuators to make the
system function. You can create a simple flowchart or
pseudo code to demonstrate your knowledge.
ROBOTICS 71
Third rule of programming: Comment your code as
much as possible.





ROBOTICS 73
.Robotics Competitions
When using the
internet, you
should do so only
with your parent’s
permission and
knowledge.
Robotics Competitions
Youth robotics competitions range from local competitions for
30 students from a single town to major, organized tournaments
featuring thousands of students, corporate sponsors, and teams
from all over the world. Only a small sample is described here.
The “Resources for Kits and Competitions” section, below, will
help you get started finding the right robotics tournament for
you or your team.
Some Popular Competitions for Youth
AUVSI Foundation. The Association for Unmanned Vehicle
Systems International Foundation conducts robotic com-
petitions for high school and college students. From
aircraft and ground to aquatic vehicles, the
AUVSI Foundation competitions focus on
designing, building, and deploying a fully
autonomous robot and competition with
students from around the world.
BEST™. Boosting Engineering Science
and Technology (BEST™), founded in
1993, runs a school-based, sports-like
robotics competition for middle and
high school students. For information,
search the internet (with your parent’s
permission) for “BEST robotics.”
Botball®. The Botball Educational Robotics
Program is an elementary through high
school competition that uses time-trial scoring.
Tournaments are held throughout the United
States. The robots are autonomous only, and the rules
allow many types of robotics controllers and construction.
The final rounds of each tournament feature a head-to-head
autonomous challenge. Search the internet
for “Botball.”
FIRST® competition


74 ROBOTICS
Robotics Competitions.
FIRST®. For Inspiration and Recognition of Science and
Technology (FIRST®) runs both autonomous time-trial and teleop-
erated sports-like robotics competitions for youth from ages 6 to
18. Younger students use LEGO kits (FIRST® LEGO® League or Jr.
FIRST® LEGO® League—FLL®/Jr.FLL™). Older students choose
between competitions featuring either a blend of LEGO and metal
(FIRST® Tech Challenge—FTC®) or a custom-fabricated 130-pound
robot (FIRST® Robotics Competition—FRC®). Thousands of FIRST
teams can be found throughout the United States and in many
other countries. The competitions welcome school, club, commu-
nity, and Scout teams. Search the internet for “FIRST robotics.”
MATE. The Marine Advanced Technology Education (MATE)
Center coordinates an international student ROV (remotely
operated vehicle) competition that takes place underwater.
Primarily for middle school and high school students, MATE
requires sophisticated construction and programming. It is a
time-trial competition, with one vehicle trying to complete a series
of tasks. Search the internet for “MATE ROV competition.”
Robofest®. Robofest® is an annual autonomous robotics compe-
tition for students in grades five through 12 and college. It
challenges teams of students to design, build, and program
robots to compete in two age divisions. Robofest robots partici-
pate in autonomous challenges using time-trial scoring. School,
club, community, and Scout teams are welcome. Search the
internet for “Robofest” or “Lawrence Tech robotics.”
MATE competition


ROBOTICS 75
.Robotics Competitions
TSA-VEX® Robotics. The TSA-VEX Robotics Competition is a
head-to-head sports-like competition put on by the Technology
Student Association. TSA’s program uses VEX® robotics parts, and
the robots may compete in autonomous, teleoperated, or hybrid
challenges. A tournament may be open to TSA school chapters
only, or to all teams in an area, so be sure to check with your
local TSA chapter. Search the internet for “TSA-VEX robotics.”
Trinity College Fire Fighting Home Robot Contest. The
Trinity College firefighting contest is among the oldest robotics
competitions. It has divisions for younger people, high school
students, and adults. Teams build fully autonomous robots that
explore a scale-model house and extinguish a fire (a candle).
Regional events are held worldwide, and the championship is at
Trinity College in Hartford, Connecticut. Search the internet for
“Trinity firefighting robot.”
VEX® Robotics. The VEX® Robotics Competition (VRC) is an
international competition offering separate sports-like divisions
for elementary, middle school, high school, and college students.
School, club, community, and Scout teams are welcome. Teams
participate in hundreds of VRC competitions—autonomous, tele-
operated, and hybrid autonomous/teleoperated—in more than 25
countries, followed by a world championship in the United States.
Search the internet for “VEX IQ Challenge,” “VEX Robotics
Competition,” or “VEX Robotics College Competition.”
Trinity College
also sponsors a
“RoboWaiter”
competition to
build a robot that
can retrieve
a plate of food
and transport it
reliably to a table.
VEX® Robotics competition


76 ROBOTICS
Robotics Competitions.
Resources for Kits and Competitions
Hobbyist and student kits and competitions are a fast-changing
part of the world of robots. In place of website and company
information, which may soon be obsolete, here are tips for
finding information that should provide useful results even
as website links and companies change.
Use a Search Engine
Use a search engine (with your parent’s permission) to find what you
need. When looking for kits or competitions, search “robotics” or the
name of a company, competition, or kit. For example, try searching for
these terms:
• Robotics kits (returns hundreds
of thousands of entries)
• Robotics kits for students
• Robotics kits for kids
• Robotics kits reviews
• LEGO robots
• Parallax robots
• VEX robots
Visitors at Roboworld


ROBOTICS 77
.Robotics Competitions
Use an Internet Gateway
Use a portal to find information. You might begin your search at
an internet gateway such as these.
Carnegie Mellon Robotics Academy (www.cs2n.org) has
information on several popular robotics platforms and youth
competitions, and provides many resources.
NASA Robotics Alliance Project (robotics.nasa.gov) provides
fun information about robots and is a gateway to several
popular youth robotics competitions.
Other useful robotics portals include magazine websites
(search for “robot magazine”), robotics clubs (search “robotics
club” and “robotics society”), and professional groups such as
the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE.org).
Robot Events (www.robotevents.com) is maintained by
the Robotics Education and Competition Foundation and is a
clearinghouse for information on youth robotics competitions.
Robotics Education and Competition Foundation (recf.org)
connects students, mentors, and schools with engaging
technology-based programs and competitions.
In addition to your counselor, use traditional means. Go to a library or
talk to your teachers, Scout leaders, parents, and fellow Scouts. Robots
draw widespread interest—you will be surprised by how many people
can help you.





ROBOTICS 79
.Careers in Robotics
Careers in Robotics
From deep seas to deep space to your closet at home, robots
are everywhere. Only a few of the possible career paths are
discussed here.
Basic Training
Starting a career in robotics begins right now. Take as many classes
as possible in math, physics, computers, and design. Get as much
practical, hands-on experience as possible by participating in clubs
or organizations pertaining to robotics or engineering.
You will need more than a high school degree to work with
robots. If you want to be a robotics technician, many junior or
community colleges offer robotics and automation associate
degrees. Robotics technicians operate and maintain the robots; if
you want to design robots you will need to get an
engineering degree.
Most people who seek a career in robotics major in
mechanical, electrical, structural, biomedical, or industrial
engineering or computer science. These degrees will prepare
you to be able to design several components of a robot system.
To design a complete robot, you need to know more than one
of these fields. Most robotics engineering programs today are
graduate-level programs that integrate several engineering
disciplines. Nevertheless, there are many opportunities around
robots these days.
Robotics careers are as varied as the tasks that robots
can do. You might choose a specialized discipline, such
as programming or mechanisms. What works in one
industry may also be applied in another industry, such
as bomb-disposal robots in law enforcement and the
military, or remotely operated repair robots in a nuclear
power facility, space, and deep sea environments.
The skills used
for robotics
crosses into many
industries, such
as computer
software, automo-
tive, electrical
power generation,
and many more.


80 ROBOTICS
Careers in Robotics.
Exploration
Exploration is a prime field for robotics, to reduce the risk to
humans working or living in extreme environments such as the
deep ocean or space. Such hazardous environments present
ideal conditions to use robots.
Space. NASA needs robotics engineers to design space robots.
Space is a hostile environment for humans, but not for robots. In
space, one side of a robot, astronaut, or spacecraft may
experience temperatures of 200 degrees F on its sunny side and
minus 200 degrees on its shady side. Space is also a vacuum. If
an unprotected human was exposed to the harsh environment of
space, it would be fatal. Robots can be designed to handle this
harsh environment.
The space shuttle’s robotic arm has helped astronauts perform
countless tasks safely inside the space shuttle or International Space
Station. Rovers such as those sent to Mars have helped
people explore the Martian surface without risk to human life.
The robot does not mind being stuck in a small capsule for the
six-month journey to Mars. The robot does not mind the stifling
cold. And, most of all, it does not mind being left on Mars once
its mission is complete.
The entertainment
industry also
offers many
possibilities for
using robots
in movies and
amusement parks.


ROBOTICS 81
.Careers in Robotics
Deep Sea. The National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Agency
uses autonomous underwater vehicles, or AUV robots, to explore
the oceans and atmosphere. Earth’s ocean floors are largely
unexplored by humans because the deep ocean environment is
dangerous to humans. Robots are being used to explore the ocean
floor so that we can determine what resources are available there
and how we can better protect the ocean floor environment.
Many private industries—especially petroleum companies—use
AUVs to support deep-sea petroleum exploration and drilling.
The Deep Water Horizon oil spill was eventually capped by AUVs.
The Military or Law Enforcement
Anywhere safety is a major concern, robots can be found.
Teleoperated robots provide air, land, and sea surveillance that
helps locate dangers. Bomb squad and fire-control robots allow
public safety officers to stand off from dangerous situations like
fires, collapsed buildings, or hostage situations. As firefighters
and police officers become more familiar with robots, the
demand for them will increase.
Robots have revolutionized how soldiers fight wars. There are
a growing number of flying, swimming, and rover robots used in
the military. The need for robot operators and robot designers in
the military is likely to grow quickly in the near future.
Aside from
assisting humans
in discovering the
wreckages such
as the Titanic and
salvaging many
other sunken
treasures, AUVs
have also helped
in discovering
new forms of
underwater life.
Robots help
us learn about
new environments
before we
send people to
those places.


82 ROBOTICS
Careers in Robotics.
Medicine
Medical robots are rapidly changing the field of medicine. More
and more robots are being designed to support doctors in all
aspects of their work. Robots are being used to analyze test
data and identify DNA defects much faster than in the past.
Lighter materials and more compact mechanisms have greatly
improved artificial limbs, giving amputees the opportunity to
live a more normal life.
Robots also are being used in the operating rooms.
Teleoperated systems give surgeons greater control over their
instruments. Surgeons can now do delicate operations on the
eye, prostate, and other small organs they only dreamed about
operating on a few years ago.
These same robots make it possible for doctors to perform
surgeries over long distances. By connecting a surgical robot
to the internet, a doctor in Los Angeles can do surgery on a
patient in New York. Nanotechnology, with its extremely
tiny machines, is transforming medicine by decreasing
or eliminating the need to cut into a patient.
“Nanobots” may soon be injected into patients’ blood-
streams to administer medicine, repair the body, or
fight off infection.


ROBOTICS 83
.Careers in Robotics
Industry
In industry, robots that work on assembly lines are built and
programmed to repeatedly perform specific tasks, resulting in
quicker production and more consistent quality. Teleoperated
robots are used in construction, mining, and agriculture. Robotic
transportation moves hazardous materials around warehouses
or manufacturing plants. Obstacle avoidance becomes important
in robotic transportation when the risk is high for humans or the
job is routine enough to delegate to an autonomous robot, thus
leaving the human free to do other things.
Personal Robots
Besides robots for government and business work, there is a grow-
ing number of personal robots to do our dirty work like vacuuming
the floor or cutting the grass. iRobot and other companies need
robotics engineers to develop the next generation of personal robots
to make each of our lives easier and more efficient.
All of these robots still require human operators. All of
these robots need to be maintained and improved. Many more
robots need to be developed to address other needs that we
have. There is and will continue to be a great need for robot
operators and robot designers for years to come.
Mechatronics
systems intel-
ligently combine
mechanical
and electrical
elements with
control systems
and information
technology to
perform com-
plex tasks.
“Mechatronics”
is another way
of saying “intel-
ligent mechanical
systems.” It is an
up-and-coming
career focus
in robotic
technology that
can be applied in
many other fields.





ROBOTICS 85
.Robotics Resources
Robotics Resources
Scouting Literature
Composite Materials, Digital Technology,
Electricity, Electronics, Engineering,
First Aid, Game Design, Home Repairs,
Inventing, Metalwork, Model Design and
Building, Programming, Safety, Space
Exploration, Textile, Welding, and
Woodwork merit badge pamphlets
Books
Clark, Dennis, and Michael Owings.
Building Robot Drive Trains.
McGraw-Hill, 2002.
Cook, David. Robot Building for
Beginners, 2nd ed. Apress, 2010.
Domaine, Helena. Robotics. Lerner, 2005.
Gibilisco, Stan. Concise Encyclopedia of
Robotics. TAB Books, 2002.
Henderson, Harry. Modern Robotics:
Building Versatile Machines. Chelsea
House, 2006.
Mataric, Maja J. The Robotics Primer.
MIT Press, 2007.
McComb, Gordon. Constructing Robot
Bases. McGraw-Hill, 2003.
———. Robot Builder’s Bonanza, 4th ed.
McGraw-Hill, 2011.
Payment, Simone. Robotics Careers:
Preparing for the Future. Rosen, 2011.
Petruzzellis, Thomas. Electronics Sensors
for the Evil Genius. McGraw-Hill, 2006.
Predko, Myke. 123 Robotics Experiments
for the Evil Genius. McGraw-Hill, 2004.
Randolph, Ryan P. Robotics. Rosen, 2009.
Valk, Laurens. The LEGO® Mindstorms®
NXT 2.0 Discovery Book: A Beginner’s
Guide to Building and Programming
Robots. No Starch Press, 2010.
Williams, Karl. Build Your Own
Humanoid Robots. McGraw-Hill, 2004.
DVDs
NOVA: The Great Robot Race. PBS, 2006.
Robotics. History Channel, 2001.
Online Resources
“How to Build a Robot.” Razor Robotics,
www.razorrobotics.com/
building-robots
“Robotics Tutorials.” ElectronicsTeacher.
com, www.electronicsteacher.com/
robotics/robotics-tutorial
Also see the websites and sources
described under “Robotics
Competitions” (See “Resources for
Kits and Competitions” on page 76).
With your parent’s permission, visit
the Boy Scouts of America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org,
for a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


86 ROBOTICS
Robotics Resources.
The next time you are online
or at the bookstore, check out
magazines like Servo, Nuts and
Volts, and Popular Science. These
publications are great resources
for robotics-related information.
Organizations and Websites
American Society of
Mechanical Engineers
3 Park Ave.
New York, NY 10016-5990
Toll-free telephone: 800-843-2763
www.asme.org
AUVSI Foundation
Robotic Competitions
Association for Unmanned Vehicle
Systems International
www.auvsi.org
Carnegie Mellon Robotics Academy
Computer Science Social Network
www.cmu.edu/roboticsacademy
Institute of Electrical and
Electronics Engineers
2001 L Street, NW, Suite 700
Washington, DC 20036-4910
Phone: 202-785-0017
www.ieee.org
National Robotics Week
www.nationalroboticsweek.org
RoboGames
www.robogames.net
Robotics Education and
Competition Foundation (REC)
recf.org
Technology Student Association
1914 Association Drive
Reston, VA 20191-1540
Toll-free telephone: 888-860-9010
www.tsaweb.org
Get Interactive with
Scout Life magazine
Unlock the BSA’s interactive merit
badge resource center! Enhance
your merit badge learning
experience by tapping into a
mind-blowing explosion of videos,
games, activities, photos, the latest
resources, and much more. Visit
scoutlife.org/merit-badges.
Acknowledgments
The Boy Scouts of America greatly
appreciates members of the Robotics
merit badge advisory group for their
assistance with developing the merit
badge and pamphlet. A number of
them are active volunteers in the
Scouting program and are robotics
competition mentors and experts.
Their input, expertise, time, and
other resources have been invaluable.
Members include the following:
Kenneth Berry, Ph.D.—group lead;
Eagle Scout; assistant director,
Science and Engineering Education
Center, University of Texas at Dallas
Kara Boyer—mechanical engineering
student, Lamar University,
Beaumont, Texas
Lyndon Bridgwater—Eagle Scout;
aerospace engineer, Robotic Systems
Technology Branch, NASA Johnson
Space Center
Rick Folea—Eagle Scout; co-author,
Digital Technology merit badge pam-
phlet; team lead, Animation merit
badge; executive board member,
Northeast Georgia Council; visual
effects artist, AutomationDirect.com


ROBOTICS 87
.Robotics Resources
Laszlo Hideg, Ph.D., P.E.—Electrical
engineering components, electric
motor controls, Chrysler LLC;
Programming merit badge pamphlet
team member; FIRST® Robotics com-
petition judge, volunteer, and mentor
Tarek Shraibati—professor, Department
of Manufacturing Systems Engineering
and Management, California State
University–Northridge
Richard Tyler—manager, Western
Region, Robotics Education and
Competition Foundation; president,
Exothermic Robotics
Special thanks to the Science and
Engineering Education Center at the
University of Texas at Dallas.(seec.
utdallas.edu), a leader in robotics and
hands-on education, for providing the
services of Dr. Kenneth Berry. Dr. Berry
coordinated the development of the
requirements and the pamphlet.
We are grateful to Carnegie
Mellon Robotics Academy (www.cs2n.
org) and Robin Shoop, its director,
for their generosity in including the
BSA as part of the FIRE initiative
(Fostering Innovation through Robotics
Exploration). This program helps foster
student interest in robotics, computer
science, and technology, and helps
engage young people in robotics
competitions, preparing them “to be
future innovators.”
Thanks also to the Association for
Unmanned Vehicle Systems International
(AUVSI), NASA, and the Robotics
Education and Competition Foundation
(RECF) for their assistance with provid-
ing visuals for the pamphlet and their
close guidance and support throughout
this entire project. The BSA thanks Eagle
Scout Christopher Hideg, an electrical
engineering student at the University
of Detroit–Mercy. He is also a FIRST
Robotics mentor and past competitor.
Photo and Illustration Credits
©2011 AAI Corporation, courtesy—
page 81 (unmanned surface vehicle)
ABB Asea Brown Boveri Ltd., courtesy; www.
abb.com—cover (industrial robot at
center right)
Battery Powered Picklejar Heads, FTC Team
4299, Lexington, Massachusetts, cour-
tesy—page 76 (robot)
Carnegie Mellon Univ., courtesy—page 30
Carnegie Science Center, courtesy—pages 76
(RoboWorld exhibit) and 86
Dagu, courtesy—page 36 (chassis)
Dassault Systèmes SolidWorks,
courtesy—page 17
©2011 FANUC Robotics America Inc., cour-
tesy—page 66
©2011 FIRST®, courtesy—page 73
FIRST Robotics Team No. 33, the Killer Bees/
Laszlo Hideg, Ph.D., P.E., courtesy—pages
62, 63, and 64
Rick Folea, courtesy—page 5
Christopher Hideg, courtesy—pages 34 and 71
Laszlo Hideg, Ph.D., P.E., courtesy—pages 27
and 70
©2011 Hydroid Inc., courtesy. All rights
reserved.—cover (REMUS 100); page 78
(REMUS 100)
©Intuitive Surgical, courtesy—cover (da Vinci
instrument arm); pages 11 (surgical instru-
ment and pencil) and 82 (da Vinci
instrument arm, da Vinci surgical system)
©2011 iRobot Corporation, courtesy—cover
(PackBot); pages 7 and 15 (Roomba)
LEGO, the LEGO logo, MINDSTORMS, and
the MINDSTORMS logo are trademarks of
the LEGO Group. ©2011 The LEGO Group.
Colors and decorative designs may vary.—
page 29 (Mindstorms robot)
Marine Advanced Technology Education
(MATE), courtesy—page 74
NASA, courtesy—cover (robot hands); pages
15 (rover), 80, and 84
NASA Human Spaceflight Collection, cour-
tesy—page 78 (astronaut)
NASA/Jet Propulsion Laboratory–Caltech,
courtesy—page 22 (Curiosity)


Robotics Resources.
NASA/Jet Propulsion Laboratory–Caltech/
Cornell, courtesy—page 56
NASA Johnson Space Center/Joe Bibby, cour-
tesy—page 19 (Robonaut)
National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, courtesy—
page 81 (AUV)
©2011 Parallax Inc., courtesy. Use of
Boe-Bot and Boe-Bot Robot Kit photos
is with permission of Parallax Inc. Boe-
Bot is a registered trademark of Parallax
Inc. (www.parallax.com/go/boebot)—
page 29 (Boe-Bot robot)
RoboCoaster Ltd., courtesy—page 21
Segway Inc., courtesy—page 22 (Segway)
©2011 Tec Weld Automation Inc., courtesy—
page 18 (manufacturing robot)
U.S. Army/Daren Reehl, courtesy—page 20
U.S. Marine Corps/Lance Cpl. M.L. Meier,
courtesy—page 23 (BigDog)
U.S. Navy, courtesy—cover and page 23
(unmanned aerial vehicle)
VEX Robotics—page 65 (both)
Wikipedia.org, courtesy—page 13
(ASIMO robot)
Wikipedia.org/Humanrobo, courtesy—page
77
Wikipedia.org/Francesco Mondada and
Michael Bonani, courtesy—page 60
Wikipedia.org/Lance Cpl. Bobby J. Segovia,
courtesy—page 19 (telerobot)
Wikipedia.org/Red Sunset, courtesy—page
18 (teach pendant)
Wikipedia.org/Mario Taddei, courtesy—page
13 (mechanical knight)
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of or
are protected by the Boy Scouts of
America.
John McDearmon—pages 46 (both),
52, and 55
John McDearmon, Rick Folea, and VEX
Robotics—all illustrations on pages 38–43;
pages 48–51, 53, and 61
John McDearmon and Laszlo Hideg, Ph.D.,
P.E.—page 69
Subscribe today at go.scoutlife.org/subscribe
Use promo code SLMBP15 to get a special
print + digital bundle offer priced just for Scouts!