COLLECTIONS


COLLECTIONS
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Collections or check Scoutbook for the
latest requirements.
35875
ISBN 978-0-8395-3242-2
©2025 Scouting America/Boy Scouts of America
2025 Printing


COLLECTIONS 3





COLLECTIONS 5
Contents
Treasure Hunts and Paper Chases. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Collecting Odds and Ends . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
Comic Books: Collecting Superheroes and Villains . . . . . . . . 25
Sports Cards: Collecting Athletes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
Rocks: Collecting Chunks of the Past . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
Careers: From Hobby to Profession . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
Resources for Collecting. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62





COLLECTIONS 7
.Treasure Hunts and Paper Chases
Treasure Hunts and
Paper Chases
Collecting was once a pastime of the wealthy. Many well-to-do
people collected fine art, musical instruments, ancient coins,
and rare books. But with the Industrial Revolution in the early
1800s came mass production. Suddenly the new consumer
society could afford to buy all kinds of goods.
A collection is
not just an
accumulation of
things, but a
well-ordered
grouping of
several items to
be considered
as a whole.
The collection
is worth more
than the
individual parts.
Don’t Lose Your Marbles
Marbles have been found in strange places, including
ancient Egyptian tombs. However, most collectible
marbles have been produced within the last 160 years.
Marbles are made of many
substances, including glass,
stone, minerals, clay, pottery,
porcelain, and china. Some of
the first porcelain and china
ones were made in the
1840s. Glass marbles
became popular in the late
1800s and early 1900s, and
mass production of mar-
bles began around the
same time. Some rare
marbles, which can fetch
close to $1,000 each, have
names as colorful as they
look: popeyes, sparklers,
agates, and rainbows.


8 COLLECTIONS
Treasure Hunts and Paper Chases.
If you enjoy nature, you might collect rocks, fossils, shells,
or leaves. If you enjoy sports, you might collect sports cards,
baseballs, caps, uniforms, pennants, hockey pucks, or bumper
stickers. If toys interest you, so might superhero or action
figures, cars, or model airplanes or trains. If military history
piques your curiosity, you might collect uniforms, helmets,
insignia, medals, flags, or maps.
This pamphlet will give you specific ideas and tips for
collecting. You will also find expanded information about
comic books, sports cards, and rocks—some of the most
popular collectibles.
Teachers, librari-
ans, and counsel-
ors familiar with
your field of
collecting can
help you
find sources
to research
your ideas.
The die-cast model car craze began in the late 1950s and early
1960s with the introduction of Matchbox cars. The hobby of col-
lecting cars skyrocketed in 1968 when toymaker Mattel launched
Hot Wheels. These die-cast metal cars came with special torsion-
bar suspension and low-friction wheel bearings, making them the
“fastest in the world.” Other die-cast brands include Corgi, Dinky,
Ertl, Johnny Lightning, Lledo, Racing Champions, Team Caliber,
and Tootsie Toy.
In the past, butterfly collecting was a
very popular hobby. Collectors captured
butterflies and pinned them to boards.
Today, however, people prefer to observe
butterflies in the same way others “watch”
birds—by taking photos and making sketches.


COLLECTIONS 9
.Treasure Hunts and Paper Chases
Mapping Out Your Treasure Hunt
Your first step toward starting a collection is figuring out what
you want to collect. Look around your bedroom. Do you
already have two of something, such as sharks’ teeth or license
plates? Add one more to either pair and you have yourself a
small collection. Perhaps you like old things. If you could live
in the past, what century would you choose? Maybe you would
like to travel back in time by collecting antique tools or toys,
cookie cutters, or documents from that historical period.
Browse through an encyclopedia or flip through catalogs of
collectibles in a library or bookstore. Search the internet (with
your parent or guardian’s permission) for information and clubs
relating to your interest. For example, if you like snow globes,
then enter “snow globes” in the search field. You will find a list
of websites about these collectibles, where to find different kinds
of snow globes, and how to care for them.
There are lots of places to find collectibles. Look in the
yellow pages to find specialty stores under these headings:
Antiques Dealers, Collectibles, Comic Books, Gift Shops, Hobby
Shops, Rock Shops, and Sports Cards. The people working in
those shops can give you a lot of information and tell you about
local clubs and upcoming events.
Flea markets,
swap meets, and
conventions are
great places to
find items to add
to and broaden
your collection.
Arrive early to
look at what is
available. If you
can wait to buy an
item, return hours
before closing on
the final day
because many
vendors lower
prices just before
the event ends.
Moving action figures are popular collectibles. Introduced in 1964,
G.I. Joe was the first movable action toy in the United States. The
World War II soldier came complete with movable limbs and real-
istic cloth uniforms. In 1970, G.I. Joe figures got realistic hair.
Other action figures were introduced during the 1970s, including
toys based on the movie Planet of the Apes and the television
series Star Trek.


Treasure Hunts and Paper Chases.
Cataloging, Displaying, and
Storing a Collection
Properly cataloging your collection is very
important for several reasons. It provides
essential information for proving the
genuineness of your collection. It is a record
of financial transactions that you may have
to report on an official tax form if you sell
your collection for a big profit. It also is a
document about your collection that you
may need to produce if your collection
becomes so valuable that you should carry
collectibles insurance.
The records for all the items in your
collection make up your master list. You
might want to keep this information in a
three-ring binder or set up an electronic catalog. When you
acquire an item for your collection, give it a number. In your
master list, record
• The number you gave the item
• A brief description of the item (age,
condition, etc.) and a picture (if possible)
• How much you paid for it
• The date and place you acquired it
• The current price guide value
• Any other information that will help
explain its significance
• Location of the item (notebook, box,
cabinet, etc.)


COLLECTIONS 11
.Treasure Hunts and Paper Chases
The information you record in your catalog file will depend on
the item collected. For example, if the item is a manufactured
product, you might record the name of the company and any
model or serial numbers. For a limited-edition item, list the
number and the size of the edition.
A limited edition
is the issue of a
collectible item—
such as a book,
art print, medal, or
commemorative
plate—in a small
set quantity.
This Wedgewood teacup is the 119th cup produced in a limited
edition of 3,000 teacups. Wedgewood is considered one of the
finest china companies in the world.
Thrift shops and garage sales are good places
to buy inexpensive cases and containers to house
your collection. You might even find a piece
of your collection that you have been hunting!
As you hunt for new items to add to your collection, con-
sider carrying a copy of your master list with you. Even if you
don’t have a large collection yet, you will not have to rely on
your memory to know whether an item you already own is
graded higher than one you are thinking about buying. Plus
you will not accidentally sell one of your items for less than
you paid for it.


12 COLLECTIONS
Treasure Hunts and Paper Chases.
Display Tips
How you display your collection depends on the kind of collec-
tion you own. Because of their fragility, certain nature collections
such as pressed flowers or leaves should be displayed like framed
pictures or mounted on felt boards. Other natural objects such as
rocks and fossils can be kept in divided cases or boxes. However,
do not keep the boxes under your bed where they are out of
sight and out of mind. Part of the fun of having a collection is
showing it off and sharing it.
Use your imagination and a little sense of humor (if appro-
priate) to showcase your collection. Tack a collection of skeleton
keys around a doorframe. Display shells in inexpensive bowls or
an empty aquarium or showcase a collection of marbles in a
recycled divided container meant for assorted chocolates.
It is best to keep
comic books and
sports cards in
their protective
jackets or in
boxes because
handling them
will decrease
their value.
One way to show off and share your collection is by
entering contests. Some are sponsored by collectors’
clubs, conventions, and even state fairs. Local libraries
and historical societies often present personal collec-
tions that tie in with their exhibits.


COLLECTIONS 13
.Treasure Hunts and Paper Chases
Storage Tips
You will want to protect your collection so that it maintains its
value and can be enjoyed for many years.
• Store (and display) your collection in a cool, dry place.
• Protect your collectibles from dust, extreme temperatures,
and direct sunlight.
• For collectibles such as comic books and sports cards, use
a protective polyester film sleeve or a box made with
acid-free materials.
Store collectibles with moving parts (such as die-cast cars and
action figures) or painted items (such as figurines) in individ-
ual, divided, and numbered containers. Wrap delicate pieces
in soft cloth, bubble wrap, or wadded-up newspaper to
prevent scratches and other types of damage.
Gently wipe dust from any collectible
before storing. If your collectible is
stored in a box that is divided into
smaller sections, be sure to
number each section and
put that number in
your records.
Save the packaging, certificates, and other materials
that come with an item, and assign them the same col-
lection number. Collectibles kept in perfect (Mint) con-
dition in their original boxes with all accompanying
materials are worth more than the item without its
packaging. They are worth even more if the original box
has never been opened.
Adhesive labels
can damage the
surface of your
collectible.
Instead, write the
item’s collection
number on a piece
of paper and keep
it in the sleeve or
the box.
Depending on its scarcity,
the value of a collectible
model car could decrease by
as much as 50 percent to 75 percent if
the paint is scratched or chipped. Take the
time to carefully wrap and store your items
when they are not on display.


14 COLLECTIONS
Treasure Hunts and Paper Chases.
Collecting: For Fun or Profit?
Everyone has heard stories of rare collectibles that made their
owners rich and famous. The hard fact is, most collectibles
never bring megabucks when sold. No one knows which col-
lectible will increase in value. So, as you collect, make your
purchases with care. Read price guides, specialized catalogs,
and collectors’ club newsletters. Study auction results, and
avoid paying too much for a collectible with the expectation
that it will increase in value. It may be years before you can
realize a profit.
Speculation is
making a risky
purchase based
on the hope that
you will be able to
sell the collectible
for a profit.
Safeguarding Collectibles
• Hand-wash decorated china using only mild soap
and warm water.
• Protect paper-based collectibles with acid-free products.
• Ask an expert’s advice before cleaning older articles
made of fabric or other delicate materials. Store
these items in cool, dry locations, and do not seal
these collectibles in plastic.
• Avoid abrasives or chemical products such as
bleaches or polishes, which could harm your
collectible’s finish.
• Avoid tampering (this includes refinishing,
replating, or restoring) or experimenting with
a collectible. Doing so could drastically reduce
its value.


COLLECTIONS 15
.Treasure Hunts and Paper Chases
Determining Value: Factors That Matter
A combination of factors determines a collectible’s value. Certain
factors are more important than others, depending on the type
of collectible. For example, if you collect nostalgia—sentimental
items that remind you of the past—you might be willing to pay
more than the item is worth because it has emotional meaning
to you. Here are key factors that affect value.
Condition. An item in perfect shape with a like-new appear-
ance will command a top price. It is much more valuable than
the same item with flaws.
Authenticity. Do not assume that an item is genuine. Study
examples of the real thing, and watch out for reproductions and
forgeries. Look for identifying marks on the bottom of the item.
A signature or date does not guarantee authenticity but should
be considered a clue along with information about the design,
material, and technique.
Age. An item at least 100 years old is an antique. Age
alone does not determine an item’s value, but age and
scarcity, for example, combine for a higher value.
Scarcity. Regardless of age or condition, scarcity does cre-
ate value because so few items are available. However, certain
collectible items produced—and available—in large quantities
may be in higher demand because they are more popular than
the scarce item.
Provenance. The collectible has documented proof of the his-
tory of its ownership. This proof does not guarantee authenticity.
Sometimes the value of an item with provenance comes from the
celebrity status of a previous owner.
Context. An item has a higher value if it has historical or cul-
tural significance. For example, a posted announcement about an
upcoming meeting becomes more valuable if it is related to an
important time in history, such as the civil rights movement.
The main point of price guides is to provide an extensive list (with photos) of
collectible items by category along with suggested purchase prices based on
condition. The guides pack a lot more information, too. You will find “state of
the market” information about trends and recent sales; articles about the his-
tory of the category; warnings about reproductions; lists of upcoming events
(auctions, exhibits, seminars, workshops, museum programs); contacts for
collectors’ clubs; auction announcements; and sale advertisements.
It usually is best to
purchase one
really good item
rather than buying
several slightly
flawed pieces.


16 COLLECTIONS
Treasure Hunts and Paper Chases.
Invest your time in your collection, not just your money.
Read as much as you can about your collectible items. Talk to
experienced collectors and dealers. Save your money to pur-
chase one really good item instead of buying several flawed
pieces. Build your collection slowly and thoughtfully, adding
more valuable pieces as your knowledge increases. Buy what
you like, and don’t let anyone talk you into selling or trading an
item until you are ready.
A mark, or hallmark on the bottom of an item
such as a china plate or porcelain figurine,
provides identifying information: country of
origin, manufacturer, age, material, model or
pattern, name of the artist. A touchmark is
the maker’s mark impressed on pewter.
Colorful and relatively inexpensive, neckerchiefs from special
events and locations are popular with Scout collectors. Other
favorite items are neckerchief slides, both the standard metal
Scouting slides and handcrafted ones.


COLLECTIONS 17
.Treasure Hunts and Paper Chases
Collecting Scouting Memorabilia
As a Scout, you begin to collect neckerchiefs, pins, and activity patches
just by participating. You collect badges that show your rank, council,
patrol, and troop number, as well as your completion of merit badge
requirements. You might also collect prized patches from Klondike der-
bies, camporees, and jamborees. Some Scouts also collect handbooks,
merit badge pamphlets, and Scout Life or the old Boys’ Life magazines.
Others prefer Scouting gear such as compasses, canteens, and flashlights.
Scouting-related products from the past include playing cards, board
games, bicycle bells, harmonicas, and even a couple of Scouting comic
books—Goofy Scoutmaster and Flintstones’ Boy Scout Jamboree. Other
Scouting collectibles include Scout banks, paperweights, and coins. Artist
Norman Rockwell featured the spirit of Scouting in many of his paintings,
which have been reproduced on collectors’ plates, mugs, and calendars.
Our 75th and 100th anniversaries in 1985 and 2010 produced more
collectibles. If you collect Scouting memorabilia, you may have picked up
some new items from the centennial celebration.





.Collecting Odds and Ends
Collecting Odds
and Ends
People often assume that collectors are interested only in
antiques of great value, such as early American furniture,
Chinese porcelain from the Ming dynasty, or paintings by French
Impressionists. But many fascinating collections contain the art
and objects of everyday life. These items were printed or pro-
duced for practical purposes and were not meant to be saved.
Ephemera generally refers to “here today, gone tomorrow”
paper collectibles. These include transportation timetables, air-
plane tickets, sporting event tickets, theatre programs, posters,
advertisements and brochures, catalogs, menus, decorated
shopping bags, business cards and letterhead, graduation
announcements, record album covers, sheet music, valentines
and other greeting cards, magazines, and even candy wrappers.
A single-type
item collection
Ephemera are
paper collectibles
that were originally
meant to be
thrown away.


20 COLLECTIONS
Collecting Odds and Ends.
Dealers and collectors have expanded the field of ephemera
to include three-dimensional objects with the same short-lived
purpose. Items include pens with company logos, political cam-
paign pin-back buttons, matchbooks, hotel soap, gift or phone
cards, and silicone wristbands.
Collectors tend to concentrate on a single type of item (for
example, wall calendars) or on all types of items from a specific
company, such as Coca-Cola or John Deere.
A premium is a
tangible incentive
given “for free.”
Yet, obtaining this
reward usually
requires the
purchase of
a product
or service.
In 1946, Ovaltine offered this Captain
Midnight secret decoder called
the “Mirro-Flash Code-O-Graph.”
Today, this “free” radio premium
is valued between $30 and $75,
depending on its condition.
Rubber wristbands have become popular among collectors.
Advertising Premiums
Businesses are always trying to find ways to attract customers.
One way they advertise is to sponsor a show or event. In the
1920s and 1930s, companies paid to sponsor radio programs
aimed at children. They offered free prizes if the kids would
send in a box top, label, or other proof of purchase from one of
the company’s products. In return, the children received a
poem, sports ticket, or kid-friendly recipe.
Kids’ adventure serials became very popular radio pro-
grams. In the 1940s, Ovaltine, a company that produced a
chocolate malt–flavored powder for milk, sponsored
“Captain Midnight.” The company
offered special premiums, including
a club membership in Captain
Midnight’s Secret Squadron as well
as metal secret-decoder badges.


COLLECTIONS 21
Cereal Box Premiums
In the 1950s, cereal companies intro-
duced sugar-coated cereals and targeted
them at children. The art on the boxes
tied in with licensed TV and cartoon
characters such as Batman and the
Flintstones. Premiums included on-the-
box cutouts for airplanes, masks, and
games. Cereal makers discovered that
sales of their products related to the pop-
ularity of the characters on the boxes.
You can find radio and cereal box pre-
miums at toy and antiques shows, flea
markets, and garage sales. Subscribe to
hobby newsletters and mail auctions. Talk
to dealers and other collectors. Ask what they
have for sale, or tell them what you are inter-
ested in buying.
Cereal box premiums are popular
with young people who
commonly eat the cereal
as well as with adults.


22 COLLECTIONS
Collecting Odds and Ends.
Commemorative Ephemera
Some people like to collect commemorative items manufactured
or printed to honor the memory of a famous person or special
event. These souvenirs may include mass-produced items (for
example, refrigerator magnets) and high-quality collectibles
such as china plates and engraved silver cups. If you build a
focused collection of commemorative ephemera, you will learn
about the cultural and historical significance of the items as
well as discover intriguing information that may inspire you to
create “spin-off” collections.
This collection of commemorative ephemera for the 1939 Royal
Train Tour of Canada was expanded to include the British king
and queen’s visit to the United States.


COLLECTIONS 23
.Collecting Odds and Ends
Americana is a
field of collecting
that includes
objects from
or about the
United States.
Collecting Ephemera: Emotional or
Financial Investment?
Ephemera collectibles often carry emotional weight. The items
may be souvenirs that have great personal meaning, such as
toys from loved ones, travel stickers from a family trip across
America, or quilts made by your grandmother. You may have a
difficult time deciding to sell these items or even putting a
value on these “priceless” items. However, people interested in
advertising and Americana collectibles will have a strong opin-
ion about their value from reading price guides and studying
auction results, and from their own experience of buying and
selling similar objects.
A big factor that affects the value of ephemera is crossover
appeal. For example, a postcard collector, or deltiologist, may be
surprised to be involved in a bidding war over a stamped post-
card featuring a photo of a painting of a Campbell’s soup can.
The other bidders include a stamp collector, a Campbell’s soup
brand collector, and an autograph collector (the postcard
writer was the painter). That inexpensive postcard will
sell for quite a profit because so many people have
different and competitive reasons for acquiring it.
Gene Autry—“the Singing Cowboy”—wrote and
recorded hundreds of songs, including “Here
Comes Santa Claus,” starred in Western films and
TV shows, and headlined his own radio program.
This pin-back button appeals not only to collectors
of pins but also to collectors of comics, sheet music,
entertainment, Christmas, and cowboy items.





COLLECTIONS 25
.Comic Books: Collecting Superheroes and Villains
Comic Books: Collecting
Superheroes and Villains
The modern-day American comic book is a product of evolu-
tion. It began across the Atlantic Ocean more than 500 years
ago with a multipanel broadside that made fun of religious
subjects. Social unrest inspired political cartoons, with the
characters’ thoughts and speech captured in word balloons.
Certain publishers gathered single-panel unrelated cartoons
and reprinted them as collections on broadsides. Later, others
published sequential multipanels that told a story in oblong
strips. In 1818 in Boston, the comic paper called The Idiot, or
Invisible Rambler introduced the first recurring character that
spoke with word balloons.
A graphic novel
is a fictional
story for adults
published as a
book in the form
of a comic strip.
A broadside is a
large poster-size
sheet of paper
printed on
one side.
In 1827, Swiss writer and
artist Rodolphe Töpffer created
a “picture novel” in a small
oblong comic strip format. In
1842, American publisher
Wilson and Company reformat-
ted Töpffer’s The Adventures
of Mr. Obadiah Oldbuck as a
40-page, 195-panel graphic
novel to fit its magazine format.
Today some people credit
Töpffer as the inventor of the
modern comic strip and Wilson
and Company as the first comic
book publisher in America.


26 COLLECTIONS
Comic Books: Collecting Superheroes and Villains.
The first sequential comic strips appeared in an American
humor magazine in 1852. As the popularity of comics increased,
more illustrated humor magazines sprang up. Puck was the first
to introduce color-tinted cartoons. Newspaper publishers noted
the success of those magazines and added “comic supplements”
to their Sunday editions to increase their sales.
On May 5, 1895, a New York
newspaper reprinted The Yellow
Kid in color. The cartoon, created
by Richard F. Outcault, was origi-
nally published in a magazine in
black and white. The “Kid” was a
goofy-looking, bald-headed boy
wearing what looked like a night-
gown. Readers loved the colored
cartoon and the Kid. The cartoon-
ist secured a copyright for his
character and licensed all kinds of
Yellow Kid items—from toys to
appliances to tobacco products. A
196-page comic book called The
Yellow Kid in McFadden’s Flats
appeared in 1897.
Publishers in the early 1900s produced comic or “funny”
books in all shapes and sizes, with soft- or hardcovers—some
even with dust jackets. Most reprinted comic strips from the
“funny papers” sections of newspapers.
“Big Little Books” debuted in 1932 with the promise
of providing big reading entertainment in a little book.
The first title, The Adventures of Dick Tracy, sold for 10
cents. These hardcover books were approximately 4
inches square and ran several hundred pages long. The
earliest Big Little Books featured reprints of art from
newspaper comic strips, with stories adapted to the art.
Richard Outcault’s cartoon,
The Yellow Kid, is considered the
forerunner of the modern-day
comic book industry, which
includes the licensing and mer-
chandising of comic characters.


COLLECTIONS 27
.Comic Books: Collecting Superheroes and Villains
Because of the commercial success of Outcault’s “Yellow
Kid” and later his “Buster Brown” comic character as a mer-
chandising mascot for the Buster Brown Shoe Company, many
businesses gave away comic strips created to promote their
products. In 1933, some employees of the Eastern Color Printing
Company (which printed the comic sections for different news-
papers) obtained the rights to publish certain comics as a collec-
tion in a 32-page color comic magazine. Led by Harry
Wildenberg and Maxwell Gaines, the group printed
10,000 copies of Funnies on Parade as a premium, or
giveaway, for Proctor & Gamble Co. Unlike earlier
comic “books,” the format of Funnies on Parade
was actually a quarter-folded newspaper sheet,
which made it the size of a magazine similar to
modern-day comic books.
In 1934, Eastern published 250,000 copies
of Famous Funnies #1 as a 64-page version
of the 32-page giveaway comic magazine.
The comic was not free—Famous Funnies #1
cost 10 cents and was the first comic maga-
zine sold successfully on newsstands. It
also became the first monthly comic
magazine, lasting 21 years with a peak
circulation of 400,000.
The 1930s was a decade of new genres, or
types: adventure, science fiction, and detective
stories. The “Phantom” was the first hero to appear
in a costume; the “Clock” was the first to wear a
mask. The Golden Age of comics (and superhe-
roes) began in 1938 when Superman made his
first appearance on the cover of Action Comics
#1. By the mid-40s, more than 400 superheroes
followed, including Batman, Captain Marvel,
Wonder Woman, and Captain America.
The comic book industry grew quickly
during the 1950s, when 1 out of every
3 magazine-type publications sold in
America was a comic book. Charles M.
Schulz created Peanuts in 1955, and the
early 1960s gave birth to the Fantastic Four, Incredible
Hulk, X-Men, and Amazing Spider-Man. Then came comic
strips based on TV shows and movies, such as Star Trek (1967)
and Star Wars (1977).


28 COLLECTIONS
Comic Books: Collecting Superheroes and Villains.
The Superhero Who
Almost Wasn’t
In the early 1960s, comic-book writer and editor Stan
Lee wanted to develop a superhero with whom the
average reader could identify. So he talked to his
employer, Marvel Comics, about creating Spider-Man.
“For quite a while, I’d been toying with the idea of
doing a strip that would violate all the conventions and
break all the rules,” Lee said. “A strip that would actu-
ally feature a teenager as the star, instead of making
him an adult hero’s sidekick. A strip in which the main
character would lose out as often as he’d win.”
At first, the decision makers at
Marvel Comics rejected Lee’s idea
for Spider-Man. They said it would
fail because people hated spiders
and readers would not want a hero
who was an unpopular, pimply
high-school student. Marvel
Comics finally gave in, and the
rest is history.
Spider-Man first appeared
in 1962 as a character in the
Amazing Fantasy #15 issue.
In March 1963, Spider-Man
emerged as the central
character under the title
Amazing Spider-Man and has
remained Marvel’s leading
superhero ever since.
When Amazing Spider-Man hit the scene in 1962,
it had a unique twist: Spider-Man—the superhero—
was not an adult, but a teenager.


COLLECTIONS 29
.Comic Books: Collecting Superheroes and Villains
Collecting Comics
You can tell from learning about the history of comics that you
can collect a variety of comics-related items. Whether you
decide to narrow your focus to a specific genre (such as
horror or sword-and-sorcery), Silver Age books, or comic
character toys, you can find out more by browsing
through catalogs, price guides, and collectors’
magazines. With your parent or guardian’s
permission, log onto the internet and
search for comic book websites.
Talk to enthusiastic employees at
comic-book stores. Join a local comic-
book club. Attend swap meets and
comicons, or comic conventions. You
will meet other collectors, dealers, pub-
lishers, comic-book writers and cartoonists,
and professional grading companies. As you
learn more about the comic-book industry,
you will collect more comics-related things
and make some friends along the way.
The history of comics is defined in terms of ages or
eras. These ages often overlap. While not “official,”
these time periods are considered standard. The begin-
ning of the Golden Age—1938, when Superman first
appeared—is the only year on which comic book
historians all agree.
Comic Book Ages
Victorian Age 1828 to 1882
Platinum Age 1883 to 1938
Golden Age 1938 to 1945
Atom Age 1945 to 1956
Silver Age 1956 to 1973
Bronze Age 1973 to 1985
Copper Age 1986 to 1992
Modern Age 1992 to present


30 COLLECTIONS
Comic Books: Collecting Superheroes and Villains.
Handling and Storing Comic Books
Comic books are flimsy and can easily be damaged. Most
dealers and collectors do not want anyone touching their rare
comics because even the smallest crease could reduce a comic’s
grade from Mint to Near Mint or Very Fine condition. (See the
following section about comic book grades.) Always ask permis-
sion before handling another person’s vintage comic book.
Most dealers will remove the comic from its protective sleeve
for you so that if the book is damaged, you will not be liable.
Fluorescent light,
which has
high levels of
ultraviolet (UV)
radiation, can
quickly damage
comic books.
Even though
tungsten filament
lighting is less
harmful than
fluorescent, you
should avoid
exposing your
comics to any
light for a long
period of time.
When handling valuable comics:
• First wash your hands. The oils from your skin can
damage the books.
• Carefully remove the book from its protective sleeve.
• To minimize stress on the book’s spine, gently lay the
comic flat in the palm of your hand.
• If you have permission to look through the book,
carefully turn the pages using your thumb and fore-
finger. Avoid bending the book open too far.
• When you are through, carefully return the book to
its protective sleeve. Watch corners and edges to pre-
vent any damage. If this is not your own comic, ask
the dealer or owner to do this so that you will not be
responsible for any damage.


COLLECTIONS 31
.Comic Books: Collecting Superheroes and Villains
Comic books are printed on paper—many on cheap paper.
Acids used in the production and printing of the books cause
the paper to crack and yellow over
time. To protect comic books, keep
them away from light, heat, extreme
cold, and humidity. Improper
storage can seriously and
permanently deterio-
rate the condition of
your collection.
Place each book in its own acid-free, polyester
film sleeve made specifically for long-term storage of
comic books. Store the sleeves upright in notebooks or
acid-free boxes. As you build your collection, you may want to
organize your collection with labeled dividers in labeled note-
books or boxes. For example, you may decide to separate your
comics according to historical age, publisher, or genre. Keep
your collection in a cool (65 to 70 degrees), dry place away
from direct sunlight and fumes. To encourage air circulation
and help prevent mold and fungus from developing, be sure to
leave a small space between storage boxes and the wall.
Polypropylene and polyethylene products contain
chemicals that can damage your collection over
time. These types of sleeves should be used only for
temporary storage and should be changed every three
to five years.


32 COLLECTIONS
Comic Books: Collecting Superheroes and Villains.
Grading Comic Books
Collectors should know how comic books are graded. A book’s
economic value is determined by its appearance; one in Poor
condition will bring only a fraction of the price of the same one
in Mint condition. The condition of the covers, inside pages,
and spine all relate to a book’s value. Discolored paper, missing
portions or pages, fading, tears, markings, brittleness, soiling,
and other defects will all diminish the value of the comic book.
Age, scarcity, and physical condi-
tion contribute to a comic book’s
value. The industry uses a com-
plex 10-point grading system that
is further broken down into a
25-point range—from .5 for Poor
to 10.0 for Gem Mint—to deter-
mine the value of a comic book.
Here are some guidelines to give
you an idea about how comic
books are graded.
Mint (9.9). Condition is nearly perfect, with only sub-
tle binding or printing defects. The cover is flat with
no surface wear. Inks are bright with high reflectivity
(shininess) and little fading. Corners are square and
sharp. The cover is centered and firmly secured. The
staples are original and centered, with no rust. The
paper is supple (flexible) and fresh. The spine is tight
and flat.
Fine (6.0). Condition is above average. The book
shows minor wear, but no significant creasing or seri-
ous defects. Minor wear on the cover is apparent. The
inks show significant loss of reflectivity. Pages or
inside covers may have blunted corners and a tan
color, but are still supple with no signs of brittleness.
As you learn about grading, try to
obtain the same comic book in differ-
ent conditions so you can make
“apples to apples” comparisons.


COLLECTIONS 33
.Comic Books: Collecting Superheroes and Villains
Good (2.0). The comic book has all pages and covers,
but small pieces are missing inside. The largest miss-
ing piece allowed from the front or back cover is a
1
⁄2-inch triangle or a 1
⁄4-inch square. The book is some-
what creased, scuffed, or soiled, but is still readable. It
may have up to a 2-inch split on the spine. The paper
quality is low, but not brittle. The cover reflectivity is
low or absent. The book has a moderate number of
defects, but is still basically sound and whole.
Fair (1.0). The comic book is usually soiled and
ragged, with many creases, tears, and folds. The spine
is seriously split; the staples are gone. Up to one-
tenth of the front cover is missing. Soiling may inter-
fere with one’s ability to read the story. The paper
quality is low. There is a slight brittleness to the edges
of the pages, but not in the cen-
ter. Coupons have been clipped
from pages. The comic book is
valued at 50 percent to 70 per-
cent of a copy in Good condition.
Poor (0.5). The comic book is
degraded; it is worn, dirty, and
torn. The book has severe stains,
cover abrasions, and mildew. Its
pages are brittle. It is missing sta-
ples and pieces of pages. The
covers are split from top to bot-
tom, but both halves are present.
The value depends on the extent
of the defects.
Note: The grading descriptions are adapted from The Official Overstreet
Comic Book Grading Guide, 3rd ed., with permission from
Gemstone Publishing.
These comics show some moderate
defects such as wear, spots, and
rusty staples, which affect the
comics’ value.


34 COLLECTIONS
Comic Books: Collecting Superheroes and Villains.
In the last seven years, third-party companies have offered
grading services for valuable comic books. Buyers and sellers
recognize the expertise and integrity of these professionals and
know that a comic book certified by a professional grader is the
real deal. The largest grading company is Certified Guaranty
Company (CGC). If you browse through auction catalogs and
price guides, you will see comic books listed as “CGC certified”
or “CGC graded.”
For a fee, you can send your comic book to one of these
companies for professional grading. After carefully inspecting
your book for wear and tear and signs of restoration, the grad-
ing specialist will assign a grade, seal your book, and encase it
in a slab or plastic holder. Do not unseal the book, or you
will invalidate the grading. Collectors can sell a professionally
graded comic book for three to 10 times the amount they would
receive for the same nongraded comic.
Not every comic book is a good candidate for professional
grading because the fees may be higher than the value of the
book. The vast majority of comic books are not very valuable.
Consider getting your book graded if it meets the following
criteria, which may indicate that you have a valuable book
that could sell for a big profit.
• Key issue: the first appearance, the story of a character’s
creation, or any other historical or artistic feature important
to collectors
• Debut of a character
• Key first issue
• Deaths of major characters, heroes, or villains
• First work of comic creators who later became popular
A restored comic book is one that has had missing or
deteriorated pieces replaced or mended so that it
appears to be original. Serious collectors
do not generally accept this restoration
practice because the value of the repaired
book is never as high as the original book
of the same grade. The seller should
always reveal to any potential buyer the
restoration of a comic book.


COLLECTIONS 35
.Comic Books: Collecting Superheroes and Villains
Collecting for Laughs or Loot
Before many comic book collectors even thought about putting
an organized collection together, they just liked to read comic
books. They tended to keep the comics after reading them, and
soon they had a stack of books featuring their favorite super-
hero or favorite adventure or horror series. You may already
own a stack of comics. You can call it a collection when you
decide to treat your books with respect, organize them, and
figure out what others are willing to pay for the issues.
You can find out the current
value of your comics by studying
price guides and auction catalogs.
While you are looking for infor-
mation about your own books,
you will discover which comics
are in high demand and what
are the current values for rare
comics. Those interesting facts
(and high prices!) will inspire
you to add to your collection
and take care of it.
In 1970, Action Comics #1 in Mint condition was valued
at $300. In 2005, the same comic in Near Mint condition
was valued at $485,000. One year later it was valued
at $550,000—an increase of $65,000, or 13 percent.
Most investors would be happy
with that return on investment,
and every collector would be
thrilled to own the comic book
that featured Superman’s first
appearance and launched the
Golden Age of comics.
In 1969, this copy of The Incredible Hulk cost 12 cents on
the newsstand. Today, in Near Mint condition, the comic is
valued at $60.


36 COLLECTIONS
Comic Books: Collecting Superheroes and Villains.
Cataloging Your Comic Book Collection
Whether you want to collect comics for your own enjoyment or
for a chance to make some money, you should keep good
records of your collection. At the least, you will know the titles
of your comics and how many books you have. If, however,
you want to manage your collection and make a profit, you will
need to note more specific information.
You can record your information on paper and keep it in a
notebook, or create a spreadsheet on the computer. Some com-
panies sell software programs for keeping track of comic book
collections. If you note the information for each comic as
shown in the following form, you will have a very good record
of the description, value, and location of your books.
Here is a sample record from a comic book collection.
Item No.: 47
Title of comic: Superman: King of the World
Publisher: DC Comics
Issue No.: 1
Date of issue: June 1999
Important information: One-shot, regular edition
Grade or grade abbreviation: 9.2 NM
Additional information
about condition:
Paper still fresh; corners
square and sharp
Value: $4.00 as of November 1999
Purchase price: $3.95
Purchase date: June 15, 1999
Purchase place: Nutmeg Comics
Location of Issue: B4 (box No. 4)
In this example, the comic was issued as a one-shot, which means only one issue of
that title was published. Regular editions are not mentioned unless other editions of
the title—such as collectors’ or limited editions—are published.


COLLECTIONS 37
.Comic Books: Collecting Superheroes and Villains
Item No.:
Title of comic:
Publisher:
Issue No.:
Date of issue:
Important information:
Grade or grade abbreviation:
Additional information
about condition:
Value:
Purchase price:
Purchase date:
Purchase place:
Location of Issue:
Use a chart like this to help catalog your collections.
You can modify it any way you like.





.Sports Cards: Collecting Athletes
Sports Cards:
Collecting Athletes
In 1875, tobacco manufacturer Allen & Ginter of Richmond,
Virginia, decided to boost tobacco sales by printing images of
athletes, heroes, and other Americans on slender trading cards.
The company put individual cards in its packs of cigarettes. The
gimmick turned into a wildly successful marketing scheme and
launched what is perhaps the first mass marketing of trading
cards in the nation.
By 1887, when baseball cards became hot items, several
other tobacco companies were packaging similar cards with
their own products. Those companies produced some of
today’s oldest, rarest, and most sought-after sports cards.
Ginter is known for the World’s Champions series,
which featured boxers, baseball players,
sharpshooters, pool players, wrestlers,
and Wild West heroes Annie Oakley and
Buffalo Bill Cody. New York’s Goodwin
& Co. launched an equally successful
Champions series featuring baseball players,
bicyclists, weightlifters, marksmen, and
college football stars.
What began as an idea to help sell
tobacco more than a century ago has
grown into a multibillion-dollar industry
that includes most major American sports.
Today, baseball cards are still the most
popular among collectors, followed by
cards devoted to football, basketball, and
hockey. Every year, hundreds of thousands
of sports cards change hands in a huge
nationwide network of card dealers, vendors,
clubs, and individuals.


40 COLLECTIONS
Sports Cards: Collecting Athletes.
The Top Sports Cards
Here are a few of the most valuable sports cards.
Baseball
1915 Sporting News #151, Babe Ruth, Boston Red Sox
Importance: Babe Ruth’s rookie card
1932 U.S. Caramel #26, Lou Gehrig, New York Yankees
Importance: The first key Lou Gehrig card
Basketball
1969 Topps #25, Lew Alcindor (Kareem Abdul-Jabbar),
Milwaukee Bucks
Importance: The star’s only recognized rookie card
Boxing
1948 Leaf #1, Jack Dempsey
Importance: First card in the set
featuring the boxer
Football
1933 Goudey Sport Kings,
Red Grange, Chicago Bears
Importance: Good color
features; appealing image
Golf
1998 Champions of Golf Master
Collection, Tiger Woods
Importance: Tough to find this card in Mint condition
Hockey
1951 Parkhurst #4, Maurice
Richard, Montreal Canadiens
Importance: Richard’s only
recognized rookie card
1979 O-Pee-Chee #18, Wayne
Gretzky, Edmonton Oilers
Importance: Gretzky’s key
rookie card
Not all cards
are valuable, but
they are still
fun to collect.
Key cards are the
most expensive,
desirable, or
important cards.


COLLECTIONS 41
.Sports Cards: Collecting Athletes
Grading Sports Cards
A sports card is graded based on its condition—a factor often
more important in setting its value than the player on the card.
In Poor condition, a card typically will be valued at least 20 per-
cent lower than the same card in Good condition. No slack is
given to older cards—a card 40 years old is judged by the same
standards as one from the last sports season.
Besides the creases, folds, tears, and angled or off-centered
photos that drastically reduce a card’s value, minor flaws can
hurt value, too. Depending on their seriousness, the following
flaws may lower a card’s value by one to four grades: bubbles
(lumps in the surface), gum and wax stains, diamond cutting
(slanted borders), notching, paper wrinkles, scratched-off car-
toons or puzzles on the back, rubber-band marks, surface
impressions, and warping.
Most card injuries
begin at the
corners. Experts
who rate cards
give five different
grades to the
conditions of a
card’s corners.
The more rounded
and worn the
corners, the
lower the grade.
The corners of a single card could be rated in differ-
ent categories. These are the major categories of
corner wear.*
Sharp. The corner is sharp, but shows slight wear.
On a dark-bordered card, this wearing shows as a
dot of white.
Fuzzy. The corner comes to a right angle, but
that angle shows a little fraying. A slightly dinged
(nicked) corner is considered the same as a
fuzzy corner.
Slightly Rounded. Fraying at a corner has
led to a rounding of the edge. The corner
may show layering where the card’s
paper stock is split.
Rounded. The corners are rounded
and there is some layering.
Badly Rounded. The corners are
completely rounded and the layering
is severe.
*From Beckett Almanac of Baseball Cards and Collectibles No. 7,
©2002 Beckett Publications. Reprinted with permission.


42 COLLECTIONS
Sports Cards: Collecting Athletes.
Different professional grading companies have their own
numeric codes for evaluating the conditions of sports cards, but
all are based on general guidelines from Mint to Poor.
Mint. A card with no flaws or wear; it has four perfect
corners. The card has excellent centering of the
picture. It has retained its original gloss (shine),
smooth edges, and original color borders. There
are no printing defects (spots or lines), or color or
focus imperfections.
Near Mint. The card has one minor flaw. Flaws that
would lower the card’s rating: one fuzzy corner or
two to four corners with slight wear, nearly perfect
centering, minor print spots.
Excellent. The card has four fuzzy but not rounded
corners. The centering is no worse than 80/20 (the
card’s picture is off-center, with up to 80 percent of
the border shifted to one side of the picture and 20
percent or more on the opposite side). There is mini-
mal loss of the original gloss, with rough edges,
slightly discolored borders, and minor print spots.
Very Good. The card has been handled but not
abused. Its corners are slightly rounded and slightly
layered. There is slight notching on the edges. The card
shows significant gloss loss from the surface, but no
scuffing. The card shows moderate discoloration on
the borders. The card may have a few light creases.
Good, Fair, Poor. The card is worn or has been
mishandled or abused. The corners are badly
rounded and layered. There is scuffing, and most or
all of the original gloss is gone. There are seriously
discolored borders, moderate or heavy creases, and
one or more serious flaws.
Note: This information comes from Beckett Almanac of Baseball Cards
and Collectibles No. 7, ©2002 Beckett Publications, and is reprinted
with permission.


COLLECTIONS 43
.Sports Cards: Collecting Athletes
Value is also based on supply and demand. For
those who collect only Mint-condition cards, the supply of older
cards may be quite small. Each year some cards are thrown
away, lost, or otherwise destroyed, reducing the supply. Until
recently, only serious collectors realized the need to preserve
cards to hold their value.
Demand depends on the interest of individual collectors,
fads, trends, and other factors. It is governed mostly by the age
of the card, the number of cards printed, the player shown on
the card, the attractiveness and popularity of the set, and the
card’s condition In other words: The older the card, the fewer
the number, the more famous the player, the more attractive the
set, the better the condition—the higher the value.
Mint condition Very Good condition Poor condition
Many hobbyists have widened
their collections to include items
such as cereal boxes, auto-
graphed programs, and gameday
tickets. However, autographs can
sometimes reduce a sports
card’s value. If you want to
collect an autograph, ask the
player to sign a spare card
or another item.


44 COLLECTIONS
Sports Cards: Collecting Athletes.
The Real Deal
Many collectors have felt the sting of unknowingly buy-
ing trimmed, recolored, or counterfeit cards. Spotting
fakes can be hard, so take these precautions and con-
sult pricing guides for other tips.
• Carefully inspect a card’s dot
pattern. Cards are printed on
high-speed presses that use
dots of ink to make the picture.
Use a 16x (16-power) magnifier
to inspect the printing, especially
the black areas and any dark text.
If possible, compare the card to a
known genuine sample. Fake cards
usually are rescreened, indicating
they have been copied (making a
card’s solid-ink areas look blurry
under a magnifier). Also beware
of blurry or faded photos.
• Recolored cards typically have
damaged or chipped edges or surface
dings. Look at the edges, under magnification,
for ink bleeding. This happens when ink used to
recolor a chipped edge or spot “bleeds” from the
surface of the card’s paper onto the edge itself. It is
hard for someone to recolor a card without leaving
the telltale evidence.
• Retouched cards might have poorly shaved edges.
The edge often appears too smooth, too rough,
or too closely trimmed. Detecting a shaved edge
can be tricky.
• A card’s edge is sometimes its most telling feature.
Tampered cards may have beveled edges. Under
magnification and from the side, a beveled edge will
show an outward slant that is not used in the original
trimming of a card.


COLLECTIONS 45
.Sports Cards: Collecting Athletes
Collecting Sports Cards: Trading and Buying
Some people collect complete sets of cards for an athlete’s
entire career. Others focus on a particular team or collect the
first, or rookie, cards of players who have gone on to become
standouts in their sport. You can buy cards in different combi-
nations—as individual cards or as a pack, box, or set. Let your
own interests (and your budget) guide your decisions as you
put your collection together.
Serious collectors get cards from various sources: other col-
lectors or dealers, sale or auction ads in hobby publications,
local hobby stores, sports collectibles shows or conventions, or
the internet marketplace. Professionals suggest that collectors
try all five sources, but be a smart shopper. Just as department
stores unload summer clothes in the fall, card dealers do the
same. They often clear out a current year’s cards at reduced
prices after the end of a particular sport’s season.
At card shows or conventions, hundreds of vendors display
thousands of cards from various sports. You can learn a lot
about sports-card collecting at these events, such as how to fig-
ure out the value of cards, how to organize your collection, and
how to sell for a profit
Monthly collect-
ibles magazines
found on most
newsstands offer
state-by-state
listings of related
conventions
and shows.
Learn more about collecting sports cards or about
specific cards by browsing the internet (with your
parent or guardian’s permission). Log onto a good
search engine and key in terms of interest, such as
“football cards” or “Cincinnati Bengals”—using words
that describe the cards or information you seek. There
are countless websites devoted to the history of
collecting, to a particular era, or to specific players.


46 COLLECTIONS
Sports Cards: Collecting Athletes.
Storing and Organizing Your Cards
Now that you know how the condition of a card affects its value,
you understand the importance of caring for your sports cards.
Use protective sleeves to hold cards. Buy only sleeves made of
polyester film and advertised as “acid free,” because acid and
other chemicals can harm paper items over time. You can find
these protective products in hobby and collectibles shops and on
the internet (with your parent or guardian’s permission).
Use common sense when storing your collection. Keep the
cards in a cool, dry place away from direct sunlight, extreme
temperatures, and fumes. Do not store your collection in an
attic, garage, or damp basement.
Cataloging Your Collection
Whether you store your cards in albums or boxes, you will
have a hard time finding a specific one if you do not keep
records. If you take the time to list your cards—on paper or on
the computer—you will avoid buying or trading identical cards
in the same condition. Plus, if you do decide to sell a card, you
will know what you paid for it and its current market value.
Sleeves come in
different sizes.
Be sure your
cards fit snugly
in their sleeves
so that they stay
put when handled.
These storage sleeves make viewing easy.


COLLECTIONS 47
.Sports Cards: Collecting Athletes
Here is a sample record from a sports card collection.
Item No.: 638 Card No: 55
Sport: Baseball Date of
issue:
February 2, 1999
Team: New York
Yankees
Condition: Good
Player: Babe Ruth Value: $2.50 as of
August 1999
Position: First base Purchase
price:
$1.00
Series: Yankees Hall
of Fame
Purchase
date:
March 4, 1999
Information: Theme:
Power Hitters
Purchase
place:
Deke’s Sports
Cards
Brand: Fleer Location of
card:
A4 (album No. 4)
Organize your records to track the information you want to know. You can use a form
like this one or buy computer software for cataloging sports cards.
Item No.: Card No:
Sport: Date of
issue:
Team: Condition:
Player: Value:
Position: Purchase
price:
Series: Purchase
date:
Information: Purchase
place:
Brand: Location of
card:


48 COLLECTIONS
Sports Cards: Collecting Athletes.
For Love or Money: Keeping or Selling
Your Cards
Sports card collecting is a personal pastime, but the sports card
industry is big business. Players earn money for having their
pictures featured. The sports leagues in which they play get
royalties for the use of the league names and logos. Card com-
panies make money producing and selling cards. Sometimes,
collectors make a lot of money, too.
In 1909, Pittsburgh Pirates shortstop Honus Wagner created
a ruckus about his image being used on a sports card. One
story claims he demanded his image be removed from tobacco-
sponsored cards because he believed the cards encouraged
children to use tobacco. Another story says Wagner was upset
because he thought he should be paid part of the profits that
his cards earned. To avoid Wagner’s legal action, the card com-
pany destroyed nearly all of his cards. Today, Wagner cards are
among the rarest. In 2022, a private collector paid $7.25 million
for a 1909 Wagner card.
The cards you
collect reflect
your personality.
They show what
athletes you
admire, what
sports you enjoy,
what playing
positions interest
you, and they
might even reveal
what goals
you have for
your future.
Sports cards like this 1953 Topps #317 Hank Aaron often are
paired with other collectibles in a handsome display, making
the hobby more interesting and fun to show off.


.Sports Cards: Collecting Athletes
Even though you might like to make a profit by selling
your sports cards, remember to enjoy this hobby. Buy what you
like—in the best condition you can afford. Take care of your
cards and keep good records, but always have fun.
Here are some other valuable baseball cards. The
values are estimated 2024 market prices for cards in
Mint or Near Mint conditions.
1952 Topps #311 Mickey Mantle—$162,000
1933 Goudey #106 Nap Lajoie—$250,100
1914 E145-1 Cracker Jack #103 Joe Jackson—$101,575
1949 Leaf #8 Satchel Paige—$19,800
1951 Bowman #305 Willie Mays—$6,300
1938 Goudey Heads Up #274 Joe DiMaggio—$3,775
1954 Bowman #66A Ted Williams—$3,099





COLLECTIONS 51
.Rocks: Collecting Chunks of the Past
Rocks: Collecting
Chunks of the Past
Rock hounds have long been fascinated with rocks because
they are evidence of the physical forces that have altered the
face of our planet. Wind and water ravage Earth’s surface,
wearing down mountains and reducing pebbles to sand.
Meanwhile—below Earth’s surface—the temperature rises so
dramatically that rock melts. These processes, which scientists
believe may have been happening for billions of years, are
never-ending. People collect rocks that reveal Earth’s natural
history even as the rocks of the future are being formed.
As a beginning rock collector, you can decide to base your
collection on a number of factors, like color, shape, texture, or
anything that strikes your interest. As your interest in the rocks’
origin and identification grows, you can begin to learn more
about different rock classifications.
Finding and Collecting Rocks
You do not have to go much farther than
your driveway to start a common rock
collection. Better sites, though, are where
you find cuts in rocks made by humans:
quarries, mines, and road building
and construction sites. The best sites
are where rock has been recently
exposed, such as valley floors and
the bottoms of mountain streams.
If you plan to identify the rocks
from their texture and mineralogical
features, try to collect samples about the
size of your fist.
A rock hound
is an amateur
collector of rocks
and minerals.


52 COLLECTIONS
Rocks: Collecting Chunks of the Past.
Consider joining a rock and mineral club, or subscribe to
a rock and mineral magazine, to learn what others collect and
how to expand your own collection. Besides having information
about local rock and gem shows, many rock clubs and societies
offer workshops on topics such as cleaning and organizing spec-
imens and understanding rock formations and crystal structures.
Rock and gem shows are excellent places to buy or trade
specimens. Many natural museums have rock and mineral
displays, and also sell starter kits in their gift shops.
If you will be rock hunting on private property, get
the landowner’s or land manager’s permission. Do
not disturb wildlife, livestock, fences, or other property.
Remember, it is illegal to collect rocks in state parks,
national parks, or national monuments. You may collect
rocks immediately outside these areas only if you
have permission.
Many rock hounds
try to collect all
the related rocks
from the area in
which they live.
Others collect
micromounts—
very small mineral
specimens that
are usually
the size of
a fingernail.
Tip: When you are out rock hunting, collect extra
specimens that you can trade with other rock hounds
to fill gaps in your collection.


COLLECTIONS 53
.Rocks: Collecting Chunks of the Past
Rockhounding Tools
Every beginning rock collector should try to get two pieces of
specialized equipment: a geologist’s hammer and a hand lens.
Use the hammer to break off rock specimens and trim them to
display size. Hammer with the blunt end and chisel with the
pick end. You can purchase a geologist’s hammer in scientific
supply houses or specialty stores.
Once you have a rock in hand, you will need a lens or
pocket magnifier to identify the specimen’s mineral grains. Six-
power to 10-power magnification is best. Advanced collectors
use an optically corrected lens. Beginners can start with hand
lenses, which may be purchased in jewelry stores, optical
shops, or scientific supply houses.
While rock
collecting, you
may need some
or all of this
equipment: field
guide to rocks
and minerals,
geologist’s ham-
mer, chisel, small
hand trowel, mag-
nifying glass,
compass, map,
pocketknife, hard
hat, safety
glasses, gloves,
knapsack, cam-
era, newspaper to
wrap rocks, adhe-
sive tape to make
a temporary label,
felt-tip marker.
If you plan to chisel or hammer rock to get
individual specimens, wear safety glasses.
Striking rocks with a hammer may knock off
sharp chips that could seriously injure your
unprotected eyes.


54 COLLECTIONS
Rocks: Collecting Chunks of the Past.
Cataloging and Displaying Rocks
Record specimens in a field notebook as you collect the rocks.
Although fully identifying a sample can wait until later, you
should immediately date and label your rock and note the loca-
tion where you found it. Use a piece of adhesive tape and a
marker to make a temporary label. Many collections become
mixed up because collectors fail to do this.
Just as in any field of collecting, a labeling system is
critical. Many rock collectors dab white water-soluble paint or
lacquer on a corner of each specimen, then write a reference
number on the paint with a black felt tip pen. For tiny
samples, mark the numbers on the container in which
you keep the specimens.
If you keep your
specimens on
trays, place a
small card with
identifying infor-
mation beneath
each rock for
quick reference.
Safety Tips
• Never enter an abandoned mine.
Walls frequently collapse.
• Wear a hard hat when hunting below a rock face.
• If chiseling rock for specimens, wear
protective eyewear.
• Wear gloves and sturdy boots or shoes.
• Always carry a compass and a good map, and
know how to use them.
• Whether you are collecting alone or with a friend,
always make sure someone knows where you
are going.
• Never throw rocks off a ledge—someone might
be right below.


COLLECTIONS 55
.Rocks: Collecting Chunks of the Past
Most rocks rarely require special treatment. Soak your
specimens in cold water and (if they are not too delicate) clean
them with an old toothbrush. Allow them to air dry. You can
simply store a rock collection in shoe boxes or corrugated card-
board boxes or display it on shelves.
Egg cartons make excellent containers for smaller rock speci-
mens. If you want something fancier, use cases that have
individual compartments and glass lids.


56 COLLECTIONS
Rocks: Collecting Chunks of the Past.
Evaluating Your Collection
Determining the value of a nonprecious rock or mineral collec-
tion can be difficult because there are no price guides available
as there are for other kinds of collectibles. Often the price of
common rocks such as granite or limestone is quoted per
pound. To get a general idea of the value of your rocks, go to
rock and mineral shows or to rock shops to find out what
people are charging for similar specimens.
Dealers and other collectors might be interested in buying
some of your rocks if you have a rare one found only
in a remote part of the world. Perhaps you have some
unique crystals that are special for
their clarity, shape, and color.
In any case, you would have
to negotiate a price based
on your knowledge of
comparable rock sales.
In your own notebook, record the specimen’s number and name,
date you collected the rock, description of the collection site, and
other relevant data. If you bought the rock, note the seller’s
name, purchase price, and purchase date.
For more
information on
identifying rocks,
see the
Geology merit
badge pamphlet.


COLLECTIONS 57
.Rocks: Collecting Chunks of the Past
You can find buyer’s guides for gemstones. Also, if you
have precious or semiprecious gemstones (opals, corundum
sapphires) in your collection, you can take them to a gemstone
appraiser to find out what the stones are worth (for a fee).
The appraiser is trained to grade the gemstones in terms of
appearance, quality, rarity, weight, and other factors that make
it unique.
Most rocks and minerals you find “in the field” have little
cash value, but they are important for what they represent in
your collection. As you show your collection to other rock
hounds, you will discover that your rocks are worth some-
thing: first, when they admire your samples; and second,
when they ask to trade specimens or offer you money
for a rock they need in their own collection.





COLLECTIONS 59
.Careers: From Hobby to Profession
Careers: From Hobby
to Profession
Some people use their hobby to relax after work. Others work
at their hobby. You can take many different career paths that
relate to your interest in collecting. For certain occupations—
such as dealing in comics-related merchandise—you can jump
right into a business if you have a collection to sell, a place to
store it, money to travel and buy more inventory, ways to sell
merchandise (webpage or auctions on the internet, storefront,
booth at a show), and some understanding about financial
record-keeping and tax laws.
Many dealers are self-taught. They may have a deep
knowledge and obvious enthusiasm about their products from
years of passionate collecting and research. They have also built
a network of potential clients and contacts from attending club
meetings, conventions, and auctions.
You may be more
interested in creating
comic books than selling
them. If you have artistic
talent, you can be—with
some training—a cartoon-
ist, penciller, colorist, or
inker. There are a number
of career opportunities in
comic book publishing.
Grading comic books also
can be a rewarding area
to pursue.
Your interest
in collecting
sports cards
may lead you into
playing sports,
sportscasting or
sportswriting, or
creating sports
card packaging
and promotions.


60 COLLECTIONS
Careers: From Hobby to Profession.
Rock collectors with a strong scientific curiosity may
pursue careers as mineralogists, petrologists, geologists, or
teachers. Rock hounds with a particular interest in gemstones
may become gemologists (trained in gemstone identification
and grading), appraisers, diamond cutters, lapidaries (artisans
who work with precious and semiprecious stones and miner-
als), bench jewelers (professionals who make, repair, and
adjust jewelry), or jewelry designers.
One Scout started
his collection with
a few hand-forged
nails from his
grandfather’s
barn. As his
collection grew,
he built a career
supplying hard-
ware for authentic
restorations.
Robert Haag, also known as the Meteorite
Man, used to go with his parents on
prospecting trips to the Arizona desert. He
became a rock hound and studied geology
in college. Today, he travels the world
collecting meteorites to buy, sell, and trade.
In a vault beneath his home in Tucson, he
keeps a treasure of meteorites, including
pieces of the moon and Mars.


COLLECTIONS 61
.Careers: From Hobby to Profession
A whole industry exists to support the buying, selling, and
display and preservation of collectibles. Auction houses, galler-
ies, and museums employ auctioneers, appraisers, curators, and
conservators. People hired for these positions often specialize in
one area, such as pottery and porcelain or prints and paintings.
You can turn any collecting interest into a related career.
For example, your candy dispensers collection may inspire
you to become a toy manufacturer, candy-maker, pop culture
historian, hobby magazine writer, brand manager, or product
placement specialist.
Education and Training
A collector is a narrowly focused expert, and that is sometimes
enough to get started. Often, however, more schooling and
training are necessary because so much is at stake. Find out
from people in your collection network what they had to study,
specialized schools they had to attend, skills they had to learn,
and professional organizations they joined to prepare for
their career.
Talk to your school counselor about some of the positions
mentioned above and discuss which colleges or trade schools
might offer the courses and training you will need. As you
consider your future, start a new collection—your own
career choices.


62 COLLECTIONS
Resources for Collecting.
Scouting Literature
Archaeology, Basketry, Coin Collecting,
Fishing, Fly-Fishing, Geology, Graphic
Arts, Indian Lore, Journalism,
Leatherwork, Metalwork, Painting,
Photography, Pottery, Pulp and Paper,
Railroading, Reading, Scouting Heritage,
Sculpture, Sports, Stamp Collecting,
Textile, Theater, Wood Carving, and
Woodwork merit badge pamphlets
Books
Baker, H.K.G. Cool Collectibles for Kids:
A Kid’s and Parent’s Guide to the
Hobby of Collecting. Silverleaf
Press, 2007.
Beckett, James. Beckett Almanac of
Baseball Cards and Collectibles, 2006
ed., Vol.11. Beckett Publications, 2006.
(Beckett writes price guides for all the
major sports cards.)
Berg, Barry. The Art of Buying and
Selling at Flea Markets. Hobby
House Press, 2003.
Collector Books. Garage Sale Flea
Market Annual: Current Values on
Today’s Collectibles, Tomorrow’s
Antiques. Collector Books, 2006.
Farndon, John. The Practical
Encyclopedia of Rocks and Minerals:
How to Find, Identify, Collect, and
Maintain the World’s Best Specimens.
Lorenz Books, 2006.
Gerber, Ernst. The Photo-Journal Guide
to Comic Books (2 vols.). Diamond
Comic Distributors, 1995.
Hake, Ted. The Official Hake’s Price
Guide to Character Toys, 6th ed.
House of Collectibles, 2006.
Lemke, Bob, ed. 2007 Standard Catalog
of Baseball Cards, 16th ed. Krause
Publications, 2006. (Krause also pub-
lishes catalogs covering other sports.)
MacDonald-Taylor, Margaret. A
Dictionary of Marks, 5th ed. Barrie
and Jenkins, 1992.
Newell, Patrick. Cool Collectibles:
Military Collectibles. Children’s
Press, 2000.
Nigro, Nicholas J. The Everything
Collectibles Book: How to Buy and
Sell Your Favorite Treasures, From
Fabulous Flea Market Finds to
Incredible Online Deals. Adams
Media, 2002.
Resources for Collecting
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


COLLECTIONS 63
.Resources for Collecting
Overstreet, Robert M. The Official
Overstreet Comic Book Price Guide,
37th ed. House of Collectibles, 2007.
Prisant, Carol. Antiques Roadshow
Collectibles: The Complete Guide to
Collecting 20th Century Glassware,
Costume Jewelry, Memorabilia, Toys,
and More From the Most-Watched
Show on PBS. Workman Publishing
Company, 2003.
Rickards, Maurice. Encyclopedia of
Ephemera. Routledge, 2000.
Sorrell, Charles A. Rocks and Minerals:
A Guide to Field Identification.
Golden Guides for St. Martin’s
Press, 2001.
Stearns, Dan, ed. Standard Catalog of
Die-Cast Vehicles. Krause
Publications, 2005.
Summers, B.J. Antique and
Contemporary Advertising
Memorabilia, 2nd ed.
Collector Books, 2004.
Thompson, Maggie, et al. 2007 Comic
Book Checklist and Price Guide:
1961 to Present, 13th ed. Krause
Publications, 2006.
Williams, Don, and Louisa Jaggar.
Saving Stuff: How to Care for and
Preserve Your Collectibles, Heirlooms,
and Other Prized Possessions.
Fireside, 2005.
Organizations and Websites
Beckett Media
beckett.com
DC Comics
dccomics.com
Ephemera Society of America
ephemerasociety.org
Gemstone Publishing
gemstonepub.com
International Scouting
Collectors Association
scouttrader.org
Lepidopterists’ Society
lepsoc.org
Marvel Comics
marvel.com
Panini Sports Trading Cards
paniniamerica.net
Rocks & Minerals
rocksandminerals.org
Society of Illustrators
societyillustrators.org
Topps
topps.com
Trading Card Central
tradingcardcentral.com
Upper Deck
upperdeck.com
Acknowledgments
Scouting America thanks Dr. and Mrs.
Charles Deur, Arlington, Texas, for their
assistance with a photo shoot for this
merit badge pamphlet, and for sharing
their knowledge about collectibles.
Scouting America is grateful to the
men and women serving on the
National Merit Badge Subcommittee
for the improvements made in updating
this pamphlet.


64 COLLECTIONS
Resources for Collecting.
Photo and Illustration Credits
C.S. Dixon, BoyOldToys.com, courtesy—
page 9 (both)
Footballcardshop.com, courtesy—page 45
HeritageComics.com, courtesy—pages
27–28 (all) and 35
Syracuse University Library, Syracuse,
New York, courtesy—page 26
Josh Waddell, courtesy—cover (baseball
and football cards); pages 40 (all)
and 43 (Lott, Aikman, Dunne)
Wikipedia.org/Andreas Praefcke,
courtesy—page 25
Andy Winkler, courtesy—page 41
All other photos are the property of or are
protected by Scouting America.
Darrell Byers—page 14 (bleach)
Tom Copeland—cover (action figure);
pages 8 (car), 10 (action figure,
note), 13, 16 (Scout), 19, 24, 32–33
(all), 38, 46, 54–55, and 56
(notebook)
Brian Payne—pages 39, 43 (Jordan),
44 (cards and image in magnifying
glass), 49, 53, 58, and 61
Randy Piland—pages 57 (Scout)
and 60 (Scouts)