ENGINEERING
STEM-Based


ENGINEERING
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


35890
ISBN 978-0-8395-3376-4
©2023 Boy Scouts of America
2023 Printing
FPO


ENGINEERING 3
Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Engineering or check Scoutbook for the latest
requirements.


4 ENGINEERING


ENGINEERING 5





ENGINEERING 7
Contents
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
What Does an Engineer Do? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
The Different Fields of Engineering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
How Does an Engineer Solve Problems? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
Basic Engineering Concepts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
Let’s Do Engineering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
Engineering as a Career . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87
The Professional Engineer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92
Engineering Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 94





ENGINEERING 9
.Introduction
Introduction
Engineers turn ideas into reality. For example, they will take the
plans drawn on paper for an exciting new roller coaster—a
design with loops, drops, and corkscrews—and figure out how
to build it so that it will be fast, safe to ride, and affordable to
build. Engineers devise all sorts of
things, ranging from a tiny, low-cost
battery for your cellphone to a
gigantic dam across the mighty
Yangtze River in China.
Engineering touches so many
parts of our lives that it has been
divided into many different special-
ties. Civil engineers create the dams,
bridges, and roadways on which we rely every day. Mechanical
engineers develop machines and engines. Software engineers
create computer programs. Biomedical engineers develop new
medical devices to help us live longer and healthier lives.
Aerospace engineers develop new aircraft and spacecraft.
Petroleum engineers help discover and extract new sources
of oil. And that is just a short list of engineering specialties.
The work of engineers affects
every part of our lives—at home,
at school, and at work. We have
engineers to thank when we use
escalators at the shopping mall,
watch TV on the latest flat-panel
screen, or get scanned for dis-
ease with the latest imaging
equipment at the hospital.


10 ENGINEERING
Introduction.
An engineer will use both science and technology to
meet needs. Famous inventors like Thomas Edison, Alexander
Graham Bell, Henry Ford, and Benjamin Franklin were not
called engineers, but innovators like them have been turning
ideas into useful products for centuries. Franklin’s experiments
with electricity are among his many accomplishments. Edison’s
first electric lightbulb dramatically changed American life. Bell’s
telephone changed the way we communicate with one another.
Ford not only made an engineering contribution to the design
of early automobiles, but also transformed manufacturing by
introducing the assembly line concept.
A Little History
Engineering has been around for a long time. Here are just a few
examples of the many amazing engineering feats of the past.
Great Pyramid of Giza.
In 2600 b.c., the ancient
Egyptians began building the
Great Pyramid of Giza, which
was the tallest structure in
the world for thousands of
years afterward. The project
took more than 20 years to
complete and required the
precise cutting and placement
of more than 2 million blocks
of stone.
Great Wall of China. In the
third century b.c., the Chinese
started building the Great
Wall. It would not be com-
pleted for another 1,800
years. The wall stretches for
4,000 miles across northern
China, averaging 25 feet
high and 15 to 30 feet wide
at the base.
Pyramids at Giza
Great Wall of China


ENGINEERING 11
.Introduction
Taj Mahal. The Taj Mahal was completed
in Agra, India, in 1654 as a monument to
emperor Shah Jahan’s wife. It is a
complex of numerous structures, including
a mausoleum, mosque, minarets, walls,
watchtowers, and gardens.
The Royal Road. In the 1400s, the Incas
of South America completed the Royal
Road, a major roadway up to 52 feet wide
that ran from what is now Santiago, Chile,
to Quito, Ecuador. Until the late 1800s, it
was the world’s longest road. Parts of it
crossed the Andes Mountains at elevations
of almost 12,000 feet.
The builders of these ancient wonders
used many of the same principles that
modern structural engineers apply, though they were limited
to the knowledge and technology of their day. As time passed,
and knowledge and technology advanced, marvels of
engineering became even more impressive.
Modern Marvels
In 1994, the American Society of Civil Engineers came up
with a list it called the “Seven Wonders of the Modern World,”
which amounted to the greatest civil engineering feats of the
20th century.
Channel Tunnel. This remarkable 31-mile-long tunnel runs
under the English Channel, between England and France.
For much of its length, the tunnel lies 130 feet below the
ocean floor. Instead of explosives, engineers used huge
tunnel-boring machines that cut through rock and removed
debris. The Channel Tunnel consists of three linked, parallel
tunnels—one for each direction of travel, and a service tunnel
that runs in between.
Canada’s National Tower. The CN Tower, standing 1,815 feet
above the city of Toronto, Ontario, is the world’s tallest
freestanding (using no guy wires) building. Some 1,465 feet up
the tower is the “Sky Pod,” the highest observation deck in the
world. From there, you can see up to 75 miles away. The CN
Tower was built to withstand wind gusts of up to 250 mph.
Taj Mahal
CN Tower


12 ENGINEERING
Introduction.
Empire State Building. The first building in the world to have
more than 100 floors was this 102-story skyscraper completed in
New York City in 1931. For 41 years, it was the tallest skyscraper
on Earth. The spire atop the 1,472-foot structure was originally
designed to be a mooring mast for airships.
Golden Gate Bridge. A beautiful 1.7-mile-long bridge in
California, completed in 1937, spans the “Golden Gate” strait,
which serves as the entrance to San Francisco Bay from the
Pacific Ocean. The suspended-deck bridge uses tall towers and
enormous cables to support the road surface below, which
carries six lanes of traffic.
Empire State Building
Golden Gate Bridge


ENGINEERING 13
.Introduction
Itaipu Dam. This 5-mile-wide dam, completed in 1982, spans
the Parana River on the border of Brazil and Paraguay in South
America. The Itaipu is the world’s largest hollow gravity dam.
A hollow gravity dam has empty chambers inside, making it
cheaper to build, but still has enough mass to hold back water
using its sheer weight. Until recently, the Itaipu was also the
largest hydroelectric dam in the world.
Netherlands Delta Works. For centuries, the Dutch have
fought to keep the sea at bay with levees (or dikes), seawalls,
and water pumps powered by windmills. But large parts of the
country fall below sea level. When a disastrous flood in 1953
killed more than 1,800 people, the nation undertook a huge
engineering project to protect its citizens. It raised thousands
of miles of dikes along the seashore and riverbanks, and built
dams and storm surge barriers.
Panama Canal. This 48-mile ship canal, completed in 1914,
connects the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans across the Isthmus of
Panama in Central America. By linking the two oceans, the
Panama Canal saves ships from having to travel thousands of
extra miles if going around South America. Engineers devised
a clever system of locks to raise ships from sea level up to
the level of inland artificial lakes. After crossing the isthmus,
boats are lowered back to sea level in another set of locks. Panama Canal
Itaipu Dam





ENGINEERING 15
.What Does an Engineer Do?
What Does an
Engineer Do?
Engineers work to solve problems. They may build roads
or cars, design factories or computer games, or study traffic
problems or the best way to make a chair. They find ways to
make life easier, safer, and more productive by putting new
knowledge and skills to work or by more efficiently using
established methods and processes.
Creating better methods and products is
important because, besides meeting people’s
needs more successfully, innovation also can
save money. Engineers are always looking for
ways to cut costs and improve
efficiency. That allows compa-
nies to sell their products
at a lower price, which
stimulates competition
and improves consumers’
lives. For example, a
typical desktop computer
costs a third of the price
it did 15 years ago.
Engineering can be defined as the application of
science, mathematics, technical knowledge, and
practical experience to solve problems. The result
is the design, creation, and operation of useful
products, structures, machines, systems,
and processes.


16 ENGINEERING
What Does an Engineer Do?.
Engineering Today
Engineering breakthroughs don’t happen only on a grand scale.
Many innovations occur on a tiny scale—in a test tube or on a
circuit board. The digital world we now live in took off with
the invention of the transistor. This fingernail-sized switch
and amplifier replaced the bulky glass vacuum tubes used in
early radios and televisions. Suddenly these products could be
smaller and less expensive and could be powered on batteries.
Over time, transistors were further miniaturized from
hundreds to now millions of tiny transistors placed on a
single integrated circuit. The integrated circuit made possible
such products as the pocket calculator and digital wristwatch.
Later, engineers designed the first microprocessor, putting all
the circuits needed for a computer’s central processing unit
(its “brain”) onto a single chip. This innovation made possible
the personal computer, cellular telephone, and advanced
missile technology.
Engineering innovations have advanced technology with
lightning-quick speed. For example, which telephone do
you think is more common these days?
For more about
electronics and
computers, see
the Electronics
and Digital
Technology
merit badge
pamphlets.


ENGINEERING 17
.What Does an Engineer Do?
Jack Kilby, Inventor of the
Integrated Circuit
Jack Kilby (1923–2005), an electrical engineer, invented
the integrated circuit in 1958 while working for Texas
Instruments. Before then, electronic devices such as
computers were made from individual transistors wired
together to form circuits. Kilby had the idea of manu-
facturing multiple electronic components together on
the same piece of semiconductor material, with all the
connections built in—no soldering required. His inven-
tion paved the way for the development of modern
computers and the Information Age of today.
Computers have also revolutionized how
we communicate. In the 1960s, a network of
computers was born that evolved into the Internet.
Then, in 1990, a physicist named Tim Berners-Lee
created the World Wide Web. His main innovations were
the Uniform Resource Locator (URL), a form of address that
can be used on any webpage or other file on the internet,
and hypertext markup language (HTML), a form of
computer language that creates webpages and links them to
other webpages.


18 ENGINEERING
What Does an Engineer Do?.
Engineering in Our Daily Lives
Let’s look at the automobile. Thanks to the use of lighter and
stronger materials and changes to engine designs, engineering
improvements have made cars more fuel-efficient. In the
1950s and 1960s, the average car got 8 to 10 miles per gallon.
Today’s automobiles go two or three times as far on the same
amount of fuel.
Another significant engineering contribution is in auto-
mobile safety. Antilock brakes use speed sensors and hydraulic
valves to slow each wheel independently to prevent skidding
when the driver applies the brakes. A global positioning system
(GPS) and cell-phone technology are combined in the OnStar
tracking service offered by General Motors. If a car is in an
accident, the system automatically signals service representa-
tives who can summon ambulance and police responders.
Improvements to car bumpers have reduced damage and
injury by absorbing shock at low speeds.
In the home, programmable electronic thermostats auto-
matically adjust heat and cold, saving hundreds of dollars in
energy costs. Ovens with computerized timers automatically
shut off the heating coils after the cooking time has elapsed.
Electronic smoke sensors, wired together into one system, alert
the whole family if a fire or smoke is detected. In some homes,
security services will call for emergency assistance. Through the
use of the internet and small cameras installed in the home,
people can check up on their homes or loved ones from thou-
sands of miles away.
Hybrid Cars: What Was Old Is New Again
Back in 1905, an American engineer named H. Piper filed the first patent
application for a gas-electric hybrid car. Piper’s hybrid, and others like it,
never caught on—that is, until the mid-1990s. Suddenly, worries about oil
shortages and air pollution made hybrids attractive again. Modern hybrids
get far better gas mileage than conventional cars. They use batteries to
store electric power, and sometimes get by on the electric motor alone.
What’s more, they cleverly capture the car’s kinetic energy (the energy of
motion) through regenerative braking. Every time you apply the brakes,
energy goes to the batteries to be stored.
Besides being
more fuel-efficient,
cars today are
much “cleaner”
—they release
fewer hazardous
emissions into the
air than those of
years past.


.What Does an Engineer Do?
Making Work Easier
As important as engineering is in the
home, it is even more important in the
workplace. Advances in engineering
increase productivity, the amount of
product that results from a given
amount of energy or cost. Shaving just
a few pennies off the cost of making a
product—through better design or
cheaper materials—could make the
difference between profit and loss.
In factories, engineers can design
systems and operating methods to
reduce waste. They can devise special-
ized software to control production
processes and manage inventory. They
can help plan the best use of salespeo-
ple in the field and can design layouts
for retail stores. They can even help set up storefronts on the
internet, figure out how much product to keep in inventory, and
decide how best to ship products.
Making Play More Fun
If you enjoy computer games, you can thank the software
engineers for writing the code that makes those games
possible. Likewise, hardware engineers design ever
more advanced graphics chips and processors that
make computer games appear sharper, more
colorful, and more realistic.
Engineering has also affected the sports
world. Bicycle engineers have developed
better gear shifting for easier riding
up hills, and lighter and stronger materials
for bicycle frames and components. Tennis
has also benefited from engineering
improvements. Recent developments in
racquet designs are resulting in a faster and
more exciting game for tennis enthusiasts.


20 ENGINEERING
What Does an Engineer Do?.
Understanding Electricity
Consumer electronics products like cellphones
and laptop or tablet computers have become so
popular that they are the basis of multibillion-
dollar industries. These products demonstrate
advanced electronics engineering, fitting
sophisticated technology into very small
packages.
The typical cellphone consists of a circuit
board containing the electronic brains of the
device, keyboard, antenna, display,
speaker, microphone, camera, and battery,
all of which fits inside a sturdy case not
much bigger than the palm of your
hand.
Cellphones use computer
technology to handle the
transmission of sound, images,
video, and text. These are all forms
of information that are either digital
or can be converted to digital so that
they can be encoded into radio waves sent
between cellphones or from cellphones to
computers via the internet. What our ears hear as
sounds are vibrations or waves of air pressure
that are not electrical. A microphone can “hear”
such vibrations and convert them into analog
electrical signals.
Cellphone processors convert such analog
electrical signals from microphones into strings
of digital ones and zeroes for transmission over
radio waves and then, at the receiving phone or
computer, the same kind of processor converts
them back to analog so that speakers can make
the final step of converting analog electrical
signals to actual sound waves you can hear.
Digital cameras in cellphones work much the
same way but by sensing light instead of sound.


ENGINEERING 21
.What Does an Engineer Do?
Light in the form of photons of
different colors and intensities and
arrangements are “seen” by
photodetectors in the cellphone
camera, which converts them into
electrical signals that are
transmitted between
cellphones or computers
digitally and reconstructed
into images that are
displayed by lighting up
arrays of colored LEDs
and LCDs on a display for
us to see.
Your Turn
Give some thought to the above examples of engineering feats.
Jot down a few of your own and see if you can suggest what
might be possible in the future. Think about Scouting and the
technological and engineering advancements that have affected
it. There are many examples, such as camping gear and
advances in first aid.





ENGINEERING 23
.The Different Fields of Engineering
The Different Fields
of Engineering
Each field of engineering applies different sciences, formulas,
and techniques. Designing a bridge takes different knowledge
than creating a fire hot enough to refine iron ore. The way an
engineer figures out how to make large batches of chemicals is
quite different from how another engineer plans to manufacture
automobiles or computer chips.
The special scientific ideas and mathematical formulas needed
by each type of engineer can be collected and made available
to all the people doing that kind of work. These include infor-
mation such as
• Tables that show how materials behave when cooled,
heated, or melted
• Mathematical formulas that describe how
air, water, or electrons flow
• Computer programs to help engineers
understand how these things will happen


24 ENGINEERING
The Different Fields of Engineering.
The First Engineering Specialties
Five early fields of engineering emerged to meet the growing
needs of society that were brought about by the industrial revo-
lution in the 1800s. These engineering fields were civil, mining
and metallurgical, mechanical, chemical, and electrical.
Civil Engineering
Civil engineers meet society’s needs for infrastructure—things
like roads, railways, bridges, dams, water supply systems, and
sewage systems. A critical part of designing these structures is
making sure they will stay where they are put—that they will
not tilt, shift, or sink into the soil over time. Therefore, civil
engineers often apply knowledge of geology and physics in
their work.
Civil engineering
specialties include
structural
engineering,
transportation
engineering,
environmental
engineering,
hydraulic
engineering,
and surveying.
The World’s Largest Dam
In 2006, the largest dam in the world
built to produce electricity was completed
in China. The Three Gorges Dam stretches
1.4 miles across the massive Yangtze
River. At 607 feet tall and constructed of
some 21 million cubic yards of concrete,
it is nearly five times as large as the
famous Hoover Dam on the Arizona-Nevada border. The Three Gorges
Dam will create a 410-mile-long reservoir up to 574 feet deep, eventually
producing 18.2 gigawatts of power—about nine times as much as the
Hoover Dam. The dam is expected to protect 15 million people from peri-
odic flooding of the Yangtze River.


.The Different Fields of Engineering
Mining and Metallurgical Engineering
Mining and metallurgical engineers work to make mining and
refining metals more predictable, safer, and less expensive. They
do this by applying the principles of materials science—the study
of the properties and behavior of solids, liquids, and gases.
Metallurgical engineers have advanced the ore refining
processes by creating new mixtures (alloys) tailored to meet
specific needs. Examples are hard metals that can hold a sharp
edge, soft metals that can be stamped with
artistic patterns, corrosion-resistant and
weather-resistant metals, and metals that
can withstand very high or very low
temperatures. The metallurgist strives to
meet the project’s goals by delivering
alloys with just the right properties in such
areas as cost-effectiveness, weight,
durability, and strength.
John Roebling (1806–1869) developed a machine to
create thin, flexible wire ropes that were twisted
together to produce lengths up to 30,000 feet. These
ropes were used to build New York City’s Brooklyn
Bridge and in projects such as the Panama Canal and
San Francisco’s Golden Gate Bridge.
Brooklyn Bridge


26 ENGINEERING
The Different Fields of Engineering.
Mechanical Engineering
Mechanical engineers apply the principles of physics to design,
build, and maintain mechanical systems. That can mean any-
thing from designing a collapsible cardboard box for holding
doughnuts to constructing the most advanced jet engines.
Presidential Engineers
Two U.S. presidents were engineers before
they entered the White House. Herbert
Hoover (1874–1964), the 31st president,
had been a mining engineer and managed
mines in Colorado, Australia, and China.
He started his own engineering firm in
1908. In 1976, an engineer was elected as
our nation’s 39th president. Jimmy Carter
(1924– ) studied nuclear physics at the U.S.
Naval Academy in Annapolis, Maryland.
Later, while serving in the Navy’s nuclear
submarine program, he became a qualified
nuclear engineer.
Potential energy is harnessed at hydroelectric power plants,
where water drives a turbine and generator to create electricity.


ENGINEERING 27
.The Different Fields of Engineering
Some mechanical engineers specialize in converting energy
into more useful forms. Boilers and generators convert heat to
electricity in coal-fired, gas-fired, and nuclear power plants. The
energy in falling water can be used to generate electricity. Heat
from the sun can be collected and used to heat water or even
generate electricity.
Many mechanical engineers specialize in moving heat to
where it is wanted and away from where it is not wanted. They
design boilers, gasoline engines, and gas turbines (jet engines)
that can operate for long periods without overheating, or fans
to cool the microprocessors in computers.
Other mechanical engineers take the converted energy and
devise machines to do useful things with it: Automobiles, lawn
mowers, microengineered medical equipment, aircraft landing
gears, and machines to mold plastic toys or fill soda bottles
are all examples. These engineers learn how to use shafts and
bearings, pulleys, gears, and mechanisms (collections of levers)
to make things move around or back and forth or in special
patterns, at specified speeds.
Two-Wheeled Marvel
The Segway® Personal Transporter (PT), a battery-pow-
ered, two-wheeled “human transporter,” is a marvel of
engineering. What is amazing about the Segway PT is
that it reacts to the rider’s movements, adjusting the
speed of its wheels to maintain balance at all times. The
rider leans forward to move the Segway PT ahead and
backward to move in reverse. This ability to self-balance
is accomplished by a combination of computers,
motors, and gyroscopes.
Mechanical
engineers
understand how
hard you can push
on a part before it
will bend or break,
and how to design
the shape of a
part so that the
lightest possible
part will support
the most
force possible.


28 ENGINEERING
The Different Fields of Engineering.
Chemical Engineering
Chemical engineers develop useful things based on the newest
advances in chemistry. In the process, they harness their knowl-
edge of chemicals, chemical reactions, and raw materials. When
chemists create a new medicine, plastic, fiber, fabric, or glue,
they normally make only a small amount in the laboratory.
Chemical engineers devise ways to adapt these small laboratory
experiments into full-scale productions in processing plants that
can efficiently make tons of the new substance every day.
Electrical Engineering
Electrical engineers discover how to harness electricity to do
more for people. They study and apply electronics and electro-
magnetism (the physics of electricity and magnetism).
Electrical engineering had its start during the latter part of
the 19th century. The original focus was on generating and dis-
tributing electricity widely, to replace steam and water as
sources of power and gas as a fuel for lighting. Along the way
came inventions like electrically powered trains, microwave
ovens, and other modern conveniences that have dramatically
changed our lives, as well as communication devices that have
brought people around the world closer together.
Electrical communications started with the telegraph before
the Civil War, followed by the telephone (1876) and the radio
(late 1800s). Television was first demonstrated in
the United States in 1927. The tran-
sistor was invented in the late
1940s and showed up in portable
radios by the late 1950s. Some of the
earliest electronic computers were
developed during World War II. The
first modern digital computer, the
ENIAC, was a giant machine that used
vacuum tubes. The integrated circuits
that make possible desktop computers
were invented in the late 1950s, followed
by the microprocessor and the first personal
computers in the 1970s.


ENGINEERING 29
.The Different Fields of Engineering
The specialties of modern electrical engineering include:
• Power generation and distribution
• Electrical machinery (motors and things run by motors)
• Communications (telephones, radio, TV, and data)
• Computer systems, sometimes called information systems
• Control systems (like those that guide robots)
• Electronic devices (integrated circuits, microprocessors)
Inventing a Better Lightbulb
In 2006, engineering professor Shuji
Nakamura was awarded the Millennium
Technology Prize in part for inventing a type
of solid state lighting that gives off light with-
out generating heat. His light-emitting diodes
use a fraction of the energy needed to
brighten the filament inside Thomas Edison’s
incandescent lightbulb.
Power Extremes
Some electrical engineers specialize in
power: generating electricity, moving it
across great distances to where it is needed,
and delivering it to end users. They work
with huge amounts of electricity, often at
extremely high voltages.
Other electrical engineers work with low
amounts of power. They design the micro-
chips that go into computers and portable
electronic devices. They can see the details of
their work only under microscopes. Many
of these fields are closely allied with other
branches of science and engineering. For example, the turbines used to
generate electricity are designed by mechanical engineers. The design of
integrated circuits depends on materials scientists and engineers.


30 ENGINEERING
The Different Fields of Engineering.
Today’s Many Fields of Engineering
As technologies have become more complex and the products
based on them more complicated, more modern engineering
specialties have developed.
Aerospace Engineering. Aerospace engineers
are specialized mechanical engineers that
study the way airplanes and rockets interact
with the air to fly; develop lightweight struc-
tures for airplanes and space vehicles; and
design the high-powered engines needed to
propel airplanes and lift space vehicles clear
of Earth’s gravity and atmosphere. Aerospace
engineers specializing in aerodynamics design
specially shaped wings, tails, and airplane
bodies to move through the air with the least
possible resistance.
Agricultural Engineering. Agricultural
engineers design farm and food-processing
equipment and develop systems for irrigation,
drainage, and waste disposal. Some experiment
with new ways to grow crops more efficiently,
like hydroponics (growing plants without soil).
Architectural Engineering. Architectural engi-
neers work with architects on the systems that
make buildings functional, such as elevators
and escalators, heating and cooling systems,
and ventilation and air-conditioning systems.
They also work with earth scientists to under-
stand when, how, and at what strength natural
forces—such as wind, rain, and earthquakes—
will affect buildings.
Bioengineering. Bioengineering combines
biology and engineering and also relies on the
principles of biomechanics—the study of the
mechanics (or workings) of living organisms.
Bioengineers work with medical doctors to
design surgical instruments, artificial organs
like heart valves and hearts, implants to
replace weakened bones, and prosthetics like
artificial legs to help people who have been
hurt in accidents.
A horticulturist inspects the size
and quality of hydroponically
grown strawberries.


ENGINEERING 31
.The Different Fields of Engineering
Ceramic Engineering. Ceramic engineers work with processes
that convert clay and nonmetallic minerals into ceramic prod-
ucts such as dishes, protective tiles for the space shuttle, and
solar panels. During production, ceramic products are heated
in very hot ovens, making them among the best materials for
parts that will be exposed to high heat—such as inside a jet
engine, or on the surface of a spaceship that must fly through
the atmosphere to return to Earth.
Computer Engineering. The amazing rate at which computers
have progressed is due in large part to computer engineers,
who continue to find ways to make memory storage devices
smaller, to fit more circuits on a microchip, and to move data
faster and faster through the circuits. Devices for holding
data and software programs, as well as media files such as
photographs and movies, have exploded in capacity while
their physical size has gotten smaller. The computer that
controlled the lunar lander when Apollo astronauts landed on
the moon in 1969 cost more than a million dollars. Today, the
cheapest home computer has far more power than the Apollo
computer—and costs a fraction of the price.
World’s First Bionic Man
Jesse Sullivan of Dayton, Tennessee, lost both of his arms in a terrible
accident involving an electric power line. After recovering from his
injuries, Mr. Sullivan was selected to receive a new type of artificial arm.
This “bionic” arm is an improvement over earlier artificial limbs because
the wearer can control it with his thoughts (a neural control) rather than
by flexing certain muscles (a mechanical control). Now, when he thinks
“close hand,” for example, impulses from his chest signal motors in his
artificial limb, and his new hand closes.


32 ENGINEERING
The Different Fields of Engineering.
Environmental Engineering. Environmental engineers study
the quality of the air, water, and land and develop systems to
reduce pollution and help restore Earth to good health.
Increasingly complex computer programs now allow environ-
mental engineers to create computer models of the movement
of air and pollutants. This lets engineers pinpoint the worst
sources of pollution and how to improve air quality for the
entire area. Once environmental engineers identify which
polluting chemicals are coming out of the exhaust stack of
a particular factory, for instance, they can design special
equipment to clean up the exhaust and improve the air
quality around that factory.
Industrial Engineering. Industrial engineers are concerned
with how manufacturing plants are organized: what machinery
there is, how materials and the things being made flow through
the factory, and how people are organized to make the factory
as effective as it can be. They often are involved in managing
warehouse operations such as tracking inventory, routing con-
veyors, and overseeing materials handling. They use the branch
of mathematics called statistics to design efficient systems.
Manufacturing Engineering.
Mass-producing large quantities
of products requires special
knowledge of high-speed
machinery (including automated
machines and robots) to make
sure the parts and finished
products really are identical.
This is the task of manufactur-
ing engineers. They understand
how machine tools cut metal,
how tools wear out, and how
assembly robots can consis-
tently make good products day
after day.
Marine or Naval Engineering. Just as special skills are needed
to create vehicles that move through the air, designing ships
also requires unique knowledge and mathematical tools. Marine
or naval engineers design equipment for a structure that is con-
stantly moving, twisting, and being slammed by environmental
factors such as weather, salt water, current, and marine life.


ENGINEERING 33
.The Different Fields of Engineering
Materials Engineering. Materials engineers work with all
kinds of materials, natural and synthetic, to create new materi-
als that meet specific needs for strength, flexibility, durability,
and resistance to corrosion. Composites are excellent examples
of what materials engineers are capable of creating. Composites
can be strong enough for use as I beams or flexible enough to
be formed into just about any shape, from airplane parts to
bicycle frames.
Nuclear Engineering. Nuclear engineers design systems that
operate in the presence of nuclear radiation, from power plants
to medical instruments to weapons. They specialize in applying
materials that are not weakened by radiation, and in making
the systems safe. Handling nuclear materials must be done
safely and surely, whether the materials are tiny “seeds” to
be implanted under the skin of a cancer patient, or new fuel
supplies for a power plant. One task of nuclear engineers is to
design containers that will safely shield the radiation under
normal use, and will not break open if they are involved in an
accident while they are being shipped.
A Comeback for Nuclear Power?
Nuclear power reactors
generate electricity to run
our homes, factories, and
businesses. Interest in build-
ing new nuclear plants has
grown with the rising cost of
oil and natural gas and public
concerns about air pollution
caused by coal-burning power
plants. Nuclear engineers are
working to develop a new
generation of reactors that
would run at higher tempera-
tures, drawing more power
from the same amount of
fuel—and also creating less
radioactive waste.


34 ENGINEERING
The Different Fields of Engineering.
Ocean Engineering. Some engineers say it is harder to work in
the ocean than in outer space. Oceanic pressures are extremely
high, temperatures vary greatly, unusual materials are found,
and the wildlife ranges from Earth’s tiniest animals to the larg-
est known mammal. Ocean engineers design ways to harvest
food from the ocean or harness the energy in waves. Some
engineers are developing new methods and machines to make
it possible to work and live beneath the sea for long periods.
Petroleum Engineering. Petroleum engineers are specialized
chemical engineers who develop efficient ways to extract
crude petroleum from the ground. Near the coast of Southern
California, oil-drilling rigs on the land actually branch out
under the sea to find oil deposits. It is difficult and complex
to drill more than a mile straight down into the earth. Can you
imagine the extra engineering problems of drilling sideways?
The giant oil-drilling and pumping platforms that
operate near America’s Gulf Coast and in the stormy
North Sea of northern Europe are complex and exciting
ocean engineering projects. Engineers must design
steady platforms that can withstand storms and occa-
sional collisions by ships.
Today, we rely on
petroleum for fuel
as well as many
nonfuel products,
such as asphalt
for roads, paint
thinners, candy
and chewing gum,
and skin creams.


ENGINEERING 35
.The Different Fields of Engineering
Software Engineering. Software engineers apply the findings
of computer science to design complex software systems and
products—from the systems that control airplanes in flight, to
the systems that watch over our money in banks, to exciting
new computer games. They learn or create different program-
ming languages to do different kinds of tasks. The fast-moving
graphics action of a computer game is quite different from
carrying out a detailed mathematical analysis. Creating
photographlike images, complete with shadows and reflections,
is different from searching a huge database for related items
of information.
Systems Engineering. Complex systems like an airplane or a
power plant require the expertise of many kinds of engineers.
Systems engineers figure out how all the many parts of a
complex system work together, so that a plane will fly safely
or a power plant will generate power steadily, safely, and
cleanly. Systems engineers often are the first engineers on a
new project. They translate the customer’s needs (like high-
quality surround sound for a home-theater system) into require-
ments and specifications that other engineers can follow as they
design the product. They then design tests to ensure that the
finished product actually does what it was designed to do.
Besides the fields described above, there are other, more
highly specialized fields of engineering. Engineers must be
able to work in teams because many problems or projects
are highly complex. Several specialties may be required to
complete the project, and no one engineer may have all the
necessary knowledge.
Computer Tools
Many engineers today use computer tools to help them with their work.
These computer-aided programs allow engineers to draw their design
and then simulate how the design will work in many situations. CAD
(computer-aided design) and CAE (computer-aided engineering) programs
also allow engineers to make quick design changes and to simulate how
designs operate without having to actually build the equipment.


The Engineer’s Work
Besides specializing in particular fields, different engineers have
different responsibilities.
Design. The design engineer uses new and existing ideas to
solve a new problem or to solve an old problem in a new way.
These engineers find solutions that work according to the
project’s requirements, stay within the budget, and are easy
and safe to use. The solutions must be doable, long-lasting,
practical to maintain or repair, and environmentally safe.
Analysis. The analytical engineer is mainly responsible for cre-
ating mathematical models of physical problems. Analysis is the
process of using the methods and tools of mathematics to simu-
late (mimic) how a physical object will behave in response to
the forces acting upon it. The goal of analysis is to understand
the object’s behavior without the time and expense of building
and testing physical models. Computer-aided engineering tools
are used for simulation and analysis.
Testing. The test engineer develops and carries out tests of a
new product to make sure it meets requirements for structural
integrity, reliability, and performance under expected conditions.
Also perform quality checks on existing products.
Industry Standards. Applying standards helps engineers to
design compatible, safe, healthy, secure, and high-quality
products. Standards influence the design of many everyday
products. Phones, computers, cars, airplanes, and even road
signs all are based upon industry standards. From sports to
food, from transportation to buildings, standards help ensure
compatibility between systems or products and aid in the
adoption of new technology.
Research. Research engineers conduct research and seek out
new materials, methods, and tools for other engineers to use.
Together with research scientists, they explore advanced ideas
and opportunities. Innovative products such as microrobots to
help medical doctors in surgery, improved car aerodynamics
(streamlining) to reduce drag and increase fuel efficiency, and
computer microchips are direct results of research done by
research engineers.
36 ENGINEERING


ENGINEERING 37
.The Different Fields of Engineering
Sales. The sales engineer is a liaison (or go-between) between
the company or organization that creates a product and the cus-
tomers who use it. The sales engineer must understand the cus-
tomer’s needs as well as how the product or process works and
why it will satisfy the customer’s requirements. An outgoing
personality and solid technical knowledge are important to be a
successful sales engineer.
Management. Successful engineers with strong communication
and leadership skills often become managers—project managers,
department managers, chief engineers, engineering vice presidents—
even presidents of companies and organizations. The role of the
engineering management staff is to supervise the work of engi-
neers assigned to them and ensure that projects are completed
successfully, on time, and within budget.
Consulting. A consulting engineer is an independent, self-
employed engineer who provides services to companies, organi-
zations (including the government), or individual clients on a
contract basis. A contract may be for one specific project or for
long-term services. Consulting engineers serve in all fields of
engineering, including management.
Teaching. An engineering professor is involved in teaching,
research, and service. Teaching includes classroom teaching,
supervising student research projects and papers, and developing
courses for colleges and universities.
A Steadying Experience
Engineers often combine their training in
one discipline with experience in other
fields. One example is Wilson Greatbatch,
who invented the heart pacemaker. Trained
as an electrical engineer, Greatbatch
worked in the areas of medicine, agricul-
ture, and chemistry. He was building an
oscillator to record heart sounds when he
accidentally installed a resistor with the
wrong resistance and it began to give off a
steady electrical pulse. From this came the
first implantable cardiac pacemaker, which
has helped millions of people to live.





ENGINEERING 39
.How Does an Engineer Solve Problems?
How Does an Engineer
Solve Problems?
Think of problem solving as a complex, challenging game. As
you solve the problem, you will find that several things must be
done, and each of these things involves a new problem. We
often call the main engineering problem to be solved a project.
Systems Engineering Approach to
Problem Solving
You will use a systematic
(planned or orderly) approach
to accomplish your project.
We call this approach systems
engineering. There are nine
steps to follow.
1. Establish a Systems
Engineering Operation
As you set up your systems
engineering operation, you will
get an overview of the next
eight steps of this approach. You
will decide what items you will
need to use, how you will make
sketches or drawings, how you
will analyze alternative designs,
how you will make the parts
you need, and how you will
assemble and test the project.


40 ENGINEERING
How Does an Engineer Solve Problems?.
Note how these simple drawings for other projects differ from
the sketch on page 43.
STORAGE BOX
STORAGE CHEST
AND TRAY
PATROL CHAIRS
FLAG STAND
ROLLERBALL GAME


ENGINEERING 41
.How Does an Engineer Solve Problems?
List items you might need, such as a computer for computer-
aided drafting, drafting tools, voltmeter, measuring scale, or
hand tools. For example, let’s assume you have the following
items that you may use for projects:
• A set of wrenches for nuts and bolts
• Two or three each of straight-head and
Phillips-head screwdrivers
• A socket wrench set
• A hammer and handsaw for wood
• A hacksaw for metal or plastic
• A ruler and a measuring tape
• Pencils, plastic triangles and
templates, and a drafting compass
for making drawings and sketches
• Electrical multimeter (ammeter and volt-
meter) for electrical measurements
• A workbench with a vise for
holding pieces
• Two C-clamps
• Various power hand tools, such as a drill motor
(with a few drill bits) and a sander
The tools listed above are the physical assets available to
you for the manufacturing phase of your project. This project
might be a freestanding patrol box for base camping. If the
base camp has electrical power available, you might add a
light to the design project. You have the multimeter to check
the electrical system.
Safety note: Use only power tools you
are thoroughly familiar with and only
under the direct supervision of a respon-
sible adult who knows how to properly
and safely operate those tools. The adult
must always be present and aware of your task while
you are operating a power tool.


42 ENGINEERING
How Does an Engineer Solve Problems?.
Next, make an outline of a milestone (or Gantt) chart. You
will use this to schedule the steps required for the project. Here
is a sample Gantt chart.
Lastly, estimate the cost of each idea and the financial
resources available to you for your project. Engineers must always
be aware of the cost of a project.
You have now established the beginning of a systems
engineering operation. You have listed your operation’s resources
(computer, calculator, tools, finances), and you have a means of
keeping track of the progress of the scheduled steps of your proj-
ect. Your systems engineering operation can apply to any project
you wish to tackle and is limited only by your available resources.
2. Describe the Project Requirements
Clearly describe the project with a project statement. Your project
description might be a statement of a relatively simple problem,
such as: “Find the time required to fill a 100-gallon water tank
with a constant flow rate of 10 gallons per minute into the tank,
and with zero water loss or leakage.” However, a problem might
be extremely complex mathematically, and still be solved with a
clear, brief problem statement.
Example Gantt Chart: Patrol Box
Time Schedule—Project days from start
Project Task 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14
Project statement
Planning
Ideas
Draw best ideas
Analyze ideas
Select best idea
Draw idea with parts
shown assembled
Obtain materials
Make parts
Assemble design
Use the patrol box


ENGINEERING 43
.How Does an Engineer Solve Problems?
On the other
hand, you may be asked
to “Design a challenging
game of skill that can be played
on a tabletop. The game should be
constructed of simple wood and other
materials that are readily available at any
hardware store, and should challenge the
player’s dexterity and understanding of the
laws of gravity and physics.” This is an example
of the design class of problem. The solution is a
project because a series of problems must be solved during
planning and construction.
You are asked to devise a design solution for this project,
which, in your judgment, best satisfies the design requirements.
This type of project solution is called an iterative (or trial-and-
error) solution and is typical of a design project, so you must
carefully list all of the positive and negative requirements for
the design. List the function (what it does), size, weight,
materials, and any other factors that may come into play,
such as the physical development of the person playing the
game. For example, would your game be appropriate
entertainment for a toddler?
For many projects,
you may be
required to
consider environ-
mental factors such
as noise, air, or
water pollution.
Social forces in
your community
might also be
factors, such as
the need for ramps
for citizens
with disabilities.
Rollerball game diagram


44 ENGINEERING
How Does an Engineer Solve Problems?.
3. Plan the Project’s Activities, With Time Schedules
Compare the resources required to accomplish your project with
your actual resources. You might need to look for more or dif-
ferent tools, or other pieces of equipment.
Let’s assume that your project is to design a wooden roller-
ball skill game. The sample list of tools given in No. 1 are
appropriate for many projects, such as designing a base camp
patrol box, and will do just fine in this situation, as well.
Be sure to take inventory of the materials you will need,
too. Because you are tackling a woodworking project, you also
will need wood and wood screws, and you might consider add-
ing a lacquer finish, paint, and paintbrushes to your list to put
the finishing touches on your game. Sheets of fine sandpaper
can be used to give your game a smooth finish. Felt pads for
the underside of the game will help protect furniture from being
damaged. And don’t forget the steel rollerball!
You could choose to make a wooden skill game like this one, in which the
challenge is to roll a steel ball along a pair of rods, dropping it into a cup
with the highest point value. The rods have a slight uphill slope, and the
player’s objective is to manipulate the rods and ball to get the ball to roll
up the slope. As the ball rolls over the cup with the desired score, the
player spreads the rods quickly and the ball drops into the cup.
The trick to mastering the game is to spread the rods apart slowly to
start the ball rolling, then work its momentum to roll the ball to the top for
the highest possible score.


ENGINEERING 45
.How Does an Engineer Solve Problems?
As indicated, you may purchase parts for your design proj-
ect. Engineers normally buy many of the parts for their projects
and perhaps need to make only a few of their own with the
manufacturing tools available to them. As you design your
project, you will decide which parts of your design to make
and which ones to buy.
For our rollerball example, we bought the following parts:
• Long screws
• Steel rollerball
• PVC pipe end caps
We made the following parts from purchased lengths
of plywood and wooden dowels cut to the proper length,
as specified on your design drawings:
• The base and sides of the game
• Two half-inch wooden dowels
When designing the rollerball game, many engineering problems will need to be
considered, like how far apart to place the cups and how high to place the rods.
You also might discover different building materials that work better than the
ones we used in this example.


46 ENGINEERING
How Does an Engineer Solve Problems?.
4. Conduct Research—Get Ideas
If your problem is analytical, you can review books and profes-
sional engineering journals to find solutions to similar problems.
But if you have a design problem—a project—you must also look
at similar design solutions (whether you are designing circuit
boards, a sprint racer, or a dune buggy). Find out what other
people have done. For the rollerball project, you would visit
hobby or woodworking shops to see examples of other wood-
workers’ projects. The goal is to get the most ideas you can,
even if you don’t use them all.
Schedule your project steps on your milestone chart and leave room to
describe your actual progress as you accomplish the project steps. If you
have overestimated the complexity of a particular phase of your project,
you will probably find that it takes less time to accomplish than you have
scheduled. As an example, you may have scheduled three weeks for
making design drawings or sketches. If it takes only four days, your actual
progress will show a faster accomplishment of your project than your
scheduled progress. This is why you should allow flexibility in your plan-
ning. If you take more time than you had planned, adjust the dates on the
time scale. If you discover additional tasks (or steps) to be done, leave
room on your milestone chart to add these new steps.
Review your planning at least
weekly. Do not be discouraged
if your planning requires sev-
eral changes. This is a feature
of the systems engineering
approach. Assess your progress
and feed information about
necessary changes back into
your planning system. You will
learn a great deal from this and
you will do better on your next
project. Remember that leader-
ship training in Scouting con-
sistently stresses the impor-
tance of planning.


ENGINEERING 47
.How Does an Engineer Solve Problems?
You can also get ideas by brainstorming. Sit alone for a
few minutes and try to clear your mind of outside distractions.
Then list all design ideas that come to mind for the next 15
minutes. Look for ways to combine ideas to produce new ones.
It doesn’t matter if these are all good ideas. You will evaluate
your ideas during the next step. Brainstorming with a couple of
friends is more fun and can lead to more (and more
creative) ideas. Write down all the ideas that
are suggested. The wildest idea may eventu-
ally lead you to the best solution.
5. Develop the Best Ideas for Alternative Solutions
Now that you have lots of ideas, it is time to take a critical look
at them, comparing one against the other. Decide which ideas
will work best, which are the easiest to make, and which cost
the least. Use your best judgment to narrow your ideas down
to three.


48 ENGINEERING
How Does an Engineer Solve Problems?.
6. Analyze the Best Ideas
Conduct a comparative analysis of your three best ideas.
• Sketch each idea, approximately to scale. The sketch should
show all of the parts for the design.
• Study the sketch to ensure that the design can be assembled.
• List all the parts you will need.
• Carefully compare the three designs for ability to function,
ease of assembly, ease of making the parts, and cost of
the parts.
WASTE GAS
O2 SENSOR
DEGASSING GAS
LASER DITHER MIRROR
CHAMBER TOP
CHAMBER
O2 SENSOR
RE-SOLIDIFIED TI
BASEPLATE
SWEEP
GAS
Y RAILS
X RAILS X POSITION
BRIDGE
MOTION
MOTION TI
ALLOY POOL
POWDER
INJECTION
PROCESS
SENSORS
SEAL/BEARING
Z POSITION
FOCAL MIRROR
14 KW CO2 LASER
POWDER
HOPPER
A technical illustration shows how a design functions. This is
an example of how powder metallurgy transforms ground metal
powder into strong and lightweight metal parts.


ENGINEERING 49
.How Does an Engineer Solve Problems?
7. Select the Best Idea
Your analysis of the three alternative ideas will lead to the
“best” idea. The best idea is the one that most closely matches
the project requirements of No. 2. Briefly describe in writing
why you selected this design as the best of the three alternatives.
8. Perform the Construction or Solution of the Project
For a design project, make your parts using the resources you
identified when you established your systems engineering
operation. Sketch the parts on paper, with dimensions. Buy the
necessary materials, or use materials you already have on hand.
Assemble the design.
9. Check the Solution
Verify that your design (problem solution) works as described
in the project statement. Whether it is a wooden skill game, a
patrol box, or something else, try it out. See how you like it—
this is your creation.
As you have progressed through this process, you have
established your systems engineering operation, made the
appropriate entries on your milestone chart, and conducted
a project. Congratulations! You have played the systems
engineer’s role of documenting every step of the project and
have made changes in planning, scheduling, and production,
as required.





ENGINEERING 51
.Basic Engineering Concepts
Basic Engineering
Concepts
Understanding engineering takes some knowledge about the
importance of measurements and a grasp of other basic con-
cepts including velocity, acceleration, force (in action), power,
and energy.
Measurements
An engineer must understand four basic
types of measurements or quantities:
length, time, mass, and force. All physical
measurements can be related to these
quantities or to a computation using
them (called derived measurements).
Two common systems that measure
these basic quantities are the English
system and the metric system. In both
systems, human beings, rather than nature,
have determined the size of the basic units,
such as the foot (English system) or the meter
(metric system).
One inch on an English-system ruler
equals approximately 2.5 centimeters
or 25 millimeters on a metric ruler.
Metric scale
This scale is 10 centimeters long. It will take 10 of these scales to equal 1 meter. The
marks between the numbers are millimeters. Ten millimeters equal 1 centimeter.


52 ENGINEERING
Basic Engineering Concepts.
Length in Meters
1,000 meters = 1 kilometer—kilo means 1,000 units
10 decimeters = 1 meter—deci means 10 parts of a unit
100 centimeters = 1 meter—centi means 100 parts of a unit
1,000 millimeters = 1 meter—milli means 1,000 parts of a unit
Weight in Grams
1 cubic centimeter of water = 1 gram
1,000 cubic centimeters of water = 1 kilogram
1 cubic millimeter of water = 1 milligram
Capacity in Liters
1 cubic decimeter of gas or liquid = 1 liter
1,000 cubic decimeters of gas or liquid = 1 kiloliter
1 cubic centimeter of gas or liquid = 1 milliliter
A CUBIC DECIMETER LIKE THIS WILL HOLD 1 LITER OF LIQUID OR GAS.
IF IT WERE FILLED WITH WATER IT WOULD WEIGH 1 KILOGRAM.
1 CM
A CUBIC CENTIMETER LIKE THIS WILL HOLD 1 MILLILITER.
IF IT WERE FILLED WITH WATER IT WOULD WEIGH 1 GRAM.
10 CENTIMETERS = 1 DECIMETER
Abbreviations
CM—CENTIMETER
DM—DECIMETER
G—GRAM
KG—KILOGRAM
KL—KILOLITER
KM—KILOMETER
L—LITER
M—METER
ML—MILLILITER
MM—MILLIMETER


ENGINEERING 53
.Basic Engineering Concepts
This chart lists the units each system uses for each quan-
tity. Research these systems of measurement on your own to
learn more about them and other measurement systems. The
units in boldface print are “basic” units that refer to a standard.
The other units are derived from the basic units.
In the English system, the basic units (boldface) are length,
time, and force. Mass is derived from them. In the metric sys-
tem, the basic units are length, time, and mass, with force
being the derived unit.
In your daily life, you already use some of these quantities
and the systems used to measure them.
Length is a measurement of distance. We can describe
objects with three dimensions: width, height, and depth.
Time is simply a measurement of how long something
takes to happen.
Mass is a measurement of the resistance of an object to a
change in motion. In one sense, it is a measurement of how
much “stuff” something consists of. Whether you are on Earth,
floating in space, or standing on the moon, your mass is the
same. While you are “weightless” in space, you still have your
body and you are definitely not “massless.”
Force is an action that can cause a mass to change its
motion. A mass (such as a car) will not change its velocity or
direction of motion (whether at rest or moving) unless a force
is acting on it. Forces will be discussed in more detail later.
SYSTEM
Measurement English Metric
Length foot (ft) meter (m)
Time second (s) second (s)
Mass Slug (lbf x s2/ft) kilogram (kg)
Force pound force (lbf) Newton (kg x m/s2)
Basic units


54 ENGINEERING
Basic Engineering Concepts.
Accuracy, Precision, Tolerance, and Validity
No measurement is perfect, and the exact or “true” measure-
ment of a quantity can never be known. But we do use stan-
dards to represent the “true” measurement. The terms accuracy,
precision, tolerance, and validity are often confused and used
interchangeably. However, in engineering, these terms have
exact meanings.
Accuracy is how good the measurement
is compared to the actual or true value of
the quantity being measured. Some devices
are very accurate and some are not. A tape
measure is much more accurate than an
odometer in a car for measuring distance.
A caliper is more accurate than a tape mea-
sure. A tape measure may be accurate to
0.001 meter, an odometer to 100 meters, and
a caliper to 0.00001 meter.
Precision indicates the consistency of
measurements. If four people each measure
the width of a playing field, and each measurement differs by
several inches, the measurements are more precise than if they
had differed by several feet.
Tolerance is a range of acceptable sizes. If a fence post is
to be made between 149 centimeters and 152 centimeters long,
then the tolerance on its length is 3 centimeters. Engineers use
tolerance to determine if parts will fit together after they are
made. When you buy a replacement part for a bike, it will fit if
it was made using the right tolerance.
Validity means that the measurement gives us the informa-
tion we need to know. Invalid measurements can result from
using the wrong measuring tool, measuring the wrong thing,
or using the right tool incorrectly. What else could make a
measurement invalid?
Other Basic Concepts
To do engineering, you need to know about a few more
basic concepts.
Velocity. Velocity is an object’s speed in a particular direction.
When you ride a bike in a straight line, we can measure your
velocity. If you speed up, slow down, or change direction, you
change velocity.
A measurement
may be accurate
and precise, but
out of tolerance.
Or, it may not tell
us what we need
to know and,
therefore, might
not be a valid
measurement.


ENGINEERING 55
.Basic Engineering Concepts
Acceleration. Acceleration is the rate of change in velocity.
Technically, it refers to both speeding up and slowing down.
To experience acceleration, try this. Sit in a car and close your
eyes while someone drives. As the car begins to move faster
(accelerates), feel your body pushing against the seat. When the
car brakes (decelerates, a type of acceleration), feel your body
trying to move forward out of the seat. When the car turns a
corner, feel your body sliding toward the outside of the turn.
Acceleration, Force, and Mass
Recall that force can cause a
mass to change its motion and
that acceleration is a change in
motion. Now, we can relate all
three concepts.
Ride a bike on a smooth,
level area such as a sidewalk.
As you pedal, your rear tire
pushes against the ground
with some force. When you
start out, you are changing the
velocity of (accelerating) your-
self and the bike (the mass)
from zero to some speed. You
can now coast without any
additional force. But, you will
eventually decelerate due to
the friction forces in the bicy-
cle mechanisms, in the wheels
against the pavement, and in
your body moving through the
atmosphere (especially if you
are cycling into a headwind).


56 ENGINEERING
Basic Engineering Concepts.
Weight. Weight is the gravitational force exerted on an object.
It differs from mass in that weight changes if gravity changes,
while mass remains the same. For example, a bowling ball that
weighs 12 pounds on Earth will weigh only 2 pounds on the
surface of the moon, where the gravity is one-sixth as strong as
Earth’s gravity. And yet, the mass of the ball remains the same
in both places.
Moment (or Torque). A moment is a force operating at a
distance from a pivot point. When you open a door, you are
exerting a moment about the door hinge, causing the door to
rotate about that point.
Work. Work is done by a force acting on a body, so that the
body moves in the direction of the force.
Power. Power is the time rate at which work is done. Pushing
your bike slowly takes less power than pushing it fast. This is
important, because much of engineering is about moving
things or keeping things from moving (like keeping the roof
from collapsing).


ENGINEERING 57
.Basic Engineering Concepts
Newton’s
Three Laws
Scientist Isaac Newton
(1643–1727) discovered
three laws related to motion
that will help you understand the
concept of force.
1. An object (or “body”)
in a state of rest or
uniform motion will
continue in its state
forever unless a force
acts on it to change that
state. In other words,
nothing is going to
move or stop moving
unless forced to do so.
2. If a force acts on a body,
the body will accelerate
in the direction of the
force. The acceleration
will be proportional to
the magnitude of the
force. That is, if the
force is doubled, so is
the acceleration.
3. To every force, there is
an equal and opposite
reaction. When you hit
a baseball with a bat,
both the ball and the
bat experience the
same force, but in
opposite directions.


58 ENGINEERING
Basic Engineering Concepts.
Energy
Energy is the ability to do work. It is classified in a number of
ways. Let’s look at common forms of energy and then consider
how one form gets transferred into another.
Kinetic Energy. Kinetic energy is the energy something has
because it is moving. Drop a ball and see how high it bounces.
Now throw it on the floor. The ball has enough energy to
bounce higher the second time. Why? A moving object has
more kinetic energy if it has more mass or is going faster. When
you threw the ball, it was going faster than when you simply
dropped it, so it had more kinetic energy.
Potential Energy. Potential energy is the energy something has
while at rest after some energy has been put into it. Lift a book
up to rest it on a chair. Push it off the chair. It will not reach a
high speed before it hits the floor. Now, lift the book higher to
rest it on a table; you have increased the book’s stored energy.
Push the book off the table. It will be going much faster when
it hits the floor than when you pushed it off the chair. The
book had more potential energy relative to the floor when it
was on the table than when it was on the chair. The source of
the potential energy is Earth’s gravitational field.


ENGINEERING 59
.Basic Engineering Concepts
Electrical Energy. Electrons flowing through a wire can transfer
energy from one place to another. In homes, offices, and facto-
ries, it is converted into light (in lightbulbs), heat (in toasters,
stoves, etc.), and mechanical energy (in motors, power tools,
etc.). Electron flow is easiest to see in a lightbulb. As electrons
flow through the filament of the bulb, the wire heats up and
gives off light.
Electromagnetic Energy. Electromagnetic fields can best be
demonstrated with a magnet. Hold a magnet close to a steel
surface. You can feel the force of the attraction even though
nothing is moving.
RADIO
MICROWAVE
INFRARED HEAT ULTRAVIOLET
GAMMA
RADIATION
X-RAY
VISIBLE
LIGHT
WAVELENGTH INCREASES ENERGY INCREASES
ENGINEERING 59


60 ENGINEERING
Basic Engineering Concepts.
Electromagnetic radiation includes what we “see” as light.
It is pure energy that moves in waves at a range of frequencies
(the number of waves per second). If the frequency is fast
enough, our eyes become sensitive to it, and we call it light.
If it is slower, we can still feel it as heat. If it is even slower,
we call it radio waves and use it for cellphone communications
and Wi-Fi. If the frequency is faster than what we see as light,
it moves into the categories of ultraviolet, X-rays, gamma rays,
and cosmic rays, which are measured along a continuous
spectrum. The energy is related to the frequency.
Chemical Energy. Matter is made of atoms and molecules
(combinations of atoms). The atoms bind together in various
ways to form solids, liquids, and gases. That binding is a form
of stored energy. When these bonds are broken, energy may be
released or absorbed, depending on the material.
There are all kinds of examples of chemical energy around
us every day. When gasoline is joined with the oxygen in the air,
chemical energy is released in our automobile engine to make it
run. The chemical energy of wood burning in a fireplace
releases heat and keeps us
warm. The chemical energy in
dynamite is released to clear
construction sites for new
buildings and roads.
Nuclear Energy. Individual
atoms are made up of elec-
trons surrounding a nucleus
of protons and neutrons. The
type of atom is determined by
the makeup of the nucleus,
which has a binding energy
keeping it together. Splitting
a “heavy” atom (fission)
releases enormous amounts
of energy—the energy source
for nuclear power plants and
nuclear bombs. Combining
two “light” atoms (fusion) can produce even more energy.
To this day, no one has been able to make a working power
plant based on fusion.
Chemical energy
includes the
energy stored
in batteries.


ENGINEERING 61
.Basic Engineering Concepts
Thermal Energy. Thermal energy is best demonstrated by an
example. Put water in three bowls—hot water in the first bowl
(not too hot for your hand), warm water in the second bowl,
and cold water in the third. Put one hand in the hot water and
your other hand in the cold water. After a few minutes, put
both hands in the warm water. Does the “cold” hand feel warm
and the “hot” hand feel cool?
The flow of thermal energy from one place to another is
called heat. In this case, heat is being transferred between your
hands and the water. Heat will flow from the hot hand to the
water, and from the water to the cold hand. Both hands and
the water will eventually reach the same temperature (thermal
equilibrium—the temperature is balanced).
Remember the
lightbulb? The
flow of electrical
energy causes the
wire to heat up
(thermal). The
thermal energy is
then converted to
electromagnetic
radiation (light).Energy Conversion
Engineers make use of energy by converting it—from
stored to transitional, from one transitional state to
another, or from one classification to another.
Some air conditioners
make use of latent heat.
Warm air is forced
through a stream of water
or through wet filter pads,
causing some of the water
to evaporate (changing
the state of the water, or
latent heat transfer). The
evaporation process takes
energy from the air, cool-
ing the air. This type of air
conditioner is called an
evaporative cooler.
Other increasingly
popular methods of
energy conversion use
solar energy. The heat of
the sun can be used to heat a fluid, and that heated
fluid can be used to drive a turbine. Solar energy can
also be used to create electricity directly, in solar cells.





ENGINEERING 63
.Let’s Do Engineering
Let’s Do Engineering
In this chapter you will find ideas for ways to fulfill require-
ment 6, whether you are interested in transforming motion,
using electricity, using materials, converting energy, or moving
people. There is also information about competing in a science
or engineering fair.
Transforming Motion
Engineers, particularly mechanical engineers, are often
interested in things that move to make life or work easier.
That includes all forms of transportation (bicycles, cars,
trains, planes, etc.), machinery, tools, satellites, com-
puters, and many other things.
There are two forms of movement: straight-line
and curved. Making one thing move by moving some-
thing else is called transforming motion. The curved
motion of bicycle wheels going around (rotating) trans-
forms the motion of the bicycle to straight-line (linear)
motion. Engine pistons moving back and forth in a
straight-line motion make a crankshaft go around in a
curved motion.
Two basic ways to transform motion are the
inclined plane and the lever. You may not know
it, but these are simple devices you use every
day. Even machines that look highly complex
mostly use variations on these
two simple ideas.


64 ENGINEERING
Let’s Do Engineering.
Inclined Plane
An inclined plane is simply a sloping surface. Try to lift a heavy
object onto a platform or table. Next, place a board sloping
from the table to the floor and slide the object up the board.
Which was easier? Why?
Lever
A lever is something such as a metal bar or plank of wood piv-
oted about a fulcrum (a prop or support). A seesaw is a good
example of a lever in action. Have you ever tried to balance a
seesaw with you on one side and someone else on the other?
The moment (see “Basic Engineering Concepts”) of each person
on the seesaw is the person’s weight times the person’s dis-
tance from the fulcrum. For the seesaw to balance, the move-
ments must be equal and act in opposite directions—the lighter
person must move farther from the fulcrum.
The lighter person can “lift” the heavier person with just
his own weight by moving farther from the fulcrum. Also notice
that the weight of both people is down, resulting in movements
in opposite directions. Try using a lever to lift or move an object
that you normally could not lift or move.
Your arms and legs also act as levers. Your upper arm
rotates about your shoulder and your lower arm rotates
about your elbow with muscles doing the work. Hold an
object in your hand with just your elbow resting on a table.
Then extend your arm. Notice how much harder it is to hold
the object with your arm extended. What other levers does
your body have? What other examples of levers can you find?
Linkages
Linkages use two or more rods or bars to transmit motion.
Try doing a push-up. There are four links in this motion—your
body, upper arms, lower arms, and the floor. The rotational
motion at your toes, shoulders, and elbows allows for the
body motion.
Examine the interaction between you and a bicycle while
riding it. Your upper and lower leg pushing on the pedal are
two links. The pedal and the gears are another link. Your body
and the bike frame are a fourth link. The principle of linkage
creates linear motion from a series of rotating motions.
A screw is an
example of an
inclined plane
wrapped around
a shaft. Some
automobile jacks
use a type of
screw to lift a car.
Can you think of
other examples of
inclined planes?


ENGINEERING 65
.Let’s Do Engineering
Pulleys
Pulleys also use the leverage principle. In
this case, the lever is a circular disk and the
forces are applied using a rope or cable.
Pulleys may include one or more disks of
varying diameters to produce the desired effect. Look for
examples in and around your home, such as a curtain draw,
an automobile fan belt, or a sewing machine.
Gears
Think of gears as pulleys with teeth. Gears
may be circular, cylindrical, flat, or other
shapes. All gears have teeth that can mesh
with other gears, and frequently with a
chain. You can view gears as a series of
interacting levers. Take a close look at a
bicycle. It will include two or more gears
connected by a chain that grabs the teeth to
transmit the force from one gear to the
other. Where else can you find gears? How
do they interact?
Examine a few common devices that
use linkages—an umbrella, folding
table legs, a bicycle gear shift. How
many links are there? How do the link-
ages provide the appropriate motion?
How is the motion restricted?
If you choose to do requirement 6a, discuss with
your counselor a mechanical problem you can solve
using the principles of transforming motion. Here is
an example problem: Using materials you find around
home or at a local store, build a device that will trans-
port a 10 kilogram (minimum) object up a slope at
least 2 meters long and 1 meter high, and then stop. It
should not use any human power during the operation.
Describe to your counselor how you decided on your
solution, how it might be improved, and at least one
other way it might be done.


66 ENGINEERING
Let’s Do Engineering.
Using Electricity
If you choose to do requirement 6b, you can get a taste of what
electrical engineering is like by learning how electricity is used
in your home. You will find out how much electricity your
family uses and how much it costs. This might also lead you
to consider how you might conserve electricity, to save money
and to help the world.
What things in your home are powered by electricity? List
at least 10 examples. To find out how much electricity each
uses, look for the nameplate on each. It will look some-
thing like the one shown here.
Volts refers to the required operating voltage. Cycles is
usually 60 hertz for North America. Phase is usually 1, for
“single phase,” but may be 3 for three-phase power appliances.
Amps is the operating current. Watts is the power consumption.
(Watts = voltage x amperes.) (For more about these terms,
see the Electricity merit badge pamphlet.)
Some appliances, such as refrigerators, air conditioners,
water heaters, or furnaces, may also have a label that tells you
how much electricity the appliance typically will use in a year.
It will usually be in kilowatt-hours (kwh). If the appliance in
the example used in the chart were always on for an entire
year, it would use 100 watts x 24 hours a day x 365 days a year
÷ 1,000 watts per kilowatt = 876 kwh/year.


ENGINEERING 67
.Let’s Do Engineering
For this study, the figure you are interested in is watts, the
measure of power consumption. Every day for a month, keep
a record of how long a particular appliance is used. Some of
your figures will have to be estimates to the nearest half-hour
or 15 minutes. Make your estimates as accurate as you can.
At the end of the month, you can make a record in a chart
like the one shown here. Perhaps you will find, in keeping your
record, that some of the appliances seem to use a lot of power.
Ask yourself why. Watch the appliance in use.
Cost per month equals the total kilowatt-hours times the cost per
kilowatt-hour. Ask your parent to let you look at your home’s latest
electric bill to find the cost per kilowatt-hour. Or, you can find this out
by calling your local electric utility company.
Watts Hours used Kilowatt-hours
Appliance (Watts rating × Cost
rating per month hours ÷ by 1,000)
Toaster $
Iron
Refrigerator
Humidifier
Dehumidifier
Furnace
Air conditioner(s)
Clothes dryer
Washing machine
Dishwasher
Television(s)
Lights
Living room
Bathroom(s)
Total $


68 ENGINEERING
Let’s Do Engineering.
What ways can your family conserve electricity? Some methods
might just call for breaking poor habits; others take a more
active approach (with your parent’s permission, of course).
• Turn off the lights when no one is in the room.
• Turn off the TV when no one is watching it.
• Before you run the dishwasher, make sure it is full.
• Don’t linger in front of the refrigerator door when you are
looking for a snack.
• Use ceiling fans to help circulate the air. (Remember to
reverse the direction of the fan blades in wintertime.)
• Use a 7-watt nightlight in the bathroom at night instead of
a 60-watt regular bulb.
• Use LED bulbs in lamps instead of regular incandescent
bulbs.
Think of more ways your family could conserve electricity.
Talk them over with your merit badge counselor. If you are inter-
ested in other electrical engineering problems, consider earning
the Electricity, Electronics, Energy, and Computers merit badges.
Contact your local power company and ask how much
electricity you could save if you raised the temperature
of your air conditioner by 1
degree in the summer, or if you
lowered the thermostat for your
home-heating system by 1 degree
during the winter. Find out how
much electricity is saved, on aver-
age, when homeowners switch to
a programmable thermostat,
which automatically adjusts the
temperature setting for different
times of the day, such as when
family members are not home or
are sleeping at night. Afterward,
share this information with your
parent. Discuss how these small changes can result in
big savings—both energy and money—for your family.


ENGINEERING 69
.Let’s Do Engineering
Using Materials
Engineers design and build things out of many different materi-
als. Different materials behave differently when put under a
load. There are several important concepts: stress, strain,
stiffness, and strength. If you choose requirement 6d, you will
do experiments that demonstrate these ideas.
Stress is the load placed on the material by area. If the
load is spread over a large area, the stress is small. If concen-
trated on a small area, it is high. Push the blunt end of a pen or
pencil against your skin. Now push with the same force using
the pointed end. The cross section of the blunt end is much
greater than the pointed end. You can definitely feel the higher
stress with the point.
Strain is how much the material changes when under
stress. Stretch a rubber band. As you pull it, you are putting
a load on the material and stressing it. That results in a strain,
or change in length. All materials change dimension under
load, even the hardest steel. However, special instruments are
needed to measure the strain.
Stiffness combines stress and strain to describe how a
material changes over a range of loads. It tells us how rigid or
flexible something is. A steel bar is rigid. Licorice is flexible.
Does the material behave the same way in all directions? How
about a steel wire? It is rigid when you pull it, but flexible
when you bend it. Why?
Strength is the stress at which the material breaks
(ultimate strength). Engineers also consider the stress at which a
material deforms and stays deformed (yield strength). When you
blow up a balloon a little, it will come back to its original shape.
If you blow it up all the way and let the air out, it will “yield”
and not come back to quite the same shape when you let the
air out. Keep blowing and it will reach its ultimate strength—
but watch out! The material strength is often confused with
structural strength. The strength of a structure is the load at
which it will break, not the stress. We will look at that later.
Describe different
parts of your
body in terms
of strength and
stiffness. Also,
look at various
plants and trees.
How do they
use stiffness
and strength
to function?
In the book The New Science of Strong Materials,
author J. E. Gordon puts it this way: “A biscuit is stiff
but weak, steel is stiff and strong, nylon is flexible and
strong, raspberry jelly is flexible and weak.”


70 ENGINEERING
Let’s Do Engineering.
Let’s take some measurements to tie the concepts together.
Hang a rubber band from a hook or paper clip. Hang a paper
cup from the rubber band using another paper clip and string.
Measure the length of the rubber band. Add weights to the cup
in even amounts (for example, marbles, fishing weights, or pen-
nies). As you add each weight, measure the new length of the
rubber band. Take at least four measurements and plot them on
a graph. That will be the stress/strain curve. What factors, such
as the thickness of the rubber band, might skew your results?
The stiffness determines how steep the curve is. For a
rubber band, the slope of the curve will change. If you were to
use steel or aluminum in the same experiment, the curve would
be very steep and straight until it reached the yield strength.
The slope of the curve describes the stiffness of the material.
If the curve is shallow, the material is flexible (rubber band).
If the slope is steep, it is stiff. For brittle materials such as glass,
the stiffness is the same for the entire curve. For materials such
as steel and aluminum, the curve is straight until the material
permanently bends.
Stress
Steel
Aluminum
Glass
Wood Rubber
ULTIMATE
STRENGTH
YIELD
STRENGTH
Bends and won’t go back to original length
(Rigid materials have steep curves.)
(Flexible materials
have shallow curves.)
Strain
Stress
(number of weights)
STRENGTH
Stiffness is described by the
steepness of the curve.
Strain (change in length)
Breaks


ENGINEERING 71
.Let’s Do Engineering
Try bending pieces of different materials such as steel,
aluminum, wood, and plastic with your hand. How do you
think their stress/strain curves would look?
Now let’s take a look at structural strength (as opposed to
material strength). Take a sheet of paper and try to stand it on
its edge without bending it. The sheet won’t support its own
weight, let alone something else. Paper is not very strong or
stiff. Now roll the paper so it forms a tube and tape it together.
Stand the tube on its end and see how much weight (for exam-
ple, how many DVDs) it will support. Engineers combine the
material properties with structural shapes to make very efficient
structures. What types of shapes do you see in skyscrapers and
machines? How about in nature?
Examine some
items you have
around your home
such as fingernail
clippers, vise
grips, clocks, tape
measures, and so
on. Think about
how the different
materials are used
and why.
Reaching for the Skies
The first steel-framed building called a skyscraper was
designed by William Le Baron Jenney (1832–1907). Built
in Chicago in the late 1800s, the Home Insurance
Building was initially nine stories high. By 1910, New
York had its first 50-story building, and by the 1930s,
the Empire State Building claimed an unprecedented
102 stories. What makes skyscrapers so amazing is how
engineers must design their structures to withstand the
elements, like gravity and wind.


72 ENGINEERING
Let’s Do Engineering.
Heat and Materials. How materials behave with temperature is
extremely important. Different materials conduct heat differ-
ently. Changes in the temperature of a material can also change
its dimensions.
Materials can also change dimension with temperature.
Most will contract (shrink) when cold and expand when hot.
Some do just the opposite, and some change very little.
Sometimes you can hear a house creak at night when there
is a big change in temperature. Also, doors in your house may
close easier in one season than in another. The materials are
expanding and/or contracting because of temperature. Engineers
have to be very careful when connecting different materials.
Experiment: Changing Dimension
Glue a strip of aluminum foil to a piece of paper the
same size (a glue stick will work fine). Make sure the
combined strip is flat; put it in a freezer for 15 minutes.
What happens to the strip? Now carefully take it out
and let it reach room temperature. What happens to the
strip? What is happening to the aluminum and paper
combination to cause the strip to change shape?
Temperature can
affect a material’s
stiffness. Put a
rubber band in
the freezer for
30 minutes.
Does it behave
the same as it
did at room
temperature?
In space, the
temperatures on
parts of a satellite
can change
100 degrees or
more over a
short time as the
satellite moves
in and out of
the sunlight.
Experiment: Heat Transfer
Bring a pot of water to a boil. Drop a metal tablespoon,
a piece of wood, and a piece of plastic into the boiling
water. After a minute, use tongs to remove the pieces
from the water, one by one. Touch each one lightly with
your fingers, taking care not to burn yourself.
What are your conclusions about the heat conduc-
tivity of metal, wood, and plastic? If you wanted to
insulate something, which material would be best?
If you wanted to transfer heat quickly, which material
would you choose? Discuss your conclusions with
your counselor.


.Let’s Do Engineering
Electrical Properties. Just as materials respond differently
to heat and cold, so do they respond differently to electricity.
Materials that carry electricity are called conductors. Materials
that resist carrying electricity are called insulators. Copper, used
extensively in electrical circuits and wiring, is a good conduc-
tor. Rubber, used to encase the copper in electrical wiring, is a
good insulator. Can you think of another example of an insula-
tor and where it is used? What about a conductor and its use?
Optical Properties. Why do we use glass instead of plywood
for windowpanes in a house or for windows in an automobile?
The question is not as silly as it seems. The answer lies in the
optical properties of the material. Why do doctors and nurses
use lead-lined aprons when they take an X-ray, rather than
standing behind a plywood door? Because the optical properties
of a material must be matched with the type of radiation it will
encounter. Visible light, such as passes through a windowpane,
is only one type of radiation. X-rays are a completely different
type. You can’t see them, but they are there.
Radiation and Absorption. One of the most
fascinating properties of a material is its ability
to radiate or absorb energy in the form of
waves. The sun is the most prominent
radiator of energy. If you stand in the
sun, it feels a lot hotter than if you
stand in the shade because your
body absorbs the heat from the
sun’s radiation. Wearing white
clothing feels cooler than wearing
black clothing in the sun, because
the black material absorbs more
of the sun’s heat-energy waves
than the white material does.


74 ENGINEERING
Let’s Do Engineering.
Similarly, using different types of waves, we turn on a TV
set with a remote control. The remote control radiates invisible
light waves that are picked up, or absorbed, by a device
in the TV set. If you point the remote control at
yourself, you don’t feel anything. If you look at it,
you don’t see anything coming out when you
push the button. Try using your remote control
on your neighbor’s or friend’s TV. It may not
work. That is because your TV and someone else’s
use slightly different waves.
Chemical Properties. When engineers study how a
material interacts with other materials and external
stimuli (stimulants), they are studying the material’s chemical
properties. Fire-resistant construction requires materials that
do not burn easily. The liquids and solids in batteries are
chosen because of their chemical properties. What kinds of
chemical properties would you want in your materials if you
were designing a match to light a fire?
Another important chemical property is resistance to
corrosion. Materials can react with oxygen, water, salt, or just
about any substance. What is important is the rate of reaction
and how long the material must survive. A bridge over salt
water may be expected to last 100 years, but a resealable plastic
bag might be expected to last for only a year. How long would
you expect the steel body of an automobile to last in Miami,
Chicago, or Phoenix? Why might you expect any differences?
(Hint: Consider temperature, humidity, salt air, and the road
salt used to melt snow.)
Properties of Liquids. Liquids are sensitive to temperature
and have a freezing point and a boiling point. Water turns to ice
(a solid) when the temperature goes
below 32 degrees Fahrenheit and
becomes steam (a gas) when
the temperature goes above
212 degrees Fahrenheit. Liquids
can also evaporate (turn to gas),
just by sitting long enough. Another
important property of liquids is their
resistance to motion, which is called
viscosity. You can swim in water, but why
would it be difficult to swim in a pool of
honey? Because honey has a high viscosity.
Think of some
liquids that you
encounter in
your daily
activities and
identify the
ones with high
or low viscosity.


ENGINEERING 75
.Let’s Do Engineering
Classifications of Materials
We have discussed the characteristics of materials that an
engineer must consider. Now let’s look at other considerations,
including the type of material and the manufacturing method.
Materials are classified into metals, composites, ceramics,
polymers, electronic materials, and other groups. For each
class of materials, the method of manufacturing is important.
Questions about how a material can be made into a given
shape must be addressed. Engineers also must know how to
predict the behavior of a material all the way from raw material
to finished product. To do this, the engineer develops equations
and computer programs to describe the material and its
characteristics.
Imagine you are an engineer with a company that makes
all sorts of different products. The chief engineer has given you
and the other engineers the task of developing new and
superior versions of those products. Specifically, you want to
improve the following.
• Fishing rods: In the past, they
have been made from materials
including bamboo, steel, and
composites. What material
might make a better rod?
• Bicycles: What might you
look for in a material to build
a better bike?
• Shoes and sneakers: What
properties of a material would
allow you to make a better sole
and heel on a shoe?
• Automobile bodies: What
properties of a material are
important for building a better
car body?


76 ENGINEERING
Let’s Do Engineering.
Structures
Structures are the most common “engineered” devices around.
They include all buildings, chairs, tables, signposts, bridges,
dams, frameworks for automobiles, airplanes, satellites, etc.
A structure’s capability depends upon the materials used,
the shape of the materials, their position (or orientation), and
how they are interconnected.
An engineer must consider a structure’s strength, stiffness,
weight, and cost. These elements often conflict with one
another. Reducing the weight and/or cost may affect the
strength and stiffness. Sometimes the structure needs to be able
to flex (be less stiff), but still be strong and light. Consider a
bicycle wheel. The wheel needs to be
strong enough to support your weight
and handle the bumps it encounters.
However, it also needs to “give” to pro-
vide a comfortable ride and it needs to
be lightweight for ease of handling.
All materials, such as paper, have
some amount of strength that will allow
them to carry a load before failing. All
shapes have properties that allow them to
carry loads. The ways in which structural
elements fit together also have properties
to carry loads. The engineer’s task is to
find an appropriate combination of mate-
rial, shape, and interconnection for
a particular task.
The primary
responsibility of
a structure is to
transmit loads.
When the wind
blows, the rain
falls, the earth
quakes, or
someone is on
the roof, you don’t
want your home
to collapse.
Review the example demonstrating paper’s structural
strength from page 71. Using materials such as straws,
toothpicks, string, glue, etc., build a bridge across a
1-meter span. Add weights (pennies, paper clips) to
the middle and observe the deflections (in this case,
the curvature) the weights cause. How could you
strengthen the bridge? How might you make it simpler
or lighter and keep the same strength? How is the
load of the added weight transmitted by the
different parts to the ends? Which are in tension?
Which are in compression?


ENGINEERING 77
.Let’s Do Engineering
Shapes
One common solution for increasing strength and stiffness, while
reducing weight and cost, is designing with the simple triangle.
Take four boards of equal length and join them. Use one nail at
each corner to form a square, but keep the joints a little loose.
How stable is it? Does it want to collapse? Can you twist it?
Now take out one of the boards and join the three remain-
ing boards. Is this structure stable? Does it collapse or twist as
easily? The square is not stable because there are an infinite
number of positions (solutions) a four-sided square can assume
between a square and the collapsed position. However, there is
only one solution to any given three-sided shape (triangle).
Go back to the four-sided square and add a fifth board
from one of the corners to the opposite corner. Does this improve
the stability? Does it twist as easily? Why? Look at a bicycle
again. How is it framed to make it strong and stiff, but
lightweight? Can you find examples of triangles used in
other structures?
Another thing to consider is the cross section of a struc-
tural member. The most common shapes for structural mem-
bers include circles, squares, rectangles, L’s, and I’s. The I beam
is often used because it is stiff in the direction that is needed
but is relatively lightweight and inexpensive—it makes efficient
use of materials. Take a look at a board with a rectangular cross
section, such as a two-by-four. Does it bend as easily in both
directions? Look at the boards used to support the roof of a
house. How are the boards oriented? What would happen if the
boards were turned 90 degrees?
Take a look at
natural things
such as trees,
plants, animals,
and hills. How are
they structured?
What loads must
they carry?
How do these
structures
“behave”?


78 ENGINEERING
Let’s Do Engineering.
For added conve-
nience, check out
ready-made plans
that give step-
by-step instruc-
tions to build a
structurally sound
treehouse. Be
sure you have
your parent’s
permission before
you attempt to
plan a treehouse.
Out on a Limb
If having a hideout of your own sounds appealing, a
treehouse can fit that bill perfectly. Before you get
started, you should know that building a treehouse
takes a lot more than a hammer and a few nails.
Yep, constructing a structurally sound treehouse
is tricky business.
Not All Trees Are Created Equal. You will need to find
out whether the tree you have in mind can endure the
stress and alterations that may be in store. A certified
arborist, or tree expert, can examine the tree’s health
and condition from the roots to the tip-tops. The inspec-
tion will reveal whether the tree can support the weight
of the house you want to build.
It’s All About the Tree. The tree’s structure will help
determine the height and size of the treehouse. Find
a spot that is not so high that your structure will twist
along with the tree’s movement in the wind—10 feet
up usually is about right. The arborist may be able to
provide some direction here and can also tell you how
to care for the tree once the structure is in place.


ENGINEERING 79
.Let’s Do Engineering
For more details
about designing
and building a
treehouse retreat,
get your parent’s
permission to visit
The Treehouse
Guide on the at
www.thetree
houseguide.com.
This site is just
one of many
helpful online
resources.
Planning Your Retreat. This is where the systems engi-
neering approach to problem solving comes into play.
Start by making a list of your available tools and mate-
rials and those that need to be obtained. Keep in mind
that a project of this scope takes a lot of resources—
including money.
Look for ideas to incorporate in your treehouse.
When you are ready to sketch your dream house, make
sure to adapt the design to the structure of the tree.
Once your sketch is refined to a workable plan, start
gathering the materials you will need to build and
go for it!
You can see that building a fort in the sky is not
something that can be done on impulse. Making a
treehouse takes careful planning from start to finish.
Yet a project like this presents an excellent opportunity
for you to explore how engineering touches our
lives day-to-day.


80 ENGINEERING
Let’s Do Engineering.
Converting Energy
Many of the machines that make our lives comfortable depend
on the conversion of energy from one form to another. How
does a car move? Oil (chemical energy) is pumped (mechanical
energy) from the ground. It is then processed (by heat, chemi-
cal, mechanical, and electrical energy) into gasoline (chemical
energy). The car then converts the gasoline to mechanical and
heat energy by using mechanical, heat, and electric energy.
Examples of such energy conversions are all around. Your
body is an excellent example. You eat food (stored chemical
energy) and convert it to heat, plus other forms of chemical
energy stored in your muscles. Your muscles convert chemical
energy to mechanical energy to move your legs to ride a bike.
Your body also converts chemical energy to electrical energy in
the neurons and synapses of your brain when you are thinking
about how to ride the bike. When you sweat while riding, ther-
mal energy is releasing heat, allowing your body to cool.
A common example of energy conversion that you could
research is how a car or flashlight battery converts chemical
energy into electrical energy. Check at your school or public
library for books on electricity. Look in the indexes under
“battery.” (If you use the internet, be sure you have your
parent’s permission first.) Study the explanations and be
prepared to tell your merit badge counselor what happens
when a car battery is used or a flashlight is turned on.
SWITCH
BULB
REFLECTORS
LENS BATTERY BATTERY
A flashlight converts chemical energy from its batteries into electrical energy.


ENGINEERING 81
.Let’s Do Engineering
Solar Energy
Solar energy is virtually unlimited,
and the sun’s rays fall everywhere
on the face of the Earth. But solar
energy has one serious disadvan-
tage: You can’t turn it on or off.
At night and on cloudy days, there
is little solar energy to catch. This
means that for heating a house, you
need another source of energy part
of the time.
Some homes have simple solar
energy systems for heating. The
sun’s heat is collected by flat-plate
collectors and heats the circulating
water. The hot water goes to a
storage tank and then passes
through the house’s heating
system. As the water cools, it is
pumped back to the collectors
where the sun reheats it.
FLAT-
PLATE
COLLECTORS
BUILDING
HEATING
UNIT
STORAGE
TANK
PUMPPUMP
CONVENTIONAL HEAT-
ING SYSTEM
Solar energy supplementary
heating system
Experiment: Solar Energy
Try this experiment on a sunny day.
Step 1—Fill a cake pan or pie tin
with water.
Step 2—Measure the water’s temperature.
Step 3—Place the pan in the sun.
Step 4—Measure the water temperature
every two hours for six hours.
Step 5—Measure the water temperature
at sundown and again at sunup the
next morning.
Step 6—Repeat step 4 on a cloudy day.
What do your findings tell you about the
value and potential of solar energy? Why
does a house heated by solar energy need
another energy source for continuous heating?


82 ENGINEERING
Let’s Do Engineering.
Moving People
Americans are always on the go. Most people have to travel
to work or to school, to shop, and to their place of worship.
Because we travel so much, and most of what we buy must
travel from manufacturers to stores, we depend heavily on
transportation systems. These systems include roadways,
railways, bus lines, trucking companies, airlines, pipelines,
and waterways.
Engineers are called upon
to plan, design, and manage
these systems. Engineers who
work for your city or region
probably have studied the
existing transportation systems.
Their aim is to find ways to
improve or expand the systems
to make travel easier, faster,
safer, and cheaper. You can find
out about their plans in the
office of your city, town, or vil-
lage engineer. Your merit badge
counselor will also help you.
Making a Traffic Study
If you decide to do requirement 6f, you can find some of the
data you will need from the city, town, or village engineer.
The engineer can tell you about predictions for population and
number of cars in five years or more. Your merit
badge counselor may be able to suggest
where to make your traffic study.
Visit the location at least once
during both its heavy and light
traffic periods. Two or three
visits on different days of
the week would be even
better. You will get a
more accurate count
of the average number
of cars, trucks, and
other vehicles using
that roadway.


ENGINEERING 83
.Let’s Do Engineering
If you find that population and number of vehicles are
expected to increase over the next five years, be prepared to
suggest ways to handle the heavier traffic. Talk with your coun-
selor. Your solution will depend on the particular location. You
might recommend widening or straightening the road. Or, the
answer might be to build a thoroughfare or tunnel, install a
traffic light or turn lane, make the street one-way, or implement
some other idea for improving the traffic flow. Some communi-
ties have installed roundabouts, which are common in Europe.
Research the pros and cons of roundabouts.
Share your data and your proposed solutions with
your counselor.
Creating a Science Fair Project
Science fairs and engineering-team competitions are sponsored
by a variety of organizations. Many schools, colleges, universi-
ties, and professional engineering societies sponsor engineering
fairs and competitions every year.
How to Pick a Project or Competition
There are many ways to pick a
project or competition and also
meet requirement 6g. Remember
that the project or competition
that you choose should be related
to examining an engineering
question, rather than gathering
pure scientific research. For ideas,
just look at the world around
you or at recent news events.
Consider how scientific principles
may have influenced them. Look
at your personal interests (sports,
bicycling, or skateboarding, for
example). How might they be
improved upon or studied?
For another example: How can the effects of low rainfall be
minimized? Think of ways to prevent or reduce the effects of a
drought. What water conservation efforts work in your commu-
nity, and how can they be improved? Asking some of these
questions, and performing experiments to find possible
answers, can form the basis of a good science fair project.


84 ENGINEERING
Let’s Do Engineering.
As you consider the different types of subjects and projects
that interest you, begin to research and assemble information in
your area of interest. Your research tools should include the
World Wide Web, libraries, and related industries.
Ask your science teacher and merit badge counselor for
guidance. Planning, developing, organizing, and building your
entry into a project that will meet the particular requirements
of a fair or competition can be complicated. Some competitions
may require both a scientific investigation and a demonstration
concerning the subject you have chosen (such as designing the
most structurally sound miniature-bridge design using specified
materials, and then building the miniature bridge).
The Joy of Engineering
For any given engineering problem, there are many solutions.
It would be great if we could always find the “best” solution.
Engineers, however, must work within limitations imposed on
them by available materials, supplies, money, and tools. They
must be sensitive to environmental concerns, politics, and the
culture of their company and the community. There is tremen-
dous satisfaction in solving a problem when faced with such
challenging constraints.
Learning From Our Mistakes
It has been said that engineering advances one failure at a time.
With every failure comes the chance to learn how to improve
design and technique. The engineer seeks the proper balance
of quality of construction and acceptable cost, while not com-
promising function or safety. A constant danger is becoming
overconfident, believing that failure can’t happen. Here are
some examples of famous engineering mistakes that also led
to engineering improvements.
The Titanic. The RMS Titanic was the largest passenger ship in
the world when it sank on its maiden voyage from England to
the United States in 1912. Shipbuilders had dubbed the ship
“unsinkable.” The ship was built with 16 compartments and
could stay afloat even if up to four of them were flooded.
A fatal design flaw, however, was that the compartments were
not sealed at the top. When the ship brushed a giant iceberg,
water rushed into forward compartments, spilling over the top
of the bulkheads into adjacent compartments, sinking the ship
and costing 1,523 people their lives.
Remember that
another way to
meet the
requirement is to
become a member
of an engineering-
project team.
Project teams
enter local
competitions,
and often the
winners can
go to national
competitions.


ENGINEERING 85
.Let’s Do Engineering
Tacoma Narrows Bridge.
This two-lane, mile-long
bridge over Washington
state’s Puget Sound col-
lapsed four months after it
opened in 1940. The cause?
A 42 mph wind that caused
the bridge deck to buckle
and twist and finally break
apart and fall into the water.
During design of the bridge,
to reduce costs, engineers
had decided to stiffen the
roadway with 8-foot girders
instead of the original plan
to use 25-foot supports. The
bridge’s collapse, which
caused no loss of life, has been used as a lesson in civil and
structural engineering classes ever since.
Space Shuttle Challenger. The space shuttle Challenger
broke apart 73 seconds after launch on January 28, 1986,
killing all seven crew members onboard. The cause of the
disaster was the failure of a seal, or O-shaped ring, at the
joint of two parts of a solid rocket booster. Because of cold
temperatures at launch, the ring was stiff rather than flexible,
allowing hot gases and flames to blow out of the seal, destroy-
ing the shuttle’s external fuel tank and causing the breakup of
the spacecraft.
Hubble Space Telescope. The Hubble Space Telescope (HST)
was launched into Earth’s orbit in 1990. Situated far above
Earth’s soupy atmosphere, the HST was expected to deliver
much clearer images than any telescope located on the ground.
But as soon as astronomers looked at the first Hubble images,
they knew something was drastically wrong. The pictures of
deep space were blurry. The problem: The huge main mirror
that the HST used to gather light from deep space had been
ground to the wrong measurements. The result was blurry pic-
tures. To correct the problem, NASA sent a repair team into
orbit to fit the HST with corrective lenses that worked like
eyeglasses to sharpen the focus. Since then, the Hubble has
returned thousands of images of deep space that were never
before possible.
Tacoma Narrows Bridge collapse





ENGINEERING 87
.Engineering as a Career
Engineering as a Career
Let’s look again at what engineers do. These statements may
help you decide if you might like to become an engineer.
• Engineers apply the concepts and methods of science for the
benefit of people.
• Engineers are creative, solve problems, and make decisions
based on their solutions.
• Analyst engineers help the design engineers solve their
most complicated problems, usually by applying complex
mathematical methods, often using computers.
• Project engineers and systems engineers coordinate the
work of a group of engineers, often from different fields,
to complete a big, complex project.
All sorts of engineers work
together on teams, which often
include nonengineers as well
(marketers, purchasers, manu-
facturers). Engineers also work
alone, using their specialized
skills to solve pieces of the
team’s problem. Though other
people, such as factory workers
or construction crews, actually
make the things engineers
design, engineers often make
simplified models to better see
how their ideas work together.
Many engineers (design engineers) dream up new
things for people to use, and then figure out how to
make them. When such an invention is a new and non-
obvious solution to a problem, the government might
recognize the engineer by granting a patent.


88 ENGINEERING
Engineering as a Career.
Do you like technology? One compelling reason to
become an engineer is that they get to use the newest
gadgets, most current computers, and most up-to-date
software programs. As new technology emerges, inter-
esting new engineering projects appear—everything
from designing robotic spy planes to unraveling the
mysteries of genetics to cure disease.


ENGINEERING 89
.Engineering as a Career
Other Things to Ask Yourself
You have read that engineers create new things to meet needs
and solve problems. Do you enjoy doing the kinds of things
engineers do? Ask yourself these questions.
• Do I try to figure out how things like toys, appliances, and
machines at home work? Do I take them apart (with my
parent’s permission!) to see how they work? Can I put them
back together without help?
• Do I like to try to fix household items that break, even
though I may need help?
• Do I build or make things like roads and castles at the beach?
• Do I build things from model kits, sometimes customizing
them by modifying the basic model and adding extra details?
• Do I use computer programs to solve special problems that
interest me, or to create simple games?
Engineers use the principles of mathematics and science to do
their work. Ask yourself:
• Do I do well in math in school? Do I enjoy it?
• Do I like science in school, especially the experiments?
• Do I do optional extra assignments the teachers give?
• Do I seek ways to use the ideas I learn in science?
• Have I ever entered a school science fair?
If you answered “yes” to some of these questions,
then you may want to consider engineering as a career.
Are You Creative?
Creativity is the ability to bring new ideas or objects into being.
It involves playing with imagination and possibilities, and
seeing possible connections. Creativity is an ability that is
vital to engineers, whether they design products, figure out
how to analyze complicated parts, develop tests that determine
how well things work, research new kinds of plastics, or
figure out how to keep classes interesting for students. So if
you like to question, explore, invent, discover, create, and
help people solve problems and find new ways of doing things,
then engineering may be for you.


90 ENGINEERING
Engineering as a Career.
Preparing for an Engineering Career
If you think you might like to become an engineer, then here
are some things to start thinking about and doing now that will
help you along the path to an engineering career.
Engineering College Entrance Requirements
Engineering colleges have entrance requirements—courses you
must have taken in high school in order to be admitted to study
engineering. Clearly, you will need math and science. It is best
to take all the “college prep” math and science courses your
high school offers. Don’t neglect English, either. Engineers must
be able to clearly describe their work to others, from their
bosses to the people who will build the things they design. You
will also need to know what special tests they want you to take
during high school, such as the Scholastic Aptitude Test (SAT).
Every college and university publishes a catalog that
describes the school’s admission requirements and
lists all its programs of study. Review the sections
for the engineering fields (majors) that interest you.
These will mention any special requirements or
suggested courses.


ENGINEERING 91
.Engineering as a Career
If you are able to take electives during high school,
you may want to consider courses that relate to the field of
engineering that most interests you. Here are some examples.
• Architectural engineering: art, drafting
• Bioengineering: advanced biology, advanced chemistry
• Chemical engineering: advanced chemistry
• Civil engineering: art, drafting
• Computer engineering: advanced computers,
electronics shop
• Electrical engineering: advanced computers, advanced
physics, electronics shop
• Materials engineering: advanced chemistry, metal shop
• Mechanical engineering: advanced physics, automotive
shop, drafting, metal shop
• Software engineering: advanced computers


The Professional Engineer.
The Professional
Engineer
Engineering qualifies as a profession because it requires
specialized knowledge and often long and intensive academic
preparation. Engineers are also professionals because they
make their living in an activity that conforms to the technical
and ethical standards of a profession.
Ethics
Ethics are an important part of the engineering profession,
especially as science and technology continue to evolve rapidly.
An engineer’s ethical standards are similar to those expected of
other professionals in the well-established areas of medicine,
business, and law.
Engineers have the responsibility to act ethically in the
research and problem-solving part of their position as well as
in dealing with the people directly affected by their work.
Their work is for the good of the public and the clients they
represent, and in no way should result in harm to people or
the environment.
A Scout who commits to the Scout Oath and the Scout
Law already has some understanding of ethics and is practicing
them in his everyday life. These are the same principles that
guide the careers of engineers and other professionals.


ENGINEERING 93
.The Professional Engineer
Professional Registration
Qualified engineers may become licensed to practice engineer-
ing in their state. It isn’t always necessary to get a Professional
Engineering (PE) license to be hired as an engineer, but it may
be required to perform certain governmental work and to
review and approve designs. Some firms require engineers to
be licensed before they can move up to engineering manage-
ment positions.
Requirements vary from state to state, but for most
engineers, obtaining a license is a four-step process. The
applicant must:
1. Earn a four-year engineering degree in a program
approved by the state engineering licensure board.
2. Complete four years of qualifying engineering
work experience.
3. Pass the Fundamentals of Engineering
exam. (Also called the Engineer-in-
Training exam, this test can usually be
taken by students in the final years of an
undergraduate engineering curriculum,
or any time after graduation.)
4. Pass the Principles and Practice of
Engineering (PE) exam. The PE exam
is hard, and it is not unusual for an
applicant to fail it the first time (failed
examinations may be retaken). The PE
license must be renewed periodically.
The Engineer’s Code of Ethics has three fundamental
principles that guide the work of the engineering
profession. Engineers uphold and advance the integrity,
honor, and dignity of their profession by
1. Using their knowledge and skill for the enhancement
of human welfare
2. Being honest and impartial, and faithfully serving
the public, their employers, and their clients
3. Striving to increase the competence and prestige
of the engineering profession


94 ENGINEERING
Engineering Resources.
Engineering Resources
Scouting Literature
Architecture, Automotive Maintenance,
Chemistry, Composite Materials, Digital
Technology, Drafting, Electricity, Electronics,
Energy, Inventing, Model Design and
Building, Nuclear Science, Programming,
Robotics, Space Exploration, Surveying,
and Welding merit badge pamphlets
With your parent’s permission, visit the Boy
Scouts of America’s official retail website,
www.scoutshop.org, for a complete listing of
all merit badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.
Books
Anderson, Margaret Jean. Isaac Newton:
The Greatest Scientist of All Time.
Enslow, 2001.
Baine, Celeste. Is There an Engineer
Inside You? A Comprehensive
Guide to Career Decisions in
Engineering, 3rd ed. Professional
Publications, 2004.
Berlow, Lawrence H. Reference Guide
to Famous Engineering Landmarks
of the World: Bridges, Tunnels,
Dams, Roads, and Other Structures.
Oryx, 1998.
Brown, Henry T. 507 Mechanical
Movements: Mechanisms and
Devices. Dover Publications, 2005.
Dupre, Judith. Bridges: A History of the
World’s Most Famous and Important
Spans. Black Dog & Leventhal, 1997.
———. Skyscrapers: A History of the
World’s Most Extraordinary
Buildings. Black Dog &
Leventhal, 2013.
Freedman, Russell. The Wright Brothers:
How They Invented the Airplane.
Holiday House, 1994.
Garner, Geraldine O. Careers in
Engineering, 2nd ed. McGraw-
Hill, 2002.
Green, Constance McLaughlin.
Eli Whitney and the Birth of
American Technology. Addison
Wesley Longman, 1997.
Hickam Jr., Homer H. Rocket Boys
(October Sky). Delacorte, 1998.
Kent, Steven. The Ultimate History
of Video Games: From Pong to
Pokemon. Prima Lifestyles, 2001.
Kuprenas, John, and Matthew Frederick.
101 Things I Learned in Engineering
School. Grand Central Publishing, 2013.
Middleton, William. Landmarks on the
Iron Road: Two Centuries of North
American Railroad Engineering
(Railroads Past and Present). Indiana
University Press, 1999.
Molotch, Harvey. Where Stuff Comes
From: How Toasters, Toilets, Cars,
Computers, and Many Other
Things Come to Be as They Are.
Routledge, 2005
Pletsch, William. Integrated Circuits:
Making the Miracle Chip. Pletsch &
Associates, 2000.
Reid, T.R. The Chip. Random
House, 2001.
Roberts, Dustyn. Making Things
Move: DIY Mechanisms for
Inventors, Hobbyists, and Artists.
McGraw-Hill, 2010.
Organizations and Websites
American Indian Science and
Engineering Society
6321 Riverside Plaza Lane NW, Unit A
Albuquerque, NM 87120
Telephone: 505-765-1052
aises.org


ENGINEERING 95
.Engineering Resources
American Institute of
Chemical Engineers
120 Wall St., 23rd floor
New York, NY 10005-4020
Toll-free telephone: 800-242-4363
www.aiche.org
American Society of Civil Engineers
1801 Alexander Bell Drive
Reston, VA 20191-4400
Toll-free telephone: 800-548-2723
www.asce.org
ASME International (American
Society of Mechanical Engineers)
2 Park Ave.
New York, NY 10016-5990
Toll-free telephone: 800-843-2763
www.asme.org
Institute of Electrical and
Electronics Engineers
3 Park Ave., 17th Floor
New York, NY 10016-5997
Telephone: 212-419-7900
www.ieee.org
Jet Propulsion Laboratory
4800 Oak Grove Drive
Pasadena, CA 91109
Telephone: 818-354-4321
www.jpl.nasa.gov
Kennedy Space Center
Space Commerce Way
Merritt Island, FL 32953
Toll-free Telephone: 855-433-4210
www.kennedyspacecenter.com
National Action Council for
Minorities in Engineering
440 Hamilton Ave., Suite 302
White Plains, NY 10601-1813
Telephone: 914-539-4010
www.nacme.org
National Aeronautics and
Space Administration
NASA Headquarters
Washington, DC 20546-0001
Telephone: 202-358-0001
www.nasa.gov
National Action Council for
Minorities in Engineering
www.nacme.org
National Society of Black Engineers
205 Daingerfield Road
Alexandria, VA 22314
Telephone: 703-549-2207
www.nsbe.org
National Society of Professional
Engineers
1420 King St.
Alexandria, VA 22314-2794
Toll-free Telephone: 888-285-6773
www.nspe.org
Smithsonian National Air and
Space Museum
Sixth and Independence Avenue, SW
Washington, DC 20560
Telephone: 202-633-2214
airandspace.si.edu
Society of Hispanic
Professional Engineers
Telephone: 323-725-3970
www.shpe.org
Society of Manufacturing Engineers
1000 Town Center, Suite 1910
Southfield, MI 48075
Telephone: 313-425-3000
www.sme.org
Society of Petroleum Engineers
Toll-free telephone: 800-456-6863
www.spe.org/en
Society of Women Engineers
130 East Randolph Street, Suite 3500
Chicago, IL 60601
Telephone: 312-596-5223
swe.org
Technology Student Association
Toll-free telephone: 888-860-9010
www.tsaweb.org


96 ENGINEERING
Engineering Resources.
Acknowledgments
The Boy Scouts of America is grateful
to Scott S. Stuckey for updating this
edition of the Engineering merit badge
pamphlet. Mr. Stuckey is former
managing editor at National Geographic
Traveler magazine and is the former
editor of Boys’ Life (now called Scout
Life) magazine.
Thanks also to the Convergence
Education Foundation, whose members
provided assistance with revising the
Engineering merit badge requirements.
The Foundation strives to expose young
students to the wonders of science,
mathematics, and engineering to pique
their interest in a possible career for the
future.
The Boy Scouts of America
is grateful to the men and women
serving on the National Merit Badge
Subcommittee for the improvements
made in updating this pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration Credits
Boston Scientific Corporation, courtesy—
cover (pacemaker) and page 37
Library of Congress, Prints and Photographs
Division, courtesy—page 85
NASA, courtesy—page 38
Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago,
courtesy—page 31 (both)
Segway Inc.; www.segway.com,
courtesy—page 27
The Treehouse Guide,
www.thetreehouseguide.com,
courtesy—page 78
USDA Agricultural Research Service/Ken
Hammond, courtesy—page 30 (bottom)
www.wikipedia.org, courtesy—pages 24
(bottom), 29 (top), and 57 (top)
All other photos and illustrations not men-
tioned above are the property of or are
protected by the Boy Scouts of America.
John McDearmon—pages 40 (all), 43,
48, 59 (illustration), 71 (all), and
80–81 (illustrations)
Brian Payne—page 55
Randy Piland—page 46