FAMILY LIFE

BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES

FAMILY LIFE

“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”

Family Life

Note to the Counselor
Some of the issues surrounding requirement 6 for the family
meeting could be considered of a personal nature. Use discretion
when reviewing this requirement with the Scout.
1. Prepare an outline on what a family is and discuss this with your merit badge
counselor. Tell why families are important to individuals and to society.
Discuss how the actions of one member can affect other members.
2. List several reasons why you are important to your family and discuss this
with your parents or guardians and with your merit badge counselor.
3. Prepare a list of your regular home duties or chores (at least five) and do them
for 90 days. Keep a record of how often you do each of them. Discuss with
your counselor the effect your chores had on your family.
4. With the approval of your parents or guardians and your merit badge counselor,
decide on and carry out a project that you would do around the home that
would benefit your family. Submit a report to your merit badge counselor
outlining how the project benefited your family.
5. Plan and carry out a project that involves the participation of your family.
After completing the project, discuss the following with your merit
badge counselor:
(a) The objective or goal of the project
(b) How individual members of your family participated
(c) The results of the project
6. Do the following:
(a) Discuss with your merit badge counselor how to plan and carry out a
family meeting.
(b) After this discussion, plan and carry out a family meeting to include the
following subjects:
(1) Avoiding substance abuse, including tobacco, alcohol, and drugs,
all of which negatively affect your health and well-being
111

(2) Understanding the growing-up process and how the body changes,
and making responsible decisions dealing with sex*
(3) How your chores in requirement 3 contributed to your role in the family
(4) Personal and family finances
(5) A crisis situation within your family
(6) The effect of technology on your family
(7) Good etiquette and manners
Discussion of each of these subjects will very likely carry over to more than
one family meeting.
7. Discuss with your counselor your understanding of what makes an effective
parent and why, and your thoughts on the parent's role and responsibilities in
the family.
*This conversation may take place with only one or both of your parents or guardians.

112

.Family Life Resources

Family Life Resources
Scouting Literature
Boy Scout Journal; American Cultures,
American Heritage, Citizenship in
the Community, Citizenship in the
Nation, Citizenship in the World,
Communication, Cooking, Crime
Prevention, Disabilities Awareness,
Genealogy, and Personal Management
merit badge pamphlets
Visit the Boy Scouts of America’s
official retail website at http://
www.scoutstuff.org for a complete
listing of all merit badge pamphlets
and other helpful Scouting materials
and supplies.

Books
Block, Joel D., et al. Stepliving for Teens:
Getting Along With Stepparents and
Siblings. Price Stern Sloan, 2001.
Brain, Marshall. The Teenager’s Guide
to the Real World. BYG Publishing
Inc., 1997.
Carlson, Richard. Don’t Sweat the
Small Stuff for Teens. Hyperion
Press, 2000.
Coleman, Ronda. Around the Family
Table: 365 Mealtime Conversations
for Parents and Children. Gryphon
House Inc., 2001.

Covey, Sean. The 7 Habits of Highly
Effective Teens. Touchstone, 2014.
———. The 7 Habits of Highly
Effective Teens Workbook.
Franklin Covey, 1999.
Davis, Ken. How to Live With Your
Parents Without Losing Your Mind.
Zondervan Publishing Co., 1988.
Foster, Chad. Teenagers: Preparing
for the Real World. South-Western
Educational Publishing, 1998.
Fox, Annie. Can You Relate? Real-World
Advice for Teens on Guys, Girls,
Growing Up, and Getting Along.
Free Spirit Publishing, 2005.
Gurian, Michael. From Boys to Men:
All About Adolescence and You.
Price Stern Sloan, 1999.
Hightower, Elaine, and Betsy Riley.
Our Family Meeting Book: Fun
and Easy Ways to Manage Time,
Build Communication, and Share
Responsibility Week by Week. Free
Spirit Publishing, 2002.
Jukes, Mavis. The Guy Book: An
Owner’s Manual. Crown Books for
Young Readers, 2002.
Maisel, Eric. 20 Communication Tips
for Families: A 30-Minute Guide
to a Better Family Relationship.
New World Library, 2000.

FAMILY LIFE

61

Family Life Resources.

McGraw, Jay. Closing the Gap: A
Strategy for Bringing Parents and
Teens Together. Fireside, 2001.
———. Life Strategies for Teens.
Fireside, 2000.
Otfinoski, Steve. The Kid’s Guide
to Money: Earning It, Saving It,
Spending It, Growing It, Sharing It.
Scholastic, 1996.
Packer, Alex J. Bringing Up Parents:
The Teenager’s Handbook.
Free Spirit Publishing, 1992.
———. The How Rude!™ Handbook
of Family Manners for Teens.
Free Spirit Publishing, 2004.
———. How Rude!™ The Teenagers’
Guide to Good Manners, Proper
Behavior, and Not Grossing People
Out. Free Spirit Publishing, 2014.

Organizations and Websites
American Association of Family and
Consumer Sciences
400 N. Columbus St., Suite 202
Alexandria, VA 22314
Toll-free telephone: 800-424-8080
Website: http://www.aafcs.org
American Red Cross
2025 E St. NW
Washington, DC 20006
Telephone: 202-303-4498
Website: http://www.redcross.org

62

FAMILY LIFE

Family, Career, and Community
Leaders of America
1910 Association Drive
Reston, VA 20191-1584
Telephone: 703-476-4900
Website: http://www.fcclainc.org
Prepare Tomorrow’s Parents
454 NE Third St.
Boca Raton, FL 33432
Telephone: 561-620-0256
Website:
http://www.preparetomorrowsparents.org

Acknowledgments
The Boy Scouts of America thanks
writer Marilyn Swierk for her involvement with this new edition of the
Family Life merit badge pamphlet.
Ms. Swierk is certified in Family and
Consumer Sciences and in Family Life
Education and is a consultant and
speaker in the realm of family life
and education.
The Boy Scouts of America is grateful to the men and women serving on
the Merit Badge Maintenance Task Force
for the improvements made in updating
this pamphlet.

