AUTOMOTIVE
MAINTENANCE

STEM-Based

BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES

AUTOMOTIVE
MAINTENANCE

“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”

You will need access to a car or truck and its owner’s
manual to meet some requirements for this merit
badge. If you do not have your own vehicle, you should
work with your merit badge counselor or other trusted
adult to obtain access to a vehicle and the owner’s
manual for that vehicle.

Requirements
1. Do the following:
a. Explain to your counselor the hazards you are most
likely to encounter during automotive maintenance
activities, and what you should do to anticipate, help
prevent, mitigate, or lessen these hazards.
b. Discuss with your counselor the safety equipment, tools,
and clothing used while checking or repairing a motor
vehicle. Use this equipment, tools, and/or clothing
(when needed or called for) in meeting the requirements
for this merit badge.
2. General Maintenance, Safety, and Registration.
Do the following:
a. Review the maintenance chart in the owner’s manual.
Explain the requirements and time limits.

35861
ISBN 978-0-8395-3241-5
©2017 Boy Scouts of America
2017 Printing

b. Demonstrate how to check the following:
(1) Brake fluid
(2) Engine oil
(3) Coolant
(4) Power steering fluid
(5) Windshield washer fluid
(6) Transmission fluid
(7) Battery fluid (if possible) and condition of the
battery terminals
c. Locate the fuse boxes; determine the type and size of
fuses. Demonstrate the proper replacement of burnedout fuses.
d. Demonstrate how to check the condition and tension of
belts and hoses.
e. Check the vehicle for proper operation of its lights,
including the interior overhead lights, instrument lights,
warning lights, and exterior bulbs.
f. Locate and check the air filter(s).
g. Explain the purpose, importance, and limitations of
safety belts and passive restraints.
h. Find out the requirements for your state’s emissions and
safety inspections (as applicable), including how often a
vehicle needs to be inspected.
i. Explain the importance of registering a vehicle and find
out the annual registration fee for renewing your family
car’s registration.
3. Dashboard. Do the following:
a. Explain the function of the fuel gauge, speedometer,
tachometer, oil pressure, and engine temperature gauge.
Point each one out on the instrument cluster.
b. Explain the symbols that light up on the dashboard
and the difference between the yellow and red symbols.
Explain each of the indicators on the dashboard, using
the owner’s manual if necessary.

AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE    3

4. Tires. Do the following:
a. Explain the difference between tire manufacturer’s and
vehicle manufacturer’s specifications and show where
to find them.
b. Demonstrate how to check tire pressure and properly
inflate a tire. Check the spare tire and make sure it is
ready for use.
c. Explain why wheel alignment is important to the life of
a tire. Explain caster, camber, and toe-in adjustments on
wheel alignment.
d. Explain the purpose of the lateral-wear bar indicator.
e. Explain how to dispose of old tires in accordance with
local laws and regulations.
5. Engine. Do the following:
a. Explain how an internal combustion engine operates.
Tell the differences between gasoline and diesel
engines. Explain how a gasoline-electric hybrid
vehicle is powered.
b. Discuss the purpose of engine oil. Explain the API
service code, the SAE number, and the viscosity rating.
c. Explain where to find the recommended oil type and the
amount of oil to be used in the vehicle engine.
6. Cooling System. Do the following:
a. Explain the need for coolant in the cooling system, and
the importance of selecting the correct coolant type for a
given vehicle.
b. Explain how to flush and change the engine coolant
in the vehicle, and how to properly dispose of the
used coolant.
7. Fuel System. Do the following:
a. Explain how the air and fuel systems work together and
why it is necessary to have an air filter and fuel filter.
b. Explain how a fuel injection system works and how an
onboard computer works with the fuel injection system.

4    AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE

8. Ignition and Electrical Systems. Do the following:
a. Diagram and explain the parts of the electrical system.
b. Explain the engine’s firing order.
c. Explain the purpose of the spark gap.
d. Demonstrate how to safely connect jumper cables to
your car battery.
9. Drive Train. Do the following:
a. Diagram the drive train and explain the different parts.
b. Explain the difference between automatic and
standard transmissions.
c. Explain the types of automatic transmission fluid.
d. Explain the types of lubricants used in a standard
transmission, and in the differential and transfer case.
e. Explain the difference between front-wheel, rear-wheel,
and four-wheel drive.
10. Brake System. Do the following:
a. Explain the brake system (including antilock systems)
and how it operates.
b. Explain the differences between disc and drum systems.
c. Demonstrate how to check the condition of a vehicle’s
brake system. After checking, make recommendations
for repairs (if necessary).

AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE    5

11.		Do TWO of the following:
a.		Determine the value of three different vehicles you are
interested in purchasing. One must be new and one
must be used; the third vehicle can be new or used.
For each vehicle, find out the requirements and cost
of automobile insurance to include basic liability and
options for collision, comprehensive, towing, and
rental car. Using the three vehicles you chose and with
your merit badge counselor’s assistance, complete the
operation/maintenance chart provided in the merit
badge pamphlet. Use this information to determine the
operating cost per mile for each vehicle, and discuss
what you learn with your counselor.
b.		Choose a car cleaner and wax product for a vehicle you
want to clean. Explain clear-coat paint and the precautions necessary for care. Clean the vehicle, both inside
and out, and wax the exterior. Use a vinyl and rubber
protectant (on vinyl tops, rubber door seals, sidewalls,
etc.) and explain the importance of this protectant.
c.		Locate the manufacturer’s jack. Use the jack to demonstrate how to engage the jack correctly on the vehicle,
then change a tire correctly.
d.		Perform an oil filter and oil change on a vehicle. Explain
how to properly dispose of the used oil and filter.
12.		Find out about three career opportunities in the automotive
industry. Pick one and find out the education, training, and
experience required for this profession. Discuss this with
your counselor, and explain why this profession might
interest you.

6    AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE

Automotive Maintenance Resources.

Automotive
Maintenance Resources
Scouting Literature
Aviation, Electronics, Engineering,
Inventing, Model Design and Building,
Space Exploration, Traffic Safety,
Truck Transportation, and Welding
merit badge pamphlets
For more information about or to
order Scouting-related resources,
see http://www.scoutstuff.org
(with your parent’s permission).

Books
Brand, Paul. How to Repair Your
Car (Motorbooks Workshop).
Motorbooks, 2006.
Dinkel, John. Road & Track Illustrated
Automotive Dictionary.
Bentley, 2000.
Editors of Popular Mechanics. Popular
Mechanics Complete Car Care
Manual, Hearst, 2008.
Gray, Michael E., and Linda E. Gray.
Auto Upkeep: Basic Car Care,
Maintenance, and Repair, 3rd ed.
Rolling Hills Publishing, 2012.

94    AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE

Jackson, Mary. Car Smarts: An
Easy-to-Use Guide to Understanding
Your Car and Communicating With
Your Mechanic. Avalon Travel
Publishing, 1998.
Kennedy, Michael. Career Opportunities
in the Automotive Industry. Facts on
File, 2005.
Krebs, Michelle: Careers Without College:
Cars. Peterson’s, 1999.
Newton, Tom. How Cars Work. Black
Apple Press, 1999.
Ramsey, Dan. The Complete Idiot’s
Guide to Car Care and Repair.
Alpha Books, 2003.
Sclar, Deanna. Auto Repair for Dummies.
IDG Books Worldwide, 2008.
Weber, Robert M. Opportunities in
Automotive Service Careers.
McGraw-Hill, 2001.

.Automotive Maintenance Resources

Organizations and Websites
Cars.com
Website: http://www.cars.com
Car Talk
Website: http://www.cartalk.com
Edmunds
Telephone: 855-782-4711
Website: http://www.edmunds.com
Insurance Institute for
Highway Safety
Telephone: 703-247-1500
Website: http://www.iihs.org
Kelley Blue Book
Website: http://www.kbb.com
NADA Guides
Website: http://www.nadaguides.com
National Institute for Automotive
Service Excellence
Website: http://www.ase.com

BMW of North America; Robert Slovey,
General Motors Corp.; Joe Van Bodegon,
Mercedes-Benz USA; Chris Mason,
Raytheon Co.; and Robin Ferguson,
University of Missouri.
The BSA is grateful to the Birdville
Independent School District and the
BISD’s Career and Technology department for allowing us to use their
Shannon Center facility in Haltom City,
Texas, for a photo shoot. In particular,
thanks to Olin Harrington, an automotive technology instructor there, for his
assistance with photography. We are
also thankful for the generosity of BP
Lubricants/Quaker State, which provided
supplies for a photo shoot.
The Boy Scouts of America is
grateful to the men and women serving
on the Merit Badge Maintenance Task
Force for the improvements made in
updating this pamphlet.

Photo and Illustration Credits

SaferCar.gov
Toll-free telephone: 888-327-4236
Website: http://www.safercar.gov

Chrysler LLC/Dodge, courtesy—page 59

Acknowledgments

Library of Congress Prints and
Photographs Division, courtesy—
page 10

The Boy Scouts of America is extremely
grateful to Bob Rodriquez, Dan Baumhardt,
and several members of the ASE test
development staff for their assistance
with this Automotive Maintenance merit
badge pamphlet.
Thanks to the following for their
assistance with past pamphlets: George
Arrants, Automotive Youth Educational
Systems Inc.; Matt Brown, American
Honda Motor Co.; Charles Klasman,

HAAP Media Ltd., courtesy—page 82
Howstuffworks.com, courtesy—page 29

Mercedes-Benz USA, courtesy—page 69
National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration—page 21 (Child Car
Safety logo)
Shutterstock.com, courtesy—cover
(toolbox, ©Rafa Irusta; air filters,
©withGod; tires, ©Jurand; washing
supplies, ©Green Leaf); pages 11
(belt system, ©apiguide; engine,

AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE    95

