RIFLE
SHOOTING
STEM-Based


SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
RIFLE SHOOTING
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Note to the Counselor
Scouting America Standards
The merit badge counselor must take responsibility to assure that all
instruction involving any handling of firearms or live ammunition must
be supervised by a certified Scouting America National Camping School
(NCS) shooting sports director or a certified National Rifle Association
(NRA) rifle instructor or coach.
Instruction involving muzzleloaders must be supervised by an
NCS shooting sports director or an NRA/National Muzzleloader Rifle
Association (NMLRA)–certified muzzleloader firearms instructor. Shooting
must be supervised by an NRA-certified range safety officer (RSO).
If instruction and shooting are to occur at the same time, both the RSO
and qualified instructor must be present. The supervisor and instructor
may not be the same person. Note that commercial shooting ranges may
provide RSOs. See the Guide to Safe Scouting and the National Range and
Target Activities Manual for further details on shooting sports.
Scouts are permitted to fire .22-caliber bolt-action, single-shot rifles;
air rifles; shotguns; and muzzleloading long guns. Scouting America
policy does not permit the use of handguns by Scouts BSA members or
Sea Scouts. It is recommended the counselor use the 2012 Rifle Shooting
merit badge pamphlet, No. 35942, and the teaching guide found in the
National Range and Target Activities Manual.
Rifles
The following are standards established for rifles used in Scouts BSA:
1. Breech-loading rifles will be single-shot, bolt-action .22-caliber with
removable magazines only. Tubular magazines are not permitted.
They may be chambered for the .22 short, .22 long, or .22 long rifle,
but not for the .22 WRF, which is a more powerful cartridge. Air rifles
using pellets or BBs are also permitted.
2. Semiautomatic rifles are not permitted.
35942
ISBN 978-0-8395-3330-6
©2025 Scouting America/Boy Scouts of America
2025 Printing


RIFLE SHOOTING 3
3. Rifles must meet the requirements for the conventional and
international rifle shooting competitive programs. The trigger
pull will be determined by the course of competition.
4. Bolt action rifles with a removable clip-type magazine are permitted but
must be loaded with no more than five rounds or used as a single shot.
5. All rifles used in Scouting America shooting sports must have
a minimum trigger pull of 3 pounds and must be tested with a
3-pound weight or scale at least once a week while in use. If the
trigger mechanism is activated by the 3-pound pull, the rifle must be
removed from service.
6. Shooting safety glasses and hearing protection must be worn on
rifle ranges.
7. Care must be taken to comply with federal, state, and local laws.
Muzzleloaders
The following standards for muzzleloading long guns are to be used by
members of Scouting America.
1. Muzzleloading rifles including “inlines” must be recently manufactured,
percussion-lock only. Scouting America recommends .45 or .50 caliber.
Rifles made by kits must be checked by a qualified gunsmith.
2. Recommended loads of black-powder substitute or Pyrodex® are
not to exceed 1 grain per caliber; 35 grains is frequently sufficient for
target shooting at close range.
3. Shooting safety glasses and hearing protection must be worn.
4. Care must be taken to comply with federal, state, and local laws.


4 RIFLE SHOOTING
RequirementsScouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Rifle-Shooting or check Scoutbook for the latest requirements.


RIFLE SHOOTING 5


6 RIFLE SHOOTING


RIFLE SHOOTING 7
Contents
Rifle Parts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Gun Safety . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
Choosing a Rifle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
Care of Your Rifle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
Ammunition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
Rifle Shooting Fundamentals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
Muzzleloading Rifles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
Conservation, Recreation, and More . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80
Glossary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 90
Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 95


8 RIFLE SHOOTING
BARREL
Parts of a rifleBUTT PAD
COMB
BOLT HANDLE
BOLT
REAR SIGHT
FRONT SIGHT
BUTT
GRIP TRIGGER
TRIGGER GUARD
FORE-END
MUZZLE
ACTION
STOCK


RIFLE SHOOTING 9
.Rifle Parts
Rifle Parts
A rifle is a precision instrument, designed for precise work. It is
designed to shoot a projectile (a bullet, BB, pellet, ball, etc.) to
hit where the barrel is pointed.
It’s helpful to learn the parts of a rifle. Then, when you
read about how to handle a gun, you’ll be able to quickly
understand the information.
A rifle is divided into three major parts or groups:
• The stock—the handle by which the rifle is held and which
holds the other groups together
• The barrel—the metal tube through which the projectile
passes when the rifle is fired
• The action—the group of moving parts that load, fire, and
unload the rifle
Let’s look at each of these main groups.
The Stock
Most stocks are made of wood, but today more and more stocks
are made of fiberglass and other synthetic materials. The stock
has special design features to give the shooter comfort, ease of
handling, and maximum shooting accuracy. The stock is divided
into four basic parts: butt, comb, grip, and fore-end.
The butt is the rear portion of the stock. It usually is
contoured to fit comfortably against the shoulder. The comb is
the top portion of the stock upon or against which the shooter
rests the shooter’s cheek. The grip, or “small of the stock,” is the
area where the firing hand grasps the stock. The fore-end is the
part of the stock that extends under the barrel. This is the area
where the nonshooting hand supports the rifle.
For easy
reference, terms
in italics are
further defined in
the glossary.


10 RIFLE SHOOTING
Rifle Parts.
The Barrel
The hollow inside the barrel—the hole through which the
projectile passes—is called the bore. The bore is measured in
fractions of an inch or in millimeters. This measurement is
called the caliber of the rifle. The larger the diameter of the
bore, the larger the caliber and, therefore, the larger the size
of projectile it will take.
The opening through which the projectile leaves the barrel is
called the muzzle. The rear of the barrel is called the breech. The
chamber is located at the breech end of the barrel. That is the
portion of the barrel (bore) into which one round of ammunition
(or cartridge) is placed for firing. Chambers are shaped to exactly
match the ammunition. As long as you are using the proper size
ammunition, the fit should be nearly perfect.
For the remaining length of the barrel, the bore is lined
with spiral grooves, somewhat like the grooves on the inside of
a machine nut. The flat, raised ridges of metal standing between
the grooves are called lands. When a projectile passes through
the barrel, the lands cut into the bullet to make it spin. This
spinning action makes the projectile more stable and accurate
in flight toward the target. The projectile in flight is similar to a
well-thrown football. The grooves and lands inside the barrel are
known as rifling, which is where the rifle got its name.
Rifling causes
the bullet to
spin, giving it
stability on
its flight to
the target.
LANDS
The safety is a mechanical device designed to prevent a gun from
being fired accidentally. When the safety is in the “on” position, it should
block the operation of the trigger, thus preventing the rifle from firing.
Always remember that the safety is only a mechanical device. Never
depend on it as a substitute for following the safety rules. You are the
ultimate safety!
Safeties are found in a variety of locations on the gun, depending on the rifle’s
design and manufacture.


RIFLE SHOOTING 11
.Rifle Parts
Other Features
Many rifles have other features such as the magazine, clip, trigger guard,
and safety.
The magazine is
a container with a
spring into which
several cartridges can
be placed. The two
most common types
of magazines are
a nondetachable box
type located inside the
bottom portion of the
action and a tube type
located under the
barrel or in the stock.
Detachable magazines
can be loaded and then
slipped into place in
the gun. The magazine
uses a spring to push
the unfired cartridges
into the path of the bolt
for loading.
A rifle chamber can contain only one cartridge at a time. The magazine
makes it possible to load a new cartridge into the chamber without having
to load it by hand. When an action is opened and closed, a new cartridge is
pushed from the magazine into the chamber.
A clip is a device to hold cartridges for charging the magazines of
some rifles.
The trigger guard is a protective shield around the trigger that keeps
the trigger from being pulled accidentally.
Tube magazine
Box magazine


12 RIFLE SHOOTING
Rifle Parts.
The Action
The action, as explained above, is the group of moving parts
that allow the shooter to load, fire, and unload the rifle.
• Loading involves opening the action, placing a cartridge in
the chamber, and then closing the action with the cartridge
in place. In most rifles, opening and closing the action cocks
the firing pin, making the rifle ready to be fired. Some rifles
must be cocked separately.
• Firing takes place when the trigger is pulled to the rear.
This action allows the firing pin to strike the cartridge and
fire the gun.
• When the action is opened after firing, the used cartridge is
ejected so that a new one can be loaded.
Types of Actions
There are several popular types of cartridge-rifle actions. To give
a general idea of how these actions operate, the following
describes the loading and unloading procedures for some of the
more common rifle designs: bolt, pump, lever, semiauto-
matic, hinge, and falling-block actions. Be aware, however,
that there are many operational variations for these as well as
other types of action designs.
Bolt. The bolt-action rifle operates on a lift, pull, and push
sequence similar to a door bolt. The bolt action is probably the
most common type. Many feel that it is the strongest and most
accurate of the action types. Scouts may use this type of
rifle to earn this merit badge.
Pump. On pump-action (also called slide-action) rifles the
fore-end of the stock is pumped back and forth to open and close
the action. Using a pump-action rifle, experienced marksmen can
quickly load, fire, and eject the spent cartridge while keeping the
rifle pointed toward the target.
Lever. The action on a lever-action rifle is opened by pulling
the cocking lever downward and forward away from the
stock. It is closed by simply returning the lever to its original
position. Lever-action rifles, like pump-action rifles, also allow
rapid reloading.
You must
thoroughly
study and
understand the
rifle’s operation
manual before
using the rifle.


RIFLE SHOOTING 13
.Rifle Parts
Semiautomatic. These actions are sometimes called repeaters
or autoloaders. Each time a semiautomatic rifle is fired, burning
powder in the cartridge produces gas that provides the energy
to open the action and eject the cartridge case. A spring then
closes the action, reloading a new cartridge at the same time.
This happens once each time the trigger is pulled.
Hinge. The hinge action opens similarly to the movement of
a door hinge. When the release lever is pushed to one side, the
barrel swings downward. Hinge-action rifles may have one,
two, or three barrels. Double rifles are built as either an “over
and under” or a “side by side,” depending on the placement of
the barrels. Three-barreled guns usually have a combination
of shotgun and rifle barrels and are often called drillings.
Falling Block. The falling-block action uses a block instead of
a bolt to hold the cartridge in place at the breech end of the
barrel. The action is opened by lowering the trigger guard or
the small lever under it that causes the breechblock to fall down
and away from the barrel. Raising the lever closes the action
and covers the breech end of the barrel. Falling-block rifles are
single-shot rifles.
Common types of actions
BOLT ACTION
LEVER ACTION
SEMIAUTOMATIC
FALLING BLOCK


14 RIFLE SHOOTING
Rifle Parts.
Sights
Sights help you aim the rifle. There are many different types of
sights, but generally they fall into three categories: optical,
open, and aperture.
Optical sights are telescopes mounted atop the barrel or
receiver (the frame for the action parts of a gun). They are good
sights for new shooters because they are simple to use. Optical
sights have a crosshair or dot that acts as an aiming point. It’s
important that the sights be of the right design and size for the
rifle. Optical sights should be mounted far enough forward to
assure that the rifle’s recoil won’t cause the sight to strike the
shooter’s eye or eyewear.
Open sights have a notch or “V” located near the rear or
breech end of the rifle, and a front sight (a post or bead) located
near the muzzle. To aim, the shooter aligns the front and rear
sights with the target.
Pictured are some of the common reticles (aiming
devices) found in optical sights. Left to right: duplex,
dot, crosshair, and post. Choosing which to use is
largely a matter of personal preference.
Open sights are available in various adjustable and fixed designs.


RIFLE SHOOTING 15
.Rifle Parts
Aperture sights are often called peep sights because they
have a small hole in the rear sight that the shooter looks through
(or peeps through) when aiming. The front sight is aligned in the
center of the rear sight opening, making alignment of the sights
much easier and more precise than with open sights. However,
peep sights aren’t as fast and easy to use as open sights when
shots must be fired quickly.
Aperture rear sights, scopes, and some open sights can
be precisely adjusted without special tools. This adjustment is
absolutely necessary for getting shots to hit the center of the
target. Usually both elevation (up and down) and windage
(left and right) adjustments can be made. The cardinal rule for
adjusting sights is to move the rear sight in the same direction
desired for the shots on the target or to move the rear sight to
the center of the target. (For more on adjusting the sights, see
“Firing Your First Shots.”)
GLOBE FRONT SIGHT AND BULL’S-EYE AS SEEN THROUGH THE APERTURE REAR SIGHT
Globe front sights with aperture or post inserts are popular with target shooters
because they allow precise aiming.
APERTURE REAR SIGHTGLOBE FRONT SIGHT
APERTURE INSERT POST INSERT





RIFLE SHOOTING 17
.Gun Safety
Gun Safety
In marksmanship, nothing is more important than safety.
Participants in shooting sports assume a vital responsibility that
affects the lives of others. It is critically important to learn and
practice all of the rifle safety rules.
When handled correctly and used properly, a rifle is not
dangerous. A rifle, like any other precision machine, instrument,
or piece of sports equipment, is manufactured to perform a
specific task and can do so at no risk to the user or others. If a
rifle is handled incorrectly or recklessly, without regard for the
safety rules, then accidents can happen.
Rifle safety is a simple but ongoing process. You must first
acquire knowledge of how to handle rifles safely, then develop and
maintain proper safe-handling skills through practice. The most
important element to being safe is attitude. Safety knowledge and
skills are of little value without a determination to use them all
of the time. Being safe means consciously keeping the gun under
control. Always be alert to, and conscious of, the rifle’s capabilities,
and be aware of what might happen if it is used improperly.
Basic gun safety rules fall into two major categories: safe
gun handling and safe use and storage.
The Scout Marksman’s Code
A Scout:
Always follows the rules for firearms safety.
Accepts the responsibility that goes with the use and possession
of firearms.
Follows the laws that govern the use and possession of firearms
in the Scout’s community.
Practices wildlife conservation.
Follows the spirit and the letter of the game laws.
Carefully follows the rules of sportsmanship when using firearms.


18 RIFLE SHOOTING
Gun Safety.
Fundamental Rules for Safe
Gun Handling
Three basic rules apply to handling a rifle—under
any circumstances.
1. ALWAYS keep the gun pointed in a safe
direction. This is the primary rule of gun
safety. “Safe direction” means that the gun
is pointed so that even if it were to go off, it
would not cause injury or damage. The key
to this rule is to control where the muzzle or
front end of the barrel is pointed at all times.
Common sense dictates the safest direction,
depending on circumstances.
2. ALWAYS keep your finger off the trigger
until you are ready to shoot. When holding
a gun, rest your finger along the side of the
gun. Until you are actually ready to fire, do
not touch the trigger.
3. ALWAYS keep the gun unloaded until ready
to use. When picking up a gun, carefully point
it in a safe direction. Engage the safety if pos-
sible. Then, while keeping your finger off the
trigger, open the action and look inside the
chamber(s), which should be clear of ammuni-
tion. (If the gun has a magazine, remove it before
opening the action and make sure it is empty.)
If you do not know how to open the action or
inspect the chamber(s), leave the gun alone and
get help from someone who does.
Rules for Using or Storing a Gun
When actually engaged in shooting—whether in hunting,
recreational practice, or competition—always follow these rules.
• Know your target and what is beyond. Be absolutely sure
to identify the target beyond any doubt. Equally important,
be aware of the area beyond the target. This means observing
the prospective area of fire before shooting. Never fire in
a direction in which there are people or where any other
potential for mishap might exist.
ALWAYS keep the gun pointed
in a safe direction.
ALWAYS keep your finger off
the trigger until you are ready
to shoot.
When picking up a gun, care-
fully point it in a safe direction,
engage the safety, open the
action, and check to be sure the
chamber is clear of ammunition.
Think first.
Shoot second.


RIFLE SHOOTING 19
.Gun Safety
• Know how to use a gun safely. Before handling a gun, learn
how it operates. Know its basic parts and how to safely open
and close the action, and remove any ammunition from the
gun or magazine. Remember, a gun’s mechanical safety device
is never foolproof. Nothing can replace safe gun handling.
• Be sure the gun is safe to operate. Just like other tools,
guns need regular maintenance to remain in good working
order. Regular cleaning and proper storage are part of the
gun’s general upkeep. If there is any question about a gun’s
ability to function, a gunsmith should look at it.
• Use only the correct ammunition for the gun. Only the BBs,
pellets, cartridges, or ammunition designed for a particular gun
can be fired safely in that gun. Most guns have the ammunition
type stamped on the barrel. Ammunition can be identified
by information printed on the box and sometimes stamped
on the cartridge. Do not shoot the gun without loading the
proper ammunition.
• Wear hearing and eye protection. Shots fired from
guns are loud, and the noise can damage the hearing
of shooters and bystanders. Firing a gun also emits
debris and hot gas that can cause eye injury. For these
reasons, shooters should wear shooting glasses and
hearing protection.
• Never use alcohol or drugs before or when shooting.
Alcohol, or any other substance likely to impair normal
mental or physical functions (including prescription and
nonprescription medicines), must not be used before or
while handling or shooting guns.
• Store guns so they are not accessible to
unauthorized persons. Deciding where and how
to store guns and ammunition depends on several
factors, such as security and accessibility. Safe and
secure storage requires that untrained individuals
(especially children) be denied access to guns
and ammunition. Wear eye and hearing
protection when you
are shooting.


20 RIFLE SHOOTING
Gun Safety.
Shooting Ranges
The supervised shooting range is one of the safest places to
enjoy shooting. The operators of most ranges use standard range
commands to control shooting and to promote uniform safety
practices. In every case, the undisputed boss is the range
safety officer, who gives the commands and monitors all
shooters to be sure they comply with the safety rules.
Range commands
and rules
let everyone
shoot safely.
It is your responsibility as a shooter to obey and respect
the range officer. The range has:
• A range safety officer
• Firing points
• A ready area
• Target holders
• A firing line
• A backstop
Typical shooting range
20' BACKSTOP
TARGET HOLDER
100 YARD TARGET LINE
50 YARD TARGET LINE
75' TARGET LINE
FIRING LINE
FIRING
POINTS
SIDE BERM
OR FENCE
READY AREASTAT BOARD
SECURED
STORAGE
AREA
FENCE
SAFETY
FAN
10º 10º
SAFETY
FAN


RIFLE SHOOTING 21
.Gun Safety
Shooters use the preparation area behind the firing line
to get their equipment ready and wait for their turn to shoot.
Shooters take their positions on the point just behind the firing
line. Most ranges provide a target holder at the proper distance
from the firing line. The backstop behind the target holder
catches the bullet just after it goes through the target so there
will be no danger to people or property beyond the range.
Here are a few of the range commands you may hear a range
safety officer use.
• “First relay—on the firing line.” This means that the
shooters assigned to that relay may now take their places
on the firing line.
• “Is the line ready?” When everyone appears ready, the range
safety officer will inquire with this command (question).
Anyone not ready should call out, “Not ready,” and the range
officer will state, “The line is not ready.” When the difficulty is
corrected, the range officer will repeat, “Is the line ready?”
• “Load.” This is normally the next command. It means that
you can now load your rifle but not fire it.
• “Ready on the firing line.” This is the last preparatory command.
• “Commence firing.” This command means that you may
begin shooting and that the time for the relay has begun.
• “Cease fire.” When the time for the relay ends or everyone
has finished shooting, or if there is a problem that requires
shooting to stop, the range safety officer commands, “Cease
fire.” Everyone stops shooting immediately. Additional
commands to unload, open the action, and bench or ground
the firearm may follow.
Depending on the shooting facility, the number of people shooting,
the type of shooting equipment being used, or other variables,
additional commands may be used. Generally these additional
commands direct the flow of shooters to and from the firing
line, provide necessary instructions, or inform shooters of the
time remaining.
Regardless of the shooting conditions, you have an important
responsibility. If you see an unsafe situation in which someone
could get hurt, then it is your responsibility to call “Cease fire.”
Don’t wait for the range safety officer to notice.
Remember, anyone
can call a
“cease fire” in
an emergency.





RIFLE SHOOTING 23
.Choosing a Rifle
Choosing a Rifle
Buying a rifle can be a memorable experience. Picking the
right one is important. Before making a selection, review local
and state laws that apply to the purchase, ownership, use,
possession, and carrying of firearms. These laws vary widely
according to community and state. Then begin thinking about
what type of firearm best fits your needs. The following
guidelines will help.
Purpose. The first consideration in buying a rifle is: Why do
you want it? There are many types of rifles, and each has a
specific purpose.
Action. A good action is one that can be kept open during
handling and that permits an easy visual check of the chamber
(and of the magazine, if the rifle has one). After trying different
action types, you may develop a preference.
Trigger. For safety reasons, rifles used in Scouting America
shooting programs must have a 3-pound or greater trigger pull.
Knowing what you want to use the rifle for can save
money and frustration. Patient searching will pay off
and help you find the right rifle.
The internet (with your parent or guardian’s permission)
or your local library or bookstore are good places to begin
your study. Visit a local sporting goods or gun specialty
store, and find someone who will explain the features
of the models you’re studying. Be specific about your
interests, plans for use, and budget. Take your time. Be
careful not to buy on impulse or because of a sales pitch.


24 RIFLE SHOOTING
Choosing a Rifle.
Weight. The proper weight depends on the rifle’s intended use
and your current physical development. If you are still growing,
a lighter rifle will be easier to handle. A larger Scout or a serious
target shooter may want something heavier, maybe as much as
10 to 17 pounds. In any case, the rifle needs to be heavy enough
to be stable and absorb the recoil (kickback) of firing but light
enough to handle comfortably.
Barrel. Barrel length, like weight, will vary with the rifle’s use
and the shooter’s size. Young Scouts with their first .22 rifle will
probably do better with a shorter barrel, around 18 or 24 inches.
A larger or more experienced shooter selecting a more powerful
rifle may prefer a barrel that is 24 to 29 inches long.
Stock. A stock that is too short will make the shooter feel
cramped, and the shooter may place the rear sight too close to
the face. A stock that is too long will put the weight of the gun
too far away from the shooter, who will be forced to stretch
to operate the gun. Since most guns are made for the average
adult, a Scout will often need the stock shortened for a good fit.
This is usually easily done by any competent gunsmith.
A quick and easy test for stock length is to bend your arm
at the elbow and place the butt of the rifle into the crook of your
arm. In this position you should be able to comfortably reach the
grip and trigger. If not, a gunsmith can add a spacer to the butt or
shorten the stock to make the length right for you.
The comb of the stock is important, too. A comb that is too
high will prevent you from properly aligning your eye with the
sight. A comb that is too low will force you to raise your cheek
up off the stock to see the sight. Both of these are detrimental to
good shooting. Fixing a poorly fitting comb can be difficult and
expensive. It is best to select a rifle with the proper comb height.
Measuring stock fit
When checking comb height, remember to consider
the type of sights you will be using. A scope will require
a higher comb than barrel-mounted sights.
A Scout shooting
a .22 who is just
getting started
will want a rifle
that weighs about
5 to 7 pounds.


RIFLE SHOOTING 25
.Choosing a Rifle
The adult rifle in the photo at left is too big for a young person to successfully
shoot from any position. The smaller rifle, at right, is better suited to the younger
shooter’s needs.
Sights. The intended use of the rifle also determines the type
of sights you need. Target shooters typically use aperture (peep)
sights that are easily adjusted. A recreational shooter might prefer
open barrel-mounted sights that are more economical. Other
shooters might select specialized sights that are made for their
particular type of shooting. No matter what type of sights you
choose, make sure that you can easily adjust them to zero-in
your rifle. (This technique is explained later in the pamphlet.)
Before You Buy
Answer these questions before you buy. If you are thinking of
buying a used gun, take additional care in your decision.
• How do you plan to use this rifle? Is the use multipurpose
or specific?
• What are the best caliber, weight, and sights for this use?
• Is ammunition readily available? How much will ammunition
cost for the amount of shooting you plan to do?
• How much money can you spend for the rifle?
• Have you done your homework? Have you studied
manufacturers’ catalogs?
Buy a gun that fits you. A gun that fits well lets you
shoot your best. Buying quality brands generally
ensures the availability of future repairs and a good
return on your investment.


26 RIFLE SHOOTING
Choosing a Rifle.
• Have you inspected and handled the different types of
rifles available?
• Have you checked the accessories and special features
options? Can accessories be easily added to accommodate
any changes in your shooting interest?
• Is the rifle simple to operate and to clean? Can the sights be
easily adjusted?
• Does the rifle fit you?
• Have you read the warranty or guarantee? Does the rifle have
a good record for dependability?
• Is the rifle produced by a known manufacturer?
• Are you buying from a reputable dealer?
• What is the resale value if you decide to sell the rifle? Could
you get back most of your money in a sale?
Buying a Used Rifle
Consider these points when buying a used rifle.
• Locate the previous owner, if possible, and find out why the
rifle was traded or sold. Be certain the seller legally owns
the rifle.
• Be aware that a poor outward appearance on a rifle generally
indicates abuse or excessive wear.
• Have a gunsmith look at the rifle and determine if it has
been misused.
• Check the bore for bulges or excessive wear.
• Check screw slots to determine if they have been abused
during disassembly by an inexperienced person.
Have you taken your time in making your decision?
Remember: The chances are good that you will keep the
rifle for life.


RIFLE SHOOTING 27
.Choosing a Rifle
• Check the trigger for consistent pull and smooth function.
• Check the safety to determine if it functions properly.
• Secure advice from a gun expert regarding this rifle’s market
value. Remember that you usually get what you pay for!
• Check the wood in the stock for type, quality, and
hairline cracks.
• Shoot the rifle before you buy it.
Note that rifles in original, unaltered condition tend to hold
their value.
Using a Borrowed Rifle
You may be able to use a rifle range in your town or at Scout
camp. There, you will probably use a rifle provided at the
range. This is fine. If possible, sight-in your borrowed rifle to
your satisfaction.
Sighting-In Your Rifle
You will sight-in your rifle whether it has come directly from the
manufacturer or has been used by other people. This is also
known as zeroing the rifle. “Zero” is sight adjustment that will
allow the bullet to strike the target at the desired point of aim.
To sight-in your rifle, follow the steps outlined in “Firing Your
First Shots.”
Air Rifles
Air guns are not toys. Today’s air gun is a technically sophisticated
and precise instrument. Everything in this merit badge pamphlet—
safe gun handling, shooting positions, fundamentals of firing
a shot, hygiene, etiquette, and purchasing—applies to air guns.
However, the procedures for cleaning an air gun differ.
Air guns are relatively inexpensive. They range in price
from about $100 to more than $1,500. The ammunition
is much cheaper than the cartridge type.


28 RIFLE SHOOTING
Choosing a Rifle.
Pellet Guns
The air rifle (pellet gun) fires a skirted lead pellet at varying
velocities from about 300 to about 850 feet per second. Because
they have velocities less than the .22-caliber cartridge gun,
these gas and air guns are shot at a distance of 25 yards or less.
There are four types of air rifles: spring-operated, pre-
compressed, carbon dioxide, and compressed air. Air rifles are
virtually recoilless (they don’t “kick”). In the spring-operated
system, the barrel and action recoil freely to the rear when the
piston and spring are moved forward.
A more modern gun uses a precompressed system—the
shooter cocks the rifle using a long lever and at the same time
compresses air in a chamber that is released when the trigger is
pulled. The carbon dioxide type uses a carbon dioxide cylinder
that allows for a short burst of gas under pressure that propels
the pellet through the barrel. A newer system uses compressed
air as the propellant.
Air rifles are used in recreational and competitive shooting,
field shooting, and silhouette shooting. The 10 meter (33 feet) is
a recognized event in the Olympic Games.
One of the fastest growing air rifle events in the United
States is position air rifle. Normally shot in the prone, standing,
and kneeling positions at 10 meters (33 feet), there are two
categories of position air rifle shooting. Precision air rifle mostly
emulates smallbore rifle shooting, using the same equipment
and an expensive air rifle. Sporter air rifle is shot in street clothes
using a low-cost air rifle.
In most programs, air rifles are shot at 25 feet on the NRA TQ-5 target or
33 feet (10 meters) on the NRA AR 5/1 or AR 5/10 targets. These targets are
sized so that the shooting requirements are comparable to the .22-caliber
rimfire rifles shot at 50 feet.
The BB gun is not a toy—nor is any air gun.
Pellet guns fire skirted lead pellets.


RIFLE SHOOTING 29
.Choosing a Rifle
BB Gun
The BB gun is usually a spring-piston model and is the simplest
and least expensive of all rifles. It operates by a lever that
compresses a spring that has a piston attached to it. When the
trigger is pulled, the spring releases the piston and sends a blast
of air up the bore behind the BB.
The bore of a BB gun is not usually rifled, so accuracy
drops off as distance to the target increases. The average muzzle
velocity of the BB gun is around 300 feet per second. This
velocity gives good accuracy at short distances. The BB gun is
shot at 15 feet for most organized types of shooting, including
qualification programs and competition.
Always wear eye protection when shooting a BB gun. Steel
BBs can ricochet off wooden or metal target frames, causing
injury and property damage. It’s best to hang BB targets from
a string suspended between two posts, secured at the top
and bottom.
Care and Cleaning
The care and cleaning of an both a pellet gun and a BB gun is
a little different from cleaning a .22-caliber rifle. (See “Care of
Your Rifle,” next.) Some cleaning solvents will harm air gun
seals. Use a 100-percent synthetic solvent, which will not
damage the rubber seals. Additionally, most air guns are to be
cleaned from the muzzle, not from the breech end of the gun.
In doing so, be careful not to damage the muzzle with
cleaning equipment. Carefully follow the manufacturer’s
instructions for cleaning the gun.
The origin of the rifling is at the muzzle end of the barrel.
This is the last contact of the rifle with the projectile. If the rifling
is damaged by inserting the cleaning rod into the muzzle, the
overall accuracy of the rifle will suffer. Instead, use a pull-through
system made from strong fishing line.
Sporter air rifle
shooting is shot
widely across the
United States and
is recognized by
the National Rifle
Association for
national records.
The advantages of air rifles include low cost, lack of noise on firing, little or
no recoil, and the shortened distance needed between the firing line and the
target, which makes these guns great for use in a large room or outdoors.
An air gun is an excellent way to practice at reasonable cost, and an air
rifle certainly can be used in fulfilling requirement 2 for this merit badge.


30 RIFLE SHOOTING
Care of Your Rifle.
Care of Your Rifle
A rifle is a precision instrument. Like any other item of value, it
must be cared for properly if it is to operate correctly and safely.
Unlike many other items of sports equipment, a rifle is built to
last a lifetime—and it will, if it is cared for properly.
Cleaning
Make a habit of cleaning the rifle after each use. Regular cleaning
will help ensure that the rifle functions properly, shoots accu-
rately, and is reliable. Always thoroughly clean a rifle and apply
protective lubrication before storing it. Cleaning helps preserve
the finish and value of a rifle. Be sure the rifle is cleaned thor-
oughly before use.
Before you begin to clean the rifle, point it in a safe direc-
tion, open the action, and be absolutely sure that the gun is
empty and all ammunition is removed from the area. To
assure safety, the action should be open during cleaning. Ideally,
the bolt should be removed from the rifle during cleaning.
Cleaning is
essential when
a rifle has been
stored for a long
time or has been
exposed to dirt
or moisture.


RIFLE SHOOTING 31
.Care of Your Rifle
Steps in Cleaning
Step 1—Pour a small amount of cleaning solvent into
a small pan or cup, or use an applicator bottle. Screw
a jag onto the cleaning rod, put a cleaning patch on the
end of the rod, and dip the patch in the pan of solvent.
Using a cleaning rod guide, push the rod through the
guide and the barrel to loosen the fouling (residue from
burning powder and lead particles left in the barrel after
a shot is fired). Always push in one direction (action
through muzzle). Remove the cleaning patch and pull
the rod out of the rifle. Take off the jag and screw a
bore brush onto the cleaning rod; dip the brush in the
solvent pan. Repeat the same process used to run the
patch through the barrel. (This technique keeps the
residue out of the trigger mechanism and helps protect
the barrel.) Remove the brush.
Six basic materials are needed to clean a rifle:
• Cleaning rod with attachment (jag tip to hold patches and a bore brush)
— The rod must be the proper size for the bore of the rifle.
—The use of a bore guide is recommended to help keep the rod in line
with the bore.
• Cloth patches
• Soft cloth
• Bore solvent
• Small brush
• Gun oil


32 RIFLE SHOOTING
Care of Your Rifle.
Step 2—Again, attach a patch to the cleaning rod and dip it into
the solvent. Run the wet patch through the bore and remove
it from the rod. (Do not pull the patch back through the barrel
because you will cause residue to fall into the trigger.)
Step 3—Run a dry patch through the barrel in the same manner.
Step 4—To remove the loosened residue and fouling, run a
series of dry patches through the barrel until one stays clean.
Repeat steps 1 through 4 until the patches come out clean.
Step 5—Push a lightly oiled patch through the bore.
Step 6—Properly dispose of the unused solvent. Do not pour
the unused solvent back into the solvent container because it
may contaminate the clean solvent.
Step 7—Using a small brush (old toothbrush) or cloth, clean
remaining parts of the rifle and remove any foreign material such
as unburned gunpowder or small particles of lead.
Step 8—Lubricate any moving parts of the rifle (see manufac-
turer’s recommendations).
Step 9—Wipe all exposed metal surfaces with a silicone or
lightly oiled cloth.
Step 10—Wash your hands when you are finished to remove
lead and chemical residues.


RIFLE SHOOTING 33
.Care of Your Rifle
Steps for a Quick Cleaning
Follow these simple steps in the field or at the range. Use a
rope/cable cleaning device such as the Hoppe’s BoreSnake®,
shown below.
Step 1—Apply a small amount of bore-cleaning solvent to the
head of the rope/cable cleaning device, just ahead of the bronze
bristles.
Step 2—Apply a few drops of light gun oil to the tail of the device.
Step 3—Drop the brass weight on the device through the opened
action and down the bore, pulling it through until it comes out of
the muzzle.
Congratulations. The bore is now completely cleaned and pro-
tected from the harmful effects of carbon buildup, metal fouling,
and moisture.
BORE BRUSH—EMBEDDED
IN THE CORD; IT LOOSENS
HARD DEPOSITS.
HEAD—REMOVES FOREIGN
PARTICLES PRIOR TO THE
SCRUBBING ACTION OF THE
BRUSH.
WEIGHTED CORD—SLIPS EASILY
THROUGH THE BARREL. GRASP
AND PULL THE CLEANING CORD
THROUGH THE BORE. THE CALIBER
OR GAUGE IS STAMPED INTO THE
BRASS WEIGHT.
TAIL—APPLY GUN OIL HERE.
Hoppe’s BoreSnake® is a popular
cleaning tool. It scrubs fouling and
clears the barrel of loose debris
with one pass and is great for
quick-cleaning your rifle.


34 RIFLE SHOOTING
Care of Your Rifle.
Storing Firearms
Before you decide how and where to keep your gun and
ammunition, consider safety, storage conditions, access
by others, and your personal needs. Many people are
naturally intrigued by guns, and the temptation to pick
one up is very real for adults and children alike. That
could spell trouble if the person is too young or inexperi-
enced to handle the gun safely. Security is another factor.
Unfortunately, guns are often desirable booty
for thieves.
For all of these reasons, shooting equip-
ment must be kept in a secure location. Many
manufacturers offer fine wooden cabinets to
display and secure guns. Some gun owners prefer
to have their guns out of sight and out of reach. If
you choose storage that requires a lock, keep the keys
where casual visitors and youngsters can’t get them.
Always store guns and ammunition so that they are
not accessible to untrained or unauthorized people. When
removing a firearm for handling or cleaning, always
remember to follow the safety rules, and double-check
to ensure that the gun is unloaded.
Ammunition
should be stored
in a cool, dry
place. Minimize
the chance of
an accident by
storing guns
and ammunition
separately.
Repairs
Beginning shooters should leave repairs to experts. If the rifle is not
functioning properly, take it to a professional gunsmith or send it back
to the manufacturer for repairs.
After the Rifle Is Clean
After the rifle is cleaned, handle the gun by the stock. (Fingerprints
can cause rust on the metal parts of your rifle.) Be sure your
ammunition is clean as well. Check it for foreign material before
using it. (Once again, be absolutely sure that no ammunition is
present in the cleaning area.)
If the gun is a type that is not fired by gunpowder, such
as an air rifle, its bore must be cleaned regularly. Keep any
gun clean and rust-free on all exposed surfaces. Follow the
manufacturer’s instructions.


RIFLE SHOOTING 35
.Ammunition
Ammunition
The types of ammunition available today are as diverse as the
types of rifles. Different sizes and shapes of ammunition have
been developed to fit every sporting need, but all modern rifle
ammunition consists of four basic parts—the case, primer,
powder charge, and bullet (projectile). Together they form
a rifle cartridge.
• The case is the container in which the ammunition parts
are assembled. A metal—typically brass—is used in its
construction. Cases come in many sizes and shapes
designed to fit matching firearms. There are
two basic types—rimfire and centerfire.
The basic difference between the two is
the location of the primer.
Centerfire
BULLET
CASE
POWDER
PRIMER
POWDER
PRIMER
Rimfire
CASE
BULLET


36 RIFLE SHOOTING
Ammunition.
• The primer is an impact-sensitive chemical mixture that
ignites when hit by the firing pin. In rimfire ammunition
(mostly .22 caliber), the priming chemical is contained inside
the hollow rim at the base of the case. The rim is soft enough
that the firing pin leaves a small dent after striking it. This
indentation crushes the priming compound, causing it to
ignite. In centerfire ammunition, the primer is a separate
component located in the center of the cartridge base. This
type of design allows the greater case strength required in
high-power rifle ammunition.
• The powder (a chemical compound) is a propellant. When
ignited by the primer, the powder’s gases expand rapidly and
produce a high pressure, providing the force needed to propel
the bullet through the barrel and to the target.
• The bullet is the projectile that is shot by the rifle at the target.
It normally is made of lead and may also have a jacket of hard
metal such as copper. The bullet must match the chamber and
bore of the rifle, or an unsafe condition can result.
FIRING PIN STRIKES AND IGNITES PRIMER, WHICH IN TURN IGNITES POWDER
BULLET AND ESCAPING GASES MAKE THE “BANG”
CARTRIDGE IN CHAMBER
GAS FROM BURNING POWDER EXPANDS IN CASE
GAS PUSHES BULLET OUT WITH FORCE
BULLET SPEEDS OUT THROUGH BARREL
Centerfire cases
have the primer
in a pocket at
the base of the
cartridge case.
In rimfire, the
primer is
contained in
a fold (rim) at
the base of the
case, which
when struck
by the hammer
ignites the
powder charge.


RIFLE SHOOTING 37
.Ammunition
If a cartridge fails to fire when the trigger is pulled,
keep the rifle pointed in a safe direction. Because the
cartridge might still fire, do not attempt to open the
action of the gun for at least 30 seconds.
Malfunctions
The three possible problems that can result from ammunition
malfunctions are misfire, hangfire, and squib rounds.
• The misfire happens when a cartridge does not fire when the
firing pin hits the primer. When this happens, the shooter must
keep the gun pointed in a safe direction and wait for at least
30 seconds before opening the action. The misfire normally
happens because the strike by the firing pin was too weak to
fire the priming compound or because there was no priming
compound where the firing pin hit the cartridge’s primer.
• In rare cases, the priming compound will not ignite immediately
but may ignite after a delay. Late ignition of the round is called
a hangfire. The possibility of a hangfire is why the rifle is kept
pointed in a safe direction for at least 30 seconds. At the end
of that time, the bolt may be opened to remove the misfired
cartridge or empty case.
• In a squib round, the primer ignites, but there are not
enough gases to force the bullet out of the barrel.
In the rare instance that the round fired but did not sound right,
nor did it hit the target, stop. Raise your hand if you are firing
on a range, and explain the situation to the range safety officer.
Do not attempt to shoot another shot, because the bullet
may be lodged in the barrel.
The proper procedure is to remove the bolt and inspect the
barrel from the breech end to determine whether the bullet is in
the barrel. If the bullet is in the barrel, it should be removed from
the barrel by pushing it with a cleaning rod from the breech—
never from the muzzle. After removing the lodged bullet, clean
the barrel to remove any residue and unburned powder.





RIFLE SHOOTING 39
.Rifle Shooting Fundamentals
Rifle Shooting
Fundamentals
Once you know how a rifle works, how to handle it safely, and
how to care for it, you are almost ready to shoot it. But there is
much more to shooting than pulling the trigger.
Learning to shoot a rifle accurately is much the same as
being introduced to any other skill. In soccer, for instance,
the beginner is taught the basic skills—like kicking, passing,
and shooting—before taking to the field and beginning actual
play. It’s the same with rifle shooting. To shoot a rifle safely
and accurately, you must first learn the basic skills of the
shooting positions and the shooting fundamentals. Once you
have learned the fundamentals of rifle shooting, you can begin
to apply them to various rifle-shooting activities for a lifetime
of fun and challenges.
The shooting position provides a platform from which
to accomplish the fundamentals of firing a shot. For this merit
badge, you will learn how to shoot from a supported position
(benchrest or supported prone position). This position will give
you the best support, from which you can correctly learn the
shooting fundamentals in the shortest time. (Shooting positions
are described in more detail in the next chapters, “Shooting
Positions” and “Firing Your First Shots.”)
Determining the Proper Shoulder
Before you can get into a shooting position, you must
determine whether you should shoot from the left or right
shoulder. In shooting, this depends on whether you are
right- or left-eyed, not whether you are right- or left-handed.


40 RIFLE SHOOTING
Rifle Shooting Fundamentals.
To find your dominant eye:
• Extend your hands in front of you.
• Put your hands together and form a small
opening between them.
• Keep both eyes open, and look through
the opening at your instructor’s nose. By
looking through the opening in your hands,
your instructor will quickly identify your
dominant eye.
As an alternative method:
• Extend your hands in front of you.
• Put your hands together and form a small
opening between them.
• Keep both eyes open, and look through the
opening at an object in the distance.
• Move your hands backward until they touch
your face, all the while keeping the object
in sight.
The eye that is looking through the opening at the object is
your dominant eye. If it is your right eye, you should shoot from
your right shoulder (left eye, left shoulder).
RIGHT-HANDED POSITION
SUPPORTED PRONE POSITION
LEFT-HANDED POSITION
Benchrest position


RIFLE SHOOTING 41
.Rifle Shooting Fundamentals
Shooting Positions
The shooting position is simply the posture of the body while
shooting. The supported position forms the foundation from which
you can learn the proper shot release technique. If your range has a
benchrest, use it. If not, shoot from the supported prone position.
Position of the Body
The position of the body is the arrangement of the head, torso,
arms, and legs, and their relationship to the target. Positioning
the body is the first step in assuming any shooting position.
Three conditions are essential for a good position.
First, be comfortable and relaxed. This means having as natural
a body position as possible without straining.
Second, provide maximum bone support. Use bones, not mus-
cles, to support the body and rifle. If you rely mostly on muscles
to support the weight of the rifle, you will tire quickly and you
may have a hard time holding the rifle still.
Third, align your position to the target. If these conditions
are met, your rifle will naturally point at the target. The point
where the rifle comes to rest when the body is relaxed is what
shooters call natural point of aim (NPA).
Position of the Rifle
Correct position of the rifle involves the proper relationship of the
rifle with the body. The rifle must be placed firmly against the
shoulder so that the sights are aligned with the dominant eye,
comfortably and naturally. Alignment of the sights with the
eye, without tilting the head to the side, is essential to proper
body position.
The fore-end of the stock should rest in the nonshooting
hand. Do not grip or squeeze the fore-end.
Correct hand and index finger placement on the rifle grip
and trigger is necessary to correctly hold the rifle and pull the
trigger. Grasp the grip of the stock with the lower three fingers,
lightly resting the thumb on the top of the stock. Place the hand
so that the index finger can pull the trigger straight to the rear.
While relaxed, and without touching the trigger, notice
through the sights where the rifle is pointing—where the rifle
naturally wants to come to rest. If the rifle does not naturally point
at the target, adjust your position around the sandbag or support to
allow the rifle to naturally point at the target (natural point of aim).
Placement of
the index finger
should allow the
trigger to be
pulled straight
to the rear.
The trigger
finger should be
clear of the stock
so it will not
touch the stock
while pulling
the trigger.


42 RIFLE SHOOTING
Rifle Shooting Fundamentals.
Unless designated
otherwise, all
position descrip-
tions and photos
in this pamphlet
are for the right-
handed shooter.
Left-handed
shooters will
need to reverse
this information.
Fundamentals of Firing a Shot
Now that you have looked at the elements of a position, it’s
time to learn what it takes to fire a shot. It is important to
understand that shooting is actually a series of one-shot events.
Whether rapid-fire, as with a high-powered rifle, or single-shot,
as with a single-shot smallbore rifle, the fundamentals of firing
each shot are the same. An expert shooter will recognize that
each shot is a single event and will learn to use the fundamen-
tals consistently for each shot.
The five fundamentals of firing a shot are: aiming, breath con-
trol, hold control, trigger control, and follow-through.
A shooter must accomplish each fundamental for each shot.
Aiming is the process of lining up the shooter’s eye, the rifle,
and the target. Aiming is done in two steps: sight alignment
and sight picture.
Sight alignment is the alignment of the eye, rear sight, and
front sight. Consistent and proper sight alignment is necessary
for accurate aiming. When using open sights with a post or
bead front sight, sight alignment is correct when the front sight
is centered in the rear sight notch and the top edge of the front
sight is even with the top of the rear sight. With aperture or
peep sights, sight alignment is correct when the front sight ring
or top edge of the front sight post is centered in the rear sight
aperture. When using a telescopic sight, proper sight alignment
is achieved by positioning the eye to clearly see the entire field
of view when looking through the scope.
Sight picture is the relationship between the eye, the aligned
sights or scope, and the target. Sight picture will vary according
to the type of sights and kind of target being used. A bead front
sight should be aimed at the center of the target. The top edge
of a post front sight is centered on the bull’s-eye or at the bottom
of the bull’s-eye (called a “6 o’clock hold”). When you have
obtained the correct sight picture, the front sight should be
clearly defined while the target and rear sight remain slightly out
of focus. A scope reticle (usually crosshairs) is simply centered
on the target and everything is brought into clear focus.


RIFLE SHOOTING 43
.Rifle Shooting Fundamentals
Breath control simply means to stop breathing before firing a
shot. Breathing causes your body to move. Continuous breathing
makes it difficult to maintain a steady sight picture. Before firing
the shot, be sure you are comfortable and relaxed. Then exhale
and stop breathing. This technique will help you in aiming by
reducing the movement of your body and rifle in relation to the
target. You should hold your breath no longer than about 8 to 10
seconds while aiming at the target. If you are not able to shoot
the shot within that time, stop, take a breath or two, and repeat
the process.
Hold control means keeping the aligned sights or scope reticle
aimed as closely as possible on the center of the target. It is the
most important period in firing a shot. Even though you assume
a proper and relaxed position and stop breathing, you will still
notice movement in the sight picture. This movement is natural.
From a support, such as a benchrest, a shooter can come
close to eliminating movement. You can minimize the amount of
movement by concentrating on achieving the proper sight picture
and holding as still as possible. You must learn to concentrate
totally and consistently on sight picture control when firing.
Controlling sight picture movement is something that
cannot be learned in one or two shooting sessions. All other
fundamentals of shooting can be learned in a fairly short time,
but hold control is practiced by championship shooters for
years. However, you will notice rapid improvement in accuracy
if you concentrate on achieving good hold control and practice
this technique regularly.
SIGHT PICTURE
ALIGNED SIGHT
FRONT SIGHT
REAR SIGHT
Aiming with open sights Aiming with
aperture sights


44 RIFLE SHOOTING
Rifle Shooting Fundamentals.
Trigger control is necessary to fire a good shot. Pull the trigger
straight to the rear when your hold is best—when it looks and
feels right. Slowly squeezing the trigger while maintaining a
good sight picture works much better than trying to quickly
jerk the trigger to catch that instant when the sight picture
looks just right.
Follow-through is maintaining position, aim, breath control, hold
control, and trigger control before and immediately after firing the
shot. Follow-through allows the rifle to recoil and return to its
natural point of aim after the shot is fired. This will minimize the
possibility of any sudden movement (just before the shot is fired)
that will disturb the sight picture and radically change the bullet’s
path. If you remember where the bull’s-eye was located in, or on,
the front sight when the shot was fired and can tell your instructor
where it was, then you have followed through. This is the process
that shooters refer to as “calling the shot.”
Shooting Positions
The shooting position is the platform from which the funda-
mentals of firing a shot are executed. There is one fundamental
learning position with two ways to step up the position, and
there are four basic shooting positions that rifle shooters use.
Whether you are shooting competitively, shooting for
recreation, or hunting, you will use one of
these positions or some variation thereof.
There are two rules for good trigger control.
1. Pull the trigger while holding steady.
2. Pull the trigger straight to the rear smoothly and
slowly, without disturbing your hold.
Remember to concentrate on hold control with your
focus on the front sight.
The first
consideration
in any shooting
activity is safety.
Remember to
observe the range
rules and the
basic rules of safe
gun handling.


RIFLE SHOOTING 45
.Rifle Shooting Fundamentals
As you learn to shoot, the best position to use is the
“supported” position. The supported position is shot either from
a table using sand-bags to support the rifle or from the prone
position using sandbags. Place the sandbags under the fore-end
of the rifle. These positions will allow you to work on the fun-
damentals with-out distractions.
In all shooting positions, a sling (a strap normally made
from leather or webbing) can be used to help support the rifle.
With a properly adjusted sling, the muscles do not have to hold
the rifle and can be relaxed, making the rifle steadier. In recre-
ational shooting and hunting, a sling can be used in all positions.
Rifle shooting is a precision sport. Learn to use the body
to correctly support the rifle when you’re firing a shot. In rifle
shooting, the four basic positions are prone, sitting, kneeling,
and standing. Each position has five basic elements that should
be observed: balance, support, natural point of aim (NPA),
comfort, and consistency.
If you are considering becoming (or are) a competitive
shooter, you also need to make sure that your positions are legal
(conform to the rules used during competition).
Balance. Balance is a prime consideration in
a shooting position. A good position places the
weight of the rifle over the support points of
the body. An erect head position is key to
maintaining good balance. Keep your head
erect and ears level to the ground in all
shooting positions.
Support. All shooting positions need to be
built around the skeleton of the body. The
skeleton is the structure that supports all the
parts of the body. In shooting, the principle
is to use the bones as much as possible to
support the rifle. When building a shooting position, shooters
must take into consideration their bones and muscles. Muscles
will tire and quiver. Bones do not tire out, and they provide
the most consistent support for the body-rifle system. A sling
plays a major role in helping to support the prone, sitting, and
kneeling positions.
In competitive
shooting, a sling
is normally used
only in the prone,
sitting, and
kneeling positions.


46 RIFLE SHOOTING
Rifle Shooting Fundamentals.
Natural Point of Aim. Natural point of aim (NPA) is where the
rifle points when the body is at rest. A good shooting position
will allow the rifle to point directly at the target, naturally, with-
out any “muscling” by the shooter. NPA has three parts:
• Bone support. The bones must be used to support the
rifle in all shooting positions because the muscles tire
while the bones do not.
• Relaxed muscles with sling support. A sling, when
used, supports the weight of the rifle in all positions
(except standing for competitive shooters).
• Alignment to the target. The rifle naturally points toward
the target with the body in a relaxed position supported by
bone structure and very little muscle tension.
How do you check NPA? Try this method. Relax in position
with the head against the stock. Close the eyes for a few
seconds. Open the eyes and see where the rifle is pointing.
How often should NPA be checked? Every shot.
Canting the Rifle
The shooting sports are in a
constant state of change. Years
ago, shooters thought that
canting (tilting a rifle to move
the rear sight in front of the
shooting eye) was not accept-
able. Over the past 20 years,
shooters have learned that to
shoot well, it is very important
to make sure that the body is
in a balanced position. That
means that the rifle should fit
the shooter and be brought to
the shooter’s position. It is more
important to keep the head erect and tilt (cant) the rifle
so the sights are in front of the shooting eye rather than
to tilt the head to the sights. It is good to cant the rifle so
the sights are in front of the shooting eye as long as you
cant consistently.


RIFLE SHOOTING 47
.Rifle Shooting Fundamentals
Comfort. The positions should be reasonably comfortable. A
good position allows normal flow of blood between the heart and
the body while firing. A good position requires the rifle and the
body to be supported by the shooter’s bone structure with little
or no use of the muscles.
Stretching and flexibility exercises can help a shooter
improve comfort. Remember that a Scout is physically strong.
Consistency. Consistency is being able to do the same task
over and over in exactly the same way. Why is this important?
In shooting, you try to place one shot on top of another in the
center of the target. The only way to accomplish the task is
by having a solid position and executing the integrated act of
firing the shot exactly the same way for each shot. If you’re not
consistent, your chance of firing each shot correctly in the same
way is low.
Attitude
Do you want to be a good shooter? The first thing you must do is
be positive. No matter what position you decide to shoot, approach
your task with the attitude that it is fun and easy. There is no
“hard” position to shoot. Every position is easy, and you learn
more every time you shoot from it. If you believe that something is
difficult, then it is. Shooters who talk about one position being
harder than another are actually teaching themselves that shooting
is hard. Remember: Be positive.
Standing Position
The standing position is the most natural and the most often
used position. Standing provides the most clearance. It is the
easiest position to assume, but it is the least stable for the begin-
ning shooter.
Position characteristics:
1. Shooter stands at about a right angle to the target.
2. Feet are about shoulder-width apart.
3. Knees are straight but not locked.
4. Body weight is distributed equally on both feet.


48 RIFLE SHOOTING
Rifle Shooting Fundamentals.
5. Back is slightly bent, with a slight twist above the waist, to
compensate for the weight of the rifle.
6. Head is erect.
7. Right arm is relaxed.
8. The right hand grasps the grip of the rifle with about as
much pressure as would be used picking up a milk carton.
9. The left arm rests against the rib cage and supports the
weight of the rifle.
10. The rifle rests in the left hand with the fingers relaxed
around the fore-end.
11. The butt of the rifle is positioned against the shoulder so
the rifle sights are at eye level.
Aligning the position (NPA):
1. In standing, major changes to NPA horizontal movement
are done by moving the feet. Minor changes are made by
moving the toes.
2. NPA changes to elevation are accomplished by breath control
or by positioning the feet in the stance wider or narrower.
The positions
discussed here
are described for
a right-handed
shooter. Reverse
for a left-handed
shooter.


RIFLE SHOOTING 49
.Rifle Shooting Fundamentals
Prone Position
The supported position (benchrest or prone) is the steadiest of
the positions. The prone position is the next steadiest because it
uses both elbows and almost all of the body in contact with the
ground to provide a wide area of support.
Position characteristics:
1. The shooter lies facing the target
about 5 to 20 degrees to the right
of the firing position.
2. The left side of the body,
forearm, upper arm, and left leg
form essentially a straight line.
3. The right leg is drawn up with
the lower leg parallel to the
back and the right foot placed
naturally on the ground. This
action shifts the weight to the
left side while raising the
diaphragm off the ground to
help breathing and reduce the
effects of the pulse.
4. The left elbow is extended with
the left arm forming about a
30-degree angle between the
arm and the ground.
5. The rifle fits naturally in the
left hand.
6. The right wrist is straight with
the fingers relaxed.
7. The butt of the rifle is positioned
against the shoulder so the rifle
sights are at eye level.


50 RIFLE SHOOTING
Rifle Shooting Fundamentals.
Aligning the position (NPA):
1. The pivot point in the prone position is the left elbow.
Major changes horizontally are made by shifting the hips
left and right around the left elbow. Minor changes are
made by slight movement with the hips.
2. Major vertical movement is made by moving the hips
forward or back. If using a sling, the sling length can
be changed to lower or raise the position. Make minor
changes vertically with breath control.
Kneeling Position
The kneeling position can be as
steady as the prone position. Many
good shooters in the competitive world shoot
better scores in the kneeling position than they
do in the prone position. This is also a good
position in the field. It is quick to assume and
steadier than standing, and it provides the
clearance necessary to shoot over obstructions
such as tall weeds or brush.
Position characteristics:
1. The shooter sits on the heel of the right foot.
Note: If shooting on a target range at targets, use a kneeling
roll. A kneeling roll is simply a bag filled with sand, rubber,
or other substance that will provide support for the right
ankle. It is placed under the instep of the right foot.
2. The head is erect.
3. The shoulders are almost square to the target (about 25 to 30
degrees to the right).
4. The back is bent slightly forward.
5. The left elbow is placed slightly over the left knee at the flat
spot on the knee.
6. The lower left leg is vertical or slightly forward.
Note: This position places about 70 percent of the body
weight on the rear heel, 20 percent on the left leg, and 10
percent on the right knee.


RIFLE SHOOTING 51
.Rifle Shooting Fundamentals
Aligning the position (NPA):
1. Major horizontal changes are made by pivoting the body
around the right foot (on the kneeling roll if one is used).
Moving the left toe will help make minor changes horizontally.
2. Vertical changes are normally made using breath control or,
if a sling is used, through a combination of breath control
and sling adjustment.
Sitting Position
Sitting is a common position used by high-power
shooters and hunters. It is a stable position because
it uses both elbows combined with a low body
position. For hunters, sitting, like kneeling, provides
more ground clearance than the prone position does.
Position characteristics:
1. The shooter sits on the ground.
2. Legs are extended from the body with ankles
crossed (left over right).
3. Shoulders are almost square to the target (about
15 to 25 degrees to the right).
4. Elbows are placed inside the knees.
5. The back is arched forward.
6. The rifle is placed in the left hand with the fingers relaxed.
7. The right hand grasps the rifle grip (straight wrist).
8. The butt of the stock is placed against the shoulder so that
the rifle sight is at eye level.
Aligning the position (NPA):
1. Major horizontal changes are made by pivoting the position
left or right around the buttocks.
2. Vertical changes are normally made using breath control or,
if a sling is used, through a combination of breath control
and sling adjustment.
Several other
versions of this
position are used
in the field and
by competitive
shooters. This
position gives
the beginning
shooter a starting
foundation.


52 RIFLE SHOOTING
Rifle Shooting Fundamentals.
Firing Your First Shots
Now that you know the basic shooting positions and the
fundamentals of firing a shot, it’s time to get into position
and shoot.
The Supported Position
The supported position (benchrest or sup-
ported prone) is the first position to learn
because it is the steadiest and will give the
best indication of the shot groups (pattern
of shot-holes on the target) that will be
fired. You should start this position from a
table or from the prone position (supported
prone) using sandbags for support.
Sandbags are placed under the fore-end of
the rifle. The support helps hold the rifle
steady so you can maintain concentration.
There are five basic steps in learning
any new shooting position. Use these steps
to learn the supported position.
Step 1—Study the Position. Look at the
position. Learn what a good benchrest
position looks like by studying the pictures
in this pamphlet.
Step 2—Practice the Position Without
the Rifle. Learn to put your feet, legs,
body, and arms in the correct position
by getting into position behind the table,
without the rifle. With the help of the
supervising NRA-certified Rifle Instructor,
do the following.
Position of the body
Position of the rifle
The supported position will support the body so that
you can work on the shooting fundamentals.


RIFLE SHOOTING 53
.Rifle Shooting Fundamentals
Left-handed position
To get into position:
• Take a seat at the table facing the target.
• Place your feet flat on the ground and lean forward, putting
your elbows on the table. Your hips and shoulders should be
aligned so there is no twist in your back.
• Make sure your left hand rests on the sandbag.
• Keep your head vertical and look at the target.
• Your position (without a rifle) should now look like the picture.
Step 3—Practice the Position With the Rifle.
When you are in position and have the feel of it,
add the rifle to the position. Again concentrate
on becoming comfortable and familiar with the
position. With the help of the supervising NRA-
certified Rifle Instructor, do the following.
With the rifle:
• Grasp the rifle grip with your right hand and
rest your left hand on the sandbag.
• Lay the rifle across your left hand and against
the shoulder so that the dominant eye can look
through the sights comfortably and naturally
without tilting the head to the side.
• Your position with the rifle should now look like the picture.
Step 4—Align the Position With the Target. Ask yourself: “Is
the rifle pointed at the target when I relax and look through the
sights?” You are putting NPA to use. If the rifle is not pointed at the
target, move your body left or right using your hand on the support
as a pivot point. Adjust the position so that the rifle points to the
target naturally (NPA). Do not “muscle” the gun to the target. With
the help of the supervising instructor, do the following.
Aligning the position with the target:
• Make vertical adjustments by adjusting the height of the
sandbag support.
• Make horizontal adjustments by moving your body left or
right around the sandbag support on the table.
Step 5—Shoot From the Position. This is the final step in learning
a shooting position because it tests everything you have done. You
are now ready to begin the shooting process with dry firing.


54 RIFLE SHOOTING
Rifle Shooting Fundamentals.
Dry Firing
Shooting an unloaded gun as though it were loaded is a process
called dry firing. All shooters, from the beginner through the
expert marksman, use the technique of dry firing. The best
competition shooters know its value.
To dry fire, the shooter closes the rifle’s action on an empty
chamber, then practices the fundamentals of firing a shot as
though the rifle was loaded. With help from the supervising
instructor, practice dry firing as follows.
• Get into position with your rifle, align your rifle (NPA) to the
target, and make sure that you are comfortable and relaxed.
• When you feel that you are ready, begin aiming and stop
breathing. Concentrate on eliminating the movement of
your aligned sights.
• When everything looks and feels right, slowly squeeze the
trigger straight to the rear until you hear a “click.”
• Keep aiming after you hear the “click” (follow through).
Dry firing several shots will give you a feel for how much
pressure is required to smoothly move the trigger without
disturbing the sight picture. Total concentration on the sight
picture, especially the front sight, is required.
(If you are dry firing a percussion muzzleloader, take steps
to prevent damage to the nipple by placing one or two rubber
or neoprene faucet washers over it. For more on this subject,
see “Muzzleloading Rifles.”)
If attempting to dry fire a rimfire or an air rifle, be sure to
refer to the user’s manual to determine if it can be safely fired
without damaging the gun.
Live Firing
Now try the real thing with live ammunition. Hang a target
backward (no bull’s-eye), or use a blank piece of paper for a
target. Put on your eye and hearing protection. Begin with single
shots on a blank target, followed by shooting three-shot groups.
At this point, you don’t need to worry about where the
groups are on the target. Your only concern should be to keep the
group as small as possible by aiming at the center of the blank
target. If you scatter your shots, check to make sure your sights
are tight and that your barrel and action are correctly mounted
into the stock. If the sights are tight and the action is correctly
mounted, then do more dry firing and review the fundamentals.
The best way
to learn the
fundamentals of
firing a shot is
to begin with
a dry run.


RIFLE SHOOTING 55
.Rifle Shooting Fundamentals
After you have a good feel for the rifle and are comfortable
with the fundamentals, hang a target correctly with the bull’s-eye
facing forward. Shoot another three-shot group.
Continue shooting three-shot groups. When all three shots
in your group can be covered by a quarter, adjust the sights to
center the group on the target.
Sight Adjustment (Zeroing the Rifle)
Once you are shooting good groups with shots placed close
together, you are ready to adjust your sights to move the shot
group to the center of the target. The adjustment is made by
moving the reticle or rear sight in the same direction you want to
move your group. Another way to look at it is to “move your rear
sight to the center of the target.” For example, if your shot group
is high and left, move the rear sight down and to the right.
Most adjustment knobs are marked to show which way
to move a shot in a particular direction. The instructions
furnished with most sights will tell how far one click or degree
of sight adjustment should move a shot a specific direction. The
supervising instructor will also explain how to move sights that
require tools such as a screwdriver.
Test your calculations by firing another group. The goal is to
have the center of the group in the center of the target. Continue
making finer adjustments until the group is in the center of the
target. Also, remember that different ammunition, shoot-
ing distances, and shooting positions can change the
zero and therefore require additional sight adjust-
ments. When you can shoot the groups in the
middle of the target, move up to shooting five-shot
groups that are centered on the target.
After Firing
Shooting is not over after the last shot is fired.
After your last shot is fired and the range is
declared safe, it is important to clean your
firing point (pick up expended brass and all
trash). If you are shooting your own firearm,
clean it before you put the gun away. If you
are using a borrowed gun, return it to the
owner clean, or follow the rules of your
summer camp or range. (Some programs
might not want you to clean the gun because
they clean their guns at the end of the day.)
Try not to evaluate
the shot groups
by the scoring
rings on the
target. The size
of the groups, no
matter where they
are on the target,
will show how
well you have
applied the
fundamentals of
rifle shooting.
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
9 8 7 69876
The shot group in the center ring
shows the results of zeroing the rifle.
The first group of shots fired hit at
2 o’clock in the 8 ring, so the rear
sight was adjusted down and to
the left.


56 RIFLE SHOOTING
Rifle Shooting Fundamentals.
Shooting Hygiene
It is a good practice to not eat or drink when shooting. You
should wash your hands and face with cold water after you
shoot. Cold water does not open the pores of your skin like hot
water will. It is also a good idea to change your clothes if you
shoot for hours at a time. This is especially important in indoor
ranges where lead dust tends to settle everywhere. On outdoor
ranges, dirt, dust, and the oils from your rifle and ammunition
are good reasons for practicing good hygiene and keeping
yourself clean. Remember, a Scout is clean.
Shooting Etiquette
As a shooter in the 21st century, you face many challenges.
Increasing urbanization, less available hunting land and fewer
shooting ranges, and a growing anti-shooting sentiment make
what you do as a shooter more visible to the public. Observing
good etiquette and being a responsible shooter is an attitude that
starts when you are first learning to shoot. All shooters need to act
responsibly if the sport is to continue to grow. If all act responsibly,
the sport will be preserved for future generations to enjoy.
As a shooter, you have a responsibility for safety and cour-
tesy toward others. Shooters are among the most polite and
responsible people of any sport. As a new shooter, you need
to observe some “rules of etiquette”: Remember to keep your
voice low or not talk while others are shooting, immediately
obey range commands, and always clean up your firing point.
Not only does etiquette apply as you are learning to shoot, it
becomes more important as you grow in the shooting sport(s) of
your choice. In hunting, for example, etiquette requires many
of the things you have learned as a Scout. Try to leave both
public and private lands in better condition than you found them.
Remember the last time you walked your favorite trail and noticed
cans and candy wrappers littering the ground? Responsible hunters
know that litter is both ugly and environmentally destructive.
If you choose competitive shooting, you will quickly learn
that being polite will help you shoot. You can offer to let another
shooter share your shooting point and use your shooting mat
and spotting scope. Not only is this polite, it keeps you from
dragging your gear to and from the firing line. Offering to help
the tournament sponsor can benefit you because you will learn
how tournaments are conducted and you will be able to observe
the good shooters and how they handle themselves.
If you don’t
practice good
hygiene, you
increase your
chances of
ingesting the lead
dust and raising
the lead content
in your body.


RIFLE SHOOTING 57
.Rifle Shooting Fundamentals
Scoring
When you have answered the questions and done the demon-
strations called for in the requirements, you are ready for your
shooting to be scored. The gun, the targets, and the distances
vary in the options offered for the cartridge rifle, the air rifle, and
the muzzleloader.
All shooting required for this merit badge is done from the
supported benchrest or supported prone position. The objective
of shooting is to place all your shots in one hole or get them as
close together as possible. This is called group shooting.
Look at the qualifying scores in the requirements for this
merit badge. The requirement for the minimum score using the
rifle of your choice (.22-caliber or air rifle) is to fire five groups of
three shots per group that can be covered by a quarter-sized ring.
Using these targets, explain how to adjust the sights to zero a
rifle. Then adjust the sights to zero and shoot another five groups
with five shots in each group that can be covered by a quarter-
sized ring, each shot meeting the specified minimum score.
Individual shots score by touching a scoring ring area. Keep
in mind that the bullet will push the paper in as it goes through
the target. The hole in the target will be smaller than the actual
bullet. You may need a scoring gauge or plug (a special metal
gauge with plastic magnifier), which is inserted into the shot
hole to accurately measure if the shot touched the scoring ring.
Remember that shots are scored inward; that is, the shot hole is
measured toward the center of the target.
Shot on a target
in a scoring area,
but not touching
a scoring ring
Shot on a target
touching a
scoring ring
If it is not practical to adjust the sights of the rifle (i.e.,
when using a borrowed fixed-sight rifle), you may
demonstrate skill in shooting fundamentals by shoot-
ing five shot groups (five shots per group) that can be
covered by a quarter or touched by a quarter, and then
explain how to adjust the sights to zero the rifle used.


58 RIFLE SHOOTING
Muzzleloading Rifles.
Muzzleloading Rifles
Much of the material in the earlier chapters of this pamphlet
applies equally to all shooters. The material is not repeated in
this chapter. Anyone involved in muzzleloading should read it.
Muzzleloading Firearms: Background
Until the introduction of cartridge firearms in the 1800s, most
firearms were loaded from the muzzle. Rifles that are loaded from
the muzzle are called muzzleloading rifles or muzzleloaders.
The firearm came from a discovery made more than 500 years
ago. It was found that when a highly combustible material was
confined and then lighted, the burning material created enough
energy to send a projectile over long distances. This was the
discovery of the basic firearm design.
The earliest firearms were crude and unpredictable. But, to
the credit of their inventors, many of the major parts developed in
the 15th century are still used today. Since their inception, firearms
have consisted of three basic parts—the lock (the firing mecha-
nism), the stock (the handle by which the gun is held), and the
barrel (the hollow tube through which the projectile travels on its
way to the target). These parts are discussed in greater detail below.
The evolution of the muzzleloading rifle spanned four
centuries, over four basic phases: the matchlock, the wheel lock,
the flintlock, and the percussion lock.
The Matchlock
The matchlock is one of the earliest types
of muzzleloading firearms. The name
comes from a wicklike piece of material
(called a match) that is lit before the gun is
fired. When the trigger is pulled, the smol-
dering match is lowered into the priming
pan (or simply “pan”) containing loose
TOUCHHOLE
MATCH
Matchlock action
MATCHHOLDER
PAN
COVER
PANTRIGGER
LEVER


RIFLE SHOOTING 59
.Muzzleloading Rifles
gunpowder. The loose powder in the pan is called a priming
charge. In ideal conditions, the match ignites the priming charge.
There is a very small hole between the inside of the barrel
and the pan, called a flashhole or flash channel. The burning
priming charge “flashes” through this hole and ignites the powder
charge that has been loaded into the barrel through the muzzle.
The ignition of the powder forces a ball of shot out of the muzzle
with great velocity.
The Wheel Lock
The successor to the matchlock was the wheel
lock. It gets its name from a spinning wheel that
makes a shower of sparks when a piece of pyrite
(a spark-producing material) is brought into
contact with it. The shower of sparks ignites the
priming charge. The burning priming charge, in
turn, ignites the powder charge in the barrel,
which pushes the projectile out the barrel.
The Flintlock
The next major step took place in the late
1600s with the development of the flintlock.
With flintlocks, a piece of flint is secured
between the jaws of the cock, or hammer as
it is commonly called. The priming pan has
a spring-loaded cover to protect the priming
charge from getting wet. This cover is called
a frizzen, and the upright steel striking plate at
the rear of the frizzen is called the frizzen face.
Like the pyrite used on the wheel lock,
the flint produces a shower of sparks when
it strikes the frizzen face. When the trigger is
Through history, shooters using this kind of firearm may have been excused
for keeping their fingers crossed. If the priming powder got wet or the
lighted match were put out, the gun would not fire. Weather conditions had
to be perfect for a matchlock to operate properly. American colonists used
matchlocks. Their use continued in Europe until the advent of the flintlock.
PYRITE
DOG
SERRATED
WHEEL
PAN COVER
TRIGGER
Wheel lock action
FRIZZEN
FACE
FRIZZEN
FRIZZEN
SPRINGLOCK PLATE PAN
Flintlock action
HAMMER
HAMMER
JAWS
TOP JAW SCREW FLINT
The matchlock, wheel lock, and flintlock black-powder
rifles are NOT approved for use in any Scouting program.


60 RIFLE SHOOTING
Muzzleloading Rifles.
pulled, the hammer snaps forward, striking the flint
against the frizzen face, creating the sparks.
As the flint contacts the frizzen face, the spring-loaded
frizzen pops open, exposing the priming charge, which
is ignited by the shower of sparks. The burning priming
charge, in turn, ignites the powder charge in the barrel,
which pushes the projectile out the barrel.
The Percussion Muzzleloader
The next major advancement in muzzleloaders took place in the
early 1800s. During this era a compound called fulminate of
mercury began to replace flints and black powder as a priming
agent. This compound is contained in a small metal cup called a
percussion cap. When the firearm’s hammer strikes the cap, the
compound ignites, setting off the powder charge. Percussion
caps were the forerunner to the modern cartridge primer.
Today the matchlock and the wheel lock are generally
found as museum pieces or in the hands of collectors. They are
so cumbersome and impractical that few shooters are interested
in them beyond their historical value or as collectors’ items.
Flintlock and percussion muzzleloaders are alive and well.
There are many original muzzleloading firearms still being fired
today. The popularity of flintlock and percussion firearms is
great enough for manufacturers to make reproductions. These
can be found in many sporting goods stores.
Cap lock action
Percussion cap
FLASHHOLE
BARREL
BREECHPLUG
TANG (ATTACHES THE ACTION TO THE STOCK)
NIPPLEDRUM The barrel is secured to the
stock by “keys” or pins
through the stock.CUTAWAY OF THE UNDERSIDE OF A TYPICAL
PERCUSSION BARREL


RIFLE SHOOTING 61
.Muzzleloading Rifles
Pennsylvania long
rifle, a full-stock
firearm also known
as the Kentucky rifle
A musket, a military-style firearm
Half-stock mountain rifle, a shorter,
more easily portable design. The
ever-popular Hawken-type rifles are
included in this category.
Popular styles of muzzleloading rifles


62 RIFLE SHOOTING
Muzzleloading Rifles.
In-line rifles are a recent development. They are popular with
hunters because the nipple (the seat on which a percussion cap is
placed and detonated) and percussion cap are covered and thus
protected from moisture, rain, and snow. Although they look like
modern rifles, they function like any other muzzleloading rifle.
Lock, Stock, and Barrel
You may have heard the expression, “Lock, stock, and barrel”
frequently. Today it refers to the total of many parts. It’s an old
expression. Our forebears used it to emphasize completeness.
The fact that the rifle was the source of this old saying gives you
some idea of the important role firearms played in America’s
early history.
The lock of the muzzleloading rifle is the part that ignites the
powder charge, causing the gun to fire. In today’s muzzleloading
reproductions, the source of ignition depends on whether the gun
is a percussion or a flintlock model.
In the percussion rifle, ignition is caused by the action of the
cock, or hammer, striking the percussion cap. The cap contains
a combustible priming substance that produces a very hot spark
when struck and causes
the powder charge to ignite.
Pulling the trigger causes the
lock to “trip,” thus setting off
the desired chain reaction
necessary for firing.
Most muzzleloading
rifles have only a simple,
single trigger. To fire, slowly
and smoothly press the
trigger straight to the rear
until the hammer is released.
HAMMER
NIPPLE
LOCK PLATE
Percussion lock plate, hammer, and nipple
In-line percussion
muzzleloading rifle
In-line rifles get
their name from
the fact that their
percussion lock
mechanism is
placed behind
and in line with
the barrel, rather
than alongside it.


RIFLE SHOOTING 63
.Muzzleloading Rifles
Some rifles have what is known as a single-set trigger.
The rifle has only one trigger, but after cocking the hammer,
push forward on the trigger until you hear a click. The trigger
is now set, and only a very slight finger pressure on the trigger
is required to fire the rifle. Single-set triggers can also be fired
by simply squeezing to the rear without first setting the trigger,
although considerably more pressure will be required on the
trigger before it releases the hammer.
Some muzzleloading rifles are equipped with two triggers.
This type of trigger mechanism is called a double-set trigger.
After cocking, pulling the rear trigger causes the front trigger to
be set. Only very slight finger pressure on the front trigger will
then release the hammer and fire the rifle. The rifle may also
be fired by pulling only the front trigger, although considerably
more finger pressure will be required.
The stock is the handle by which the rifle is held. Stocks
come in a variety of shapes and sizes designed to allow secure
holding and handling under various shooting conditions.
Each area of the stock has a special name. Here is a review
of terms.
• The butt is the part that is placed against the shoulder.
• The wrist is the area where the hand grasps the stock in
order to pull the trigger.
• The comb is the top portion of the stock against which the
shooter’s cheek rests when the gun is held properly.
• The forearm is the front portion of the stock, which extends
under the barrel.
• The barrel is the hollow metal tube through which the
projectile passes when the rifle is fired. To review
(see “Rifle Parts”):
• The breech is the rear-most end of the barrel. It is closed
by a screwed-in part called the breechplug.
• The bore is the hollow space that runs the length of the
center of the barrel. The diameter of this hole is measured in
fractions of an inch or in millimeters. This measurement is
called the caliber. A .50-caliber (read as “fifty caliber”) rifle
has a bore of 50 one-hundredths of an inch, or one-half inch.
• The muzzle is the end of the barrel through which the
projectile leaves the rifle. On muzzleloading rifles, it is also
the end from which the rifle is loaded.


64 RIFLE SHOOTING
Muzzleloading Rifles.
• Rifling is a series of spiral grooves cut on the inside of the bar-
rel that imparts a spin to the projectile as it passes through the
barrel. This improves the stability of the projectile and promotes
accuracy in the same way that spiraling a football makes it more
accurate. Spinning a bullet (or a football) helps to keep it on its
intended path. Most muzzleloaders have rifled barrels.
The Powder Charge
The powder used in muzzleloading rifles is referred to as black
powder. Black powder is a simple mixture of chemicals that are
easily obtained from natural sources. Although it looks similar,
black powder is drastically different from the powder used in
modern cartridges. The powder used in modern cartridges pro-
duces significantly more pressure than black powder and is never
safe to use in muzzleloading rifles in any amount.
Actual black powder is NOT authorized for use by Scouting
America. Only commercially manufactured black-powder
substitute (like Pyrodex®) offered for sale by a reputable firm
should be used in muzzleloading rifles. Pyrodex® produces
nearly identical pressure, bullet velocity, smoke, and noise. It
may be used safely as a powder charge in percussion rifles. It
is not recommended for use in flintlock rifles because of its
difficulty of ignition.
Fine granulations of powder burn quicker than do coarse
ones. Rifles with a large bore (.50 caliber and greater) need
slow-burning, coarse-grain powder. Rifles with bores less than
.50 caliber need somewhat faster burning powder.
Black powder is gunpowder that burns explosively, and
special safety precautions must be observed whenever handling,
transporting, or storing it. Because it is vulnerable to sparks and
heat, black powder should be kept in a tightly sealed container.
The 1-pound metal container it comes in is ideal. Do not use glass
or plastic containers. The container must be stored away from heat.
In some areas, there are local ordinances covering storage proce-
dures for black powder. Carefully follow any laws in your area.
When you pour black powder from its container into a
powder horn or flask, you must do so in an open, well-venti-
lated area. Never use an imitation horn (made of plastic) to
store black powder. Static electricity can be generated and
cause ignition. Never let anyone smoke near where you are
handling black powder. Percussion caps and flints should be
stored separately from black powder.
Black powder was
first used around
a.d. 1200 as
a charge for
rock-throwing
cannons. It is
still essentially
unchanged after
800 years.


RIFLE SHOOTING 65
.Muzzleloading Rifles
The Projectile
Most muzzleloading rifles are designed to fire a projectile known
as a ball (sometimes called a round ball). Other muzzleloaders,
particularly muskets, fire conical bullets or minié balls. There
are also several new types of projectiles that can be fired in
a muzzleloading rifle and are used primarily for hunting.
A ball is simply a sphere of pure, soft lead. Usually, there
is a slight projection on the ball left from the hole in the mold
through which the lead was poured. This projection is called
a sprue. Properly sized round balls are slightly smaller
than the bore itself. Therefore, they require the use of
a cloth patch wrapped around them to seal the gas
from the burning powder behind them. The patch also
fills the rifling and grips the ball so that the rifling is
able to impart a spin on the ball.
Black powder usable in muzzleloading rifles will be found in
four granulations:
Fg Coarse-grain powder used in rifles of .75 caliber or larger.
FFg Medium-grain powder used in large rifles (.50-.75 caliber).
FFFg Used in small rifles (under .50 caliber), this is the finest-grain
black powder safe for use as a powder charge.
FFFFg This extra fine-grain powder should be used only for priming
flintlocks and never as a main charge.
Balls are highly accurate at short ranges and are
preferred by target shooters and small-game hunters.
SPRUEPATCH
Ball
Fg FFg FFFg FFFFg Pyrodex


66 RIFLE SHOOTING
Muzzleloading Rifles.
A minié ball is a soft lead bullet with a hollow base. The
base has a thin skirt that is designed to expand when the hot
gases from the burning powder push against it. This skirt fills the
rifling and seals the gas behind the minié ball. Since the skirt fills
the rifling, no patch is needed. The minié ball gets its name from
its inventor, French army captain Claude Minié, who developed it
in the mid-1800s as an improvement over the round ball.
A conical bullet (sometimes called a solid-base conical) is
a soft lead bullet with a solid base and two or more bands at the
rear. These bands are slightly larger in diameter than the bullet
itself. When the bullet is loaded, the bands cut into the rifling,
sealing the base of the bullet and allowing the rifling to spin the
bullet as it travels down the barrel. No patch is used with the
conical bullet. It was designed as a further improvement over the
minié ball. Conical bullets retain their energy over longer ranges
than do round balls. Conical bullets are preferred for long-range
shooting and hunting big game.
Loading a Muzzleloading Rifle
Put a cartridge into a modern rifle’s chamber, and it’s ready to
fire. The steps involved in loading a muzzleloader are consider-
ably more involved. Special equipment and supplies are
needed, both for loading and for cleaning the gun. These will
be introduced as each step is described.
Until you gain more practice, always have an experienced
muzzleloading shooter or instructor with you when you are
loading and shooting a muzzleloading rifle. This person can
help with any problems you might encounter or questions
you may have. Learning with the guidance of an experienced
shooter makes learning easier, safer, and more fun.
Load at least
10 feet from the
firing line to avoid
sparks from
others shooting.
Depending on whether the rifle is designed to fire round balls, minié
balls, or conical bullets, you will find the loading instructions slightly
different. Regardless of the kind of projectile, however, the same
step-by-step method must always be followed.
The basic steps in loading a muzzleloader are as follows:
• Clear the barrel.
• Measure the powder charge.
• Charge the barrel (pour the powder into the barrel).
• Seat the projectile.
• Prime the rifle.
BANDS
SOLID
BASE
Conical bullet
SKIRTBASE
Minié ball


RIFLE SHOOTING 67
.Muzzleloading Rifles
The rules of gun safety that you learned earlier in this pamphlet apply to all
firearms, including muzzleloaders. Also, there are some extremely important safety
rules that you must follow when loading and shooting muzzleloading rifles.
Safety Rules for Loading
and Firing Muzzleloaders
• Always keep the gun pointed in a safe direction.
• Always keep your finger off the trigger until you are ready to shoot.
• Always keep the gun unloaded until ready to use.
• Know how the rifle operates before handling it.
• Know the target and what is beyond.
• Always wear eye and hearing protection.
• Wear a long-sleeved shirt or jacket and a hat made of natural fibers.
Long sleeves and a hat will protect your skin from injury caused by
sparks produced by the priming charge. It’s important to wear clothing
made from natural fibers (such as cotton or wool) for two reasons. First,
synthetics, such as nylon, melt and stick to the skin when they burn,
which can cause severe burns to the skin. Second, synthetics can also
produce sparks from static electricity, which can ignite black powder.
Items needed for shooting muzzleloading rifles, identified by number: (1) priming
horn, (2) percussion caps, (3) patch material, (4) ball starter, (5) pregreased patches,
(6) powder horn, (7) loading rod, (8) patch lubricant, (9) powder measure, (10) clean-
ing patches, (11) cleaning jag, (12) patch puller, (13) ball puller, (14) soft lead balls,
(15) powder flask, (16) possible bag, (17) eye protection, (18) nipple pick, (19) ear
plugs and case, (20) patch knife, (21) ear muffs, (22) nipple wrench.
1
2 3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
1112
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21 22


68 RIFLE SHOOTING
Muzzleloading Rifles.
Before loading, be sure to read and follow the manufacturer’s
instructions and loading recommendations for the rifle. Use the
following steps as a general guide.
Step 1—Position the rifle for loading. Stand the rifle on
the ground between your legs, with the muzzle pointed up
and away from your body. When holding the rifle as shown,
the arm used to hold the rifle should be extended enough to
ensure that the muzzle is kept pointing up and away from the
body. Never work directly over the muzzle.
On a percussion rifle, pull the hammer back slowly until
you hear the first click and leave the ham-
mer in this position. This should be about
halfway between the down and full-cock
positions. This halfway position is called
half-cock. The nipple should not have
a cap on it.
Step 2—Check the bore for a load or obstruc-
tion. Stored beneath the barrel of a muzzleloading
rifle is a long stick called a ramrod. Draw the ramrod out of the
thimbles that secure it and insert it all the way into the
barrel, keeping your fingers from being directly over
the bore. Mark the ramrod where it exits the
barrel, using a pencil or by holding the ramrod
between your thumb and forefinger. Remove
the ramrod and place it alongside the barrel
with the mark (or your thumb and finger)
even with the muzzle. The tip of the ramrod
should come very close to the nipple or flash-
hole. If the ramrod does not reach the nipple or
flashhole, the gun may already be loaded! If
there is any indication that the gun is loaded,
have an experienced muzzleloading shooter or
a gunsmith remove the load for you.
Some ranges have special loading racks for muzzle-
loading rifles that hold the rifle upright while it is
being loaded. If you use one of these racks, be sure to
properly position the rifle so that it is held securely and
kept pointed in a safe up-and-away direction.
Position the rifle
for loading.
Percussion rifle on half-cock
Check the bore for a load.


RIFLE SHOOTING 69
.Muzzleloading Rifles
Once you are certain that the rifle is unloaded and the
bore is clear, insert the ramrod down the barrel again as you
did above. Now, permanently mark the ramrod where it exits
the muzzle. Use a permanent marker or a pencil. Do not cut
a notch into the ramrod, as this could weaken it, causing it to
break and severely injure your hand.
With the ramrod permanently marked, you have a quick
reference to determine whether the barrel is empty. Simply
insert the ramrod into the barrel. If the mark is ever above the
muzzle, you know that the bore is obstructed.
Step 3—Wipe and clean the barrel. Use your ramrod to run
a clean patch up and down the bore. This will remove any
excess oil from the bore that might interfere with ignition.
With a percussion rifle, you may dry and clean the flash
channel by firing two or three percussion caps on the nipple.
Move to the firing line to do this. Wear eye and hearing
protection. Be sure the range officer has
approved your firing caps. Make sure the
muzzle is pointed down range. When you
fire the last of these caps, point the muzzle
at a blade of grass or other lightweight
object. If the object moves upon firing, you
are assured that the channel is open.
Step 4—Measure the powder charge.
Always use a powder measure. The
powder measure helps assure the correct
and precise amount of powder in loading.
Fill your powder measure to the appropriate
level from the original can or your horn or
flask. The gun’s manufacturer can provide
the recommended powder charge for that
particular firearm. Never exceed the
factory-recommended loading.
Never try to clear an old load by firing it.
You have no way of knowing what was
loaded into the barrel.
Measure against
the outside of
the barrel.
Make sure the ramrod is against the
face of the breechplug.
Wipe and clean the barrel.


70 RIFLE SHOOTING
Muzzleloading Rifles.
Some powder measures have a fixed capacity,
while others are adjustable. Always be certain
that you have the correct measure or that it is
adjusted properly.
Powder charges are measured by weight in grains.
A grain equals 1/7000 of a pound. The general rule is
to use one grain of powder per caliber. In other words,
an appropriate load for a .45-caliber rifle would be
45 grains of powder.
In casual shooting, you may want to use a
reduced load. This will result in less recoil and noise
and will make for a more comfortable and economical
shot, with little or no effect on accuracy at close range.
You may safely use as little as 35 grains of powder. As always, fol-
low the manufacturer’s recommendations.
Never pour powder directly from a powder horn or flash
into the barrel. The inaccurate charge will result in inaccurate
shooting, and if a spark remains in the barrel from a previous
shot, an extremely dangerous explosion will occur.
Once you have measured the powder charge from the can,
powder horn, or flask, remember to close the container. This is
standard procedure for black-powder handling and an important
safety rule.
Step 5—Charge the barrel. Holding the rifle in the loading
position, use the powder measure to slowly pour powder
down the muzzle into the barrel. This procedure is known as
charging the barrel. To make sure that all the powder falls
down to the bottom rather than clinging to the side, tap the
side of the barrel several times with the heel of your hand.
Be careful not to knock or tap against a hard object. Tapping
the side of the barrel with your hand by the lock also
distributes some of the powder charge into the drum
(the part that holds the nipple) on a percussion rifle,
making ignition more reliable.
Scouting America
policy requires that
Scouts do
not exceed a
load of one grain
per caliber.
Always use a powder
measure to measure the
powder charge.
POWDER
MEASURE
Charge the barrel.
If you are not shooting a patched round ball,
go to step 8.


RIFLE SHOOTING 71
.Muzzleloading Rifles
Step 6—Prepare the patch. As previously mentioned, round
balls require the use of a patch. Not just any material can be
used for a patch. A patch must be either 100 percent cotton or
linen. The hot gases produced by the burning powder can melt
synthetic materials. This can let gases blow past the ball while it
is in the barrel, significantly reducing its velocity and accuracy.
A synthetic material can also smolder in the barrel for a long
time—creating a safety hazard when the next charge is poured—
and it can be a severe fire hazard when it hits the ground.
The first step is to lubricate, or grease, the patch. Lubrication
makes it easier to load the ball, provides a better gas seal, and
makes the residue from the burning powder left in the barrel after
the shot easier to clean. (This residue is called fouling.) Special
lubricants specifically designed for this purpose are available.
You can also use common cooking shortening.
If you are going to shoot immediately after loading, you
may use a spit patch. A spit patch is lubricated with your own
saliva. Just spit on the patch and work the saliva into the fabric.
(Safety note: Be sure to spit on the patch rather than bringing
the patch to your mouth and licking it. You will have powder,
chemicals, and possibly lead on your fingers that you do not
want to ingest.)
Step 7—Patch the ball. Place the lubricated patch squarely
over the muzzle. Center a single ball directly over the patch with
the sprue facing up.
Patches are also
available that are
prelubricated
and precut to a
specific caliber.
To lubricate the patch, put a small amount of lubricant on your thumb and
forefinger. Hold the patch between your thumb and forefinger, and work
the lubricant into the fabric. The lubricant should be totally absorbed into
the fabric. If any globs remain on the fabric, wipe them off. It is a good idea
to prepare ahead of time as many patches as you think you will need. That
way, your hands won’t be greasy and slippery as you load and shoot.
A spit patch must be fired immediately. Leaving it in the
barrel, even for just a few minutes, can put a rust ring
in the bore and cause serious damage. Patch the ball.


72 RIFLE SHOOTING
Muzzleloading Rifles.
Step 8—Prepare the projectile. (Note: If you are
using a patched round ball, skip this step.) Minié balls
and conical bullets need to be lubricated before they are
loaded. Minié balls need only a very thin coat around
the skirt and sides. The base may also be filled with
grease to soften the fouling (see step 6), but too much
grease in the base of the bullet can severely affect the
bullet’s stability on its way to the target.
If you are using a conical bullet, the space between
the bands on the bullet must be completely filled
with lubricant.
Step 9—Start the projectile. To start the ball or bullet, you
need a special tool called a starter (sometimes called a ball-starter
or short-starter). The starter has a wooden handle with two short
rods protruding from it. The first rod is only about half an inch
long. The second one is usually about 4 to 6 inches long.
Place the bullet’s flat base directly into the muzzle and push it
in as far as you can using just finger pressure, being careful to push
it in straight. (Proper placement of the patched ball was described
in step 7.) Place the shorter of the two rods on top of the bullet or
ball and give it a sharp strike with the heel of your hand, driving
it into the barrel flush with the muzzle. If you are using a patched
ball, this will also wrap the patch tightly around the ball.
Step 10—Trim the patch. If you are using a precut patch or
a bullet, this step will not be necessary. Otherwise, use a knife
to remove any excess patch material protruding from
the muzzle. Be careful not to scrape the muzzle with
the knife.
Step 11—Short-start the projectile. Using the longer
of the two rods on the starter, place the tip of it on the
projectile. Drive the projectile into the barrel by tapping
the wooden handle with the heel of your hand until the
handle is at the muzzle. Remove the starter from the
barrel and set it aside.
Start the ball and patch.
Short-start the projectile.


RIFLE SHOOTING 73
.Muzzleloading Rifles
Step 12—Seat the projectile. Retrieve the ramrod. Place
it into the muzzle, and grasp it no more than 8 to 10 inches
above the muzzle. (Safety note: Grasping the ramrod further
up might cause it to break, and you could stab your hand with
the jagged, broken rod protruding from the barrel.) Push the
ramrod down until your hand is at or near the muzzle. Again
grasp the ramrod 8 to 10 inches above the muzzle and repeat
this procedure until the projectile is firmly seated against the
powder charge. You should encounter only slight resistance
while you are pushing the projectile down the bore.
Safety note: It is vital that the projectile be seated firmly
against the powder charge with no air space between the pow-
der charge and the projectile. This is one of the most important
safety precautions in shooting a muzzleloading rifle. Failure to
properly seat the projectile can create a dangerous situation.
If you are always going to use the same load (the same
amount of powder and the same type of projectile), you may
want to mark your ramrod where it is flush with the muzzle
while the tip of it rests on top of the load. You will then have
two marks on your ramrod: one that shows when the barrel
is empty, and one that shows when the projectile is properly
seated on the powder charge.
If for any reason the projectile will not go down the bar-
rel or seat firmly against the powder charge, it will have to be
removed and the powder charge cleared. The procedure for
removing a projectile is covered later in this chapter. Never
attempt to fire a load that is not firmly seated.
Step 13—Cap the rifle. The final step in the loading proce-
dure is to place a cap on the nipple. This should be done only
when you are on the firing line and ready to fire. With the
hammer still at half-cock, use a capper to place a percussion
cap on the nipple. Be sure to seat it all the way down.
This is a general guideline. The steps to follow for any
particular rifle can be found in the instructions provided by
the manufacturer.
Now you are ready to shoot!
Seat the projectile.
Mark the ramrod.
BALL
TANG BREECHPLUG
BARREL
POWDER PATCH
Cap the cap lock.
Cutaway showing proper seating
of ball against powder


74 RIFLE SHOOTING
Muzzleloading Rifles.
Failure to Fire
Even if you have followed all of the steps carefully, the muzzle-
loader might not fire. You might just hear a “click,” or the cap
may fire, but nothing else happens.
If the gun fails to fire, keep it pointed in a safe direction and
against your shoulder for at least two minutes. Sometimes
the powder charge will smolder for a few seconds, or as long as
a minute or two, before igniting. This perceptible delay in the
ignition of the powder charge is called a hangfire. When you
have waited two minutes and have reduced the chance that a
hangfire will happen, you may begin diagnosing the problem.
If the percussion cap did not ignite, remove it from the
nipple, dispose of it properly, and wipe any visible debris off the
tip of the nipple. Recap using a fresh cap, making sure to seat
it all the way down on the nipple. Failure to seat the cap all the
way down on the nipple is the most common cause for a cap
failing to ignite.
One of the most common causes of a misfire is a blocked
flash channel. Run a fine wire through the nipple to make sure
the channel is open. Then recap and try again.
Still no luck? The problem could be that there is no powder
behind the ball. You might have forgotten to put in a powder
charge. This is one reason for carefully following the same loading
procedure every time. Let nothing distract you when you are
loading. Remember: “First the powder, then the ball, or your gun
won’t shoot at all.”
In a percussion gun, the problem of having no powder
charge can be remedied by removing the nipple with a nipple
wrench. (Work with your counselor in removing the nipple
until you become proficient.) Once the channel is exposed,
you can work enough powder behind the ball to enable firing.
Reinstall the nipple, then reseat the ball with the ramrod. When
you cap and fire this time, the ball probably will be expelled. If
not, repeat the entire process, making sure, again, that the ball
is reseated. If this will not work, you may need to pull the ball.
Be sure to keep the gun pointed in a safe
direction during this entire process of
diagnosis and projectile removal.


RIFLE SHOOTING 75
.Muzzleloading Rifles
Removing a Projectile
The simplest and safest way to remove a projectile is to use a
carbon dioxide discharger. This device uses a common carbon
dioxide cartridge attached to special adapters that fit over the
nipple of a percussion rifle or into the flash channel of a flintlock.
The projectile is discharged by the pressurized carbon dioxide.
Keep the rifle aimed at a safe backstop and carefully follow the
manufacturer’s directions. Be sure to clean the barrel after the
projectile has been removed and before reloading.
If you pull the ball manually, you must first deactivate
the powder. There are several methods to do this. If your rifle
has a removable barrel, remove it from the stock. Remove the
nipple or flash channel liner and place the breech-end of the
barrel in a bucket with at least 8 inches of water in it. Let the
barrel soak for a minimum of one hour. After letting the barrel
soak, you may also want to pour a small amount of water down
the barrel to loosen any fouling in front of the projectile. This
will make removal easier.
If your rifle’s barrel cannot be removed, remove the nipple
or flash channel liner, lay the gun horizontal or muzzle-down—
ensuring that it is kept pointed in a safe direction—and fill the area
behind the projectile with water. Let it soak for at least one hour.
It is preferable to use a work-rod with a T-handle so that
you can place the “T” in the crotch of a tree or a vise, and
pull the barrel toward you to remove the projectile. It is also
sometimes possible to wrap a heavy leather thong around the
work-rod, securing it with several clove-hitches, and wrap the
other end around a tree or a stout post. You can then pull the
barrel toward you to remove the projectile. Once the projectile
has been removed, clean the barrel and reload. If the ball
cannot be removed in this manner, take the firearm to a
competent gunsmith.
You must take
care when using
a carbon dioxide
discharger device,
as the projectile
is expelled with
great force.
Pulling the ball requires special tools. Most ramrods are not strong enough
to pull a projectile from the barrel. A heavier rod, called a work-rod,
should be used. An attachment that looks like a tapping screw, called the
ball-puller, is attached to the end of the work-rod. Attach the ball-puller
to your work-rod, push it down firmly against the ball, and screw the
ball-puller into it.


76 RIFLE SHOOTING
Muzzleloading Rifles.
WORK-ROD WITH BALL-PULLER
BARREL
BALL BEING PULLED
Cutaway showing how a ball-puller is used to remove a ball from a barrel
PATCH
Wiping the Bore
After firing, wait a minute before reloading to allow any sparks
remaining in the barrel to burn out. Each time you fire a muzzle-
loading rifle, carbonlike residue is left in the barrel. After several
shots this residue (fouling) can become so heavy that the gun
will be hard to load. It can cause a ball to become stuck in the
barrel during the loading process. For this reason, it’s best to
wipe out the barrel each time you fire a shot.
Wiping is easily done. A cleaning jag of correct size must
be attached to the rod. Simply dampen a single cleaning patch—
making sure the patch-jag combination is sized properly for a
tight fit—and push it down the length of the bore several times.
Then repeat this procedure with a clean, dry patch. Now you are
ready for reloading a clean gun. Wiping between shots ensures
that no sparks are left glowing in the bore from the previous shot,
and accuracy is usually better if the bore is wiped between shots.
Caring for Your Gun
Much of the information in the “Care of Your Rifle” chapter
can be applied to the care of a muzzleloader. But caring for
a muzzleloader requires a few special steps.
You can protect your muzzleloader by following a basic
rule: Never leave your rifle overnight without a thorough
cleaning after shooting. A simple solution of hot water and
any conventional dishwashing soap or a bottle of cleaning
solvent are virtually all you need to keep your gun free of
harmful agents.
Commercial
black-powder
solvents are
effective in
removing residue.
The gun must
also be lubricated
frequently to
protect its moving
and stationary
metal parts.


RIFLE SHOOTING 77
.Muzzleloading Rifles
Cleaning the Barrel
Muzzleloading rifles come in two styles. On one, the barrel can be removed
from the standing breech. This is called the hooked breech design. In the
second variety, the barrel, breech, and breechplug (or tang) are one piece.
The cleaning method depends on the style of your rifle. Muzzleloaders
with a hooked breech design are cleaned fairly easily.
Step 1—Remove the ramrod.
Step 2—Bring the hammer to the full-cock position.
Step 3—Remove the nipple if the gun is a percussion firearm.
Step 4—Remove the barrel key from
the forearm.
Step 5—Lift the barrel out of the stock.
Step 6—Using a cleaning rod with a cleaning
end or a jag attached to its end, fit a soft flannel
patch around the jag.
Step 7—Saturate the patch with cleaning solvent
and wipe the bore several times to loosen the
accumulated fouling.
Step 8—Insert the breech end of the barrel in a bucket
of hot, soapy water.
Step 9—Stroking the rod in an up-and-down
manner, “pump” water from the bucket
through the full length of the bore. Repeat
several times. Follow the procedure with
a bucket of clean, hot water, repeating the
pumping action until the barrel is clean.
Remove the nipple. Remove the barrel key
from the forearm.
Position the hammer in
full-cock position.
Insert the breech end of the barrel in a bucket
or container of hot, soapy water.
5
8


78 RIFLE SHOOTING
Muzzleloading Rifles.
In cases where the breech, barrel, and tang are all one piece,
they must be cleaned together. If your rifle is a percussion model,
this can be done by using a flush-out nipple. This part is similar
in size and shape to the “shooting nipple” that you use with
percussion caps, but it has a larger hole for ease in cleaning.
Follow these steps:
Step 1—After swabbing the bore with a cleaning
solvent or liquid soap, remove the shooting nipple
and put a flush-out nipple in place.
Step 2—Weight one end of an 18-inch section
of thin plastic or rubber tubing (the kind used as
fuel line in model airplanes is ideal).
Step 3—Attach the tubing to the flush-out
nipple, making sure the fit is tight and snug.
Step 4—Insert the weighted end of the tube
into a bucket of hot, soapy water so that the
water is siphoned through the tube and into
the rifle as the rod is gently moved up and down
in the barrel.
Step 5—Maintain this action until the gun is
thoroughly flushed. Then repeat the procedure
with clean, hot water.
While you have the shooting nipple removed,
clean it with soapy water. Use an old toothbrush
to scrub the outside and a pipe cleaner to clean
the inside channel. After you have thoroughly
cleaned it, wipe it dry, oil lightly, and screw it
back into the gun, replacing the flush-out nipple.
If you have a flintlock rifle, you won’t be able
to use this technique. The one exception is the gun
that is equipped with a removable flashhole liner.
In this case, the flashhole liner can be replaced with a flush-out
nipple and the above procedure can be followed.
In all other cases, you must clean the barrel with a series
of wet patches, using either hot water or a cleaning solution.
The flashhole and the rear of the bore may be cleaned with
a pipe cleaner.
Clean the breech and barrel of
your percussion model by using
a flush-out nipple.


RIFLE SHOOTING 79
.Muzzleloading Rifles
Drying and Protecting the Barrel
After you have thoroughly cleaned the barrel, use several clean,
dry patches to wipe out the entire length of the bore. Continue
to run patches on the inside until they come out clean and dry.
Then wipe with an oily patch.
Don’t overlook the outside of the barrel. Wipe and inspect
all metal surfaces. Make sure that no moisture remains in such
hard-to-get-at places as the breech and the thimbles that hold
the ramrod under the barrel.
Cleaning the Lock
The lock is usually held to the stock by two bolts. It can be
removed from the rest of the rifle simply by unscrewing the lock
bolts a few turns and tapping the bolt heads gently to loosen
the lock plate. Then, unscrew the bolts the rest of the way and
carefully remove the lock.
Once the lock is removed, use an old toothbrush to scrub
both sides thoroughly. Don’t hesitate to use very hot water—the
hotter the water, the better the lock will dry. Make sure the
mechanism is thoroughly dry. Then, lightly oil both the lock and
the lock bolts, and replace the stock.
Cleaning the Stock
The stock on your gun is probably made of a fine wood. You
will want to keep it free of grime and powder. Powder solvents
can hurt a wood finish, so be careful when using them. The
stock can be cleaned with a damp cloth or a commercially
manufactured stock finish, using a clean patch or cloth. When
the stock is thoroughly dry, treat it with a light coating of stock
oil or wax preservative.
Throughout the cleaning process, take extra care to
ensure that no water or cleaning fluid spills into the
space between the stock and the barrel. This moisture,
undetected, can cause rust, the unfortunate source of
damage to many a cherished firearm.


80 RIFLE SHOOTING
Conservation, Recreation, and More.
Conservation,
Recreation, and More
Wildlife biologists have long recognized two key factors in
game management:
• The first is that wildlife cannot be stockpiled like coal or
oil. Any area of land, or habitat, can support only a certain
number of wild animals. If a decision is made to have more
game (wild animals for hunting) in a specific area and it is
stocked with additional animals in excess of the biological
carrying capacity of the habitat area, what will happen? In
time, all animals in excess of the biological carrying capacity
of the land will be eliminated by the natural factors of
disease, starvation, emigration, or predation.
• The second important factor is that wildlife species naturally
overproduce each year. That is, more young are produced
than necessary to continue the species, and more are
produced than the habitat area can support. The extra
animals are lost to disease, starvation, emigration, or
predation. This is nature’s way of making sure that there
are enough surviving animals each year for a breeding
population and that the strongest strains survive for
reproduction. For example, only 8 percent of young
rabbits grow to breeding age.
A population is
all of the
individuals of
the same
species that live
in one place.
A habitat is the place where a plant or animal naturally
or normally lives and grows.
Carrying capacity is the population of animals that an
area will support without being damaged.


RIFLE SHOOTING 81
.Conservation, Recreation, and More
These principles apply despite what people do with animals.
If extra animals are put into an occupied habitat, more animals
than normal will die. If a few extra animals are taken by hunters,
the remaining stock will soon bring the population up to a
normal range.
Wildlife management experts try to arrange hunting
seasons and bag limits (limits on the number of animals taken)
so that hunters will harvest only the surplus. The hunting
regulations they set ensure that hunters do not take too many
animals. It is far better that hunters should get the healthful
outdoor recreation and the meat by harvesting the surplus than
to lose those surplus animals to disease, starvation, and other
natural causes.
Without effective natural limiting factors, natural repro-
duction will cause an animal population to grow too large, and
the result is damage to the habitat. For example, an unmanaged
population of grazing animals such as deer will grow until its
food and water supply will no longer support its members. In
such situations, the large numbers of animals severely damage
the plants in their habitat by overgrazing or browsing and by
trampling the plants. Plants exposed to this kind of grazing
pressure will not return to their former level of productivity
for many years. The loss of productivity is equally harmful to
other wildlife species with similar food and survival needs.
A limiting factor is anything that limits the survival,
reproduction, or number of animals in an area.
Productivity in plants is the power to bear or yield
food abundantly.
When it becomes obvious that a population is too
large, it is important to increase the harvest and get
the herd down to its biological carrying capacity. Game
managers will often extend the hunting season and/or
increase the bag limit to thin out the population. By
harvesting animals that would otherwise be lost to
causes such as starvation and disease, the hunter
becomes a responsible participant in natural
biological processes.
For more about
these ideas, see
the Environmental
Science and
Fish and Wildlife
Management merit
badge pamphlets.


82 RIFLE SHOOTING
Conservation, Recreation, and More.
The real problem for wildlife is what human-
kind has done, and is doing, to the habitats where
these animals must live. People are replacing
woods, fields, and marshes with subdivisions,
shopping centers, superhighways, industrial
complexes, and airports. These changes lead to
the destruction or alteration of habitats and to
a smaller number of game animals.
Hunting Regulations
Each state has its own hunting regulations. These are
issued by the state fish and wildlife agency, conservation
department, or similar organization that is responsible for
the state’s fish and wildlife management program. You can
get a copy of the regulations by writing to the correct depart-
ment at your state capital. Locally, sporting goods and
hardware stores that sell hunting and fishing licenses and
equipment usually can supply a copy of the regulations. The
supervising instructor can help you with this, also.
There are many differences in the state game laws.
Hunting in Kansas is unlike hunting in California or New York.
Differences in geography, human population, and game
species call for different game laws. Even within a state, there
will be some differences in game laws. Certain areas or counties
may have different laws because of local conditions.
All states have regulations regarding the use or carrying of
guns when hunting. These laws are designed to protect those
in the hunting neighborhood. Such regulations may prohibit
carrying a loaded gun in a car, shooting from a car, or shooting
near buildings or roads. Many states control the type and
caliber of gun that can be used for certain kinds of hunting.
The states require hunters to carry a hunting license.
This helps them control the game harvest, and the license fees
provide money for habitat improvement and game management.
To get a hunting license for the first time, all states require the
hunter to satisfactorily complete the hunter safety course
initially developed by the National Rifle Association and now
administered by each state’s hunter education program. These
courses are taught by volunteer instructors. (Several states
“grandfathered” people born before a specified date, and those
hunters were not required to take a hunter safety course. In


RIFLE SHOOTING 83
.Conservation, Recreation, and More
In hunting language, big game usually refers to such
animals as deer, elk, moose, antelope, and bear. Small
game includes animals such as rabbits and squirrels.
Upland game includes quail, grouse, partridge,
and ptarmigan.
other states, people who were licensed hunters in the state
before a specific date established by law or regulation were
not required to take a hunter safety course.)
Even if your state does not require you to take such a
course, it is certainly worth your time to take it before you start
hunting. You will find it interesting and informative. And if you
have earned the Rifle Shooting merit badge, you will find it easy.
Sportsmanship
Sportsmanship applies to all of shooting, whether recreational,
competitive, or hunting. Scouts should always follow these
rules of sportsmanship:
• Know and follow the rules of safe gun handling at home, on
the range, and in the field.
• Know and follow the laws regarding possession and use
of firearms.
• Know and follow the letter and spirit of the hunting regulations.
• Be considerate of the landowner whose property is being used,
ask for permission to hunt on the property, and avoid littering
the area with trash.
• Be careful of the target, both for safety and also to avoid
senseless destruction, confining shots to the proper targets
and not to power line insulators, pipeline valves, signs, or
similar property.
• Be careful of the area beyond the target to ensure that
bullets that miss the target or ricochet do not travel on to
cause damage.
• Give other hunters a fair chance at game when hunting in
the field, and avoid taking advantage of another shooter in
any way.


84 RIFLE SHOOTING
Conservation, Recreation, and More.
The accomplishment of taking game during the hunt is only
part of the experience. Enjoying the outdoors, seeing wildlife,
and stalking game are also pleasurable parts of the hunt.
What’s Next?
The shooting sports are a popular recreational activity in
America. Many people enjoy hunting or sharpening their skills
at a shooting range. Tens of thousands of competitive shooters
participate in shooting contests (matches), including those at
the Olympic Games.
Instruction and Qualification Programs
You can enroll in a basic shooting course for several types of
shooting, including rifle, shotgun, and muzzleloading. Basic
marksmanship courses are offered by NRA-certified instructors
who will be able to help and guide you to better shooting.
After you have taken a basic course, you can continue
to improve your shooting skills through the Winchester/NRA
Marksmanship Qualification Program. This program is a good
way to test your shooting skills and earn medals, pins, and
patches as your shooting skills improve.
Shooting Clubs
One of the best ways to improve your shooting skills is to join a
local shooting club and its junior shooting program. Juniors in
these clubs shoot the NRA Qualification Program and participate
in local, state, and national competitions. A local club is a great
way to meet new shooters with the same interests and to travel
to new places to test your shooting skills.
Leagues and Championships
INFORMAL COMPETITIONS
Postal matches are competitions in which shooters fire at their
home club ranges and send scores to the NRA for comparison
with other scores sent in from around the country.
Shooting is the
third most popular
Olympic sport
when ranked by
the number of
participating
nations. It is
exceeded only by
Olympic track and
field events and
boxing events.


RIFLE SHOOTING 85
.Conservation, Recreation, and More
There might be special
competitions and other
challenging programs
available in Scouting to
recognize your effort to
become a better and safer
marksman. Check with
your camp’s shooting
sports staff or your unit
leadership for more
information.
Special Activities
NRA Youth Hunter Education Challenge (YHEC) programs
are sanctioned each year in the United States and Canada by
the hunter safety coordinator in each state or province. The
top finishers from these events are eligible to participate in
the North American YHEC, which is held each summer.
Young hunters also have the opportunity to earn awards for
successful hunts in the Young Hunter Awards Program.
The law enforcement Explorer shooting program
offers a qualification shooting course for use by Scouting
America’s law enforcement Explorer program. The NRA also
conducts a law enforcement Explorer shooting championship
as part of the national law enforcement Explorer conference.
Camp programs offer one way to introduce young people
to shooting. Not only do Scouting America local councils have
shooting in many of their summer camp programs, but many
private summer camps also have shooting programs. There are
also special shooting camps sponsored by the NRA designed
to improve the junior shooter’s skills with the rifle. Shooting
camps are conducted at the state and national levels for
beginners, intermediates, and advanced junior shooters.
You can find out
more about
these and other
programs by
writing to the
NRA at 11250
Waples Mill Road,
Fairfax, VA 22030,
or visiting
explore.nra.org


86 RIFLE SHOOTING
Conservation, Recreation, and More.
School programs are designed to educate high school
students about shooting sports and to promote activities among
school groups. Physical education classes, scholastic clubs,
and competitive teams may be involved in any of the various
shooting disciplines.
College programs are geared to shooting activities on the
college level. These programs include competitive intercollegiate
teams, student-run shooting sport clubs, physical education, and
ROTC programs. Rifle shooting is an NCAA sport with scholarship
opportunities available at several colleges.
Other activities are also available such as the Sighting-In
Days Program, National Hunting and Fishing Day, and other
types of junior shooting camps.
Olympic Games and Shooting
Olympic-style shooting evolved from the European tradition
of shooting. There are uniform courses of fire, and strict
regulations govern the firearms, clothing, and equipment
used in international competition.
The following rifle sports are fired in the Olympic Games.
Air Rifle
With separate events for men and women, air rifle shooting
joined the Olympic program in 1984. Competitors stand and
shoot lead pellets from .177-caliber guns at targets 10 meters
away. The bull’s-eye, or 10-ring, is one-half millimeter wide,
the size of the period at the end of this sentence.
Guns: By international regulation, air rifles can be either air- or
gas-powered and weigh up to 12 pounds.
Course of fire: Men take 60 shots in 1 hour 45 minutes.
Women take 40 shots in 1 hour 15 minutes.
The NRA sanctions more than 11,000 tournaments each
year. Many are conducted specifically for juniors, but
most are also open to adults. These competitions are
a good way for you to test your skills and to learn more
about competitive shooting. They are also the path to
the Olympic Games.


RIFLE SHOOTING 87
.Conservation, Recreation, and More
Perfect match score: For men, 600 is perfect and 592 is
world-class. For women, 400 is perfect and 395 is world-class.
Finals: The top eight competitors advance to a 10-shot final
round, with 75 seconds allowed per shot. The final is calculated
in tenths of a point and added to the match score to determine
winners. A perfect final score is 109. A perfect aggregate (match
plus final) score is 709 for men, 509 for women.
Three-Position Rifle
In the three-position event (also called 3  40), athletes fire
.22-caliber smallbore rifles from the prone, standing, and
kneeling positions, in that order, at targets 50 meters down-
range. The bull’s-eye is 10.4 millimeters in diameter. Today
there are separate events for men and women. Until 1980, the
three-position was an open Olympic event, meaning that men
and women competed head-to-head.
Guns: Men and women use different types of smallbore rifles.
Women fire “sport” rifles, which weigh up to 14.2 pounds,
and men shoot “free” rifles (up to 17.6 pounds), which can be
customized with special accessories or alterations. Both men’s
and women’s guns have metallic (nonmagnifying) sights.


88 RIFLE SHOOTING
Conservation, Recreation, and More.
Course of fire: Men fire 40 rounds per position for a total of
120 shots. Time limits for men are 45 minutes for prone, 1 hour
15 minutes for standing, and 1 hour for kneeling. Women shoot
20 rounds per position for a total of 60 shots. They are allowed
2 hours 15 minutes for all three positions.
Perfect match score: For men, 1200 is perfect and 1165 is
world-class. For women, 600 is perfect and 580 is world-class.
Finals: For men and women, the top eight performers advance
to a 10-shot final round, fired entirely from the standing
position with 75 seconds allotted per shot. The final is
calculated in tenths of a point and added to the match
point total to determine winners. A perfect final score is
109. A perfect aggregate score is 1309 for men; 709 for women.
Running Target
Athletes stand and shoot .177-caliber air rifles with telescopic
sights (not exceeding 4-power) at paper targets moving across
a track 10 meters away. The target has two bull’s-eyes spaced
roughly 6 inches apart; an aiming dot placed between them
aids the shooter in tracking. The 10-ring (the innermost
ring of the black section of the target) on each bull’s-eye is
5 millimeters wide, about the size of a pencil eraser.
Only men fire this event at world cups and the Olympics.
Competition is open to men and women at U.S., continental,


RIFLE SHOOTING 89
.Conservation, Recreation, and More
and world championships. Running deer and running game
target, the 100-meter and 50-meter versions of this sport, were
part of the Olympics at different times between 1900 and 1988.
Today’s 10-meter event replaced running game target on the
Olympic program in 1992.
Guns: Shooters fire .177-caliber rifles that use air or gas to
propel lead pellets downrange. This is the only shooting event
in which competitors are permitted to use telescopic sights—
4-power magnification or less.
Course of fire: The match consists of 60 shots divided into
30 slow runs and 30 fast runs. In slow runs, athletes have
5 seconds to track, aim, and fire at the moving target. In fast
runs, the target is exposed for only 2.5 seconds. Shooters start
with their rifles at hip level and can only mount their guns
once the target is exposed.
Perfect match score: 600 is perfect; 575 is world-class.
Finals: The top six competitors advance to a 10-shot fast-run
final. Finals are scored in tenths of a point and added to
match scores to determine winners. A perfect final score
is 109. A perfect aggregate score is 709 points.


90 RIFLE SHOOTING
Glossary.
action. The group of moving parts that
allow the shooter to load, fire, and
unload a gun.
ammunition. The projectiles with their
cases, primers, and propelling charges
that are fired from guns; cartridges.
aperture sights. A kind of metallic sight
that uses a small hole in the rear sight
and a front sight with a metal or plastic
insert with a post or a ring in it. To aim,
the shooter aligns the front sight in the
center of the rear aperture, placing the
front bead on the target or placing the
black of the bull’s-eye in the center of the
front sight ring.
ball. A round projectile, usually of lead
and usually fired with a cloth patch, fired
from a muzzleloading rifle.
ball-puller. An attachment that looks
like a tapping screw attached to the
end of a work-rod, for screwing into an
unexpelled ball and removing it from the
barrel of a muzzleloading gun.
ball-starter. A short rod or peg used to
start a ball or bullet down the barrel of a
muzzleloading gun.
barrel. The tube through which the
projectile passes. It has raised surfaces or
ridges on the inside to impart spin to the
projectile (see rifling).
bolt handle. The lever that the shooter
pulls back to open the action on a
bolt-action rifle and pushes forward to
chamber a round and close the action.
bore. The interior of a gun barrel.
bore snake. A flexible fabric cord with
a tapered thin end that has a weight
attached to it to help feed the cord
through the breech end of the barrel.
When the thin end has been fed through
the other end, the rest of the cord is then
dragged toward the muzzle, scrubbing
the bore along the way. A bore snake
often has one or more integrated brushes
to help clear away contaminants and
may also be used to apply lubricants.
breech. The rear portion of a rifle,
usually the rear opening of the chamber
into the barrel.
breechblock. A movable block of metal
that closes the chamber at the rear and
supports the base of the cartridge case
during firing.
breechloader. Any gun that is loaded
from the breech, usually with a cartridge,
as distinguished from a muzzleloader.
breechplug. A plug threaded into the
breech of the barrel of a muzzleloading
gun, to seal the breech against the
rearward escape of gases when the
gun is fired.
bull’s-eye. The central blackened part of
a target or the smallest center ring.
butt. The rear end of a gunstock.
caliber. The interior diameter of a
gun barrel.
calling the shot. Predicting where the
shot will strike the target based upon the
sight picture at the instant of firing.
Glossary


RIFLE SHOOTING 91
.Glossary
cartridge. The complete unit of
ammunition, consisting of projectile,
case, powder (propellant), and primer.
chamber. The rear portion of the gun
barrel into which a cartridge is inserted
for firing. “To chamber” is to insert a
cartridge into the breech of a gun.
cock. The hammer of a muzzleloader.
“To cock” is to place the hammer of a
firearm in the firing position.
comb. The upper edge of a stock. The
shooter’s cheekbone rests on the comb.
conical bullet. A soft lead bullet with
a solid base and two or more bands at
the rear. The bands are slightly larger in
diameter than the bullet itself and cut
into the rifling, sealing the base of the
bullet and allowing the rifling to spin the
bullet as it travels down the barrel of a
muzzleloading gun.
drum. A cylindrical piece of steel
holding the nipple in a percussion rifle.
elevation. Vertical adjustment of a
firearm sight to change where the bullet
hits the target.
firing line. At a target range, the line
along which shooters are positioned
for firing at their targets.
firing pin. The device that strikes the
primer in the cartridge, igniting the
primer by causing an indentation that
crushes the priming compound.
flash channel. A small hole between the
inside of the barrel and the priming pan
in a muzzleloading gun; see flashhole.
flashhole. A fire hole used in
muzzleloaders; a small hole through the
breech that runs from the ignition source
to the powder charge.
flint. In a flintlock, the piece of stone that
strikes the steel frizzen face to produce
a shower of sparks, thus igniting the
priming charge and, subsequently, the
main charge in the barrel.
flintlock. A muzzleloader with a
hammer, or cock, that holds a flint in
screw-tightened jaws; having a frizzen,
or striking plate; a pan in which the
priming charge is placed; and a flashhole
through which the flame passes to the
main charge in the barrel.
fore-end. That part of a gun’s stock
forward of the action, extending under
the barrel and providing a grip for one
hand below the barrel.
frizzen. In a flintlock, the spring-loaded
cover of the priming pan, with an upright
steel plate against which the flint strikes,
producing the sparks that ignite the
powder.
full-cock. The position of the cock or
hammer when ready for firing.
See half-cock.
grip. The part of the stock gripped by the
firing hand.
gunsmith. A person who designs,
makes, or repairs guns.
half-cock. A hammer position at the
midpoint of hammer travel; an inter-
mediate safety position for the cock
or hammer. See full-cock.
hammer. The part that strikes the
percussion cap in muzzleloaders or the
primer in cartridge arms. Some hammers
directly strike the cap or primer, while
others strike a separate firing pin. The
hammer on flintlocks is called the cock.
jag. The end of a cleaning rod, having
grooves or ridges that grip a cleaning
patch or swabbing material.
knapping. Shaping flint by breaking off
pieces with quick blows.
lands. On the inside of a rifled barrel, the
ridges, standing above the grooves, that
make a bullet spin.
length of pull. The distance from the
trigger to the rear of the butt.


92 RIFLE SHOOTING
Glossary.
load. A particular combination of case,
primer, powder, and projectile. “To load”
is to charge a firearm with ammunition.
lock. The firing mechanism of early
firearms (see flintlock; matchlock).
match. The fuse, wick, or smoldering
cord used in matchlock firearms.
matchlock. A muzzleloader in which a
lighted match is touched to the powder
in the priming pan, igniting the priming
charge, which in turn shoots its flame
through the flashhole to set off the
powder charge in the barrel.
metallic sight. Nonmagnifying devices
on the front and rear ends of a firearm
used in aiming. See sights.
minié ball. A soft lead bullet with a
hollow base. The base has a thin skirt that
expands when hot gases from burning
powder push against it, filling the rifling
and sealing the gas behind the bullet.
musket. A military shoulder arm, either
flintlock or percussion.
muzzle. The forward end (mouth) of the
barrel, through which the projectile exits.
muzzle velocity. The speed of the
projectile measured as it leaves the
muzzle of the barrel.
nipple. The cone-shaped seat on which
a percussion cap is placed and detonated
by the hammer of a muzzleloader. The
nipple has a hole through it to let the
flame from the cap travel to the powder
charge in the barrel.
open sights. The simplest kind of
sights, consisting of a rear bar with
either a V-shaped or U-shaped notch cut
into it, and a front blade or bead. The
shooter aims by aligning the notch in the
rear sight with the front blade or bead
and superimposing that alignment on
the target.
optical sights. Telescopic sights,
consisting of a tube containing
magnifying lenses and an aiming
reticle. See reticles.
pan. On matchlock, wheel lock,
and flintlock guns, a small, shallow
container for priming powder.
percussion cap. A small metal cup
containing a priming mixture (detonating
powder), placed open-end-down over a
nipple that has a vent hole leading into
the main powder charge in the barrel of
a percussion rifle. When struck by the
hammer, the cap sends a small jet of
flame into the powder charge, igniting it.
possibles bag. A pouch carried by
a muzzleloader shooter, for packing
necessary gear.
powder charge. A measured amount
of a chemical compound that, when
ignited by the primer, generates gases
that expand rapidly and produce high
pressure, providing the force needed to
propel a projectile. In modern cartridges,
the powder charge is contained within
the case. In muzzleloading rifles,
the powder charge is loaded into the
barrel through the muzzle. The black
powder used in muzzleloaders is quite
different from the powder used in
modern cartridges.
powder horn. A container for holding
black powder. Modern powder flasks
are usually made of metal, with a spout
on one end and a lever at the side that
opens the flask to pour out a measured
amount of powder.
priming charge. The fine-grained
powder that is used in the pan of a
flintlock and that, when set off, ignites
the main charge of powder.
projectile. Any solid material propelled
through the gun barrel by pressure—
a bullet, ball, BB, pellet, etc.
pyrite. A common mineral that has
a pale brass-yellow color and a
metallic luster.


RIFLE SHOOTING 93
.Glossary
Pyrodex®. A modified black powder
or black-powder substitute that burns
without the heavy fouling of regular
black powder.
receiver. The frame for the action parts
of a gun, and the part of the firearm
around which the rest of the arm is built.
A rifle’s stock is attached to the receiver;
the barrel is screwed or locked into the
receiver; and the receiver also accepts the
bolt, magazine, trigger mechanism, etc.
recoil. The rearward movement of the
gun in reaction to the forward movement
of the projectile and powder gas
emerging from the muzzle; the kickback
of a gun upon firing.
reticle. The aiming device in a telescopic
sight, arranged within the lens system of
the scope to focus perfectly on the target.
Common patterns include crosshairs (in
various thicknesses); crosshair and dot;
dot; crosshair and post; and post (flat-
topped or pointed).
rifling. The lands (raised surfaces) and
grooves in a barrel that make the bullet
spin, imparting greater accuracy.
short-starter. The short peg of a ball-
starter, used to seat a patched ball or
lubed bullet just below the muzzle of a
muzzleloading gun.
sighting-in. Adjusting the sights on a
rifle so that the projectile strikes the
target where intended; also known
as zeroing-in.
sights. The metallic or optical devices
attached to rifles that enable them to be
aimed. See aperture sights; open sights;
optical sights.
six-o’clock hold. In target shooting,
aligning the front sight directly below the
bull’s-eye, as if the bull’s-eye were resting
atop the front sight.
slide action. See pump action.
sprue. The excess metal that hardens
in the opening of a ball-casting mold
through which the molten metal is
poured into the mold. Also, the slight
projection on the ball that is left from the
hole in the mold.
starter. See ball-starter; short-starter.
starting load. Powder charge in a
muzzleloading gun, generally in a
measure of one grain of powder per
caliber. For instance, a .45-caliber rifle
would take 45 grains of powder as a
starting load.
stock. The part of a rifle that the shooter
grasps, usually made of wood, and
consisting of the butt, comb, grip,
and fore-end.
tang. The part of a firearm’s receiver that
extends to the rear and is used to attach
the action to the stock.
10-ring. The innermost ring of the black
section (the bull’s-eye) of the target.
thimbles. Short metal tubes used to
secure the ramrod under the barrel of
a muzzleloading gun.
trigger. The lever that activates a firearm
when moved, usually pulled by one
finger.
trigger pull. The amount of pressure
needed to fully release a trigger to fire a
gun.
windage. Horizontal adjustment of the
sights on a firearm to send the projectile
to the right or the left on the target.
work-rod. A rod heavier than a ramrod,
used for special tasks such as pulling a
ball from the barrel of a muzzleloading
gun.
zero. The point at which a rifle’s sights
are adjusted to the proper point of
impact. See sighting-in.
zeroing. The mechanical movement of
the sights to center the shot group in
the center of the target. See sighting-in.





RIFLE SHOOTING 95
.Resources
Resources
Scouting Literature
Archery, Environmental Science, Fish
and Wildlife Management, and Shotgun
Shooting merit badge pamphlets;
Guide to Safe Scouting; Health and
Safety Guide, National Range and
Target Activities Manual; NRA Guide —
Basics of Rifle Shooting
Rifles and Rifle Shooting
Anderson, Gary L. NRA Junior Rifle
Shooting. National Rifle Association
of America, Washington, D.C., 1983.
Bassham, Lanny R. With Winning in
Mind. Bookpartners Inc., 1996.
Crossman, Jim. Olympic Shooting.
National Rifle Association of
America, Washington, D.C., 1978.
Parish, David. Successful Rifle Shooting.
Crowood Press, 1997.
Sheets, H. Wayne. The Basics of Rifle
Shooting. National Rifle Association
of America, Washington, D.C., 1987.
Trefethen, James B. Americans and
Their Guns. Stackpole Books,
Harrisburg, PA, 1967.
Yuryev, A.A. Competitive Shooting.
National Rifle Association of
America, Washington, D.C., 1985.
Muzzleloaders
Bridges, Toby. Muzzleloading. Creative
Publishing, 1997.
The Muzzleloading Rifle Handbook.
National Rifle Association of
America, Washington, D.C., 1985.
Organizations and Websites
Alco Target Company
Toll-free telephone: 888-258-4814
alcotarget.com
American Target Company
Telephone: 303-733-0433
americantargetcompany.com
Hoppe’s
Toll-free telephone: 800-423-3537
hoppes.com
National Rifle Association
nra.org
National Target Company
Toll-free telephone: 800-827-7060
nationaltarget.com
Target Barn Inc.
Telephone: 419-829-2242
targetbarn.com
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


96 RIFLE SHOOTING
Resources.
The Target Shop
Toll-free telephone: 800-746-6812
thetargetshop.com
U.S. Target Inc.
Toll-free telephone: 800-746-6836
ustargetinc.com
Acknowledgments
For their many contributions to the Rifle
Shooting merit badge pamphlet, Scouting
America thanks Charles Mitchell,
Howard Q. Moody, and Rudy Dufour of
the National Rifle Association; and J.
Franklin Sturges Jr., National Camping
School shooting sports director, Denver
Area Council shooting sports coordinator,
and NRA training counselor. Thanks also
to David Prizio Jr., NCS shooting sports
director, Western Region, for reviewing
the manuscript.
We appreciate Troop 660, Falls
Church, Va., and Troop 1830, Landover,
Md., of Scouting America’s National
Capital Area Council, Bethesda, Md.,
for their assistance with the photo-
graphs used in this book.
Scouting America is grateful to
the men and women serving on the
National Merit Badge Subcommittee for
the improvements made in updating
this pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration Credits
All photos and illustrations in this
pamphlet are the property of or are
protected by Scouting America.
Harvey Hoopes—page 85
Bruce Levitt—page 22
John McDearmon—All illustrations