RIFLE
SHOOTING

STEM-Based

BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES

RIFLE SHOOTING

“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”

Rifle Shooting
1. Do the following:
(a) Explain why BB and pellet air guns must always be treated with the same
respect as firearms.
(b) Describe how you would react if a friend visiting your home asked to see
your or your family’s firearm(s).
(c) Explain the need for, and use and types of, eye and hearing protection.
Demonstrate their proper use.
(d) Give the main points of the laws for owning and using guns in your
community and state.
(e) Explain how hunting is related to the wise use of renewable
wildlife resources.
203

(f) Successfully complete a state hunter education course or obtain a copy of
the hunting laws for your state, then do the following:
(1) Explain the main points of hunting laws in your state and give any
special laws on the use of guns and ammunition.
(2) List the kinds of wildlife that can be legally hunted in your state.
(g) Identify and explain how you can join or be a part of shooting
sports activities.
(h) Explain to your counselor the proper hygienic guidelines used in shooting.
(i) Give your counselor a list of sources that you could contact for information on firearms and their uses.
2. Do ONE of the following options:

Option A—Rifle Shooting (Modern cartridge type)
(a) Identify the three main parts of a rifle, and tell how they function.
(b) Identify and demonstrate the three fundamental rules for safe gun handling.
(c) Identify the two types of cartridges, their parts, and how they function.
(d) Explain to your counselor what a misfire, hangfire, and squib fire are, and
explain the procedures to follow in response to each.
(e) Identify and demonstrate the five fundamentals of shooting a rifle safely.
(f) Explain to your counselor the fundamental rules for safe gun handling.
Explain each rule for using and storing a gun. Identify and explain each rule
for safe shooting.
(g) Explain the range commands and range procedures.
(h) Demonstrate the knowledge, skills, and attitude necessary to safely shoot a
rifle from the benchrest position or supported prone position while using the five
fundamentals of rifle shooting.
(i) Identify the basic safety rules for cleaning a rifle, and identify the
materials needed.
(j) Demonstrate how to clean a rifle properly and safely.
(k) Discuss what points you would consider in selecting a rifle.
(l) Using a .22 caliber rimfire rifle and shooting from a benchrest or
supported prone position at 50 feet, fire five groups (three shots per group)
that can be covered by a quarter. Using these targets, explain how to adjust
sights to zero a rifle.
(m) Adjust sights to center the group on the target* and fire five groups
(five shots per group). According to the target used, each shot in the group
must meet the following minimum score: (1) A-32 targets—9; (2) A-17 or
TQ-1 targets—7; (3) A-36 targets—5.
*NOTE: It is not always practical to adjust the sights (i.e., when using a borrowed fixed-sight rifle). For requirement
2(l), you may demonstrate your ability to use the shooting fundamentals by shooting five shot groups (five shots per
group) in which all shots can be covered by or touch a quarter and then explain how to adjust the sights to zero the
rifle used.

204

Option B—Air Rifle Shooting (BB or pellet)
(a) Identify the three main parts of an air rifle, and tell how they function.
(b) Identify and demonstrate the three fundamental rules for safe
gun handling.
(c) Explain the range commands and range procedures.
(d) Identify the two most common types of air rifle ammunition.
(e) Identify and demonstrate the five fundamentals of shooting a rifle safely.
(f) Identify and explain each rule for shooting an air rifle safely.
(g) Demonstrate the knowledge, skills, and attitude necessary to safely shoot
a target from the benchrest position or supported prone position while using
the five fundamentals of rifle shooting.
(h) Identify the basic safety rules for cleaning an air rifle, and identify the
materials needed.
(i) Demonstrate how to clean an air rifle safely.
(j) Discuss what points you would consider in selecting an air rifle.
(k) Using a BB gun or pellet air rifle and shooting from a benchrest or
supported prone position at 15 feet for BB guns or 33 feet for air rifles,
fire five groups (three shots per group) that can be covered by a quarter.
(l) Adjust sights to center the group on the target and fire five groups
(five shots per group). According to the target used, each shot in the group
must meet the following minimum score: (1) BB rifle at 15 feet or 5 meters
using TQ-5 targets—8; (2) pellet air rifle at 25 feet using TQ-5 targets—8,
at 33 feet or 10 meters using AR-1 targets—6.

Option C—Muzzleloading Rifle Shooting
(a) Give a brief history of the development of muzzleloading rifles.
(b) Identify principal parts of percussion rifles and discuss how they function.
(c) Demonstrate and discuss the safe handling of muzzleloading rifles.
(d) Identify the various grades of black powder and black powder substitutes
and explain their proper use.
(e) Discuss proper safety procedures pertaining to black powder use
and storage.
(f) Discuss proper components of a load.
(g) Identify proper procedures and accessories used for loading a
muzzleloading rifle.
(h) Demonstrate the knowledge, skills, and attitude necessary to safely shoot
a muzzleloading rifle on a range, including range procedures. Explain what a
misfire, hangfire, and squib fire are, and explain the procedures to follow in
response to each.
(i) Shoot a target with a muzzleloading rifle using the five fundamentals of
firing a shot.
205

(j) Identify the materials needed to clean a muzzleloading rifle safely. Using
these materials, demonstrate how to clean a muzzleloading rifle safely.
(k) Identify the causes of a muzzleloading rifle’s failure to fire and explain or
demonstrate proper correction procedures.
(l) Discuss what points you would consider in selecting a muzzleloading rifle.
(m) Using a muzzleloading rifle of .45 or .50 caliber and shooting from a
benchrest or supported prone position, fire three groups (three shots per
group) at 50 feet that can be covered by the base of a standard-size soft
drink can.
(n) Center the group on the target and fire three groups (five shots per group).
According to the target used, each shot in the group must meet the following
minimum score: (1) at 25 yards using NRA A-23 or NMLRA 50-yard targets—7; (2) at 50 yards using NRA A-25 or NMLRA 100-yard targets—7.

206

.Resources

Resources
Scouting Literature
Archery, Environmental Science, Fish
and Wildlife Management, and Shotgun
Shooting merit badge pamphlets;
Guide to Safe Scouting; Health
and Safety Guide
Visit the Boy Scouts of America’s
official retail website at http://www.
scoutstuff.org for a complete listing
of all merit badge pamphlets and
other helpful Scouting materials
and supplies.

Rifles and Rifle Shooting
Anderson, Gary L. NRA Junior Rifle
Shooting. National Rifle Association
of America, Washington, D.C., 1983.
Bassham, Lanny R. With Winning in
Mind. Bookpartners Inc., 1996.
Crossman, Jim. Olympic Shooting.
National Rifle Association of
America, Washington, D.C., 1978.
Parish, David. Successful Rifle Shooting.
Crowood Press, 1997.

Yuryev, A. A. Competitive Shooting.
National Rifle Association of
America, Washington, D.C., 1985.

Muzzleloaders
Bridges, Toby. Muzzleloading. Creative
Publishing, 1997.
The Muzzleloading Rifle Handbook.
National Rifle Association of
America, Washington, D.C., 1985.

Organizations and Websites
Alco Target Company
Toll-free telephone: 888-258-4814
Website: http://www.alcotarget.com
American Target Company
Telephone: 303-733-0433
Central Target Company
Telephone: 502-895-3390
Michaels of Oregon
Toll-free telephone: 800-962-5757
Website: http://www.hoppes.com or
http://www.michaelsoforegon.com
National Rifle Association
Website: http://www.nra.org

Sheets, H. Wayne. The Basics of Rifle
Shooting. National Rifle Association
of America, Washington, D.C., 1987.

National Target Company
Toll-free telephone: 800-827-7060
Website:
http://www.nationaltarget.com

Trefethen, James B. Americans and
Their Guns. Stackpole Books,
Harrisburg, PA, 1967.

Target Barn Inc.
Telephone: 419-829-2242
RIFLE SHOOTING

95

Resources.

The Target Shop
Toll-free telephone: 800-746-6812
U.S. Target Company
Toll-free telephone: 800-746-6836
Website:
http://www.ustargetonline.com

Acknowledgments
For their many contributions to this
edition of the Rifle Shooting merit badge
pamphlet, the Boy Scouts of America
thanks Charles Mitchell, Howard Q.
Moody, and Rudy Dufour of the National
Rifle Association; and J. Franklin Sturges
Jr., National Camping School shooting
sports director, Denver Area Council
shooting sports coordinator, and NRA
training counselor. Their assistance was
indispensable with producing this new
edition. Thanks also to David Prizio Jr.,
NCS shooting sports director, Western
Region, for reviewing the manuscript.
We appreciate Troop 660, Falls
Church, Va., and Troop 1830, Landover,
Md., of the BSA’s National Capital

96

RIFLE SHOOTING

Area Council, Bethesda, Md., for their
assistance with the photographs used
in this book.
The Boy Scouts of America is
grateful to the men and women serving
on the Merit Badge Maintenance Task
Force for the improvements made in
updating this pamphlet.

Photo and Illustration Credits
Shutterstock.com, courtesy—pages 33
(©Gavran333), 34 (©Foto593),
80 (©MVPhoto), and 82
(©Keith Publicover)
Wikipedia.org/Wittkowsky—pages 38
and 88
All photos and illustrations in this
pamphlet are the property of or are
protected by the Boy Scouts of
America.
Bruce Levitt—page 22
John McDearmon—All illustrations

