LIFESAVING


LIFESAVING
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


35915
ISBN 978-0-8395-3297-2
©2025 Scouting America
2025 Printing


LIFESAVING 3
Note to the Counselor
Merit badge counselors are responsible for following the
requirements, procedures, and techniques presented in this
pamphlet and ensuring that each Scout earning the merit badge
is able to demonstrate knowledge and skills at a level consistent
with the requirements. In addition, counselors must ensure that
all applicable Scouting America safety policies, including Safe
Swim Defense and Safety Afloat, are followed during training,
practice, and review.
Counselors for the Lifesaving merit badge must be registered
members of Scouting America, have current training in Safe Swim
Defense, and be approved by the local council advancement
committee. Councils with an aquatics committee should utilize
that committee to coordinate with the advancement committee for
approval of qualified counselors.
All counselors should have formal training in the knowledge
and skills indicated by the requirements, experience in teaching
such skills to youth, and experience in identifying and managing
risks associated with the activities involved. For the Lifesaving
merit badge, an appropriate credential is current or previous
certification as a Aquatics Instructor. Those trained as instructors
for Aquatics Supervision: Swimming and Water Rescue or as
lifeguard instructors (e.g., Scouting America, American Red
Cross, or YMCA) are also qualified, provided they self-study and
practice the material in this pamphlet. The council advancement
committee may approve counselors with similar experience and
training in knowledge, skill, safety, and instruction.
Several merit badges prepare the Scout for immediate
service. First Aid is one; Lifesaving is another. In earning these
merit badges, the Scout should learn how to perform this service


4 LIFESAVING
safely. The well-being of both the accident victim and the rescuer
depends on it.
The requirements for the Lifesaving merit badge are designed
to prepare a 12- to 14-year-old to respond safely and effectively to
water emergencies. Each year, Scouts of all ages encounter such
emergencies and successfully perform scores of water rescues. A
Scout may actually be the best person on hand to respond.
As counselor, it is your responsibility to approve only those
who fulfill the merit badge requirements. You should give each
Scout a reasonable opportunity to retake any formal written
or skill tests, and ideally continue to provide guidance until
all candidates have earned the badge. Provided they are good
swimmers, most Scouts who make a conscientious effort should
earn the Lifesaving merit badge without too much difficulty.
At the very least, a Scout who is having difficulty with
any element must be helped to understand why his or her
performance is not yet acceptable. A misconception is often worse
than no training at all. It is the responsibility of the counselor to
ensure that each Scout knows and understands what he or she
can safely and properly do in a rescue situation.
The techniques deemed proper are those outlined in this
pamphlet. It is Scouting America policy that requirements be
followed exactly as written. However, you have some flexibility in
presentation and emphasis when more than one technique will
satisfy a given requirement. For example, several types of rescue
entries are discussed in the text.
The Scout should be shown and practice several options, but
it is most important that he or she understands the basic concepts:
not to jump or dive into water of unknown depth, to stay always
aware of the victim’s location, to move safely and quickly, and


LIFESAVING 5
to keep control of the rescue aid. If the Scout recognizes and
understands those concepts, then he or she is much more likely
to make a safe and effective entry in a rescue situation. It is not
necessary to test the Scout on every entry discussed in the text to
satisfy requirements 8, 9, and 13 for a “proper” entry.
This merit badge pamphlet presents a comprehensive
discussion of concepts and techniques that the requirements alone
cannot provide. Each instructor, regardless of experience, should
read the latest printing of the pamphlet before beginning a course.
Use the text, along with the requirements, to construct a
detailed course outline. Also, encourage each Scout to read and
study the pamphlet. It helps if the troop, camp, or counselor
maintains lending copies of the pamphlet and distributes them
either before or during the first training session.
Because earning the Lifesaving merit badge involves
swimming assists, the Scout is expected to have strong swimming
skills before attempting the requirements. Use the swimming
prerequisite to review each Scout’s skills before accepting the
Scout as a candidate for merit badge instruction. If a Scout has
marginal swimming skills, weigh any commitment to provide
remedial swimming instruction against that Scout’s chance of
success in the time available for instruction. Denying a Scout an
immediate but inappropriate opportunity may better serve the
overall aims of Scouting.
Offer training on a flexible schedule to a single buddy pair
or small group, or on a more formal basis to a larger group at
prearranged times. No definite time limits are established. The
minimum time required for training is that which leaves the Scout
prepared. Factors such as class size, participant maturity, number
of instructors, and prior instruction in CPR will influence the time
needed.
Most Scouts can adequately absorb the material in six
90-minute sessions or five two-hour sessions. For this age group,
several short sessions over a week or two weekends are better
than a single 10-hour day. Most of the time should be spent
with in-water instruction, practice, and review. If available, a
classroom setting can be used to cover concepts, CPR, and first
aid. A suggested schedule for use at summer camp is presented in
the Aquatics Staff Guide available for download at scouting.org/
outdoor-programs/aquatics/forms.
Formal skills testing is not required; adequate performance
during practice will satisfy the requirements. However, a final,
basic skills test can be a valuable teaching aid. You also can assess
and reinforce understanding by presenting participants with


6 LIFESAVING
simple “situation exercises.” For example, while the rescuer’s back
is turned, place various rescue devices at the rescuer’s disposal
and instruct the victim(s) in how to act and where to go. Ask the
rescuer to turn and respond to the given scenario. Praise positive
performance and review it for other participants. If a different
response would have been more appropriate, lead the rescuer
to that conclusion with a series of questions and suggestions,
and then congratulate the rescuer on his or her reasoning. These
exercises should be designed for success and learning, not
intimidation or failure.
The Lifesaving requirements cover a wide range of
techniques based on the type of equipment available and the
victim’s condition. A deliberate progression of instruction is
needed to prevent confusion. Emphasize simple, preferred
techniques over complex skills. Clearly define the application of
each exercise. Reviews at both the beginning and the end of a
session reinforce understanding, particularly if the review involves
discussion and/or presentation by the participants. Cognitive
requirements may be completed either orally or in writing at any
time during the course.
Base your instructional outline on material in this Lifesaving
pamphlet. Other organizations offer excellent basic water safety
and lifeguard courses that may supplement the Scout’s training,
but the goals of such courses generally diverge from those of the
Lifesaving merit badge. Do not substitute outside course material
for Lifesaving merit badge instruction.
Basic water safety courses generally stop short of in-water
assists, particularly contact rescues of unconscious victims.
Lifeguard courses train facility employees in water rescue skills
based on the availability of specialized equipment, such as a
rescue tube, that is often not available in a lifesaving situation.
Lifeguard training also adds skills, such as backboarding, that are
beyond the scope of the Lifesaving merit badge. Such skills are
included in the Scouting America Lifeguard program.
The training that qualifies you as a counselor may have
confined basic rescue techniques to use of a rescue tube. If so,
thoroughly familiarize yourself with the material in this pamphlet.
Work unfamiliar material into your teaching toolbox. Practice with
another adult until you are comfortable with the skills and their
range of application.
Boats are rescue tools available to the public but not
addressed in courses for pool lifeguards. Similarly, the Lifesaving
merit badge requirements do not call for proficiency in small
watercraft. Various boating merit badges address that need.
However, make a reasonable effort to incorporate more than


LIFESAVING 7
discussion into the “row” portion of “reach-throw-row-go.” A
demonstration with a canoe or kayak in a pool is often feasible.
Most of the requirements cover water rescue as an emergency
response, but some of the prerequisite rank requirements and
requirement 2 deal with emergency prevention based on an
understanding of factors that lead to emergencies. To satisfy
requirement 2, the Scout should have an understanding of how
each point of Scouting America Safe Swim Defense contributes
to swimming safety beyond the often cursory review required for
rank advancement. It is highly recommended that each instructor
and participant view the Safe Swim Defense training video, either
online or from the AV-09DVD29 DVD.
The intent of requirements 15 and 17 is to reinforce skills
and knowledge previously learned or to teach them for the first
time. If the Scout lacks training in either first aid or CPR, then
the counselor should teach the skills if he or she is qualified,
or arrange training from a qualified instructor. Where Scouts
have learned and practiced first-aid and CPR skills through rank
advancement or other merit badges, the counselor should still
review this information and apply it to the swimming and boating
environment.
Scouts should be able to demonstrate that they have retained
information learned previously, either by discussion or skills
performance. Recent training in CPR by a recognized agency can
be accepted as completion of requirement 15 only if the counselor
feels the Scout’s skills are satisfactory and need no additional
reinforcement.
Suggestions for improvement are always welcome. Reviews
of merit badge literature are conducted regularly. Please send
suggestions to Pilots and Program Development, S272, Boy Scouts
of America, 1325 West Walnut Hill Lane, Irving, TX 75038. If you
prefer, you may email your comments to merit.badge@scouting.
org.
Your contribution to water safety and youth development is
greatly appreciated.
Scouting works because of volunteers like you. Thank you.


8 LIFESAVING
Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Lifesaving or check Scoutbook
for the latest requirements.


LIFESAVING 9


10 LIFESAVING


LIFESAVING 11





LIFESAVING 13
Contents
To Help Other People at All Times . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
Drowning Situations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
Drowning Prevention: Safe Swim Defense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
Victim Recognition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
Planning a Rescue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
Reaching, Throwing, and Rowing Rescues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
Swimming (Go) Rescues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
Resuscitation and First Aid for Water Rescue . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
Spinal Injury Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87
Additional Opportunities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91
Lifesaving Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93





LIFESAVING 15
.To Help Other People at All Times
To Help Other People
at All Times
No Scouts BSA member will ignore a plea for help. However, the
success of your response will depend on your knowledge and
skills. The Lifesaving merit badge is designed to help you safely
and successfully assist those involved in water accidents.
Lifesaving is a serious undertaking and must be treated accord-
ingly. You may seldom need to use these skills. But if you do,
your ability could make the difference between a person’s
drowning and survival.
Preparation and Practice
Skills are best learned from demonstration and practice. Be alert
to all that is said; your instructor will cover only necessary mate-
rial. Read this pamphlet carefully and swim regularly until you
can easily complete the required distance swim. Practice each
skill slowly and deliberately before working on speed.
Rescuer Safety
The rescuer’s safety is important in any emergency. In most
emergency situations, you can minimize risk and perform a
successful rescue. Some people drown in futile attempts to save
others, but those would-be rescuers are usually frantic friends
or relatives whose swimming skills are little better than those
of the person in distress. They lack basic lifesaving training and
act inappropriately.
After earning the Lifesaving merit badge, you should know
when you can and cannot perform a safe rescue. If called upon,
uphold your promise to help others at all times, but do it well.
Do not risk injury to yourself when a rescue appears futile. Go
for help rather than going into the water.
Rule No. 1:
Don’t become
victim No. 2.


16 LIFESAVING
To Help Other People at All Times.
The Big Picture—Preventing Tragedy
Breathing is essential for life. Drowning is a process of breathing
impairment from submersion of the airway in a liquid. If the
drowning process is interrupted quickly enough—within seconds—
the victim may be able to resume normal breathing with no
lasting health problems. A victim who is not breathing may be
resuscitated with rescue ventilations within a minute or two of
submersion, again without lasting harm. However, without
quick intervention, the heart may stop in as little as three minutes,
with permanent brain damage occurring in four to six minutes.
Even if someone is revived after a submersion incident, it
is important for him or her to receive prompt medical treatment
since lung function may have been compromised. It is also
important to continue CPR until emergency medical services
arrive because some victims, particularly those rescued from
cold water, have recovered with no ill effects even after pro-
longed submersion.
When practicing a rescue, do not use the word “Help!”
Lifeguards and others may think there is real danger.
Also, arrange a signal with your buddy that means “Let
go; I need to catch my breath.” Be sure that the “victim” is
realistic; he or she should not chase after you in the water
or in any way behave unlike a real drowning person.


LIFESAVING 17
.To Help Other People at All Times
Unfortunately, death or permanent disability is too often
the result of a drowning process that could have been easily
prevented or stopped. Enhancing your ability to prevent and
safely intervene to stop the drowning process is the goal of the
Lifesaving merit badge.
Major Topics
This pamphlet covers subjects in a specific order to help you
follow the material in a logical progression:
• Drowning situations. There are both similarities and differ-
ences in common situations that lead to drowning incidents.
Awareness of those may help you prevent and respond to events.
• Drowning prevention. The examples of drowning situa-
tions reveal common risk factors such as lack of supervision,
lack of swimming ability, and unsafe areas. The Safe Swim
Defense plan for safe swimming activities addresses those
common risk factors.
• Recognition. Before responding to a drowning situation,
you need to know that one exists. Too often, victims are not
spotted until it is too late. That is one reason for the buddy
system. Studies have shown that more than half of victims in
guarded pools are first recognized by someone other than
the lifeguards.


18 LIFESAVING
To Help Other People at All Times.
• Assessment. You need to evaluate how many people are in
trouble, how urgently they need help, whether they can help
themselves or need assistance, who at the scene is best quali-
fied to render aid, and whether emergency medical services
personnel should be summoned immediately.
• Water rescue planning. If you decide to act, you need to
determine the safety of the scene and how to best perform a
safe rescue using equipment and people at hand. The Reach,
Throw, Row, Go progression guides rescue planning.
• Rescue procedures. How you perform a rescue will depend
on the victim’s condition, where the victim is, and available
equipment. Some victims will require follow-up care after you
get them to safety.


LIFESAVING 19
.To Help Other People at All Times
Scouts in Action
Almost as soon as Scouting began in the United States in 1910,
the national office began to receive reports of lives saved by
Scouts and leaders. At that time, water rescue training was just
receiving attention. Those early reports were used to refine safe
rescue techniques, such as the use of flotation aids, still in use.
Today, Scouts save approximately 100 people annually from
drowning. Since 1947, Scout Life magazine has reported worthy
true stories of Scouts in action. Excerpts from the “Scouts in
Action” feature are used to illustrate selected topics in this
pamphlet. “Scouts in Action” and “More Scouts in Action,” the
two series featured in the magazine, depict selected lifesaving
stories. Some of these are available online, as well. If you
have an opportunity to review the aquatics-related scenarios,
consider the likely cause of the emergency, how it could have
been prevented, and how you might respond in a similar
situation.
Check out the online archives of favorite “Scouts in
Action” at scoutlife.org/scouts-in-action and
“More Scouts in Action” at scoutlife.org/
more-scouts-in-action.





LIFESAVING 21
.Drowning Situations
Drowning Situations
Various situations lead to trouble in the water. This section
describes some of them.
Drowning is a leading cause of death for 1- to
4-year-olds. Unsupervised toddlers near bodies of
water, particularly backyard pools, are common
victims. If they fall into the water, they can
submerge within 20 seconds without crying
for help.
People who have never supported
themselves in deep water are in danger
if they step into a hole in a lake, step
over the edge of a drop-off at the beach,
or slip off a float in deep water. Such
victims are unable to move just a few
feet to safety, reach for an aid, or call for
help. Adults may struggle ineffectively for
up to a minute.


22 LIFESAVING
Drowning Situations.
Unaided drowning victims will soon lose consciousness.
They may float momentarily at the surface, but are likely to sink
partway or all the way to the bottom. Permanent brain damage
and death may occur within minutes. Prompt rescue is essen-
tial, but finding a submerged victim in murky water is difficult.
Nonswimmers may be in peril as soon as they enter water
over their heads. Other swimmers develop problems when they
attempt to swim distances beyond their ability. Even a strong
person can rapidly become exhausted when using a poorly
executed crawl. At first, the person may only be tired and
just need encouragement. However, panic can set in
when the person becomes vertical in the water and
struggles for breath.
Swimmers can also exhaust themselves and
then drown trying to swim against a rip current.
Avoidance is the best defense against a rip cur-
rent, but swimmers caught in one should swim
parallel to the shore rather than against the cur-
rent. Even expert swimmers in calm, small pools
may need rescue if they suffer a cramp, a heart
attack, a stroke, a seizure, or other debilitating
medical condition. The same is true for those
impaired by alcohol or other drugs.
Rip tide


LIFESAVING 23
.Drowning Situations
Extended breath holding is yet another reason a good
swimmer may need rescue to prevent a fatal drowning.
Hyperventilation, or taking several rapid, deep breaths, does not
increase oxygen but rather decreases CO2 in the blood. That
delays the urge to breathe and can result in loss of conscious-
ness when underwater. For that reason, breath-holding contests
are not allowed during Scout swimming activities.


24 LIFESAVING
Drowning Situations.
Swimmers who are injured may also need rescue. These
situations vary widely, from allergic reactions to jellyfish stings
to being cast against pilings by surf. However, the most com-
mon situation is head, neck, or spinal injury in those who dive
into shallow water or into water with hidden obstacles. Injuries
complicate rescue procedures.
Not everyone who drowns intended to enter the water.
Hundreds die annually from boating incidents. A common situ-
ation is a fisherman, who may or may not be alcohol impaired,
falling from a boat while not wearing a life jacket.
Paddlers, as well as swim-
mers, need to be careful in
moving water, particularly near
low-head dams. The water at
the base of such a dam tumbles
in place and can trap a per-
son or boat. The action of the
water is called a hydraulic,
also known as a “drowning
machine.” Rescues should be
done from shore.


LIFESAVING 25
.Drowning Situations
Floods are major safety
concerns. During hurricanes, more
people die from high water than dam-
age from the wind. If you are in a car
when water starts rising, heed the advice
of the National Weather Service: Turn Around
Don’t Drown®. Rescues in such situations often
require professional, specially equipped swift-water
rescue teams.
Especially when you can’t tell how deep the floodwater is, it is
best to play it safe and turn around.





LIFESAVING 27
.Drowning Prevention: Safe Swim Defense
Drowning Prevention:
Safe Swim Defense
All swimming activity in Scouting is conducted according to the
following Scouting America Safe Swim Defense standards. The
drowning situations just discussed should help you understand
why each item is important. As a lifesaver, you should consider
accident prevention as important as rescue skills. You probably
remember a condensed version of the Safe Swim Defense stan-
dards from Second Class requirement 5(a), but you should now
be ready for a more complete understanding for Lifesaving merit
badge requirement 2. Ideally, your merit badge counselor should
arrange for you to view the same video used for adult leader
training. For a full description of the standards, see the Guide to
Safe Scouting.
1. Qualified Supervision. All swimming activity must be super-
vised by a mature and conscientious adult age 21 or older who
understands and knowingly accepts responsibility for the well-
being and safety of those in his or her care, and who is trained
in and committed to compliance with the eight points of
Scouting America Safe Swim Defense.
2. Personal Health Review.
A complete health history is
required of all participants as
evidence of fitness for
swimming activities.
Supervision and protection
should be adjusted to
anticipate any potential risks
associated with individual
health conditions.


28 LIFESAVING
Drowning Prevention: Safe Swim Defense.
3. Safe Area. All swimming areas must be carefully inspected
and prepared for safety prior to each activity. Water depth,
quality, temperature, movement, and clarity are important
considerations. Hazards must be eliminated or isolated by
conspicuous markings and discussed with participants.
4. Response Personnel (Lifeguards). Every swimming activity
must be closely and continuously monitored by a trained rescue
team on the alert for and ready to respond during emergen-
cies. (The line tender rescue you learned for First Class
is one procedure that response personnel can use
to safeguard unit swims. You will learn addi-
tional techniques for the Lifesaving merit
badge.) The qualified supervisor, the desig-
nated response personnel, and the lookout
work together as a safety team.
5. Lookout. The lookout continuously
monitors the conduct of the swim, iden-
tifies any departures from Safe Swim
Defense guidelines, alerts rescue person-
nel as needed, and monitors the weather
and environment.


LIFESAVING 29
.Drowning Prevention: Safe Swim Defense
6. Ability Groups. All youth and adult participants are
designated as swimmers, beginners, or nonswimmers based on
swimming ability confirmed by standardized Scouting America
swim classification tests. Each group is assigned a specific
swimming area with depths consistent with those abilities.
7. Buddy System. Every participant is paired with another.
Buddies stay together, monitor each other, and alert the safety
team if either needs assistance or is missing. The safety team
knows the number of buddies in the water and conducts buddy
checks to make sure buddies are watching each other.
8. Discipline. All participants should know, understand, and
respect the rules and procedures for safe swimming provided by
Safe Swim Defense guidelines.





LIFESAVING 31
.Victim Recognition
Victim Recognition
The first step in a rescue is recognizing that someone needs
help. Often it is obvious. A capsized canoeist may be frantically
swimming for shore while being swept toward rapids. People
clinging to the top of a car swept off a low-water crossing may
be shouting for help. Bystanders may be calling to someone
floating facedown. But not all drowning situations are that dra-
matic or easy to spot. A child who appears to be playing may
actually be in serious trouble. It is important to know that not
everyone in trouble will call for help or seem to be struggling.
People in danger of drowning can be divided into catego-
ries based on their conditions. Categories include distressed
versus drowning, active versus passive, and conscious versus
unconscious. The labels are less important than the traits
that will help you to recognize an emergency and plan
how to respond. Also note how the type of victim
relates to drowning situations discussed earlier.
Subjects in Danger
Swimmers and nonswimmers alike may be
caught in hazardous situations as the result of
a fall into treacherous water, a boating acci-
dent, a car crash into a lake, or a similar
incident. Details can vary greatly, as will rescue
responses. Some victims may make it to shore
unaided and the rescuer’s responsibility becomes
one of follow-up support, first aid, and transporta-
tion. In other cases, a rescuer can help from shore.
In still others, the lifesaver’s only safe option is to
immediately seek aid from trained rescuers with special
gear. Remember, seeking help is as much a lifesaving technique
as any other. Success is the final measure of any rescue. If you
can’t safely perform a rescue with resources at hand, then quickly
seek help from those with more training and better equipment.


32 LIFESAVING
Victim Recognition.
Tired Swimmer
Tired swimmers may ask for help.
Swimmers in this situation might be
clinging to a boundary line, trying to
float on their back, or making little
progress using short bursts or a weak
stroke. They lack, or think they lack,
the energy to make it to shore and sim-
ply need encouragement or a helping
hand. Tired swimmers are calm, will
respond to questions, and should coop-
erate with the assist. Aid to tired
swimmers prevents rather than inter-
rupts the drowning process.
Distressed Swimmer
Swimmers in distress are normally vertical in the water and
show various degrees of anxiety or panic. They may be poor
swimmers who have exceeded their abilities. If caught in a rip
current, they may first become exhausted swimming against the
current and then become frightened. Sudden medical problems
such as a cramp or asthma attack may also cause a conscious
swimmer to need help. Distressed
swimmers make little or no progress in
the water but may struggle enough to
keep their face out of the water. They
may call or wave for help. If they could
level off and apply the same energy to
swimming, they might be able to reach
safety on their own. They may act on
clear instructions from a rescuer and
reach for an aid as it is presented.
Nonbuoyant rescue aids, such as a shirt
or rope, may be used. Once help has
come, they may grow calm and even
assist by following instructions to
assume a prone position and kick.
A tired swimmer is responsive and able to aid in the assist.
A distressed swimmer may call or wave for help and may reach
for an aid.


LIFESAVING 33
.Victim Recognition
However, the rescuer should remain alert and wary, and
should avoid contact. Victims may try to grab the rescuer in
an attempt to remain above water. It may be some time before
they return to a normal state of mind and behavior. The longer
distressed swimmers remain in trouble, the more likely they are
to show the symptoms of an active drowning victim.
Active Drowning Victim
Active drowning victims are experiencing the beginning of the
drowning process prior to inhaling water, becoming uncon-
scious, and submerging for a prolonged period. Like distressed
swimmers, these victims are also frantic or distraught. However,
the level of mental “distress” is not the important factor. Active
drowning victims lack the ability to make deliberate motions to
stay afloat and will generally go under within 20 to 60 seconds.
They can’t call or wave for help; they must be recognized by
their behavior. They are usually vertical in the water. They may
have their head thrown back with arms extended to the side and
pressing down or flapping. The arm action may resemble that of
climbing a ladder. There is no effective leg movement. Their
head may bob below the surface. Their struggle might continue
momentarily under water. They probably cannot respond to
commands or reach for nearby rescue aids. During the assist,
they may grab a rescuer who makes contact and resist horizon-
tal tows. Respond quickly, and use buoyant aids for support.
Toddlers who lose their footing or fall into deep water may be
horizontal in the water rather than vertical due to the weight of their
heads. They may briefly look like they are trying to “dog paddle.”
The active drowning victim cannot call or wave for help and
cannot reach for an aid.


34 LIFESAVING
Victim Recognition.
Passive Drowning Victim
Various situations lead to victims who do not struggle. Unaided,
active drowning victims will soon lose consciousness and
become passive. Immersion in cold water can numb and weak-
en swimmers, eventually causing unconsciousness even if they
are wearing a life jacket. Other swimmers may black out with
little or no warning because of a diving injury, hyperventila-
tion, heart attack, stroke, seizure,
drunkenness, or drug reaction.
Unconscious victims may
float facedown at the surface or
sink partway or all the way to
the bottom. Spotting such victims
in murky water may be difficult.
Rescuers must make physical
contact, but the victims will not
resist. Speed and resuscitation are
critical. In every instance, any-
one who has lost consciousness
in the water will need medical
evaluation. Summon emergency
medical help as soon as possible.
Impaired or Injured Swimmer
A water rescue may become more complex if victims are injured
or suffering from a nondrowning medical emergency. Cramps,
strokes, seizures, or stings or bites from marine life may cause
otherwise good swimmers to have trouble staying afloat. Diving
into shallow water or being hit by a surfboard can cause head
and spinal injuries. Cuts and broken bones can result from boat
collisions, water-skiers hitting objects, vehicles entering the
water, boats capsizing in rapids, or surf casting swimmers
against pilings. Gasoline explosions on motorboats can cause
burns. Anglers might become entangled in hooks.
A passive drowning victim probably is not breathing and will
need medical assistance; a contact rescue is likely.


LIFESAVING 35
.Victim Recognition
A phone is impor-
tant equipment for
any emergency.
If the person is passively
floating facedown or is sub-
merged, rescue is the same as
any other passive drowning case.
Breathing and circulation are the
primary first-aid concerns, and
emergency medical services should
be called as soon as possible.
If the person is still con-
scious, rescue procedures will
often be similar to those for other
conscious victims, but keep gener-
al first-aid rules in mind after you
move the person to safety: Treat
the most serious condition first,
do no further harm, and quickly
summon help if needed.
Rescue procedures may need modification for some situ-
ations. If the person is having convulsions, you will need to
keep his or her face out of the water. Special procedures are
also needed if there are signs of
head, neck, or spinal injury.
Water rescue for victims
of spinal injury will
be covered later.
The rescue of an impaired or injured swimmer generally is similar
to those for other active or passive victims, although some situa-
tions may require special response.
REACH–THROW–GO FOR HELP
Use these options in dangerous situations when it is
unsafe to be on or in the water.





LIFESAVING 37
.Planning a Rescue
Planning a Rescue
The steps in any rescue follow four A’s. Note that action
should not be taken until you accept responsibility
and form a plan of rescue that is safe for both you
and the victim.
The first step is Awareness, that is, rec-
ognizing the need, which was covered in the
previous section.
The second step is Assessment. How
many victims are there, how urgent are their
needs, what safety hazards exist, who is best
qualified to make the rescue, what items are
nearby that can be used during a rescue?
The third step is Action. Make and execute
a plan based on your assessment. Decide which
method of rescue—Reach–Throw–Row–Go—is
most appropriate. Gather equipment to be used in
that rescue and determine if there are others present
who can help. Direct someone to call emergency services if
the victims are facedown or injured.
The final step is Aftercare. If needed, provide first aid until
medical help arrives. If first aid and medical evaluation are not
needed, reassure victims and make sure there is someone who
will take responsibility for any minors involved.
Steps for Planning a Rescue
Awareness Recognize the need.
Assessment Who, what, where. Weigh who responds.
Action Take responsibility. Develop a safe plan.
Execute the plan.
Aftercare First aid as needed. Release to
reliable party.


38 LIFESAVING
Planning a Rescue.
Accepting Leadership
If someone already has started a rescue, respond only if you are
clearly in a better position to help the victim; for example, if you
are much closer. Otherwise, consider how to help without interfer-
ing. Make sure emergency help has been called if you think it will
be needed. If the victim is in a lake and might go under before
help arrives, pinpoint the person’s position against landmarks.
You also may keep curious bystanders from getting in the way.
If no one is attempting a rescue, check that someone in
authority—a lifeguard, park ranger, or Scout leader—hasn’t yet
noticed the problem. Alert that person and follow instructions.
Shouting for help is often the first action you should take.
If no one else takes responsibility, then it is up to you.
Don’t hesitate to act just because others, including adults,
are milling around undecided. They might not know how
to respond. In that case, proceed with planning the rescue,
including asking bystanders to call for aid, get equipment, help
launch a boat, or any other simple task.
Selecting a Rescue Technique
Summoning help, gathering equipment, and getting into posi-
tion to perform a rescue in hazardous conditions may take some
time. Rescuer safety is a major concern, not only because of
danger to the rescuer but also because an injured rescuer will no
longer be able to help the person in trouble. Do not rush the
Don’t waste time.
Many victims
need assistance
quickly—the
drowning process
may take only
moments.


LIFESAVING 39
.Planning a Rescue
planning process. If the problem exceeds your abilities, go for
help. The skills you learn for the Lifesaving merit badge are
most appropriate for rescues in safe conditions.
Fortunately, rescues in calm, safe waters are relatively
simple to rapidly plan and execute. The goal for active vic-
tims is to quickly provide support so they can breathe without
stress. Various rescue aids are available to help support the
person. Rescuer contact with the victim can often be avoided as
many victims will be able to grasp an aid if it is placed within
their reach.
The goal for passive victims is to move them to safety so
that resuscitation can be started as soon as possible. The res-
cuer must grasp unconscious victims to provide support.
Noncontact tow
Order of Rescue Methods
The order of preference for rescue techniques, from
simple to more complex, is easy to remember:
REACH–THROW–ROW–GO
Each will be covered in detail. The method you select
will depend on the victim’s condition and distance from
shore, available aids, and the condition of the water.
Noncontact tow





LIFESAVING 41
.Reaching, Throwing, and Rowing Rescues
Reaching, Throwing,
and Rowing Rescues
Reaching, throwing, and rowing will often be the safest and
most effective rescue types.
Reaching Rescues
Reaching rescues are safe, simple, and effective. Poor swimmers
may get into trouble as soon as they enter water over their head.
That is likely to be close to the edge of a pool or near a dock. If
you are out of the water and spot someone in trouble, lie down
at the edge, extend a hand, and pull the victim to safety. This
simple procedure will quickly and safely save a life. However,
conscious victims often will stop their own efforts to remain
afloat once they grab a rescuer’s hand. The extra weight can
pull an unprepared rescuer into the water. With reaching res-
cues, always lie down first or otherwise brace yourself.
If there is something firm to grasp, such as a pool ladder,
you can extend the reach of your arm or leg by entering the
water while maintaining a firm grip on shore. However, first see
if there is something nearby, such as a shirt, towel, pool noodle,
or other aid to extend your reach. Note that some conscious
victims will not be able to reach for a device, so position it to
contact the victim’s hands or arms.
Provide verbal
instruction and
assurance to all
conscious victims.
REACH


42 LIFESAVING
Reaching, Throwing, and Rowing Rescues.
If you are using a pole, don’t thrust it at the victim like a
spear. Instead, sweep it from the side under the victim’s arm.
Always firmly tell victims in clear, simple words what you want
them to do, for example, “Grab the pole.”
Unconscious victims will be unable to grab a pole or other
extension aid. Many hotel and apartment pools will have poles
available with a hook or loop on the end. Those can sometimes
be used to snag unconscious or unresponsive victims to pull
them to the side.
However, rather than try to wrestle someone from the bot-
tom with a shepherd’s crook, it is generally better for a good
swimmer to do an in-water Go rescue instead of a reaching res-
cue for passive victims beyond arm’s reach.
In some natural bodies of water, there often is a gradual
increase in depth away from shore. Victims may be found
near a transition from standing depth to deep water. A rescuer
in those situations may wade partway out with an extension
device to do an in-water extension assist. A human chain
may also be an option. However, only good swimmers should
attempt either effort.
Water flowing in a recently filled irrigation canal caught
the attention of a 4-year-old girl. A Scout saw her fall in. He
ran over, lay on the bank, and grabbed her just 4 feet from
where the water was swept into a debris-laden culvert.


LIFESAVING 43
.Reaching, Throwing, and Rowing Rescues
Throwing Rescues
For victims beyond your reach, an aid
may be thrown from shore. A floating
aid with a line attached is best because
it provides support and allows you to
pull the victim in. However, floats and
lines may also be used by themselves.
Always keep track of a victim’s
location, especially if the water is
murky or the person is far from shore.
If the victim submerges, you need to
know where he or she went down.
Work with a partner if possible. One
person can act as a spotter while the
other gathers equipment and performs the rescue.
Aim carefully to toss the device within the victim’s reach
without hitting him or her in the head. Allow for wind and cur-
rent. Shout to get the person’s attention before the throw and
then provide simple instructions.
A throwing rescue is most appropriate for tired swimmers
and distressed victims. Drowning victims who are active will
not be able to reach for the device or move even a few feet if it
lands nearby. Throwing assists will not work for unconscious or
impaired victims who cannot grasp the aid.
THROW
Always commu-
nicate with the
victim. Always
keep the victim
in view.


44 LIFESAVING
Reaching, Throwing, and Rowing Rescues.
The easiest way to throw a rope is to use a floating line
stuffed in a small sack. These throw bags are often carried
on paddle craft and are sometimes found around pools. Make
sure the neck of the bag is not cinched. Hold the end loop in
one hand and throw the bag with the other. The line will play
out of the bag. If you miss your first toss, then use the rope as
a regular heaving line rather than restuffing it. Leave a bit of
water in the bag when throwing it again.
If you are using a throw bag for a victim caught in a river
current, have him or her roll over on the back after grasping the
line and hold on as he or she swings in an arc toward shore. Be
prepared for considerable force once the line becomes taut. You
may need to belay the line around a stout tree or large rock, or
have others help you hold it. Be sure that you can release the
line if you are about to be pulled in or if the victim gets tangled
and needs the line slacked.
To coil the line for a right-handed
throw, place your left hand on your left
knee and stretch the line to the full reach of
your right arm. Then return the line from
your right hand to your left hand to form
a loop. If you leave your left hand fixed to
your knee and reach as far as possible each
time with your right hand, all of the coils
will be the same size and less likely to tangle
when thrown. Reverse the directions for a left-
handed toss.
If you are coiling a heaving line with-
out a float or monkey fist at the end, you
will need to separate the line into two parts:
one coil is thrown and the other feeds the
line. The weight of the thrown coil helps
make an accurate toss. One way to divide
the rope is to gather the first few loops
with the index finger of the hand on your
knee. Then coil the rest of the line on your
remaining fingers.
You also need to avoid tossing the free end of the line into
the water. An easy way to do that for both a heaving line and
the line on a ring buoy is to tie a bowline in the free end and
slip it over your wrist. Be sure the loop is large enough that
your hand can easily slip free if needed.
Don’t use a wrist
loop if you are
throwing the line
from a moving
boat.


LIFESAVING 45
.Reaching, Throwing, and Rowing Rescues
Many ring buoy lines have a float or “lemon”
at the end. The rescuer steps on the line just
prior to the toss. A lemon is often recom-
mended to prevent a person who can’t
swim from being pulled into the water.
However, it is more cumbersome to use
than a wrist bowline. In an emergency,
use the end of the line as you find it.
Accurate use of a heaving line or
a ring buoy with a line attached takes
practice. One concern is management of
the rope to keep it from tangling. The
line for some ring buoys is stored in a
bag or a canister, but it is common for
the line to be kept in a loose coil.
To throw a heaving line or ring buoy, step back with the
leg on your throwing side, swing your throwing arm back, and
toss the coil or buoy underhand to the victim. Grasp a buoy
through the center of the solid part—not one of the side lines.
Release the coil or buoy when your throwing arm is about
level and still moving. If you release too soon, the aid will hit the
water just in front of you. If you release too late, the aid will trav-
el up rather than out. Practice is needed for consistent accuracy.
ROPE BAG


46 LIFESAVING
Reaching, Throwing, and Rowing Rescues.
Aim to place a heaving line over the victim’s shoulder and tell
the person to hold on. You will need to pull in the line fast enough
to keep the person up, but not so fast you jerk the line from his or
her grasp. If you miss, quickly recoil the line and try again.
Throw a ring buoy beyond the victim and then use the
line to pull the buoy into the victim. If you miss, quickly
pull the buoy back for another try. Drop the retrieved
line at your feet—you do not need to recoil it for
another toss.
When the victim grabs the line or buoy, pull
in the line hand-over-hand. Cross your palm
over the line, thumb inward, for a secure grip.
Active drowning
victims cannot
reach for aids.


LIFESAVING 47
.Reaching, Throwing, and Rowing Rescues
Rowing Rescues
Boating incidents contribute significantly to drown-
ing and other injuries in the United States.
Numerous boating incidents in small open
motorboats on inland waters involve capsize or
passengers falling overboard. Fatalities also
occur when paddle craft are used. According
to the American Canoe Association, 85 per-
cent of canoeing victims and 48 percent of
kayaking victims were not wearing life jack-
ets. Unfortunately, they could not swim well
enough at the time to save themselves.
Boat rescues are appropriate for any type of victim. In
essence, you are using a floating platform to get close enough
for reaching and throwing assists. A boat rescue can be both
faster and safer than a swimming assist. It is the best way to
reach multiple victims who are far away and may provide a
platform for rescue breathing or CPR without having to wait
until the victim is brought to shore. It offers protection from
currents, waves, and cold water.
Although you may already be familiar with some of the
concepts discussed in this section, you should study it carefully
and pay close attention to demonstrations or videos provided
by your counselor. You never know when the information will
be useful.
Small-boat skills are not included in the
Lifesaving requirements. That is not because
boat rescues are unimportant; rather, the skills
for each craft are beyond the scope of this merit
badge and vary more than can be included in this pam-
phlet. The Canoeing, Kayaking, Motorboating, Rowing,
Small-Boat Sailing, and Whitewater merit badges all
offer opportunities to learn boat rescue skills.
A ski boat hit a small sailboat, knocking the occupant
unconscious and cutting a gash in his back. Two Scouts
in another sailboat pulled him aboard and began rescue
breathing on the way to shore.


48 LIFESAVING
Reaching, Throwing, and Rowing Rescues.
Even if you have never rowed a boat, paddled a canoe, or
started an outboard, you may still be able to use a small boat to
assist a swimmer or boater in need. If conditions are safe, get
in the front of the boat and paddle, stroking first on one side
and then the other. That will allow you to make headway in
slight wind or current when you might otherwise be shoved
off course.
Consider the following for rescues from boats.
• If the boat is large enough, take at least two rescuers rather
than going alone.
• If only single-person kayaks are available, consider launching
two kayaks for the rescue rather than one.
• Take extra paddles or oars and flotation aids to use as reach-
ing and throwing devices as you approach.
• Keep the victim in sight at all times.
• Shout encouragement and instructions to the victim.
• Avoid letting active victims grasp the sides of small boats that
might capsize.


LIFESAVING 49
.Reaching, Throwing, and Rowing Rescues
Keep your eye on
the victim.
• With motorboats, cut the engine before the final approach to
avoid injuries from the prop.
• If you are the only rescuer, carefully consider options before leav-
ing the boat to reach a submerged victim. Even a slight breeze
may blow the boat away faster than you can tow the victim to it.
Pinpointing a Victim’s Location
Always watch the victim as you approach, in case he or she
submerges. The farther away you are, the harder it will be to
keep track of where the person went down. As you approach,
line up the victim with two marks on the shore, a shorter one in
front of a taller one. If you later become confused about the vic-
tim’s location, you will know that he or she was near the line
defined by the two objects.
Two fixed points are required to define the line. The two
points can be part of the same object—the front and back of a
car, for example. If you line up the victim only with the boat and
one object on shore, you can swing off course after the victim
disappears. The only sure way to pinpoint a location on the
water is for two or more people to align objects with the victim
from different locations. The spot where the lines of sight cross is
where the person went down. You should serve as a second spot-
ter if someone else has already begun a rescue.
How to take a bearing





LIFESAVING 51.Swimming (Go) Rescues
Swimming (Go) Rescues
The final option in the order of methods of rescue, following
reach, throw, and row, is go. This can mean two different
actions. Either you go for help because the rescue is too difficult
or dangerous to attempt alone, or you go into the water to per-
form a swimming assist, ideally using a floating aid.
Swimming assists can be divided into two classes depend-
ing on the need to touch, or contact, the victim.
In noncontact rescues, the victim grasps the rescue aid
you provide. Noncontact rescues are the first choice for active
victims. Rather than throw a rescue aid, you take it to the victim.
In contact rescues, you grasp the victim and the aid.
Contact rescues are normally required for unconscious victims.
Go = Seek help
or enter the water
if safe to do so.
A Scout and his uncle were taking part in a precamp work-
day when they heard a call for help. They took a boat out
to where a victim had submerged. With the help of another
swimmer, they conducted a quick in-water search, found
the victim, brought him aboard the boat, and returned to
shore. The Scout was the only person at the scene trained
in CPR.


52 LIFESAVINGSwimming (Go) Rescues.
Each type of rescue technique discussed in this pamphlet
has been more complicated and has required more skill than
the one discussed before. Swimming rescues are generally
more complex than reaching rescues, and you likely will need
to make several choices as you plan your action. An overview
of the complete process is provided, followed by step-by-step
details for choices needed in different situations.
Recall the four A’s appropriate for any rescue: Awareness,
Assessment, Action, and Aftercare. After you decide that an in-
water rescue is the appropriate action, noncontact and contact
rescues follow the same steps:
• Preparation (equipment selection, calling for help)
• Entry
• Approach
• Providing support
• Moving to safety
• Removal from water
Water Rescue Procedure for Active
and Passive Victims
Getting to the victim, that is, choices for entries and approach
strokes, is similar for both noncontact and contact rescues. How
you complete the rescue differs for active and passive victims.
1. Preparation—have someone call 911 for passive victims.
Active victim Passive victim


LIFESAVING 53.Swimming (Go) Rescues
2. Enter the water safely with preselected equipment.
3. Approach rapidly, keeping victim in sight.
4. Provide support, speaking to the victim as appropriate. Allow
active victims to grasp aid. You will need to grasp passive victims.


54 LIFESAVINGSwimming (Go) Rescues.
5. Move to safety—the closest safe exit may not be where
you entered.
6. Assist or remove from water.
7. Provide care as needed.


LIFESAVING 55.Swimming (Go) Rescues
Equipment Selection
Equipment choices will depend on the situation and location.
Buoyant items are preferred for swimming rescues.
State laws often require owners to post rescue aids, such
as shepherd’s crooks and ring buoys, at unguarded hotel and
apartment pools. Home pools also should have rescue devices
close at hand.
Recreational swimmers often use a variety of buoyant
items, such as swim tubes, air and foam mattresses, kick-
boards, and foam rods or noodles. Other flotation aids such as
life jackets, ring buoys, and cushions will be on hand at mari-
nas and on float trips.
In a pinch, use a nonbuoyant item, such as a towel
or the clothes you are wearing. When you have a choice
of aids, weigh the time needed to reach a distant aid
against your ability to use a less suitable item nearby.
If you are wearing a life jacket, leave it on and
carry a second flotation device. If you have only one
life jacket, consider the victim’s condition. If the
victim is active, it may be best to carry the life jacket
and push it to him or her for support. If the victim is
unconscious near the surface, it will be easier to tow
him or her if you wear the life jacket.
Lifeguards typically use either rescue tubes or rescue
buoys and may not practice with alternative items. These
are also excellent aids for volunteer rescuers who happen
upon a situation where professional lifeguards are not on duty.
However, the lay rescuer needs to be ready to use other devices
because these may not be available.


56 LIFESAVINGSwimming (Go) Rescues.
Entries
Carefully consider the best location to enter the water. If you can
get closer to the victim by first running along the shoreline or
edge of a pool, then do so. Take care not to trip or fall. Also
keep watch on the victim. If the bank is irregular or covered by
dense vegetation, you may need to enter from a clear area that
could mean a longer swim. In lakes, look out for weeds or sub-
merged trees. In rivers, allow for current and enter upstream of
the victim.
Disrobing for Rescues
A swimming rescue may require a lot of energy.
Swimming while supporting another person, even with
a floating aid, can be exhausting, and speed is needed
if the victim is not breathing. Discard heavy clothing,
such as a jacket and boots, before you enter the water.
The time this takes will be easily regained through your
increased ease of swimming.
How much to discard depends on the situation. If an
unconscious victim is floating in a small shallow pool,
time is critical and the distance to safety may be only 6
feet or so. In that case, you might not remove as much
as you would when facing a long approach swim. If the
shore or water bottom is rough or cluttered, it may be
best to have shoes on.
If you are dressed for cold weather, consider
whether it is safe to enter cold water, which can be
deadly in just minutes.
DANGER! Avoid
swimming rescues
in very cold water.
Beach entry Ease-in entry Compact jump


LIFESAVING 57.Swimming (Go) Rescues
You can walk, run, slide, or jump into the water. Choose
an option that is safe for the conditions; a head-first dive is
seldom a good choice. Also avoid jumping from heights. Do so
only for heights less than you are tall and also if you know the
water is deep and clear of submerged
objects. Otherwise, climb lower. You
can hold your rescue aid to your chest
or to the side, or throw it into the water
ahead of you.
The leaping entry or stride jump
is good for entering deep, unobstructed
water from low heights because it
allows you to keep the victim in sight.
Begin as if you were trying to reach the
victim in one giant step. Spring outward
while leaning slightly forward with your
arms outstretched. Move out, not up.
Snap your legs together as they enter
the water. Catch the water on your
chest and push down with your arms
to keep your head above water. It takes
practice to properly time the kick and
the downward movement of the arms.
Whether or not your entry is from a jump,
it is important to select your equipment
before jumping.
Leaping entry


Swimming (Go) Rescues.Approaches
The approach will generally be in a straight line from the entry
point to the victim. Always try to keep the victim in sight. Adapt
your swimming stroke to the type of aid you are carrying, the
distance, and the condition of the water.
A head-up breaststroke is often appropriate,
although any other stroke may also be used. Pace
yourself if the distance is great.
When approaching an active victim, give
instructions and encouragement and carefully close
the final distance to avoid being grabbed. If the vic-
tim appears passive, shout and splash water from a
distance to confirm.
Providing Support for Active Victims
Flotation Aids
The preferred option for an in-water rescue of an active victim is
to avoid contact and provide support by pushing a flotation
device within the grasp of the victim and releasing it. The flota-
tion aid must be buoyant enough to support the victim and the
victim must be conscious and able to grasp the aid.
58 LIFESAVING


LIFESAVING 59.Swimming (Go) Rescues
Tired swimmers and some distressed victims will reach for
the aid as you approach, but victims in the first stages of the
drowning process will be unable to reach for the aid even if
they know it is there. You may need to push the float under the
victim’s arms, into the chest, or into contact with the hands.
If the float is long and narrow, like a rescue tube, noodle, or
surfboard, swing it to the victim from one end or push it to the
victim sideways. Victims are more stable with their arms draped
over such a device than trying to hold it in line with their body.
Provide clear, simple instructions throughout the assist,
such as “Grab this,” “Hold on,” “You’re OK,” or “Follow me.”
If the victim is unable to move to safety on his or her own,
explain clearly that you will grasp the aid and pull the victim to
shore. The victim will generally be more comfortable with his
or her head up rather than on the back. Use a sidestroke for the
tow if you can control the float with one hand. Use an elemen-
tary backstroke kick to do the tow if you need to hold the aid
with both hands.
In a small pool, the closest point of safety may be behind
the victim. In that case you can push on the aid to move the
victim to the side. As always, tell the victim what you are going
to do and continue to provide encouragement.
Nonbuoyant Aids
Buoyant flotation aids are preferred for in-water rescues of all
types of victims. However, there may be situations when such a
float is not available. Second choices for rescue aids include soft
extension items such as towels, shirts, or short pieces of rope.
Other options include short rigid devices, such as a paddle,
which might float but without sufficient buoyancy to hold the
person’s head above the water.


60 LIFESAVINGSwimming (Go) Rescues.
Use of such aids requires the victim to grasp the device while
you tow him or her with sufficient speed to keep his or her head
out of the water. These options are therefore more appropriate
for tired swimmers or cooperative distressed victims than those
unable to reach for the device when you extend it to them.
The following steps for a shirttail rescue illustrate the use
of a nonbuoyant aid.
Remove your shoes while unfastening your pants. Run
in place to work your pants down while removing your shirt.
Watch the victim rather than the buttons. Step out of your
pants and don’t fuss with socks.
Safely enter the water, approach holding the shirt in your
teeth, and stop before reaching the victim. Flip the shirt over
the victim’s shoulder and tell the person to hold on. Use a side-
stroke to tow the victim to safety, taking care not to jerk the
shirt from the victim’s grasp.
Shirttail rescue


LIFESAVING 61.Swimming (Go) Rescues
Avoiding Contact
In-water contact rescues of active victims can be dangerous. Double
drowning incidents can easily be found in news reports docu-
menting failed rescue attempts when a poor swimmer attempted
to wrestle a victim to safety. Those events could often have been
avoided had a good swimmer responded with a flotation aid.
There are, however, a few situations when a trained swim-
mer might consider a contact rescue of an active victim.
• A calm person asks for help because of fatigue, cramps, or
another problem. If you must enter the water to help such
a person, take a buoyant aid with you. However, if you are
already in the water, it might take too long to retrieve an aid.
Even then, it may be possible to lead the victim to safety
without contact.
• Some conscious victims will be unable to grasp or keep a grip
on a rescue aid, particularly if it is nonbuoyant, because of
rough water or a medical problem such as a stroke or seizure.
• The victim of a spinal injury may be conscious but unable to
grasp an aid. Conscious or not, all spinal injury victims require
special handling techniques that involve direct contact. (These
are covered later under “Spinal Injury Management.”)
• A small child or an infant may fall into a small, shallow back-
yard pool where you are swimming. If you are significantly
larger than the child, a quick contact rescue may be an effec-
tive option with little risk. That would not be the case for a
large adult in trouble.
Lead-and-Wait Tactics
If you are faced with a tired swimmer or panicked victim and
have no equipment, first try to talk the person in. If such swim-
mers can keep their head above water, they can swim—they just
aren’t making the right motions. Tell them to level off and kick
toward you. If they do not follow your instructions, they may at
least move in your direction. If they do, keep
encouraging them as you back up
toward shore while telling them to
come to you so you can help. Little
by little you may be able to lead
them into shallow water
without making contact.
Remember
Rule No. 1:
Don’t become
victim No. 2.


62 LIFESAVINGSwimming (Go) Rescues.
If an active victim will not follow you to shore, back off
and wait. The person may become more cooperative as he or
she tires. As long as the victim can keep his or her head above
water, the water is warm, and no currents are carrying you
toward danger, you are not forced to act. Stay close enough to
place the victim in a tow if it becomes necessary.
Contact Assists for Active Victims
In rare cases you may need to provide assistance to someone by
supporting them without a flotation device. One such circum-
stance is if you and others are caught in a rip current and some
of the party become increasingly tired trying to swim out of the
current parallel to shore.
For short distances, you can aid a cooperative tired person
swimming on his or her stomach by swimming alongside and
grasping the upper arm.
If the person is trying a restful backstroke, a single armpit
tow is appropriate.
If the underarm swim-along or armpit tow won’t work
because of waves or other circumstances, a cross-chest carry is
another option.
Underarm swim-along Armpit tow
Cross-chest carry


LIFESAVING 63.Swimming (Go) Rescues
Both the armpit tow and cross-chest carry are also used for
unconscious victims and will be described more fully in that
section. A scissor or whip kick is used for either towing meth-
od, and both tows may require a strong initial motion to move
the victim from vertical to near horizontal.
Before you get close enough to touch a tired swimmer, be sure to
tell the person what you are going to do and how you wish him or her
to help. If the person is unable to respond, reconsider your options.
If the person panics and you feel you are losing control, let
go, get away, and try something else.
Defenses and Escapes
If you approach victims properly, you shouldn’t need to
struggle with them. If they reach for you rather than your rescue
aid, let go and back off. Don’t forget lead-and-wait options. But
assume for the sake of practice that a victim manages to grab
you. Remain calm. You should be able to quickly free yourself.
Drowning victims want support to keep their head clear
of the water so that they can breathe. They are not trying to
purposely hold you beneath the water. If a drowning person
reaches for or grabs you, your first defense is to go under, fast.
The victim will likely let go since he or she is trying to stay up,
and will certainly will not swim down after you.
Wrist Escape. If a victim grabs your wrist, you have two
options. If the person is small and safety is near, let him or her
hang on while you quickly tow the person to shore. However,
you can also break free. If a victim grabs your wrist with only
one hand, break the hold by quickly jerking your wrist against
his or her thumb. If the person grasps your wrist or forearm
with both hands, you may need to apply extra force. Push
down to pull the victim lower in the water. Make a fist with
your “confined” hand, grab it with your free hand, and jerk
them both upward.
Wrist escape


64 LIFESAVINGSwimming (Go) Rescues.
Rear Head-hold Escape. If a
victim grabs you around the neck
or shoulders from the rear, take
a quick breath, tuck your chin to
either side, raise your shoulders,
and submerge both yourself and the
victim by using the arm motion of a
feetfirst surface dive. This action is
also known as suck, tuck, and duck.
If you don’t pull the victim under
enough for him or her to let go,
grasp the person’s upper arms near
the elbows and shove upward and
away while twisting your head and
shoulders. Swim clear of the person
before surfacing. Do not struggle
with him or her or try to place the
person in a hold. Back off and wait
while you review your options and
the person’s condition.
Front Head-hold Escapes. Use the same technique if the vic-
tim grabs you from the front. Take a quick breath (suck), pull
your chin down so it doesn’t hang on the person’s arm (tuck),
turn your head to either side, raise your shoulders, and sub-
merge (duck). If the person doesn’t let go, push upward and
away with your hands beneath his or her arms. You also may
push a small victim up with your arms against his or her hips
while you lean forward.
Be aware that
active victims
may try to stay
afloat by grasping
would-be rescuers.
Rear head-hold escapes
Front head-hold escapes


LIFESAVING 65.Swimming (Go) Rescues
Landing a Conscious Victim
Conscious victims probably can remove themselves from the
water once they have sure footing on the bottom or a firm hold
on a ladder. Choose a safe landing site before entering the water.
In exceptional cases, such as in a steep-sided quarry, you may
both need help from others onshore. Ideally, arrange such aid
before the rescue. When landing a conscious victim, lower your
legs to check the water depth if you can do so without causing
the victim to lose support. Natural bodies of water can be shal-
low for long distances from shore. It may be easier to walk
through shallow water than it is to swim.
Shallow-water Assist. If the victim is exhausted, cold, or has
trouble with footing, help him or her ashore using a shallow-water
assist. While standing at the person’s side, help him or her to stand
and to place one arm around your neck and across your shoulder.
Grasp the wrist of that arm with your outside hand, and wrap your
free arm around the person’s back. Then walk slowly together to
shore. If he or she is much larger than you are, you may need to
ask others for aid. A second person can help from the other side.
Aftercare for a Conscious Victim
Once you reach safety, make sure the victim gets appropriate
first aid. Call 911 as soon as you suspect advanced care may be
needed. You may need to offer advice to friends and family
members waiting onshore. Even if victims have remained con-
scious, they may need treatment for shock.
If a medical condition led to the incident, strongly suggest
that the victim get medical attention as soon as practical. If the
victim shows signs of hypothermia, suggest that he or she be
moved quickly to a warm place. Small children may be scared
and will need reassurance, not scolding. A child’s parents might
be upset because of their own fright or panic. Try tactfully to be
a calming influence on all those around.
If the victim was alone or is unknown to you, look for an
adult in a position of authority—a park employee or your parent,
for example. Ask that person to see that the victim has access to
care, can notify others, and has adequate transportation home.
Don’t forget yourself. Wait for your own adrenaline rush
to subside before going off on your own or doing anything that
requires concentration, even crossing a busy street on foot. If
you are cold, take the time to get dry and warm.
Additional details on first aid and CPR will be covered after
rescue procedures for passive victims.
Shallow-water
assist


66 LIFESAVINGSwimming (Go) Rescues.
Line Tender Rescue
As a reminder, this section is
still discussing the Go portion of
Reach–Throw–Row–Go. The
options for active victims have
been covered above. Before cov-
ering rescue procedures for
passive victims, now is a good
time to review the First Class
line tender rescue that is a pre-
requisite for the Lifesaving merit
badge. The rescue is appropriate
for both active and passive
victims. If you view the Scouting
America Safe Swim Defense
training material for requirement 2, you will see a video presenta-
tion of the technique.
Two people are required for this rescue. One feeds a line
from shore; the other swims the line past and into the grasp of
an active victim or clasps a passive victim to hold his or her
face above the water. The line tender then
pulls in both the victim and the swimmer. The
swimmer may carry a flotation aid if available.
The line tender rescue is similar to the
line and reel used for decades to save thou-
sands on the beaches of Australia and New
Zealand. When first deployed, the swimmer
swam the line using a harness. Flotation
devices were added later. Although motorized
inflatable boats have replaced lines as the
primary surf rescue device in those locations,
the technique remains valid. Because it is easy
to teach to good swimmers, and the risk to
the swimmer is reduced by being connected
to shore, this procedure is a recommended
option for response personnel in Scouting
America Safe Swim Defense. However, it is
most appropriate for safe swimming areas. Do
not use this procedure for whitewater rescues.
Swimmer safely enters water and swims line
past and then to active victim.


LIFESAVING 67.Swimming (Go) Rescues
For passive victims, the swimmer turns the victim faceup
and holds on while the line tender pulls in the rope hand-over-
hand. For submerged victims, the swimmer does a surface dive
to reach and grasp the victim.
Providing Support for
Passive Victims
Preparation. Rescue options for
unconscious victims are more
limited than for active victims;
throwing rescues and noncontact
tows won’t work. Speed is critical,
but don’t forget the basics. Assume
that anyone floating facedown will
need emergency medical services.
• Call out for or get someone to call 911 immediately. Don’t
wait until you check for breathing after the rescue.
• Consider the possibility of a wading assist. See if appropriate
equipment is at hand.
• Check the water for hazards and decide how and where to
enter and exit the water.
• Look for signs of injury.
• Attempt a rescue only if it is safe to do so and if you are the
most qualified person.
Line tender pulls both victim and swimmer to safety.
Call 911 immedi-
ately if a victim in
the water appears
to be unconscious.


68 LIFESAVINGSwimming (Go) Rescues.
The rescue of an unconscious victim will always require
contact. If the victim is at the water’s edge, a reaching assist
may be possible. For victims away from the edge, a contact
tow will be necessary. Although passive victims are unlikely to
grasp a rescuer, you should always look for an appropriate flo-
tation device to carry with you.
Some aids will be more suitable than others. It will be
easier to support the victim with a rescue tube or something
similar, such as a noodle, than with a ring buoy or ice chest.
Unless the victim is submerged in deep water, you should prob-
ably put on a life jacket before entering the water rather than
carrying it with you.
Entry and Approach. The same entries and approaches are
used for a passive victim as for an active victim. Always keep the
victim in sight; unconscious victims often submerge. If the vic-
tim is still at the surface when you get near, call out and splash
water on the person to confirm he or she is unresponsive.
Rescues for a passive victim may be done from either the
front or the rear. Choose whichever is easier, quicker, and better
suited to a particular aid.
Wrist Tow: Front Approach
Use the wrist tow when approaching a facedown victim from
the front. It will work whether the victim is at the surface, float-
ing below the surface, or resting facedown on the bottom.
After confirming that the victim is unconscious, reach
across to the victim’s opposite wrist as if you were shaking
hands, and take hold under the wrist with your palm up. Hold
the victim’s wrist firmly and begin your tow. Roll your wrist by
turning your thumb up and over. This will turn the victim onto
his or her back.
Maintain this grip as you tow the victim to safety with
a sidestroke. Both your towing arm and the victim’s arm
should remain straight; some tension is needed to keep the
victim faceup.
Wrist tow


LIFESAVING 69.Swimming (Go) Rescues
It also is possible to use the wrist tow to place a flotation aid
under the victim’s shoulders. Hold the aid with one hand and reach
across it with the other to grasp the person’s wrist. Lift up slightly,
twist him or her onto the back, and shove the float underneath as
he or she turns. You will then need to change your grip to keep
the person on the float. You may be able to place one arm
over his or her shoulder and reach across the chest to
grasp the aid with your hand. That should steady
the person on the float and leave your other
arm free for swimming.
Armpit Tow: Back Approach
The armpit tow may be used for active, semiconscious, and pas-
sive victims at or near the surface if you approach the victim
from the back. There are both single and double versions, which
may be used with or without a flotation aid.
Use of a single armpit tow for a tired swimmer floating on the
back has already been covered. When the victim is unconscious,
he or she may be floating facedown or almost vertically. Getting
the victim into a faceup towing position is the first challenge.
The wrist tow is
used only for
passive victims.
Wrist tow with air mattress


70 LIFESAVINGSwimming (Go) Rescues.
For the single armpit tow, use one hand to grasp the victim
under the armpit, keeping your thumb up and on the outside.
(Your right hand goes to the right armpit or your left hand to
the left armpit.) Pull back with your arm and immediately begin
swimming to shift the victim from facedown to faceup. It may
take several strong strokes using both your legs and free arm
to pull the victim onto the back. Once the victim is fairly level,
continue to shore with your towing arm extended. Be sure to
keep the victim’s face out of the water.
If the victim is large, you may find it easier
to pull him or her onto the back if you grasp
both armpits and lean backward while using
a whip kick. If safety is only a short distance
away, continue with the double armpit tow.
However, such a tow requires a strong, well-
developed kick. Once the victim is level using
both arms, it may be quicker and less tiring to
shift to the single armpit tow.
Single armpit tow, back approach
The armpit tow may be used for both passive
and active victims.
Double armpit tow


LIFESAVING 71.Swimming (Go) Rescues
The double armpit tow can also be used with some buoy-
ant aids, particularly if they are soft and relatively long and
narrow, such as a rescue tube or noodle.
For either a conscious or unconscious victim, approach
from the rear with the float across your chest and under your
arms. Use both your hands to scoop under the victim’s armpits,
lean back, and pull him or her against the float as you kick
backward. Keep your head to one side to avoid being hit by the
victim’s head as it moves back.
For unconscious victims, it may be easier to continue for-
ward and roll the victim faceup rather than pulling back from
the rear. Reach under the victim’s armpits to grasp the shoulders
and pull him or her firmly against the float. Then dip one of
your shoulders and roll onto your back to turn the victim faceup.
Double armpit tow with flotation aid
Using a buoy in the rescue of an
unconscious victim
Approach from the rear
Using the double armpit tow


72 LIFESAVINGSwimming (Go) Rescues.
Whether you should pull back or roll to place a passive
victim faceup depends on the victim’s size, the type of flotation
aid, how confident you are with either, and also on the direc-
tion to safety. If you pull back, you are headed back along your
approach line. If you roll, you continue in the same direction.
Transitions to Cross-Chest Carry
Whenever possible, use a flotation aid to help support both you
and a passive victim. If a suitable aid is not available, try either
the wrist tow or the armpit tows. However, both of those may
be ineffective in some cases. Since a victim recovered from the
bottom is no longer floating, you will need to provide additional
support while swimming. The relaxed neck muscles of an
unconscious victim may make it difficult to keep his or her face
out of the water, particularly in rough water.
The cross-chest carry, or tow, gives a victim additional sup-
port and can be used if other techniques prove difficult.
You can change to a cross-chest tow from either the arm-
pit tow or the wrist tow. To do so, change towing arms as you
switch briefly from a sidestroke to a backstroke and move
behind the victim. Pull the victim close with your towing arm
and reach over the victim’s shoulder and across the chest with
your other arm. Rest your hand just below the person’s armpit.
Hold him or her firmly against the side of your chest with your
hip in the middle of the back. The elbow of your towing arm
should be against his or her chest. Support the head against your
shoulder or neck. If the victim starts to sink during the change,
use your hip to push him or her back to a level towing position.
Changing from wrist tow
to cross-chest tow
Changing from armpit
tow to cross-chest tow


LIFESAVING 73.Swimming (Go) Rescues
Use a sidestroke to tow
the victim to safety. If you are
swimming slightly facedown
to support the victim on your
hip, use a regular scissor kick.
If you are swimming slightly
on your back, use a reverse scissor.
The cross-chest tow offers more
support for the victim and is better suited to rough water than
other tows when you don’t have a flotation aid. However, it
takes a lot of energy and is therefore not well suited for most
rescuers over long distances. Try either the armpit tow or the wrist
tow first. You may also shout to someone on shore for help, such as
bringing out a flotation aid.
Submerged Victims
An unconscious victim can come to rest anywhere between the
surface and the bottom. If the victim is just below the surface,
reach down and use the wrist tow to bring him or her up and
forward. If the person is deeper, you will need to use a feetfirst
or headfirst surface dive. See the Swimming merit badge pam-
phlet if you need to review those skills.
Grasp the submerged victim in any logical manner, either
by the wrist, under one arm, or under both arms. If the bot-
tom is hard and clear, you can shove against it with your legs
to help you up. If the bottom is muddy or covered with weeds,
grasp the victim from above with one hand and use the other
hand and a strong kick to pull him or her up. If you have a
flotation aid, leave it at the surface and grasp it again after you
surface. You can use the strap on a rescue tube to help pull you
up by pulling the tube down.
Cross-chest tow


74 LIFESAVINGSwimming (Go) Rescues.
Rescue of a submerged victim is easiest if the water is rela-
tively shallow and you can see the bottom. Recovery is more
difficult, and in some cases impractical and dangerous, if the
water is deep and murky.
Take only one or two deep breaths before diving to avoid
hyperventilating. Do not attempt to dive deeper if the pressure
on your ears becomes painful.
If you saw the victim go under as you approached but
can’t see him or her from the surface, carefully do a feetfirst
surface dive in the hope of making contact. If you do not find
the victim, abandon the rescue attempt after you have made
a reasonable search of the immediate area and before you
become exhausted. Leave yourself plenty of energy to make it
back to shore.
If you encounter submerged trees, weeds, or other obsta-
cles while attempting to find a victim you saw submerge in
murky water, postpone the search to get trained help. Take
bearings in the water before you leave so you can find the spot
again. Realistically, it may already be too late to help the vic-
tim, but leave that decision to others. It is possible to survive
long submersion unharmed, particularly in cold water.
Also seek trained help if you arrive at a scene where a
person is presumably on the bottom in murky water but no one
can pinpoint the location.
Landing an Unconscious Victim
An unconscious victim needs to be moved as quickly as possible
to where breathing and pulse can be monitored and CPR done if
necessary. It is sometimes possible to start rescue breathing in
shallow water or at the side of a boat, but an unconscious vic-
tim should normally be removed from the water and placed on a
rigid surface. Removing an unconscious victim from the water
often takes more than one rescuer.
Beach Drag. A drag is a relatively easy and safe way for one
or more rescuers to move an unconscious victim when there is
a sloping bottom. During the tow, the victim will be on his or
her back. Once your feet touch bottom, grasp the victim under
the armpits and pull him or her onto the beach by slowly walk-
ing backward. Support the victim’s head with your forearms or
against your chest as much as possible. Keep your back straight
as you bear the person’s weight with your arms. Gently lower
him or her to the ground once the person is clear of the water.


LIFESAVING 75.Swimming (Go) Rescues
If a second person is available, you can each hold the vic-
tim under his or her arms on either side.
If you are alone and the victim is large, do not try to lift the
person. Instead, squat down so that the water continues to provide
support. Even if you only get the person’s head past the water’s
edge, that should be enough to begin resuscitation if needed.
Bank Lift. Lakes and rivers may have irregular banks. Several
people can improvise a lift, with some lifting from above and
others pushing from below. Remember to consider the best spot
to return to shore when you are planning your rescue. Time is
critical so you need to factor in how long it will take to move
farther to a better spot.
Bank lift
Beach drags


76 LIFESAVINGSwimming (Go) Rescues.
Vertical lift with
one rescuer
Vertical Lifts. The edges of pools and piers are often vertical. If
the water is shallow and the victim small, one or more rescuers
can lift a person cradled in their arms a short height to place
him or her on the deck. Otherwise, a vertical lift can be used.
The victim is first positioned at the edge with his or her
head clear of the water. A single rescuer can cross the victim’s
arms on a low deck and hold them in place while boosting
himself or herself out of the water.
One or more rescuers on deck crouch and hold the victim’s
arms. Vertical lifting is done when the rescuers straighten their
legs to stand up. Once the victim’s hips are higher than the edge,
the victim is slowly lowered to the deck on his or her stomach.
The person’s head should be cushioned when lowered. The vic-
tim’s legs can then be pulled onto the deck. Do not try to roll the
victim over until at least the hips and thighs are supported.
If the victim is too large to lift safely, call for additional help.
Vertical lift from a dock with two rescuers


LIFESAVING 77.Swimming (Go) Rescues
Aftercare for a Passive Victim
As you bring an unconscious victim safely ashore, make sure
that emergency medical aid is on the way. Ideally, a call to 911
should have already been made as you started the rescue. If
emergency medical help has arrived or someone onshore has
advanced first-aid training, turn care of the victim over to them.
If you still appear to be the most qualified person, check
the victim’s vital signs as soon as you get him or her out of the
water. An unconscious victim will probably need rescue breath-
ing and may need complete CPR. Resuscitation is covered in
the next section.
If the victim is breathing but is still unconscious, place him
or her in a faceup position, maintain an open airway, monitor
vital signs, and keep the person warm until help arrives. Ask
the victim’s friends if they know of any medical condition that
could have led to difficulty in the water. Also check to see if the
victim wears a medical alert tag or bracelet.
If the victim regains consciousness, either on his or her
own or because of your efforts at CPR, keep the person inac-
tive until emergency help arrives. The person may feel OK
and rebuff further attention, but real danger may still exist.
Submerged victims who have aspirated, or inhaled, water may
collapse hours after the rescue. Inhaled water can irritate the
lungs and cause them to fill with fluid from within the
body. Foreign matter in the lungs also can lead to
pneumonia. Any victim who lost
consciousness, stopped breathing,
or choked on water should
undergo prompt med-
ical evaluation.





LIFESAVING 79
.Resuscitation and First Aid for Water Rescue
Look, listen, and feel for breathing.
Resuscitation and First
Aid for Water Rescue
Having basic knowledge of resuscitation and first aid as it
relates to water rescue will help you respond safely and
effectively to water emergencies.
Resuscitation
Drowning results when a person cannot breathe
due to submersion in water. If a person cannot get
the airway clear of the water often enough to keep
adequate oxygen in the blood, he or she will stop
breathing. That is respiratory arrest. If breathing is
not restored, the heart will shortly stop beating. That
is cardiac arrest. If a healthy heart rhythm is not
restored, death follows quickly. Note the “ifs.” Drowning
need not be fatal if breathing and heart functions are
restarted. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation, or CPR, fills the gap.
Ventilations keep oxygen in the blood and compressions keep the
blood moving until advanced medical care becomes available.
It is important to note that a person having a heart attack
in the water also needs rescue and resuscitation. Because heart
disease is the leading cause of death in the United States, that
is a very possible situation. When a
person has a heart attack, the heart
rhythm can be disrupted. That is, the
heart quivers rather than pumps. The
only way to restore a normal rhythm
is with an automated external defibril-
lator, or AED. Because an AED will
not restart a heart with no motion at
all, compressions may still be needed.


80 LIFESAVING
Resuscitation and First Aid for Water Rescue.
For more detailed
information about
CPR, see the
First Aid merit
badge pamphlet.
Many public places such as local recreation center pools have
now installed AEDs in clearly marked, designated areas much the
same way that fire extinguishers are made readily available for
access in an emergency.
The requirements for the
Lifesaving merit badge state that
you demonstrate current knowl-
edge and skills for CPR, includ-
ing rescue breathing. This pam-
phlet is not intended to serve as
a textbook for CPR instruction.
A few of the basics are reviewed
here, but important details are
not provided. Work with your
merit badge counselor to review
current training guidelines. CPR
techniques are subject to updates
every five years and different
agencies offer courses that cover
different amounts of detail. To
maintain your skills, you should
take a refresher course every one
to two years.
If you suspect a person is not breathing, check for respon-
siveness. A person who can speak or cry is breathing and has
a pulse. If the person is not responsive, look to see if the chest
rises and falls and try to feel air against your cheek. If the per-
son is not obviously breathing, give ventilations. If provided
quickly enough, ventilations may be enough to restore breath-
ing to a drowning victim. Compressions are needed only if the
person is not breathing and does not have a pulse.
Check to see that the victim’s chest rises when giving ven-
tilations. If not, reposition the airway. Clearing airway obstruc-
tions is covered in CPR training.
Drowning victims may vomit during ventilations. If so,
quickly turn the victim on his or her side and clear the airway.
Then continue ventilations as needed.
Continue to provide ventilations, and compressions if indi-
cated, until the person begins to breathe on his or her own,
an AED becomes available, another trained rescuer takes over,
emergency medical services personnel arrive, you become too
tired to continue, or the location becomes unsafe.


LIFESAVING 81
.Resuscitation and First Aid for Water Rescue
It is important to provide ventilations as soon as possible to
a person who is not breathing. Because compressions may also
be needed, and those can only be provided on a firm surface,
you should typically remove a person from the water before
providing care. However, if you cannot remove the person quick-
ly, it is sometimes effective to provide in-water ventilations.
First Aid for Water Rescue
There are additional first-aid concerns with water rescue other than
spinal injuries and respiratory and cardiac arrest from drowning.
Recall that some victims who need rescue may be injured.
If you notice the victim is bleeding, apply direct pressure to
the wounds as soon as possible after you provide support and
check that the person is breathing. Promptly summon emer-
gency services.
Various preexisting medical conditions may lead to distress
in the water. The first priority is to support the victim to pre-
vent respiratory arrest from drowning. If breathing stops, begin
resuscitation and summon emergency services.
A heart attack occurs when blood flow to heart tissue is
blocked. Symptoms may include chest pain, difficulty breathing,
dizziness, and nausea. A stroke happens when blood flow to the
brain is blocked. Symptoms may include weakness or numbness,
usually in the face or arms and often on one side of the body.
The victim may be dizzy, confused, and unable to speak clearly.
Both heart attacks and strokes may impair a swimmer.


82 LIFESAVING
Resuscitation and First Aid for Water Rescue.
Seizure disorders include epilepsy. Abnormal electrical
signals in the brain trigger seizures ranging from short lapses
in attention to severe convulsions. About 1 in every 100 chil-
dren has a seizure disorder. Although medication can control
seizures well, people prone to seizures should swim only under
close supervision and with a physician’s approval. A person
having a seizure in the water could submerge without warning.
If you observe someone having convulsions in the water,
first see if a companion or lifeguard comes to the person’s aid.
If not, approach from the rear and hold the victim’s face clear
of the water by lifting under the arms. A double armpit tow
with or without a flotation aid can be used to move the person
to water depths where you can stand. Don’t try to stop the
movement. Do only what is necessary to keep the victim’s head
clear of the water until the seizure ends. See that the person
gets prompt medical evaluation.
During an asthma attack, the sufferer has trouble breath-
ing and may make wheezing sounds. Such attacks are relatively
rare while swimming but are not uncommon during vigorous
exercise in hot, humid weather. If a victim is in the water,
he or she may be able to help you with the assist.
Once on shore, have the person rest in a com-
fortable position and try to find his or her
medication. If the attack continues, seek
medical aid.
Several million Americans have
diabetes. Diabetic emergencies may
happen when the body’s sugar
level is either too high or too low.
Symptoms include rapid breathing
and pulse, feeling and looking ill,
and changes in the level of con-
sciousness. A sufferer in the water
may ask for help and aid in the
assist. Use any standard technique
to move the victim to shore. Give a
conscious person candy, a non-diet soft
drink, or table sugar dissolved in water.
Call for emergency medical aid if the person
is unconscious.


LIFESAVING 83
.Resuscitation and First Aid for Water Rescue
Overexposure to
the sun is not only
painful but also
increases the risk
of skin cancer.
Other First-Aid Concerns
Hypothermia. Exposure to cold water can lower your core tem-
perature dangerously, a condition called hypothermia. You
should avoid entering very cold water to perform a rescue.
Check all water rescue victims for signs of heat loss. Early signs
include bluish lips, shivering, numbness, or a glassy stare.
Advanced signals include decreased coordination, grogginess,
and inability to think clearly. Further chilling will lead to uncon-
sciousness and eventually death, which can occur even before a
victim’s body temperature drops fatally low. The first step is to
prevent further heat loss. Remove the victim from the water and
dry him or her off, preferably indoors. In mild cases, wrap the
person in dry towels or anything handy. If the condition is
severe, call for medical aid. Actively (but not too quickly) warm
the victim, and minimize movement. If the victim is uncon-
scious, open the airway and check for breathing and a pulse.
Sunburn. This familiar condition is common during swimming
activities. To prevent sunburn, cover up, use a waterproof
sunscreen with an SPF rating of 15 or higher, and limit your
time in the sun. If your skin begins to redden or feel painful
to the touch, get out of the sun. To treat sunburn, apply clean
cloths, towels, or gauze pads dipped in cool water. Protect the
burned area from further sun exposure. For severe cases, con-
sult a physician.


84 LIFESAVING
Resuscitation and First Aid for Water Rescue.
Even when you are swimming, it’s important to stay
hydrated and drink plenty of water.
Heat Exhaustion. Symptoms of heat exhaustion may include
dizziness, faintness, nausea, and a severe lack of energy. A per-
son with heat exhaustion also may develop a headache, expe-
rience muscle cramps, have a rapid pulse, look pale, and be
sweating heavily. To treat heat exhaustion, have the victim lie
down in a cool, shady spot. Cool the person with a damp cloth
or a fan. Have the victim sip water. Recovery should be rapid.
If the condition worsens, get medical help.
Heatstroke. This extreme, life-threatening heat reaction occurs
when dehydration (water loss) has caused a very high body
temperature. The victim’s cooling system has started to fail, and
the person’s core temperature is at a dangerously high level. In
addition to any symptoms of heat exhaustion, heatstroke symp-
toms can include hot, dry, red skin, confusion, and disorienta-
tion; the victim may be unconscious. Cool the victim imme-
diately by fanning and applying wet towels. If you have ice
packs, wrap them in a thin barrier such as a T-shirt and place
them under the armpits and against the neck and groin area.
If the person is able to drink, give small amounts of cool water.
Treat for shock and seek emergency medical help.
Dehydration
Dehydration can play a significant role in heat exhaus-
tion, heatstroke, hypothermia, frostbite, and a host of
other maladies. An early sign of dehydration can
be dark urine. Other symptoms include weari-
ness, headache and body aches, dizziness,
and confusion. If you suffer any indications
of dehydration, get out of the water, rest in
a shady, cool place, and sip water.
To prevent dehydration, drink
before—and whenever—you feel thirsty.
Thirst is an indication that you are already
becoming a bit dehydrated. Replenish
your water supplies at every opportunity,
and drink often in warm weather and cold
weather alike.


LIFESAVING 85
.Resuscitation and First Aid for Water Rescue
Muscle Cramps. These painful muscle spasms or contractions
generally affect the calf, foot, or thigh. A cramp can impair swim-
ming ability and may endanger a poor swimmer. Causes include
overexertion and dehydration. If a swimmer gets a cramp, give
him or her a flotation aid. If one is not handy, have the person
float on the back or survival float. If possible, have the person
massage and stretch the affected muscle to improve circulation.
Cramps are not serious unless the victim panics.
Stings and Bites. These are not common when swimming in
pools or lakes, but swimmers in saltwater may suffer severe
stings from certain types of jellyfish, urchins, the Portuguese
man-of-war, or other sea creatures. Knowing the body of water
in which you are swimming, obeying warning signs at
beaches (such as instructions to shuffle your feet to avoid
rays), and avoiding possible contact with dangerous sea
animals are the best strategies. After helping a sting vic-
tim from the water, seek immediate medical aid if the vic-
tim is in severe pain, is having trouble breathing, has an
allergic reaction, or feels dizzy, or if the pain does not
let up in a short time. For most jellyfish stings, soak
the area with vinegar, or cover with a paste of
baking soda mixed with water. For Portuguese
man-of-war stings, flush the wound with
ocean water. Immobilize the injured area
and soak it in water as hot as the victim
can stand, for about 30 minutes or
until medical personnel take over.
Packing the area in hot sand
may have a similar effect if
the sand is hot enough. Next,
carefully clean the wound and
apply a bandage. Consult a physi-
cian for puncture wounds.
Hyperventilation. This condition is the result of over breath-
ing, either deliberately or as a result of panic. Hyperventilating,
that is, taking a series of deep rapid breaths decreases the level
of carbon dioxide in the blood and suppresses the breathing
reflex, but it does not increase oxygen intake. The likely result
is dizziness and fainting. If a swimmer becomes panicky, he or
she should be removed from the water and calmed. A foolish
swimmer may deliberately try to hyperventilate to prolong time
underwater; that is dangerous and should never be attempted.





LIFESAVING 87
.Spinal Injury Management
Spinal Injury
Management
Diving into shallow or unclear water is unsafe and foolish. The
diver risks spinal injury, permanent paralysis, or death. In pools,
most diving injuries happen in shallow water but also can occur
if the diver hits another swimmer or a diving board. In lakes
and rivers, diving injuries are caused by misjudging the
depth of the water or hitting rocks or trees unseen
from the surface. At beaches, lunging into
waves or falling off a board can cause spi-
nal injury when a wave slams the victim
into the bottom.
If you notice anyone dive into
the water and float immobile to
the surface, call for help imme-
diately. Head, neck, and spinal
injuries are extremely serious
and are best handled by trained
personnel with special equip-
ment. If trained and equipped
personnel are not immediately
available, your job is to maintain
the person in a faceup stable posi-
tion until help arrives.
Also check for breathing. If the
person needs CPR, time is critical.
Breathing and circulation take precedence
over a spinal injury. The injury may be stable
or the damage already done, but death is sure to
follow respiratory arrest if breathing is not restored. Do
not wait. Provide care to the best of your ability, using others at
hand to help.


88 LIFESAVING
Spinal Injury Management.
Hip and shoulder support
Hip and Shoulder Support
For a victim found floating faceup, move to the person’s side
and lower yourself to chest depth. If the victim is conscious, tell
him or her not to move. Next, slide one arm under the shoul-
ders and your other arm under the hips. Support the victim
with his or her face clear of the water, but do not lift the person
further. Additional rescuers can provide similar support from
the other side and stand near the head to protect the person
from contact with other swimmers.
Ask the victim what happened and tell him or her to
answer verbally, not by shaking the head. Reassure the per-
son that help is on the way and that you will hold him or her
steady until then. If the victim is unconscious, look for signs
that he or she is breathing.
Head Splint
Hip and shoulder support doesn’t keep the victim’s head from
moving in waves and works only if he or she is faceup. Another
technique is to use the person’s arms to brace the head.
If the victim is facedown, approach carefully from the side and
stand near the head. If the person’s arms are dangling at the sides,
move them forward alongside the head. Reach across and grasp the
outside arm (your right to his or her right, or left-to-left) between
the elbow and the shoulder with your thumb toward his or her
hand. Grasp the person’s other arm similarly with your free hand.
Carefully swing the arms forward until they are near the ears, then
squeeze them to trap the victim’s head in place.
Next, glide the victim slowly forward while rolling him or her
faceup. Turn the victim by pushing down on the near arm and pull-
ing the far arm across. As you roll the victim, lower yourself in the
water as needed to avoid lifting him or her. Your body turns to face
the person’s feet.


LIFESAVING 89
.Spinal Injury Management
Head splint
After rolling the victim faceup, continue to hold his or
her head in place with pressure on the arms. Brace your near
hand against your shoulder to make it easier. If the victim is
not breathing, have a second rescuer start rescue breathing and
check for a pulse.
For a victim found faceup, approach from behind the head
and pull his or her arms into position as you face the person’s
feet. You can also approach from the side and reach one arm
across his or her chest to squeeze the person’s arms against the
head. That approach lets you kneel in very shallow water.





LIFESAVING 91
.Additional Opportunities
Additional Opportunities
Earning the Lifesaving merit badge should prepare you to assist
as a lifesaver in most swimming-related emergencies, but you
can always be even better prepared. Earning the First Aid,
Canoeing, Rowing, and other boating merit badges will help you
develop additional skills.
As you get older, you may consider career opportunities in
which water rescue plays a part. Public pools, water parks, and
beaches employ lifeguards. Fire departments and county sheriff
departments often train their personnel in search and rescue,
including swift-water rescue and scuba diving. Such organiza-
tions sometimes call on trained volunteers for help. Selected U.S.
Coast Guard and Navy personnel receive intense water-rescue
training, including the use of motorized craft and helicopters.
Earning the Lifesaving merit badge also should make you
a better guardian for a young friend or sibling cooling off in a
backyard pool or in a lake at a family picnic. There, your task
is to prevent accidents as well as to stand by for possible emer-
gencies. That is, you would serve as a lifeguard rather than a
lifesaver. You can serve the same function at a troop swim.
Earning the Lifesaving merit badge does not cover all of
the skills needed by a professional lifeguard. Unlike a troop
swim using Safe Swim Defense, a lifeguard at a public pool is
responsible for more people, of unknown numbers, of unknown
swimming ability, of unknown physical condition, who may at
times be rowdy or uncooperative. Lifeguard training emphasizes
accident prevention, working as a team, and use of a limited
range of special-purpose rescue devices.
Scouting America Lifeguard provides such training, as do
courses offered by the American Red Cross and YMCA. Those
courses are open to Venturing-age youth and provide excellent
opportunities for you to qualify as a lifeguard at Scout camps
or public pools. Other facilities, particularly those near ocean
beaches, offer their own training programs.
Fulfilling the
Lifesaving
merit badge
requirements
teaches you
how to react to
an unexpected
incident using
materials at hand.





LIFESAVING 93
.Lifesaving Resources
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.
Lifesaving
Resources
Scouting Literature
Aquatics Supervision; Scouts BSA
handbooks; Deck of First Aid; Emergency
First Aid pocket guide; Fieldbook;
Canoeing, Emergency Preparedness, First
Aid, Kayaking, Motorboating, Rowing,
Safety, Search and Rescue, Small-Boat
Sailing, Swimming, Water Sports, and
Whitewater merit badge pamphlets
Books
American Red Cross. American Red
Cross Lifeguarding Manual. American
Red Cross, 2024.
Graver, Dennis. Aquatic Rescue and
Safety: How to Recognize, Respond to,
and Prevent Water-Related Injuries.
Human Kinetics, 2004.
Raatma, Lucia. Water Safety. The Child’s
World, 2004.
U.S. Lifesaving Association. Open Water
Lifesaving: The United States
Lifesaving Association Manual, 3rd
ed. Pearson Learning Solutions, 2024.
YMCA of the USA. On the Guard II:
The YMCA Lifeguard Manual.
YMCA of the USA, 2016.
Organizations and Websites
American Canoe Association
americancanoe.org
American Red Cross
Toll-free telephone: 800-733-2767
redcross.org
American Whitewater
americanwhitewater.org
International Life Saving Federation
ilsf.org
Lifesaving Society of Canada
lifesaving.ca
National Safety Council
nsc.org
Royal Life Saving Society–Australia
royallifesaving.com.au
Royal Life Saving Society UK
rlss.org.uk
Safe Kids Worldwide
safekids.org
Surf Life Saving Australia
sls.com.au


94 LIFESAVING
Lifesaving Resources.
Surf Life Saving New Zealand
surflifesaving.org.nz
U.S. Coast Guard
Boating Safety Division
uscgboating.org
U.S. Lifesaving Association
usla.org
YMCA of the USA
ymca.net
Acknowledgments
Scouting America thanks its Aquatics
Task Force, in particular the following
members who were instrumental in the
development of this edition of the
Lifesaving merit badge pamphlet: to
David Bell, Ph.D., for his indispensable
assistance with the text, illustrations,
and photography; to Calvin Banning for
his assistance with text and
photography; and to Patrick Noack
(chair) for his input and guidance.
These volunteers unselfishly spent
many, many hours updating this major
revision of the pamphlet.
Scouting America is grateful to
the men and women serving on the
National Merit Badge Subcommittee for
the improvements made in updating this
pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration Credits
David Bell—page 24 (low-head dam)
All other photos and illustrations are the
property of or are protected by
Scouting America or are royalty-free
stock images.
John McDearmon—all instructional
illustrations





Subscribe today at go.scoutlife.org/subscribe
Use promo code SLMBP15 to get a special
print + digital bundle offer priced just for Scouts!
Get ideas
for your next
merit badge
adventure in
every issue
of Scout Life
magazine.