SUSTAINABILITY
STEM-Based


SUSTAINABILITY
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”
On our cover: The shy giant panda, one of the world’s
rarest animals, eats a lot of bamboo. As people cleared
more and more bamboo for building, industry, and
farming, the panda lost more of its food source and its
home. This great animal is also very slow to reproduce,
which contributes to its vulnerability. We now know that
the panda is endangered and needs to be protected.


35711
ISBN 978-0-8395-0030-8
©2024 Scouting America/Boy Scouts of America
2024 Printing
Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Sustainability or check
Scoutbook for the latest requirements.
FPO


SUSTAINABILITY 3


4 SUSTAINABILITY


SUSTAINABILITY 5
For more information about sustainability and its
connection to people, prosperity, and the planet, go
to www.scouting.org/sustainability/.





SUSTAINABILITY 7
Contents
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Sustainability: What Does It Mean? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
Reducing Water Use. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
Reducing Food Waste. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
Designing Sustainable Communities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
Achieving Sustainable Energy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
Earth’s Life-Support Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
A Roundup of Sustainability Issues. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
How People Can Support Sustainability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
Careers in Sustainability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89
Glossary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92
Sustainability Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 94





SUSTAINABILITY 9
.Introduction
Introduction
Sustainability. It’s a big word with many aspects. But when you
break it down, it goes hand in hand with being a good Scout.
Sustainability means the ability to endure. Conserving the land,
forests, air, water, wildlife, and limited resources we all share
is everyone’s responsibility. Reducing what we consume and
recycling, repurposing, restoring, and repairing what we own
all are parts of being thrifty, a key point of the Scout Law.
Sustainability requires living within our world’s ability to
regenerate the things we need to live. As good Scouts, we try
to leave things better than we found them. We should
try to do what we can to ensure generations to
come will also have what they need.
We human beings can lighten
our imprint on planet Earth by
managing the way we consume
resources. Conserving the land where
we walk, the forests that surround us, the
air we breathe, the water all living things need
to survive, and the other resources Earth provides is
important to sustaining life itself—not just for your lifetime,
but for future generations.
The Big Picture
Healthy ecosystems (environ-
ments full of living things)
provide goods and services
to humans and are vital to all
forms of life, from the tiniest
organisms to the tallest trees,
and from bugs to whales.


Introduction.
Sustainability
begins with you.
Can you bike or
walk to school or
work instead of
drive? Or can
you take public
transportation?


SUSTAINABILITY 11
.Introduction
On a worldwide level, sustainability may involve urban
planning that reorganizes living situations into eco-villages
and eco-cities, where green building and green technologies,
renewable energy sources, and sustainable agriculture become
the new normal.
Sustainability begins with rethinking your individual lifestyle
and becoming aware of how you can conserve natural resources.
Moving toward a more sustainable lifestyle will challenge the
attention, ingenuity, and know-how of your generation—the
youth of America.
We all have a stake in preserving life. We all share in the
responsibility to make our planet a desirable place, now and in
the future. Human actions have lasting social, environmental,
and economic effects on the place we all call home: Earth.
Sustainability is a journey, not a destination. It is a call to
action. What can a single Scout do? A family? One community?
It’s time to find out! This is a journey that begins with you.
The Brundtland Commission (formerly the Commission on Environment
and Development) was created to unite countries toward pursuing
sustainable methods worldwide, reducing environmental impacts, and
raising awareness about sustainability. Simply put by the commission,
“Sustainable activity meets the needs of the present without compromising
the ability of future generations to meet their own needs.”
SUSTAINABILITY
PEOPLE
EQUITY
PROSPERITY
ECONOMY
PLANET
ENVIRONMENT
SOCIAL-
ENVIRONMENTAL
ECONOMIC-
SOCIAL
ENVIRONMENTAL-
ECONOMIC
This diagram shows how sustainability intersects with the three P’s
(people, prosperity, planet) and the three E’s (equity, economy,
environment). It helps us understand our current situation and
how we might find solutions. Source: Safeway Inc.





SUSTAINABILITY 13
.Sustainability: What Does It Mean?
Sustainability: What
Does It Mean?
To “sustain” a thing is to keep it up or continue it. Sustainable,
then, relates to methods of harvesting or using resources in ways
that do not squander or permanently damage them. A sustainable
lifestyle or society meets today’s needs without depleting
(completely using up) natural resources for future generations.
The Summit: Leading the
Way to a Sustainable Lifestyle
With the design and construction of
the Summit Bechtel Family National
Scout Reserve, Scouting America saw
an opportunity to explore how com-
munities can become more
sustainable. The reserve turns into
a busy city of 50,000 people during
the national Scout jamboree. That is
larger than many towns in America.
A commitment to sustainability
ensures that the Summit is strong
and successful for Scouts today and
for generations to come.
The Summit, Scouting America’s
newest national facility, located
in West Virginia, is reaching for a
goal of net zero through design
of the site and its buildings and
utilities. Learn all about the
Summit and net-zero energy,
water, and waste in this chapter.


14 SUSTAINABILITY
Sustainability: What Does It Mean?.
A few key principles of Scouting guided the sustainable design
of the Summit:
1. Be thrifty and resourceful in our use of energy and water.
2. Apply and expand outdoor ethics beyond the backcountry
by considering how we use materials and reduce waste in
all operations.
3. Be good stewards of our human and natural communities by
creating healthy places today and for future generations.
4. Demonstrate leadership in sustainability by measuring our
efforts and continually improving.
Scouting America has pledged to work toward a “net zero”
property. Net zero is an ambitious goal that will take some time
to reach. In order to achieve net zero, the Summit will need to:
1. Produce as much clean, renewable energy as it uses each year.
2. Collect water from the Summit’s own watershed and treat it
passively (making use of natural water treatment methods)
before returning it to the soil.
3. Find creative ways to eliminate sending material to the landfill.
Buildings on-site are designed to conserve 30 percent more energy
than typical buildings of the same size, staying cooler in summer
and warmer in winter through their shape and location. Their
doors, windows, and walls exchange very little heat or cold with
the outside, requiring less energy to heat and cool the inside.
Beneath the ground of the Summit Center are geothermal wells
that keep the buildings warm in winter and cool in summer.


SUSTAINABILITY 15
.Sustainability: What Does It Mean?
The Sustainability Treehouse, the first building on-site at the Summit,
is a net-zero structure with solar panels and wind turbines. The
panels collect sunlight and turn solar energy into electricity. Atop the
treehouse, you can see a vertical wind turbine designed to work at
lower elevations where wind speeds are slower. The Summit Treehouse
combines a number of sustainability features with fun, education, and
purpose. It is a “living playground” on three levels, ending at the top
with a transparent enclosure.
1
2
3
4
5
6
SOLAR PANELS
RECYCLED-STEEL FRAME
WIND TURBINES
RADIANT HEATING
AND NATURAL
VENTILATION
COMPOST TOILET
COMFORT STATION EDIBLE FOREST GARDEN
Mithun Inc., courtesy
The Summit is designed for people, not cars and trucks.
Within its compact footprint, Scouts live close to activities and
amenities. A network of trails through the woods and around the
lake connects base camps to central and adventure areas. Fewer
vehicles mean cleaner air and a safer, healthier environment for
Scouts and guests.


16 SUSTAINABILITY
Sustainability: What Does It Mean?.
In order to
reach the goal of net
zero water, the Summit
concentrates first on finding
ways to use less water and to apply
passive treatments for processing any
water used on-site.
• Graywater, the water that drains from sinks
and showers, is cleaned and reused to flush
toilets and urinals. This will save 11 gallons
per day per Scout—a savings of 4.4 million
gallons in the course of a single jamboree.
• Blackwater, the water that is flushed down toilets and urinals,
is treated without chemicals at an on-site wastewater plant and
then used to irrigate the surrounding forest. No wastewater
leaves the site. Instead, it serves to put important nutrients
such as phosphorus and nitrogen back into the soil.
• Stormwater, which runs off roofs, roadways, and paved areas,
is also treated on-site over 70 acres of biofiltration. The dirty
water is carried in a network of swales (depressions or low-lying
land) and rain gardens that allow the water to soak back into the
soil while the plants filter out oil and sediments.
The average American uses 80 gallons of water per day. At the Summit,
conservation measures like low-flow fixtures and graywater systems have
reduced that amount to 30 gallons.


SUSTAINABILITY 17
.Sustainability: What Does It Mean?
On average, each American produces about 4.3 pounds of trash
per day. At the jamboree, that would multiply to 2.15 million
pounds of trash in just 10 days at a cost of nearly $50,000 to
haul to a landfill.
But most of that trash is valuable material. Food, paper, and
yard waste make up about 30 percent of what typically gets thrown
away. At the Summit, Scouts will separate their food and paper for
composting. This added to yard waste produces a rich material—
compost—that provides nutrients to the soil. A jamboree produces
285 tons of compost worth about $43,000 to the Summit, not to
mention the money saved on chemical fertilizers, landfill fees, and
hauling fees.
Scouts attending jamborees also work toward net zero waste
by separating plastics, metal, wood, and cardboard, which will
then be baled and sold. Some things that are hard to recycle, such
as glass and plastic foam, won’t be found at the jamboree.
Careful construction with green (nonpolluting) building
materials to create a healthy environment, and efforts to conserve
and protect sparkling mountain streams and 1,600 acres of forest,
ensure that Scouts today and in the future will be able to enjoy
the Summit’s Appalachian landscape.
Scouts admire this natural waterfall at the Summit, Scouting America’s newest high-
adventure base, in West Virginia.


18 SUSTAINABILITY
Sustainability: What Does It Mean?.
Ecological Overshoot
You might have heard the term “ecological overshoot” but did not know what
it meant. Individuals in the United States consume more water, more food,
more goods—just about more everything—than most people in other parts
of the world. That rate of consumption has increased so much that we now
are using more resources faster than those resources can be replenished by
nature. This is called ecological overshoot.
Think about what would happen if you kept withdrawing money from your
bank account but never replenished it. Eventually, the money would run out. The
same thing is happening with our water supplies. We are “withdrawing” water
faster than it can be replenished. In fact, in some aquifers, the water cannot be
replenished and will eventually be depleted. The same thing can happen with
other resources, such as minerals, food, fuel, and so on.
When we run out of something, we hardly give it a second thought to
where we can easily get more. When something gets old, we throw it out
and replace it. We continue to create vast amounts of waste and use up our
resources with the notion that those resources are unlimited. Now that we are
more aware of ecological overshoot, which scientists have known about since
the 1970s, we can do something to change the way we think and behave.
The graphic here shows how in our current state, we are consuming or
“spending” Earth’s natural resources about 1.4 times faster than they can be
replenished. This means it takes us 17 months to replenish what we consume in
12 months. By 2050, that rate will increase to nearly three Earths. If we were to
work together to substantially reduce the rate of consumption, we could close
that gap and Earth could sustain its current population.
Source: Global Footprint Network
Ecological Overshoot


SUSTAINABILITY 19
.Sustainability: What Does It Mean?
Talk to Your Family About Sustainability
Now write in your own words the meaning of sustainability. Have a family
meeting, and ask your family members to write down what they think
sustainability means. Talk about how conservation and stewardship relate
to sustainability. Be sure to take notes.





SUSTAINABILITY 21
.Reducing Water Use
Reducing Water Use
In the United States, people are fortunate to have easy access to
some of the safest treated water in the world. For most of us,
that means simply turning on the tap.
How much water do we use? According to the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, the average American family
of four uses 400 gallons of water per day at home. Indoor usage
accounts for 70 percent of this whopping amount, with 30 percent
used outdoors. That’s 146,000 gallons per year—for one family!
Less than 1 percent of all the
water on Earth can be used by
humans. The rest is salt water from
the ocean or water permanently
frozen and not available for drinking,
bathing, or watering plants. As the
world’s population grows, more
people are using this limited
resource. It’s important that we all
use water wisely.
Wisdom starts with under-
standing and becoming aware of
how you use water and how much
water you waste. Take note of places
inside and outside your home where
you use water. This might include
the kitchen, bathrooms, laundry
room, and outdoor faucets. Look
carefully at all the ways you and
your family use water every day.
A fully loaded dishwasher usually is
always the most efficient way to wash
dishes. This is particularly true if your
dishwasher has an Energy Star rating
and if you use the “light” cycle, which
should work just fine for day-to-day
loads that are not heavily soiled.


22 SUSTAINABILITY
Reducing Water Use.
Water-Saving Tips
It might surprise you where you use the most water each day.
Flushing a toilet claims nearly 27 percent of family water use each
day. The clothes washer uses nearly 22 percent, with the shower
taking up almost 17 percent. The faucet is around 15 percent, and
leaks take up almost 14 percent.
Do you wash your dishes in a dishwasher? Is your dishwasher
energy efficient? If it is, you may use about four gallons of water
to wash a load of dishes. If it is an older model that isn’t rated for
energy efficiency, you might be using about six gallons of water
for every load.
If you wash your dishes by hand and run the water the entire
time to rinse them, you can use up to 16 gallons of water for one
load. Don’t let the water run. Instead, fill one sink with soapy
water and the other with rinse water.
Here are more water-saving tips for your home:
• Run your dishwasher and wash your laundry only when you
have a full load. You can save up to 1,000 gallons of water a
month just doing these two things.
• Use the garbage disposal sparingly, if at all. Compost your raw
vegetable food waste instead, and save gallons every time.
Toilet
Leaks
Other
Clothes washer
Faucet
Shower
SHOWER
16.8
FAUCET
15.7
CLOTHES WASHER
21.7
OTHER
5.3
LEAKS
13.7
TOILET
26.7
Source: American Water Works Association


SUSTAINABILITY 23
.Reducing Water Use
• When brushing your teeth, simply turning off the tap while
you brush can save up to eight gallons of water per day per
person. That adds up to 200 gallons a month.
• Don’t leave the water running when you wash your hands.
Wet your hands, shut off the water, lather your hands, then
turn the faucet back on to rinse.
• A bath uses about 70 gallons of water, and a shower takes about
25 gallons. To save water, take a shower and time yourself. Keep
it under 5 minutes. For greater savings, wet down, then turn off
the water. Wash your body and your hair, then turn on the water
just to rinse.
• A small leak in a toilet can waste 200 gallons of water per
day. That’s like flushing your toilet 50 times for no reason.
What about water use outdoors? Here are ways to conserve:
• Use a hose sparingly. To wash your bike or your car, use a
bucket of sudsy water and a sponge. Spray with the hose only
to rinse. Some commercial car washes recycle water instead
of letting it run down the sewer drain. Ask your parents to
check whether a car wash near you recycles water.
• If you use sprinklers, adjust them so they water only the
lawn—not the house, sidewalk, or street.
• Check your outside faucets for leaks. Water your yard in the
early morning and then only as much as needed.
• Place buckets under eaves or install
rain barrels under downspouts to
collect rainwater from the roof for
watering your yard. You will be
surprised how much water you
can collect in a short rainstorm.
Using water that would otherwise
be lost or run off beats running
a hose, which can discharge up to
10 gallons a minute.
Try this experiment with your parent’s help: Test for
leaks in your toilet by placing a drop of food coloring in
the toilet tank. If the color shows up in the bowl without
flushing, you could have a leak.


24 SUSTAINABILITY
Reducing Water Use.
• In the summer, especially if you live in a region that is hot
and dry, adjust your lawnmower to a higher setting. Taller
grass holds moisture and shades the roots from the sun better
than close-clipped grass.
• Spread about 4 inches of mulch on top of the soil around the
plants in your yard to protect the roots from heat and cold and
to help keep moisture from evaporating. Your family will need
to replace the mulch every few years to keep it 4 inches thick.
Many cities and towns offer free mulch to homeowners. City
workers cut tree limbs to keep them out of power lines, and they
may also take in Christmas trees and wood scraps that people
put out for recycling. All of these natural items can be ground
up into mulch. Check with your town or county to see if they
have a free mulch program.
If your yard is xeriscaped (with plants such as succulents
and cactus that don’t take much water) or if you have
shrubs, trees, and grass native to your region planted in
your yard, once the plants are established, you should
have to water them only once a month. If the soil is wet
two to three inches down, that’s enough.
Daily watering is
not necessary,
even in the hottest
climates. Plants
will grow longer
and stronger roots
if you don’t over-
water them. Once
a week is plenty.
Only water until
the soil is wet 2
inches down.


SUSTAINABILITY 25
.Reducing Water Use
Be water-smart with your pets, too. If you own a fish tank,
when you clean the tank, recycle the nutrient-rich water to outdoor
plants. When you refresh your pet’s water bowl every day, recycle
the water in the yard. When it’s warm enough, bathe your pets
outdoors so you are watering the yard at the same time.
Your Family’s Water Bill
For requirement 2a(1), ask your parents for
your family’s water bills for the past three
months. The bills will show how many
thousands of gallons of water your family
uses each month and the cost for that use.
You should also examine wastewater service
charges for treating the water that goes down
the drains in your home.
Talk with your family about how each
person uses water. Do you leave the water
on the entire time you brush your teeth?
Do you take 20-minute
showers? Do you run the
water when you wash
and rinse dishes? Do
you wash full loads of
laundry or do you often
throw in your favorite
pair of jeans by itself?
How do you potentially
waste water?
Be honest about
your habits and how
hard it may be to elimi-
nate bad ones. Ask what
each member of your family is willing to do to reduce water use.
Choose three ways you can help reduce your use of water, and
carry out those ideas.
Then check your family’s water bill to see whether you and
your family have become wiser and more thrifty about how you
use a precious limited resource: fresh water.


26 SUSTAINABILITY
Reducing Water Use.
“Off the Grid” Doesn’t Mean “Free”
If you have a private water well or a septic tank, your family
may not receive a monthly water or wastewater bill. Unless you
have a meter on your well, you won’t have a way to measure
how many gallons of water you use or how much wastewater
drains into your septic system.
However, that doesn’t mean your water and wastewater
are “free.” It costs a great deal of money to dig a well. The
well must be dug deep enough to reach an underground water
source such as an aquifer. An aquifer is an underground layer of
water-saturated rock from which groundwater can be extracted
through a well. Aquifers can run dry or be contaminated from
pollutants such as fertilizers and chemical wastes.
In times of drought, groundwater levels often drop and
wells must be dug deeper to continue to reach the water source.
If you live close to the ocean and have a water well, it can also
become contaminated with seawater. Water withdrawal can
lower the water table enough to allow salty water to contaminate
the groundwater.
Besides the cost of digging a water well, there’s also the
expense of a pump and a holding tank for the clean water. Well
water is often full of minerals, which are hard on the pump, the
pipes that run the water through the house, and the hot-water
heater. All of these items cost money to maintain or replace.
If well water becomes undrinkable or the underground supply
is completely exhausted, you would have to find an alternate water
source. This can be expensive. Some towns in the United States
in the past few years have had to truck in water when their water
source dried up.
If you are on a septic system, wastewater from toilets,
showers, sinks, and laundry goes into a septic tank. The more
people in your household who are using water and creating
wastewater, the more often your septic tank may need to be
cleaned out. A company can be hired to pump out the tank
and truck the waste to a treatment facility. This service can cost
several hundred dollars each cleaning.
In the absence of water-use regulations or monthly bills,
Scouts whose families have private water wells and septic tanks
must make an even more conscious choice to use water wisely.
It comes down to awareness of what you as an individual Scout
and your family can do to conserve a precious resource.
Fresh water is
limited to the
rain and snow
that has fallen
on Earth and the
reserves where
it has collected
such as lakes,
rivers, streams,
and underground
caverns.


SUSTAINABILITY 27
.Reducing Water Use
Where Does Your Water Come From?
Where Does It Go?
Your water may come from a nearby
river, a lake, or an underground aquifer.
Or the source could be a long way from
where you live. If it is a surface water
source (typically a lake or reservoir),
find out where the water flows from,
where it is treated, and how it gets from
the treatment plant to your house.
Also investigate where water goes
after it drains from the kitchen sink,
bathroom basins, toilets, shower or tub,
and washing machine. How far does
your home’s wastewater travel by pipe
to a treatment plant? Where does that
treated wastewater go? Where does the
outside runoff go from watering the
yard or washing the car?
You can usually find this infor-
mation online at your official city,
municipal utility district, or ground-
water district website. If your source is
an underground aquifer, find out more
about the particular aquifer you draw
your water from.
If you live in a region that has
experienced drought, find out how dry
conditions affect your source of water.
If your water is threatened by industrial
pollution, saltwater contamination, or
commercial agricultural practices, make
notes about what you discover and
share them with your counselor.
Water treatment facility


28 SUSTAINABILITY
Reducing Water Use.
Drought Across the World
From 2002 to 2012, Israel experienced a record heat wave and
devastating drought. Its freshwater sources dropped by nearly
25 percent. The crisis caused Israel to take vigorous steps to
conserve water.
Today, more than half of all water used for agriculture in
Israel is recycled water. Urban consumption has dropped by
15 percent. The country is investing in the latest desalination
(salt-removal) technology, turning Mediterranean seawater into
more than half of the total clean drinking water available in the
country. Israel’s water authority has predicted that the efforts to
conserve water could quickly return the country’s water supply
to sustainable levels.
From 2007 to 2012, Britain had endured its worst drought
since 1929. In that same five-year period, Thailand was gripped
by its worst drought in 20 years. The high temperatures also
contributed to the thinnest sea-ice levels on record in the Arctic,
and to an alarming melting of the
polar ice cap. Because polar bears
hunt prey from ice floes (sheets of
floating sea ice), which are rapidly
disappearing, the bears may become
extinct in your lifetime.
Turning off the water while
you brush your teeth is one of
the easiest ways you can start
saving water today—about
8 gallons per day, or 2,920
gallons per year. Encourage
your family members to do
the same, and see what a
difference it makes in your
water bill. This change of habit
could save a family of four
more than 11,000 gallons
per year!


SUSTAINABILITY 29
.Reducing Water Use
In the United States, particularly the Southwest and the
Midwest, prolonged drought, depletion of underground water, and
extensive wildfires have damaged vast areas of the nation’s main
“bread basket.” These regions produce corn, wheat, and soybeans
not only for our country but for much of the world.
Because of the long and widespread drought in
the United States from 2009 through 2013, nearly
80 percent of the country’s corn crops and more
than 11 percent of its soybean crops were
harmed. Food prices rose worldwide because
of the low yields and record high prices for
grains. America’s drought led to food short-
ages and hunger in places around the globe.
Concern is growing that prolonged heat
spells and droughts may become increasingly
common. As the world population grows, water
may become more precious and expensive, regard-
less of where you live.





SUSTAINABILITY 31
.Reducing Food Waste
Reducing Food Waste
As avid campers and backcountry stewards, Scouts are skilled at
planning meals right down to the exact portion size each member
of a troop will need for three squares a day while trekking into
the great outdoors. Scouts come prepared but don’t want to carry
in or pack out anything more than what is needed.
Food and especially water weigh down backpacks. Troop trips
are also less expensive when food costs are kept to a minimum and
the expense is shared. These are just two of many reasons Scouts
carefully plan their meals and the weight they’ll be carrying before
each campout.
Household food waste, however, can be another matter
entirely. When you have a refrigerator and maybe a freezer and
a pantry or cupboards to store food and drinks, items that do not
get eaten often go to waste.
In the United States, more than 65 billion pounds of food is
thrown away each year, according to the Environmental Protection
Agency. That amounts to about $2,200 per year that the average
American household simply throws away. Food waste is the single
largest component of municipal solid waste that ends up in landfills
and incinerators.
More than
60 percent of
food waste could
be avoided.


32 SUSTAINABILITY
Reducing Food Waste.
The more disposable income people in a country have to
spend, the more food they waste. In industrialized countries,
such as the United States and the United Kingdom, each indi-
vidual throws away an average of 200 to 250 pounds of food per
year. Compare those hefty figures with sub-Saharan Africa and
South/Southeast Asia where individuals throw out only 13 to 24
pounds of food per year.
People are not only tossing away money but also contrib-
uting to the production of methane—a greenhouse gas that is
a big concern for the future of the planet—as the food breaks
down in landfills. Also wasted are the energy, water, labor, and
other costs that go into growing, processing, and transporting
food from farmers and factories to consumers.
Making the best use of household food comes down to
learning good management techniques to cut your food bills and
food waste, much as Scouts do when camping out.
Composting:
It’s Everyone’s Responsibility
Compost is organic matter that has been recycled
into a natural fertilizer and a soil improver. It is a
key ingredient in organic farming. Considering
we throw away as much as a third of the food we
buy each week, reusing it in compost is a valu-
able way to give back to the environment and
save money.
Making composting easier for people to do
is a step governments and companies are begin-
ning to take to keep food waste out of landfills.
At Portland International Airport in Oregon, the
food court has been set up as one of the first
public-area food collection stations in the coun-
try. Folks who buy food at the airport place their
food scraps and leftover ice or beverages in sepa-
rate bins for organic recycling.
While most folks want to make environmentally
responsible choices, research shows that it is difficult
for people to “go green” unless it saves them money.
Changing consumer habits is a big challenge.
For food to compost properly, it
needs light and air. In a landfill, it
would get neither.


SUSTAINABILITY 33
.Reducing Food Waste
Some green restaurants in the United States ensure that all
the waste they produce can be either composted or recycled,
and they provide compost and recycling bins instead of trash
cans for their customers.
The King County, Washington, solid-waste department is part
of an EPA program to reduce household food waste. The county
works with families through a local elementary school to measure,
reduce, and recycle their food waste. Families who follow the
program’s guidelines receive gift certificates to grocery stores.
A program in the United Kingdom helped 81 households cut
their food bills and food waste in half. People who took part then
served as volunteers to recruit and lead groups to do the same
in their own communities. The groups trade tips about how to
best use household food, right down to recipes for leftovers. They
have produced a simple “how-to” guide for other communities to
follow in their footsteps. In the process, they have learned to save
money, recycle, and throw away far less food.
Tips to Reduce Food Waste
Here are some ways you can reduce food waste, help
to protect the environment, and save money.
• Sit down with the member of your house-
hold who does the grocery shopping.
Plan family meals for one week, includ-
ing breakfast, lunch, dinner, snacks, and
drinks. Pay attention to portion sizes. How
much of each item on your list do you
need? Check to see which ingredients you
already have.
Make a shopping list that includes only what your household
doesn’t have.
Organic waste collection systems are already available
in cities such as San Francisco.


34 SUSTAINABILITY
Reducing Food Waste.
• Check the refrigerator temperature.
Food needs to be stored between
33.8 degrees and 41 degrees
Fahrenheit (or 1 to 5 degrees
Celsius) to keep it fresh
for the longest time. Also
check to see that the seals
around your refrigerator
and freezer doors are tight.
• When you buy new food
from the supermarket, pull all
of the older items in your pantry and
refrigerator to the front. Put new food toward the back, and
you’ll have less chance of finding something moldy and green
in the back of your food storage areas. By rotating your food
in this way, you will also have a better idea of
what you have on hand.
• Try not to throw away fresh food. Freeze over-
ripe fruit to make into smoothies or fruit pies
later on. Put wilting vegetables in soup. Pack
leftovers for school lunches, or add other ingre-
dients to make another family meal.
• Serve small portions of food. People may want
second servings when they’ve cleaned their
plates, but starting with small portions helps cut
down on food getting scraped into a garbage can.
Leftovers should be cooled, promptly stored in
the fridge, and used another day of the week.
• If you buy loose fruits and vegetables instead
of those that come prepackaged, you can buy
precisely the amount you need. The same goes
for buying meats and cheeses from the deli
section of your grocery. Buy just what you can
eat before it goes bad.
Never go to a grocery store when you are hungry, or
you will be tempted to buy things you don’t need. Take
your shopping list with you and stick to it.


SUSTAINABILITY 35
.Reducing Food Waste
• If your family buys in bulk, meats and vegetables
(and meals prepared ahead of time for those
nights when there’s too much going on
to cook) can be frozen in portions that
are sized right for a single meal for
your household.
Some food waste will happen, no matter
what you do. If you set up a compost bin, in
a few months you’ll have valuable compost for
plants. A kitchen composter called a bokashi bin
works for cooked food waste, even fish and meat.
You feed it your scraps, sprinkle over a layer of special
microbes, and leave it to ferment. Houseplants and
gardens love this broken-down enriched substance.
Creating Your Own Food Sources
Growing your food, or purchasing fresh fruits and vegetables
from local sources when possible, has many benefits. You have
better control over what is used on your food for fertilizer and
pest control, and once a garden is in place your family can
grow a variety of foods that do well in your particular region,
depending on the season.
One way to make a change
and have a positive impact
on ecological overshoot is
to reduce waste. Does your
family tend to throw out a lot
of leftovers or uneaten food,
such as fresh fruits and
vegetables? If so, plan better
and buy less. Purchase
only what your family
will consume.


36 SUSTAINABILITY
Reducing Food Waste.
Sustainable Gardening
Gardening is a favorite leisure activity in America. In our country’s
77 largest cities, there are close to 700 community gardens and
13,000 individual garden plots, according to a 2008 survey by the
Trust for Public Land. Many community gardens are on urban
parklands or land owned by churches or senior centers.
These gardens provide a place for people to come together to
work side by side, grow food, educate young people, instill pride,
raise property values, and reduce pesticide exposure. For example,
the Central Bainbridge Street Community Garden in Brooklyn,
New York, produces thousands of pounds of vegetables a year.
It is also a center of activity for young and old in the large
community it serves.
Fruits and
vegetables fresh
out of the garden
are hard to
beat for taste
and nutrition.


SUSTAINABILITY 37
.Reducing Food Waste
A Seattle, Washington, urban garden
program called P-Patch began in 1973.
The program plans, oversees, and protects
gardens citywide. As a model for community
gardening, P-Patch has grown to 68 commu-
nity gardens totaling 23 acres, with almost
2,000 plots that are cultivated by about
4,000 people. At any given time, about
1,900 people can be on a waiting list to
get a garden plot.
City rooftops have been turned into
garden spaces, too. Some of these urban
gardens have small ponds with koi fish. Fish
droppings enrich the fishpond water with
nutrients, which provide natural fertilizer
and water for the garden plants each time
the pond is cleaned. Residents who live in
buildings with rooftop gardens save their
vegetable and fruit peelings for a community
compost bin. The compost is spread around
the plants to make the soil more nutrient rich.
Organic farmers who live in rural areas
may raise cows, pigs, chickens, and other
livestock on grazing land to provide consum-
ers with natural meats, free-range chicken,
and fresh eggs. The manure the animals
make is used as natural fertilizer to grow
organic gardens.
Many cities are turning unused land
into urban garden spaces. Land
used for gardens not only offers an
excellent use for otherwise vacant
spaces, but also beautifies areas that
might otherwise be places of blight
and trash dumping.


38 SUSTAINABILITY
Reducing Food Waste.
Backyard Gardens
A backyard garden can provide much of the fresh produce your
family needs in a small plot. Even a container garden grown
in 12- to 15-inch-deep pots on a sunny apartment balcony can
produce generous results. Check with your county extension
agent to learn more about gardening in your area. Knowing
when and what to plant for the season and your region is
important for successful gardening.
Factors That Limit World Food Supplies
Producing and delivering enough food to feed the world’s
people is a serious challenge. Scientists estimate the world
population could reach 8 billion by 2030.
In the 1960s, most countries were self-sufficient in food
production. Today only a few grow what they need. During the
’60s, high-yield crops and energy-hungry farming practices led
to dramatic increases in crop production. Except for parts of
Africa, grain yields exceeded population growth in those days.
But now, grain production struggles to keep pace as the world’s
population increases.
For most people in the world, grain is a primary source
of nutrition. Yet today, only two of 183 nations are major
grain exporters: Canada and the United States. As many as
1 billion people in the world today are undernourished and
live with hunger.
How might
local gardens
contribute to a
more sustainable
way of life if
practiced globally?


SUSTAINABILITY 39
.Reducing Food Waste
Although it was called the “Green Revolution,” the
energy-intensive farming that once fed the world depended on
agricultural practices that many consider to be unsustainable.
These practices include heavy use of fossil fuels for fertilizers,
pesticides, and irrigation, along with designing plants that
can tolerate high levels of fertilizers and pesticides to increase
the harvest.
In nations that had good farmland, enough water for
irrigation, and ready access to fossil fuels and fertilizers, the
Green Revolution didn’t turn out all that “green” in the
current sense of the term. The energy-intensive farming led
to soil erosion and water pollution, and sped up the depletion
of groundwater and surface water resources.
Other unwanted environmental and public health
consequences have arisen from the widespread use of
chemical pesticides and herbicides. Worldwide, crop
research centers are now studying how to make
large-scale commercial agriculture more sustainable.
Limited land that is suitable for agriculture,
soil contamination and erosion, dwindling water
for irrigation, and pollution of water sources all
play parts in the world’s ability to grow enough
food for the present and the future.
Discuss with your counselor some of these
factors that limit the availability of food and food
production in various regions of the world. How do these
factors influence the sustainability of worldwide food supplies?





.Designing Sustainable Communities
Designing Sustainable
Communities
Before you sketch out how you would design a sustainable
community, you may want to research some of the world’s most
sustainable cities to help you with your own plan.
For example, Reykjavik, Iceland, a city with about 115,000
residents, gets energy for hot water, electricity, and heat entirely
from hydropower and geothermal sources. Both sources are
free of greenhouse gas emissions and are renewable energy;
that is, they are replaced by natural processes. (See “Achieving
Sustainable Energy” in this pamphlet for more about hydropower,
geothermal, and other energy sources.) Some buses and vehicles
in Reykjavik run on hydrogen. Iceland plans to entirely end its
dependence on fossil fuels by 2050 and become a hydrogen, solar,
wind, and geothermal society.
Vancouver, Canada, has also embraced renewable energy.
City leaders have developed a 100-year plan to become cleaner
and greener. Vancouver is already No. 1 in the world in using
hydroelectric energy, which provides 90 percent of its power. The
city also plans to drastically reduce greenhouse gas emissions
through investments in solar, wave, and wind energy systems.
Portland, Oregon, has been a sustainable-living
model city for years. Urban planners have set aside
92,000 acres of green space with 74 miles of bike/hike
trails, and created an urban-growth boundary to con-
tain the city and protect outlying farms and 25 million
acres of forestland. Portland is the first U.S. city to enact
a plan to reduce its greenhouse gas emissions and get
100 percent of its energy from renewable sources. In this
health-conscious city, one-quarter of commuters bike to
work. More than 50 buildings in Portland exceed the U.S.
Green Building Council’s standards for sustainability.
SUSTAINABILITY 41


42 SUSTAINABILITY
Designing Sustainable Communities.
Camp Emerald Bay:
Scouts Tackle Sustainability
Located on the remote west end of Santa
Catalina Island, California, Camp Emerald
Bay is operated by Scouting America’s
Western Los Angeles Council. This is the home of the threatened
Catalina Island fox and Catalina California ground squirrel, and
many federally endangered plants. With less than 16 inches of
rain falling per year on the island, water is scarce and there is a
high risk of fire. Scouting leaders felt it was essential to protect
the island’s natural resources.
Water Conservation
In 2009, Camp Emerald Bay began shrinking its environmental
footprint. First, it reduced water consumption by replacing
high-use water fixtures with lower-flow models.
Water
Consumption
Area
Usage Before
Reduction
Measures
Usage After Reduction
Measures
Total
Result
Showerheads 2.5 gallons
per minute
0.6 gallons per minute 75 percent
reduction
Sinks 2.0 gallons
per minute
0.5 gallons per minute 75 percent
reduction
Toilets 1.6–3.0 gallons
per flush
0–1.6 gallons per
flush, depending on
model; dual flush 1.1
(liquid waste) or 1.6
(solid waste) gallons
per flush
Washing
Machines
35–40 gallons
per load
14 gallons per load 60 percent
reduction
Water
Softeners
175 gallons of
salty brine
discharged weekly
0 gallons and 0 salt 100
percent
reduction
Hose Bibs Standard handles
that could be
turned on (and left
on) by anyone
Keyed models
that restrict
unauthorized access
Estimated
25 percent
reduction


.Designing Sustainable Communities
SUSTAINABILITY 43
Other water-saving methods adopted by Camp Emerald
Bay include:
Drip irrigation. Plants receive direct, precise amounts of water.
Water is no longer lost to the air or to unnecessary plants as
with traditional sprinkler systems.
Water meters. Water meters measure the amount of water
going into a building. The camp’s network of meters reveals
where, when, and how much water is consumed. Some meters
can be read in real time, immediately identifying problems
such as running toilets or broken pipes. The real-time monitoring
also sends an email alert any time water use is above a
certain threshold.
Pressure-assist toilets. These units need only 1.0 gallon per
flush, using air pressure to push water through the bowl.
Waterless urinals. These use no water, helping to save thousands
of gallons, and the novelty has made them popular with campers.
Camp Emerald Bay garden


44 SUSTAINABILITY
Designing Sustainable Communities.
WATER CONSERVATION RESULTS
The water conservation efforts have helped Camp Emerald Bay
save more than 1.5 million gallons per year, or use 50 percent
less water than was used in 2006.
Besides saving water, the changes have brought other
benefits, including:
Improved health of native plant species. With a drip irrigation
system delivering precise amounts of water to each plant, native
vegetation has flourished.
Improved leach fields. All drains in the camp lead to
septic tanks, which treat the water and release it into
vegetated areas known as leach fields. The elimination
of salt-based water softeners has reduced the salty
brine from the septic system and produced better soil
in the leach fields.
Reduction in propane usage. Using less water for
showering means less propane is required to heat the
water. In addition, switching to on-demand water heaters
that heat water only when it is needed has cut the
consumption of propane and the release of 9.36 metric
tons of carbon dioxide each year.
Annual Water Usage, 2006–2011
4,000,000
3,500,000
3,000,000
2,500,000
2,000,000
1,500,000
1,000,000
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011
YEAR
TOTAL GALLONS USED
3,658,900
2,665,600 2,736,000
1,989,600 1,953,600 1,809,800


SUSTAINABILITY 45
.Designing Sustainable Communities
Protection of the natural aquifer. Fresh water on the island
comes from an underground aquifer that currently flows out to
sea. If too much water were to be used, that underground river
could be diminished enough to reverse the direction of flow,
allowing saltwater intrusion.
Increased awareness. Most importantly, Scouts at Camp
Emerald Bay have become more conservation-minded.
Conserving water and practicing environmental stewardship
are now camp standards.
Think about how you would design the housing, work
locations, shops, schools, and transportation systems
to build a sustainable community for the future.
How would you redesign your town or community
for sustainability?


46 SUSTAINABILITY
Designing Sustainable Communities.
Sustainable Housing and Green Building
Along with water conservation, Camp Emerald Bay has explored
sustainable housing options. The Scouts teamed up with an
architectural firm to create its Eco-Cabin. The structure was
built using reclaimed wood from a pier, two old 20-foot shipping
containers, a rubber floor, and aluminum arches to suspend a
silicone-coated roof. A small solar panel outside provides power
to the eight LED lights inside the structure. Today, the Eco-Cabin
serves as an education center to demonstrate sustainable design
and principles of outdoor ethics, and it is used as a classroom for
merit badge instruction.
Through the efficient use of resources, Camp Emerald Bay
has constructed various spaces out of recycled material. The
Scoutcraft area was built with materials from a pier, dock floats,
and railroad ties. The obstacles for a Leadership Reaction Course
were constructed from the roof of the dining hall. A bridge
across an intermittent stream and parts of a garden were built
from the pier.


SUSTAINABILITY 47
.Designing Sustainable Communities
“Upcycling” is converting waste materials or useless
items into new materials or items of better value.
Energy Conservation
Energy conservation continues beyond the Eco-Cabin.
Lighting replacements. Incandescent bulbs have been replaced
with compact fluorescent lamp (CFL) or LED lights, which use
much less electricity. Motion-sensor timers have been installed
in the bathroom facilities, dining hall, and maintenance yard.
Energy Smart meters. Monitoring energy consumption in real
time helps identify where energy is being used and the peak
times for energy consumption. The monitoring system sends an
alert when energy use reaches a certain threshold.
The reclaimed “landship” at Camp Emerald Bay serves as a unique meeting
place for Scoutcraft activities.


48 SUSTAINABILITY
Designing Sustainable Communities.
Every time a
glass or plastic
bottle is put in
a recycling bin,
natural resources
are conserved
and greenhouse
gas emissions
are reduced.
Waste, Recycling, and Compost
A waste audit found that only 27 percent of what was put in
the trash bin actually belonged in the trash bin. The other
73 percent was either recyclable or compostable.
To reduce the amount of trash, recycling and composting
programs are now part of daily life at Camp Emerald Bay.
Recycling. Glass bottles, aluminum cans, and plastic bottles
make up 26 percent of the camp’s trash. Instead of being thrown
out, these items are collected in recycling bins located in every
campsite, cabin, and building in camp.
Composting. Through the composting program, the camp also
recycles fruits, vegetables, and grains. These items, along with
leaves, wood chips, and discarded paper, are sent to compost
bins to be processed daily.
During summer camp, nearly 150 gallons of compostable
material is processed every day in the camp’s garden. With
proper aeration (supplied with air), food decomposes within
a few days and transforms into a rich soil called humus that
retains moisture and nutrients. This soil is added to the native
clay soil to grow fruits, vegetables, and native plants in the
garden and around camp.
Through the composting program, the food waste
generated at Camp Emerald Bay turns into a usable
product that enriches the soil and reduces the need
for water, fertilizers, and pesticides.


SUSTAINABILITY 49
.Designing Sustainable Communities
SFI is the largest forest certification
program in North America and the
largest single forest certification
standard in the world. Philmont
Scout Ranch is certified to the SFI Standard. Scout Life magazine
is printed on paper certified by SFI’s global Programme for the
Endorsement of Forest Certification (PEFC), and the magazine displays
the PEFC label in every issue. Merit badge pamphlets also are printed on
SFI-certified paper.
These programs cut the number of times the
camp’s trash must be hauled across the Gulf of Santa
Catalina, reducing pollution and extending municipal
landfill life. Another benefit of waste reduction is that
animals are less prone to scavenge through the trash
to find food. This keeps trash from being scattered
and also protects animals from accidental harm.
With initiatives such as these, Camp Emerald
Bay sets a pattern for sustainability and strives to
protect Catalina Island for future generations.
Sustainable Building Materials
At the heart of sustainable construction are the three R’s of
green living: reduce, reuse, recycle. Inside and out, energy
efficiency is built in to environmentally sound buildings.
When ordering wood for a sustainable home, for
example, you would look for wood products certified under
the Sustainable Forestry Initiative (SFI) and purchase wood
that is generated locally. This reduces shipping costs and
saves the energy of shipping wood from a faraway location.
Green Building Initiative’s Green Globes program and the
rating tools of the U.S. Green Building Council’s LEED (Leadership
in Environmental and Energy Design) certified sustainable home
program have set high standards of sustainable design and
development practices for land developers, architects, engineers,
real estate professionals, and others who are interested in sustain-
able construction. The programs rate building projects based on
construction site selection, water and energy efficiency, materials
used, and indoor environmental quality.


50 SUSTAINABILITY
Designing Sustainable Communities.
Listed below are some of the materials
and techniques that are recognized in
sustainable construction:
• Plywood processed
without formaldehyde
• Installation of large energy-efficient
windows that provide fresh air and
natural light
• Installation of energy- and water-
efficient appliances
• Installation of low-emitting volatile
organics carpeting
• Use of low-volatile-organic
compounds (VOC) paint
• Use of reused or recycled construction
materials when possible
• Building within walking distance of
many basic services
• Selection of a building site that is not on prime farmland,
in a floodplain, on threatened animal habitat, or too close
to wetlands
• Prevention of pollution on the construction site
• Space provided for recyclable collection and storage
• Establishment of a minimum level of indoor air quality
• Building near alternative transportation
With your parent’s permission and counselor’s approval, interview
a local architect, engineer, contractor, or building materials
supplier. Before the interview, prepare a list of questions to ask the
construction expert or building supplier. Find out the factors that
are considered when using sustainable materials in renovating or
building a home. Share what you learn with your counselor.
Tax breaks and incentives are available for green building and vary from
state to state and sometimes by city. The Database of State Incentives
for Renewables and Efficiency (DSIRE) keeps a database online with
up-to-date information by state.


SUSTAINABILITY 51
.Designing Sustainable Communities
How Communities Assess Housing Needs
Cities and towns throughout the country conduct “housing needs
assessments” to determine the need for affordable housing. With
parental permission, go online or visit a public library to look at
a current housing needs assessment for your town, city, county,
or state.
Looking at a housing needs assessment will give you a better
understanding of the need for rental housing, affordable homes,
senior housing, and special-needs housing in your community. A
housing needs assessment also helps to identify issues that may
need to be addressed such as urban blight or foreclosure.
In this way, cities determine whether proposed development
projects meet the community’s needs and should be high priority.
A housing needs assessment is a first step in planning how, when,
and where to address local housing issues so that priorities can be
set, resources identified, and strategies chosen.
City planners and interested groups might ask the
following questions:
• Who can afford to live in this community?
• Does our community provide quality housing to a wide range
of residents?
• Can our children afford to remain in, or return to, the
community as they start their own careers and households?
• Can those people who provide essential services to the
community—such as firefighters, law enforcement officers,
healthcare workers, and others—afford to live here?
• Do people with special needs have adequate housing options?
• Are there substandard, overcrowded, or other undesirable
living conditions that should be addressed?
• Do our elderly residents have adequate housing for remaining
in the community as they age?
• Do we provide the type of housing that promotes local
job growth?
• Are there significant local housing trends such as an increase
in absentee landlords, mortgage foreclosures, increasing
housing prices, or decreasing home values?
“Needs” categories you may want to research include
affordable rental housing, home ownership, senior housing,
and special-needs housing.





SUSTAINABILITY 53
.Achieving Sustainable Energy
Achieving Sustainable
Energy
You are now set to learn about the sustainability of different
energy sources and what the term carbon footprint means.
Here is a list of the terms you will find in this section and a
brief definition of each of these forms of energy.
Fossil fuels, such as petroleum, coal, and natural gas,
come from the accumulated remains of ancient plants and
animals. Burning fossil fuels releases carbon dioxide and other
greenhouse gases, which are considered by many to be among
the primary causes of global climate change.
Solar energy is the energy received by Earth from the sun
in the form of solar radiation, which makes the production of
solar electricity possible.


54 SUSTAINABILITY
Achieving Sustainable Energy.
Nuclear power is produced
by a fission reaction that splits the
uranium nucleus, creating heat.
The heat is used to turn water into
steam; the steam drives a turbine,
spinning a generator to produce
electricity. Although nuclear
energy is carbon-free, the toxic
waste created by used or depleted
uranium is difficult to dispose
of safely.
Wind power is the conversion
of wind energy into usable forms
of energy through windmills for
mechanical power, wind pumps for
water pumping or drainage, and
wind turbines to make electrical
power. Wind energy is renewable
and clean and produces no green-
house gas emissions, but some
people find wind turbines
unsightly or noisy.
Hydropower, or water power,
comes from the energy of falling
and running water, which may
be harnessed for useful purposes
such as operating textile mills and
other mechanical devices, and
generating electricity. Hydropower
is a renewable energy source.
Geothermal power comes
from the heat of Earth’s core. Hot spring water can be brought
to Earth’s surface and used to heat homes and buildings.
Geothermal power generates clean, renewable electricity.
Its sources are mainly concentrated in the “Ring of Fire,” a
volcanic region with large geothermal reservoirs located
around the Pacific Ocean. Geothermal power is cost-effective
and sustainable, although bringing the heat to Earth’s surface
does emit small quantities of greenhouse gases.
Bioenergy is generated from biomass: trees, crops, algae,
animal dung, or plant material that is left over from agricultural
and forestry operations.


SUSTAINABILITY 55
.Achieving Sustainable Energy
Everyone Makes a Carbon Footprint
Your carbon footprint is the total amount of carbon dioxide
(CO2) that you create. The bigger your footprint, the less green
your lifestyle is. When you burn fossil fuels like gasoline in
your family car or heating oil to warm your house, carbon
dioxide is released.
Unless your family lives “off the power grid” (that is, you
don’t rely on a power company for electricity), the electricity used
in your home creates the biggest part of your carbon footprint.
Although electricity does not make greenhouse gases when
you use it in your home, most of the power plants that generate
electricity do, by burning fossil fuels.
Using fuels like oil, natural gas, or coal-generated electricity
to heat or cool your home add to your carbon footprint. How
you adjust the thermostat and what type of fuel you use make a
difference in the amount of CO2 produced.
Cars, buses, trains, and planes that run on fossil fuels also
produce CO2. Household garbage is a culprit, too, if it isn’t
composted. For every pound of trash you throw in the garbage,
one pound of greenhouse gases is created because trash over
time produces CO2 and methane.
How to Shrink Your Carbon Footprint
By using less fuel and less electricity and reducing the amount
of trash you create, you can reduce your carbon footprint
dramatically. Start by turning off computers, televisions, and
lights when you are not using them. Unplug small appliances
and phone chargers, etc., when they are not in use. Lower the
temperature in your home to 68 degrees or lower in winter, and
raise it to 78 degrees or higher when running an air conditioner
in summer. Turn off your heat or air conditioner entirely and
open screened windows for natural ventilation when the weather
is comfortable.
Many websites provide ways to figure out the size of your carbon
footprint. Get parental permission before using one of these “carbon
calculators,” because you will need to answer questions about where
you live, the type of home you live in, how much electricity you use,
and how often your family uses a car.


56 SUSTAINABILITY
Achieving Sustainable Energy.
Here are more tips for reducing your carbon footprint:
Buy local and buy organic. When possible, buy organic or
“fair trade.” There’s a better chance the food was grown in
an eco-friendly way. Food grown locally doesn’t have to be
transported far, which saves fuel, reduces the carbon footprint,
and supports the local economy. Eat at restaurants that serve
locally produced or seasonal foods.
Keep packaging to a minimum. For example, choose loose
vegetables instead of boxed or plastic-wrapped ones. Take
reusable cloth tote bags to the grocery store.
Don’t buy bottled water. Bottled water creates a huge carbon
footprint. And it is often shipped long distances. Refill a
reusable water bottle instead.
Take steps to make your home energy-efficient. The attic
should be insulated, windows need to close properly, and heating
and air-conditioning systems should be properly maintained. If
possible, switch to reusable air filters instead of disposable filters.
Switch from incandescent to compact fluorescent or LED light
bulbs. These use less electricity and last longer. They are more
expensive to purchase, but they will pay for themselves over time
in reduced energy costs.
Switch to native plants. Wherever you live, there are plants
that are native to your region. These will grow better and take
less water in most cases than nonnative species and may get
shipped shorter distances to reach your local nursery. Green
plants are an excellent way to offset carbon. Planting anything
helps the environment.
Practice being thrifty. To help you buy only the things you
truly need, avoid impulse buying. Every item you purchase
has a footprint, so when you curb your urge to spend money
on items, you are reducing your individual carbon footprint
and our nation’s overall footprint. Some people call this
“precycling.” If you don’t buy stuff, no “recycling” is necessary.
Switch your water heater to vacation mode when you go
away. In “vacation” or “away” mode, a water heater does not
keep a tank full of hot water ready when you don’t need it.
Newer tankless models heat water only when it’s needed, making
them far more energy efficient than standard water heaters.
Close window
drapes to keep
heat out in
summer, and open
the drapes to let
in the warm sun
in wintertime.


SUSTAINABILITY 57
.Achieving Sustainable Energy
Pull the plug. If you don’t use an appliance frequently, unplug
it. The same goes for cellphone chargers, laptops, televisions,
stereos, toasters, coffee pots, hair dryers, and other electronics.
Many devices continue to use energy even when they appear to
be turned off. If you use a power strip for a group of electronic
devices, you can flip one switch and disconnect them from the
power all at once.
Keep your car as long as it runs well. Rising gas prices do not
mean you should rush to buy a hybrid or an electric vehicle. If
your older car still runs well, keep it, and keep it well tuned-up.
Even hybrids create a huge footprint when they are built, so
consider driving a well-maintained older car for a while longer.
Use more eco-friendly forms of transport—buses, light rail,
bicycle—and walk or carpool whenever possible.
Choose fresh over frozen. Frozen dinners are energy-intensive
to produce. It takes energy to freeze foods, ship them cold,
display them frozen in the grocery store, and keep them frozen
in the home freezer. Try to eat fresh food when you can, and
ditch frozen foods that must be zapped in the microwave.
Use cold water to wash clothes. It takes lots of energy to heat
water. Multiply that energy by the number of washer loads your
family does weekly, and it adds up to a big footprint. Try washing
mixed loads and dark clothes in cold water. Most detergents are
designed to have the same cleaning power in cold water as in
warm water.
Combine errands to save trips in the car. Driving to the same
part of town on different days to run multiple errands uses more
gas than if you had planned and done everything in the same
area all at once. Reduce your need to travel back and forth on
short trips by planning your errand trips in advance.
Remember the Three R’s: Reduce, Reuse, Recycle! Buy less,
reuse and fix things when you can instead of buying new, and
recycle as much as you can at home and at school. Upcycle,
too: Repurpose things into useful and fun new items.
Think about how you and your family can reduce your carbon
footprint. Discuss with your counselor what you’ve learned
about how each energy source affects the environment, what
the term “carbon footprint” means, and what your family can
do to reduce your impact on Earth.
Reduce your
food waste by
shopping and
cooking wisely,
and you’ll also
reduce the
size of your
carbon footprint.


58 SUSTAINABILITY
Achieving Sustainable Energy.
Lowering Household Utility Bills
In addition to the other tips provided in this pamphlet,
consider these ideas for lowering your family’s
utility bills.
• Seal cracks around doors and windows to cut
energy costs by an estimated 15 to 30 percent.
Caulk and weather-stripping are inexpensive to buy.
• Properly insulate attic spaces. In cold climates,
install storm windows.
• Use heat-generating appliances like the oven, clothes dryer,
and dishwasher at night when it is cooler outside. Running
these appliances during the heat of the day in summer forces
the air conditioner to work harder to keep a home comfortable.
• Use a slow cooker to cook some meals each week. Slow cookers
use less energy than cooking in pans on the stovetop, and they
do not heat up a house the way cooktops and ovens do.
• If you have ceiling fans in your rooms, turn them on. Fans
make a room feel more comfortable, and using them could
save hundreds of dollars a year.
• Air-dry laundry instead of using a dryer. If you live in a city
or you can’t hang clothes outside on a clothesline because of
allergens in the air, try hanging them on hangers and letting
them drip-dry in your laundry room or inside your home.


SUSTAINABILITY 59
.Achieving Sustainable Energy
After you have made and carried out a family plan to
reduce one or more of your household’s utility bills,
share with your counselor how your plan affected your
family’s usage.
• When you leave a room, turn out the lights. That single act
can save hundreds of dollars per year.
• Use a programmable thermostat. If you don’t have one, make
it a habit to set the thermostat higher in summer or lower in
winter when no one will be home.
• Replace air filters or clean a reusable filter once a month.
Dirty air filters cause air-conditioning or heating systems to
run longer and harder as airflow gets restricted.
Lowering Transportation Bills
To evaluate your family’s fuel and transportation expenses, look
at your family’s transportation-related bills (gasoline, diesel,
parking, public transportation, etc.). As a family, consider how
you can help reduce these costs.
You may have seen those funny-looking EV (electric vehicle)
pumps around town and wondered what they were.
They provide alternative energy sources such as
electricity, natural gas, and propane—all of which
burn cleaner than petroleum fuel, which is what
most motor vehicles use.


60 SUSTAINABILITY
Achieving Sustainable Energy.
Here are some ways you can save on fuel and transportation costs.
• Use the right grade of gasoline. Most cars run fine on regular.
Look at the vehicle owner’s manual to find out what’s right
for your family’s car. Regular-grade gas is usually significantly
less expensive than premium grade.
• Make sure the fuel cap is on tight. Loose gas caps can reduce
fuel efficiency and allow gasoline to vaporize into the air.
• Carpool, use public transit, or bike and walk when you
safely can.
• Encourage family members to not drive aggressively and to
drive at the speed limit. Vehicles lose economy at speeds
above 55 mph.
• If it’s cool outside, use the flow-through ventilation system in
your car instead of rolling down windows or running the air
conditioner. Air conditioning increases fuel use.
• On a trip, carry suitcases, tents, coolers, and camping gear inside
the vehicle, not on a roof rack. Loaded roof racks increase wind
resistance and fuel use. Also eliminate unnecessary weight from
your car.
• Idling for a long time in a drive-through lane wastes gas.
Instead, park and walk inside.
After you have followed your family plan to reduce fuel and
transportation costs, discuss with your counselor how your plan
affected your family’s transportation habits.


.Achieving Sustainable Energy
What About All This Other Stuff?
We live in a consumer culture that bombards us daily
with advertisements and enticements to buy the latest
whatever-it-is, from cellphones and tablet computers to
games, movies, and shoes. Many of us buy more “stuff”
than we need.
One part of living greener is learning to tell the dif-
ference between essential needs and desirable wants.
Eliminating unnecessary “stuff” from your life is easier
when you consider every new purchase in terms of
momentary “want” versus true “need.”
If too much ”stuff” is cluttering your home, plan a
family project to identify the possessions your family
no longer needs. Individually, go through closets and
drawers. Together, sift through the garage, basement,
attic, or other common areas.
The key to paring down clothes is to look at each
piece of clothing and ask yourself how long ago you
last wore the item. Does it still fit? Is it comfortable?
Are you ever likely to put it on again? Does it have
sentimental value? Your answers will help you decide
what to keep and what to put on the discard pile.
Make your life less complicated and cluttered
by recycling or repurposing those things that are
simply gathering dust. While you are at it, you
might want to reorganize your closets and
drawers so you know where everything is.
Thinking thriftily and treading more lightly
are important as you start to lead a more
sustainable lifestyle.
Box up or bag your reusable items. Your
donations will be welcome at Goodwill®
stores, The Salvation Army, women’s
shelters, and various local nonprofit
organizations. If you have items you
want to sell, consider having a garage
or yard sale. Recycle, repurpose, or
donate items that don’t sell.
As a Scout, you
should make
conscious choices
about the stuff
that you own, have
to store, take care
of, and use.





SUSTAINABILITY 63
.Earth’s Life-Support Systems
Earth’s Life-Support
Systems
One way to picture how planetary systems support life on Earth
and interact with one another is to think of an intensive-care
unit in a hospital, where many life-support systems are in place
to help critically ill people survive and get better. Earth also has
life-support systems. In a sense, our planet could be considered
one big intensive-care unit, supporting all forms of life.
The Encyclopedia of Life Support Systems offers this definition:
“A life support system … furthers the life of the biosphere
in a sustainable fashion. The fundamental attribute of life
support systems is that together they provide all of the
sustainable needs required for continuance of life. These
needs go far beyond biological requirements. Thus life
support systems encompass natural environmental systems
as well as … social systems required to foster societal
harmony, safety, nutrition, medical care, economic
standards, and the development of new technology.
The one common thread in all of these systems is that
they operate in partnership with the conservation of
global natural resources.”
By viewing the world in this way, people can begin to develop a
new appreciation of how we can work together to sustain life on
Earth. As we gain a deeper understanding of nature and society,
that knowledge can be used to create a better quality of life and
a healthy, sustainable environment for those of us who live here
now and for all those who come after us.
This is a crucial challenge of our time. Many of our
technologies and social institutions will need to be redesigned
to lessen the environmental impact on our natural resources.


64 SUSTAINABILITY
Earth’s Life-Support Systems.
To make this happen requires a positive attitude toward
sustainable development. Instead of consuming more of Earth’s
limited resources, people will need to learn how to consume
far less.
Scouts are well prepared to lead this effort. Scouts are used
to leaving no trace behind when camping in the backcountry.
And community service is second nature for Scouts who see
areas of need and pitch in to create a better quality of life for all.
A Tipping Point
The makeup of our atmosphere, marine ecosystems, coastal
zones, freshwater systems, forests, land and soil, and biological
diversity are all coming under increasing pressure as the global
population grows and the global economy expands.
Since 1930 the world’s popula-
tion has tripled to more than 7 billion
people. The global economy has
increased more than 15-fold since
1950. All of this human activity has
had far-reaching impacts on the
planet and how it functions. Many
scientists believe we may be reaching
critical “threshold points” where
the effects on land, oceans, air, and
fresh water may be irreversible.
Carbon dioxide levels in the
atmosphere are increasing at a rate
10 times faster than any natural
increase since the last ice age. As
more and more rainforests are cleared
for housing, farming, and fuel, the
environment has less ability to absorb
greenhouse gases. More cars on
the roads mean more pollution in
the air and in the world’s oceans
and fresh water.
Consider promoting sustainability and ecologically
sound practices for your larger community—Earth
itself—as the biggest Scouting project that you and
1.4 million like-minded Scouts can undertake in
your lifetime.
If public transportation is available in your
area, consider yourself lucky and take
advantage of it. Riding on a subway, train,
or bus will give you some down time for
listening to music or reading.


SUSTAINABILITY 65
.Earth’s Life-Support Systems
The melting of the Greenland ice sheet could lead to a
rise in sea levels of from 6 to 20 feet. Imagine how that
could change Earth’s shorelines and disrupt societies
around the world.
Earth’s life-support systems interact in complex ways. For
example, coral reefs in the world’s oceans have been degraded
by fishing and tourism, and by chemical and agricultural pol-
lution. Now the reefs are also under threat from the changing
chemistry of seawater, which is one result of the dramatic
increase in atmospheric carbon dioxide.
Increasingly warm and dry conditions are contributing to
soil erosion, dwindling wildlife diversity, diminishing freshwater
supplies, and large intense wildfires worldwide.
Some scientists call this period of time the Anthropocene
Era, where human beings are the dominating environmental
force. Deforestation, biodiversity loss, freshwater depletion, and
climate change are issues that call for major lifestyle changes
and action on a large scale.
The need is great for cooperation among businesses, cities,
states, regions, and countries because these life-support systems
sustain all forms of life on the planet.


66 SUSTAINABILITY
Earth’s Life-Support Systems.
Use of Raw Materials
The extraction of raw materials from Earth has social and
economic effects, both positive and negative. Extracting raw
materials can create jobs and economic growth, but extraction
activities also have the potential to affect people’s health and
disrupt or displace communities. Taking raw materials from
Earth may cause environmental damage, such as water scarcity,
air and water pollution, and problems of waste disposal.
Increasingly, ethics play a huge part in sustainable
extraction of raw materials. Sustainable development of
natural materials means preserving the environment, which
can involve, for example, harvesting at the appropriate times,
replanting for the future, and restoring the land to health. More
companies are embracing forest certification standards like the
Sustainable Forestry Initiative to ensure forest sustainability.
Others are adopting fair-trade policies that try to pay fair wages
and improve the quality of life for those who cultivate and
harvest the products we need.
For example, a company in Australia uses sandalwood
oil in its fragrance products. Company leaders knew that
deforestation (destruction of forests) was threatening the
sandalwood supply from India, so they partnered with a
producer of Australian sandalwood oil to “ethically source”
that raw material. The partnership creates a sustainable
supply of oil from sandalwood that is harvested by
indigenous (native) communities in western Australia.
The company also works with local communities and a
local partner in Madagascar, which is the source for 80 percent of
the world’s vanilla. To ensure a sustainable, fair-trade supply of
vanilla from the island, they have adopted environmentally
sound harvest and production methods.
The company works to educate the local
people in how sustainable agricultural
methods can enhance their quality of life
and help protect their future.
The energy
and resources
required to
make one new
aluminum soda
can could be used
to make 20 cans
from recycled
aluminum.
Source: Can
Manufacturers
Institute
Vanilla
bean pods


SUSTAINABILITY 67
.Earth’s Life-Support Systems
City governments, too, are looking for ways to help their cities become
more sustainable. Some cities are working to significantly reduce
greenhouse gas emissions. These steps include banning plastic bags;
using wind power and other clean, renewable energy sources such as
hydropower, biomass, and solar power for some of their electricity;
switching high-wattage electric lights in parking garages and streetlights
to low-wattage LED lamps; and recycling restaurant food waste
by composting.
These are just a few of the ways that businesses are turning
toward sustainable methods to reduce their environmental impact
on the planet while at the same time earning profits. Now you can
meet with your counselor and talk about how the harvesting and
production of raw materials, along with how they are distributed,
consumed, and disposed of or recycled, is part of current and future
thinking and planning for sustainability.





SUSTAINABILITY 69
.A Roundup of Sustainability Issues
A Roundup of
Sustainability Issues
You don’t have to look far to see the blight that plastic waste
makes in our environment. Drive down any road in America
and you’ll likely see plastic bags stuck in trees and plastered
against fence lines, and plastic bottles, wrappers, and containers
tossed in ditches or accumulating in piles along the banks of
creeks, rivers, lakes, and marshes.
Plastic Waste and the Trash Vortex
Plastic bags are also among the top two items of trash found in
our oceans, where they choke, strangle, and starve wildlife. The
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration noted that
plastic bags can also cover living corals in coral reefs, which can
lead to the death of the reef.
Many large coastal cities use barges to transport their garbage
offshore and dump it into the ocean. This has caused an island
of plastic to form off California’s west coast that is twice the size
of Texas and made up of 7 billion pounds of plastic garbage. It is
known as a trash vortex because the prevailing ocean currents keep
it swirling around slowly in a circle. The dead zone is choked with
dead fish, marine mammals, and birds that have gotten snagged in
the mess.
Zooplankton are small floating animals that drift with the
currents. Along with phytoplankton (tiny plants), zooplankton
make up the food supply upon which almost all oceanic organ-
isms depend to survive. Plastic pieces now outweigh surface
zooplankton in the central North Pacific Ocean by a factor of
6 to 1, according to researchers.
Plastic pieces poison the ocean environment. They attract
and hold deadly elements like PCBs, a pollutant used in coolants,
transformers, capacitors, and electric motors; and DDT, a chemical
Reports of
microscopic bits
of plastic washing
ashore to become
part of a beach
are starting to
spring up where
stunningly beautiful
and abundant
natural environ-
ments once stood.


70 SUSTAINABILITY
A Roundup of Sustainability Issues.
compound widely used as an agricultural pesticide that Rachel
Carson wrote about in 1962 in the famous book Silent Spring.
Carson’s book documented the ways pesticides harm the environ-
ment and wildlife, particularly birds. Although both DDT and PCBs
were eventually banned, these toxic, cancer-causing chemicals do
not break down in the environment.
When plastic enters water sources, it stays there. According
to the Research Triangle Institute, “every little piece of plastic
manufactured in the past 50 years that made it into the ocean is
still out there somewhere.” The plastics you use today will still be
polluting our environment when your grandchildren are born.
Keep these things in mind every time you use a plastic
bag, drink from a polystyrene cup, or buy anything wrapped or
contained in plastic. Instead, substitute reusable shopping bags,
bottles, and containers, and do your part by spreading the word
to end wasteful consumption of plastics.
The Number System for Plastic Recyclables
A coding system exists for identifying the type of plastic used in products
and packing materials. This recycling codes system consists of a number
within the universal recycling symbol, which is a triangle formed by
three arrows.
Each code provides useful information about the recyclability of an
item and its possible effects on human health. Here are the seven types of
plastics represented by the recycling codes system:
1. Polyethylene terephthalate (PETE) is a clear, hard plastic
used in disposable food and drink containers. PETE is
easy to recycle into furniture, carpet, polar fleece, and
some types of containers. No known health risks are
associated with this type of plastic. PETE is accepted at
recycling programs in most U.S. cities.
2. High-density polyethylene (HDPE) is a hard plastic but it
is not transparent like PETE. HDPE is found in household
cleaner bottles, shampoo bottles, and yogurt containers.
Easy to recycle, it is accepted widely by recycling
programs. It can be recycled into pens, recycling bins,
laundry detergent bottles, drainage pipes, and fencing.
No known health risks are associated with HDPE.


SUSTAINABILITY 71
.A Roundup of Sustainability Issues
3. Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) is less stiff than HDPE but has
many of the same uses. It is the main plastic in bottles
for detergent, shampoo, and cooking oil. It is more
difficult to recycle than the first two plastics and is not
commonly collected in municipal recycling programs.
PVC is known to contain phthalates, a suspected
carcinogen, or cancer-causing agent.
4. Low-density polyethylene (LDPE) is a soft, flexible
plastic found in plastic bags including bread bags,
frozen-food bags, and plastic shopping bags. Although
LDPE can be recycled, it is often not included in city
recycling programs but can be recycled in collection
bins set up at many retail stores. There are no known
health concerns related to LDPE.
5. Polypropylene (PP) is a plastic commonly found in
bottle caps, some yogurt containers, medicine bottles,
and straws. Number 5 plastics are not accepted by all
recycling programs. If PP plastics are recycled, they
are used in items such as brooms, racks, battery
casings, and battery cables. No health concerns
have been linked to PP.
6. Polystyrene (PS), also known as Styrofoam®, is found
in disposable coffee cups and takeout food containers.
PS is not accepted by many recycling programs. If
recycled, it can be used in insulation. PS contains
styrene, a suspected carcinogen.
7. Number 7 includes miscellaneous plastics but is most
often polycarbonate (PC). PC is used in water-cooler
bottles, most other large plastic containers, and,
until recently, in baby bottles. Number 7 plastics
are not commonly accepted by recycling programs.
PC contains bisphenol-A (BPA), which is a known
hormone disruptor. The use of BPA has been
banned from some items.
Check with your city or county to see which numbered items are accepted
for curbside recycling.


72 SUSTAINABILITY
A Roundup of Sustainability Issues.
Electronic Waste (E-Waste)
When the newest gadget comes along and replaces the outdated
computer, television, stereo, CD player, cellphone, or any number
of other electronic devices, the old one often gets tossed in the
trash. Americans now own an average of 24 electronic gadgets
per household. It’s a terrible idea to just throw them away.
All electronic scrap may contain contaminants such as lead,
cadmium, and beryllium. These heavy metals can leak into our
environment in landfills and spew into the atmosphere as ashes
from incinerators. It has become increasingly important to manage
e-waste more carefully and effectively.
A company headquartered in New Jersey has created national
recycling systems for previously nonrecyclable or hard-to-recycle
waste, including electronic waste. With more than 20 million
people collecting waste in over 20 countries, the program has
diverted billions of units of waste and used them to create more
than 1,500 different products that are sold in well-known retail
stores. In the process, the company has donated more than
$20 million to schools and nonprofit organizations that serve
as “brigades” to collect waste.
Try counting the
electronic gadgets
your family has.
Are you surprised
by the number in
your home?
Some recycling centers won’t accept electronic waste but a growing
number of businesses now offer e-waste recycling.


SUSTAINABILITY 73
.A Roundup of Sustainability Issues
Many Cub Scout packs and Scouts BSA troops across the
country have signed up to contribute to this program, collecting
electronic waste from their communities and other “stuff” that is
not commonly recycled, such as used juice boxes and pouches,
candy wrappers, and office products.
In exchange for acting as a collection station and shipping
the waste to the company, the Scouts earn points for their troop
for the waste they collect. Points earned can be redeemed for
charitable gifts, or for a payment of a penny a point to nonprofit
organizations or schools.
Consumer electronics now make up 1 to 2 percent of all solid
waste. A great deal of energy and diverse, often scarce resources go
into manufacturing electronics. Instead of giving these devices the
heave-ho when they have served their purpose, recycle electronic
products even if you must go to some trouble to do so.
New Life for Old Cellphones
The metals from cellphones—gold, silver,
platinum, palladium, copper, tin, and zinc—
are recovered in the recycling process,
then used in such different industries as
jewelry, plating, electronics, automotive,
and art.
The plastics recovered from cellphones
are recycled into components for new
electronic devices and other plastic
products such as garden furniture, license
plate frames, nonfood containers, and
replacement auto parts.
When the rechargeable battery can
no longer be reused, it can be recycled into
other rechargeable battery products.
In 2009, 438 million new consumer electronics were
sold, 5 million tons of electronics were gathering dust in
storage, 2.37 million tons were ready for recycling, and
yet only 25 percent of these tons were collected for
recycling. Source: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Many councils
collect old
cellphones for
recycling. Check
with your local
council to see if
it participates.


74 SUSTAINABILITY
A Roundup of Sustainability Issues.
Food Waste
What are the benefits of turning food waste into compost? To start
with, it’s a source of free fertilizer for your plants, it’s good for the
environment, and it’s easy to make. Compost adds nutrient-rich
humus to the soil, which fuels plant growth and restores depleted
soils. It also introduces beneficial organisms into the soil that are
a natural way to ward off plant diseases and aerate the soil. And
compost offers a natural alternative to chemical fertilizers.
How to Compost
If you live in an apartment and have only houseplants, you might
choose a kitchen-counter compost bin. If you live in the country
and have a garden, lawn, shrubs, and trees, you can start a large
compost pile that will enrich the soil on your family’s land.
Here are suggestions for how to build a compost pile outdoors:
1. Build the pile on bare earth so that worms and other beneficial
organisms can get into the compost to aerate it.
2. Spread twigs or loose straw on the ground a few inches deep
to aid drainage and let air into the pile.
3. Add compostable materials in layers, alternating moist
ingredients (food scraps, tea bags, etc.) with dry materials
(leaves, sawdust, wood ashes). Sprinkle wood ashes thinly
to keep them from clumping together.
4. Add manure, clover, buckwheat, wheatgrass, or any nitrogen
source to help speed the composting process.
5. Keep the compost moist, not saturated. When rainfall is
scarce, water the pile but do not soak it.
For more
composting tips,
see the Gardening
merit badge
pamphlet.GARDENING
STEM-BasedSTEM-Based
What You Can Compost
Compostable materials include table scraps, fruit and
vegetable scraps, eggshells, leaves, grass clippings,
garden plants, flowers, lawn and garden weeds, shrub
prunings, straw, hay, pine needles, seaweed, wood ash,
chicken manure, coffee grounds and filters, tea leaves,
newspaper, shredded paper, shredded cardboard, corn
cobs, dryer lint, sawdust pellets, and wood chips.


SUSTAINABILITY 75
.A Roundup of Sustainability Issues
6. Cover the pile with plastic sheeting, wood, carpet scraps, or
anything that will serve to hold in moisture and heat, two
things that are essential for composting.
7. Every few weeks, remove the cover and turn the pile with
a pitchfork or shovel to introduce more oxygen, which is
needed for the composting process to work.
With your parent’s permission, go online to find out more about
composting, or get tips from local nurseries. Many cities and
county extension services also offer free classes in composting.
Species Decline
The world’s biodiversity (number of different species of plants
and animals) is declining at a record rate, according to the
International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN), an
organization that produces an annual “red list” of the most
vulnerable wildlife. Current extinction rates are at least 100 to
1,000 times higher than natural rates found in the fossil records,
the group reported. Humans are the main reason for the decline
of many of these species.
“Habitat destruction and degradation are the leading
threats, but other significant pressures include over-exploitation
(for food, pets, and medicine), introduced species, pollution,
and disease,” the IUCN has reported.
In 2012, the Red List of Threatened Species noted that of
63,837 species assessed, 19,817 are threatened with extinction,
including 41 percent of amphibians, 33 percent of reef-building
corals, 25 percent of mammals, and 13 percent of birds.
One strategy for preventing species decline is to protect and
preserve wildlife habitats. Governments and private organizations
purchase land to protect wildlife and provide nature preserves,
state parks, national parks and reserves, and designated wilderness
areas. Another strategy is to manage our natural resources to
provide critical wildlife habitats, such as active forest management
that takes into account the value of wildlife habitat and
conservation as well as timber values.
Laws and regulations fostering biological diversity exist at state, national,
and international levels. The U.S. Endangered Species Act of 1973 was
enacted to protect plant and animal species.


76 SUSTAINABILITY
A Roundup of Sustainability Issues.
Well-managed protected areas can benefit many species.
Yet only about 3.2 percent of Earth’s land surface is currently
protected, which is not enough to preserve the world’s biological
diversity. Captive breeding—programs in which endangered
species are bred in captivity to increase their numbers—has
had some success in reintroducing species to wilderness areas.
Ultimately however, if suitable habitat is not available and few
released animals survive, those reintroductions may end in failure.
Many organizations work to increase suitable wildlife habi-
tat and have been successful in helping species recover from
extirpation (the disappearance of species in certain areas) and
near extinction. Scientific research and public education play big
parts in helping people understand the needs of certain species
to help them recover. Many species have been reestablished and
their populations stabilized in areas where they once thrived,
including the American bison, eastern wild turkey, American
bald eagle, whitetail deer, wolves, and grizzly bears.
Animals, fish, and birds cross national borders, and marine
mammals traverse vast oceans, so there is a great need for inter-
national agreements to protect biodiversity. Cooperation among
nations is crucial to protect wildlife, marine life, amphibians,
birds, and pollinators such as bees and bats.
Two important international agreements to protect threat-
ened or endangered mammals were crafted by the International
Whaling Commission, which regulates commercial hunting
of whales; and the Convention on the International Trade in
Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora, which regulates
the buying and selling of endangered species and their parts,
such as rhino horns, skins, and ivory.
“A sustainable future cannot be achieved without con-
serving biological diversity—animal and plant species,
their habitats and their genes—not only for nature itself,
but also for all 7 billion people who depend on it. The
latest IUCN Red List is a clarion [loud, clear] call to world
leaders … to secure the web of life on this planet.”
—Julia Marton-Lefèvre, director general of the IUCN


SUSTAINABILITY 77
.A Roundup of Sustainability Issues
Much more must be done to slow the destruction of wildlife
habitats and protect our environment and ecosystems, which
is one more reason why leading a sustainable lifestyle is how
every Scout can take a big step for humankind.
If you have a yard, one way you can help wildlife is to turn
your lawn into a suitable habitat for birds, butterflies, and bees.
By providing food in the form of plants that attract and sustain
birds, butterflies, and bees, and by providing water, cover, and
places for wildlife to raise their young, your garden can qualify as
a Certified Wildlife Habitat by the National Wildlife Federation.
You can also work with your Scout troop and local schools to
transform school property into an educational wildlife garden.
Discuss with your counselor how human activities can
endanger animals and plants and contribute to species extinction.
What do you think can be done to stop the decline in wildlife and
its impact on a sustainable environment?
As Earth’s climate warms, sea levels rise and snow and
ice melt sooner in the spring, causing animals, and eco-
systems to come under greater environmental stress.


78 SUSTAINABILITY
A Roundup of Sustainability Issues.
World Population
The diverse life on Earth is interconnected in a “web of life.”
Maintaining biodiversity is crucial to the welfare and future of
human life. Biodiversity also contributes mightily to the quality
of life on Earth, providing climate regulation, fiber, food, clean
water, and clean air.
Many of our medicines come from plants. We rely on wild
populations of fish, shellfish, trees, and many other species for
food, rubber, wood, and other products. When a species becomes
extinct, it diminishes our lives and those of future generations.
Consider how the world’s growing population can reduce
biodiversity. You may want to do research on your own before
you speak with your counselor about how the needs of the
world’s people affect the sustainability of life on Earth.
Climate Change
On any given day, you might see the weather change from
sunny and warm to cold with thunderstorms. As you go through
each year, you see the seasons change from spring to summer to
fall to winter.
Earth’s climate may be changing, too, but in ways that are
more significant and far-reaching than daily or seasonal shifts
in the weather. While Earth’s climate has gone through many
periods of change in its long history, the actions of people may
now be adding significantly to the changes.


SUSTAINABILITY 79
.A Roundup of Sustainability Issues
Conserving
water now is our
best way to “Be
Prepared” for
the future.
When people around the world started burning large
quantities of coal, oil, and natural gas to power their homes,
vehicles, factories, and businesses more than 100 years ago,
the burning of these fossil fuels began releasing large amounts
of carbon dioxide. Most scientists agree that fossil fuels are a
significant factor in our changing climate.
Greenhouse gases exist naturally in the atmosphere. As the
world’s population has grown, however, the added gases from
human activities seem to be causing Earth to grow warmer at a
faster rate, and have set off many other changes on land, in the
atmosphere, and in the oceans. These changes affect animals,
plants, and people in many ways.
Scientists predict that higher temperatures can lead to more
droughts, wilder and more extreme weather due to changing
rain and snow patterns, less snowpack, and rapidly melting
glaciers, shrinking sea ice, and thawing permafrost.
Less rain can mean water sources dry up in some locations,
while too much rain can cause devastation from terrible flooding
in other places. More hot days can make crop harvests smaller
and sicken animals and people.
Oceans play an important role in keeping Earth’s carbon
cycle in balance. Warmer water and increased ocean acidity
from absorbing excess carbon dioxide can make it hard for
corals to build skeletons, and for shellfish to build the shells
needed for protection. As the acidity in the ocean rises, more
and more marine species may be unable to reproduce and
may die out.


80 SUSTAINABILITY
A Roundup of Sustainability Issues.
Severe heat waves and stronger hurricanes are other possible
effects from climate change. These changes may make it too hot to
grow certain crops, and could reduce the amount of water available
for irrigation.
Rising temperatures and an increase in the intensity and
number of droughts worldwide will likely cause freshwater
supplies to diminish. People will have to make lifestyle changes,
using less water in their homes and businesses.
Heat waves, severe storms, air pollution, and diseases linked
to climate may leave many people at risk for illness, especially
infants, the elderly and disabled, and those who live in big cities
and along coastlines. Heat waves can be lethal for people who are
already ill.
Ozone found high in the atmosphere is called “good ozone” because it
protects life from the sun’s harmful ultraviolet rays. But ozone close to
Earth’s surface is considered “bad ozone” because it is a main ingredient
of smog. The pollutants in smog make it hard for people to breathe. As the
temperature rises, more ozone is created.
According
to the U.S.
Environmental
Protection
Agency, more
deaths are caused
by heat waves
each year than
by hurricanes,
tornadoes, floods,
and earthquakes
combined.


SUSTAINABILITY 81
.A Roundup of Sustainability Issues
Most plants and animals live in areas with specific climate
conditions that allow them to thrive. Any change in the climate
of an area can affect the plants and animals living there, and the
entire ecosystem they depend on to survive.
Some species are already moving to cooler locations. On a
warming Earth, plants and animals that live in cold places, such
as the Arctic, may not have suitable places to live any longer.
Some scientists predict that up to one-fourth of all plants and
animals on Earth could become extinct within the next 100 years.
Reducing the use of fossil fuels and reducing garbage waste
gives the coral reefs a better chance of surviving the effects of
climate change.
Forests are particularly sensitive to climate change, because
they can’t get up and move when it gets too warm. Forests
provide homes, shelter, and food for many kinds of plants and
animals. Trees protect water quality in rivers, lakes, and streams.
They also filter many pollutants out of the air we breathe. They
can lower heating and cooling costs when near homes.
Severe droughts and the extreme fire conditions that result
when long-term drought conditions take hold are expected to
occur more often. On a warming Earth, wildfires may occur more
often, spread faster, and burn more forestland than they do now.
To do some climate-change research of your own, find a
map that shows the pattern of global temperature change for
a period of at least 100 years. Discuss with your counselor the
major factors that scientists believe affect the world’s climate
and temperature. You might also share your ideas about the
seriousness of climate change and how to find solutions for the
problems it is predicted to create.
Proper forest
management
based on scien-
tific principles
can help forests
be healthier
and resist their
vulnerability to
drought, disease,
and insect attack,
while providing
renewable wood
for products we
all need.
In every ecosystem, all plants and animals play roles in the web of life.
For example, some plants and animals are sources of food; others are
predators, pollinators, or sources of shelter. Losing one element of an
ecosystem can harm many others.





SUSTAINABILITY 83
.How People Can Support Sustainability
How People Can Support
Sustainability
Throughout this pamphlet are tips for sustainable living. Here
are more actions you can take.
Choose green power. Talk with your family about switching to
renewable energy.
Generate your own power. Can your home generate its own
renewable energy? Talk with your family about the possibility of
installing solar panels, a solar water heater, or a wind turbine.
Use less energy. Power down appliances and electronic devices
when not in use.
Get an energy audit. An audit can help your family figure out
how much energy your home uses and identify ways to reduce
your energy use.
Look for the label. Energy-efficient appliances and electronics
typically use about 10 to 50 percent less energy than regular
models. Look for products that display the Energy Star label.
Also look for products that display the Sustainable Forestry
Initiative label. Wood and paper products from certified forests
ensure forest sustainability.
Be energy wise at school. Schools can partner with the EPA’s
Energy Star program to reduce their energy use.
Travel greenly. Walk, bike, and hike when you can be safe
doing so.
Watch your water use. Don’t squander this precious resource.
Reduce waste. Reduce, reuse, recycle. Make compost. Upcycle
useless items into things of value.
Plant a tree. Trees absorb carbon dioxide and provide shade.


84 SUSTAINABILITY
How People Can Support Sustainability.
Buy locally grown food. The farther your food travels, the
more greenhouse gases are produced in getting it from the farm
to your plate.
Spread the word. Teach others what you have learned.
Join with others. Find environmental or other public-interest
groups that focus on sustainability issues in your community or
region, and lend your time and support to their efforts.
Lead a Family Meeting About Sustainability
After completing requirements 1 through 4, have a family meeting
to talk about what you and your family have learned about
becoming sustainable citizens. Discuss the behavioral changes and
life choices that your family can make to live more sustainably.
Scouting has taught you values that you use in your everyday
life. How can living by the Scout Oath and Scout Law in your daily
life help promote sustainability and good stewardship? Talk to your
counselor about what you have learned.
Doing Your Part: Minimizing
Your Global Footprint
You might ask yourself what role you play in sustainability, what you can
do to help sustain Earth. Earning the Sustainability merit badge is the first
big step in educating yourself and increasing your awareness about the
topic. Continue the trend by making your family, friends, and classmates
more aware.
There are lots of steps you can take toward net zero waste, from how
you wash dishes or brush your teeth, to how you can be a smart shopper.
Turn that water off. Buy only what you need or will consume. Help reduce
what goes in our landfills and make purchases based on minimal packag-
ing. Practice the three R’s of green living—recycle, reuse, reduce.
Take a genuine interest in practicing what you have learned and
changing your lifestyle and habits at home, school, work, your place of
worship, and in your community. You—and your family—can make a
pledge to be sustainability citizens. Who knows, you might take it a step
further and pursue a career in the growing field of sustainability.


SUSTAINABILITY 85
.How People Can Support Sustainability
Take the Footprint Calculator Challenge
To find out your ecological footprint, take the “Footprint Calculator”
quiz found at the Global Footprint Network website www.footprintnetwork.
org/en/index.php/GFN/page/calculators. You will learn how
much land it takes to support your lifestyle, how much carbon dioxide
you generate, and how many planet Earths it would take if everyone
lived just like you.
The calculation is based on a number of factors, such as the foods
you consume, where you live, the goods and services you depend upon,
and how you get around. Once you have your ecological footprint,
start thinking about the ways you can change your lifestyle and adopt
new habits. Walk, bike, or take the bus, for example. Then go back and
retake the quiz to see how those changes can help you reduce your
ecological footprint. The results might surprise you.
The global footprint shown here is typical of a U.S. businessperson.
The calculation shows how it takes 8.3 Earths and 36.8 global acres
of Earth’s productive area to maintain this individual’s lifestyle, which
generates 47.5 tons of carbon dioxide each year.
Source: Global Footprint Network


86 SUSTAINABILITY
How People Can Support Sustainability.
The Scout Law and Sustainability
A Scout is:
Trustworthy. Sustainability starts with you, and helps you to stand out as
a young leader. You can help by recycling, and advocating green solutions
to everyday issues.
Loyal. Demonstrate sustainability by being the voice of reason and reminding
others we all share limited resources.
Helpful. You can make a difference in your family and in your community—
and help our world—by using only what you need. Take time to share with
others what you are doing.
Friendly. Volunteer in your community at a community garden, recycling
center, or other sustainable activity and encourage others to do the same.
This can be a fun and exciting way to see firsthand how, when we all are
working together, we can make a difference in this world.
Courteous. Always thank people for their help and understanding, because we
all benefit from sustainability and thinking about how our actions, no matter
how small, affect others.
Kind. Treat this world with respect, save valuable resources and set an
example for others to follow. Take time to smile; it does make a difference.
Obedient. To protect the world’s resources you need to be true to yourself
and believe in sustainability.
Cheerful. Tell your stories of sustainability activities and projects with a
smile, knowing you are making a difference, and others just might take
action based on how you tell your story.
Thrifty. Track your savings at home or in your troop on solid
sustainability actions.
Brave. You can be a leader at home or in your community when taking
the appropriate actions. Stand up for what is right; start with your actions
so you and your family can lead others to engage in sustainable living.
Clean. Respect our world and the valuable resources we are consuming
every day. You can always help by understanding what is really needed
and talking with others to protect the air we breathe, and the water
we drink.
Reverent. Always consider other points of view and be true to Earth,
as we all live here together.
Remember that sustainability starts with you.
Camp Emerald Bay


SUSTAINABILITY 87
.How People Can Support Sustainability
These charts*, which show the relationship between people, prosperity,
and the planet, are examples of additional materials and resources
available for those who want to learn more about sustainability than
can be presented in a merit badge pamphlet. The blue boxes represent
topics covered in detail in this pamphlet; the white boxes represent
deeper topics that can be researched online. (Be sure to get your parent
or guardian’s permission before going online.)
2010 People (7 billion)
Prosperity
Planets (1.4X)
Problems
Water Food
Species
Decline
Community
Plastic
Waste
Health
Electronic
Waste
Transport
Climate
Change
Energy
Food
Waste
Stuff
Extract
Ocean +
Creatures
Air +
Creatures
Produce
Waterway +
Creatures
Distribute
Desert +
Creatures
Consume
Forest +
Creatures
Dispose
Grassland +
Creatures Earth +
Creatures
WasteWaste
Material Product
*Source: Scott Harmon
2050 People (9 billion)
Prosperity
Planets (1X)
Solutions
Water Food
Biomimicry
Community
Green
Chemistry
Health
Net Zero
Transport
Upcycle
Energy
Cradle to
Cradle
Stuff
Extract
Ocean +
Creatures
Air +
Creatures
Produce
Waterway +
Creatures
Distribute
Desert +
Creatures
Consume
Forest +
Creatures
Dispose
Grassland +
Creatures Earth +
Creatures
Little material extraction
Little disposal of waste
Waste
Product
Is now material What was waste
Much disposal of waste
Much material extraction





SUSTAINABILITY 89
.Careers in Sustainability
Careers in Sustainability
Scouts can use their science skills in many ways to help create
a sustainable future, from developing sources of renewable
energy to securing habitats for endangered wildlife or creating
nonpolluting plastics.
Scientists in all fields working together and with the
community will be needed to help solve the increasingly
complex problems our world is facing. Here are some career
paths in sustainability that may be of interest to you.
Environmental consultants study the ecological impacts of
conservation, development, and industry projects and recommend
solutions to environmental problems. Natural resource managers
care for ecological resources for private and public organizations.
Park naturalists provide education programs to people of all ages.
Restoration ecologists carry out programs to reestablish
natural ecosystems. In the field of geography, geographic
information system specialists evaluate alternative locations
for landfills, roads, and other facilities using computer-based
map information.
Area specialists study specific countries or regions of the
world and provide information to help government officials
set policy or address important issues. Coastal zone managers
oversee ecologically sensitive areas, such as river mouths, bays,
and marshes, so the areas can better survive the growth of
cities, ports, industries, and roads as well as an increase
in tourism.
In public health careers, statisticians help interpret data.
Mathematicians analyze the data to develop models, for example,
to predict epidemics and to compare various strategies to combat
epidemics. Mathematicians and statisticians also create models
that can help find oil reserves, understand complex biosystems,
forecast weather, and predict storm surges.
Many large
companies employ
sustainability
officers to ensure
their business
is functioning
with sustainability
in mind.


90 SUSTAINABILITY
Careers in Sustainability.
Chemists and chemical engineers design products and
processes that can eliminate or reduce hazardous substances.
Careers in green chemistry and engineering can lead to
new household products, green building materials, and
energy-efficient devices.
Biologists also work to solve environmental problems and
preserve natural habitats. Zoo biologists undertake endangered
species recovery programs. Wildlife biologists manage, protect,
rehabilitate, and enhance wildlife habitat.
Management and conservation biologists work with
community members and special-interest groups to develop
and implement land-management programs. Science advisors
work with organizations to study and address the economic
impacts of biological issues.
Sociologists can use their understanding of human
interaction to help create sustainable pathways for the
future. Careers for sociologists include environmental
policy, environmental outreach, environmental law,
urban planning, communications, environmental affairs,
resource management, conflict mediation, government
or university sustainability coordination, sustainable
development, and human dimensions science.
The complex issues surrounding global climate change
will provide jobs for chemists and engineers in the
government and private sectors as challenges to
sustainability arise and solutions must be developed.
Park rangers
protect state and
national parks and
educate the public
in preservation of
natural resources.
Psychologists, who are trained to study human
behavior, may research such topics as understanding
environmental beliefs, attitudes, and values and
determining the emotional benefits humans receive
from green, open spaces. Psychologists may also study
the local ecological concepts of a native society.


SUSTAINABILITY 91
.Careers in Sustainability
Foresters manage forest resources to sustainably provide
products that people need as well as habitats for wildlife,
watersheds for clean water, recreational opportunities, and
jobs that support communities.
Geologists, geophysicists, hydrologists, oceanographers, marine
scientists, meteorologists, environmental scientists, and soil scien-
tists gather and interpret data about Earth and other planets, using
their knowledge to increase our understanding of natural processes.
Atmospheric scientists study weather, solar radiation, climate and
its effects, ozone depletion, climate change, and pollution.
Economic geologists study metallic and nonmetallic resources
and mineral deposits, and find safe ways to dispose of waste mate-
rials from mining. Environmental geologists study the ways in
which land, water, air, and humans interact. They also work to find
solutions to pollution, waste management, flooding, and erosion.
Civil engineers help to meet human needs for industrial
products, natural resources, food, transportation, shelter, waste
management, and energy while protecting environmental quality
and the natural resources essential for future development.
Mechanical engineers design and manufacture more
efficient vehicles and power systems that use renewable energy
sources, along with many other products needed for creating
a sustainable world.
Electrical and computer engineers design information systems
to connect people working on projects in remote areas, create
networks that allow communities to quickly report data such as
disease outbreaks or receive warning of natural disasters, and
give people in developing countries access to the internet. They
also design computer chips and circuit boards to be more
environmentally friendly.
Congratulations! In fulfilling the requirements for the
Sustainability merit badge, you have become a better citizen
of planet Earth. As you go forward in your life and in Scouting,
remember all the things you have learned about living a
sustainable lifestyle.
Go forth and be green!
See the resources
section to find
more about
sustainability and
careers in
the field.
Landscape architects plan and design outdoor spaces for homeowners,
businesses, and others. They understand how to make the best use of large
land areas, protect or restore natural resources, and also help preserve
historic areas. Landscape architects are leaders in the area of sustainable,
“green” designs.


92 SUSTAINABILITY
Glossary.
Glossary
biological diversity. The full range of
variety and variability within and among
living organisms and the ecological
complexity in which they occur,
encompassing ecosystem, species,
and genetic diversity.
biomass. The total mass of living matter
within a given unit of environmental
area. Also refer to all plant material,
vegetation, or agricultural waste used
as a fuel or energy source.
biosphere. The entire Earth including
the atmosphere and all the living
organisms that inhabit it.
carbon footprint. The sum of all
emissions of CO2 (carbon dioxide) that
are induced by your activities in a given
time frame. Usually a carbon footprint
is calculated on a yearly basis.
climate change. A change of climate
that is attributed directly or indirectly
to human activity that alters the
composition of the global atmosphere
and which is in addition to natural
climate variability observed over
comparable time periods.
consumption. The use of a resource.
eco-city. A human settlement that
uses the least possible resources, keeps
waste and pollution to a minimum, and
builds dwellings to make good use of
sun, wind, and rain. Food and goods
are sourced locally. Transportation is
limited to walking and cycling, with
public transport for longer journeys.
eco-village. A small-scale intentional
community with the goal of being more
socially, economically, and ecologically
sustainable while having less of an
ecological impact.
extinction. When all members of a
species cease to exist.
global economy. The world’s nations,
their respective economies, and the
institutions that unite them in a global
marketplace. Developments since
World War II and especially since
the early 1990s have enabled rapid
movement of goods and services
around the world, causing greater
interdependence in trade and creating
a system where the economic status
of one nation affects many.
graywater. The relatively clean waste-
water from bathtubs, sinks, washing
machines, and dishwashers.
green chemistry. A philosophy of
chemical research and engineering that
encourages the design of products and
processes that minimize the use and
generation of hazardous substances;
also called sustainable chemistry.


SUSTAINABILITY 93
.Glossary
habitat destruction. The process
through which a natural habitat is
rendered unable to support the
species present.
industrial pollution. Pollution resulting
from an industrial plant releasing harmful
emissions into the environment.
natural resources. Materials or sub-
stances such as minerals, forests, water,
and fertile land that occur in nature and
can be used for economic gain.
oil reserves. An estimate of the amount
of crude oil located in a particular
economic region. Oil reserves must
have the potential of being extracted
under current technological constraints.
For example, if oil pools are located at
unattainable depths, they would not be
considered part of a nation’s reserves.
organic farming. A form of agriculture
that relies on techniques such as crop
rotation, green manure, compost, and
biological pest control. Organic farming
uses fertilizers and pesticides but
excludes or strictly limits the use of
manufactured (synthetic) fertilizers,
pesticides (which include herbicides,
insecticides, and fungicides), plant
growth regulators such as hormones,
livestock antibiotics, food additives,
and genetically modified organisms.
pollution. The presence in or
introduction into the environment
of a contaminating substance that
has harmful or poisonous effects,
thereby causing imbalance.
renewable energy. Energy that comes
from resources that are continually
replenished such as sunlight, wind,
rain, tides, waves, and geothermal heat.
resource depletion. The use of re-
sources, especially a natural resource,
faster than it is replenished.
runoff. The draining away of water
(or substances carried in it) from
the surface of an area of land or
a structure.
species decline. Reduction in the
actual numbers of a species. Usually
this decline is a result of a reduction
in the area occupied by the species.
sustainable agriculture. A form of
agriculture that uses nonrenewable
agricultural resources and on-farm
resources in the most efficient manner
to sustain the economic viability of
farm operations.
trash vortex. The Pacific trash vortex
is composed of high concentrations of
plastics, chemical sludge, and other
debris trapped by the currents of the
North Pacific Gyre. It is located in
North Pacific Ocean roughly between
135°W to 155°W and 35°N and 42°N.
urban planning. The branch of
architecture dealing with the design
and organization of urban space
and activities.
xeriscape. A style of landscape design
requiring little or no irrigation or
other maintenance that is used in
arid regions.
wastewater. Water mixed with
waste matter.
wildlife habitat. An ecological or
environmental area that is inhabited
by one or more species of wildlife.


94 SUSTAINABILITY
Sustainability Resources.
Sustainability Resources
Scouting Literature
Scouts BSA Handbook for Boys; Scouts
BSA Handbook for Girls; Fieldbook;
Energy, Environmental Science, Fish and
Wildlife Management, Forestry, Nature,
Oceanography, Plant Science, Public Health,
Soil and Water Conservation, and Weather
merit badge pamphlets
Books
Kaye, Cathryn Berger, and Philippe Cousteau.
Going Blue: A Teen Guide to Saving Our
Oceans, Lakes, Rivers, & Wetlands. Free
Spirit Publishing, 2010.
Petronis, Lexi. 47 Things You Can Do for the
Environment. Zest Books, 2012.
Roa, Michael L. Environmental Science
Activities Kit: Ready-to-Use Lessons, Labs,
and Worksheets for Grades 7–12, 2nd ed.
Jossey-Bass, 2008.
Savedge, Jenn. The Green Teen: The
Eco-Friendly Teen’s Guide to Saving the
Planet. New Society Publishers, 2009.
Sivertsen, Linda, and Tosh Sivertsen.
Generation Green: The Ultimate Teen
Guide to Living an Eco-Friendly Life.
Simon Pulse, 2008.
Organizations and Websites
American Association for the
Advancement of Science
www.aaas.org
American Chemical Society
Green Chemistry Institute
www.acs.org/greenchemistry.html
American Forest & Paper Association
www.afandpa.org
American Institute of
Biological Sciences
www.aibs.org
Association of Fish and
Wildlife Agencies
Telephone: 202-624-7890
www.fishwildlife.org
Center for Biological Diversity
www.biologicaldiversity.org
Eartheasy
eartheasy.com/grow_compost.html
Ecological Society of America
www.esa.org
EnviroLink Network
www.envirolink.org
Environmental Protection Agency
Telephone: 202-272-0167
epa.gov
Global Footprint Network
www.footprintnetwork.org
Leave No Trace Center for
Outdoor Ethics
Toll-free telephone: 800-332-4100
www.lnt.org
With your parent’s permission,
visit Scouting America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org,
for a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


SUSTAINABILITY 95
.Sustainability Resources
NASA Climate Kids
climatekids.nasa.gov
The Nature Conservancy
www.nature.org
Natural Resources Conservation Service
Telephone: 202-720-3210
www.nrcs.usda.gov
Society of American Foresters
www.eforester.org
Sustainable Forestry Initiative
www.sfiprogram.org
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
Toll-free telephone: 800-344-9453
www.fws.gov
USDA Forest Service
www.fs.usda.gov
Acknowledgments
Scouting America greatly appreciates the
tireless efforts of volunteers of Scouting
America for their work in creating this merit
badge. Without their vision, insight, expertise,
and time, this merit badge and pamphlet would
not have been possible. We would especially
like to acknowledge Jonathan Harmon. He
not only encouraged his family to live a
more sustainable way of life, but it was his
inspiration that brought this merit badge to life.
We are thankful to the Crescent Bay Area
Council’s Camp Emerald Bay, Catalina Island,
California, whose staff was instrumental in
assisting with photography needs. We also
thank the Orange County Council’s Irvine
Ranch Outdoor Education Center in California.
We are grateful to Walmart Stores Inc.;
Troop 64, Portola Valley, California; and
George Denise for their support of this
merit badge and pamphlet.
Many other individuals and organizations
contributed to the development of the
Sustainability merit badge and pamphlet.
We thank them all here for their assistance
and their role in educating our Scouts and
encouraging them to adopt a more sustainable
lifestyle than they had before earning the merit
badge.
Photo and
Illustration Credits
Mithun Inc., courtesy; www.mithun.com—
page 15
Natural Resources Conservation Service/
Tim McCabe, courtesy—page 28
Sustainable Forestry Initiative, courtesy—
page 49 (logo)
Wikipedia.org/evgonetwork, courtesy—
cover (car and pump); cover and page 59
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of or are
protected by Scouting America.
Camp Emerald Bay, courtesy—pages 42
(logo), 43–48 (all), and 86
Daniel Giles—page 37 (Scout)
The Summit Bechtel Family National Scout
Reserve, courtesy—pages 12 and 14


Get ideas for your next merit
badge adventure in every
issue of Scout Life magazine.
Subscribe TODAY at
go.scoutlife.org/subscribe
Use promo code
SLMBP15
for a special Scout price!