ARCHITECTURE
AND LANDSCAPE
ARCHITECTURE
STEM-Based


ARCHITECTURE
AND LANDSCAPE
ARCHITECTURE
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


147
Landscape Architecture
1. Go to a completed landscape project that a landscape architect has designed.
Before you visit the site, obtain a plan of the design from the landscape architect
if one is available.
2. After completing requirement 1, discuss the following with your merit
badge counselor:
(a) Tell whether the design had separate spaces, a defined point of entry, a
clear path system, and sun and shade variety.
(b) Discuss how any structures, the designated seating, eating, or parking
areas suited the overall design.
(c) Explain how the design reflected consideration for the comfort, shelter,
and security of the users.
(d) Discuss how the choice of trees, shrubs, and ground covers used in the
project contributed to its appeal and function.
3. Identify five shrubs, five trees, and one ground cover, being sure that you
select examples of different shapes, sizes, and textures. With the help of your
counselor or a local nursery, choose plants that will grow in your area. Bring
pictures of the different planting materials or, if possible, examples of their
branches, leaves, or flowers to a group such as your troop or class at school.
Be prepared to tell how you might use each in the design of a landscape and
the maintenance that would follow.
4. After obtaining permission from the appropriate authority, look at and study a
place of worship, school grounds, or a public building and identify where
most people arrive by bus or car. Then do the following:
(a) Using a measuring tape, measure and draw the main site entry and its
nearby area. Define the scale of your drawing. Be sure to include the driveway
and sidewalk or path that leads to the building’s main entry. Indicate any side-
walks, structures, trees and plants, lights, drains, utilities, or other site furnish-
ings within the study area. Make two copies of this plan and save the original,
then do 4b and 4c using the copies.
(b) On one copy of your site plan, use directional arrows to indicate where
the water drains across the site, where ditches occur, and where water stands
for a longer period of time.
L


(c) Decide how you can make the place safer and more comfortable for those
using it. Redesign the area on another copy of the plan. You may want to
include new walks, covered waiting areas, benches, space-defining plantings
of trees and shrubs, and drainage structures.
5. Find out about three career opportunities in landscape architecture. Pick
one and find out the education, training, and experience required for this
profession. Discuss this with your counselor, and explain why this profession
might interest you.


92 ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE
Landscape Architecture Resources.
Scouting Literature
Environmental Science, Forestry,
Gardening, Plant Science, Soil and
Water Conservation, and Sustainability
merit badge pamphlets
Books
Bertauski, Tony. Plan Graphics for
the Landscape Designer, 2nd ed.
Prentice Hall, 2006.
Blake, Peter. God’s Own Junkyard: The
Planned Deterioration of America’s
Landscape. Holt, Rinehart and
Winston, 1979.
Booth, Norman K., FASLA, and
James E. Hiss. Residential
Landscape Architecture: Design
Process for the Private Residence,
6th ed. Prentice Hall, 2011.
Church, Thomas D., Grace Hall, and
Michael Laurie. Gardens Are for
People, 3rd ed. University of
California Press, 1995.
Dee, Catherine. Form and Fabric in
Landscape Architecture: A Visual
Introduction. Taylor & Francis, 2001.
Douglas, William Lake, et al. Garden
Design: History, Principles, Elements,
Practice. Smithmark, 1994.
Foster, Kelleann, RLA, ASLA. Becoming
a Landscape Architect: A Guide to
Careers in Design. Wiley, 2009.
Grant, Reid, ASLA. Landscape Graphics.
Watson-Guptill, 2002.
Marsh, William M. Landscape Planning:
Environmental Applications, 5th ed.
Wiley, 2010.
McHarg, Ian L. Design with Nature.
John Wiley and Sons, 1995.
Rybczynski, Witold. A Clearing in the
Distance: Frederick Law Olmsted and
America in the Nineteenth Century.
Scribner, 2000.
Starke, Barry, and John Ormsbee
Simonds. Landscape Architecture:
A Manual of Environmental Planning
and Design, 5th ed. McGraw Hill, 2013.
Landscape
Architecture Resources
Visit the Boy Scouts of
America’s official retail website
(with your parent’s permission)
at http://www.scoutstuff.org for a
complete listing of all merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE 93
.Landscape Architecture Resources
Magazines
Garden Design
Toll-free telephone: 855-624-5110
Website: http://www.gardendesign.com
Landscape Architecture
636 Eye St., NW
Washington, DC 20001-3736
Telephone: 202-898-2444
Website: http://www.
landscapearchitecturemagazine.org
Organizations and
Websites
American Society of
Landscape Architects (ASLA)
636 Eye St., NW
Washington, DC 20001-3736
Telephone: 202-898-2444
Website: http://www.asla.org
The ASLA is a national organiza-
tion of landscape architects. Its goal is
to promote the profession, educational
programs, and the careful planning of
natural environments.
Council of Educators in
Landscape Architecture (CELA)
Telephone: 817-272-2321
Website: http://www.thecela.org
An organization of educational
programs in the United States and
Canada, the CELA promotes quality
and professionalism in landscape
architecture education and publishes
new research in the field.
Council of Landscape Architectural
Registration Boards (CLARB)
Telephone: 571-432-0332
Website: http://www.clarb.org
CLARB prepares and scores the
exams for students and professionals
seeking licensure in landscape architec-
ture. The organization provides services
to landscape architects and students to
help them obtain certification.
Landscape Architecture
Foundation (LAF)
Telephone: 202-331-7070
Website: http://www.lafoundation.org
The foundation offers scholarships
and internships to students who wish to
study landscape architecture.
Acknowledgments
For this new edition of the Landscape
Architecture merit badge pamphlet,
the Boy Scouts of America is grateful
to Associate Professor Judy Brittenum,
FASLA, Department of Landscape
Architecture, University of Arkansas–
Fayetteville; Caye Cook, ASLA; Ron
Leighton, ASLA; Pat O’Leary, ASLA;
Steven Saling, ASLA; Rex Schuder,
ASLA; Toby Sneed, ASLA; and Lori
Woodham for sharing their time and
expertise, and for lending their assis-
tance in many different capacities.